SEVEN TREATISES, CONTAINING SVCH DIRECTION AS IS GATHERED OVT OF THE HOLY
SCRIPTVRES, leading and guiding to true happiness, both in this life, and in the
life to come: and may be called the practice of Christianity.

PROFITABLE FOR ALL SVCH AS HEARTILY DESIRE THE SAME: IN THE WHICH, more
particularly true Christians may learn how to lead a godly and comfortable
life every day.

PENNED BY RICHARD ROGERS, PREACHER OF the word of God at Wethersfield in Essex.

DEVT. 33. verse. 12. The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety with him,
who protecteth him all the day long.

PSALM. 84. verse. 10. One day in thy Courts is better then a thousand other
where.

DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS
RD

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for THOMAS MAN, and ROBERT DEXTER, and
are to be sold at the brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS, HIGH, AND MIGHTY PRINCE, King JAMES, our dread
Sovereign, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith, etc. long life, happy days, and most prosperous reign.
MOst gracious and dread Sovereign Lord, I have not presumed upon this
dedication, as being overtaken with the forgetfulness either of your Majesty's
greatness, or mine own poverty: For I confess, that if comparison were made
that way, I might worthily be blamed of presumption. But the truth is, that I
laid in balance your mind rather then your Majesty, and the argument rather
then my penning of it. In this I confess I presumed and I trust without desert
of blame, that as you have preferred godliness before glory in the midst of
this glory which God has brought you unto: so you will prefer a treatise of
godliness, thus simply furnished, before a glorious style. Which is not seldom
repugnant to the simplicity of holy things. And yet my meaning is to confess
to your Majesty, that this argument deserved both a more learned and more
gracious pen then mine. To which I would with all my heart have given place,
if I had either seen before me, or heard behind me the footsteps of any
tending that way that I go, though I confess, there are some to be seen
travailing in ways near adjoining to this.

Concerning your Majesty, I am persuaded, that you repose your greatest
greatness in the communion of Saints, and not in your severed calling which is
transitory: and therefore will account your self honored by the augmentation
of grace, and the furtherance of true holiness. Your Majesty's own affairs
must be permitted to enjoy their opportunities, and your godly wisdom to
enjoy your choice in this variety of reading. But I doubt not, but your godly
heart will persuade you to receive a book of this kind with a gracious hand,
though it were to no other end, but to begin to Gods people in the entertaining
of any true hearted motive unto holiness. And this to say the truth, is that
wherein I have made bold to use your gracious and renowned name, to advantage
my intent of furthering the people committed to your charge in their passage to
salvation. Let it therefore (I most humbly supplicate) please your Majesty to
give allowance to my endeavor and drift, and to pardon my slips: for my meaning
has been to seek the honor of God in this work, and to borrow help in this
Dedication, of the grace he has given you for such purposes.

Thus rejoicing, with the rest of Gods people, for the comfort wherewith the
Churches heart is comforted by you, and desiring the lineall descent of these
kingdoms to your Majesty's royal posterity, till Jesus Christ with his
glorious coming obscure all the glory of the world, I beseech the holy Ghost
to be with your spirit, and keep your Majesty in Christ unto the end.

Your Majesty's most humble subject RICHARD ROGERS, Minister of the Gospel.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THe children of this world are in their generation wiser then the children of
light. Luke 16.8.
The truth hereof may appear in the Papists; who discerning that their books
of Controversies, stuffed with manifold untruths, fallacians, and corruptions,
were not able to gain sufficiently (though small gain be too great for such
merchants) to their Babylonish kingdom, Revel. 18.15.
Iam. 3.6.
have set themselves and others on work (being all set on work of Hell) to
pen certain treatises, tending to ensnare and entangle the minds of ignorant
and simple Christians, in the corrupt and filthy puddle of Popish devotion. In
this respect I persuade my self, it is come to pass (not without the gracious
providence of God) that the author hereof has been encouraged in himself, and
by others, to write these Christian directions, as a counterpoyson to all such
inchauntments of Papists, who would by these means bear men in hand, that al
true devotion dwelt amongst them* and were enclosed and tied to their Cells and
Cloisters: In which unclean cages it is impossible for any true spiritual and
holy meditations to have their abiding: for as much as even the very minds and
consciences of such unclean birds, Tit. 1.15.
are defiled with damnable errors, and Idolatries. Wherefore I would earnestly
advise, and heartely entreat thee (Christian Reader) to embrace this book,
wherein thou shall find good precepts, and holy directions, not delivered by
rote (as from a Parrat) out of the books and writings of other men: but
confirmed by the singular experience of one, who has long labored the
conversion, and confirmation of many other; but especially the mortification
and quickening of his own soul and conscience: one, whom indeed I have ever
esteemed another Greenham: and herein more happy then he; because he has
lived to pen, and peruse his own labors, and may yet live (by the mercy of
God) to correct and amend whatsoever slip of his pen (for in a long work one
may happily take a nap, two, or three) shall be showed unto him. Read it
therefore (beloved Christian) and that with diligence: and thou shall find (I
doubt not) more true light and direction to a true devout and holy life, then
in all the Resolutions of the Jesuitical Father Parsons (though never so
refined, as a brick newly washed) or meditations of Friar Granatensis, or any
Popish Directories whatsoever. And so I commend thee and all thy holy labors
in this and all other good books, especially in the book of books (I mean
the holy Bible) to the rich and merciful blessing of God our Father in Jesus
Christ.

Blackfriers London this 26. of May 1603. Thine in the Lord, STEPH. EGERTON.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
WHat be the privileges and high favors of God Almighty, wherewith he has
preferred this age, and in special our nation above all before us, since the
days of the holy Apostles, needs more meditation to move our selves to
thankfulness, the^ proof to convince our adversaries, who though they should
gainsay it, shall gnash their teeth and pine away in grief to behold it. Among
all (I may say with the Prophet and the Apostle) this is chief, that God has
so clearly showed his word to Jacob, his statutes and his judgments to
Israel; and has committed to us his holy oracles: Wherein I mean not only
that we have the Gospel so publikly and plentifully preached, which (though
great) is common to us with many: but withal, that in some admirable manner,
God has revealed his secrets unto us, such as we know no Church upon the
earth, in which the true sense of the Scriptures and sound doctrine thereof,
are more sincerely embraced and professed. Yea with what store of rare and
excellent lights the Lord has furnished this our Church, he is blind that
sees not, and malicious that will not acknowledge it: wherein though generally
it falls out by humane frailty and Satan's subtlety, that there is more
light of judgment, then integrity of conscience; yet herein God has not left
himself without witness of many worthy Christians both Preachers and
professors of the truth, who lively express the form of holy doctrine into
which they are cast, such as upon my uttermost peril I dare profess, the
deuoutest Papist neither has nor possibly (in that profession) can attain
unto, lacking true faith the right mother and nurse of a godly life. And herein
to give one instance in steed of many, take and examine straightly this one
work, and if it breathe not out more sound godliness in one leaf, then all
their artificial composed treatises of Resolution (which in their estimation
are chief in this argument of a godly life) let me bear my deserved blame. I
leave the life of the writer of that Popish book to such as seem upon better
knowledge to have set out the same. And for the Author of this Treatise, I may
not in modesty say what I know, but could and do desire that his life were so
known to all, to whom his writing shall come, as it is to such, who have heard
the doctrine and seen the practice hereof in himself these well near thirty
years. But to spare the person for his life time, and to foretell what you
shall find in his labors. In my simple opinion it might in one principal
respect be called the Anatomy of the soul, wherein not only the great and
principal parts are laid open, but every vein and little nerve are so
discovered, that we may as it were, with the eye behold, as the right
constitution of the whole and every part of a true Christian; so the manifold
defects and imperfections thereof. Whereto be added most approved remedies for
the curing of all spiritual diseases, with like preservatives to maintain our
health, in such sort as may be enjoyed in this contagious air, and so in a
second respect may be called the physic of the soul. In both which how
welcome it shall be to all that love their souls health, I need not doubt:
only I would desire the Christian patient, not to be offended with the
largenes of the work (as too dear for the poor, and too much to be read over
in long time) but consider with me, that if the art of bodily physic be so
long, as the father of that art testifies; then is it no marvel, that this
spiritual physic does as much exceed the other in length, as it does in
dignity. And yet for the relief of such as desire to profit by his labor,
great care has been taken so to set out apart every several matter, that by
the help of the Table they may be directed to the particulars, which I
persuade my self will be so far from glutting any, though never so weak
stomach, that it will rather procure him a better appetite. For simply to say,
as I feel, I have not read in any man's writing a more sauourie style and
better relished. All which I leave to every one to speak as they find, and so
with my strongest desires do commend the fruit of these labors to the
blessing of God.

Ezechiel Culuerwel.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, I am constrained in commending this spiritual blessing unto
thee, to begin with the excuse of a good deed. For although it be a good deed
to commend this commendable work, yet must I plead the pardon of my
defectiuenes in doing it, by alleging my calling thereto; and impleade the
fulsomnes of the maligners of such holy enterprises, who for the most part
distaste all things but vanity. Job. 34.3.
The ear (says Elihu) tries words, as the mouth tastes meat, to wit, if
the ear be truly spiritual; otherwise there is an uncircumcised ear, Act.
7.51.
where there is an uncircumcised heart: and he that has an unmortified ear,
which is an affection to carnal eloquence, cannot escape a reprobate sense in
judging of the wisdom of God. An itching ear requires a clawing style, and
the most readers seek after that which this treatise purposely eschueth. But
wisdom will be justified of her children, and the godly hearted will lay that
unlooked for imputation upon affectation of brave words, which the holy Ghost
lays upon women's bravery, mentioned in the 3. of Esaias, which soon after in
the 4. chap. verse. 4. by passage of speech he calls the filthiness of the
daughters of Sion. Something I grant may be yielded by way of indulgence to
the weak; but he that seriously seeks the Lord, will not be offended nor
cloyed with that simplicity, which offends not God by turning away the mind
by trifles from a bent purpose of sound edification.

The matter of this book is right worthy to occupy the minds of men, and will
be received of the gracious perusers of it. The rest of the professors, which
like wanton and full fed children begin to play with their meat, and brook
nothing but conceited writing and speaking, are to be bewailed; and as for the
dogs they are to be detested and denied holy things. The blessing and comfort
of grace brought S. Paul to account all things as dung, Philip. 3.8.
in comparison; and their illumination (how great soever) is unsanctified,
which are not so minded: and if any man love godliness indeed and be good
metal, Romans 6.17.
he will bless the fire which is ordained to melt him, and the mould which is
made to cast him in: but they which make the founder to melt in vain, Iere.
6.29.30.
shall be called reprobate silver. It is part of the blessing of a work to be
wrought by a blessed instrument: and although it be sacrilege to interuert the
praise of God; yet it is of religion to take notice of Gods chosen vessels, and
all men are more affected by such. This is the advantage of this book, I mean
the long approved godliness of the Author, as he is a Christian; and his zealous
painfulnes, as he is a Minister. And if it please God that his pen may be as
his tongue has been, a tree of life, the very leaves thereof will cure him of
the sting of Serpents tongues. That which S. Luke testifies of Barnabas, may
(after Gods admeasurement) be spoken of him, and hoped of his labors, Act.
11.24.
that he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost and faith, and much people
joined themselves to the Lord. Receive therefore (good Reader) this provision
which he has made for thee of wholesome meat, not caring for conceited
cookerie, but remember that godly hunger is the best sauce for heavenly food.

Thine in Christ, FRANCIS MERBVRY.

THE ENTRANCE INTO THE BOOK, OR PREFACE TO THE READER, which contains these
four things: First, the general sum of the whole. Secondly, the reasons why
it was set forth. Thirdly, the matter and argument of every particular
treatise. Fourthly, a directing of the Christian reader, how to read it with
most profit.
IN so great variety of all learning, as God has furnished this age withal,
it were not only needless, but arrogancy and folly, for me to put any in
hope, that I go about to teach that, which has not been taught, and set
forth already by godly and learned brethren. But yet, least any should think
my labor vain, in that which I enterprise, I would all such might understand,
that howsoever I shall bring no other thing, then some have, in general, or in
some part heretofore published; yet they shall not be glutted with the same
thing in particular, whether they respect the treatise and argument it self,
or the manner of following and prosecuting the same. At leastwise, I may say,
that there has not come to my hand any book directly tending to this end,
which I propound here in the seven Treatises following, to help the frailty
of Gods children, and namely, by setting before their eyes as in a glass, the
infinite, secret, and deceitful corruptions of the heart: from whence (without
a gracious regarding of the same) sore and dangerous evils do arise and break
out in their life. Neither have I seen any treatise, and direction
particularly drawn and gathered for men's lives to govern and order them,
which tieth them to daily use of the same throughout their whole course: of
both which my purpose is most chiefly, The intent of the author, and general
sum of the whole book.
as well faithfully as lovingly, to entreat, and to aid my poor neighbors
and brethren, with that which I have gathered by reading, and noted by
experience, if by any means I may be able hereby, to make the Christian way
any thing more easy and pleasant unto them, then many find it: and to bring
it into more price, then the most do value it at.

In few words, this is that which I aim at, that such as have tasted how good
the Lord is, and have felt the power of the life to come, by any work of faith
and Christian life, which they have obtained by the preaching of the Gospel,
may after that, see their wants, their infirmities, their corruptions,
rebellions, hindrances, and other discouragements, from that blessed estate
wherinto they are entered: and how they may every day in the best manner,
remedy, or at least wise weaken and diminish them, and that they may also
behold their liberties and prerogatives, which they have by Christ: as the
certainty of Gods love, deliverance from the fear of the great and evil day,
peace and comfort through faith, and the blessedness of such an estate, and
daily enjoy the same. And therefore, not to be as men that have no such
privileges, either cast down with needeles fear, or possessed with an
earthly or vain rejoicing, or destitute of encouragement to walk forward in
an heavenly course: The fruit and benefit of it to the true Christian.
But that they may be merry in the Lord, and yet without lightness; sad and
heavy in heart for their own sins, and the abominations of the land, and yet
without discouragment, or dumpishnes: resting and believing in God, without
bold presumption, and fearing their own weakness, but yet without dreadful and
deadly despayring. And that thus the Christian man, and he who is faithful
indeed, may so carry himself in his course, as he may have no thought or
purpose to revolt and turn from this hope which is set before him, but be
persuaded that he is infinitely encouraged, to hold out constantly therein,
against all that might come in his way to the contrary. And that the ungodly
may see how such are blessed in comparison of other, and what they themselves
go void of which they might enjoy, What the ungodly may learn by it.
and therefore may seek how to become not almost, but altogether Christians
with them.

The second point.

The reasons of setting out this.


To these (I say) who have set themselves in a full, and resolute purpose to
pass their days godly in the midst of many encombrances, and to walk with
the Lord, so far as of frail flesh may be obtained (how weak so ever in their
own persuasions) to these (I say) I desire in this treatise of mine to be some
help and assistance, and to speak plainly, that such as would feign do
well, The first.
and yet cannot tell how, may hereby be eased and relieved. And if any (who yet
are in superstition, The authors desire that they might profit by it.
hypocrisy, prophanenes, or as yet in darkness) desire to be partakers thereof
also, and so to like of that advice and instruction, which is written for the
believers, that they be willing to depart from the wicked, crooked, and cursed
way, which they have walked in: I should be so far from envying them this
blessing, that (although this was not set out directly for them) yet they may
understand, that with such a willing mind, as I have undertaken this work for
their good who are in Christ already; with the like, I am ready to further
and help forward them, who think and know themselves as yet to be strangers
from Christ altogether; and to rejoice, if I might understand, that they have
been moved hereby with their brethren, to become the true disciples of Christ.
This work especially tends to better the good.
Indeed I have not labored so much, to persuade these to return from their
misery, and to become penitent, because many both examples of the like, and
reasons to move them, are plentifully, plainly, and in good order, extant
among them already; and for that I know, that for the most part, they profit
not by our writing, who do not before regard and take good by our preaching:
and yet they shall have my best advice in the end.

But as for such as have already been in the truth of their hearts converted
unto the Lord, and unfeignedly been called back from the former lusts of their
ignorance, and the fashion of the world, after the which sometime they framed
themselves: for such (I say) I know it is the earnest desire of their hearts,
that they may as well have a pathway to godliness, and a direction to the same
lie by them, to the which they may always at need resort, when public
helps by sermons cannot evermore be enjoyed: as also to be made more fit
thereby, to profit by them, when they do repair unto the same. And although I
look not for it, that such account should be made of this book among the
greatest number, who have resolved with themselves either not to learn or
embrace any thing more, the^ already they have, especially proceeding from a
meaner person then themselves: or to scorn whatsoever agrees not with their
humor, and to cavil and quarrel with that, which natural reason does not
allow; yet (wishing better things unto such) I am not discouraged, but for
their sake who would desire the same in practice which here they shall find by
reading, I will go forward in this enterprise.

I know it can do the best no harm. It is of use to all sorts of good
christians, and that was one reason of setting it out.
I am sure (trusting and looking for the blessing of God) that it shall do many
good, such I mean as would do well, if they knew how; and would grow wiser,
sounder and more constant in faith and a godly life, if they had help and
direction thereto plainly set before them. And I am not ashamed to say, The
second reason of setting it forth.
that for mine own furtherance as well as other men's, and the better carriage
of my self through this my pilgrimage; I have been willing to gather some such
things together, as in this small volume I have contrived. The third.
Neither had it come into the hands of others, unless such as are of account
above my self for their gifts, as well as my neighbors, The fourth.
among whom I have preached the doctrine, had persuaded me to set it forth.
Besides all that has been said, I have chiefly in this enterprise (as God does
know) sought this, that this imperfect and weak labor of mine may stir up and
move some of my godly brethren (who for the ability and grace which God has
given them, if their leisure had been as much as mine, might tenne-fold more
profitably and substantially have undertaken it) to enlarge and perfect the
same, the argument being so needful and profitable, to the further benefit of
Gods Church and people. The fifth.
Another reason of setting out this treatise was this, that they who desire it,
may see, by the diligent marking of the same, the beauties of the Christian
life more clearly, then by many Christians lives it can be seen, and that it
may be brought into greater account with many, who think it (through error)
ouerburdensome.

And partly also I was moved hereunto by this reason, The sixth.
that the Papists cast in our teeth, that we have nothing set out for the
certain and daily direction of a Christian, when yet they have published (they
say) many treatises of that argument. For answer to the first point of this
objection, they cannot deny (but that they care not what they say, to bring the
people out of love with our religion) they cannot (I say) deny, that both in
catechismes, sermons, and other treatises, there is set forth by us that which
may clearly direct Christians, and stir up godly devotion in them, though all
be not gathered together into one volume: for the second part concerning their
treatises, I grant there are two which I have seen, set forth by them in our
English tongue, the one called a Christian Directorie, the other the Exercise
of a Christian life, wherein the author does, though both superstitiously and
nothing properly, go about to teach and give direction for every day in the
week; (the one bearing the name of Robert Parsons the King of Spaines
confessor: the other by an Italian a Jesuit Doctor in Divinity, Jasper Loarte.
and translated into English by some favorite of Popery) the first is nothing
less then a direction for a Christian though it be called a Directorie,
tending rather to persuade men to resolve with themselves to leave some gross
evils, then to show them soundly how to attain pardon, or teaching how to live
christianly: the other is a ridiculous tying men to a daily task of reading
some part of the story of Christ's passion, and saying certain prayers
throughout the week every day a task; but indeed nothing less then
directing, after the will of God, him who desires to lead a Christian life.
Both of them I dare boldly affirm, being deceived themselves, do deceive
others, especially the simple, who is not able to discern and try the lying
spirit in them. The one, that is to say, Parsons, has under a pretense of a
holiness and devotion, set down sundry impediments to resolution: But yet they
are put in among other things to take away the harshnes and tartnes of manifold
errors of merit, and other superstition mixed with them and vpholden in that
religion, and as it were, with sugar to season them, which else no taste could
abide, and in the depth of a subtle heart, put in, to make the world believe,
that the Popish religion is the only holy religion, and the professors thereof
the godliest livers; when yet Antichrist is their captain, and head, or (as
they will not deny) the Pope of Rome, who yet does, and for these many years
has vpholden and maintained open, and almost infinite heresies and abominations.

And as their religion and worship is composed and framed of heresies and lies,
and a confused heap of superstitions, and outward dead works, even Jewish and
Heathenish ceremonies; so the persons themselves who profess they know most,
and that they are able to give rules unto others, upholding and building upon
so rotten foundations, are furthest off from well guiding others, so that no
man may ever look by any Popish direction to live christianly. Although I will
not dissemble what I think, namely, that some do mean more simply and truly
then the rest, and think that they serve God aright having devout minds, but
being ignorant of the truth, must needs be deceived.

But of Master Parsons book of Resolution, seeing he and some other have set
it out in a glosing style to insinuate with the ignorant and unlearned reader,
that he seeks no other thing but to draw him to piety and godliness, I cannot
forbear, but I must say a little, which otherwise I would not have done. And
the rather, for that I know, he has snared many simple peoples consciences
thereby, who being themselves willing to be led in a right way, believe that he
means as he speaks; and therefore are left, I say, deceived, and in a
bottomless gulf; out of the which, if God help them not some other way, it is
not possible for them to get. And this I say first, for the delivering of such
out of the snare and maze in which they have lost themselves by reading of that
book, that although there be a pretended show of godliness in it, and much
superstition; yet the best of it is far from true piety and godliness, seeing
that, and every part of it proceeds from faith joined with assurance of Gods
favor, Heb. 10.22. Act. 15.9.
which is that alone that purifieth the heart, and makes it able to bring
fourth fruits of amendment of life; without which, men's best actions are
wrought by the strength of corrupt nature, and are fruits of the flesh, and
works of darkness, and so abominable. And yet this faith do Papists make no
reckoning of, neither therefore can the book of Resolution teach or hold it.

Further, I say that the law only is urged in that book, without teaching the
poor soul that may be terrified thereby, how to lay hold on the promise of
eternal life, and without the Gospel: Esaias. 61.1. Ezech. 34.4. Ioh. 8 32.
the truth and glad ridings whereof, is only able to set at liberty the
consciences of such as are strangled by the threats and terrible curse of the
law: for if that truth make free (as our Savior says) then are men free in
deed. And whereas it may be objected to me, that I do the author of the book
open wrong in saying, that he joins not the Gospel with the law; for he that
reads it, may find, that he speaks of Jesus Christ, that he was given by
his father to the world, that many might be saved; and of the promise: and how
say I then that he teaches the law without the Gospel? I answer, that he
does indeed mention both the promises of the Gospel, and also Christ; and this
he does in that chapter which is entitled [diffidence in Gods mercie] but yet
is that true that I say: Romans 1.16.
For the Gospel is the power of salvation to him that believes: and it is not
the Gospel if it be not believed: for that is a part of the description of it:
Now believing or faith has assurance going with it, as I showed out of the
epistle to the Hebrews: Which the author of that book with the rest of his
religion, does flatly deny; and therefore it is clear, that he does not teach
the Gospel, neither in that book does plainly and soundly guide the wandering
soul which sees it self lost, to find remission of his sin, and
everlasting life; and consequently, that he does not direct his reader to live
godly, as I said, but holds him in darkness and in the state of damnation, and
deceives him.

And what reckoning he makes of faith (which the word of God prefers before
all other things, and says, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
that it overcomes all difficulties in the world) we may see by his own
words, in his preface fol. 6. I exhort the discreet reader (says he) of
whatsoever religion and faith he be, to enter into the careful study and
exercise of good deeds, assuring him, that this is the right way, to obtain
at Gods hands the light of true belief. And a little after he says, It is
more easy to believe as we ought, then to live, as we should. Here we see, he
preferres good deeds before faith: as if the fruit should be said to be more
precious, then the tree that bears it. And yet as not marking what he said, he
utters these words a little before, which cannot stand with the other: Our
fathers received one uniform faith from their mother the holy Catholic
Church, and did attend only to build upon that foundation good works and
virtuous life, as holy Scripture commands us to do. Here he affirms, that
good life comes from faith. Thus while he speaks such contraries, sometime,
that good works must be built on the foundation of faith; and with an other
breath, that good life is the right way to bring faith, (and yet all may see he
speaks of one and the self same faith in both places) must he not needs by
so teaching, deceive the simple reader while he not being able to understand
what is taught, cannot possibly practice that which he ought?

And it was not to be doubted (to speak even in charity as in conscience we
ought) that the said author promising in that his book of Resolution, that he
would add two other parts to it, (as thereby confessing, that it alone was an
insufficient work of it self, to be set forth; and therefore dangerous to
entangle and snare the ignorant) and yet cannot in eighteen years find a
time to fulfill his promise; it was not to be doubted (I say) but that he was
well content to deceive and trouble many that should read it: As if one should
but preach the wrath of God for sin to a hundredth persons, (whereas his book
has been in the hands of thousands) and should come no more in eighteen
years, to help them out of fear and doubt, and how to live afterward, it
would be condemned and that justly, and cried out of by all advised people. And
yet we may conclude, without any doubt, knowing his religion what it is (if
ever he had any such meaning, to set out two other parts) that they should have
been as sound as this one is, that is to say, unwholesome, full of damnable
errors, and uncomfortable: For can men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? No more can any sound fruit be reaped or comfort gotten by false and
unsavory doctrine. But for Parsons devotion (whereof his book bears so great
a show) or how little of the labor was his, or how little honesty is in the
man, yea rather how great iniquity: let them of his own religion testify, I
mean the secular priests in their books against the Jesuits.

But to say no more of Parsons: The other has little in him worthy any
account or reckoning, and to this purpose very nothing. To go forward
therefore, seeing this was one cause why I took this work in hand, because
the Jesuits cast in our teeth the want of such books, as may direct a
Christian aright through his whole course toward the kingdom of heaven, and
yet that which they teach tending thereto, is but as poison in a golden cup;
although, as I have said, there are many of my brethren, who had been fitter
for this service then my self, if they had not been employed some other way:
yet I nothing doubt by the help of God, to frame out of the word of God by
that little help of my knowledge and experience, such a direction for
Christians (all ostentation, and comparison of learning set aside) as shall
give them small advantage of boasting, and shall be both more pleasing to God,
and more for the comforting the heart of him, who lists to be directed by it,
then popery can afford: and withal, a direction, that has not only been
shaped out after the rules of the Scripture, but also such as has been and is
practiced and followed so far forth, as of sinful flesh may be looked for,
both of minister and people, and approved of those who have excelled, and gone
before many, in both.

And although I deny not, but that many things might have been far better
set down, and expressed, then I am able to do; yet that none think me to
have taken in hand a matter above my reach, and wherein I have no skill, thus
much I say, that for these twenty years and more I have aimed at this, in my
reading, preaching, and living, and in the observing of my self, and the
example of others, what communion and near acquaintance there may be betwixt
God and a Christian, what hold may be laid on the promises of God, what
strength may be gotten against sin, what freedom and liberty we may have by
faith, what setlednes and constancy in a godly life, what comfort, and
rejoicing the children of God by his free grant, may have, even in this life,
and that both sound and constant, which shall not be taken from them: also how
far the spirit may overcome the flesh, and how the devil may be resisted.
And more especially for these seven years and more, I have more particularly
set my self about the matter, which in this book is contained (which how
weakly soever it be performed, I have therein a good conscience:) First, to
show, both how a man may become a true believer, be brought into the favor of
God, and afterward how he may be directed to lead his life daily: And
therefore I have not suddenly nor unadvisedly set upon this. And what help I
have been able to get from others, as my convenient opportunity has given
leave, I have not neglected. The which I set down (as I said) that none may
think me fantastically to have gone about to broch some novelty, but rather
to offer that to the people of God, which has with good advise been gathered
for their edifying. The seventh reason.
But now to return, the last reason moving me to take this work in hand, is,
that they who have inioyed my ministry above these twenty years, might have
me (as many of them have often desired) after a sort putting them in remembrance
of that which I have taught them in my life time, many years after I shall be
taken from among them. This shall suffice to be spoken of my intent and purpose
in this treatise, with the reasons thereof.

Now it remains further to acquaint the reader with the order, The third
point in the preface.
which I use in the same, and to give some instructions, that he may read it
with the more profit; and that it may be more plain and easy to understand
(which I do especially intend) then otherwise it should be. First, therefore,
because I have written it for their sakes chiefly, which are truly called to
be Gods Children, and have an interest in his promises, as being converted to
him from the subjection of the devil: first I say, The contents and
particularly of the whole book, in seven several treatises.
my purpose is in the foremost treatise to show, who are his, and who they are
which in an holy, and humble manner may rest satisfied in his promises, against
all dreadful fear and doubt which might disquiet them: that so neither the
loose livers may deceive themselves with an opinion of that, which belongs
not to them: nor Gods children be deprived of that, The first treatise.
which is their own, and the ignorant of both sorts that list, may learn to
know better and amend their estate. In the second, I mean to show, The second
treatise.
what course of life such persons must walk in, throughout their days, and
how they are to carry themselves both toward God and men, which I think
expedient to lay forth as clearly as I can, and in some ample manner for the
more full satisfying of the ignorant sort. From these two, all the other points
handled in this book do arise. The third treatise.
Therefore in the third, I will show what are the means whereby this life may
be maintained, and how the believer shall use the same, to the end that this
whole and great work of worshipping and serving God, may not be taken for a
bare matter of knowledge, as the most do make it: or (which is little better)
for a serving of God by halues, as too many professors of the Gospel do use
it: but for a faithful regarding of our ways, that they may be shaped out
after Gods will.

The fourth treatise.
Now this practicing of the godly life is performed by following a daily
direction to guide us, and whiles we do every day with conscience set our
selves to honor and obey God, as in our callings, and by other occasions
offered, we shall be able, and not wanderingly and uncertainly, as we have been
wont to do. And so this shall be set down in the fourth treatise. And this
is one of the points in this book which requires to be read again and
again, as being neither commonly entreated of, and of singular use to such as
desire to take good by it, especially not being able otherwise to guide
themselves. The fifth treatise.
In the fifth, I make the reader acquainted with the lets, which will hinder him
(though he be willing to be directed daily) from this course, except he will be
persuaded to arm himself with such helps, as whereby he may withstand them:
and remedies against these lets shall in this fifth treatise be set down, as
far as shall be thought expedient. The sixth treatise.
The sixth shall set before thee sundry privileges and blessings, which God
does peculiarly bequeath unto, and bestow upon his beloved ones, besides such
benefits as they have in common with the men of the world. By the which, as by
other reasons, the faithful may see themselves persuaded, The seventh treatise.
with much more chearefulnes, and greater willingness to lead a christian life
daily, and to shine as lights in example to others. In the seventh and last,
such objections as may be brought and alleged by any, either weak christians,
or carnal cauillers, against the practicing of the daily direction, shall be
sufficiently answered; that thereby the truth appearing more clearly, many
such as desire unfeignedly to do well, and yet have not learned to guide
themselves by any plain direction, out of the Scriptures, may have this as an
help unto them to see that which the Scripture has revealed hereof. All
which, though I direct not this work to the unreformed, may be in stead of an
exhortation unto all loose and careless persons, (though more briefly, seeing
there is enough written of that argument) to move them to rouse up themselves,
and to awake out of their deadly sleep, and not to cast away their souls for
the love of their sins, (which they may be sure that God will find out
howsoever they hide them) but to seek betimes, that they be unburdened of
them, cast them up as a most filthy gorge, and avoid the vengeance of Gods
wrath which will otherwise most surely come upon them for it: For though sin
be sweet in the committing of it, yet it will be bitter, when it comes to be
repented of: and most bitter, when without repentance, it must be accounted for.

The fourth point of the preface, directing the reader, how to read this book
with most profit.
Now it remains to direct the reader how to bestow his time profitably herein,
and how he may read it to his benefit. For I doubt nothing, but he that shall
be conversant in it, desiring to be directed in his course, shall think his
time well spent, so as he be helped to understand the same. First therefore let
him read the contents of it briefly set down in the table before the book,
to help his memory; then the marginall notes of the chapters. And if he
conceive and understand the short sum of it so set down; then let him read
the book it self, till he be acquainted with and understand it: wherein if
his capacity be the weaker and shallower, he must desire the help of some
which are more skillful (and better able to see the drift, scope and meaning of
it) then himself, especially in such points of it, as are more hard and
difficult, either to understand, or to practice. For although many shall have
no need of this directing of them to read it with profit, because they can
easily direct themselves when they once know the general parts, and argument
of it, as before is mentioned: yet because my desire herein is as well to help
and benefit the plain, and simple, (such as many of them are, amongst whom I
have preached the same) as well as to bring the wiser and more learned sort
acquainted with the practice of it, therefore I know they shall have need
thereof.

Now when they shall understand it in some good sort, let them weigh and
consider, how far forth they have had use of it heretofore, as whether they
have according to the first part of this book, by the ministry of any sound
preacher of the Gospel, attained to the assurance of their salvation, and of
the forgiveness of their sins, wherein if any will take it as granted, though
falsely, (as they are most ready to do so, who have least felt the burden of
their sins, and therefore are indeed furthest off from it) herein, I say, if
any will needs deceive themselves, I cannot help it, but they are like to
read the rest with less fruit and comfort, and to go without the use of it
in their lives, whatsoever they hope for. And therefore such I advise to take
most pain in the first part: I mean in the doctrine of it, and reading other
treatises concerning the matter, as Master Mores and other catechismes; and
Master Perkins works, namely, his book entitled the grain of mustard
seed: And to raise all the doubts they can to any experienced teacher or
brother, and to look for, and see those things work upon them which are
taught there, both the doctrine of humiliation, and also of justification and
deliverance.

If this be attained, let them consider for the better assuring themselves
hereof, that they cannot but affect, love, embrace, and delight in the doctrine
of sanctification, and repentance from dead works, I mean they shall desire
to practice the godly and christian life when they see that it is the
commandment of him who loves them most dearly, and what it is, and wherein
it consists, which is the sum of the second treatise of this book. And to
this end, let them read, and by marking seek, (as such who would find) that
they may see what sin there is in them which they are not willing nor
desirous to forsake (if there be any) or among duties generally appertaining to
all, or particularly touching themselves, which they cannot submit themselves
unto. If there be either of these found in them, as that they cannot leave nor
be brought to renounce some particular sins, nor obtain of themselves to be
subject to some special duties, as thinking it too strict (as thus it may be
with many, and no doubt is) such must know, that it is the doctrine of the
Scripture, that all the commandments of God be had in account of us, Iam.
2.10. Heb. 13.18. Matthew. 5.18.
and conscience made of one as well as of another: which if they see and
acknowledge according to the word of God, they cannot but submit themselves
thereunto, if they have rightly embraced the doctrine of the former treatise,
that as in judgment and knowledge they yield; so their heart and affections may
go with the same. And so doing, God will work in them by little and little
(seeking it by prayer of faith) even as he wrought the like in them before, and
weakened such rebelliousnes in their hearts already.

If therefore the teachable and christian reader be thus far wrought upon by
the spirit of God, that he thus favor, approve, and give over himself to be
made truly repentant, which is that that is required in the second treatise of
this book; then is he fit to occupy himself about, and to be conversant in
the third and fourth part of it, that is to say, in the doctrine which
requires a daily walking in a Christian course, by the use of such helps as
are appointed of God for that purpose; and some of them also daily, as in the
proper place shall appear. For every true Christian is to know, that the
religion and worship of God must be in use and practice among the imbracers of
it, as well one day as another. But how shall any be able to keep his heart in
frame, and reform his life daily by the means which God has appointed, as in
the third and fourth part of this book is required: except he be first a
liker, and an allower of all known points of duty, and do heartily renounce
all evil, as is required in the second part? Which being done, let him look
to grow daily more strong in faith, whereby he may hold, and keep fast the
certainty of Gods favor daily, and constantly. And not as too many (and yet
the people of God) do, who are not acquainted with this: that their confidence
should be maintained daily, or a good conscience in their particular actions
regarded, and that on one day as another, but think it enough at sometimes to
have this care. Neither let any look to repel this as too strict, under
pretense of weighty affairs, and their own infirmity. For this is but the
delusion of the devil, as shall be showed, who will easily persuade it to be
more then needs. This is that which must be learned out of the third and
fourth part.

And when this is understood, approved, consented unto, and aimed at, the fifth
part of the book shall be clear and easy to understand, and what use he
should make of it, namely, of the lets and hindrances which the devil raises
up to hold him back from this course of life, and the practice of the same: of
the which some I will set down, and help him the better to know many others
thereby. And he that shall endeavor to direct his life, and take heed to his
ways, as he shall by Gods word be taught, shall break through many of the
lettes, which yet shall strongly hold back and hinder other men, as the fifth
part will show: and if he be for a season withdrawn from a godly course, yet
he shall there find helps and remedies to recover again; and little ease,
otherwise.

And if there be any difficulty in conforming a man's self after this
forementioned doctrine (as I deny not but the flesh will find many) yet
against them all, let him proceed and read with good regard the sixth
Treatise, wherein are set down the manifold and goodly prerogatives and
privileges, which God has bequeathed to his people to hearten them on, and
encourage them to godliness, and to make the christian life easy; and he shall
see great light, and find exceeding force therein, to stir him up to go
forward mightily against all fainting. And then he shall not be moved for all
the objections, cauils and fleshly reasons which he shall read in the seventh
part. For the comfort and experience, which he shall partly enjoy already, and
partly hope for and expect afterward, shall make the^ vanish away as smoke,
although otherwise they are able to hurt and sting, as fire. And then when in
the due consideration of the whole, he shall see what the blessedness and
manifold good things are, which he in part has already, and shall afterward
enjoy both here and in the life to come, he shall see what infinite cause he
has to praise God for his portion, that he has rather beautified and blessed
him with his favor and graces then many other, whereby he may walk so
comfortably, and that in this vale of miseries, to Gods kingdom.

And thus I advise thee (good reader, as I know it shall be best for thee) to
bestow thy travel about this book: wherein I appoint thee no certain time,
nor hours, seeing all which would profit by it, cannot spend their time alike
about this, or any other such exercise. But this know, that this book tends
to teach thee the practice of thy knowledge, and not to know only: and that I
have gathered together into this one, the things which are dispersedly
contained in many other. And therefore in that respect, over and besides the
ordinary reading of the holy Scriptures, thou may bestow the more time
about it, as thy leisure will permit, considering that once or twice reading a
book for practice, is not enough.

Lastly, seeing the whole matter herein contained, is to serve thee and stand
thee in steed, as setting before thee a direction to govern thy whole life,
thou must not think thy labor and time much, though thou be occupied in it
for many years together: for as much as the fruit shall be greater, the
longer that thou have been exercised in it: and yet thy labor less, yea easy
and pleasant: for so shall thou grow better acquainted with the use of it,
which in one word is to make thy life more sweet and sauorie, then thou
could look for, that is, happy here, and hereafter, for ever. Read
therefore not only to be able to report what thou have found here, but
especially to find it thine own which I do teach: and to be settled daily in
the government which this doctrine drawn out of his word offers thee, so as
thou may see that God, in the setting forth of it, has directed me.

Read with a quiet, teachable and a meek spirit, desirous of that which I
labor to bring thee to, rather then with a curious head to carpe and cavil;
or censure that which thou do not practice nor follow. A dram of grace is
better then a pound of censorious wittines: remember that all our natural
gifts, and faculties of our souls should be sanctified: I go about to make
thee see thy self inwardly and outwardly to be trained up in Gods family:
where the heart must be well seasoned, as well as thy whole life well ordered,
till thou find that which many a thriftie person does in his outward estate;
namely, that diet to be ordinary with him, which sometime had been feasting
cheer: for, when a poor man by his travel and pain has brought this to
pass, he thinks his estate good, and that which pleases him exceedingly
well: So, labor thou in thy spiritual work and serving of God, to find that
gain, and thriuing therein, that thou may make thy soul as joyful every
day, and at as great peace with God, as sometime thou scarcely had obtained
once in the week or month. Which grace and prerogative that thou may make
much of, when thou have it, look back and remember with thanks unfeigned how
far thou have been off from it, and how little hope thou once had of
obtaining it, when thou were easily mastered of thy sins and passions, and
know that it must cost him many a prayer, and groan for it, who is yet without
it, before he shall be partaker of it.

RICHARD ROGERS.

THE SVMME OF ALL THE SEVEN TREATISES, AND THE CONTENTS OF every Chapter in
them.
The first Treatise shows, who be the true children of God.
Chap. 1. OF the sum and order of this first Treatise. page 1 Chap. 2. Of
man's misery. page 3 Chap. 3. Of the knowledge of redemption and deliverance.
page 7 Chap. 4. How this knowledge works, and namely, first, that God makes
them believe their misery, and be troubled in mind for it. page 9 Secondly,
they consult in this case what to do. page 13 Thirdly, they are broken hearted
and humbled. page 15 Fourthly, a secret desire of forgiveness. page 15 Fifthly,
they confess and ask pardon. page 18 Sixthly, they forsake all for it, and
highly prize it. page 19 Seventhly, they apply Christ and his promise. page 20
Chap. 5. Of the lets of faith, and namely in the behalf of the Minister. page
24 Chap. 6. Of the lets that hinder faith on the behalf of the people. page 28
Chap. 7. What desire breeds faith. page 34 Chap. 8. How the weak in faith
should be established. page 37 Chap. 9. The difference of believers from them
that are none. page 44 Chap. 10. Of the eight companions of faith. page 54
Chap. 11. How weak faith is confirmed. page 64 Chap. 12. The sweet fruit and
benefit of the preserving and confirming of our faith. page 68
The second Treatise declares at large, what the life of the true believer is,
and the conversation of such as have assured hope of salvation.
Chap. 1. THe sum and order of this second Treatise. page 72 Chap. 2. That a
godly life cannot be without unfeigned faith, nor this faith without it: which
is the first point in the first general head to be handled. page 74 Chap. 3.
That for the leading of a godly life, is required faith in the temporal
promises of God, and hearty assent and credit to the commandments also, and
threatenings in the word of God, as well as faith to be saved. page 79 Chap. 4.
Of the heart, and how it should be cleansed and changed, and so the whole man,
which is sanctification, tending to repentance and a godly life. page 86 Chap.
5. Of the renouncing of all sin: which is the first effect of a renewed heart in
the true believer. page 96 Chap. 6. Of the diverse kinds of evil to be
renounced, and namely of inward against God and men. page 102 Chap. 7. Of other
evils and sins, most properly concerning our selves. page 108 Chap. 8. How
the minds and hearts of the believers are taken up usually, seeing they
renounce inward lusts. page 114 Chap. 9. Of the second kind of evils or sins
to be renounced, namely outward. page 124 Chap. 10. Of four sorts of such as
hope for salvation; and yet renounce not open sins, and outward offenses.
page 126 Chap. 11. Of certain objections raised from the former doctrine, and
answers thereto: as why we should put difference betwixt men: whether the godly
may fall reprochfully, and what infirmities they may have. page 134 Chap. 12.
Of the keeping of the heart once purged, in that good plight afterward. page
140 Chap. 13. Of the sum and manner of handling this second part of a godly
life: and particularly of the rules to be observed for the effecting of it:
namely, knowledge and practice. page 147 Chap. 14. Of the answering of some
objections about the former doctrine, and of the other two virtues which help
to a godly life. page 154 Chap. 15. Of some particular duties pertaining to God
directly in the first, second, third, and fourth commandments. page 160 Chap.
16. Of certain duties to men, in the fifth, sixth, and seventh commandment, the
obeying whereof is a part of a godly life. page 167 Chap. 17. Of some duties to
men in the 8, 9, and 10. commandments. page 175 Chap. 18. Of certain reasons
persuading to the practice of a godly life: which is the fourth general part
of this treatise. page 191 Chap. 19. Of answers to objections brought against
the necessity of practicing this godly life. page 200 Chap. 20. The last
objection against the godly life answered. page 208
The third Treatise lays forth the means, whereby a godly life is helped
and continued.
Chap. 1. WHat the means are, and the kinds of them, and of the sum and
order of this Treatise. page 211 Chap. 2. Of the public helps to increase
godliness: and namely the ministry of the word. page 213 Chap. 3. Of the
second public help, namely, the Sacraments. page 217 Chap. 4. Of public
prayers: also of the private helps in general. page 222 Chap. 5. Of the first
private help, which is watchfulnes. page 226 Chap. 6. Of meditation, the
second private help. page 235 Chap. 7. Of the third private help, which is
the armor of a Christian: and of the three first points of it. page 259 Chap.
8. Of the last point, which is the benefit of this armor. page 272 Chap. 9. Of
our own experience, and what a special help it is to the leading of a godly
life: also of the use of company and family exercises. page 278 Chap. 10. Of
prayer and the parts thereof, thanksgiving and request, whereunto is added
confession of sins. page 282 Chap. 11. Of reading. page 288 Chap. 12. Of the
extraordinary helps. page 291
The fourth Treatise directs the believer unto a daily practice of a
Christian life.
Chap. 1. OF the sum, order, and parts of this treatise. page 294 Chap. 2. Of
the first reason, why there ought to be a daily direction to guide the
believer. page 297 Chap. 3. Of the second reason of a daily direction,
consisting of two branches. page 299 Chap. 4. Of the third reason of the daily
direction. page 303 Chap. 5. Of the fourth reason. page 307 Chap. 6. Of the
5.6.7. and 8. reasons. page 310 Chap. 7. Of the description of the daily
direction. page 313 Chap. 8. Of the necessary parts of the daily direction,
being the 2. branch of the 2. part of this Treatise. page 316 Chap. 9. Of the
illustration or more full declaration of the former parts of the direction.
page 320 Chap. 10. Of outward duties of life, most commonly to be done daily,
but not of necessity. page 333 Chap. 11. Of the benefit and commendation of
the direction. page 337 Chap. 12. Of the declaration of the first duty of
awaking with God. page 346 Chap. 13. Of the declaration of the second duty, of
beginning the day with prayer. page 349 Chap. 14. Of the declaration of the
third duty, about our callings. page 353 Chap. 15. Of the declaration of the
fourth rule or duty, directing us in company. page 364 Chap. 16. Of the
declaration of the fifth duty, how we should behave our selves in solitarines.
page 376 Chap. 17. Of the declaration of the sixth duty, of using prosperity
well. page 385 Chap. 18. Of the declaration of the seventh duty, of bearing
afflictions rightly every day they come. page 393 Chap. 19. Of the declaration
of the eight duty, namely, of using religious exercises in our families. page
396 Chap. 20. Of the declaration of the ninth and last duty, of viewing the
day. page 399 And here follows a prayer, containing the sum of the life,
which is to be daily led of a true Christian. page 404
The fifth Treatise shows the lets, which hinder the sincere course of the
Christian life before described.
Chap. 1. OF the sum and order of this Treatise, and how it agrees well with
the former. page 411 Chap. 2. Of Satan's properties and attempts against us in
general, and our help against them. page 414 Chap. 3. Of the devils troubling
the weak believer about his faith, and if he do not prevail against him one
way, he seeks by another. page 417 Chap. 4. Of Satan's hindering the
continuance of faith. page 422 Chap. 5. Of Satan's hindering the believer from
living godly: and how many ways: and namely, by keeping him in a wandering and
unsettled course; and also of the remedy against it: and first by occasion of
that, how he holds back the wicked. page 425 Chap. 6. Of another let: the
leaving of our first love. page 432 Chap. 7. Of a third let in this first
kind, namely, the want of the ordinary preaching of the word of God. page 437
Chap. 8. Of the second kind of general lets: namely, the unmortified
affections wherewith he oppresses the believer. And first of fear that they
shall not persevere: and of pride in their gifts. page 441 Chap. 9. Of other
unruly affections, touchines, peeuishnes, etc. page 447 Chap. 10. Of worldly
lusts, and namely the love of carnal pleasure, and the inordinate desire of
riches. page 451 Chap. 11. Of the remedies of this worldly lust: namely,
covetousness, and excessive love of riches. page 458 Chap. 12. Of the third kind
of lets general, whereby the believer is hindered from going forward in a
godly course. page 467 Chap. 13. An example of a covenant made by certain
godly brethren, declaring what manifold lets the faithful have in this world
(fit to illustrate the former doctrine) contained in the two next chapters
following. In this chapter of the first part of it, namely a complaint. page
477 Chap. 14. Of the second part of the covenant, namely, the remedies against
the complaint mentioned in the former chapter. page 487
The sixth Treatise sets down what privileges belong to every true
Christian: and how he may have his part in them.
Chap. 1. OF the sum of this Treatise: the reasons why it is set out: the
order of it: and of the diverse kinds of privileges. page 493 Chap. 2. Of the
first privilege. That the believers may know in this life, that they have
eternal life. page 495 Chap. 3. Of the second privilege, namely, that God is
with his always, after he has assured them of his favor. page 498 Chap. 4.
Of the third privilege, how God gives grace to his children to live godly,
and of the first branch. page 502 Chap. 5. Of a second branch of the third
privilege. page 505 Chap. 6. Of the fourth privilege, how the godly may rise
again when they are fallen. page 514 Chap. 7. Of the fifth privilege, namely,
the gracious helps by which he has granted them to grow in faith and
godliness. page 519 Chap. 8. Of the sixth privilege, namely, of the right using
of prosperity. page 524 Chap. 9. Of the seventh privilege: concerning the
afflictions of the godly: and namely of the first branch of the same: that is,
how they may be free from many of those troubles, which do light on and meet
with the unreformed. page 529 10. Of the second branch of this privilege,
concerning the afflictions of the faithful: namely, that God delivers them
out of many, when the wicked still remain in theirs. page 535 Chap. 11. The
third branch of this privilege: that we may have much good by our
afflictions. page 539 Chap. 12. Of the eight privilege: of growing in grace.
page 543 Chap. 13. Of the ninth privilege: that the believers shall persevere
unto the end. page 549 Chap. 14. Of the tenth and last privilege, inioyed
perfitly in the life to come, but begun here. page 560
The seventh Treatise contains the objections and cauils, which may be
brought against the doctrine before set down, and an answer to them.
Chap. 1. OF the sum and order of this Treatise. page 569 Chap. 2. The first
objection (that there needs no direction daily, besides Gods word, and
therefore this is needles) answered. page 570 Chap. 3. Of answering this
objection, that no such direction can be observed daily. page 575 Chap. 4. Of
answer to this reason against the practice of daily direction: that it is
toylsome and inconvenient, taking away al pleasure from men, and hinders their
labors. page 577 Chap. 5. Of answer to another reason against daily directing
of us, that it would break off all society and fellowship among men. page 581
Chap. 6. Of the doubts and objections, which weak Christians ought to propound
until they be satisfied: namely, how they may attain to such direction
daily, and answer thereto; and other like, namely that they count it hard, and
what such ought to do. page 583 Chap. 7. Of other objections of the weak; as
that they cannot see how they should walk thus, while they live in such an
evil world: and other like objections, with answers thereto. page 587 Chap. 8.
Of the objection of weak Christians who cannot read; and another of them,
that are troubled through some Scriptures; and answers to both. page 590 Chap.
9. Of the objection, that Ministers may follow daily direction, but yet not
therefore the people, and of such as object, that better counsel is given by
the author then he himself will follow: with answer to both; and a larger
answer to the first objection in the second chapter. page 593 Chap. 10. The
conclusion of the whole book, containing an exhortation to good and bad. page
599
FINIS.
THE FIRST TREATISE, SHOWING WHO BE THE TRVE CHILDREN OF GOD.
CHAP. 1. The sum and order of this first Treatise.
ALthough my chief purpose be to direct the true Christian, who is already a
believer, How any may know they be the Lords.
and how men are brought unto this estate, and thereby may know that they are
so. Partly for them who desire to be directed in a Christian life, that

For it comes to pass by our corrupt nature, and slownes of heart to believe,
Most are deceived in the assurance of salvation.
that we in nothing more deceive our selves, then in, and about the assurance
of salvation: for proof hereof, we may understand that some, yea, many
thousands think that no man can know whiles he lives here that he is the
Lords, 1. Papists think it impossible.
neither can have any assurance of his favor till his death, unless it be by
special revelation. And this is the error of the Papists. On the other side,
2. Carnal Protestants think it easy.
many think that this is not so hard a question, as that any that profess the
gospel should doubt of their salvation (notwithstanding our Savior Christ
says that his Luke 12.32. Matthew. 7.14. Luke 19. Matthew. 7.21.
and that in comparison but few shall be saved.) And this is the opinion of our
common Protestants, which say Lord Lord, and yet are not prepared to do the
will of the Lord, and therefore far from entering into the Kingdom of heaven.

3. VVeake Christians full of doubting.
Besides both these, many poor ignorant souls think whiles they do well and
serve God, they may be assured of their redemption by Christ: but if they be by
any means hindered from pleasing God, yea, though it be by mere frailty, and
corruption of nature, then they can have no hold thereof; which uncertainty,
though it cleave unto many who are dear unto the Lord, yet it is to be counted
their error and sin, and they must be brought

These are some few of a great many doubts and erroneous opinions about this
matter, as after shall appear. For resolution whereof, though many things must
be said, yet the matter it self may clearly and soundly be set down in few
words.

To the end therefore that these and such like many see how far differing
Three general heads, or parts of this first treatise.
First, to show how a man may attain to this, to know that he is the child of
God, and how God works it by his spirit in the hearts of those which are his.
Secondly, how the weak believers may uphold themselves in temptation, and so
be stayed, as seeing that they differ apparently from those, which are not the
Lords. And thirdly, how they may afterward more easily prove that they have
true faith, and be able to

Three branches of the first head.
And for the plain declaration of the first point hereof, these three things
must be handled. The first, the clear knowledge of man's misery. The second,
of his redemption and deliverance out of the same. And the third, how both
these ought to work upon their hearts, and what fruit they will bring forth
by the operation of the holy Ghost in such as shall be saved: That is to say,
that the one which is the knowledge of misery, will wound and humble their
hearts, when they shall see thereby, that they are but dead and damned people.
The other will heal the sores of their hearts, and lift

CHAP. 2. Of man's misery.
TO begin therefore with their misery, The first head.
and briefly to speak of it, and the next branch (seeing they are of others
largely handled) no man must think that it is the estate wherein God at the
first created them, The first point of man's misery.
either Adam the father of all the world, or his posterity which was then in
his loins.

Genesis 1.26. Heb. 2.7.
the lord of all the creatures which were upon the earth, little inferior to
the Angels, endued with infinite blessings, full of beauty and glory. So that
when it might be seen that nothing was wanting but this, that he was not
altogether free from losing this blessed estate, yet even there the devil
took an occasion against him, Revel. 12. Genesis 3.
and deceived him, and his posterity, and cast them from that happy condition
which before they enjoyed.

And yet if this had been all the harm that mankind by the malice of the Two
parts of man's misery: first his sin. Genesis 6.5.
that he does always, and in all things offend God, being able to do nothing
but that which displeases him, as having his heart always and only evil.
And secondly, that he in all this is odious to God, and most justly accursed of
him. Hosea 1.2. Coloss. 1.21. Man's sin what.
Man's sin is not only that transgression of Adam in most unnatural and
treacherous rebellion, and disobedience, whereof he is most justly guilty
with Adam, and has his part (as being to stand or fall with him) but another
which rises out of this, even that infection of all the powers and members
Adam is spread over his posterity, does poison his whole nature: Every part
corrupted.
so that no sound part is found in him from the crown of the head to the sole
of the foot. And from hence it is that the understanding, even the excellentest
power of the mind, Understanding. Ephesians. 4.17.
is filled with blindness and darkness, and sauoureth not the things which are of
God. The conscience is wounded, seared, or defiled some other way, Conscience.
1. Cor. 2.14. Heb. 10.22.
and never soundly peaceable. The memory forgetting good things wholly, or
remembering neither good or evil aright, and as it ought, as experience forces
the Will. Romans 8.5.6.
neither wants ability to that which is evil. And thereafter is he carried
of his affections, as a chariot on her wheels, only to that which displeases
God. What should I say more? For who can choose but bewail and lament such a
distressed and woeful estate of the soul of man, which sometimes having been
framed after the image of God, in true holiness and righteousness, is now both
empty of that grace, and filled with all filthiness of sin and uncleanness?
But alas, who believes this or consents to it, that it is true Conversation.
But (to go forward) if his conversation and course of living, which is the
untimely fruit of this bitter root, were laid out in her colors (which I
must only very briefly touch) it were able to make him who thinks himself
most innocent, to appear most vile and loathsome in his own eyes, ashamed of
himself, and to hide himself in a dungeon that no other might behold him. For
(to speak of the actions of the mind) what are his cogitations about heavenly
matters, Thoughts.
but errors, falsehood and Iyes? What are the Desires.
but earthly, and fleshly, in degree one above another, till he being led away
of his concupiscence, is enticed, and so consents thereto, Outvvard behavior.
defends it, and is hardened? What is the outward behavior, but an yielding
up of the members of the body, as instruments and weapons of sin, even the
sin of the tongue, and sin of the life? in so much that he is all ways,
and in all things, and therefore out of measure, sinful. As Paul though he lived
after the most strict order of the Pharisees, which was in show far above
many; yet when he was converted could say, I was a blasphemer, 1. Tim. 1.15.
Romans 8.7.
an oppressor, a persecutor: So that it is most truly verified which is
written, that he neither is, nor can be obedient to the law of God, and that he
can do

The sins of man are as the hairs of his head, and sand of the seashore,
innumerable, and his best actions (as his prayers) are no better then
abominable before God, Prouer. 28.9. John 9.31. Psalm. 50.16.
as Solomon speaks: He that turns his ear from hearing the law, even his
prayer shall be abominable. Oh, it is not imagined of thousands that there is
any such evidence to be brought against the inhabitants of the earth, Fevv
think it thus.
even the unworthy sons of men, which yet were sometime by creation the
sons of God. For the most ungodly which can be heard of, will have some
goodness to be found in them: so far off is it, that they will yield to this
censure, that all their life is sinful. And therefore it is no marvel

But all this sin which thus rules and reigns in man, making him not much
unlike the devils themselves, is but one part of the misery which he is in,
yea and the least of the two, in their eyes and judgment, who are the greatest
number in the world.

The second part of man's misery. The curse first on the body.
The other part thereof is, that for this sin he is subject to all those
fearful Cursed he is in the field, and cursed in the house, cursed in his
basket, Deuteronomy. 28.15.
and in his store: and as Moses speaks of all the creatures, wherein he
should take his repast and delight, saying: Cursed is the earth for thy sake,
Genesis 3.17.
thorns and briers it shall bring forth unto thee. From hence come all the
dearths, famines, penury, and poverty, which every where are cried out of. In
his body, sickness, diseases of many kinds, aches, gripings, swellings,
burstings, and other Heb. 1.2.
If there were but a sword hanging with the point downward over a man's head,
which were sitting at a royal banquet,

But this goes not so near men's hearts as it ought, Men shift off this.
whiles they have one objection or other (as it were water) to quench the force
and heat of it. For all men (they say) are not in this miserable estate,
except some one or few, who be weary of their lives, and make all their other
delights unpleasant to them for the same. This (as unwise) they object, This
curse is to all.
because they are moved with nothing but that which they see with their outward
eyes, the voice of Woe be to the inhabitants of the earth, because they have
sinned! So long as this word shall be true, no man's estate is better then
another, all are under the wrath of God: Therefore let no man deceive himself,
God is not mocked. How this ought to affect the heart of him that hears it,
we shall see hereafter: but he that hardneth his heart at the hearing of this,
because he feels not, neither seeeth any such thing, shall surely come to
evil.

I have not yet spoken of the plagues and punishments which take hold The curse
upon the soul.
if so be they could as easily be discerned. A man to be given up to his own
vilde lusts, like a brute beast to wallow in filthiness, who might have shined
as an Angel in goodness, is there any of judgment, which counts it not
amongst the most fearful judgments? To be utterly darkened and destitute of
the true knowledge of God and of the life to come (the knowledge whereof is the
beauty of the world) and to be hastening to endless woe, and yet not to
understand it: what part of misery can be greater in this world? To be so

The necessity of this knowledge of man's misery.
These two points of man's misery are to be known as an especial part of

But here I think it not unseasonable to add this (seeing ignorant people,
which lie yet in their sins, do harden their hearts at the hearing of this)
that none have just cause to quarrel with the Lord: for if any thing spoken
John Baptist, and other his faithful servants

And therefore, I also, in the former point having showed how this knowledge of
his miserable estate must be preached unto him that shall be saved, am now to
show, that he prepares other doctrine most fit for him that has learned the
former: namely, that he causes most joyful and glad tidings of a

CHAP. 3. Of the knowledge of redemption and deliverance.
THis remedy therefore I will first lay forth, It must be known as well as
our misery.
and then show how God will have him to understand and know it, that when he is
enlightened to know the will of God both in Christ Jesus preached (as he is
revealed in the Gospel) is salvation unto all that believe: Ioh. 3.16. 1. Tim.
1.15. 2. Cor. 5.21. Act. 4.12. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
and more fully in this saying of S. John: God so loved the world that he gave
his only begotten And again, S. Paul: This is a true saying, and by all
means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners.

Out of these places, as also many other, to the full and plain declaration of
this remedy, these four things are to be considered. First, what it is, and
wherein it consists. Secondly, by whom it is wrought. Thirdly, how it is
brought to light and revealed. And fourthly, how it is received and embraced.
Now as concerning the first, The first point about the remedy.
the only sufficient remedy for the saving of man, is to satisfy Gods
justice, which by sin is violated: without which satisfaction, the wrath of
God cannot be appeased, nor his favor obtained, Gal. 3.10.12.
by suffering the punishment due to sin, which is the curse of God; and the
perfect keeping of the law, Heb. 9.22. and 12.14.
without which there can be no deliverance from sin and condemnation. The
only remedy of our misery consisting herein, we may clearly see that it is
out of our selves, and not in any other creature: for neither we, nor any other
creature for us, is able either to sustain the curse, much less to overcome
it: or perfectly to fulfill the law, which is impossible to Romans 8 3.
and all opinion of merit, or of any thing in man to avail to his
justification.

But to go forward to the second point, to show by whom it is purchased: The
second point about the remedy.
This remedy, which could be had by no other, is appointed by the Father,
undertaken and wrought by Christ, and sealed in men's hearts by the holy Ghost.
It is wrought (I say) and found only and wholly in Jesus Christ, God and man,
who being perfect God took our humane nature on him; and in both became a most
merciful Mediator betwixt his father and us, to reconcile Act. 4.12.
that salvation is in no other, but that in him only is the whole remedy of
the misery of mankind to be found: There is given no other name under heaven
(as the holy Ghost speaks) whereby we must be saved: So that whosoever has
the Son (as S. 1. Ioh. 5.12.
John says) for to redeem him, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life. And to make up the whole matter: if any should ask how Christ's
redemption is made man's, he is to know, that God his father of his marvelous
love gave him freely (even as he had long before Romans 58.
God declared his love to us, that when we were yet his enemies, he sent
Christ to die for us, that whosoever believes in him, should not any longer
lie under Gods wrath and perish, Ioh. 3.16.
but have everlasting life; he being given us of his father to be our wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30. Now if by him alone
God has brought this most sovereign remedy to mankind, against the
intolerable woe, which by sin is come into the world, and is (as has been
said) gone over all men, the popish practizers may blush and be ashamed, who
part stakes betwixt him and creatures, and so ascribe not the whole work of
our salvation to Christ alone.

The third point about the remedy.
The third thing, namely how this divine mystery and secret is brought to
light, is (in the peaceable and flourishing estate of Christ's Church) the
glorious Gospel: which because it contains the most worthy and acceptable
message of man's full redemption by Jesus Christ, is called of S. Paul, the
power of salvation to all that believe. Romans 1.16.
The use of the which Gospel is, to manifest that righteousness in Christ,
whereby the whole law is fully satisfied and salvation attained. The which
being soundly and plainly published and preached by the faithful ministers and
messengers of God, and namely this part of it, that mankind is fully redeemed
by the blood of Christ Jesus, the only begotten son of God, manifest in the
flesh, does bring great and Luke 2.10.
and is embraced of them which know the value and price of it, Matthew. 11.12.
with all possible welcomming of it. And this, though more darkly, as the times
were, the Lord caused to be taught under the law in types and shadows,
prefiguring Christ to come and to be exhibited; even as he says in Ioh. 5.46.
Moses wrote of me: though indeed now under the Gospel far more clearly and
plainly, that it may now be verified, if ever, that Christ by preaching him,
has been crucified in our eyes. So that by this, is this mystery of salvation
(purchased by his death) manifested unto us.

The fourth point about the remedy.
Now the fourth point remains, how this tidings of Christ's delivering man from
the fear of the wrath to come, is received in the world: and that Matthew. 11.28.
that poor sinners coming unto Christ, he will ease them, that is, Act. 26.18.
and to be short, so to give credit to Gods word, Hebr. 4.1. Romans 10.
as he rest thereon that he will save him. Which true faith is wrought in him
by the ministry of the word, revealing this mercy and truth of God: and by
these, the holy Ghost inlightening him to conceive, and drawing him to
believe, and so uniting him to Christ: which whosoever has thus received, is
hereby made the child of God (so as he himself shall see it) and an inheritour
by sure hope of eternal life. This therefore is to be known of him who shall
be saved, and his judgment is to be settled in this truth, before he enjoy it
as his own, or can have his part in it. He must be able to see clearly and
soundly that God Romans 5.
as ever was by Adam procured guiltines and condemnation. And thus much of
these two first points, that he whom God will effectually call to the assurance
of salvation, must have knowledge in general of man's misery and Gods mercy
by Christ's redemption.

CHAP. 4.
THere is yet wanting the true embracing and applying of Christ, with all the
merits of his death and passion, The third point of the first part of this
Treatise.
to this man that has the foresaid knowledge, or else he can in no wise be
happy. Let us see therefore how this knowledge works in him, on whom God
will show mercy, how God by the light and help of it draws him forward,
until he believe for his own part, and in his own person, which the other,
Romans 7.9. They are most light, who have most cause to mourn.
as though no danger were coming toward them (and therefore keep a course in
their lives which is after the fashion of the world) are to be pitied That
there is a way that seems pleasant to them, Prouer. 14.12. Act. 14.16.
but the issues thereof are the way of death. God suffering them (as he did the
Gentiles) to walk in their own ways.

But to leave them as sufficiently convinced of a woeful estate, even by the
testimony of men, who have any judgment, and to go forward with that which
is in hand, that is, to show how this doctrine works in him, who by Col. 1.9.
the Lord giving him with his knowledge, wisdom, which is a gift of the
spirit, whereby he applleth general things particularly to himself: and that
he thereby speaks unto him, as well as he does to any other, in the
denouncing the threats of the law, Romans 15.4.
and everlasting damnation: and (his eyes being now opened to believe this) he
thinks himself the miserablest of all other, who before nothing at all
regarded the welfare of his The whole have no need of the Physician, but
Matthew. 9.12. Neither let this deep impression of the doctrine of the law
preached (being no less sensible to the party that feels it, then the print
of the seal is to our eye in the soft wax:) let it not (I say) be counted a
mean and common mercy: In deed it is meanly accounted of, the doctrine of it
being so common and often taught. For as it is said of faith, Luke 18.8. that
when the Son of man comes, he shall find it rare in the world: so in some
sort we may say of this, that it is rare, that men, who know that all are
under the wrath of God, till the Son of God make them free, do believe
indeed that it is so with them, and even their own case.

Oh, men shun this as death (and yet without believing it there is no Act.
2.37.
And that is lively set forth in the example of the three thousand that were
converted at Peter's sermon: who for their estate they were drunken with new
wine: yet when on the sudden the Lord arrested them by his word and challenge,
and with his spiritual sword, by Peter's skillful handling the same, had
wounded and stricken them (so as they could not escape nor resist the power and
stroke of it) they were pricked in their hearts, as if an arrow had pierced Men
and brethren, what shall we do? Even thus in some sort does the Lord work,
when he makes them to give credit to this his thundering voice by his law
arraigning men for their sins: which is no less fearful to them then the
roaring of a lion, when yet other men, whose sins are as great, and have as
good cause to be feared, and to faint under the burden of them, are not a whit
moved thereat: not moved, I say, through the commonnes of it, any more then
the

And this I do the more stand upon, to make this point clear, because I have
observed by long experience, how grossly the people of our age do suffer
themselves to be bewitched about this matter. For to bewail them who are soon
healed, if they be pricked at all, and them who fall deadly to raging at the
Minister, if their hearts be vexed by hearing their danger: I say, to bewail
the estate of them, there is yet a third sort (in number an hundred for one of
the other) who were never troubled in conscience for their Matthew. 24.27.
and some work; and, as they did in the days of Noah, embrace this present
evil world, profane, merry, yea and light-hearted, when (as S. Iam. 4.9.
James says) they should houle and mourn: and as though they feared no more
then they would make men believe they do, are never scared, till the very time
and hour of death, or deadly danger. But what do they then? when they have
called in lustily, as men at a banquet, I mean, when they have taken their
pleasure and lived therein? I say, when they see their reckoning, and day of
accounts is near, then what do they? where is their mirth become? Oh, Nabal,
that is, as fools, and are as he was, when he heard he should die, as a stone,
and a block: or despair, as Judas did, and some of them die as he died, that
is, sooner then they needed (as well as they loved their life.) And the best
sort of them are but as they that are spoken of by the Prophet, that is, they
have no bands in their death: they die quietly, perhaps with a Lord have mercy
on us: but they not regarding blessing in their life, Psalm. 73.4. Luke 13.2.
it is now far from them at their death, and therefore dying without
repentance, let other be feared by them.

And yet while the world is full of such people (as I have said) behold, as if
they yet wanted something to make them miserable, how this unsavory The law
is to be preached.
by many ministers as well as common persons: who cry out, that it is pity
that some are suffered to preach the law: and that such urging of men's
consciences for their sins, is enough to drive the people to desperation: and
such like. When yet S. 2. Tim. 4.2.
Paul commands that the word be preached with all authority, which men may
not be able to resist, and with conuincing of the conscience. And S. Luke in
the Acts commends the fruit of that doctrine so highly, even that they were
pricked in their hearts for their sins, without which But not without the
Gospel.
nor obtained pardon of their sins. Indeed, if any preach the law alone
without the glad tidings of the Gospel, or urge repentance without the
encouragement of Gods mercy through Christ and forgiveness of sins, he were
worthy to be sharply reproved, and to be restrained till he should amend so
dangerous an error and so grievous a fault. But if any find fault with the
joining of both together, when experience and Scripture do show, that no other
kind of preaching can profit and do good in the Church, they are earnestly to
be desired, if they do it of ignorance, to be taught; if of a worse mind, to
desist from it. But this shall suffice for answer to this speech, rashly and
unwisely cast forth to cause many to

The Scripture yields many complaints and cryings out of Gods servants, who
acknowledged as much: Some when they had once escaped the danger of their
former woe; 1. Tim. 1.13.
as that of Paul to Timothy does testify; I was a blasphemer, a persecutor,
and an oppressor: Some in the time of their distress, as by that in Jeremy;
Ierem. 21.18. Judge. 2.3. and 10. 1. Sam. 7.2.3.
I heard Ephraim complaining thus: Convert me O Lord, or else I cannot be
converted: and they in Sam. 1.12.20. with many other. And God be thanked,
although they are but a few of so many thousands as have lived Jacob sorrowed
when he thought that a wild beast had devoured his son Joseph, Genesis 37.34.
have confessed the depth of their woe, sighing and seeking, if by any means
they might find ease and deliverance: although the most are hardened, and can
be brought to no such abasement.

Objection.
And if that which I have said before to this purpose persuade not men to think
so: but this which I say is the less believed and regarded, seeing Answer.
for (as I have said) this is so with some, because they neither know nor
believe this, but they lie in ignorance and unbelief, and therefore neither
suspect, nor fear any such thing, and so it is with all the world until they
have knowledge by the law: and Paul shows that it was so with him, till the
law revealed it to him, for so he says Romans 7.8. I once was alive before the
Law, that is, I thought myself in most perfect safety: even through this
ignorance I say, and unbelief it is, that this peace, peace, when there is no
peace, Ierem. 6.14. For with such as by the

The second work: they consult in this case what to do.
AFter that he sees by the doctrine which he has heard, how the case
stands with him, namely that he is guilty before God of eternal punishment
and wrath, and sees not how to escape the same hanging over him; the Lord
directs him and guides his heart to enter into further consideration with
himself of and about his present estate, and consulteth what to do in that
his extremity. Neither does he this lightly or houerly (as many) after he has
heard the necessity of that duty taught him, and the same earnestly urged
unto him: but minds it seriously, and goes about it as a matter of life and
death.

Ierem. 8.6.7.
it is evident by that the Prophet Jeremy says with a vehement complaint, when
the people were called to repentance, and What have I done? that is, none
entered into consultation about the matter. Therefore it is said, that the
prodigal son, Luke 15.17.
who resembles most rightly the sinner, and in his returning home to his
father resembles the penitent sinner in turning to God: that he did before
that, come to himself, and say, How many hired servants in my fathers house
have bread enough, and I die for hunger? Which, what other thing was it, then
to consider and deliberate what he were best to do? And the Steward
questioning with himself what to do, when he was warned to give an account
of his stewardship, does plainly teach this. Besides all that has been said,
if the godly who had fallen, could Revel. 2.4.
and Peter before he wept bitterly remembered the words of Jesus, and how he had
transgressed against them: Upon all these considerations, let us not doubt, but
that God draws his, to consult about their estate what they should do, being
in anguish and distress of mind. And that they may look for little good to
come of their casting down, and sorrow, which by the law is conceived in them,
if they do not in the most serious manner, as they be able, and as the The
complaint of the penitent sinner.
what he has lost, and deprived himself of, in this his estrangement from
God, by following and seeking his own will, and foolish liberty: he sees an
end is come of the cursed race which he has God will not be mocked, nor his
word be frustrate, which has

He will therefore consult no longer with flesh and blood, as he has done, but
puts away all fleshly and carnal shifts and holds; and by Gods gracious
direction takes counsel by the knowledge that he has; and considers that
no man can come to Christ, if the heavenly father draw him not by his spirit:
And therefore although the sorrow of hypocrites vanishes away, and comes to
nothing, yet by Gods gracious working in him, it becomes an occasion of
humbling and breaking of heart unto him, and of much other good, as hereafter
we shall see. Also he considers that God is slow to anger, and ready to
forgive sinners, being gracious and full of mercy: And though that Oh
miserable man that I am! what shall I do? how shall I escape this fearful
vengeance? In this heaviness, he accuses himself, and complains: but to
avoid that Romans 7.24.
he cries out with Paul: O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me? Paul
to Ananias, Act. 9.17. or stays him by the public ministry, or by his own
knowledge brings him, as we read of the prodigal child, Luke 15.17. to
counsel himself by that which he has heard.

The third work: they are broken hearted and humbled.
THe former consultation by Gods working, brings this resolution to him, that
he will no more look back to his old Sodom, what hard conditions soever he go
under, and so he falls to relenting, his heart is broken, Luke 17.9.
as Paul did after he was cast down, Act. 9.6. Lord, what will thou have me to
do? And now he sees that the Lord has him at advantage (as a man bound in
chains) ready and attendant to whatsoever it pleases him, who before, for
his stiff-necked stubbornnes was neither to be entreated, commanded, nor
feared. This unfeigned humbling of himself before God, for all his wants,
breaches, and wounds in conscience, is a beginning of all goodness and grace,
which man feels in himself, and casts off pride, and the strength of an
high mind: and what knowledge of religion, or any other good gifts soever a
man has without humility, he is but unreformed and unmortified. An happy

Thus must the Lord work and show his wisdom and power upon this vnframed
and crooked person, before he can be made right and straight. But what then
(perhaps you will say) and what is this man the nearer to Gods kingdom, and
the sight and knowledge of his redemption, out of his forementioned misery? I
answer, Very much every manner of way. For being thus humbled, he is now
easily to be persuaded: and being by the same spirit of

The fourth work: a secret desire of forgiveness.


Here therefore he sets before his eyes, more clearly then he could before,
the nature of God, how loving and kind he is: how ready to pardon: and how
how great sinners (who might more easily be dismayed then he) have found favor
with him. It is also (by Gods good directing of him) much to Matthew. 12.20.
Matthew. 11.24. Matthew. 5.4.
but such as exempt themselves: And that the bruised reed especially, shall not
be broken, nor the contrite heart despised, but the heavy laden coming to him
shall be eased, and they who mourn shall be comforted, being blessed already.

And although through ignorance, and ill building up, many are far from those
thoughts and affections a long time (the devil working upon their weakness) and
God so disposes it also, that even some such as have the best means and
helps to set them forward, may feel and see their own weakness for a time;
yet does he work those things in them at one time or other, if he purpose to
save them: and this fervent desire (I mean) though in some Matthew. 9.12. Luke
7.38.
he shall be saved; and if he have not, he shall perish everlastingly) does
above all things in the world sigh after him, longing to be made partaker of
him.

In this hunger therefore and thirst of his, after pardon, how welcome think to
whom an honey comb before, Prou. 28.9. Matthew. 15.27. Luke 15.17.18.
was not pleasant: nay, crummes under the table are comfortable refreshings to
him; who before, was glutted with the childrens dainties. Oh, how glad such an
one would be, if he might be received of his but as an hired servant, who could
not before be brought to like of the place of a son? But he that could bring
him tidings of righteousness, that is, a messenger sent of God to tell him that
God will be merciful to his offenses, Job. 33.23.
and think upon his sins no more, this should be unto him an odd man, and
one of a thousand. Then to hear that Jesus Christ has vanquished sin, death
and the devil, who had power over him, and brought to light immortality and
life to him, and has given him perfect righteousness to cover his shame, and to
make him comely and well favored in the sight of God, and that hereby he is
fully reconciled to him again: all the former disgrace, anguish of mind, and
deadly thraldom abandoned, what think

Is it to be thought, that a man being in this case before mentioned, filled
with misery from top to the toe, not knowing where to hide himself, not
seeing how to go under the burden of his grief, would make no reckoning of
this message? as if a man thirsting almost to death should refuse to drink; or
one at the place of execution should reject his pardon. Among other that it may
be (as the King of Nineveh said) he will have mercy upon him; so that there is
some hope by suing and seeking in humility and remorse unto God: thus the Lord
still brings him on. And whereas some other in this case hastes out of his
sorrow, if by any means he may either break through it, before it has if he
perishes he perishes: yet some hope he has; he resolving with himself that
he will never walk in his former deadly estate, but that he will confess and
lay forth his long continued wickedness, unto the Lord, though it be against
himself: do but how for a day (as it were) like the bulrush, with the wind:
and therefore they are far from the truth of it: But he of whom I here
speak,

Now if it be asked, what he is the better for his resolving: to the end it may
more clearly appear, I answer, that when this is wrought in him, his heart
is mollified, humbled and softened, as Paul's was; who after he saw that God set
himself against his going to Damascus to persecute his Saints, and threw him
down on the ground, Acts. 9.6.
said: Lord, what will thou have me to do? And when he is brought to this
point, his heart is both full of relenting, and sorrow an heart of flesh,
Ezech. 36.26.
not of stone, in which, the saving grace of God being offered, may be planted
and received. And all this is wrought in him by the marvelous and secret
operation of Gods holy spirit; who as he begins, and finisheth the whole
work of his receiving Christ; so does he the middle part of the same: for it
is not in any other, thus to bow and bend man's heart. Neither does Gods spirit
that only, as with an hammer breaking and brusing the clods of it, but also
does lead him further.

The fifth work: they confess and ask pardon.
FOr with these holy affections in this poor sinner, there is wrought an
encouragement and some more bold access to God by the same spirit, to confess
his sins to God, even as particularly as he can, especially those in which he
has taken most pleasure, and which have most prevailed in him: and to say with
the prodigal child, I will go unto my father, and confess, father, I have
sinned against heaven and thee, Luke 15.18.
etc. how much soever it goes against him: and as he confesses his sin, so he
powers out earnest prayers to him for the pardon of the^, through the
mediation of Christ. All which, howsoever Romans 10.14.
and him, who obtains them, to be in especial favor with God: as in the
forenamed parable is most lively to be seen: where the father (resembling God)
is said to have met his lost son before he came at him, and to have embraced
and kissed him, after that he was resolved in himself to go and seek to him
for favor and pardon, and to acknowledge his faults unto him, etc. Now was
there any thing (think we) in the natural father, which is not much more in
the father of mercy? who exceeds all the fathers of the earth in kindness and
compassion. Thus the the field, Matthew. 13.44.
wherein the pearl is hidden, selling all to buy it: so do they (I say) set
light by all things, in comparison of this, and are carried with this mind, that
they will forsake whatsoever may hinder, for the obtaining of it.


But what then? (some perhaps will say) do you affirm that these things can do
a man any good without faith? (for of this nothing has yet bin said) and do
you affirm a man to be justified (for such an one is he who is in favor with
God) having no faith? or that any thing is accepted of God which he does (as
his desire to be forgiven, his hungring after it, his humiliation, access to
God in prayer and confession of sins) all these being without faith? or if
not so, do ye then say that we our selves must thus prepare our selves to
receive faith? but that is to attribute free will unto man being yet in the
estate of misery and bondage, and unrenewed, as being yet men in their
filthiness and gore blood, as the Prophet Ezechiel speaks: Ezech. 16.6.
and she whom he vouchsafes to make his beloved spouse (I mean his Church) he
raises out of the dust, washes and cleanses her from her filthiness wherein
he found her, and then takes her to him to delight in, as his dear and only
spouse. It is the Lord therefore which is the author, Heb. 12.2.
and finisher of his faith who shall be saved: and he, as he has abased him,
and filled his heart with sorrows for the same purpose; so it is he that
soketh it by little and little, and seasoneth it in time with faith, hope, and
comfort: This is his only work.

To proceed therefore with this person whom the Lord will save, when he has
wrought thus far in him earnestly to desire the remedy against when the
desire is not accomplished, the heart faints, and they for all their desire,
seeing it vanishes away, and is not constant, fall away altogether. But God
goes further with this person, as I have said.

For he having now with the skillful merchant weighed the price of this Matthew.
13.44. He whom God loves highly priseth the pearl.
namely, to have Christ to become his, has it in such estimation, that he
counts meanly of all things, in comparison of this: and in good aduisednes
sells all that he has, to buy it. But what has he (you will ask) of his
own, to purchase or come into the possession of it? As for his goods and
riches, whatsoever he inioyeth, they are not his own, but an others, and
borrowed: Luke 16.12.
(yet many thousand poor souls which shall be saved, have little or no wealth
at all) but this precious pearl is not bought with money. What has he then
(ye say) to procure it? Esaias. 55.1.
verily, he has nothing, but an interest and hold in sinful pleasures, He
has nothing of his own but sin.
and worldly lusts. But alas (some man will say) what do ye naming of them, as
things any thing worth? But I Yet hard to renounce that.
and therefore to renounce it, is no easy nor small matter. And yet (so well
it falls out for him) there is no other thing required of him, to the
attaining of the forementioned pearl, then the casting away and the forsaking
of that his sin. For so the Lord plainly testifies: he that denies
himself, he shall be my disciple: and whosoever forsakes any thing (that is,
Matthew. 19.29.
which God condemns) he shall have an hundredth fold more then he forgoeth,
(so bountiful a rewarder is the Lord of

Therefore, when this silly sinner understands, and gives credit unto it: as
dear and pleasant as his sins were unto him, that he could neither by fear
nor shame, neither by allurements or persuasions before that, be brought to
abandon and wax weary of them; yet now, he disclaimeth and cries out of
them, But he despises it. Hos. 14.9.
and in an utter detestation of them, says: as Ephraim said of Idols (in which
she had so much delighted) What have I to do with them? A thing all may see to
be very admirable. A man to forgo that, which he loved best of all, yea
better then life it self, (for how many lose their lives for their sinful
pleasures?) yea and that willingly and readily, only This is a great work of
God.
that they cannot profess it? Thus does the Lord work in the heart of him,
who shall embrace Christ for his Savior, that nothing shall separate betwixt
them. Ioh. 6.44.
It may well be said, No man comes to him, except the father draw him by his
spirit: for otherwise, we read, that it is as hard for a wicked man to become
good, Ier. 13.23.
as for the black More to change his skin, or the leopard his spots.

And whereas it may be said, there are many, when they are pricked in
conscience for their sins, who do thus cry out of them, for the time; but He
forsakes not sin as the wicked.
for the hope of mercy and forgiveness of sin, differs as much from that
rash and sudden crack of fearful crying out of sin while only terror
oppresses; as cannon shot differs from the Ahab gave signs that he forsook
his sins, 1. King. 21.27. Joel. 2 13. 1. King. 22.8.26.
by rending his clothes, (but not his heart) putting sackcloth upon him, and
fasting; yet he showed by and by after, that al was but a ceremony, by wilful
resisting and disobeying the message of God by the prophet, and boldly
affirming, that he hated him: Yet on the other side, Zacheus did far
otherwise: for how he received Christ's doctrine, he declares by the fruits
following: Luke 19.9.
revenging Abraham. An other example: the people, 1. Sam. 7.3.4.
whom Samuel persuaded to forsake their sin, for the hope of the promise, did
not only lament after God, but they did in deed forsake it: they did cast away
Baalim and Ashtaroth, idols, which they so delighted in: declaring thereby,
that they found by the prophets ministry, a far greater treasure: that is,
the mercy of God in forgiving them their sins: according to that, which is
written since; Pro. 28.13.
but true before, even since the first man's repentance: He that confesses and
But their fathers, who made as great profession and show as they, returning to
God and seeking him early: Psalm. 78.36.
yet they did but flatter him with their mouth, and dissemble with their
tongue, for they were not faithful in his covenant.

But these shall suffice: like unto the which, there are many more: Let it be
granted therefore, that this is a mighty and admirable work of Gods spirit,
which thus persuades this silly soul, which is travailing hard to find
peace and rest unto his heart, thus (I say) to bid farewell to his sweetest
delights for the hope of the gain that is set before him: For these two go
together: highly to esteem and prise the promise of life and happiness: and for
the Paul says of himself, Phil. 1.7.8.
that when he began to see the beauty of this blessed message, he counted
those things loss, which had been vantage to him, yea very doung for Christ's
sake, that he might win him: the same is verified in all such as I now speak
of, even Moses, when he was of a ripe age, full forty years old, he did show
the fruit of it, as many other ways, so this one: that he refused to be
called the son of Pharaos daughter, and to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season. And when this work is

The seventh work: they apply Christ and his promise.
FOr by the doctrine of ye promises, which he hears, or has heard published
and preached unto him, he draws his heart to apply the^ to himself, and to
fasten upon them as his own, even as if they had bin properly made to him: he
persuades him by that which he hears, no longer to fear God as a terrible
Judge, and so slauishly to abide in his former bondage, God seals up his
promises to the believer
2. Cor. 1.22.
And therefore it is that the Scripture does so often use this phrase of
speech, We are sealed up by the spirit of promise, and by the spirit of our
God: to give us to understand, that as nothing is with greater security
assured unto us then a writing sealed; so there ca^ be no surer way for a man
to hold this redemption and salvation, then by having it sealed unto him by the
spirit of God: who only knowing the mind of the father and of the son, does
make the same known unto his mind, and bear witness to his spirit that he is
Romans 8.16. The believer reasoning with himself.
and teaches him thus to reason. If God will forgive him, who has received
grace to seek without fainting and wearines, who longs for it in a melting
heart for offending him, who desires it more then al earthly pleasure and
profit, and is willing to cast away all impediments that may hinder it: if he
will forgive such, and he has framed me to be such a one; then (doubtless) he
will be merciful and forgive me.

Thus God makes him (of whom I speak) to see clearly that he is his, no more
to be separated from him, when he has opened his heart, as he did the heart of
Lydia, Act. 16.15.
and causes him to believe that the son of God who was given to the
unworthy world, is given to him, being one of the same. For Luke 15.20. He
weighs all things hereto belonging.
For we must think that this afflicted person now mentioned, does often and
deeply weigh the truth, unchangeableness, and perpetuity of the precious
promises which he hears preached unto him; yea and that with more delight,
then he does any thing else; he weighs what may be like to hinder and hold him
from having his part in the^: and when he considers that God, who wills him
not to fear, is greater the^ all that lets him; what he may, he remoueth
it, though never so precious to him; and considers what does give him
greatest encouragement, and so imbraceth the same: we must think when he once
co^ceiueth the incomprehensible

He seeks help of others.
he seeks the help of others, wheresoever they may be come by, men of deeper
insight, and greater judgment and experience in and about the will and purpose
of God, concerning salvation, by whose loving travail, counsel and labor he
grows more expert and resolute, and so setleth his heart in believing, If any
thirst, Ioh. 7.37.
let him come to me, and I will give him the water of life to drink. So that
as Jacobs heart failed when he believed not his sons report that Joseph was
alive, and the chief governor under Pharaoh; yet when they told him the words
of Joseph, and showed him the Chariots which he had sent to carry him, Genesis
45.26.27.
the spirit of Jacob revived, and he said, I have enough, etc. Joseph my son
is yet alive. So though the goodness of the message shall be so far beyond the
expectation of him to whom it is brought (as fearing the clean contrary) yet
when he shall weigh and consider advisedly the truth of the matter, and
certainty of

And thus does his soul stay up it self: for seeing God does give it freely
all tears wiped away, the rags are cast off, the robes are put on: What
will follow of applying Christ.
the spouse is betrothed to Christ her husband, and she by faith made partaker
of all the good things which he brings with him: who is given unto his
Church, not poorly nor bare; but to be her wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30.
And he that has thus put on the Lord Jesus, God will know him for his,
wheresoever he finds him, neither shall any take him out of his hands, so
says our Savior himself: My sheep (whom in the verse before he calls
those which believe in him) My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me, Ioh. 10.27. etc.
and Like unto these are they all, who shall glorify God in this life,
separated from the world, though annoyed by the people of it, as the silly
sheep are by the goats: whose conversation what it is, another place shall
declare, and lay forth hereafter. And this is faith, which making them
inwardly persuaded in some sort by so clear evidence, (as I have said) causes
them outwardly in time to profess the same more them blessed which have these
graces: but none are blessed without faith: Mat. 5.4.5. Psalm. 48.
therefore faith is there also; because the spirit of Christ dwells in he
dwells in his by faith, therefore it must needs be in them. Which thing I do
the rather stand upon to prove, seeing it is rather tried and discerned by
these, then known by it self without other holy affections going with it, and
for that many of tender age in Christ, and yonglings, cannot be certain and
thoroughly persuaded that they have faith, and consequently, that their sins
are forgiven them, and yet by infallible signs and tokens we know that it is
so. I speak of the least measure of it: for of the stronger faith, the
question is easier. And the weakest measure of faith I call that, when an
humbled soul longs, A description of the smallest measure of faith.
and almost faints for Gods mercy in Christ; and although he be not assured
of it, yet he sees that it cannot be denied:

This I have spoken for their sakes who more hardly do lay hold on Gods
mercy, and do with more difficulty apply the promise to themselves: the
which to do with all possible care, and not to be turned aside from examining
our selves soundly and thoroughly by any let, is a grace of the greatest
importance. And he is wise indeed, who will not stay before he have it: which
wisdom God will teach them whom he loves: for though many very ignorant and
careless hearers do hardly, yea never come to any resolution of faith; yet
ordinarily, where people are soundly, clearly and wisely How God works faith.
by little and little soketh and distilleth into the hearts of many of them.
And though they know not when this gracious work of God was wrought, for the
most part, as neither can we discern and see the plants and herbs when they
shoot out, though in time we see it is so: yet some there are, whom God in
special manner does privilege at one time Luke 19.9.
As our Savior Christ pronounces of Zacheus: This day is this man become the
son of Abraham, and salvation is come into his house. So Lydia, and they in
the Act. 2.37. Faith unites to Christ.
And this is the faith whether it be weak or strong which unites to Christ;
and makes them that have it (which is a mystery and riddle to the world) to
have and enjoy their hearts desire; yea and indeed more then they could desire
or think, namely, to be truly the children of God, and thereby happy. Even the
same faith, for which Christ pronounced Peter blessed: who when he saw him but
in base estate the son of man, yet for the words which Blessed art thou
Simon, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, Matthew. 16.17.
but my father which is in heaven.

This faith though Peter had, and he has it of whom I speak, even whosoever
it be whom the Lord makes blessed (for both weak and strong are partakers of
one and the same precious faith, 2. Pet. 1.1. Common professors have not this
faith.
) yet the common professors and hearers of the Gospel have it not, because
they do not look that the Lord should reveal it to them, without which they
cannot have it, but take counsel of their own wisdom and reason, which do
hinder and Peter) they cannot tell nor see: except this be it, when they think
and have a good hope that it is so: as though such a thing might be wrought in
them, and they not know how, the change which it works being so apparent:

But such men should understand, that as it is the gift of God to believe,
Phil. 1. How God works faith.
and he draws men hereto by his secret working grace: so yet, he does it by
means outward, even whiles men obey his ordinance in attending upon the
preaching of his word, and wait for this work, seeking it and praying for it
daily: his ministers so speaking, and the people so reverently hearing, Act.
14.1.
that they may believe: and if not in the time of hearing, yet after by their
own examining of their estate, and comparing it with the doctrine taught, Why
many want faith.
And this thing verily men do not, that is, hear, try their estate by the
rule taught them, weigh after examination, and remove lets, until they may see
that they have found that which they sought, and that there is no just cause to
hinder it. Few will bestow any labor, or beat their brains about any such
matter, nor any travail of the mind: for that is unsavory and unwelcome
unto them. Therefore it is, that after so long preaching of faith, there is (as
our Savior foretold) little faith in the world, Luke 18.8.
few have acquaintance with it,

The conclusion of this third part.
But before I go any further, I will, for the readers better remembrance,
conclude that which I have taken in hand in this third branch of the first part
of this book to prove, that is to say: although there be many departings from
the right way leading to eternal life, and many breakings off from it, and
though it be easily conceived but of few: yet he whom the Lord will choose and
repute for his, shall both see into it, and discern it from al bypath, and
walk in it; and so be partaker of happiness by believing. Whereby also that he
shall see the Lord in the land of the living: even he who has been truly
humbled in the sight of his misery, seen Christ Jesus the only deliverer of
such, and therefore himself has, and does believe in him unfeignedly.

And thus I have showed how both the doctrine of misery and redemption ought
to work, which is the third point. But seeing we are so fearful at the first
beginning of our effectual calling, that we dare not rest persuaded that we
have any faith: these few marks of it following I have set down Marks of
faith. Ioh. 3.23. Seeing God commands us to believe. Psalm. 77.3.8.9.10. 1.
Pet. 2.2. Psalm. 32.5.
are infallible tokens, that in such a person there is some true measure of
justifying faith. That is to say, first, if we strive against doubting, Judge.
6.17. Secondly, if we not feeling faith, complain bitterly of the want of it.
Thirdly, if we seek fervently to be settled in believing. Fourthly, if we
desire to search out the sin which may possibly hinder us, and to expel it.
And some one of these, or other graces like them, shall ever be seen in the
believer by such as can judge, though not always perceived of the party
himself.

CHAP. 5. Of the lets of faith, and namely in the behalf of the Minister.
ANd now that I have showed, how by faith men are made the people of God (and
consequently justified thereby) who were before his enemies, and his beloved,
which sometimes were not beloved, I would here cease to say any more of this
matter, but that I consider that every truth is not by and by received; and so
I fear, I may say of this, especially because few have this faith, and that it
is seldom or rarely found in the world: which thing, we who mark the course
and practice of the greatest part in the world, do see may well be so: I will
therefore here speak to my dear and weak brethren somewhat more at large to
satisfy them, and set down the chief lets that hinder faith on the behalf
of the Minister. Now seeing that faith so honors, inricheth, Many deceived
in faith.
it should (doubtless) be far otherwise with thousands of them which think
they have it (but are deceived) then now it is, if they did enjoy it. Yea, and
to come more near to our selves, for whose cause chiefly I wrote this, the
multitudes in our parts of the land which profess that they have it, and by no
means can abide the contrary speech to go, or opinion to be conceived of
them, should, if they had it indeed, astonish and fear all Epicures,
Atheists, and Papists, and other hypocrites, which now differ little from them.
They should make the religion (I say) of those which have any (as it is in it
self, a lump of lies, and an heap of heresies) to appear so indeed; and the
other, who regard none at all, to Esaias made in his time, saying: Behold, I and
the children whom the Lord has given me, are as signs and as wonders in
Israel, Esai. 8.18. In few words therefore let us see what is the cause why so
many, who boldly affirm that they believe, and look verily to be saved by the
death of Christ, 1. Let of faith, the devils bewitching. 2. Cor. 4.3.4
are yet utterly destitute of the same. It is briefly set down by S. Paul, to
be this: If our Gospel be hidden, the god of this world has blinded their
minds, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine unto
them. He plainly shows that the fault is in men, that they are content to be
blindfolded and holden back, though the devil be the bewitcher of them, and
so keeps them from so great a treasure, as is brought unto them by the
Gospel. But as we truly say that man is faulty in this, that he opens his
ears, and gives credit to Satan's deceitful suggestions: so because God did
see what would come to pass thereby, he did therefore set watchmen, who should
give his people warning thereof, namely, how Satan holds them from believing
by some of his subtle trains, to the end they might Fault of not believing in
Minister and people.
whereby men are let from believing, is either in him who should bring the
tidings, that is, the watchman, who is the Minister; or in them who should
receive the same, that is, the people and hearers: for if the lets be not
removed in both, faith is rarely, or not at all come by.

It is clear therefore (to begin with the Minister) that if he be one which
teaches not at all, In the minister. Prou. 29.18.
they that depend upon him cannot know what love God bears to them through
Christ, 1. Not teaching.
or at least they cannot know it to belong unto them: for as much as faith
comes by hearing of the word of God preached unto them: and as our Savior
says: If the blind lead the blind, Romans 10.17. Matthew. 15.14.
both will fall Therefore it is too manifest, that in some parishes, Prou.
29.18.
not one man knows himself to be saved (I say, if he depend upon his
Minister) but all such knowledge is a mystery to them. And yet if that were
the only let on the Ministers behalf, it were well with many people: 2.
Seldom teaching.
but where seldom teaching is, the hearers must needs be ignorant of this
matter also: because this heavenly truth, to teach how men may know that they
are the elect of God, and without wavering, cannot be sufficiently and clearly
enough laid forth by the skilfullest teachers seldom teaching; neither, if it
could, were conceive and understand, Heb. 8.11.
remember and be familiarly acquainted with it; so as they may be able to try
themselves, and to prove their estate to be good; all which yet is meet and
necessary. For though I know that the grounds and general truths are few,
upon which this matter depends: yet the breaking of them small to the peoples
benefit, requires labor, and time, Phil. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 2.11.
plainenes, and love: yea, to teach the same thing often, for their safety; and
in a nurselike or motherly affection to stut and stammer with them: that is, to
apply our selves unto them, and to give them here a little, and there a little,
now a line, and then a line; and yet to count all little enough to make them
savor our message: at least, and to be saved by it. Howsoever many Ministers
make Paul to Timothy, that attendance should be given to teaching, 1. Tim.
4.13. 2. Tim. 4.1.
and that they should be ready to do that duty in season and out of season,
and to put the people in mind of the same daily ( though they know this thing)
as well as to attend to reading privately, 2. Pet. 1.12.
to make them fitter for that duty: Ioh. 21.17.
Christ has laid no weightier business upon them, calling it the pawn of their
love to him, to whom he has given this charge, to this end that this may be
well and thoroughly done, 1. Pet. 5.2.
and the rather seeing the people depend upon them.

Necessity of often teaching.
They will also consider, that the people have many infirmities, much dulnes,
slipperie memories, and sundry other pulbackes; all which do show the
necessity of often teaching. The which being so, I profess with grief, it
astonisheth me often, when I think of the too great slacknes, and unwillingness
of many who have gifts; that they hearing, and knowing, that he who has an
office, must attend upon it: and again, that woe is pronounced to them who do
it not: Romans 12.9. Ezech. 33.3. Ierem. 48.10. 1. Pet. 5.5.
and that as they love Christ, they should feed his lambs, and his sheep:
and also that the flock depends upon them: Yet that they can be content to
take the commodity, and to refuse the labor, and as some do count it, too
base a thing to discharge that duty. But howsoever they can easily shift it
off before 3. Let of faith in the Minister not plain teaching.
As if he should teach often, and yet do not carefully acquaint himself with
the peoples weakness, and want in conceiving the doctrine, which is to be
delivered unto them; but should speak above their reach, little to their
understanding, and conceiving, and consequently little to their edifying. There
is nothing more like to hurt the people, then such a kind of teaching, when
they shall have a learned man to preach unto them (whereby they are ready to
think their case far more happy then others) and yet in the evidence of the
spirit, reverence might be procured to their Ministry among the hearers: and
that their doctrine might be approved in their consciences, which is approved
of the Lord, as being drawn from his word, and easily conveyed to their
understandings, 2. Cor. 5.11. Matthew. 7.29.
that so they may prove that they preach with power and authority, and not as
the Scribes.

There is but one thing more, 4. Want of Catechizing.
which in my judgment does hinder profiting on the teachers behalf: and that
is, when by Catechizing, the chief grounds of faith be not briefly and
clearly taught, in right and good order, Matthew. 9.12.
when they see no need thereof by their sin and misery; because it is
clear, that they can find no sweetness in Christ, who feel not their sins
bitter and sower. Also that a man be taught, that he no sooner believes, then
he is made a new creature, and so is changed in heart and in life: 2. Cor.
5.17. 1. Pet. 2.2.
and that the newborn desire to grow by the sincere milk of the Word. It
were a great furtherance to their Ministry, Ministers should have authority
to examine the People.
It were much to be wished that the Minister, who is willing to take this pain
(for it is tedious and unwelcome to many) might have authority to prove such
as hear him, how they profit: as well to build up those which are weak the
better, when he enjoined to be subject to trial of their soundnes, as well as
to resort to the assembly,

Commendation of Catechizing.
A Minister able, and painful through love, in few necessary points jointly
laid together (laboring with the people) to make a sufficient Catechism,
might be well assured, that he should call so many to the fellowship of the
precious faith, Heb. 6.1.2.
as God had appointed there, unto eternal life: and without this, it is found
too true, that much preaching does the less good, as shall appear better unto
such as list to look more deeply into it. And I could with all my heart
desire, that they (so many as neglect this worthy work, and necessary duty)
might be constrained to attend upon it with all diligence: Good life of
Ministers.
Private conference.
who should resort to them upon special need and occasion, to comfort them in
their heaviness, and to stir them up to religious and Luke 20.21.
) I make no doubt, but that God would plentifully bless their harvest.

CHAP. 6. Of the lets that hinder faith on the behalf of the People.
Lets of faith in the people. Devils bewitching.
But if the Minister be framed both in life and doctrine, as were to be wished,
thus to give warning to the people of Satan's malicious intents, and other
impediments; and so seek to win them to the faith: yet are there such
swarms of evils in the people, and so many kinds of them, that except, they
for their parts be willing to be counseled, and to receive their message and
doctrine, they shall find, that through one let or other, few of them shall be
partakers of this precious faith which I speak of. To speak more plainly,
my meaning is, Satan lays infinite stumbling blocks in their way: Light
esteeming the Gospel.
for when God by the Preaching of the Gospel their pleasures, Luke 14.
and their profits; with the beauty and love whereof, the devil dazeleth
their eyes, that they see nothing there, that is, in their preaching, which can
provoke them to be in love with it: although that which can save them be only
there to be had. So by one deceit or other he prevails so far with them,
that they believe not, no not even they, who hearing, receive the doctrine with
liking it, and for that very cause think that they believe.

And what is cleerer at this day, then this, that of many thousands which
receive the glad tidings of eternal life by our preaching, willingly, Fevv
that receive the doctrine have faith.
or at the least without resisting our doctrine; yet few, yea very few attain
to the power the Gospel being hidden from them? that is, the promises of it
not being believed of them, what other cause is there then this, the devil by
one means or other has so blinded them all, that they believe not: and as for
this latter sort, they seeing their misery what it is, and how unavoidable by
any way that they can find out, how could they (if they were not enchanted and
deprived of their right mind by the devil) be content to go without the
remedying thereof, it being so freely and graciously offered them?

The which thing also, Practice of true Christians.
is proved further to be true by the practice of true Christians, who having
sure hold and taste by faith of Christ's merits, will Heb. 4.1.
strong and fierce, as well as the other, yet they so look to the greatness of
Gods love, and the truth and certainty of his promises, and the benefit which
they reap thereby, that although with strong fighting, and loud cries through
depth of sorrow, they are in combat with Satan; yet they will not give over,
nor yield their right into his hand. But as one in the peril of drowning
takes hold of a naked sword, though it cut him deep, rather then yield his
life to the water: so they choose to keep their faith with some great
difficulties, rather then to give over their soul, which is vpholden only
thereby, into the Job. 13.15. Psalm. 23.4.
Although thou kill me (O Lord) yet will I trust in thee: and, Though I walk
in the midst of the vale of death, yet will I not forsake thee. By which
appears, that the same god of this world, is not wont to cast mists only
before the eyes of the best, but even attempteth sore to take away all the
light of their faith from them, as he does keep it from the other altogether:
But God has taught their hands to war, and their fingers to fight (as it is
in the Psalm) the which skill, because the other

None beguiled by Satan, but wilful and foolish.
And thus by this which has been said, let all learn to know, that none are
kept void and destitute of the fruit of the Gospel, and the believing of the
same unto salvation; but such as willingly put their necks in Satan's yoke,
and are contented to be deprived of the crown of righteousness and life,
through their own folly; whiles others, more wise then they, will by no
means let it go. But to the end that every sort may see themselves as in a
glass, and what their several lets are, I have thought good to set them down
briefly and particularly; or at least so many, as whereby the most are hindered
by the devil from embracing and believing the promise of life: that all
Particular lets of faith.
may see how they are held back from their happiness and peace: And these they
are briefly.

1. Some think it impossible. Psalm. 14.1.
1. First, some think it impossible to be assured of their salvation in this
life, and therefore seek not after it.

2. Not necessary. Matthew. 19.22.
2. Others think it possible, but not necessary, that men should busy
themselves about it, for the obtaining and keeping of it, and that they may be
saved without so much ado.

3. Too hard.
3. Another sort are such as think it both possible and necessary, but they
see it so hard to come by, that they are loath to take the pains, therefore
they will not go about it. Luke. 14.18.


4. Careless.
4. Another sort are careless, and as ignorant, as they are careless; ever
learning, but never coming to the knowledge of the truth: who though they come
to hear, yet regard not when God speaks unto them out of his word, Luke 8.12.
their minds being taken up about other matters: Now by this manner of hearing,
they come not to understand the doctrine, much less affect it.

5. Fear loss.
5. Others see that if they should labor so after heavenly things, they must
lose their liberties in sinful pleasures, which they will not by any means
forgo: and contrariwise, that they must suffer reproach, and afflictions, with
the children of God: Heb. 12.16. Luke 8.13.14.
and therefore they look not after the promise of the life to come: as Esau.

6. Presume. Ioh. 2.23.24.
6. Others are presumptuous, who through selfeloue persuade themselves that they
do believe, and yet keep some one sin, or many in their hearts, which they
will not renounce; contenting themselves to think they have faith, Matthew.
8.21. Revel. 3.17.
when they have it not; and so never seek for the truth and power thereof. As,
they would follow Christ, but first they would go bury their father.

7. Never broken hearted. Iere. 4.4. and 8.6
7. Others with these, though not so gross offenders, were never broken hearted
through the sight of their sin, and misery; and therefore the doctrine of
faith cannot enter.

8 Fear continuance. Acts. 26.27. Ioh. 6.60.66.
8. Others think, that though they begin, yet they shall never continue, or

9. Too slightly seek it.
9. Others will say, it is a comfortable thing to know our selves to be the
children of God, and they hope they are so: they speak well of the Gospel:
they are glad to hear it, and like well of the promise of eternal life, but
they never go about to fasten it to themselves, by meditating of it, weighing
the Revel. 3.1.
and to be conformed to it.

10. Others like well of it, as the former, 10 Sudden flashes soon out.
and sometimes weigh and consider the doctrine, and thereby think themselves
to be in good case: but this comfort is sudden, and quickly gone again. And
thus they are driven and tossed to and fro; yet being close men, will not
disclose their hearts, and lay open their doubts to such as may help them, and
help to set them at liberty from their lets: although they be utterly unable
to help themselves. Matthew. 7.26.


These are the chief lets, whereby the people are holden from this grace of
believing, without which, it is impossible to please God, or to be his children.

And now that I have set down a taste of both kinds of lets, I think it not
amiss to stay a while in speaking to both sorts of them, by whom these arise,
that is to say, the Ministers and people. And first, An exhortation to the
ministers
I turn to you my brethren in the Ministry: And you I exhort to consider
your duties laid forth at large in the word of God, sometime by the names and
titles which he gives us, and sometime in plain commandments and charge. The
names are many; as watchmen, Ezech. 33.7. Cant. 3.3. laborers, Mat. 9.37. the
salt of the earth, The titles of Ministers.
and light of the world, Matthew. 5.13.14. shepherds, Ioh. 21.15. and the good
Scribes which bring out of their treasury both old and new things, Matthew. 13.
and stewards 1. Cor. 4.1. and nurses, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. with such like. In
commandments thus: Take heed to your charge, and to the whole flock, Their
charge.
over which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God
which he has purchased with his blood, Act. 20.28. And again, to Timothy: I
charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick
and dead at the appearing of his kingdom, preach the word, be diligent in
season and out of season, convince, reprove, exhort, with all long sufferance
and doctrine. 2. Tim. 4.1.2.

All which with the like, what other thing do they teach, but that all such as
the Lord has put in trust with his people, bought with so great a price, What
their practice should be.
should love them tenderly, as nurses do the young children, and bear their
teach them the whole counsel of God, as good Scribes: and regard all sorts as
the Lords stewards, by wise applying themselves to all. Then that they should
be diligent and painful, as the Lords workmen and laborers, going before them
as lights to guide, in example of vncorrupt life in all wisdom and gravity,
but especially (as Christ taught his Disciples at his departing from them) in
humility, Ioh. 13.14.15. not thinking themselves too good, 2. Cor. 4.5.
for Christ's sake to be their servants. And to the end, they may bring them to
him, 2. Cor. 11.2.
and preserve them as chaste spouses to him their only husband; to do them
good privately, as confirming the weak, comforting the afflicted, 2. Tim. 2.^.
admonishing the unruly, and being patient toward all, Ezech. 34.4.5. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. These duties (I say) the Lord inioyneth us by the forementioned
titles which he gives to his Ministers, and by the commandments and charges
annexed thereto. Now, as we would be glad he should hear us in the time of our
necessity, and especially in our last and solemn day of our departure from
this life: so let us hear him thus calling upon us to have compassion on his
silly, Incourageme^ts to the Ministers to do their duty.
ignorant and shiftles people. And although the burden that he be his
ambassadors, The first from their honor.
and to bring the message of so great a king, and the message it self not
about things transitory or earthly, but eternal, what can be like unto it?
Besides, The second, from their comfort.
the comfort which we may reap both by our private study in giving
attendance to reading, and as having that, as our ordinary labor to talk
with God (as I may say) and his good servants, when other men must toil and
travail in all weather, with much care and trouble: and also the comfort by
our preaching, which may easily be greater to us then to them which hear us,
oh what can be in this life, comparable unto it? whereby also Solomon says,
Prou. 2.10. unless we be careless of our own good. More then this, we have
encouragement and persuasion to do our duties in this behalf more
cheerfully, by considering that so many as we turn from their evil ways,
The third, the peoples benefit.
so many souls we are counted to save, Iam. 5.20. And this we should do now,
whiles we may do it in peace, and whiles there are many willing to hear,
whose example may draw on others: who, if they should not be taken, whiles they
may, will not afterterwards perhaps be brought on, though we should never so
much desire it: fearing that which the Apostle says, 2. Tim. 4.3. that the
time will come, when The last, from our reward.
And lastly, we know, that the reward after this life, is a stronger motive
then all these, which I have mentioned: (but I am sure, that all together are
most strong, and should be to us as the threefold cable that is not easily
broken) and that is set down in Daniel thus: Dan. 12.3.
They which instruct others shall shine, as the light of the firmament, and
they which turn many to righteousness, as the stars, for ever.

This is that which I thought meet to say to my brethren in the Ministry,
who according to their diverse estates, places, people, and other occasions, How
to answer the objections which might discourage us.
and duty, are infinite: Therefore only look to God, and have him going
always before you, and let his word be the man of your counsels (in which
estate alone, sound, and durable peace is to be found) and he will teach the
teachable above their expectation, and give wisdom to the simple, and
strength to the weak, that by him, they shall find that easy, which
otherwise were impossible: I mean

An exhortation to the people to embrace the Ministry.
Now I turn to you, my brethren or people and hearers: who (as I have said)
raise up lets and hindrances to too many against your selves, though ye had
none offered you by your Ministers. Whose case (for the greatest part) I pity
and bewail, that you are so far from knowing and duly considering after ye
have first tasted how good the Lord is to them by their preaching unto you.
Know ye therefore, The first reason.
that God has appointed them as messengers of your reconciliation with him,
who were far sequestered from him before, and estranged: and whereas he might
have taught you by other means, and led you thorough this long and wearisome
wilderness by other guides, he has seen this the fittest way to do it, by men
his ministers, seeing ye never have been able to hear the Lord himself, if
he should have spoken to you, no more then the people of Israel were, Exodus
20.19.
when they cried out at the hearing of his voice, and said, Lord speak thou no
more to us, but let Moses speak to us, and we will hear him in all that thou
shall say to us by him. Hear them therefore, who are able to deliver the Lords
message unto you; whose preaching is life or death to you: and if ye despise
them in that their message, ye shall do all one, as if ye despised the Lord
himself that sent them. Hear them (I say) in the Lords steed, in all that
they shall say to you from him. Learn by their ministry to see your selves
to be the sons and daughters of God almighty, who, before the ministry of
the word work upon you mightily, are his enemies, Receive the wholesome word of
exhortation, and be content to put your neck in his yoke, and willingly submit
your selves to his word, that so ye may glorify God for his love toward you,
in and by their labor and travail among you, that ye may thereby gain more,
then if you had al abundance and your hearts desire.

Which because you see not, I will show you how great it is in some sort: and
that is so much, as if you attain it, ye owe no less then your own souls to
them for it, Philem. 19. For they shall not only save themselves, The second
reason.
who shall perform they shall save you also, who intertaine them as Gods
messengers, 2. Tim. 2. and be means to make you see your selves happy, both
here and for ever. Which being so, who can sufficiently admire the blindness,
The peoples sin.
nay the wilful blindness of the people, the carelesnes, yea the bold
carelesnes and blockishnes of them, who see nothing of this which I say, though
we speak often of it and aloud among them, that they may regard it. I thank
God to see some thing, that I see in some persons; I mean their reverent and
thankful receiving of the Gospel, and their care to be reformed by it: but
that in so long a time of peace and free passage to the Gospel under her
Majesty's most prosperous many of them love darkness more then light, because
their deeds are evil, and who do not esteem Gods messengers as sent from
him, for their singular benefit. For then would not some (and those not a few)
deny them their due which God has given them that labor among them; nor
withhold their earthly nor esteem meanly and basely of them, How the people
hinder themselves.
who would feign win them to God: Neither would many of the people lay such
blocks in their own way as they do, descanting of them in such wise, as they
will be sure that none of them shall do them good. For rather then they would
have nothing to except against them, if they cannot find those accusations,
that are just, they are content with any show, why they should refuse to be
counseled and persuaded by them. And therefore, if they be old, they say, they
dote, and know not what they say: if they be young, they have no judgment nor
experience: if they be wealthy, then they are covetous: if poor, then base
and contemptible: if they be married, they can

Thus I having set down these lets which do chiefly hold from faith, both on
the Ministers part and the peoples, and having said somewhat to both in way of
exhortation, seeing out of these two kinds of men, God chooses out his elect: I
conclude, that there are many lets from faith, but yet withal There are fit
remedies to these lets.
that there is apparent remedy to be found against them, (as I have said) and
how subtly soever the devil bewitcheth and holds men back by them, yet
the Scripture offers greater grace, by the which they may break through all
hindrances and discouragements, which may keep them from it, if the Minister
and people would make conscience of their duties.

CHAP. 7. What desire breeds faith.
But seeing it were both long to stand in prescribing remedy against all these
lets, and the way for all, has been set down to come by faith already: I
will therefore briefly stir up and advise such as are in good way, and have
made some good entrance, that they may see what to take heed of, and what to
embrace, and to seek faith by the means, and in the manner which before I
have set down, and a little to strengthen them after they have attained to any
true measure of it. Wherein it is to be marked (because I before highly
commended a good desire) that a naked and bare desire of salvation, now and
then stirred up in Balaam, that a man could hardly have showed any difference
betwixt their desiring of it, and the desire of such as have attained to it
indeed, for that instant. But in time it has appeared, that it was but
sudden, or of short continuance, and failed before it obtained that which it
sought: as by them who in the Gospel are said to have ioyed in that which they
desired to hear, Mat. 13.20.21 True desire gives not over.
but it vanished; whereas the desire of the other cannot be satisfied without
it: but mourns, and longs for it, and pineth for sorrow when any thing
comes in the way, to weaken the hope, which was conceived of it, till that
be removed, which hindered them from that benefit. Therefore such must know of
the pearl may be seen: Matthew. 13.45.
That as soon as it was found, the value of it being known of the skillful
Merchant, he never rested till he had gotten it for his own: for we must know
that he, who thus desires it, is forcibly drawn hereunto by God, who has
showed him his great need of it, and what he shall gain by it, and thereby
has prepared and made him fit to receive it: for otherwise, High account of it.
if God draw not men to the valuing of it, it is of no account with them.

Now further, this desire, if it be the work of Gods spirit, is strengthened
hereby: namely, while he prizeth, and valueth it according to the worthiness
which believes is dear unto God, and shall be saved. Luke 7.50.


And so must faith and assurance of eternal life be valued indeed, 2. Pet. 1.1.
of him who shall find the blessing of it: for which cause S. Peter calls it
precious faith. Now who can esteem thus of it, as that it is better then all
profit, pleasure and preferment, but he must needs think, all his praying for
it, hearing the word which works it, his questioning about it, and his
travail and labor in meditating of the promises, whereby the spirit of God
writes it in Difference betwixt sound and vain desire.
how far he is from it. Now who sees not the difference betwixt these two,
to be this, that the one is led by the spirit of God, whereby the father of
heaven sees it not) he shall find no less, then is promised: therefore he
sets more

And this is the way to believe in God indeed, though we see him not, that by
this our confidence in him, we may have joy and peace. And because this faith
is counted far more precious then all worldly wealth: therefore he who thus
accounts of it, will set himself to seek it willingly and readily, Heart
upon Gods promises.
as I said before. And therefore as the word teaches him, he will have his
heart upon the promises of God, because they are his treasure, musing on them,
until he has al difficulties and doubts of any moment, removed from him, Gods
will we should believe.
which God for his part will not be unwilling to grant. And in his meditation
he shall see that he is not more desirous to believe, then God is that 2. Cor.
5.19. 1. Tim. 1.15. 1. Ioh. 3.13.
of friendship counsels him, and of his authority being able to perform,
commands him to believe: as if he would hereby show that none has
authority to hinder or forbid the same: He sees further, that as he may
receive this promise, having so strong encouragement, so he can no otherwise be
saved, nor happy. All this he seeing, and weighing deeply, begins to stay
himself, and to lay faster and surer hold on eternal life: and sees that it
cannot otherwise be, but that he should be saved, how far soever he was from
this persuasion before. And now he begins to conclude with himself, that he
is delivered indeed from all fear Jf any doubting arise.
for example, If any doubting should arise, any lying spirit should suggest,
and trouble him with fear of falling away Believe, lay hold of eternal life,
cast not away thy confidence, John 3. 1. Tim. 6. Matthew. 13. Coloss. 2.5. Ioh.
10.27.
who also says: The plants of the Lord shall flourish and grow up as the
grain of mustard seed, till it have branches and bows: And again, Be ye
established, confirmed, and abound in faith. Therefore he is to lend no ear to
the^; remembering that which is written: My sheep hear my voice, and the voice
of a stranger they will not hear. It was the first degree to the utter undoing
of her Not to hearken to any contrary voice. Genesis 3.
and her posterity, in our grandmother Eve; that when God had given liberty
to eat of all the trees, excepting one; that she rested not in this word, but
opened her ear to a false and lying spirit, in the mouth of the serpent, which
under a fair color, persuaded, or rather covertly enticed, and drew her
(contrary to the word of God) to eat of that one tree also, which was
forbidden: whereas she should have been astonished to have heard the Serpent

We must learn some wisdom of the Adder, Psalm. 58.5.
who stops both her ears that she may not hear the voice of the charmer,
charm he never so wisely. And if any Act. 2.38.
the men and brethren, who if they have kindly pricked, can as well skill to
heal: and therefore also remove such doubts, as for want of sure laying hold
on the promise, have troubled any.

And further, if he which is weak in faith, after laying sure hold, Remedy
against fear of continuance.
shall yet be dismayed thus, that he cannot keep (for any continuance) his
faith strong and steadfast; but feels it flitting: he is to be answered, that
a child which begins to go by a stool or form, is not strengthened, as he
which is by long use and custom settled in his joints: in like manner it fares
with Matthew. 11.29.
to keep a good conscience in longer continuance of time, they shall be well
and fully settled in their faith, to their great contentment and comfort.

And thus I conclude, that what lets soever there be, Conclusion of the former.
which hinder men from believing (as that they be unworthy: they shall fall
again to their old course: they shall never be able to attain to it: or if
they have not like certainty of it always, therefore they conclude, that they
never had any at all, or any such like) yet he who earnestly desires it, will
not utterly faint, except in temptation, when he must be well plied, and
helped; and when he is that all tears are wiped away: and therefore will
refuse no means to attain to it, by attending on God, and waiting his
leisure, and reverently considering the encouragements and persuasions which
have been set down, Luke 22.31. Luke 12.32. Ioh. 13.1. and 10 27. and 17.
that so he may lay sure and strong hold of Gods promises and Christ's prayer
for him, I have prayed that thy faith fail not (as one in his case may do)
and so by little and little shall see himself to be in the number of true
believers, no more to be cast out from them.


ANd thus to pass to the second head of this first treatise, The second head.
understand that these two things are here to be handled: first, how the weak
believers may and should be stayed in their vehement temptations. Secondly,
how they may further prove, that they differ from such as are not believers,
although they seem so. Of these weak ones, there are two shadow of
changeablenes with God, that it is their own weakness so to think, Psalm. 77.13.
after he had long wrestled and strove with that temptation: for he that has
been assuredly persuaded of Gods love toward him at any time in his whole life,
ought not to cast away his confidence after, Heb. 10.35.
nor suffer himself to be deprived of it, being his chief treasure. The first
persuasion to uphold a weak faith.
But though this may be a stay to a weak conscience, who is sometimes
afflicted in this sort; yet I say further, that seeing he cannot be satisfied,
till his doubtfulnes (which by all his might he seeks to subdue) be removed,
and his soul set at liberty again by some new light in Gods promises:
therefore he is to be persuaded that he laboring after, and groaning to rest
his wearied and heavy heart on these, he cannot miscarry, nor be forsaken of
The second persuasion to uphold a vveake faith.
For some one or other testimony and property of the new birth shall ever be
found in him, although he always feels it not, neither perceives it
himself; whereby it shall be manifest, that he lives to God the life of God:
even as hearing, breathing, moving, feeling, and such like, are infallible
tokens of life in the body, which by many likelihoods appears to be dead.
And if to his own judgment it seems, that all hope is cut off through the
rage of the devil, and strength of the temptation: yet it is, as if a man were
suddenly stricken down to the ground with some violent blow, and amazed, who
yet afterward recouereth himself again: so that even he, which feels not
that he has faith and

But if this be not enough, but thou will marvel, why God does thus deal
with thee, and suffer thee to fall to such depth of doubting, sorrow, and
fear, although he loves thee; yea and that after thou have felt such comfort

For the right removing hereof, this is duly to be considered, that as the
root of our comfort in Christ is not the strength of our Christian life: A
third persuasion to uphold a weak faith.
so the weakness herein, ought not to breed doubting of our salvation by Christ.
who justifies the ungodly, has freely given his son, and in him is
reconciled to us, who so heartily desire his favor, having been his enemies:
and has by his Gospel called us, and by his spirit wrought in our hearts a
sure persuasion hereof; whereby we which were dead in sin, are made alive to
God, and so are newborn: and therefore begin to be changed, first in
affection, and then in conversation by little and little. Therefore if we have
this assurance of our new birth, though there be in us much weakness of the
spiritual life, yet we ought not to doubt, whether we be Gods children, seeing
he that is newborn can never die.

The fourth persuasion to uphold a weak faith.
and therefore weak. Secondly, we are very subject to many spiritual
diseases; some such as take away sense of life: and therefore we must seek to
be cured, and not despair of life, because it is certain that no such can
perish. So that if we see, that we have turned our hearts from our christian
course, and offended God, or (which is more) if we have suffered our selves to
be seduced any manner of way, we must not despair, or doubt of the safety of
the whole person, when any one part or member is distempered, and ill at ease;
but cure it, A fit simile.
and labor to restore that to health again: as if it be thine heart, thine
eye, thy hand, or any other part which has offended; resort thou to the
Physician Christ Jesus; Return thou which wandrest, Esai 55.1. Matthew. 11.28.
and thou who would find ease and comfort, come unto me, and I will refresh
thee: believe in me, and I will satisfy thee in that which thou hungrest for.
Now if they who have fallen and offended God, may turn home again to their
first husband with good welcome: shall not they much more be beloved of him,
and therefore comforted by him, who have not provoked him, but are

And thus I having answered the doubts of this sort of Gods people, weak in
faith: I had purposed to have proceeded no further to deal with them which
have the seal of God, and which are marked to eternal life: but to have
disclosed the pack of counterfeits, and to have proved that many such, as say
they are Christians, and the elect of God, and are not, but do lie; that they
are nothing less then the children of God (for as the weakest in faith must
not be deprived of their privilege, as to think they are not ye Lords: so
must not the most glozing hypocrites be suffered to conceive a false opinion or
hope of that which is none of theirs: as to dream of happiness) This, I say, I
had Another sort weak in faith, and how they are to be comforted.
have yet after that, been troubled with doubtings) by occasion of them (I say)
I called to mind another sort of Gods dear servants, who are weaker then they,
deeplier grieved, and therefore more tenderly to be regarded: least that they
being bruised reeds, should be altogether broken, and as smoking flax should
be utterly quenched.

And these are they, who having manifest signs of faith, and the new birth in
them: yet by the subtle and cruel malice of the devil (although not without
Bright Physician, Anno 1586. unto the which also I may refer them, for the
former point: that is to say, if they be deeply touched with the conscience of
sin alone, how they may be comforted and delivered out of it. Persuasions to
the weak to uphold them.
as their case requires.

And first they must be persuaded, that they are not under the wrath of Satan
works upon us by suggestions.
And this our infirmity Satan does sometime assaie without means, that is,
only by spiritual suggestion: sometime by means and outward

Now if to these two we add his malice (for he is not called the envious man
for naught) and his unsearchable subtlety, and exceeding strength; Satan's
properties.
and that which is greater then all the rest, that he most hurts, when it
least appears, when we least suspect it: for which cause it is said, that he
changes 2. Cor. 11.13, 14. we shall not marvel, though without any means,
or outward occasions, he raises great terror, and dismaidnes, especially the
Lord giving him leave so to do, for the good of us which are exercised with
them. For besides that, Satan tempts and persuades to sin, which we delight
not in.
we are enticed sometime to the sins, which by nature we love: we are also
(especially such as are thus brought low, in the anguish and bitterness of
their soul) tempted to such evils as are very strange, and such as we abhor
the very least conceit of them; and find not the least part of our nature to
incline to them; though otherwise He labors to dim our knowledge, and the
sight of Gods grace in us.
which he ever loathed. And when the devil can fasten upon such as this weak
person is, in this wise, he especially labors to dim their knowledge and
judgment, that they may have no sure hold of any point of doctrine, which may
soundly comfort them, that thus he may, like a Lion, devour more speedily:
For when they cannot be persuaded in their judgment, that God can, or will
pardon them, how are they able to desire, or pray for it, when it shall be
beaten into them, that they have no faith, nor any better things in them than
reprobates? how can they be moved to stir up that weak faith which they
have? no more can they desire good means, as counsel, reading, or any such
like, when he has stricken this deadly blow in their consciences, that God
has forsaken them.

And this be spoken of the devils tempting the children of God (when, and whom
it pleases the Lord for their trial) and that without the help of outward
means, or any occasions to work by: the which I purposed to

To proceed therefore, and so to draw to an end herein: As he does often without
any means, deeply fasten upon the weak consciences of Gods people, to fear
and dismay them; so does he the same much more easily by the help of outward
means: so that, when he has covered their hearts with darkness, and brought
them into a dreadful fear of Gods wrath; and plucked their armor from them,
He troubles much by outward objects.
whereby before they had resisted him, he holds them at this vantage, that
every thing which is before them, is made The objections of the weak in
temptation.
oh, it belongs not to them, they say: they are past hope:

It were infinite to set down their speeches and thoughts like unto these,
which I have now mentioned; which the devil draws from them by such
occasions, as he works by: but all this is (as we see) through their own
letting

For it is not to be attributed to Satan, or any want of subtlety, readiness
to hurt, ablenes, malice and cruelty; that either the one sort is at all
preserved, or the other more freed from the like measure of languishing and
fear, David speaks, Psalm. 41.12.) That he may see that no hurt befall them;
even as a mother has her eye always on the young child which begins to
go, that it get no knocks.

But now to conclude, ye will ask, what remedies are to be used against such
sore assaults? First I say, that seeing their consciences bear them witness,
how much these temptations are repugnant to their desires and liking; Remedies
against Satan's temptations.
and out of heart, although he has haled, and violently carried them to such
misery; as though they had taken glory in offending God: this (I say) let
them mark, as soon as they be fit to hear it; and the rather, they are to
count them to proceed from him, than from themselves; because they are such,
as are altogether contrary to their former conversation, and to nature it
self: and such as have no enforcement, nor inticement, but from him. Further
remedies.
They are further to consider, how much it does displease God; that they are
removed from their faith, and give place to the spirit of error: and therefore
they Christ Jesus, who is he, which should hinder us? If the Lord will justify
and clear us, who shall condemn us? Neither let them after all this, be still
obiecting, that they feel small strength of faith and hope, as many of Gods
dear children do, for thereby the enemy may take great encouragement to
their own disadvantage: for what if they feel not the sweet taste thereof,
What we should do, when we feel not the sweet taste of Gods mercies.
which sometime they felt; shall they judge therefore themselves to be utterly
bereaved

A fifth persuasion to uphold vveake faith.
Further, the trial of their faith is likewise to be taken, by those fruits
which A sixth persuasion to uphold the weak faith.
that they being the Lords plants, take not their full perfection at once: but
according to the nature of a plant, require a daily watering and dressing,
whereby in the end they attain to a full growth in Christ? Oh, but they feel
not the testimony of Gods spirit, which might assure them! I answer, neither
do any of Gods children at all times feel it: but that they may see their
own frailty, God does, as it were, hide himself sometime for a season (as
the mother does from the child to try the affection of it to her) that they may
with more earnest desire mourn for Gods wonted grace: and when they have
obtained it again, may with more ioyfulnes of heart praise him: and yet God
does not withhold comfort from his, many Deuteronomy. 33.12.
when they walk heavily, who (if they could give credit unto him) may assure
themselves that they may live in safety under his protection all the day long:
but their own frailty, and the vehemency of the temptation, which oppresses
them, A seventh persuasion.
diminishes the feeling thereof. But patience and constancy, with a resolute
mind to bear Gods trial, will bring a good end: yea and by the meek going
under Gods hand in these, they shall learn experience, afterward to wade
thorough greater; and yet in the midst of them, to have hope, that shall not
make them ashamed.

Romans 5.4.5.
And thus it may appear, that although the weak faith of Gods dear servants
may be many ways assaulted, and their salvation by means thereof,

CHAP. 9. The difference of believers from them that are none.
NOw follows the second point, wherein for the cleerer manifestation of that
which has been said, I must now discern from the former sort, such as have
great show of faithful ones and believers,

And first whereas some may marvel, that I in the describing of Gods
children, have not rested in these as infallible marks thereof, namely, 1.
sorrow for their misery, 2. confession of their sins to God, 3. fear of his
displeasure for the same, and 4. desiring some kind of amendment of life;
seeing they are also in them, who are effectually called of God: I answer, I
have followed the Scripture herein, and that I have in showing who are the
terrified by the spirit of bondage; Matthew. 27.3. 1. King. 21.27.
he may be pensive afterward for his sin committed, and wish it were undone,
afraid for the punishment, and may promise amendment, and walk heavily, and
express it by outward signs: and yet not released, nor set free from that
which he Matthew. 13.20.
He may have a taste of the life to come, as Balam; he may reverence and fear
the Ministers of God, as Herod, Numb. 22. Mark. 6.20.
and begin to amend some faults in his life, as he and others, of whom we
read in the Gospel did; and yet for all this (though fearful to think of)
not sealed up to salvation: even thus far a man may go in the profession of
Christian religion; and yet a stranger from the power of faith, from the life
of godliness, and from that, which accompanies both; I mean, a good and
peaceable conscience.

that he will not break a bruised reed, Matthew. 12.20.
nor quench; and the most glorious shows of godliness, and boldest crakes, and
most loud boastes of faith, where yet it is not indeed, Luke 18.14.
shall all vanish away in the air, and come to nothing, not having any part in
him: even as Saul's bragges, that God had delivered David into his hands, when
he was shut in the city, were frustrated to his own shame, 1. Sam. 23.14. and
24.5. The which, how true it is, may appear not only by some examples
mentioned out of the Scripture, but also by the lives of sundry in the
Country, who have received the Gospel with joy, and been much cast down by
the force like a bulrush with the wind; so their joy has been a sudden flash
of fleeting mirth, not well grounded in them, and an inlightning of them with
the general knowledge of salvation, rather then a sealing of the assurance of
their own in their hearts for continuance.

Forwardnes in religion was sometime in many. Hebr. 6.5. Exodus 22.
Oh, how many have after the report made by others, what great change the
Gospel had wrought; how many, I say, have resorted to the hearing of it, and
given good and commendable hope of their own change also, and repentance; who
yet were soon weary of the Lords yoke, and of being subject to his holy
government? how many have forsaken the fountains of the water Ier. 2.13.
which could have refreshed their souls in their necessity with sound
comfort, and have dug to themselves broken pits, which can hold no water to
comfort them? And so have started aside, like a broken bow, and have returned
shamefully to their vomit, 2. Pet. 2.22.
and as the sow which was washed, to wallow again in the mire? Which I speak
not, as though God had not both called out of this life many amongst us (within
these years in her Majesty's reign) of singular hope, and left a comfortable
company amongst us still, with others daily coming on; Apostataes.
but to cast their shame as dung in their faces, who have fallen from that
fervent desire of the sincere milk of the word (which once they had) to the
world, John 6.66. 1. John 2.19.
to prophanenes, and to carelesnes. These (as the Scripture Judas) went out
from us, but they were none of us: for if they had been of us, they would have
continued still with us. For when either prosperity has been granted them,
James 5.8.
they have waxen wanton, and have turned the grace of God into loosenes: Matthew.
13.21.
or when affliction has followed them, they have grown weary of their
profession, saying as we read in Eccles. 7.12. That the former days were
better, and wished again for the merry world, which they inioyed, and the
pleasant life ( as the Israelites did their flesh pots) which they passed in
ignorance of God, Exodus 16.3.
and the lusts thereof in superstition, and such like: and so have fallen from
the grace of God, and have departed from him, to whom yet they had professed
themselves to have been infinitely indebted, as for his other benefits; John
5.35.
But these when I consider their falsehood toward God, and their double
dealing, that they would not give their hearts to him to believe his mercies,
Matthew. 19.29.
to be their only treasures, and so hold fast their confidence in him (who
would sufficiently have recompensed their forsaking of the world) I cease
meruailing at them, although they are fallen from an high account and
estimation among the servants of God, The falls of many Professors have made
them vile.
unto a vile and reproachful estate, to be reckoned with the unbelievers; some
of them making this their chief religion, rather to be judges and censurers of
their brethren, then to hold and retain love and fellowship with them. For
whom yet, I will not

Thus, the love of these men has constrained me, a little to go aside in
lamenting Some have fallen away before trouble came.
might have given better hope of them to their brethren, that mere weakness
had hindered them) but they have gone away from their first love, and broken
off their fellowship with their brethren, even in the time of the Gospel
flourishing, and preached in some places with more power, then when they were
in the beginning most earnestly stirred up to embrace it: yea, and some of them
then forsook their good beginnings, not when Moses Let such repent.
and now take surer hold of eternal life, with the hand of their faith, rather
than by so weak and small occasions to let it go. For if they had in the
feeling of their sin, fear, sorrow, and other distresses for the same, been
unfeignedly to have returned to their former lusts of their ignorance; 2. Pet.
1.9.
from which they professed themselves to have been purged.

2. Cor. 5.17.
have been changed in will, affection, and conversation: and so have become new
creatures. For though they allege (and that justly) that in the conversion of
Paul, the people mentioned Act. 2.37. Judge. 10.16. 1. Sam. 7.3.5.
the returning of the people of Israel to Samuel, and in such other examples;
the holy Ghost sets down their trouble of mind, their prick of
conscience, and their great abasing of themselves, which I grant are wrought
in such, as have been truly penitent: yet there has been joined also with
these, an earnest hungring after Gods mercy, an unfeigned faith, the spirit of
adoption sealing up their salvation unto them, and the lively fruits of the
same: They have believed that God has become their most loving father through
Christ Jesus, who was before their fearful judge; 1. Pet. 1.8.
and to seek now to please him with all their hearts: and these graces have
set them forward in a godly life to bring forth fruits, beseeming their
profession.

1. Tim. 1.4.
But these men furnish not themselves with faith, a pure heart, a good
conscience, change of their life, through the loving of God; but they let time
end their grief of mind, and their wounds of conscience are healed outwardly
with opinion that it is sufficient repentance, only to be sorrowful: some not
abiding the gripes of grief, and yet not finding sound comfort against them,
have cast them off, and therefore in affliction are from time to time vexed
with the returning of them again, because they were never driven away The Law
is not to be preached without the Gospel.
I answer: first, the law was never preached alone by any discreet teacher,
who himself was skillful in the doing of his duty, but the Gospel with it.
Secondly, the law was not, nor is not preached to hold men under, with the yoke
of fear and bondage; but to cause men to see their sin more clearly: Why
the Law is preached.
and thereby their punishment to be due; that so they might come to themselves
in truth, and set more store by and to try themselves both by rules and
doctrine, as well as by their own experience, 2. Cor. 13.5.
if Christ were in them, that so through him they might become acceptable. Now
then if they have heard and received one part of our Ministry, and not the
other: if they have placed happiness in the repentance, which they have fancied;
and not in the knowledge of God through Christ, which How men abuse their
afflictions through Satan's vviles.
And others he dismaieth, and holds under with the contrary: as that they
cannot be Gods children, because they have never had that deep sorrow, and
long lying in it, for their sin, as many of their brethren have had: As
though men's examples, and not rather Gods word should be their rule to follow.
So he suggesteth this to Psalm. 73.13, 14.
seeing they are every while under one cross or other. Thus the devil (whose
malice and subtlety few do know, fewer do well weigh, but fewest of all do
wisely and carefully resist) the devil, I say, holds numbers occupied about
these and such like points: wherein the trial of their happiness, and
certainty of their peace does not consist. And because religion and holy
doctrine does affect them, and that he sees they will needs embrace the Psalm.
50.16.
and matters concerning the same; but they hate utterly to be reformed. Who
sees not that he holds these in error and bondage, as grossly as he does
the other before mentioned? Look to that which is principal.
who trouble themselves about opinions and conceits, which are not the chief
and maine points to occupy themselves about; as though happiness consisted in
them, but may fail of eternal life (for all

For neither does this commend a man to God, whether he has long continued in
grief of mind, fear of conscience, and doubtfulnes of salvation: but that he
be well freed and delivered from such trouble, and discharged of his fear: I
mean that he can heartily thank God through Jesus Christ, that he sees and
feels himself set at liberty, and by him is made happy: for if the truth
of God and his promise make him free, then he is free indeed. Ioh. 8.32.
Neither is this with a man, or against him in assuring himself of salvation,
whether his life be full of afflictions and crosses, seeing God keeps not
always, an even hand in these things; for they are common both to good and to
be justified and acquitted before God: and therefore is at peace with God, Romans
5.1.
in himself, even such as passes all understanding, whether his crosses be
many or few.

There are many things of like sort, with which Satan does blindfold sundry
of good hope: as that, for having some infirmities, or falls breaking forth
in them, therefore they cannot be beloved of God: and when they find that in
some sort they can overcome them, then they think they are the beloved of God:
in neither of which a man is to place his safety. For both the dear Saints of
God may possibly be led out of the way, When a man is none of the worst, he may
be far from being good.
to commit somewhat detained and holden in such snares, they are to be desired
in the most earnest 1. Pet. 1.10.
and as S. Peter says, to give all diligence to make their calling and
election sure: and in trying by all means, whether their faith, their hope,
their patience, and love be sound, though imperfect; and true and effectual,
though weak and feeble: for upon these the matter depends.

And if they can be certified, that the spirit of God since, and through their
hearing of his Gospel preached unto them, has shed such grace into their
hearts, as to make them partakers of the fruits thereof, they shall not need
to be troubled about the other: and if they contrariwise find that they do
yet

And here I must further require, that such as, to whom God gives any work of
his spirit, and whose hearts he seasoneth with good affections and desires
through the Gospel, so as they sensibly feel themselves to look after
eternal life, that they would cherish, and make much of these holy sparks of
grace kindled within them: and whiles they be warm in them, to blow them up
every while, with the bellows of fervent prayer, and to inflame them by
acquaintance, company, and conference with such, as in Iam. 4.2.
that they may the sooner come by them: and that the things which they see but
dimly, they may behold more clearly, and their doubts may be resolved to them,
and they may find comfortable encouragement to go forward. Let the unstaid
ones use all means to be converted.
But especially, they must give attendance daily and diligently to the doctrine
of faith and godliness, where they may enjoy that soundly preached unto them:
assuring themselves that if they find not that the one thing above all things,
chief and necessary, they love it not, as Mary did, Luke 10.42. and then they
shall not have their part in it. But otherwise they may know, Esai. 65.1.
I was found of them that sought me not) will not hide himself from them which
do seek him; seeing he finds all in their filth, when he calls them to
repentance, even the best. And finally, they must wait upon him, desiring him
in his good time (notwithstanding their unworthiness) to draw them by his secret
grace unto him. But this shall suffice to have bin said of them who think
themselves Christians and are not, but do lie: and of them who have left their
first love of the Gospel and of their brethren, which sometime (as it seemed)
they had. Which two being of the forwardest sorts of professors, who go for
true believers, and yet being none indeed, do

Thus I have, not as I would, but as I could, The third head
set down my meditations upon this first point, to show, who are the true
people of God, and given occasion to many, who have little to say for
themselves, why they should claim any right or title in that great purchase,
to consider of their estate more deeply and seriously then they have done. If
these, who are almost Christians, and (as I may say) not far from eternal
life, being many of them usual hearers of Sermons, would inquire about their
estate, till they should



They may be compared in this, to King Nabuchadnezzar: Dan. 4.26.
he was very earnest to hear the interpretation of his dream, and could not
be satisfied Is not this great Babel, which I have built, for the house of my
kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? Whereby
we see, that he was more desirous to know what his dream meant, then

But what is the cause that they going so far before many other, who are
professors also, cannot be brought to go beyond them in this as well? and
herein to be equal to the best lovers of the Gospel? I mean, in proving and
2. Cor. 13.5. Romans 8.9.
whether Christ be in them, without they be reprobates: and whether they have
not the spirit of God, without which they be none of his? The maine cause is
this: Ierem. 5.3.
Their hearts are not upright: nor they will not deal plainly with the Lord.
They cannot say in truth: Search me (O Lord) and see if there be any
unrighteousness in me, which I do hide within me: and it shall be removed out
of thy sight: Job. 20.12.
Nay it is certain, if they might come to trial, that they do keep some
sin (as Job says) even as a child does sugar under the palate. Sundry
faults, I grant, such will refrain both themselves, and drive them out of
their families: but yet for all that, they will not be brought to this, to
make profession that they will be willing to be reformed in what part

Neither do they set their privileges, which they have by the Gospel, before
all other things always: they think it over strict, that they should be tied
so narrowly: and that it is neither beseeming wisdom, credit, civility,
policy, gravity, or such place and calling as some of them may be in, to
show what is in them (though they be zealous) they say, but too base a thing
for them; when yet the Scripture says, I believe, and therefore I have spoke.
And again, 2. Cor. 4.13. Psalm. 69.9.
The zeal of thine house has consumed me. And again, if this be to be vile
and base, 2. Sam. 6.25. Psalm. 16.
I will yet be more vile for the Lords sake that has honored me. Yea all
their delight should be in the Saints which are on the earth, Psalm. 133.2.
and such as excel in virtue: and that they should be companions with such as
fear God; when yet the communion of Saints is more pleasant and sweet then
was Aarons ointment, and more fruitful then mount Hermon was, with the dew,
and Sion and her valleys about her, with the silver drops that fell upon
them. Yea for the preciousnes thereof the Church spoke thus of it: Psalm. 137.6.
If I prefer not Jerusalem, that is, the welfare of Gods people, before all
joy that I have on earth beside, then let me lose my best delight.

To return, they of whom I speak, though in their own opinion, and in the
judgment of some others, they be in right good state to Godward: yet Matthew.
13.44. Luke 10.42.
They having found the pearl, sell all that they have to buy it; though they
are occupied about many things, yet that one (even the word of God) Cant. 8.6.
that admits no recompense; and as death that cannot be resisted. They cast
not away their confidence, if they once grow to see what recompense of reward
it has: Hebr. 10.35. Revel. 3.11. John 1.12. 1. Cor. 14.1 Matthew. 15.6.
nor will not suffer any to take their crown from them, even their honor that
they have in being the Lords sons and daughters. They covet spiritual
things, they hunger and thirst after righteousness: they with good and honest
hearts receive the word, and bring forth fruit in due season. Luke 8.15.
They if they have offended their most loving father, Cant. 3.3.
cannot be quiet till they return and come home again, and say, we have
sinned. And if they be in worse estate then this, they like it not, unless it
be when they are fallen asleep, Cant. 5.2.
and have forgotten

And yet what do they in all this, more then they ought? feeling for all this,
their wants and burdens, of which they complain and cry out. And whereas they
are mocked and evil spoken of, for this, that they do thus carry themselves
in the love of heavenly things, and in the hope of immortality, far more
fervently then they who are not entitled to any such thing: it is hard to say,
whether they who offer them this injury, do most offend in hindering the
honor of God thereby, or their neighbors welfare, Ioh. 6.27.
or their own salvation? For God commands, that we should labor rather for
the food that abides to eternal life, then for that which perishes. And

But to return to them to whom I speak, and to conclude in a sentence or two
to them, and such as they are: I say therefore, give no rest to your selves,
till you can prove that you be in the estate of salvation: You have many ways
set down, by which you may do it, even in this treatise; in other godly men's
labors; and especially in the Scriptures. Lose not all your labor which you
have bestowed in seeking to be saved: I mean your reading, hearing of Sermons,
praying, and confessing your sins (it is lost, if you attain John 6.70.
how far off soever as yet ye be; know that ye are in the estate of devils,
2. King. 2.13.
if ye continue

CHAP. 10. Of the eight companions of Faith.
NOw I have spoken of those, who are weakest in faith, and have the smallest
measure of it, and have labored to stay them in their temptation: I have also
showed the causes of their conversion, the love of God the father in giving his
son: the love of the son in reconciling them to God, and delivering them
from all their misery: the word of promise our salvation shall every day be
nearer, then when we first believed. And thus I come unto the third general
part of this treatise; wherein (seeing I hope the weakest believers are or may
be somewhat stayed by that which I have said already) I now purpose in this
last part, to show how all such of Gods people, as are stayed from strong fear
and trouble of mind; may by other clear evidences, have further proof and
trial of their faith, and be able to preserve and confirm it, and how much
such an estate is to be desired for the benefit it brings. And first, to

The first inseparable companion of faith, is joy. 1. Cor. 1.3. Romans 5.5. 1.
Pet. 1.8.
This true believer therefore whosoever he be: first, as soon as he shall
perceive that God (far otherwise then he looked for) has given him his son
to bring life unto him, and to be his wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption, he must needs feel in his heart great joy and comfort, as we
see in the example of the Eunuch, when Philip had converted him, he went away
rejoicing, Acts 8.39. and in Samaria, where when he had preached Christ there
was great joy in the City, Acts 8.8. And what marvel? for how can a man be
persuaded by good and infallible grounds, that greater happiness is given him of
God then all the world is worth, Psalm. 126.1.
but he must needs rejoice with joy unspeakable, as they which dream? For is
there any natural man so senseles, that if he should understand that some
portion of goods, as an hundredth pounds value by the a child of wrath, made
heir of heaven for ever) but it must needs glad his heart exceedingly, and
raise sensible joy in him, which cannot be expressed? as in him who found the
pearl. Matthew. 13.44.
But do common professors thus, or worldlings? when they manifestly bewray
that they are glutted with the tidings of it? So that, as the Eunuch before
mentioned, immediately after he had been instructed in this mystery of faith,
went on his way rejoicing; Act. 9.17. and 19.
and as Paul soon after his conversion was marueilously comforted, although
before as far from it, and as deeply cast down as any: joy unspeakable,
and glorious in his measure. Romans 5.1.


Indeed it shall not perhaps so much be seen, or appear to another, as by
good evidence it is felt of himself. Neither shall a stranger, that is, a man
otherwise affected, be partaker of this joy: but that it accompanies them, who
are by faith made assured of their election; our Savior Christ teaches, Luke
10.20.
saying, Rejoice not that the spirits are subdued unto you, but rather rejoice
because your names are written in heaven.

And whereas it may be objected, that it is sore shaken and slaked by
afflictions, no affliction for the time present is joyous, but grievous: and
yet we rejoice even in them through hope, that makes not ashamed, Romans 5.4.
Besides, we have it here but in part, as we have all other graces: and yet
affliction (after we have been exercised with it aright) shall make our joy the
greater in the end; Hebr. 12.11.
when Gods former graces shall be restored to us, which we were wont in him to
find: therefore Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.8.
Though ye have not seen, yet ye love him: in whom (though ye see him not) yet
ye believe in him, and rejoice with joy unspeakable. Now seeing it must needs
be thus, it may well prove to us, that the common opinion of faith, which most
have where the Gospel is preached; namely, that they believe in Jesus Christ,
deceives our selves justified before God by faith; Romans 5.1. John 14.27. and
Philip. 4.7.
but we are at peace with him: and such peace as passes all understanding.
Which after we know how sweet and precious it is, we will by no means forgo
again: although for want of stronger faith and sounder knowledge, it is more
flitting in some: and yet even that makes them complain, until they be
enlarged: and he that has not this witness within him, shall not do best to
sooth up himself with a vain confidence. Thus I conclude, that joy and peace

But here me thinks, I hear some obiecting thus. If you zealous folk, who
glory so much of the assurance of salvation, and for that very cause be so
joyful, ye agree not within your selves: for some which are of your mind, are
ever sad and sorrowful? To this I answer, that many desire to be sure, and
groan for it, in the Lords ears; and in time, shall be comforted, being
already pronounced to be blessed: and sometime they are assured for a season,
Matthew. 5.4.
and then are cheerful: and before this, they cannot be so, as they, whose
Ierem. 9.23. Luke 10.20. Eccles. 7.8.
and not a rejoicing for that they know God to be their most loving father;
without which, their joy is but folly, yea madness; as Solomon speaks of
laughter, which testifies such joy. But to end this in few words, let such as
have true hope in God, though weakly, moderate their heaviness, that they may
offend as few as they may: and they that find fault with them for that, let
them know, that they ought rather to pity and pray for them, and interpret all
in the best manner, and look that their own mirth and cheerefulnes be well
warranted them, or else it were far better for them to have

The second companion of faith; holy admiration.
But to go forward; as the due consideration of the greatness, and persuasion of
the certainty of his benefits, will raise this joy in the heart of him that
possesses it: so likewise it will cause him to marvel with reverence, to see
his state so changed; himself to be brought from so low a depth of extreme
misery, to so high a degree of honor and glory: and so to be enriched by
this favor of God, that he shall often fear on the sudden, least it should
not be so, wondering at the greatness of the same: as Judas the good Apostle did,
who considering the great kindness of Christ, brake forth into these words: John
14.22.
Lord, what is the cause, that thou will reveal thy self to us, and not Yea,
and the woman of Samaria, which had long lien in blindness and superstition, and
in the fruits of both, that is, in cauilling and mocking; yet when our Savior
had overcome her evil with good, and converted her, her heart was so set on
the benefit which she received by him, that she forgot her water-pot (which in
her, who sauoured before only of the earth, was a great matter) and went,
admiring at her own change, to tell her Saul's conversion did so cause him to
wonder at Gods work therein, that it caused also them that beheld it to admire
it and to be amazed, when they saw him preach the doctrine, which he before
pursued, with the imbracers of it, Act. 9.21. So great admiration does this
precious faith work in them that obtain it. And yet if this holy and
reverent admiration at so great good things befallen those, or other such,
should but then only immediately after the receiving of them be felt, the
benefits might seem the smaller: but it is far otherwise, if it be duly
nourished and maintained: for they are so sweet, and so far above all that
they can ask, or that except it be through men's own default, they are every
day new and fresh, and so far from bringing tediousnes, that the oftener they
be daily considered, and the longer they be inioyed, Gods savor the longer it
is inioyed, the sweeter.
the more they will cause wondering at the love of the giver, and what should
move him to bestow so great a portion (even more then the whole world) upon so
unworthy an one, as would have thought a little before, that it had been an
happy estate, not to have been at all. The Sun in the beauty and strength
thereof, does not more cause the eye to dazzle, then the viewing and beholding
of this glory, which God communicates with his beloved ones, does astonish
and abash the heart to think of it: which is so true that David the man of God
should do such great things for his soul, Psalm. 116. v. 8.139.34.
as deliver him from the neathermost grave, by which he meant hell.

And therefore it cannot be without gross bewitching of many professors by
Satan, that if they have, at the hearing of this tidings published, meruailed
a little, they think they have received this benefit with that reverent
account, that it deserves, though after it waxes a common thing with them:
for this they say, it were foolish daily to be wondering at one thing, as when
we first heard of it.

Full well all such declare what fruit they reap by it: but if they did daily
Psalm. 118.4.
should be so enduring also. For who can think upon his slippes, and
rebellions (I speak of the best of us) which break forth from him daily, for
the which the wrath of God is justly provoked against him; and what might be
feared thereby, and how notwithstanding them all, he may come to God for
refuge by Christ, and be without fear, as if he had not sinned: 1. Ioh. 2.2.
yea and hold fast his confidence, that God yet loves him: who (I say) can
consider magnify the loving kindness of our God for ever, even as it indureth
for ever, Psalm. 118.4. For though natural reason, even flesh bear a great
stroke in this matter: yet we are not debtters to it: and we have great cause
whiles we live, to do this.

So that, although I confess, that in nature it is otherwise, that a man
cannot always admire the greatness of some rare deliverance, or fortunate
estate befallen him by his friend, which at the first raised great admiration;
yet it ought to be far otherwise with the spiritual man being a believing
Christian: he, I say, having the loving countenance of God shining daily upon
him as before, which is a treasure invaluable, should wonder at the continuance
of it; especially seeing he provoking the Lord with his sins daily renewed,
might therefore fear that such former comforts as had been inioyed, might have
been turned into as great sorrows, and his light into darkness, rather then be
continued and multiplied. And this he shall do, unless through

The third companion of faith, love.
But that I may not dwell upon this matter, who have purposed but in brief who
feels this love of God shed into his heart) returned to him again. The which
although in hollownes and hypocrisy, the most affirm boldly to be in them
toward God, before they have found and felt themselves to be beloved of him;
yet the Scripture teaches us that it is far otherwise, 1. Ioh. 4.19. Ioh.
15.16.
seeing we have not loved him, but he has loved us first. But when we see
indeed what great things God has done for us, from what dreadful bondage he
has delivered us, unto the which in all our life we were in danger, I love the
Lord, Psalm. 116.1 Luke 7.47.
because he has done so great good things for my soul: and with the woman to
be thus affected, that seeing many sins are forgiven us, therefore we must
needs love much. So that although before this we were lovers of pleasures,
more then lovers of God, as others are: yet now that we know Gods bountifulnes
toward us, and the vanity of our fond delights, we have our hearts more set
upon God, then upon the best pleasures which we enjoy.

The true believers feel sensibly the love of God to shadow the love of other
things.
And although sometime before this we loved father, mother, friends, goods,
more then God, when we were merely natural: yet now that we we have our
hearts set on him, as being our chief treasure. For this our spiritual
kindred with Jesus Christ, has knit us to him with a far more near bond of
love: and therefore we rest in him, joy in him, and satisfy our selves with
him; for there shall be ever cause so to do, and that without wearines. There
is no end of his bounty and kindness, his mercy indureth for ever: and who
does not see that such infinite I am full of love yea sick, chap. 5.8? And yet
they who shall say to us for thus doing: What is thy well-beloved more then
another well-beloved? We may answer them, that know not the love of our
well-beloved: Our well-beloved is the chiefest of ten thousand: wholly delectable:
his head, as fine gold: etc. Cant. 5.10. But indeed, I must say: except we
have tasted of this, our love shall be cold enough toward him, as may be seen
too commonly, even in many who worship God with us, that all the love and
mercy of God which they boast of, cannot make them forsake their vile lusts.

The 4. companion of faith, is thankefulnes.
how can there be but unfeigned thankfulness, and acknowledging of this gift of
God to his great praise, when we shall weigh what he has done for our souls,
and what solace he has filled our lives withal, which otherwise must needs be
full of deadnes, or deceivable and unsavory folly? They must of necessity
work the same affections in us which were in the man of God, mentioned in the
Psalm. 116.12. What shall I give unto the Lord for all his mercies? I will
praise his name before his congregation, and commit my self wholly to his
government hereafter, who heretofore has regarded me so graciously: yea and we
shall be provoked daily, to this honoring of him, even to sing a new song of
praises to him, Lamen. 3.23.
who will renew his kindness, and goodness daily upon us still: so that we shall
say that his first receiving of us, was but the beginning of our happiness. So
it shall follow, that our hearts being daily exercised in praise and
thanksgiving, the more we do it, the more we shall see cause to do it
still, and so shall wax thankful still in all that God sends, and so in all
parts of our life, even in our troubles, as it is written, In all things be
thankful. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
And although the world see none other cause, but to murmr and rage in their
afflictions, yet shall we see Gods favor to us even in them, and knowing that
they turn, as well as benefits, to our good; we shall praise God, even for
them also: for it becomes well the righteous (who know how greatly they be
occasioned hereto) thus to be thankful. It is the love of God that
constrains us, and inlargeth our hearts to Godward, and gives us matter and
occasion of singing and making melody to the Lord, and of praising him, alone,
as well as in the assembly of the righteous: and no marvel (whereas without
that sweet smell of his love, we should be utterly lumpish, and far from
all cogitation of any such matter.) And I say, it is no marvel that
continual and often thinking on Gods kindness should make us thankful: for how
serviceable, yea how slavish shall ye see a poor man to a benefactor to him in
his bodily necessities, though it be but a little? when he can be content to
lose his life for him, Romans 5.7. and the very borrower is a servant to the
lender.

The 5. companion of faith, is a desire of an holy communion with God. 2. Cor.
5.1.
do take such taste and sweetness in God (he making us so acquainted with his
fatherly kindness and bounty) that we finding no such welfare in any estate
beside, do now desire to be with him, that we may see his glory, and so long
after his blessed presence, that we desire nothing more then being unburdened
of this earthly tabernacle, and prison of our bodies, even to be with Christ to
see his glory. For thus we resolve with our selves upon deep consideration,
and certain trial, that if we might have our choice, whatsoever we should
wish: one day in is better then a thousand in all variety of earthly
pleasures. Psalm. 84.11.
Gods presence in heaven to be preferred before it on earth.
And if his favor be so much to be desired here, where we see but as in a
glass; and his benefits, which he bestows upon his beloved ones so sweet,
where we are but strangers: what think we shall they appear to us, when we
shall see him, in his majesty, as he is? and when we shall enjoy the pleasures
of his house in fulness for ever? Yea, I say, if here, where we live but in a
vale of misery, God does so show his bounty toward us; what (think we)
shall our estate be, Revel. 14.13. Psalm. 16.11. Revel. 22.20.
when we shall rest from our labors, and have fulness of joy with God at his
right hand for evermore? The believing and weighing of this, has caused Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly: And again, I desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ.

And this (if we be not grossly deceived) shall cause us, even when our days
shall be at the best, to receive, and hold fast this mind and hearty desire
to go home, and be ever with the Lord. And if this heavenly affection, and
holy desire be a companion to true faith, it might be meruailed, where their
faith is become, and where it lies a rusting, who make so little haste home,
and have so small desire to be with Christ, where he is in his fathers house,
that they may see his glory (and where there are many mansions, even for us as
well as for him) that they cannot abide to hear of departing thither, 1. Sam.
25.37.
no more then Nabal: he was as a stone: and who are so besotted with that which
is visible, that they have no longing after that which is not seen with eye
but eternal: when yet all should know this, that the presence of God in heaven
is far to be preferred before his presence here on the earth, yea when our
estate is at the best.

The 6. companion of faith, to forsake the world. 1. Pet. 2.10.
But to join the next companion of faith to this, from which it cannot be
separated. This makes us sigh oftentimes, and to desire to go hence, and
(that which we thought would never have been) to become strangers and pilgrims
here, and so to have no more to do in this world, then we needs must. And
this I may truly say, is more then was like ever to have been, if it be
considered, A great grace not to be tied to the world.
the lusts of our heart, the lust of our eye, and what pride, and what glory
we have had in the things which we have loved best: yea and how like unto mad
men, we have nestled, and delighted our selves here (where yet we have had no
certainty of abiding til to morrow) as though we should have continued
always: and yet who sees not, that even then when we ioyed most in our life,
we were but as the bankerupts, which flourish in their kind, and occupy with
other men's goods? So that, in which we gloried, was not our own: goods, and
glory which we took such pleasure in, they were another, Luke 16.12.
we being earthly minded, could not savor of heavenly things, but only of the
earth.

But since that the Lord has by faith persuaded us of his favor, and granted
us to see, what variety of holy and heavenly delights may be inioyed of us
Matthew. 13.
and soon flitting away, and believing that we our selves are with all other
things, daily drawing to our end; we desire to have nothing to hold us here,
rather then to abide here in the flesh, which ought to admonish us, that we
keep fast a willingness to die, and when we have gotten it, that we lose it
not again: A great liberty to be vvilling to die, such only are fit to live.
and the rather, seeing it is that alone which makes us fit to live, while we
remain here, as we ought. Even this grace accompanies faith in us, after that
it is effectually wrought in us: I say not, 1. Cor. 7.
that we loath the benefit of life callings in the which we are commanded to
abide, The forsaking the world, is not to leave necessary duties.
neither condemn we the moderate care of maintaining our selves and ours, and
providing for our outward estate, retaining (in all these) heavenly minds: but
we renounce the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2. Pet. 1.4. and
profane abuse of earthly affairs and dealings, which will not stand with the
practice of Christianity, nor with the word of God.

Which I say for two causes: The one, because in some respects it is lawful,
yea holy, to desire to live; namely, to do good in the Church: Phil. 1.20.21.
and we may and ought to say with David, I will live and not die, to set
forth the praise of The same I say of dealing in our earthly affairs, Psalm.
119.17.
to the end we may not be burdensome to others, and of performing the duties of
our particular callings: in the which actions, we may have proof of the grace
that is in us; I mean patience, righteousness, hope, faith, love; that so our
whole conversation may be well ordered, and proportionable to other holy
duties: and therefore in these respects we may be willing and content to live,
while God will have it so, that we may show forth the virtues, which he has
given us, amongst men: which otherwise should be hidden, and it could not
otherwise be seen of men, that any can possibly live godly, who has an hand
in the world; when in the mean while God forbids not the actions mentioned,
Luke 21.34.
we be not tainted, neither have our consciences defiled.

The 2. cause, why I say, that we should not contemn life, and other lawful
liberties, is, because upon this principle falsely grounded, and as falsely
understood (that we should forsake the world) diverse have troubled many weak
people and abused them; saying and teaching (and that under a great pretense of
godliness) that when we begin to be devout, and to savor of religion, we ought
to leave the world: that is to say, depart from our earthly callings, and
dealings, and also from the society and fellowship of men who are occupied
therein. And to the end that greater devotion and piety may be bred in us,
Cloystring and such like no point of godliness.
2. Cor. 10.14
and the devil has showed himself as an angel of light in persuading, that
such a kind of life is the highest degree of holiness, although it has been
and easily may be proved to be the den and depth of abomination.

For though many have of a good meaning at the first, gone apart from

The seventh companion of faith, is shame for our former unkindness to God.
To proceed therefore, when we see that we be thus made rich by the Lord, after
that we have fastened on his promises, (whereas we were before Luke 7.44. Act.
2.13.
by washing his feet with her tears, and wiping them with the hairs of her
head. For we cannot be ignorant, that when he sought us, we fled from him, and
refused to come: such fruits we yielded him of all his patience and long
suffering, Deuteronomy. 32.32.
whereby he sought to win us: we were as the vines of Sodom, and our grapes
as bitter as Gomorrha: even as much as if we had offered It was the
unspeakable mercy of God, Lament. 3.22. Job. 21.14.
that we were not consumed, when we regarded not to know him, nor to have
acquaintance with his ways: though he sent his ministers daily amongst us,
The believers revenge themselves for their former sins.
to reclaim us. We therefore now are ashamed to think what we have done, and
are deeply grieved to remember that we should find him so loving and gracious
to us, who had done all this injury unto him.

And therefore we sorrowing thus, have been brought to a greater care of
ordering our ways aright, 2. Cor. 7.11.
and desire to please him; yea, to be even angry with our selves, and to seek
an holy revenge at our own hands, that thus we 1. Tim. 1.16.
that we may be examples (as the Apostle speaks of himself) to all that
shall in time to come believe in him to eternal life: that they may the David
say, Remember not, O Lord, the sins of my youth: and again, Psalm. 25.6. and
130.30.
if thou should look straightly, what is done amiss; who should abide it?
The eight companion of faith, is to convert and bring on others.
And to come to the last, we seeing and knowing our selves thus to be redeemed
out of so deep misery, we wishing the same good to our brethren, which we our
selves have received of God, declare unto them how we are redeemed, as occasion
is offered, as Philip and Andrew did privately, John 1. and Paul publicly
being called thereto. Acts. 9.
For we cannot choose but speak the things which we know (the love of God
constraining us) as well to them, who know the same, that we may rejoice
together; as to them who know it not, that they, being yet 2. Cor. 4.13.
And the rather remembering, Luke 22.42.
that as it is our duty being converted our selves to strengthen others: so
also because, if we turn any from their evil ways, we have been means to
save so many souls from death. Psalm. 66.16.
Neither are we of their minds, who think it both uncivil, and unseasonable,
either among strangers, or their own neighbors, to acquaint the ignorant and
wandering souls with this heavenly matter, or to build up the weak in the more
sound and clear certainty of it: but pitying their misery, who cannot help
themselves, we think it meet to benefit them with whom we are conversant, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
with that which we have found to be greatest happiness to our selves. And
although 1 Thessalonians. 5.11.
and so of our faith, and a duty commanded us of God; we desire therefore
rather to neglect our own pleasure which we might enjoy in the liberty of
other talk, then to let go such good oportunities, with hope of the fruit
which may come thereby. And me thinks, seeing edifying talk is one means to
season our selves with grace, Edifying talk, good for our selves and others.
and to stablish our own hearts more constantly in a good course, as well as
to glad the hearts of others, me thinks (I say) if we have comfort by our
believing, and know the benefit of faith we ought to be patient toward them,
1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Use it, as it may be, though we see not present fruit of it.
bearing with their ignorance, infirmity; yea, and with their waiwardnes also,
waiting to see if God at any time will give them better minds: and not tie him
to work when we would, nor to think our labors to be such, that if we see
not present success and blessing, we may therefore justly leave off. But the
truth is, this grace is two cannot walk together, if they be not of one mind,
Amos 3.3. Or if they converse more familiarlie with them, and turn their
meetings and company to idle, light, Prou. 10.21. Psalm. 119.13.
whereof this is one, to exhort, and admonish one another: and with our lips to
feed many. These with such holy affections constantly settled in our hearts,
are inseparable companions of faith unfeigned, as I have said; although it is
not to be denied, that a resemblance of all these eight may be in the wicked by
starts, and in their good mood, their affections may thus be stirred up to show
for the time, some likelihood of them (especially, where they are under
ordinary teaching) which yet otherwise, and at other times

CHAP. 11. How weak faith is confirmed, and the comfort of it.
ANd now a little, I will add yet further (as I promised) for the staying and
satisfying of those which have attained to lay hold of Gods promises, and have
some measure of true have tasted how good the Lord is, by any small light of
true faith, they find and feel it to be so sweet, that in fear of forgoing
and losing it again, 1. Pet. 2.2.
they desire above all things to know how they may hold and keep it. And it is
indeed the most necessary question that they can move. This question I think
very fitly to be answered in this place, because it is the doubt of them which
are newly borne of God: for otherwise of the daily and continual growing in
faith, it is more fitly to be spoken of in another place, where I shall speak
of the new life, and the holy course of such as are the Lords people already.
Therefore to this question, it is thus to be answered, The first means to hold
and to be confirmed in faith.
meditating, and praying to seek to believe: even so let them settle, and
accustom themselves to do still.

And if they do desire to keep and hold their faith from day to day, till
Matthew. 6.21. Matthew. 13.44. Revel. 3.11. Hebr. 10.35.
their fear will be usually, least they should lose it; they will think it
most necessary to regard, and look to it, whatsoever they have besides it,
worth the looking after: Even as the husbandman will more especially regard
his cattle, and corn, being his chief substance, A simile.
The best things must best be regarded.
then his pullen which is smaller and of lesser value. And otherwise every
small occasion will hinder them from nourishing and looking to it: and every
trifle and fond desire of their own, will carry them after it, and cause
their hearts to be taken up with it: we are not ignorant of the devils
enterprises; 2. Cor. 2.11.
what swarms of evil lusts, and noisome delights, and other matters of like
sort, he fills men's heads withal, even such as he knows do like them
best, that they may mind no better things: and even such especially as are in
the way to know Gods great kindness toward them, that they may be, Evil must
be avoided, and lawful liberties soberly used.
after some sort, put out of the way again. Therefore not only these, which
are evil of themselves, must grow loathsome to them; but they must also be
sober, and moderate themselves, even in their lawful liberties and dealings
so, one thing be thought needful of them, whatsoever they go about, Luke
10.42.
even this; to nourish their faith, and to hold fast their hope of eternal
life, and Gods favor, seeing God, who gives it, does never change his mind,
John 13.1.
nor repent him.

And that they may do this the better (which is too slacklie performed of
many, The second means to confirm faith.
who yet have felt some sweetness in the promises) they are further to be
directed, that daily and often, (which few will be brought unto) they send up
strong prayers to God for it, and that they do of set purpose separate
themselves from all other things in the most convenient manner, that they can,
to call to remembrance the manifold and gracious promises of God: Exodus 34.7.
how loving also and kind God is: that thus their faith may be confirmed in
them: and so bring their hearts by little and little to a new course and
custom, that they may have more near acquaintance with Gods nature, his mind
and purpose toward them: how lovingly he is affected to them: how little they
need to fear his anger and displeasure: and how free they may be from
doubting and wavering. For it must be well considered and often thought upon,
that weak bleeuers, who are privy to themselves of their many doubtings, do
soon let slip out of their memory, and so out of their hearts, such grounds
of their True believers are soon faint and fearful.
unless they can bring themselves to reuiew and call them to mind usually:
Yea, and further; unless they do provide to help their feeblenes of heart and
memory (as they shall be able) with some pithie and clear proves of their
salvation and safety; such as they have before rested on, and found comfort
by: as this, Come to me, all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you:
Matthew. 11.28.
and let them reason thus from it: If Christ call them that are laden, and
promises to ease Peter, Paul, or any other. Thus should the weak apply it.
Ioh. 7.37.
Another: If any thirst, let him come to me, and I will give him the water of
life to drink. 1. Ioh. 5.14. Hos. 14.2.3.4.5 Prou. 28.13.
And many other such: as in the margin.

Some of these and such like are often to be thought on, and applied, as I have
said, if we desire to keep in the safe estate, which I have spoken of; that
is to come to God in prayer when we will, with boldness and confidence: and yet
when we do not pray, not to be afraid of him, but to walk in any of our
actions without slavish fear before him. And if we do not thus, we shall by
on the left hand or on the right, Luke 1.75.
and go out of the royal way; even that way of which the Prophet speaks,
when he says: Thou vpholdest me in mine integrity, and set me before thy
face continually. As if he should say, Psalm. 41.12.
They must much help their weakness and often.
thou will see that I take no hurt, being ever in thine eye, as ye child in the
mothers eye, that it may have no danger. I say, in this royal way we shall
not keep safe and sound, except we do (as men dim of sight, use of
spectacles) help our spiritual eye sight with often looking in the glass of
Gods word and promises: which I say not, as though God did change his mind so
often (seeing there be so many doubts in us) who is ever one and constant; but
for that we have riuen memories, wandering affections, and deceitful

The 3. mean to confirm faith. 1 Thessalonians. 2.10.13. and 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. Luke
22.19.
And to this purpose they are also to help their weakness in faith, by
ordinary Do this as often as ye do it, in remembrance of me. With these two
they must carefully retain a viewing of their sins, Lam. 3.40.
which by examination they have found out: They must, I say, be The 4. mean to
confirm faith.
by a mean and base thinking of themselves from fulness and loathing of Christ's
death, as it is made too common a reckoning of. Neither can it be felt sweet
and pleasant of any, except their sins be felt bitter and tart. And besides all
this, their former experience is not the least help to establish and settle
them in this persuasion: that for as much as they cannot deny, The 5. mean.
but that they have believed with joy, and received much ease to their heavy
hearts thereby: therefore much more now they ought, and lawfully may rest and
persuade themselves so again. And therefore to say with themselves, Psalm. 77.9.
it is but their own weakness, when they are pierced thorough with such doubts:
from God there is who is ever one and changes not: Iam. 1.17.
for all this might they have with Gods good liking; and worse estate then this
they need not to be in, if they would be advised by him, and not by the evil
custom of their hearts, whereby they are easily brought to think, that faith
and other graces will dwell in them, though they be slightly cared for, and
regarded: which conceit is most false and erroneous.

And that the Lord gives his beloved ones such bold and free access to him,
to know his mind toward them, The faithful have near acquaintance with God.
They are called his friends. Ioh. 15.14.15. Ephesians. 2.4. Zach. 2.8.
and to have this holy acquaintance with him (which can hardly be persuaded to
the weak in faith, at their first coming to him) hereby it may appear, that
he says, he will not count them with whom he will communicate his very
secrets, as far as shall be expedient for ^^em to know them: and as Paul
says; God of his rich mercy has loved us thr^^gh much love. God says, they
are as the apple of his eye, and therefore dear unto him: he tells them that
he has taken from them the spirit of bondage, that they should no longer be
afraid of him, Romans 8.15. Luke 1.74.75. Phil. 4.4.
but serve him without fear: and to rejoice in him always: which cannot be,
except they knew his mind, and affection to them, yea and that more clearly
then the son can know his fathers, or the wife her husbands mind. And
therefore if they who have begun to lay hold on eternal life through
believing, should by some occasion lose the feeling comfort of their faith; as
by Satan's the love of God by Christ shed into their hearts: Let no place be
given to doubting. Ioh. 13.1.
but to count it their frailty and timorousnes, and that without cause; even
for that they were not better acquainted with the will of God, who loves to
the end all such as he has once loved.

And yet this is not without the most wise providence of God, who disposes all
these weaknesses of theirs to their good, that they may be humbled the more in
themselves, and rise to their faith again; and to the glory of God, who
brings back again, those who were almost in their own feeling, How faith
is weakened.
through neglecting the means whereby it ought to have been preserved; or by
sleightnes in the use of them; or by letting loose the heart after some vanity
or worldlines, which it lusted after; or being disquieted, and unsettled
otherwise: this is not their refuge to say, we must be content to go without
it: and it is impossible to hold it: when we have bestowed all our travail,
we have done it but in vain: Revel. 2.5.
But as they epsy their weakness, so let them remember how they have fallen, A
simile.
as he that has ach in his teeth, or a wound in his leg, does not neglect
the health of his whole body for that, but seeks the redress of that one,
that the whole may be in good case, as it was before.

And seeing it helps much to the nourishing of our faith, among all other
times, to season our hearts, in the morning, if it may be, with the recording
and thinking upon Gods promises of his love and salvation: therefore, if the
morning meditating on the promises, with earnest prayer thereto adjoined,

But this is not the place to show how the day is to be passed; that shall
follow

The sixth mean to confirm faith.

Compare Exodus 4. with chap. 10.


The sixth mean to hold and confirm faith, is the examples of others, whom of
weak, we have seen to become strong in faith: as Moses, with whom as God
has been, and with other his good servants to strengthen them: so will he be
with us, till he perfecteth in us in like sort the work which he has begun.
And this be spoken of the means, by which weak faith is helped and confirmed.

CHAP. 12. The sweet fruit and benefit of the preserving and confirming of
our faith.
NOw if any think the looking to these means, and this daily diligence for
the preserving of faith to be overmuch, let them understand, that the benefit
is most great which it brings. And if this answers them not, let them hear
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2.4.
who says, that our faith consists not in the wisdom of men, but in the
power of God: as if he should say, that No outvvard means confirm faith, if
we prize it not the best of all things.
and hold it fast, as the first and principal: it is not their hearing*

Whiles I thought verily (said he) that I had faith, A pithie speech of a
vvorthie person.
but yet held it not by the surest grounds, I thought of it sometimes, and was
glad to think that I had it: holding my persuasion thereof, by such evidences
as I had before inioyed, rather then I could tell what sure warrant I had then
of it: but I took no great pain to confirm it by daily meditating on the
promises, neither bestowed any more diligence in and about that, then upon
other duties. But Psalm. 9.14.
by refreshing my soul, with considering Gods abundant love and favor
toward me, and rest upon it as mine own. But when I have done it, I am (by
good heed taking) cheerful, and in good estate, all the day after: and so I
am (in reverence be it spoken) said he, persuaded, that I shall continue to do.

Now to make use of this Christian speech, because it is according to
knowledge, and I have said nothing of him, which is not as needful for us; and
his practice agrees with the doctrine of the Scriptures: if we will speak
every man the truth, what comfort, or well ordered estate can be in our lives
any The chiefest thing every morning is to remember Gods love.
or in care and sorrow, and so be disquieted? Therefore if men were wise, they
would see that they could not well want this any day; especially seeing God
has given liberty to them to enjoy such sweet communion with him by means of
this precious faith: but they would consider their end, how uncertain it is,
as all other things which they enjoy, and therefore be ready for it, at one
time as well as another, which they might do, if they held fast their
confidence, that brings with it so great reward. And how shall we lead our
whole life by

But, alas, we verify the saying of our Savior, Gods children not so wise for
their good, as the bad for theirs.
though to our great shame it may be spoken: that the children of this world
are wiser in their kind then we: who if they be disappointed of their desire
one way, have twenty shifts to seek it another. But it is too manifest, that
the most part, even of the better sort, and those who have tasted of this faith
and assurance already, do not Many good Christians have not half the comfort
they might have. Ephesians. 5.18. Deuteronomy. 33.12. Psalm. 90.
And thus doing, they see not the twentieth part of Gods bounty and fatherly
affection toward them, who gives them not some taste now and then of his
abundant love, but would have them filled with it, and that continually; yea
and thereby to be in safety all the day long: which if many of Gods servants
did believe, as they do any article of their faith, that it is true; how
greatly should their heavy hearts be made joyful, and their heads lifted up
with cheerefulnes, whereas now deceivable mirth, or unprofitable sorrow
holds them rejoice in the Lord always, and that because they believe not
always, neither think that they may, or can possibly attain to it.

And by this means, that they are so often cast from their hold, of faith, and
so of peace, and constancy therein, the devil weakneth and holds back
sundry (which are coming on) by their example: thinking themselves well in
the case they are in, rather then in following them, except they saw some
beauty and excellency in their lives, more then is in themselves.

Vnsetling of our selves from nourishing faith, is full of dangers.
Besides this, they not holding their persuasion for continuance, as well as

This spirit of bondage therefore, which holds them often in fear, I earnestly
wish were abandoned: and that this wavering and needles doubting, which
possesses so great part of their life (especially when any great affliction
arresteth them, or lies long upon them) were as far from them, as the East
is from the West: so that they might see the abundant favor of God far
greater toward them, then ever they did: and that by how much they he has
given be diligent to hear and mark the promises daily: so shall they wax
familiar, and well acquainted with the mind and purpose of God, howsoever the
profane worldlings make them common things, and are soon weary of hearing
the^. Let the^ weigh the^ also, and apply them to their own souls daily by
private meditation: let them learn of other the faithful servants of God, how
they do most especially preserve their faith. And let them be thoroughly
persuaded, that how crossely soever things come to pass, yet the Lord seeks
their good by them, and does not delight in their sorrow and troubles: for if
he did, he could a thousand ways make a riddance of them, but sends them
specially for their benefit and good; so grow rooted, and established in their
faith, as the grain of Mustard seed, which after rooting becomes a stalk,
The longer we live, the better we should be.
and has branches and boughs: and as that grows, so shall sound peace and
safety, and strength against their corruptions; yea and these means whereby
it is preserved, how wearisome soever they have been sometime, shall become
easy and pleasant, and from time to time more and more, so that they may be
assured that they have cause in all things to be thankful. Many have found
small comfort through their life.
And that should be thought a rare and special benefit, if we consider how
many thousands have not an hour of this comfort through the year, no not
through their whole life. And thus much to show who is the Lords, and how the
weak believer is to be vpholden: 2. Pet. 1.1.
The first is the weakest and least measure: when there is yet no assurance in
the believer; and yet inseparable fruits, and infallible tokens of it: as I
have set down. The second degree is, when some assurance is wrought in the
believer at some time, but very weak: and is often to seek and wanting, and
recovered again by entering into due consideration of his estate, and of the
truth

This I have said for their cause, who being tender and weak in faith, would
desire some help herein: the larger handling of the helps is to be sought in
the third part of this treatise, where the helps to preserve the whole heart,
and consequently faith, and all godliness in the believer, is set down.

The end of the first part of this Treatise.
THE SECOND TREATISE, SHOWING AT LARGE WHAT THE LIFE OF THE TRVE BELIEVER IS,
AND THE Conversation of such, as have assured hope of salvation.
CHAP. 1. The sum and order of this second Treatise.
HItherto I have showed, who are they whom the Scripture James 2.26.
and beauty of faith, which without works is dead: neither could the believer
know how to occupy himself throughout his join with his faith, 2. Pet. 1.5,
6, 7
virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and
love, etc.

This (I say) is the argument and matter to be handled in this treatise. And
seeing there is much difficulty about this point, as about the other, in the
former treatise; and seeing it is of greatest weight and moment of all other,
except that: Diverse opinions about godliness. Matthew. 27.3.
it must with like care be looked into and laid forth. For some think, that
repentance and godliness, is nothing else, but grief for some offense
committed: and so Judas might have been godly. Some think, that to amend some
thing which was amiss, is godliness, especially, if they also do Herod that
caused John to be beheaded, might have been godly: Mark. 6.20.
For he reverenced John, and when he heard him, he did many things. Some
think, that if they have been well moved at the hearing of the word of God,
and do bow themselves before God, for the time, in outward signs of
repentance only; that then they be godly in deed: but so might Ahab have been
godly. Some, if they can shut up all their vain talk, It is necessary to
understand wherein a godly life consists.
that we may understand the will of God aright concerning this, and what to
lean unto, that we be not deceived.

The necessary connection of this treatise with the former.
whether his course and behavior be such or no: and the trial of this must be
made of him, who has tried himself by the former, that the one may be seen
to go with the other, and both together as twins; so that he who has not
both, may be truly said to have neither. And in laying forth this matter, I
will follow this method and order: to refer all that shall be spoken about
it, Faith and a godly life, are as twins, and go together. The heads of this
treatise are four.
to four general heads or parts. The first, that a godly life must of
necessity go with the faith before spoken of: and that it is the foundation
and ground thereof, whereby we receive and give credit, not only to the promise
of our Ezekiel speaks, Ezekiel. 36.26.
I will take away your stony or hard heart from you, and put a new heart in
you: This must of necessity be in him who shall live godly, and so
consequently, that the whole man be changed. Thirdly, I will set down the
first part of a godly life; and show that it is a renouncing and forsaking of
all sin, both inward and outward. And fourthly, I will add the other part of
godliness, declaring that

CHAP. 2. That a godly life cannot be without unfeigned faith; nor this faith
without it: which is the first point in the first general head to be handled.
THus, having showed what the sum of this treatise is, and the order and
parts of it, I will now proceed: and first, seeing I have taken in hand to
describe the life of the believer, and what the godly life is, which he must
lead:

But before I lay forth this godly life at large, in this chapter, I will begin
with the first point of the first general part of this treatise, that is, that
seeing godliness cannot be without justifying faith, but springs and arises
from it, as the branch from the tree; James 2.18.
for so Saint James says, Show me thy faith by thy works: therefore where no
true justifying faith is, there can be no godly life. And so he, Where true
faith is not, there is no good life. Ephesians. 2.3.
who is no true believer, cannot have any sparkle of godliness in We all had our
conversation sometime as other disobedient men, in the lusts of our flesh,
doing those things which liked us: where we see, that this was the life of all,
even the best, to be strangers to the life of godliness, and the children of
wrath, before they believed, Ephesians. 2.8. But least any through ignorance might
say: though we did that which liked the lusts of our hearts, yet we did not
only so, nor all that we did, was not such, but some good we did amongst the
evil which we committed, (and if it be so, they think that the one may
answer for the other:) I further say to them, out of the place to Titus 1.15.
Unto the pure, are all things pure: but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.6.
that without faith, it is impossible to please God, whatsoever things we do,
but all is abominable, odious, and vile before him. For as is the fountain,
so are the rivers which run from it; and as is the heart, and the cogitations
of it, so are the actions which proceed from it: but the cogitations of the
heart are always, Genesis 6.5. No good thing in the unbeliever that pleases God.
Genesis 9.6. Prou. 28.9. Psalm. 50.16. Genesis 4.4.
and only evil. So that (to return) in the unbeliever there is no good thing
that pleases God: his best actions are turned into sin: his prayers, alms,
reading, hearing, confessions, thankes-giuings, and whatsoever else, they are
all abominable in him; and God will never be pleased with his works and
services, until the person, namely, even he himself be accepted The just
shall live by faith, but if any withdraw himself [that is, thorough vnbeliefe]
my soul shall have no pleasure in him, says the Lord.

And this is the work which God requires of him, above, and beyond all
works, that he believe in his son, that he has already wrought his
happiness: and therefore that he shall be saved by him only. Now if a man,

And if any count this doctrine hard, and say, that if this should be true, No
new doctrine.
it were the next way to drive many to discomfort, yea and to desperation: let
such know, that if any despair because their wicked lives are condemned of
God, the doctrine is not to be blamed, but the persons themselves, who should
rather repent; for the doctrine is the doctrine of the Scriptures: It is hard
only to the obstinate 2. Pet. 3.16.
and al sound Divines both old and new have taught it. And if it be hard, it is
hard to the ignorant, unstable, and obstinate, who indeed can take little
comfort by it, but pervert all things to their own destruction: and although
they despair

But let this suffice to show, that no man can lead a godly and Christian
life, before he has some measure of true faith, as it has been set down and
described in the former treatise. And as I have showed, None that have faith
can live wickedly.
that no man lives godly which believes not: so it is on the contrary, to be
marked, that no man who believes, and nourishes and preserves his faith, can
live wickedly, nor fashion himself after men of the world, or return to the
offensive, and unsavory course, which he walked after before: but as he is
newborn, 2. Cor. 5.


And first, by that place to Titus: The grace of God, that has appeared,
Proofs of the former. Tit. 2.12.
teaches and to live holily, righteously, and soberly in this present life; he
says plainly, if we be once enlightened by that divine grace and gift of the
Gospel to see our selves partakers of salvation: we are by the same knowledge,
taught (and so learn it) to renounce our old conversation. So that even as a
scholar plainly taught by his master, becomes skillful in those points
wherein he was instructed: so is a man taught, to see God worthy all honor,
and to give it him, by casting away the works of darkness, when he sees that
he has brought him out of most woeful bondage, into the glorious And is it any
marvel? For what will we not be ready to do, for such a one as has but
once saved our lives from death? How much more do all they which know that
they are discharged for ever from fearful damnation, see infinite causes why
they should change their wicked lives (which so much displeased God) and are
also ready to do the same? Be not therefore deceived, God is not mocked by
them, who profess they look to be saved, and do not bring forth
fruiteworthie amendment.

Faith is not content with a wandering desire of godliness.
It is not a bare wandering desire to please God, which this precious faith, and
assurance of salvation works: but it frames also the man unto it, and
teaches him in some true and acceptable measure to go about it. The tidings
Agrippa, being a King, and therefore acquainted with earthly felicity; and a
Heathen, and therefore unfit to see very easily into spiritual things: 2. Cor.
5.
yet this appeared so glorious tidings to him, when he heard it by Paul, not
preaching in the pulpit, but standing a prisoner at the bar, Act. 26.28.
that it caused him at the first to say: Thou have almost persuaded me to
become a Christian. And therefore he, who has not only heard a sound of this
heavenly news with his ears (which yet did weigh equally against a Princes
kingdom in a Heathen man's judgment) but has believed it to be his own, and
that for ever: do we think, that any thing will be thought too dear for him,
Gospel despised, because it is not known.
who has freely given it him? And therefore to love darkness more then light,
because their deeds are evil, Ioh. 3.19. I marvel not at it: they do after
their nature and kind. As they are not obedient to the will of God, so neither
indeed can they be; who yet for all this, know not any cause why they should
accuse themselves: but if they might see what kindness God offers them, even
to be made happy, and might believe the same, ye should see them changed, as
sensible as ever was Saul, of a persecutor to become a preacher; so they of
oppressors, merciful persons, and restorers of that which the lamb and the
lion do eat together.

Many would be thought believers, who live not a godly life. Hos. 7.8.
But to let these go, as too gross, I would wish such to weigh these
Scriptures aright; who will take no nay but that they belong to Gods election,
when yet their goodness is as the morning dew, soon vanishing and blown away;
or as a cake half baken. Let them see how well this becomes them, to be
sometime forward, sometime backward: in some things, zealous, and yielding to
the will of God: in othersome, sinning against their own knowledge: and when
they be straying from duty, to make no haste to it again; Paul speaks of,
in those which know themselves saved? Romans 7.4.
which, as an husband, rules and bears sway, which commands holy and
heavenly motions and affections into the heart, not suffering poisoned, Phil.
2.12. Ierem. 8.6.
what have I done? or else loose, vain, and foolish by other occasions, and all
this without repentance. Where is his testimony, that his heart is a good
treasury, and nurserie of good things? when his tongue shall be walking, not
only foolish jesting, taunting, railing, mocking, lying, swearing, slandering,
currish and churlish speaking; how are the powers and members of the body in
subjection, as a wife unto the power of Christ, which rules as an husband, in
the heart of Gods beloved ones? where is those men's religion, which S. Iam.
1.26.
James boldly says is none, where the tongue is thus ungoverned, what show
soever be made thereof?

And so I might go forward to convince many of our countrymen, who have often
heard me, and other of Gods Ministers urging them after the same manner, in our
Sermons: and do know, I tell them the truth, that such their rejoicing good,
who glory in their faith and hope, when yet they are thus earthly and carnally
minded.

They must know it (howsoever they believe) that God has joined with faith,
virtue, and godliness, patience, temperance; and that who so believes, is
thereby turned from his old conversation. For mine own part, Too hasty
repentance seldom sound.
I have long misliked this haste, and sudden shows of great repentance in men,
who in their first acquaintance with the word preached to them, have not only
professed Note.
which Change of life without faith, vain.
and assurance of Gods favor, which is the beginning, and worker of all new
life, as a thing soon gotten: and therefore it is so slightly labored for of
them, and so to seek with the^, for want of thorough proving whether they have
it or no, that many are driven again to seek for it, many years after, they
thought they had been sure of it, yea and (that which is more to be lamented)
many of them never attain unto it at all. It stands with no sound reason,
that young beginners in learning of any trade, should by and by, become A
simile.
and setters up; or that they should rule well, who have never learned to obey:
so it stands not with religion, that they should count themselves good
Christians, or that they should be so indeed, who have not tasted of Christ,
and the benefit thereof; neither learned him, as the truth is in him, that is,
to put off the old man with his affections and lusts, and to put on the new:
and who have not felt him so good and bountiful to them, that for his sake
they be ready to do any thing.

This I have spoken by occasion of the matter in hand; namely, that faith
brings always with it new life; in so much, that when it is ouermatched with
the fleshly corruption, yet it raises sighings and striuings in the heart It
is vain to think we have faith without a new life.
not only with many offensive actions; but also with custom and commons in the
same: whereas he which is honored with the title of Gods servant, must be known
by the liuerie of vncorrupt life, and prove by his savor and smell of good
conversation, that he came from God, and is not of the earth, 1. Pet. 3.4.
that so he may show himself to be a man of God indeed: his roots must be
fastened as the trees of Lebanon: Hos. 14.6.
he must flourish as the Lilly, and find the graces of God as dew to quicken
them. For of this be we sure, that whatsoever men allege, why their lives
cannot bear the Romans 6.17.
and yet they will needs go for the approved servants of God; it is a strong
delusion which persuades them so.

And therefore seeing the Scripture does (as I have said) so fully, and so
often set down this truth unto us, that such as have obtained mercy of God,
are taught and guided by him: ought not men to settle themselves to another
course, then in times past they walked in, being now delivered from so great
bondage? Luke 1.75.
For to that end, as they have heard, they were delivered. Wherefore, Matthew.
11.29.
if any be assured of salvation, let them either willingly be subject to the
Lords yoke, I mean his commandments, and commit their whole Tit. 3.8.
to their cost: and be they well assured, that God will not be slack to
revenge such boldness. But I will shut up this matter in one sentence. Saint
Paul to the Ephesians most lively describes this life, which is to be led of
them which are sure of Gods favor: Ephesians. 4.22.
saying, Put off, or lay aside, as concerning your conversation past, that old
man, that is, that corrupt nature; and so the powers of your mind and body,
which were infected with deceivable lusts: and be renewed in the spirit of your
minds, (even where the force of reason should be greatest) that so you may put
on

CHAP. 3. That for the leading of a godly life, is required faith in the
temporal promises of God, and hearty assent and credit to the commandments
also, and threatenings in the word of God, as well as faith to be saved.
NOw I have showed, that true justifying faith and a godly life, must of
necessity go together, and that the one cannot The believer must believe
other promises beside that of salvation. 1. Cor. 1.30.
that he which believes in Christ to salvation, must not stay himself and
rest therein only, as though he were given unto us of his father to be our
righteousness only, and to make for us a way to eternal life: but to be our
wisdom also, to make us wise; our sanctification, to make us holy, and also
our redemption and deliverance, to rid us in his good time, promises of this
life, 1. Tim. 4.8.
and of the life to come, which serve to confirm him in obedience (whether the
great and principal, as of the graces of the spirit; or the smaller, as of
bodily safety and preservation from dangers, so far as they shall be good for
him) do belong unto him.

And beside both these, he must believe, Also the threats and commandments.
that both all the commandments which teach obedience, and the threatenings,
because they restrain the contrary, are set down for him particularly, as
well as for any other, to bind his conscience thereunto: these also, I say,
must he believe, Romans 15.4.
according Paul: Whatsoever things are written aforetime (as either promises,
threats or commandments) they are written for our learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. So that he is bound to
depend upon this word of God, written in the canonical Scriptures, and to
build his faith thereon (in such wise, that he dares ieopard his soul upon the
truth and doctrine of them) even as he is to look for salvation, only by our
Lord Jesus Christ: ever counting that for sin, which shall be found to jar
or iangle with the same, either in his heart or life.

But though all, who have hope to be saved, should do this; The believers do
not thus. 1. Cor. 3.1.
yet it is manifest, they do not. They make not conscience of many sins:
they look The cause why.
that they be no better stablished and rooted in the truth to believe it,
because these things (as they be worthiest and most excellent) so they be not
plainly, soundly, and thoroughly beaten into the people, and that again and
again, till they that are willing, A second.
have them for their own. And another cause is, for that the

Want of this faith works much inconvenience.
And therefore when they have some work of true faith in them; yet they see not
how to set upon repentance, and a godly life: how to begin, and how have
received the first fruits of the spirit. Whereas, if they were persuaded that
they ought to make conscience of all sound doctrine that they hear, and to
give assent to every part of the word of God, and submit themselves thereto,
promises, threats and commandments; they should hold more firmly the
persuasion of their salvation, and also be better prepared how to fly evil,
and how to do duty, and how to trust God in all kinds of his promises.
Therefore it is said to the Heb. 4.2.
To us was the Gospel preached as also unto them: but the word that they
heard, profited not them, because it was not mixed with faith in those that
heard it. Again, Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23.
Without faith, it is impossible to please God. With the which agrees that
which is written by S. Paul to the Romans: Whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin: that is, whatsoever we do, not being persuaded in our consciences, that
we please God in doing of it, we sin against him. Now then, when our
judgments be not settled in this doctrine and truth, and consequently, we
follow no such rule in our actions, must we not needs wander up and down the
more unprofitably and heavily; or, when we be at the best, must we not needs be
doubtful and uncertain, whether we please God or no? whereas our the bruised
reed, which is easily broken.

The believer must believe that he shall be sanctified.
Therefore if any believe to be saved, let them believe also that they shall be
sanctified (for with one and the same faith we believe both) and that they
shall receive grace from God to bring forth fruits of amendment of life, and
that they shall be made able by him through the hearing of the holy
Scriptures, to cast off their old conversation. This faith much avails to the
furthering of the dear children of God in a godly course, even at their first
coming unto God, as it does always after, to live by it. And although God And
particular promises of benefits and deliverance.
yet shall they sooner wade through their doubts, and grow out of their fear,
if they have this faith as a foundation to uphold them, and encourage And
precepts and threats, even the word it self. Romans 1.5.
and to suffer themselves to be led by it (and that because it is his word)
having in them always a settled purpose to do so: and this is called by the
Apostle, the obedience For they must be resolved of this, that to whom God
gives Christ, to them also he gives all things needful for this life, and the
life to come, in and by Christ.

And thus Noah did not only believe that he was made heir of righteousness;
Examples of such as did st. Hebr. 11.8.
but also, that he and certain of his household should be saved in the flood:
and Abraham likewise believed not only, that he was justified, but also went to
a place which he knew not, only seeing God commanded; and abode in the land of
promise, as in a strange country; and believed, that he should have a son in
his old age. And they who believed among the Israelites in the Savior which
was to come, of whom Moses, though darkely, had taught before: John 5.46.
the that the walls of Jericho should fall down, Ios. 6.10.
after they had bin compassed about seven days. Many other such examples, who
showed themselves not only to believe the promise of forgiveness of sins, and
of eternal life, but also other temporal promises; yea and precepts also and
threats, which God had set down in his word, very profitable for us, to this
purpose: many such (I say) both thoroughout the Scriptures; and namely, in that
eleventh chapter to the Hebrews, are set down unto us. And this general
faith, (so called, for that it gives assent and credit to the word of God, in
the elect, as well to one part as to another, with an honest heart ready to
obey it) even this faith (I say) must be planted in them, as well as faith to

And this doctrine, because it is occupied about the promises of this life, and
the commandments of God, which are to guide us to full sanctification here, I
did not therefore join it with my discourse of faith in the former treatise;
but referred it to this place as the fittest, where I teach how to live godly:
to the attaining whereof, the believing, that I have spoken of, is a special
help and furtherance. And so I wish the christian reader to mark well that
which I say about this matter: for it is one of the hardest points in all
christianity to practice, and one of the darkest to conceive and see into, and
The just shall live by faith: the other, I live no longer, Hebr. 10.38. Gal.
2.19.
but Christ in me, and the life that I lead is by faith in the son of God.
As if they both should say; Christ by his spirit does draw his faithful ones
to be led and guided

This kind of faith not often beat upon by teachers.
I said that this believing which I speak of, is not much laid open in public
teaching, but only this (which is the effect of it) that we ought to be
obedient to the word of God: and therefore it is, that the forwarder sort of
good hearers (except some few, The less conceived, and in use with the better
kind of hearers.
who have been thoroughly made acquainted with it, and exercised in it by long
experience) do little see into it: namely, that they may undoubtedly be
persuaded, that God will make them able to obey his will, as they are fit to
reach unto it: and that he has promised, if they once Luke 1.28.
) as it was said by the Angel to Mary, Hail, thou that art freely beloved,
the Lord is with thee. Many of Gods dear children, when they are somewhat
stayed about the assurance of their salvation, after that they have been long
laboring about it, and then come to hear that they must lead new lives; many
of them (I say) are willing to go about it: but they are much discouraged,
because they see not how they shall be able. And least any should object,
Objection.
that Paul himself was so troubled, who said, To will, is present with me;
Romans 7.18.
but I find no means to perform that which is good: I answer, he Answer.
that is, that he had no hope in God, nor no promise of strength from him to
perform: for he said the contrary in sundry places. Philip. 4.13.
I am able to do all things through the help of Christ which strengthens
me. And again, I live no longer, but Christ in me: but he complained, that for
all the hope of help that he had, yet the rebellion of his flesh, and nature
that was unreformed, did mightily resist him. And this hinderance he had, and
we all shall have while we live. But what is that to this, that besides this
rebellion of the old man, they have this also to hinder them: that they cannot
tell, whether they shall have strength to make them able, or no: nor whether
God have given them any promise, that their burden shall be

This it is, that kills the heart of right good christians, when they are
ignorant of it, and when they be not well grounded in it, and thoroughly
persuaded of it, that God will make them able and fit for so great a work, as
the leading of a godly life is: even like the burden of the Israelites, who
were enjoined their task of brick that they had made in times past, Exodus
5.11.
(which work was hard enough) and yet themselves to seek and provide their
straw. This, I am sure, has troubled many, What causes tedious troubles to
many christians.
who yet were willing and ready to do any duties required of them, and has
been the cause why they have gone about the several

The testimony of good christians.
And for the benefit of many good souls, I will say that which has been
acknowledged unto me, by sundry well approved christians, when I have in
conference set down plainly to them the point which now I write of:

And to go forward, who does not know, that when some certainty of An
exhortation to the Ministers.
Pity therefore the distressed estate of Gods poor people, ye shepherds of
his flock. Although this is but one point of many which ye are to teach them:
and arm your selves with that mind, which was in the Apostle: 2. Pet. 1.12.
who saw it meet as long as he should abide in this tabernacle, to put the
people in mind of al things necessary to salvation from day to day, though
they knew and were stablished in them. And let me with your patience, say one
thing more to you, which if ye will make good gain of that which you shall
teach, if your hearers should not: John Baptists time with greedines, Matthew. 11.
and as it were with violence; and so, that if they be not brought to the true
practice of Christianity by it, they will not be brought to it by any other
teaching.

And this I wish, that ye be not of the mind that some have been of (for it is
no opinion fit for the Minister of God) that is to say, that they think,
though some preach by experience, yet no man is bound to do so: as though the
good shepherd does go before the sheep, Ioh. 10.4.
and they follow him: And if he go before them in example of good life, then
he cannot choose but teach them by experience, that which he himself does
practice in his good example. And so, he that shall think that he is not
bound to teach by experience, as well as by the letter, concludes that he is
not bound to be a good man himself, who teaches.

Let faith and godliness be often taught.
Now I have said what I purposed, I will go forward. In teaching, labor much
in this manner, which I have mentioned, to beat into the people, (with making
it plain to them, how they may be assured of their salvation, Phil. 3.1.
So S. Paul has left behind him his practice for our instruction, saying: It
grieueth me not to write (when he cannot the same things to you, and for you,
it is a sure thing. And we should know, that it is no shame to preach the same
things often, yea in our own congregation; but meet and fit (especially if they
be these special matters) unless we contend for the vain praise of men, and
will show our pride by seeking after nouelty, The same things without vain
repetition and barbarousnes.
rather then our desire of the peoples edifying. Yet I nourish not
barbarousnes, nor the uttering unseasonably and vnsauourly either of the same
words and sentences, or in bosom Sermons, the same things: but in the evidence
of the spirit, and in renewing our labor and pain, even about the same
doctrine which we taught before, it shall be so far from being wearisome and
tedious, that the best hearers shall affirm that they Act. 13.42.


And because I am by fit occasion come to utter this, I will add one thing
which ought worthily to prevail much both with Preacher and people. And that
is this: that in this long and gracious time of peace and liberty, of free
preaching the Gospel, he is a rare private man (that I go no further) who is
to take unto us words to express that which we conceive; as well as to have
matter in our minds. Hos. 14.2.
And although the knowledge of this in general, do bring men in liking with
it: yet who sees not, that the particular unfolding hereof, by fit coherences

And thus to return again to that from whence I digressed not unnecessarily,
and so to draw to an end about it: Although people profit thus far that they
get some true taste of salvation by preaching; yet they shall very much stagger
and go back, and coldly set upon the practice of godliness, if they be not
well grounded in believing, that God will build them up more strongly from day
to day, and perfect the good work in them which he has begun, even to full
sanctification in the fear of God. A simile.
If a chief and maine post in a building life, upon which it shall be no hard
matter to set the building of his life suitable Matthew. 7.25.
so that, although the rain fall, and the floods come, and the wind blow, and
beat upon that house, yet it shall not fall; for it is builded on a rock. But
he who lays not this foundation, but builds on the sand, shall soon his
building turned over. And thus the case stands with many in these days, who
therefore are cast down often times from their good beginnings, because they had
not skill to make them more substantial and sure. And I fear not to affirm
(the Lord witnessing to that which I say) that the offensive lives of many,
with many startings aside from the good way which they have entered into, and
the crooked and halting steps that they make grossly in the sight of men,
who yet durst not sometime before quench

CHAP. 4. Of the heart, and how it should be cleansed and changed, and so the
whole man which is true sanctification, tending to repentance and a godly life.
ANd now that I have showed, that true godliness comes

The heart the fountain of godly life, must first be purged.
ought to be purged and cleansed: and consequently, the body it self, ought to
be first made a fit instrument for the same (to the accomplishing of that which
is good, and to the well ordering of the life) in which two, consists the
sanctification of the whole man: We must thus be changed before we can will
well, or live well: even as a filthy and unsavory vessel must be well and
thoroughly seasoned, before it can be put to use and occupied: and we must hate
sin with a deadly hatred, and have the power of it abated in us, and love
goodness and righteousness, and be renewed in them before we can Like heart,
like life.
both before the clensing and change of it, and after. And according to the
proverb, like tree, like fruit: for a good man, out of the good treasury of
his heart, Matthew. 12.35.
brings forth good things: and the wicked man out of the ill treasury of his
heart, brings forth evil things. This heart of man therefore must be good,
and holy, and pure: it must be brought to yield, and submit it self willingly
to better instruction, then naturally it has been acquainted with; that so it
may bring forth fruit of amendment of life, and be readily disposed unto
every good work.

But (as I said) that men may not deceive themselves, who for the most part
being ignorant about the heart, and the nature and properties of it, do think
that they may live godly, whatsoever corruption does infect the heart; it
shall be requisite to know it better, and how all godliness is but fantasy
The heart is a dungeon of iniquity.
that the heart of man before it be emptied, is a dungeon of iniquity: before
it be enlightened, a den of darkness, before it be cleansed, a puddle of
filthiness: and that which Saint James speaks of the tongue, may much more
be said of the heart, that before it be tamed, it is an unruly evil. Iam. 3.8.


If then such an heart be the guide of our life, how monstrous, and loathsome
should go about any good duty, then to have our heart to seek (as they say)
A simile.
as if an husbandman should always be driven to mend and sharpen his plough
share, when, and as often as he tilleth the ground; or a Carpenter to grind his
tools so often as he goes to work: but much more, seeing the heart is
backward, and not willing, and ready to any good thing, yea rather rebellious
against it; must not all of necessity the more preposterouslie go forward? A
view of the filthiness of the heart.
But to proceed, more particularly to anatomize and describe the heart, and
in few words to say much of it; we must know that it is ouerspread with
unbelief, deceitful, unruly, loose, hardened, wilful, vain, idle, blockish,
cold in goodness, and without savor, and soon weary of it: high, big, proud,
disdainefull, selfe-louing, uncharitable, unkind, conceited,

It is not without cause therefore, that Solomon says, there are seven
abominations in the heart, Ierem. 17.9.
that is many. And Jeremy in like manner affirms, that the heart of man is
deceitful and deep above all things: who can gage or search it out? Even I
the Lord (says God) am the searcher or finder out of it. Therefore also our
Savior to set out the nature of the heart, says: Out of the heart come evil
thoughts, Matthew. 15.19.
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies, slanders. Must
it not then needs be a filthy sinkehole, out of which so unsavory stinkes
do arise? So that it may truly be said, the heart of man is evil above
measure: and in the kinds thereof, in number as the sparkles that come out of
the furnace; and as the sand of the sea shore, which is innumer^^le. And what
should I made a temple for the holy Ghost to dwell in, and a good treasury,
that out of it, a good man may bring forth good things? Yea, an admirable thing
it is, that it should ever be brought to good.

What the purging of sin is.
But to go forward now, to show what this purging of the heart is, and how How
can such as are dead to sin, live any longer therein? Romans 6.2.
And withal, he is quickened and sensibly stirred up to a love and earnest
desire of Ephesians. 4.23.
and being renewed in the spirit of his mind, does affect and long after
righteousness and true holiness. And herein consists this purging and
changing of the heart, which I now speak of, and such a thing it is, showing
it self by an hatred of sin, and a delighting in goodness. Which no power nor
will of man can effect: for it is an enemy thereto.

And although this new change be not such, as that it is able to bear down all
the old corruption, that reigned in him sometime, and to intertaine holy things
only: yet it is a mighty alteration, that goodness has any place in him in
truth, which was before so far from him, and sin and evil hunted out He
that dies in this weak estate is saved.
For there is (without question) the first fruit of the spirit, which will
afterward bring forth an increase of the same for continuance: which work of
grace and sanctification (if he in whom it is wrought should not live to show
forth any further fruit of it) is an infallible mark of Gods election and
love toward him, and can no more be in a reprobate, then light can be in the
belly and bowels of the earth. But if any will demand, what becomes of
this grace in time; Holy desires be often times quenched in the believer.
because it is too clear, that it is not only dimmed, but even choked also in
many, in whom it began to shine and give light: such must understand, that God
does strengthen and continue this grace of holiness and sanctification, David
did often, sometime one way, and sometime another: Why art thou heavy, O my
soul, Psalm. 43.5.
and why art thou so disquieted within me? Also, Psalm. 103.1.
praise thou the Lord (O my soul) and all that is within thee, praise his holy
name. And thus, and by the like means, we shall cherish our sparkles, which (as
the fire is blown up with bellows) shall not ordinarily fail us, not be
extinguished in us, especially for any long time, (except in time of
temptation, or when melancholy oppresses us) unless through our default and
folly. Thus understand what it is, How the heart is purged.
to have the heart

The next thing is, how this is done; and how it comes to pass, that men
after they have received the grace of justifying faith, do find and perceive
in themselves such an alteration from that which was before? even as if a
benumming cold should be on the sudden turned into a glowing and burning
heat. I say, this is the proper and wonderful work of God: By the power of
the holy Ghost.
who mortifying our worldly lusts and evil desires in us by his holy spirit,
does reform us, and create this holiness and sanctification in us. He it is, S.
Luke says, that purifieth our hearts. Act. 15.9.
He kindles good affections, and subdueth the contrary in us. There is no
other besides him in heaven, who can work it: much less on earth that can set
his hand to it. Which if that man of sin had duly considered, he would not
have arrogated to himself a greater work then it, (which also is inseparable
from it) namely, the authority of forgiving sins. The Lord (I say) by his
holy spirit, it is, who stirs up in our hearts godly motions and good
desires: namely, of knowledge, good government, fear of him, communion with
him and his people, the desire of spiritual rejoicing, and strength against
infernal foes, and such like: which good affections when they be kindled in
us, he suffers not to vanish away, but teaches us the spirit of wisdom,
strength, Esai. 11.2.
fear of the Lord, etc.

This is at the first turning of a sinner to God
And this he does to his dear children, when they are first brought to this
happy change (even in their first entering into the estate of grace) to the
end they may loathe, as stinking garments, the old custom, in which they had
long lien; I mean, the unsavory draffe of their own cogitations, desires,
and lusts of their hearts: the least danger whereof, was this, that they
deceived them. These, when they see what variety there is of better matter to
season A simile.
they do shun and fly from, as one that had escaped the loathsome prison,
does cry out when he must be brought back to it again. And although I deny
not, but that they must hold and retain the savor and smell of their old
filthiness and profanenes, which in times past, as bands and chains, did keep
them in captivity: yet is not their condition, Even this is a gracious work.
for all that, to be counted mean and little worth, because they have not full
deliverance from it, but happy and highly to be judged of, in that they have
obtained deliverance in part, and do see how they may be partakers of a far
better.

I speak now but of the beginning of a Christians change, when he can We
must not stand at a stay in this.
But yet seeing the clensing and purging of the heart, at the first conversion
of a sinner, is a distinct work of the spirit, and in man but the beginning
the grain of Mustard seed, in comparison of the tree it self, to the full
growth and perfect age in Christ: yet is it in possibility, nay in certain
and sure hope, even the same, and already of the nature of it; and therefore
has part of the reward also. And

But for all this which I have said of this matter, namely, both what this
change of the heart is, and how it is wrought by Gods spirit, yet one thing is
wanting, which the diligent reader will desire to know: That is, why the
Scripture says, that although it be God which purifieth the heart, yet that it
is ascribed to faith; their hearts were purified by faith, says S. Luke: And
S. Act. 15.9. 1. Ioh. 3.5.
John (which is little difference) attributes it to hope, saying, he that has
this hope, purges himself: To this I will speak somewhat at large, seeing it
is a point of great moment Heart is purged by faith.
and purged by faith: we knowing thereby our selves to be made the beloved of
God. For it is faith in the precious promises of God which the holy Ghost
works in us ( whereby we fly the corruptions that are in the world through
lust) and which purges the heart, Act. 15.9. Act. 26.18.
casting out the draffe and filthiness which was in us. And until our minds be
thus enlightened that we see clearly that our sins are forgiven us, and we
united to Christ, and made one with him, and partakers of the graces of his
spirit; we never come out of our selves, neither have any desire to heavenly
things: but our wisdom is earthly, devilish, Iam. 3.15.
and sensual.

VVorldly delights so sought for, because the heavenly are not felt.
do know no better delights, then our blind and deceitful hearts do dream of
here on earth. The which though we see by experience, that they are short and
momentanie (seeing they who have greatest part in them, cannot keep them long)
yet we, who have least part in them, will never forgo the love of them, until
we see how we may certainly enjoy better (which may clearly be seen in the
poorer sort of people destitute of grace, that although they have no wealth,
yet it does their hearts good to talk of it, in token that it is the thing
which they love best of all). And hereof it is, that many thousands, through
ignorance, pass their time in sport, play, pastime and pleasure: accounting
that Iam. 5.5.
in quarrelling, contention, murmuring, debate, suites, and accusing of their
neighbors: The most tolerable, and honest course seems to be the spending of
men's years, in, and about the worldly goods. And thus are men occupied,
although one sort diversely from another, yet all to be pitied, seeing they
walk amiss: I speak of such as know no better. Notwithstanding, no one of
these can be brought to mislike his course, or to turn his heart and delight
from it, until he be assured of a far better portion. No, although we bring
tidings hereof unto them, so as they believe that it is true, and have great
liking of the same: yet, till they see that it may be their own, they will
Hebr. 11.6. Hos. 1.10.
But when they believe that God is a plentiful rewarder of all that seek him,
and that they who were once no people, are now freely made his people, and
beloved of him, which were sometime not beloved: then their hearts turn, and
ask after him: then they desire to know more of his will and mind: and repent
that they were so ignorant before, and that so long time; and that they drunk
up the draffe of unsavory puddles, even deceitful pleasures, when they might
have drunk of the sweet cesternes which were able to refresh So soon as any
are assured of Gods favor* so soon are their hearts changed.
and what liberties they have by Christ, whereby they are made happy (which
how it is attained, has been showed in the former treatise) but so soon are
their evil hearts and affections changed, so far as the judgment is
enlightened, and they contrarily affected to that sin, which they liked before:
as seeing now cause sufficient why they should do so; for they receive from
Christ by his spirit both will and power thereunto. Gal. 5.6.
For faith works by love, and so causing them to love God, and for his sake
their brethren, it makes them also ready to do any thing

Faith purges only as the instrument.
So that it is faith which purifieth and changes the heart, not as the chief
and highest cause; for that is the holy Ghost (as has been said) which at the
same time, when it assures us of our reconciliation with God, does work this
change and sanctification also: which is a purging of us from the corruption of
our own nature, Col. 3.9.
and an induing of us with a new quality, and disposition of mind, whereby
we begin to will well, and sincerely to go about the things which please God:
Romans 6.4,
and both by the merits and power of Christ's death and resurrection. Which I do
advisedly mention again briefly, for the 1. Tim. 1.5.
) And these do set on work the will to hate sin, which before it loved: and
contrariwise cause the affections, as fear, hope, love, joy, etc. to be well
ordered, in such sort, as the whole man is carried thereby (even as the chariot
on the wheels) agreeably: and the heart being thus renewed, does work that
glorious repentance True repentance. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. 2. Cor. 7.1. Col. 3.9.10.15
Psalm. 119. verse. 44, 57. and a continual endeavoring in the life Act. 24.
verse. 16. to cast off all evil, and to obey God both inwardly and outwardly,
according to the measure of knowledge in every one: For when we are sanctified,
we are delivered from the tyranny which sin had over us, into the liberty
of the sons of God, to walk righteously, and obediently; that we receiving
new increase of grace from Christ daily, Romans 6.2. 1. Pet. 2.24.
may hold fast the same liberty unto our end.

This I have said, seeing it makes way to the renouncing and forsaking of
Without the change of the heart, there is no amendment of life.
and current and true fruits of amendment to be found amongst them.

And this though all true Christians cannot express, as I have set it down:
yet the most simple, when they hear mention made of it, can affirm, The
simplest Christian finds some measure of these.
that they find it so, to their no small consolation and contentment.

Now I having showed that the heart, and consequently the whole man must
necessarily be changed and purged, before good life can come from it; Proves
that this change is wrought by faith.
and wherein this change consists; and how it is wrought: I will return to
this last point, from which a little I digressed, that by faith in Christ's
promises, Peter does plainly lay forth this truth unto us, that the heart is
purged by faith, when he says: By the precious promises which we have from
God, 1. Pet. 1.4. opened.
(and they are made ours by faith) we are made partakers of the divine nature,
or the graces of the holy Ghost, by whose heavenly power, we are able to fly
the corruption, and naughtines both of our hearts and lives, which is the
principal let of our obeying God. And therefore that corruption being subdued
in us by a stronger power then it self, we have liberty to goodness; whereas
before we were in bondage: And not only so, but the nature and qualities of our
hearts being changed, we are no more they, who we were before; but are led
contrary Paul by a most apt similitude sets down, saying: Romans 7.5.6.
opened.
When we were in the flesh, the affections of sin which were by the law, had
force in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death: but now we are
delivered from the law (he being dead of whom we were holden down) to serve in
the newnes of spirit, not in the oldnes of the letter. Here he describing the
first estate of life, wherein all live, devilish, and vnrenued, and setting as
contrary to it the regenerate and happy estate of Gods children after they be
changed, makes this comparison: That as our corrupt hearts like an husband
stirred up evil desires in us, having the powers both of mind and body as
the wife at commandment, and both who purges the heart by faith, puts
also a new nature into it, and makes us love, and delight in the good and holy
things which before we loathed; and to loathe the evil which we once loved.

to a vine, and his beloved to branches of the same. To teach us, John 15.1.2.
that as the branch bears no fruit if it grow not in the vine, but being cut
off, withers: so if we be not knit to him by faith, we can bear no fruit.
But as the branch abiding in the vine sucketh sap, and draws juice from it,
and is fruitful: so all faithful, and true believers receive strength from
him, and Ephesians. 4.16.
by the which they crucify their own lusts, resist their corrupt will; and so
bring forth fruit according to the will of God. For from him the whole body
gathers increase fit for it: who in manner of the soul, quickens all the
members. Gal. 1.4. Luke 1.74.
And to this end, Christ wrought our salvation, and gave himself for our
sins, to deliver us from this present evil world. And from him we have
received a mind to know God: 1. John 5.20. Luke 7. Psalm. 50. Romans 6.6.11.
an heart to love him: a will to please him; and strength also in some sensible
measure to obey him, as he says: Know ye, that ye are dead to sin, that is,
so made partakers of the virtue and power of Christ, that natural corruption
has lost her vigor, and force, to bring forth most bitter fruits: By this
change, the believer sensibly discerns his present state from his former.
and also, that ye are alive to God, that is, have

The weak troubled, that this change is so small.
That which most troubles the weak about this matter is, that this change of
the heart, and renewing thereof, is so hardly seen, and so meanly felt within
them; that they cannot satisfy themselves in wishing, and desiring to be more
changed: And although before, their open gross faults did not accuse them, yet
now their inward corruptions do disquiet them: now idle motions and vain
thoughts, and fantasies much trouble them: in their praying, Yet this is a note
that their state is good.
All which duly considered, do testify in deed another estate of their minds,
then was before; though through their weakness, and the devils malice, they
fear hereby sometimes, that they are not renewed, and changed at al. But that
is not to be maruailed at, for as much as they were so lately drowned in sin,
and had no delight in goodness: it must needs be strange unto them

This change of the heart, is the foundation of a godly life.
And this change of the heart, they have need to be persuaded of, who Saul did,
1. Sam. 15.3. but will have the whole to be given unto him. He will not be
loved a little: Note.
for that is neither beseeming his greatness, neither fit for them to offer, who
receive so great good things at his hands. And as none can do this, but such
as shall see sufficient cause hereof; namely, that they are infinitely indebted
to him for his bountifulnes toward them; so will he, that such shall make him
their chiefest delight, and treasure, as other do the world; and therefore to
account it no tediousness, nor toil to labor for it, till they have obeyed
the voice which says, Prouer. 13.26 Jf men at first gave God their hearts,
then should their whole life be better.
Give me thine heart, my son. And if all men did at the first embracing of
the Gospel, Not a piece of the heart.
give him their hearts again, as they are commanded, not a piece of their
heart, but their whole heart: Even as the burnt offering in sacrifices, was not
in part the Lords, another part the Priests, or his who did offer it, but it
was wholly the Lords: so Leuit. 1.13.
to turn to him with their whole heart, that so (as far as their knowledge
leads them) they may be at his commandment: not halting, not flitting, not
giving him their service sometime, and at other times refusing and holding
back by such occasions, as shall fall out; as for their own pleasure, profit,
for men's friendship and favor, or such like: for so doing, they shall never be
fit to renounce either their will, or lusts, when they are enticed to evil by
them, but must yield, and give place to them; which kind of unsavory and
fickle service God abhors. But if we freely give over our selves wholly to
God, and be resolved to be guided by him in all things, and to this end, wax
better Many hardly brought to give their whole heart, therefore give over.
and drive off, before they will be brought to this, hoping that less may
serve, and that they may please God without all this ado, (as accounting it
too hard) yet must they be brought to this, when all is done; or else they
shall see, that all is in vain that they do besides, what fair shows and
colors soever they set upon their doings.

For want of this soundnes, and through purging of the heart, as the people
Psalm. 78.35.
but ever turned back again from their covenants, and promises of amendment:
Judge. 2.11.
even so at this day, there are many vows to God of holy life, and purposes of
repentance, but none of them hold, nor take any good effect, though some in
longer, some in shorter time, do vanish away, and come to nothing: because men
go to work in their mood, and hastily, not sufficiently considering how
weak such foundations are to bear up so great, and weighty buildings, as the
whole course of their lives to be holilie passed. Judas his preaching Ahabs
hasty repentance in hair cloth, and ashes: yea, Iehu his zeal for the Lord
of hoasts: with all other such shows, as for a time, in the eyes of men seemed
to be great godliness, 1. Sam. 15.4.
together with Saul's speedy executing of Gods commandments against the
Amalekites: they had a time to be bewraied, and brought to light to the world,
to have been, either mere hypocrisy and fained godliness, or sudden and rash
attempts, or without root from the heart, even the best of them.

Therefore first let this be known of us, that before the evil life can be
renounced, God purges and makes clean the heart, that so it may be fit for
Ezech. 36.25, 26, 27.
whose heart is truly renewed.

CHAP. 5. Of the renouncing of all sin: which is the first effect of a renewed
We must be changed before our lives can be amended.
NOw the heart being renewed and changed, must be kept so: but of that
afterward, in more fit place. In the mean season, I will pass to the effect
of this clensing and change of the heart, and show what work it brings forth
in him that is thus renewed and changed. For I having spoken of the clensing of
it, as I purposed, namely, that it must, with the whole man, be changed and
renewed, before the life can be amended; it follows, What the life of the
believer is.
that I should now further proceed to this; that is, to the description All
ungodliness, not some only is to be renounced.
and not some part or kind only, is renounced of the true believer, and of him
who will soundly profess to live godly: and they are brought to this power and
grace, who trust in the living as pure and sweet water, and filthy cannot
come from one fountain: so neither does the heart reformed, send forth good
and evil. So that as one in prison hardly dieted, feeds with great appetite
and greedines upon scrappes and parings, and is well at ease if he may fill
his belly with them; The believer loatheth his former filthy life.
Revel. 3.9.
they have it in most vile account and detestation, and they which were of the
synagogue of Satan shall worship God among the faithful. This is the power of
faith (which has changed their heart) that it is able to make him, who has
it, to overcome, I say not, himself, but even the spiritual craftines,
whereby the devil deceives many thousands, and even the poisoned baits and
allurements of the world also.

O power unconquerable, and not to be matched! Power of faith, and gain
thereby.
If there were any earthly stay or fleshly hold in any sort comparable to it
(which is impossible) in David, 1. Sam. 24.10.11.
to turn your hearts toward your greatest enemy (which is true manhood and
wisdom) and to preserve his life, when you had him in your hands to kill him.
Moses) to renounce them when ye might have them, and to find greatest
pleasure in doing so, Heb. 11.24.
and yet in forgoing them, to think your selves plentifully rewarded. Heb.
11.6.


Finally, this will not suffer you to fret and to be unquiet in thinking upon
the day of death, and to put the remembrance of it far from you by wishing
long life: but it will make you sigh and groan to be out of your life, and
with Paul to account it a prison to live in the body still: 2. Cor. 5.3.
and as the Preacher says, to reckon the day of death when you must live here
no longer, Eccles. 7.1.
better then the day of birth, which is the beginning of life. O ye men of this
world! if ye can tell us of greater commodities, and tidings of better things
then these, and assure us how we may come by them, we will forsake and leave
all, and rejoice with you: Vanity of worldly joys.
If ye cannot, but rather your best things are those which I have spoken of
already; namely, great riches, pleasures, your enemies death, and desire of
long life to your selves, the vanity, uncertainty, and danger of the which I
have set down already; 1. Timot. 3.
then renounce you all that ye cannot safely keep; and rejoice with us: do
but taste and see how good the Lord is: and when you Act. 13.41.
although you hide your selves from it. Behold, and wonder, and vanish away:
for I will work a work in your days, that if a man tell you the truth, ye
shall not believe it.

More might be said of this point, but the treatise is too long: now I will
return again to show that the believing Christian does renounce the sinful
course, 1. Ioh. 5.19.
which all the world besides lies and walloweth in though some more then
others) who, as I have showed, that he renounceth al kinds of wickedness: so he
does it not in some good mood only, neither cries out of He renounceth sin
in good aduisednes, and not in some good mood only. Hos. 14.9. Ephesians. 4.24.
when he sees shame or danger approach, he does not (I say) then only
signify his mislike of it; but upon good deliberation, he makes protestation
no more to have to do with it: as Ephraim was counseled to say, being called
to repentance: What have I to do with Idols, which yet before had been her
glory? So whatsoever others do, he is resolved to forsake it: and casts off
all such behavior, as a loathsome and ragged garment. And this is it which our
Savior acquainted his Disciples and followers with, Matthew. 16.24.
after that they had testified ( Peter answering for the rest) that they
believed in him unto salvation: He that will be my disciple, must deny
himself, which is as much as ungodliness, and worldly lusts: for then only
indeed, For want of this settled denying our selves, diverse never attain true
godliness.
as much as they can: which is the cause at this day, that many professing the
Gospel, yet never know what this means, namely, to abstain from the filthy
lusts which fight against their soul.

Others which do, and must needs hear such things taught, that all Gods
servants do, and shall disclaim their lives past, and be ashamed of them, it
is pity to think how coldly they receive it. Some of them scorn it and mock,
and so turn it off that way: some never conceive it: some are often accused
and made afraid to see their lives so far off from that which is taught them,
but soon forget it, because they see the most of the world to do so. Some

VVorst sort of Protestants, who hate this doctrine.
For they hate them who teach it, most deadly: they rail on them and disgrace
both them and it; and if they can, bring them into danger for teaching of it:
although their pretense shall be another thing. Yea doubtless (I say more) if
by her Majesty's gracious authority and protection we did it not, (which more
prevails with them then the authority of God, from whom and in whose name
we teach it) their poisoned and malicious stomachs would suffer none to walk
peaceably, who plainly and soundly publish it. These therefore are far from
ouercomming themselves: and yet whiles many sorts in the world are thus far
off (as I have showed) from victory Gods servants are at utter defiance with
the world.
in the mean while the servants of God, who know what the Lord has done for
their souls, renounce all inordinate desires, and wicked actions: that they
have afterward no more fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
howsoever they were sometime chief doers in committing of them. So that as the
true repentant people of Judah, who had before offended God by Idolatry, when
they were brought captives into Babylon, loathed the sight of false gods: and
as the good people, who repented by Ezra his preaching, Ezra. 10.12.
did put away their strange wives, how dear soever they had been unto them:
and as Ephraim was heard complaining thus; I am ashamed and blush, Iere. 31.19.
that now I bear the reproaches; so loathsome and wearisome it was unto her: So
are they who have felt the salvation of God, at utter defiance with the
corruption of the world. And yet if this were done but for a time, or for
company, They leave not sin for a time, nor by constraint, or for company,
fear, etc.
or by constraint, and for fear, or any such like corrupt end, it were not
worth the speaking of: for it is to be seen that after these sorts, iniquity
is left of many: which kind of renouncing evil is little to their rejoicing,
and shall be to their reproach, when it shall appear in how evil manner they
have gone about it. I will not digress, but this I must say: we have had too
much experience in our parts, and (I doubt not) so have others, of sundry
persons, who once accounted their teachers burning lights, and for a season
they received and rejoiced in casting off their old course in the sight of men
readily: but some for company of those, who persuaded them; some for fear of
the woe which hung over them; and others for good report, as long as they could
hold out: but these, because they renounced them not, neither upon good
consideration abiured them, they returned to them again, as the dog to his
vomit: Whereas such, who truly believing do of conscience renounce sin, do
as they in Nehemiah, came to the oath and the covenant, Nehem. 10.29. Abjure
sin.
that they would never take again their strange wives, which they were
commanded to put away, nor look back to Sodom any more: nor (being washed)
wallow again in the mire. Not our own strength.
Which I say not as though their word, protestation, or oath, could alone by
any Phil. 4.13. Romans 9.31.
that God would make them (who had made them willing already) able also to do
it.

And therefore although they saw not that help present, with eye; yet they
hoped for that which they saw not, and therefore waited patiently for it, till
it should be granted them. And thus both faith and hope being nourished and
strengthened in them from day to day, they who are the Lords, do Got with much
striving.
Indeed it must be granted, that this is not obtained without much striving
against the same, and that it will cost many prayers to weaken such corruption,
and to hold such rebellion under: of meditating upon Gods promises also: much
sighing, and sorrow to see what vnlikelihoods there are of subduing such unruly
passions, through our own manifold weaknesses. But what then? Is it much, if
so great a work require our watching thereto, and diligence, when God is
pleased that it be bestowed that way, and without No discouragement. Matthew.
19.29.
Or is that any just cause of discouragement to us, to take pain for so great
profit, when we are sure of it before we go about it?

Faithful always prevail not.
But it may be demanded, do God servants always prevail in striving against
evil? and obtain that which they seek thereby? for otherwise (say some) what
discomfort and dismaiednes will come thereby? I say, that as God often helps
them, that they overcome; so they are often overcome themselves of their
affections against which they strive: but yet they have learned not to be
troubled at this, Yet find comfort. 1. Pet. 1.5.
as at any strange thing, as if their hope were either wholly or chiefly
vpholden hereby, and as though they held their happiness by grace they stand.
Neither yet on the other side, do they make light of it, when they are foiled
and prevailed against: 2. Cor. 12.6. Psalm. 116.11.
but as they rejoiced in measure, and gave God the glory, when they felt
strength of grace against their temptations: so after they come to themselves
again, they are troubled, and sorrowful chiefly for displeasing God, 2. Cor.
7.8.9.
and they take view of their own frailty, ignorance, and negligence better,
and confess the same to God, and take shame to themselves: and cast not away
their confidence, but be encouraged, and heartened both to hope for pardon,
and also to be more circumspect in looking to their ways afterward.

No hurt by abasing.
Now tell me, if Gods children be thus brought low and abased, sometimes to pull
down and assuage the strength of pride in them, what fearful matter is
hereby fallen out? what rasing out of their faith is there hereby procured? or
what great cause of complaining is this? when it is manifest to all who can
judge, that the thing which through ignorance and weak faith they feared would
separate them from God, does fasten them more nearly unto him: and through his
working, that which they think to be cause of great sorrowing, is turned
indeed into sound rejoicing, and that for this cause especially, that they do
better know themselves hereby, and have experience of his grace working in
them; which otherwise they should not

Gain of our falls to purge us.
I cannot more lively compare the malice of Satan in this case, then to one who
thrusting thorough his enemy, and purposing to kill him, does thereby let out
the ulcer and corruption out of his body, and so preserve him. After the same
manner is it with Gods children: much privy pride remains yet; and much
secret favoring of, and bearing with themselves is in them; Prou. 28.13.
or may thereupon, obtain it.

And thus we may see that even then when Gods servants are mastered of their
affections, and in fighting against them, are found the weaker: yet even those
falls of theirs, do turn to their exceeding good, afterward. And This is
only to the believer.
as for want of faith, and experience many do often fear. But yet let this
(which I say) be wisely received: that to the true believers it shall thus come
to pass, and not else: least any hearing this, should after he has fallen, be
little careful to rise up again in such manner as I have showed, and yet
think all should be well with him notwithstanding, which is not possible.

Thus by occasion of this objection I have bin longer then I had purposed in
this matter. By this it may appear, Believers can renounce all.
that how unskillful soever the Christian believer was, and as unable, as he was
unskillful to renounce his ignorant and sinful lusts before the Lord became
his teacher; yet since that he taught him Unbelievers cannot.
whereas others who have not believed truly, shall find it is as possible for a
black Moore to change his skin, or the Cattamountaine her spots, as for a
man accustomed to evil, to leave it. As Christ said of the rich man: It is as
easy for a camel to go thorough the eye of a needle, as for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of heaven: so no more can a wicked man renounce his
course: for the wisdom of the flesh, that is, of man vnrenued, is an enemy
to God, because it neither is, nor can be subject unto him. If this were
thoroughly settled in men's hearts, No dram of goodness in a natural man.
that there is no dram of goodness in them, by which they might be able to
turn from their former wicked ways, but that their carnal wisdom and
reason, to the which they most

CHAP. 6. Of the diverse kinds of evil to be renounced, and namely of inward
against God and men.
But to proceed: as we have seen, in what manner sin is to be renounced; so
let us now consider the diverse kinds of evil, which are to be renounced,
before we lay forth the good fruits and duties which proceed from the same.
And these kinds of evil are of two sorts, Diverse kinds of evil to be
renounced.
either inward or outward.

And to speak distinctly of them (that I may proceed) we are taught, that in
the godly life, First inward lusts.
in whomsoever it be found, the lusts and concupiscences which reign
throughout the world, and make them whom they rule, to be as brute beasts:
these corrupt lusts (I say) with all other such defilements of our actions, are
in the godly life renounced, according to the light which we have to discern
the^; yea the faithful desire to abstain from the^, as men who have received
another manner of spirit then the men of the world, and therefore can take up
their delight in better things: and who know the hurt which these unruly evils
bring with them, whatsoever show of pleasure they offer. Not all in like
measure.
and do not hold them under in a like measure; yet of the weakest of Gods
children they are hated, and striued against, when they are once seen and
perceived. But by these inward evils, I mean not the native infection of the
heart, for of this I have spoken before, The effects of our natural corruption
here be meant. Iam. 1.14.
but the fruits hereof, namely, the wandering, noisome, and blind thoughts,
fleshly desires, and worldly lusts, which arise from the heart so infected,
which are contrary to the commandments of God, and tending directly to the
destruction of them, who bring them forth: So that as the hands, feet and
eyes be the members of the body, A simile.
and do whatsoever the body has need of; Col. 3.5.
even so these are the members, and as the arms, feet and eyes of the Heb.
3.12.
when a man not giving sound credit to the word of God, and the holy
Scriptures, dares be bold to harbor the same whatsoever is forbidden in them.

Three sorts of lusts.
From hence grow out, even in those which profess; three arms, or boughs, of
the which every one shoots forth as branches, innumerable worldly lusts: A
view of some corruptions.
first, impious against God: second, injurious to men: and the third sort, most
properly concerning themselves.

1. Against God and his honor and worship in the first Table.
As touching the majesty of God, as men's hearts are full of blindenes, and
covered with darkness; so it goes against them to be taught the true knowledge
Job. 13.
it is death to them to be drawn out of their ignorance: they cannot abide to
hear of his judgment day: they would there were none: they rebel against the
spiritual and true serving of God, Acts 24.25.
and that which they yield him, is a will worship, even that which fantasy,
Job. 21.14, 15. Matthew. 15.9.
custom, or fleshly wisdom teaches them.

And whereas he requires that confidence should be put in him, for continual
defense, deliverance, and succor in soul and body, Distrust.
they are carried with distrust, as with a whirlewind, and therefore their hope
is faint, or none at all, before they see their desire accomplished. In their
great dangers, Jn adversity.
when means to come out, do fail them, they are overcome with fear, and
almost Jmpatient.
receiving them as from a cruel judge, and sorrowing for them deadly. And as
some have their hearts thus boiling in their trials, and afflictions: so others
have their hearts swelling against God in obstinacy and contempt for his
afflicting them, and are loose, careless, and desperate, whatsoever pincheth
them: Obstinate.
yet in a scoffing spirit they say within themselves, let him do his best, yet
will we not turn unto him, nor seek unto him: (oh horrible blasphemy,
fearful to be once named!) that I say nothing of them, who ascribe all to
blind fortune, (in cursing of the which, they curse God;) or as the Atheists
do, to nature. Are not these loathsome guestes to lodge in the hearts of
Christians? Loathsome guests.
Jnward corruptions in prosperity. No thankfulness.
so how they behave themselves toward him in the days of their prosperity,
experience teaches, and I could show at large, if the time would suffer me to
declare it. Carnal rejoicing.
yet what grace do they desire the more, although they have their fill, but
are rather more headstrong, and inordinate? And if they ask ought of God, it
is to bestow it on their lusts, being made drunken with their pleasures: James
4.4. Drunk with pleasures.
so that they are lovers of them, more then lovers of God, and become
insensible thereby, and past God prescribes in his word, Ioh. 4. Ioh. 5.
that is, to do it in spirit and truth: though God Matthew. 15.
without which God tells them plainly that in vain they worship him. And as
in their worshipping of him, by the use of religious exercises,

Moreover, they have no desire in peace to be taught the true use of it:
namely, to have peace with God, and as much as in them lies to be at peace
with all men, Deuteronomy. 28.46.
Romans 12.18. no, not in their own houses, which yet to be without, is a little
hell to them. Abuse of peace.
And as for the Lords Sabbath, and other many good Psalm. 8.5.6.
as shadows, their minds looking no higher: so that though they were made to
honor, yet they not understanding it, are like the beasts that perish.

These may serve for a taste of the corruptions and worldly lusts, which men
not worse accounted of, do swarm with, directly tending to the dishonor

Wicked lusts toward man. The 2. table, fifth Commandment. Contempt of
betters.
But to go forward: to acquaint men with some of the unbridled and worldly
lusts, which carry them after the hurt of their neighbor: what irreverence,
contempt, and obstinacy appears to be in the hearts of many against their
betters, diminishing that authority, credit, and estimation, which submit
themselves to those of low degree? Romans 12. Unthankfulness to men.
What unthankfulness in the people, to them which labor for their peace and
welfare in their outward estate, and are instruments to convey the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ unto them? I mean Christian Princes, and governors?
How many esteem of them, who labor to make them happy and to live for ever?
what wishing is there that there were none such, which is all one as to make
sure work to go to hell? How do many hunger for their death (yea though they
be their natural parents) by whom they might be enriched and preferred,
although to make their folly and madness the better appear to themselves and
others, the Lord takes them oftentimes away before them? What Saucines in
youth.
till it break out from within and show it self in gesture and words? which
brings forth such rudenes and barbarousnes, as were too bad among Heathens.
But I will contain my self.

Further, whereas the soul of our neighbor should be most precious to us, how
do many rejoice to see them fall into any sin, Rejoice in evil.
devise to make them offend, as to be drunk, to leave off hearing Sermons, and
fret or disdain at them who live Christianly; rather then to reverence the
graces of God in them? And whereas we should love others as our selves, that
is, indeed, 1. Ioh. 3.18.
and unfeignedly, not in word and show only; yet how truly is it verified
through the Wrath.
and yet they go not once to their heart to take shame for them? How easily
and readily do men take the least occasion from others of hard conceiving of
them, and yet how unmeet do they think it, that others should take the least
displeasure by the greatest occasions which they offer them? What little care
is there that none be hurt by them, but a churlish senselesnes, of it, if it be
so, rather then pity and compassion in steed of it? As concerning cutting off
broiles betwixt men, who is wary to avoid occasions thereof, sometime Abraham
did to Lot, Genesis 13.8. and 9
and coming to lawful and equal conditions of peace, which were but their
duty? Nay rather, No bearing.
men bethink them of all means to provoke others further then they have done.
And as for bearing of them, if they pass bounds toward any, what meekenes or
mildnes is there in us to forbear them, and to be patient and long suffering
toward them? and when it may well be done, Prou. 12.15.
to pass over their offense and bury it? where is any pacifying of wrath in
men's selves, and a free forgiving of them, Ephesians. 4.32.
but rather a seeking of revenge for the smallest wrong? This is far from the
Apostles rule: Romans 12.15. No fellow feeling.
Weep with them which weep: rejoice with them which rejoice, and be alike
affected toward all men.

Now I come to that kind of these fleshly lusts, Unclean lusts.
which are most properly so called: And they are, when men let loose their
hearts to filthy unclean thoughts and desires, with purposes of defiling
their bodies, which should be kept holy to the day of marriage, and after to
the end of their life. What variety of unclean wishes and desires do occupy
them? how are they inflamed through every object, of such persons as please
their eye, and so are Feed their lusts
but they delight to blow up these burning lusts further, even to occupy their
thoughts in all talk of unclean matters, to feed their eyes wantonly, that
they may show themselves to be those, whom the Scripture describes, namely, to
have eyes full of adultery: and to such places their delight is to go, where
they may have that carnal humor satisfied, or incensed by all prouocations,
that thus the precious treasure of the mind which is fit to have received most
divine matters, and to have made it more like unto the Angels, is made a
stinking brothel-house, Zach. 12.8.
and a nurserie of filthiness: What beating of neighing after their neighbors
wives, as the Prophet speaks, and so stopping the course of a Christian life,
from the which some of them otherwise had not been far off. But this for a
taste.

Covetousness.
if they may come by it, whosoever smarteth by the loss of it. What a sea of
evils is there in this kind? how many ways, and that all the year through,
are men's heads occupied about this, how they may by some new deceit, wind
somewhat from others? what insatiable desire is there of other men's goods? and
how do men resolve that they will be rich, though the Apostle to Timothy does
show them the danger of that purpose? 1. Tim. 6.9.
What repining is there in all sorts to see others get that which they
themselves can not come by? How does the mighty devise to pill and make bare
the meaner sort, the Landlord the poor tenant, till he has fleeced him of
all, and Prou. 9.17.
but stolen waters, as it is in the Proverbs, when men can see how to get more
then their own: the borrower (though he has found friendship) yet seeks and
bethinketh how to defraud the lender, if by any means 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. Psalm.
15.6.
when the Lord commands straightly that there be no oppression nor usury at
all: So of the seller, and the buyer; the love of equity and indifferency is
thrust to the walls amongst men, if it stand not with their gain.



But to draw to an end in the laying forth of these worldly lusts, tending to
the hurt of our neighbor in his goods; and to go to another kind: Lust
against our neighbors name.
Surmises. 1. Sam. 22.8.
and rash surmises of them, (as they did in Saul against David and Jonathan his
son) and all thorough mistaking of that which was rightly done, and
honestly meant and spoken? how do their hearts burn hereupon (think we) to
speak and do, not ambiguouslie and doubtfullie against them, but resolutelie
whatsoever comes into their head, as Shemei did against David? 2. Sam. 15.7.
So that they thirst to defame them by word or writing: yea, and if many years
before there were any offense committed by them, of which they are privy,
although they concealed it till then, and made light of it: yet now, Exodus
2.14. Libels.
(if it hangs Moses. What inuentings of libels, Psalm. 50.22.
and devising of new slanders; yea, against our own brother and mothers
son: and with such shameless boldness, and impudency, that Iezabel was not
able to go beyond them in that faculty. And by these, it may be gessed not
doubtfullie what swarms of outrageous lusts do lurk secretly in their
bosoms, who yet see little, or nothing amiss in themselves, and oftentimes
set as good a show upon their doings in the sight of others, as the best: nay,
I say more, who shall with a Judas his kiss embrace them, whom behind their
back they thus abuse. And none of these foul and shameful faults would
break out openly

But that I may shut up all that I have to say of these sorts of worldly lusts,
least many should object, Though not always, yet these be common.
that although they grant that sometime they be led with these frensies, yet
they be not always so bad: I say that is smallie to their commendation and
rejoicing: for as they are now too often and common, so should they be commoner,
if other things did not break them off. But can they deny this, that whereas
their desires should tend to good, and lead them to God, that yet they are the
most of their time taken up in wishing

Thus I have in some sort laid forth the lusts of the heart against God and
These lusts be causes of all woe.
as I have showed, and ruling and carrying them, are the causes of all
dissolutenes, licentiousnes, and disorder in their lives, and of many sore
punishments thereby. By that which I have said of this matter, it may appear,
what a singular mercy of God it is unto his children, that their hearts are
not nurseries of such draffe, but that they abhor it rather: For though this
grace of renouncing such filthiness be little regarded of the common sort, but
counted precisenes, yet shall it be an ornament in these before God, and a most
precious comfort unto themselves.

CHAP. 7. Of other inward evils and sins, most properly concerning our selves.
NOw follow the branches of earthly corruptions, and worldly lusts, Evil lusts
concerning our selves.
which although they do offend God; yet they do not directly concern the
person of God, or of their neighbor, but especially themselves, that in some
sort I may discover and bewraie the loathsome kennell from whence Fretting when
crossed of their will. 1. Sam. 31. Acts 16.
even that which they would have, they desire nothing more then to be out of
the world; forgetting all Gods kindness toward them: and yet when God calls
them hence indeed, they cannot abide to

Excessive delight in abundance.
Again, they are so unruly, that if God gives them the bridle, and follow them
with abundance of his outward benefits, they have no delight in them, except
they abuse them most excessiuelie in eating, and drinking, not to live thereby,
but to surfeit, to be pampered so as they be fit for no good thing: in play from
one kind to another, James 5.5.
counting it pleasure to live deliciously for a season: in costlines of
apparel, and curious trimming up of their carkases, not mindful of the
necessities of others, howsoever their superfluity would help to apparel many
which go naked. How do they please themselves, and imagine that others do
admire them for the same? yea and for all this, oftentimes Pride of life.
Upon these, and such like, their hearts are set in their plenty, John 2.13.
and contrarily fretting, murmuring, and vexing their hearts, when they fall
into necessity: although they hear that a good name is; yet they will follow
their appetite so grossly, until the fruit of it causes them to lose
credit, and good name, as if it were nothing worth. What should I say of their
priding in their wit, wealth, beauty, strength, wisdom, and other gifts? when
they are, who knows not what, if it were but by this description, and when as
also they know not how long they shall enjoy them: they account of to morrow
what they will do, James 4.13.
and cannot tell what may fall out to day. Their lightness, vnsetlednes,
Frowardnes. Prou. 27.1.
and wilful frowardnes for every thing that does displease them; their vain,
idle, and deceitful desires of things, which become not the gravity of such
as are borne to a better life; their deadly pangs of sulleines, when nothing
will please them; with Self lov^*
that daily come from them: may easily persuade them to confess that their
hearts are burdened, and laden, though they had not outward sins to press
them down, and to say that it is divine power and grace from above, that must
purge these and such like unsavory draffe out of them. And yet these, and many
other such are renounced as they come to be known of Gods servants, and are
resisted according to the wisdom which God has given them, although in others
they rule and reign. And the obtaining of David says in the Psalm 19.11.
where he setting down many uses and benefits of the law and word of God, as
that It is more to be desired then fine gold, and more sweet then the honey
comb; adds this: Moreover thereby is thy servant made circumspect and wary.
And Solomon says the like, Prou. 2.10. When wisdom delights thy heart, and
knowledge enters into thy soul, then shall counsel preserve thee, and
understanding shall keep thee from the evil way: And what way is worse, then
the devices and desires of our evil hearts? Saint Paul likewise, to show The
weapons of our warfare, are not carnal, but mighty through God to cast down
holds: casting down the imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ: and to the Ephesians 4.22. If we have learned Christ
aright, we have been taught to cast off, concerning the conversation in time
past, the old man, which is corrupt through deceivable lusts.

Thus therefore now having laid open the pack of these worldly lusts, A
special part of a godly life to renounce these.
and proved that the Lord by the Scripture gives greater grace to his, then to
obey them, James 4.6. Romans 6.16. I will proceed now to show, that this is a
Hebr. 3.12.
It is the evil heart that causes men to fall away from the living God: Iusts
mar al.
they are their fleshly lusts which fight against their souls, 1. Pet. 2.10.
Iam. 4.1.2.
and will bring destruction in the end: even these lusts, as S. James says,
which fight in our members, they are that carry us violently and foolishly
after them from our settled peace, to fret and rage (as enemies in war, one
against another) when we have not our desires satisfied, nor obtain what we
would. Therefore these being weakened, and their force restrained, we may
clearly see, that with ease and cheerefulnes the Christian life shall be set
upon: for as our Savior Christ, because he was void of all corruption and
sinful desires, therefore the prince of this world attempting him (as he does
other men) yet found nothing in him which he sought, fit for his purpose; and
as Adam in the time of his innocence This shall be accepted. Psalm. 130.3. 1.
Ioh. 2.2.
And this will God accept for holy service, and not look straightly what is
done amiss, but pardon our sins because of our advocate: so that
notwithstanding our obedience be far from that it should be; yet we

And thus far, God in great mercy, has made us partakers of the knowledge
of his will, that we having our desires in this wise subject to him, as I have
said, we may possess our souls after in peace and heavenly manner. Therefore
if any man, He that observes these, is occupied in a godly life. Iam. 4.7.
whose heart is purified by faith, does exercise himself in knowing these his
soul and shameful lusts, and mark how he is led away of them, and deceived
by them, and which of them do most trouble him, and oftest prevail against
him, and therefore by the helps which God has given him (which shall be set
down in the next treatise) does resist them; let not him doubt, but that he is
occupied in the godly life, and that he is come the true wisdom which is
from above, of the which every godly man has his name, that is, he is called
wise, this wisdom shows it self in all manner of holy conversation in
meekenes, and suffers not the contrary lusts to dwell and abide in the heart,
as bitter envying, prouokings one of another, swellings, tumults, and stormings
one against another, with such like, as every one has his measure. In deed
all men have not overcome themselves alike; All overcome not these alike.
no not even they, who have set themselves to this work of plucking down the
ruins of their old building: for they who have great and clear knowledge of
the will of God, The better sort.
And to speak plainlier, they who make faith and a godly life their treasure
indeed, finding and feeling that they are greater riches and pleasure to them,
then gold or all substance, and in their account take them so, as in their
judgment they know and will say, they ought to be so; they are the men, who
will take most pain to withstand their lusts and desires; they get Moses
meek, Numb. 12.3. Abraham believing, Romans 4.3. Joseph continent, Genes. 39.10.
Daniel zealous for the Lord, Dan. 1.8. and 6.11. The woman in Luke full of
love, Luke 7.47. with many more such. Therefore they ruled their evil hearts
from the contrary corruptions.

The weaker are not to distrust for not matching the best.


of such grace: and by their good example, there are through Gods goodness in
this age many, who have inioyed great liberty from God this way, that no man
may think this (which I am now about) to be a thing impossible to attain
unto, neither denied to be granted us of God, as it shall be sought and cared
for. But, as I said, all Gods servants have not one and the same, therefore not
this excellent measure.

some receive thirty fold, some sixty fold, and some an hundred fold, by that
which they hear. It is commendable and meet, that we should walk, as we
have the best, for our examples; and to follow them, as they are paternes of
good things unto us: but to stay at this, that we are not at all in Christ,
because we are not in all points like unto some other in subduing our
affections, that is in no sort to be yielded unto, if that which is in us, be
in us in truth. Which thing I speak for their cause, who both think, and often
utter the same, saying: Oh I am not, as such of Gods children! they are

And these things being rightly considered, it may appear, These lusts are
resisted of all believers in their measure.
that in a godly life the inward lusts of the heart, and known corruptions of
it, how common soever they be in the world, are resisted and declined from, of
all true Christians in their measure, according to that which is alleged by
the Apostle S. Peter: We having most precious promises given us of God, are
made thereby If they then who embrace and believe the promises, and therefore
have fastened upon a godly life, They who be ruled by their lusts, ca^ claim
no part in a godly life.
do fly the lusts and corruptions which others delight in and embrace; it
follows on the contrary, that they, who are ruled and led by them, can
claim no part in a godly life. For he that is so minded cannot be but carnal:
estranged from God, and a bondsman of hell: which if it were weighed, would cause
many thousands, who now think themselves good Christians, to take some pain
to bridle their intemperate and unruly hearts, and to be wounded for the same
deeply, who contrarily give liberty to them in most things that The weak may
stay for their comfort in these three special graces.
Let such weak Christians (to omit these) rest their hope in some certain
estate: and not ouerreach themselves with things which they canont compass: I
mean by resting in some certain estate, this: First, that they have a clear
knowledge of their salvation. Secondly, that they account it as their chief
treasure. And thirdly, be set forward in some plain and good course of life,
whereby they may grow in faith, and the obeying of God, though with some
striving. But if they walk destitute of any of these three, they shall be
snared much with fear, and unquietness, while they feel that all is not well
with them: often fearing that they have not begun aright, nor were ever truly
called: and yet (if they should forgo this hold) seeing there is some lively
Cant. 3.3.
but moan and seek home again, as a bird wandering from her nest, least
otherwise they walk heavily many months, it may be, years, before they find
deliverance. And until they do so set themselves to nourish their faith with
great care and diligence, Note.
their godly life (with what labor and toil soever it be) is but a building
up and a pulling down: for one day they shall like, and another day mislike:
sometime they may feel themselves well stayed, and often otherwise without
peace. Yea and I say again, when they are stayed, yet if they hold not this as
their best riches, to solace their souls every while (as they may well and
easily do, having so many good helps among

These three must be earnestly labored for.
These three things therefore being of so especall price, must be more
regarded, and sought after of such as want them, more carefully then they have
been: and preachers not only heard teaching these, but also conferred with
about the same: that the peoples hungring after the same, may whet on and Luke
8.1. Matthew. 13.36.
as the people in the Gospel: or rather as Christ's Disciples came often to him
to be taught, and have their questions answered. And although other doctrine is
not to be neglected, yet I would have all to know, that nothing is so
necessarily to be learned as these three are, of such as have already
attained to the knowledge of true happiness by

For my part, I do thee to understand, A chief end of this book, is to set
forward a weak Christian.
that it was the most principal regard I had in setting out this book, to
help and direct the weak Christian thoroughout from his first entrance into
the knowledge of Christ Jesus, that he understanding and believing, what a rich
portion God has bestowed upon him, he may make such account of it, as it
deserves, that is, esteem it How to make godliness a pleasure.
even without money) shall go forward readily, and with ease, and make no
toil of godliness but pleasure: neither have his teeth watering after the
greatest men's dainties, but they after his. He shall not be at the point of
them, whom I described a little before by their speech in the way of objection,
who sometimes are driven to doubt of their calling, but be able to guide
himself, how to rise when he is fallen, and to return when he is stepped out of
the way: Note.
and to walk in most sweet safety under Gods protection all the day long,
Deuteronomy. 33.12.
as

Thou will ask me, what thou shall have for thy portion: Gain of your course.
I say not this measure, nor that of heavenly peace, full contentation, and
other graces: neither as this man or that: but such as for the beauty and
brightness of it, shall cause thee to marvel, and to say, as it is, even
more then thou could have asked. If thou further demaundest, how thou shall
attain to this: that thou may thus know, esteem, and keep it: this
present treatise (besides all help of public Ministry, and private
conference) shall teach thee: neither do I doubt, but that in one part or
other of it, the humble and teacheable reader shall find it.

Why God withholds some grace from his.
And if the Lord, in this case, increases not our faith, knowledge,
experience, strength over our corruptions, our comfort, and such like fruits
of his spirit, (as we have no cause to fear it, while we fervently desire it)
he knows sufficient cause why he does not: that is, because he knows it
should not be good for us, if he should give us them: So that his holding
back, is not, Note.
for That the Lord did deny to him a gift, which he had often, 2. Cor. 12.9.
and earnestly prayed for. And for this cause God may deny blessing to his
own faithful servants, as also to try them, whether they love them so well,
that they will seek after them still, and yet this ought not to be taken
hardly of them. But otherwise (these excepted) if they grow not, Causes in our
selves of not growing.
it is most justly to be imputed Jgnorance.
and their slouthfulnes in refusing pains taking, Sloth.
Favoring sin.
or slightly and houerlie going about it, and favoring themselves against
their consciences, and not removing out of their way such clogges as they saw
to hinder them: Or if these be not the causes, then is it their own
timorousnes, and unbelief; they fearing that such heavenly grace as they
seek after, Timorousness.
shall not be given unto them, wherein they do God no small dishonor: James
1.6.
who is more ready to give then they to ask: and gives plentifully to them
which ask, and casts no man in the teeth; but then they must also ask in
faith, and waver not, but that they shall receive; for if they waver, they can
receive nothing. Remedy of our unbelief.
to remedy our distrust, then by speaking in this wise unto us, to imbolden
us, who are so sore let and hindered by unbelief, that when we do that
which in us lies to please him, and to grow on in grace; yet we stick fast in
it, as in the mire of unbelief? and when we have done all, yet we doubt, God
will not grant us our request? so engraven in us it is: thereby showing that
we can hardly believe further, then we can see. I know men's answer herein is
this; they dare not be so bold, as to assure themselves that they shall have
the grace which they pray for and seek: But I say, let an evil conscience be
taken out of the way, and their doubt may soon be at an end. Oh but they are
afraid, least

CHAP. 8. How the minds and hearts of the believers are taken up usually,
seeing they renounce inward lusts.
How the minds of the godly are occupied.
But to return to the renouncing of our lusts: If ye ask me what manner of
persons they be who are at defiance with this unsavory stuff, and what
thoughts such have, as expel these corruptions, and have them in hearty
contempt, Three ages of Gods children.
and seldom unoccupied? I answer, that the persons are, as I have said,
sinners, as others be, but sanctified: and weak, but willing to be better; and
that their thoughts are according to the diverse growths and ages of Gods
children, 3. Childhood. 1. Pet. 2.1. 2. Middle age. Ephesians. 4.14. 1. Old age.
Heb. 5.14. Heb. 12.12, 13
which are three. The highest degree, is old age, or the experienced estate:
which yet is not the perfect age in Christ, for that shall not befall us until
the desire of the sincere; and namely of the promise of the forgiveness of
sins: which although some of these dear children of God cannot with full
assurance lay hold of, yet this their hungring desire after it (which cannot
be satisfied without it) with a sensible fear to offend God, is a true sign
thereof. And this is the lowest degree of true believers; which estate is at
first, weak in respect of the other two, as it is in the natural body: for
in the young babe, it is first weak, and after grows to greater strength, as
it grows in years: yea, and this is an excellent estate, in respect of the
counterfeit, which have most near resemblance of it, in whom may be seen some
flitting motions after good things, but in time, they vanish and go away, as
they came. Heb. 5.14. Ephesians. 4.14. 1. Pet. 2.2. The highest degree of
Christians.
about what things the thoughts of these three are chiefelie occupied, or
desire at least to have them occupied, though they do not ever attain to that
which they desire. And to begin with the first, some of Gods elect, through
long experience, and much acquaintance with the practice of a godly life; have
obtained grace to guide them more constantly then others: whereby they so
serve God, that they may please him with a reverent awe of his majesty, which
holds them within bounds, and in holy and religious fear of offending him,
while the other often break out more easily. And this estate, though it be to
be aimed Heb. 5.14.
as to have their will in good sort at commandment to follow the good, and
shun the evil. Such as Saint John calls fathers, in his epistle (saying,
1. John 2.13.
I write unto you fathers) because they had known the Lord, and his manner of
dealing with his people, and had experience of the discipline and government
of his house in a godly life a long time.

Now such as have been trained up in the obedience, which the Scripture Heb.
10.24.
upon their so long trial of Gods directing them in that course, Matthew. 13.31.
not only to go forward cheerefullie and readily themselves, but also to
persuade and hearten on others. And such therefore, thorough this grace
received at Gods bountiful hands, are much freed from this bondage, and
seldom so grossly holden under of their corrupt lusts, as others, saving
that God will make them see their weakness from time to time, especially to
subdue pride in them, which is soon kindled in them, and to hold them under:
they have therefore their minds usually set upon Prou. 14.8.
how they may keep in their way: For it is the wisdom of the prudent to
understand their way. Also, how they may hold out constantly the profession of
their hope with joy unto the end: how they may resist all occasions of evil
(for they presume not without daily help from God for all their strength)
they consider what lets they shall find from Satan, the world, and their own
hearts: how they may order well their particular actions in, and through the
day, in their callings, giving to all men their due: that they may prosper, and
also, that they may make a good account Prou. 2.10.11.
and so at their last end. They who have these, and the several
particularities under all these contained, to occupy their minds about, Prou.
6.22.
is it doubted, what thoughts, desires, and occupying of their heads, 2. Pet.
1.8.9.
and hearts they have, to keep them that they may neither be idle, nor
unprofitable? The thought they take daily (unless they be much blinded) is in
the greatest part, this: how they may have a good conscience in all things,
pleasing God, Acts 24.16. Coloss. 1.10.
and how they may be prepared for the cross, and to keep the same mind under
it, that being exercised therein often and much, they may reap the fruit of
righteousness, Hebr. 12.12.
even most sweet peace: and as their salvation grows nearer, Romans 13.11.
then when they first believed; so they may be fitter, and readier to Revel.
2.22. Acts 2.25, 26.
and never at ease, nor to think themselves well, but while they are under his
government.

Have su^^ no other things to do, but that with the scumme and ofscourings of
the world, they must ask how to spend the long summers day, and the wearisome
winter nights? Although others, who are profane, have not, Psalm. 1.2. Psalm.
119.67
yet with these we may see, it is otherwise. What? do men think, because the
devil has filled the most parts of the world with darkness, so that the most
see none of these things, and having no experience of, nor acquaintance with
them, do not desire to be partakers of them: do men, I say, therefore Luke
19.42.
) but they are not wonderful in thine eyes: this blessed time is the day of thy
visitation, but it is hidden from thee.

But to return: I have showed thee, how some of Gods people have their minds
exercised, when they have chased away the noisome drove of such unclean lusts,
as were wont in times past to possess them as well as other; The best are
molested sometimes with lusts.
yet do I not conclude that these are not at all troubled with evil thoughts
and that the messenger of Satan (even some pricks of corruption) was sent to
buffet him: and at another time, Oh wretched man that I am, 2. Cor. 12.9. Romans
7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of sin! Nay I am so far from saying
so, that I contrarily affirm, that their purest actions are mixed with
corruption: and no better then good water running thorough an unsavory
vessel; as their faith, love, vprightnes, mercy, etc. Now then, if God should
look upon their faults, though they may be kept from foul and filthy
uncleannesses, how should they be able to abide it? no, if it were no more then
untowardness and unfitness to the duties of their callings, and to other good
works, and much wearisomnes therein. Not comparable to the Apostles.
Paul could say, of his joy in his sufferings, and that oftentimes, and the
strangenes, 2. Cor. 12.4.
and variety of them, of his lifting up into paradise, and that he had heard
such things, as are not lawful for a man to speak.

These and such others, I think, God gave him as privileges, Paul had
special privileges.
which were mere arrogancy and ostentation for any man among us to dream of,
or compare with him in: seeing our sufferings (to speak of them who have
sustained the greatest afflictions for the Gospel in our age) have bin small:
and to have no fellowship with them: and when they are kindled in us, to have
grace and strength ordinarily, and usually against them, and to see and know
how to avoid them; Zach. 12.8.9.10.
it is so far off from arrogancy to think that it should be so, that it is
far unbeseeming the gravity and age of fathers in Christ, and strong
Christians, not to have it so. So that as ancient men, who have lived long, are
called fathers for their age, skill, These be fathers.
and experience: so these for their time and long continuance in Christ's
school are called fathers; and therefore ought to have wisdom and knowledge,
how be paternes of good life unto the younger sort. Tit. 2.4.
And thus they having their minds established with grace, and unburdened of
such affections and thoughts, they may rightly, and in good sort, go about
their works and dealings: as laboring, bargaining, iourneying, companying,
serving their prince, and doing any other lawful actions; and yet not be
distempered by them: which things for want of such a well ordered

The third sort of the godly, in battle.
The second sort is compared to young men, who then are in their strength, rather
then when they are either children, or old men: so some of Gods servants are as
yet neither experienced nor thoroughly acquainted in the Christian battle as
the fathers, nor utterly ignorant of it, as the newborn Christians: these are
especally occupied in fighting against temptations, and resisting and
ouercomming their unruly desires, which hale and draw them after 1. Ioh. 2.14.
) so S. John writing to them, does show them what is their chief and
principal work: that is, to resist the devil, and his strong assaults, which
in them, lusty and strong, are not easily subdued: and persuades them to this
combat, not only by telling them what a glorious victory it shall be to them
to vanquish such an enemy; but also that they may be sure of it, as if they
had got it already. These knowing by the light of the Scriptures and the
Commandments, how corrupt their hearts are, and how many sinful thoughts and
desires do swarm in them, they watch their hearts; whereas Sin is odious to
them, though not ever overcome of them.
sensible desiring of their neighbors goods, as wife, servant, or such like,
which in times past were common matters with them, and their delight, purge out
that old sower leaven. They renew their covenants with the Lord to please him
better, when they see how they have slipped and fallen from their good
purposes; and yet are soon unsettled again. They are in very good case this
day or week, to withstand any sin; and yet to morrow or next week unsettled
and sensibly distempered; These are sometime discouraged.
and their hearts. Through ignorance and vnacquaintance in their Christian
course, knowing, what hardnesses and difficulties are in their way, they are
many times discouraged; but they, who have laid their foundation strongly,
rise up after some heaviness, and discomfort, out of their sleepines and
security, complaining thereof, and come to themselves again. Cant 3 2.3. Glad
to use all helps.
All good helps that they can enjoy, they are glad of, public, or private,
and thus (I mean,

They having thorough Gods goodness prevailed somewhat, especially at sometimes
against their strongest corruptions, which were wont to bear too much sway in
them, they earnestly are set against the smaller, Set against smaller sins.
and such as seem less dangerous; as the idle, and unprofitable rouings of
their brain: (which do not directly so much carry them after evil, as
hinder them from good, blindefolding their judgments first, and then poisoning
the will afterward) as the dreaming of outward peace, and prosperity, of long
life, of pleasure, and profit; vain wishings of that which other have, being
things precious in their eyes: Which they are often tickled with, till they come

So that they having thorough custom long lien in them, they cannot so easily
and readily cast them off, though they see the shame and vanity of them.
Their labor therefore (of their minds, I mean) is in great part, this: to
keep themselves from being taken up of them, seeing good meditations These be
held under their infirmities for their good.
that for their great good they are holden under of their infirmities, even
that they may be the more humble, when they see themselves so imperfect, and
corrupt, who yet had dreamed sometime before, that they were void of that
corruption (though the more was their ignorance) a long time before: and their
short mourning shall bring after deliverance

The third sort of the godly.
Now the third sort of the people of God, are compared to little children: of
the which, some are as it were in the birth: of whom the Apostle speaks, Gal.
4.19. My little children, of whom I travail in birth again, till Christ be
formed in you: who, though they as yet know it not, are dear to God, and have
sure tokens of it, as I have showed in the first treatise: and they have many
properties of the other young ones, which are of this third sort. The other be
such as are young, and hang upon the breast, that as such grow to know the
father and mother, when as yet they know nothing else; cry after them, and
desire the breast, whereby they are nourished, and joy and take their pleasure
in these: even so it fares with this third sort of Gods elect, if they be well
1. John 2.14.
except in temptation. For they (as the Apostle says) know the father: such
light and understanding they have of the Gospel, that though they know not how
to serve him; yet they know that his favor is all in all to them: in so much,
as if some of them have not full certainty that he is tenderly affected
toward them, they so long after it, that nothing can satisfy them without it:
About which their thoughts are chiefly occupied, and in the which their
delight is, after they know what it is worth; and in the means of their
spiritual nourishment, which is the word of God; and not least of all in this,
that they may not in the least thing offend or displease God. This Saint Peter
Desire (says he) that sincere milk of the word, 1. Pet. 2.2.
that ye may grow thereby.

And these are the especial things which are most apparently to be seen in
them, by others; and felt of themselves: who also are much troubled for want of
stronger faith, thirsting after, and ioying in the sense and feeling of Gods
loving kindness. True it is, they have little mind to the sin, which they
were wont to offend in; yet that is not so much to be counted sound practice of
godliness, (for that they often times little mark and consider how they are
tempted and enticed, having their mind taken up in that, wherein

The one of them is, least whilst their comfort continues, The first danger
in comfort.
they should neglect their lawful business, as thinking it to be the greatest
let which they have: seeing by means thereof, they cannot attend to reading,
praying, and thinking of Gods love, to the quickening of their hearts when they
would: although when they have leisure and opportunity to such duties, they
have no such desire for the most part; neither do they use it commonly to the
most and best advantage of their souls as they might. Here Satan appears as
an Angel of light.

The second danger, when they feel want of comfort.
they fall into heavy dumpes, distrustfulnes, and fear that all was but a
shadow, and a dream: from hence may arise despair for a time; and after, a
sleepie and secure conscience, as fearing that the Lord will no more restore to
them the grace that they were wont in him to find. Here the devil shows
himself as a roaring Lion. But before experience teach how to deal herein,
counsel and help of other, who are able to minister it, with calling upon
God, (as well as ordinary hearing of Sermons) is chiefelie (when they are so
weak, that they cannot help themselves) to be sought for, and regarded. And
the rather, for that their childishnes does require the same: For many follies,
Many defects of these.


For we must remember, that they are compared to children, Young Christians
compared to children.
for that they should daily grow out of childishnes; and not look, as it
were, to be always set on the lap. Which wisdom God gives, teaching even his
weak ones to know themselves better from day to day: and to look to bear
some crosses (which God sends for the exercising of their faith and patience)
because he their father does see it meetest for them to have it so; and to
prepare them for greater by little and little: And as children grow to leave
childishnes, so they should begin to mislike such faults as they epsy in
themselves, and not to think, that they should be from time to time borne with
and winked at in These must grow. Matthew. 13.31.
Therefore our Savior compares the estate of his Church and people in the
first age and beginning of it, to a grain of mustard seed, which being once
rooted, how small soever it be, grows forward from appearing above the
ground, to be a blade, and so to branch: Teaching his thereby, that they should
so look to go from one degree to another, that though they did not know what
was to be done of them in this their christian course, when they first entered
into it: yet now after they have been trained up in it for a season, and have
tasted of the promise of life, they should hasten thither, thorough Psalm. 88.9.
yea, perhaps of their own flesh to be despised and hated for it.

Their duty.
They are to begin to know the multitude of fleshly lusts, which secretly lurk
within them, seeing they are now much fitter to discern and find them out in
themselves, then ever they were at any time, the Lord tenderly

Thus I have showed in some sort what are the thoughts, affections, and desires
usually, and for the most part of the weaker sort of Gods children (about
matters of the soul) this being added, that they are grieved, when they are
led of the contrary: and this is to be understood of that part of their
estate, which is free from strong and vehement temptations: for otherwise, it
may best be gathered out of the former treatise how it is with the^; the which
I have partly laid forth and described plainly, and partly set down in the
way of exhortation. For the same things that I exhort them unto, are the very
anatomy and representation of their hearts, except the devil has cast Gods
children are in danger sometimes to be dazeled and without feeling.
My meaning is, that the children of God weak or strong, do not only step
aside sometimes from the peaceable estate, wherein they desire to keep: but
also are in danger (without continual watchfulnes, and earnest and often
praying) to be sensibly dazeled, as men not knowing where they are, and stripped
of grace utterly to their own feeling, as if there had never been any: Which I
say, that none may be dismayed (as they might easily be) if they should hear
only the best of the state of the godly, and not understand something of the
worst also; and yet, even that worst part God turns in the weights of the
Sanctuary, that is, to try their estate by the word of God: But their
thoughts and desires are about carnal liberty, pleasure, profit, long life,
revenge, etc. even as their speech is, that comes from their hearts, frothie
and vain, These degrees may in some respect fall one into another.
that every action mentioned in the three kinds of our estate, must not
precisely be so appropriated who of weak became strong: As Moses, Exodus 3.11.
who was first afraid to look Pharao in the face, desiring that another might
go who was meeter then he: Exodus 10.29.
yet afterward he was not afraid to do his message boldly and thoroughly in
the name of the Lord. And Peter, who in his middle estate, as I may say, was so
faint and fearful, that he was stricken and flighted with the voice of a
silly damsel, Luke 22.57. yet after, when he grew to the degree of a father,
was not

And thus to return, and to join this which follows to the end of the

CHAP. 9.
Outward wickedness to be renounced.
TO rejoice either about their salvation, or the goodness of their heart, if
their behavior be stained with outward wickedness, and their holy profession
blemished with open and shameful sins, is vain: which is the more to be
marked, seeing many boast that they have good hearts to God, when their lives
are wicked. 1. Sam. 7.4. Vide Judge. 10.14. Hos. 14.1.
When Samuel willed the people to try their repentance to be sound, he willed
them to put away Baalam and Ashtaroth, Paul tells the Corinthians, that they
must cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh, 2. Cor. 7.1.
as well as of the spirit. But the less shall be needful to be said of this,
seeing the whole course of the Scriptures, both doctrine and examples, as also
common reason does testify the same, that none can prove their hearts upright,
if their behavior be offensive and evil.

2. Pet. 2.20. Believers must forsake their former sins.
For doctrine first, that of S. Peter does plainly show it, where he says, If a
man after he has professed a Christian course by acknowledging the forgiveness
of his sin, and the hope of everlasting life, shall yet be entangled again
in his old sins, and overcome of them, the latter end of that man is worse
then the beginning: for it had And they that do so, are most fitly compared to
dogs which return to their vomit, and to swine which having been washed,
Iam. 1.25.
do wallow again in the mire. S. James also is bold to say, that if the
tongue only be unbridled (be the rest of the life reformed how it can) even
that one disorder in a man professing the Gospel, shall be enough to testify
against him, that his religion is nothing worth, but vain. If his religion be
in vain, he can neither have any part in salvation, nor in a godly life: How
can we which are dead to sin (says the Apostle) live any longer therein?
Romans 6.2.
The reason is, seeing they which are dead to sin, are so made partakers of
the power,

Examples.
which set this truth plainly before our eyes. When Joseph saw that he could
no otherwise keep favor with his mistress, and hold still many other
liberties, which in his place he did enjoy, unless he would defile his body, and
give over himself to her whoorish demand: because he was a godly man, he
would never consent; Genes. 39.10.
although he brought upon himself thereby, utter displeasure, and for ought he
could see, perpetual misery: How can I (said he) do this great wickedness,
and sin against God? Moses being a very man of God, refused, when he might
have inioyed it, to be called and counted the son of Pharaohs daughter an
idolater, Hebr. 11.24.
and chose rather to lead an hard life with the people of God in the
wilderness, Luke 19.2.
Zaccheus one of the chief tole-gatherers, an infamous man counted by the very
multitude (in so much that they thought hardly of it, that our Savior Christ
would go into the house of so bad a man) yet when Christ had converted him,
whilst he abode that day with him, and for proof thereof, had pronounced of
him openly, that he was that same day made the son of Abraham, who at his
entering in unto him, was a manifest oppressor, and poler of the people, what
did he? A thing seldom seen in such as have their hearts nailed to their
goods, and have their whole delight taken up in them: He revenged himself upon
his covetous, and miserlike mind, and his greedy devouring of other men's he
gives half of them to the poor: and made restitution with the rest
fourefolde, to such as he had wronged.

Oh worthy example to all oppressors, or Usurers! with whom all is fish that
comes to net: and which (whosoever smart for it, beg, complain, yea and
pine away for very sorrow of that which they have lost) will not forgo any
piece of their appetite: herein coming behind Judas the traitor. Oh happy
Zaccheus! who had learned in so short time, Luke 7.37.
that which many of thy companions in sin, as greedy as thou were, as
unmerciful to the poor, as violent in drawing from others, to the enriching
of themselves, can It is as easy for a Camel to go thorough a needles eye,
as for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God: Well it were with them, if
they could learn of thee to cast up their gorge, and to set less by that,
which above all things, yea above God himself, though to their own perpetual
shame and woe, they have made their delight.

But I must proceed. To end therefore with laying forth any more examples:
how forcible is that of the woman in the Gospel of S. Luke, who having been
(as Zaccheus had) a woman of notorious life; yet when she saw that her many and
great sins were forgiven her, had her unchaste life in such

Now if these with many other could not allow their sins, which by nature
they loved, and by custom they had long lien in, we need not doubt,

CHAP. 10. Of four sorts of such as hope for salvation; yet renounce not open
sins, and outward offenses.
But we need not spend many words about this matter, that the servants of God
have, and ought to cast off outward sins. The ungodly will scorn professors,
if their lives be faulty.
Another thing here is chiefly to be regarded; and this I think good to
advertise the christian reader of: that there are many who seem godly, and are
not; that he may take more heed to himself, least he be found of the number
of any of them. I refer them all, to four special kinds: the first are
gross offenders, whom every vile person which knows them to have made
greater shows of godliness, then the common sort do (and yet not to be lights
in good living) nor such indeed, as they go for, but deceivers; every who
professing godliness, in their deeds denied the same, and were nothing less
then they went for. 2. Tim. 3.5.6.
Whose cursed course of living (I mean them which have caused others to fall
most dangerously) does witness and speak fore against them: and they are
enemies to their own soul, and nothing the men they go for: and seldom have
I seen such to be reclaimed from their evil Saul is to be seen, who though
he offered sacrifices to the true God; yet did things odious in the eyes of the
wicked world, 1. Sam. 22.18. and such as the worst of his servants could not be
brought to approve, and join with him in, save that one, even cursed Doeg the
Edomite.

To the forementioned sort, The second sort of bad professors, ignorant and
careless.
if we shall adioyne three other kinds of bad ones, it shall easily appear
that there are infinite persons living among good Christians, and of some so
accounted of also, at least of themselves; who yet have not renounced open and
apparent sins. The first of these three kinds, are the rude and common sort of
people: and as ignorant for the most part, as they Note the woeful estate of
the rude ignorant.
(they say) they were greatly urged to it: and though they do not like this
singing of Psalms, and Prayers, and reading in their houses (for they think
there is reason in all things) yet they love as well to hear their own man
say service, (I speak in

These with many more such speeches, which lay open their heart, and estate
which they are in, toward God; to every man that can judge, are suitable fully
to the course of their lives: and therefore he that judges by the Scriptures,
will think them far from everlasting life. And yet as gross and brutish as
they are, there want not such who should tell them the truth more Jeremy, where
he says, Ierem. 8.11.
They have healed the sores of my people with gentle words, crying peace,
peace, when there is no peace. Alas, the Apostle might ill say, that he, to
whom the Lord has given assured hope of salvation, must renounce ungodliness,
of necessity, if a man laden with such a burden, might yet as one that
runs well, attain to the crown of glory in the Lords kingdom!

If any marvel what I mean to set down this rabble of evil qualities, it

Many laugh at the rude for their homely speeches, who yet are like them in
qualities.
Besides, I would wish others (who do not perhaps utter their minds so rudely
and plainly as these, but are more subtle to beguile themselves) to take me
as speaking to them, if their lives be corrupted, and defiled with these, and
the like offenses; and yet will needs hope and trust for salvation: Note.
who had more need to weep for being so like them in qualities.

A third sort. Civil Professors.
But to proceed: There is a third sort, which come yet more near to the godly
life, and may seem to have great wrong offered them, if they be not so taken:
who because they keep within some civil course of honesty, and are free
(some of them especially) from gross offenses, think themselves to be of the
best sort of good livers, and scorn to be accused, though their open faults
are many: whom though God does sufficiently brand, when he says, That harlots
shall enter sooner into his kingdom then they: Matthew. 21.31.5, 20.
yet because they take no warning by his word; he does further bewray them, and
set them out in deed to be known, such as he never took pleasure in, by
suffering now and then, here and there, in all ages some such to hang and
drown themselves, or to die in despair, or other miserable manner, if
possibly he might bring some of the rest to repentance. These persuade
themselves that they do live godly, and yet by apparent proof of Scripture
may see plainly, that they do not so: for of such our Savior speaks when
he says to his Disciples, Matthew. 5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the kingdom
of heaven. These (it fears me to utter Some of all these 3. sorts are
sometimes pricked in conscience.
yet some of all these three sorts, are sometime pricked in conscience, and
sore disquieted in themselves for their sins (which is hardly procured and
wrought in the most hearers, no not even by often and sound teaching) but yet in
deed this is only a Exodus 9.27. 1. King. 21.27.
in which fear they do also confess their sin, and that in tears sometime.
There may be seen in them also a leaving for the time of some of their old
evil qualities, that a man would marvel at them, as John Baptist did, when
he saw the Pharisees resort to his baptism. For this is but external, in some
things, and for a season as Herod, who did many things at John his teaching:
and as Ephraim in Osee, Mark. 6.19. Hos. 6.4. Mich. 6.6
whose goodness was as the morning dew. In their trouble they seek the Lord,
but they seek him not, as they who would find him: for then would they not
leave off to seek, until they had found him (as the church did in the
Canticles, chap. 3.3.4.) Neither do they regard his ways, when their trouble
is ended; as Job speaks, The hypocrite does not pray, that is, Job.
27.8.9.10. These be hypocrites.
serve God always: meaning, in one condition of life, as in another: in peace
as in trouble. Yea more particularly, when God smites and plagueth them
(either by their enemies, diseases, losses, and such like) they covenant
religiously with him, that they will never fall from him any more: but they
flatter him with their mouth, Psalm. 78.36.
and dissemble with their tongue, their heart is not upright with him; neither
are they faithful in his covenant. They will sharply tell others of their
faults, though they be but small; yea though they be but so in their opinion:
as though they could not abide that God should be dishonored: but they
themselves will not take a reproof, they hate to be reformed. They are zealous
in some things; Psalm. 50.16. Ioh. 3.19.


They hear the word of God willingly sometimes, Sudden flashes of grace.
and some of them speak of it with joy, and wonder at the heavenly wisdom of
it; but it vanishes away and fleeteth: whereas if it had been sound, it would
have increased and continued, as the herb that takes root in good ground,
becomes fruitful. So they attain to many good gifts of God, whereby one
would think sometimes that they were not far from eternal life; but they
either bury them in a napkin, and do no good with them, or use them amiss,
as Judas did Christ's communion with him, to their own hurt, while they

But if I should reckon up the beadrolles of gross faults which they suffer in
themselves, and nourish (yet under the name of infirmities) it should easily
appear, to such as have any judgment in the Scriptures, that they cannot be
reckoned among the believers, and beloved of the Lord. For howsoever he gather
his elect out of all these kinds, yet are none of them to be accounted for his,
while they abide and continue so. From these faults therefore let the believers
separate themselves.

A fourth sort, and those diverse from these now mentioned may be added, A
fourth sort of bad professors, schismatikes, inordinate livers.
such as they mislike, though far better then themselves) which testify They
are taunters, railers, and slaunderers of their brethren.
without taunting, girding, rating or wounding them, and in their absence
deface and defame them very uncharitably, for somewhat which they mislike in
them: and yet often times without any just cause at all. Yea, and some of them
being themselves but private men (but put the And censurers of others.
to censure sharply, and descant arrogantly of their betters and superiors: so
that it is well known that many of them have turned utterly to become
Schismatikes, and others have not been far from them. Which kind of zealous
professors, I do the more boldly reprove, because some have thought me a
favorer of such: their readiness in receiving the Gospel I have well liked,
and as I have been able, furthered it: but this arrogant, bold, and
uncharitable spirit of theirs bringing forth such fruit, as I have mentioned
(never taught them in any sound Ministry) I utterly mislike, and have done
from time to time, since I had any judgment. Who Soon ride in their own
conceit.
to be taught (as seeing great need thereof) have in a few years, I may say
months, outgrowne their teachers, (in their own judgments) and have thought
almost none of them, good and meet enough, or sufficient for them: and
therefore some of them have given themselves (as they say) to grow by their
private reading, when they might have been taught also in the public
assembly: which some of them refuse to do, especially by the ministry of
such as they are exasperated against: and so, for the serving of their own
cankred humor, they sin against God in breaking one of the greatest
commandments. I give herein a taste of the rest of their qualities of like
sort: Is this behavior seeming

To whom may be referred these, who go for zealous persons, who live
inordinately, Tit. 3.
without attending upon any honest trade, idle, unprofitable, busy bodies,
Inordinate livers.
and counting it godliness to talk of the faults of others; yea and oftentimes
speak to please such as are in the company, and this not by unawares, or
suddenly, at some one time; but often, and without any hearty repentance (for
then they would amend:) which when they have done, how can they deserve any
such name of reverent Christians, or to be so accounted? when they, who will
be thought forwarder then other, shall not look also, that they live more
without offense then other, Worse in dealing then men who profess no religion.
but in their dealings one taking all and for no persuasion, Romans 1.
remitting any thing of their uttermost due, toward such as be in their danger.
What reckoning is to be made of their religion? when men will be taken for
earnest professors, and yet they shall be found hollow, and double in their
dealings, one speech to some, and at some time, but contrary at other times,
to other persons; and so be void of plain dealing: so that for commodity,
they depart from manifest duty. What are they in respect of that which they do
pretend? when they dare yet feed their eyes with unchaste looks, thereby
making way to the defiling of their bodies, when they will nourish the
occasions thereof, although not so openly, as others do, by company, talk,
amorous looks, lascivious and

Now if this sort (partly mentioned already, and partly to be mentioned) who
(I must needs say for some religious duties which they do) come most near of
all other to the godly life (as no doubt they do) do yet fail of it, and
have little part in it: I shall not need to show how far others (of what

For the benefit and good of the offenders whom I have bewraied, and to gather
into a sum, that which I have said of the renouncing of inward and outward
evils: this I say, if by any means, I may set before their eyes, and persuade
them, how odious their estate is (and I say it in compassion of them) that
neither the inward rebellious lusts, which I have spoken of, nor the outward
behavior which I have mentioned, is any way or in any manner beseeming the
Christian man. But whiles the Lord urges this at his that they have no
fellowship with such unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11.
but cleanse themselves from all that is evil, both of soul and body: so long
shall it be reproachful for all which rejoice in the name of Christians, 2.
Cor. 7.1.
to be either in their hearts stained with such corruptions, or in their lives
defiled with such treacheries. Which being so, is it not to be wondered at,
especially, seeing the will of God is so clearly revealed, that this should be
so harsh and unsavory a thing; yea and foolish even among such as will be
thought zealous, that we should so particularly sift our selves from these,
when yet the Lord by the Prophet requires that this be done again and again,
saying, Soph. 1. Fan your selves, fan your selves, O nation not worthy to
be loved? It is manifest in the

Bear with me (gentle Reader) though I go far and abide long in them; it may
be some shall take more good at the hearing of them, and their hearts Other
disorders of such professors. Earthlines.
Such frowardnes, heartburning, and most sore broiles there are one against
another, and that for trifles: such earnestnes is also in their worldly
dealings: and yet deadnes of heart, and little courage in matters of the soul:
such nimblenes and vnweariednes in the one, and such tediousnes and irkesomnes
in the other, that all which see their conversation in the one and the other,
would guess that the things which they contend about, were matters of life and
death, the other very light and of small reckoning: such griping of the poor
and needy, in their sales, covenants, and other dealings, especially not
forgoing or yielding the least piece of their right (be their necessity Note.
Such giving men's selves the bridle in their merry makings (I speak still of
such as favor the Gospel) to talk what they will, so as it be not merely
impious, how unprofitable soever it be to edifying or hurtful to example,
Matthew. 12.36.
when yet for every idle word men shall give an account: when as also such
times of friendly meetings should be used for the gaining of one another to
God, or confirming one another in their most holy faith, as also for the
provoking to love. Such unquietness in the governors of families, for every
thing that is not to their liking, as petty losses, and discommodities in
house, or without, by neighbors or servants, when yet their own unruly
Unquietness.
Such broiles and breach of duty betwixt husband and wife, such strife, and
often contentions, that every small occasion of dissenting one from another about
any thing, must bring peeuishnes, heartburning, strangenes, sowernes; yea and
often times absence from bed and board: so that they must commonly have a day of
debating the case before it can be forgotten and digested: who can think, how
common it is, without deep bewailing it? And where more agreement is betwixt
couples, yet to mark Heb. 10.25.
to Godward in knowledge, faith, amendment, meekenes, patience, by reading,
praying, communing together, and watching over one another, for their mutual
good (which yet they should do to others) and therein be helps each to other,
Genesis 2.18.
as well as in things of this life: to mark, I say, how little good is done
betwixt them, is it not worthily to be complained of? And yet of these two
things the latter is thought needless to be urged, as though weightier matters
were in hand always: the former is defended, that sometime iarres must needs
be, and it cannot be otherwise, and therefore not to be spoken against.

Again, in such as receive the Gospel with good liking: how does the they
love darkness more then light, and pleasures more then God, howsoever they hold
still with the Gospel, least their iniquity should be too manifest to them? I
may say, as many have confessed, and I hope by this, and such like remembrance,
some other will be admonished to remember, consider, and confess, that they
have so offended in Luke 9.23.
neither is this to take up their cross daily, that is, receive meekely the
troubles which God sends them, without which yet, they cannot follow Christ,
nor be his disciples.

What should I speak of them, who although they will boldly affirm, Ill
educating their Children.
that they will not bear with the sin of any, (no not their own children)
to offend God for their sakes; yet will take part with them having done
wickedlie, and bolster them up, when they should be punished, though it be to
dissimulation in word only, not in heart and in deed: Romans 12. 1. John 3.
Proverb. 20.7
and how hardly credit may be given to their fair words, or countenances? But
as for fashion they were showed; so according to the fashion of the world, they
are changed into another affection, then they promised: I have not mentioned
many of the strong corruptions and rank rebellions breaking out in some
Christians, and those of no common hope among their brethren.

I have scarcely mentioned this, Uncharitable surmises.
what deadly suspicions and hard conceiuings they have of many, better men then
themselves; how imperiously they we be not many masters: yea, James 3.1.
and these faults are committed many times, when no occasion is given; which
makes their sin the greater: and if there were any, yet meekenes and
lenity, which should be in all reprouers, might easily remove them, whereas
froward and uncharitable condemning does no good. A poison which dwells; as I
have said, most principally in the Schismatikes of our time, and such as have
leaned that way: who if they had not deceived themselves, in

CHAP. II. Of certain objections raised from the former doctrine, and answers
thereto: as why we should put differences betwixt men: and whether the godly
may fall reprochfully, and what infirmities they may have.
Ob. Are all such damned.
But me thinks I hear some obiecting thus: what? are all damned, and out of
the estate of grace, which commit any of these sins? And may not many of
these offenders notwithstanding their faults, be the children of God? And if
men commit such faults, do they not (think we) repent afterward? (I say, if
they do, that objection is answered) Also they say, they cannot abide that
such differences should be made of men. And have the godly, whom ye shoale out
of others, no faults, but are they without infirmities? are they so pure, that
they live not as other God shoales out some from others. Psalm. 1.2.50.16. 1.
These. 1.9. John 1. and 10.
why should one be shoaled from the other? I answer, as for differences of men
they are put, by the Lord himself, both in name, conversation, and reward: to
the Thessalonians, he says: The Lord shall recompense tribulation to them
which trouble his: but to those which are troubled, peace and rest: and the end
of the Ministry is to shoale Gods elect and beloved ones from the world, and
to bring them to his sheepefold.

Infirmities in all. Matthew. 7.22.25.34.
As concerning infirmities, it is defended by no Christian, that the most

The godly somewhat infected with common corruptions.
Therefore where it is demanded, if they be not partakers of the same sins,
that other men are; I deny not, but that it is possible for them in some sort,
and for a time, to be carried after the stream of the evil example of so
many, which are in the world so common, and almost universal: for the best
live, where Satan's throne is, (even as the Israelites and the Egyptians dwelt
Noah, Lot, David, and Peter: and woeful experience among us in all ages do
testify. But what then? Are they therefore given over of the Lord to lie and
abide in them, and being washed to wallow again in the mire?

And as I deny not but that it may be possible, Difference between the falls of
the godly and the wicked.
and is too clear by woeful experience, that the best may be snared with the
sins of others; so yet, I say, that when they fall, it appears plainly,
that it was the subtle malice of the devil, watching his opportunity so
narrowly, that he deceived them, rather then that they were given over like
wicked men; to lie therein, and to add sin to sin without combat and
conflict, as though they had made a league as the other be. And the rather I
say this, because when they have been awaked, Cant 5.
and come to themselves again, they are so strangely amassed at their offense,
Note.
and so tremble to think what they have done, and can have no peace within
themselves until they return: and that after they have got out, they are made
more wary and vigilant against the like another time: the which of the wicked
cannot be said, Cant. 3.4, 5.
in any of their repentings, till God change their hearts in deed, although in
sudden, and rash fear they may be flighted, till it vanish away again like
smoke, and so come to nothing.

Last of all, when have they fallen dangerously, who had so well begun? The
godly fall not, but when they are secure and take liberty. 1. Sam. 35.24.
to count stolen waters sweet: it is no marvel though they have smarted
with Dinah, for ranging and seeking to have their will amiss: for if his own
children provoke him, Psalm. 89.31.
he must punish even their sins with the rod, and their offenses with the
scourge, till they return and say, we have sinned.

God has promised to keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91.11.
wherein he appoints us to Philip. 3.13.
and he has promised us strength to walk in them. But if we will run out
of our bounds, with Shemeia, 2. Chron. 16.9 Philip. 4.
where our own hearts tell us that we are in danger, is it any wonder, if
afterward it take hold of us? And was it not thus with that dear servant of
God, whom the Scripture commends by this title, that he was a man according
to Gods mind? that when that one time befell, 2. Sam. 11.4.
(more to his reproach, then all other) he was found to give himself the bridle
of unlawful liberty, Psalm. 51.5.
and to shaking off the secret reign of holy fear, more Prou. 4.23.
so it is and may be kept, by such means as God has provided, and not lost
any more, but confirmed and continued in the fear of God. But then, as we be
one with Christ, and partakers of him, and as branches we hold fast the
beginning of our abiding in him, Heb. 4.1. Heb. 3.12.
that is, our faith, unto the end, and that we take heed that there be not at
any time in us an evil and corrupt heart, which will make us fall from the
living God, to our own deceitful imaginations and desires, and so to fall
dangerously, and to purchase heaviness thereby, our bellies full.

How we may be fenced.
And this let every one endeavor to do, and he shall see himself so strongly
fenced, that through Gods blessing, which fails not in such a case, he shall
be free from the diet of the careless livers (who are every while shaken)
because who walk uprightly, walk safely: but he that peruerteth his ways,
God will find him out, Prouer. 10.9. For whereas many of Gods beloved ones
procure sore wounds in their lives, and anguish thereby, it is but the fruit of
their own labors, who will not be held within holy compass, but plead for
some unlawful liberty, and count it strictnes more then needs (by harkning
too much to the unruly flesh) to tie themselves to any certain directing of
themselves in his service, (when yet his service is perfect freedom) whose
evils I defend not: but yet I say, as I have said, if they be his, they shall
rise and repent with Peter, if they have fallen with him, when yet the wicked
shall lie still and wax worse. 2. Tim. 3.13.


But ye demand, and would needs have me answer, whether I can warrant such
as fear God, No warrant of not falling deadly.
that they shall never fall into some reproachful and dangerous evil, as other
men do, as well as they may break out some other ways. If I might answer a
wise and sober demaunder, I would not refuse to speak my mind; although it
may in part be gathered by that which I have said already: unto such a one
therefore I say (for if any other see his own practice not to agree with my
answer, let him impute it to his own sin rather then to my rashness) I say
therefore, seeing rare and dear servants of God have fallen thus into
shameful sins, it may seem scarce possible for the best in these latter
times, being far inferior to some of them in grace, We may be preserved from
foul falls.
But yet we must know, that some other of his good people God has preserved
from that kind of shameful sins and stains, as Enoch, Abraham, Caleb,
Joshua, with many others: and therefore it may of us be hoped for, especially
seeing it is no other thing then we are commanded to have special regard and
care of: 2. Pet. 1.5. Col. 1.2^. Iam. 1.27.
that is, to live without just reproach in the midst of a crooked generation
and unstained. Saint Peter says, If ye have these things, ye shall never fall:
that is, dangerously, 2. Pet. 1.10.
to take any great hurt thereby.

Therefore by these, and such other persuasions, we ought to be encouraged;
for to us there is good hope to obtain grace hereunto. But seeing all Gods
children cannot alike be persuaded, that they ought to give all diligence
hereunto; even that they may be unrebukable amongst men, as Paul did, 1. Cor.
4.3.4.
and so taught other to do; but think it impossible to live so constantly,
Act. 26.18.19.
but that they shall sometime break out dangerously: Therefore such must be
taught wisdom by experience, and some of them being more proud then others,
must have their pride humbled, and healed by such medicines: The first end, why
God suffers some to fall so.

Some to be humbled by their falls. Why many fall.


for grievous The second end, to magnify his mercy in forgiving great sins.
Ioh. 21.15.


This does our merciful father see expedient oftentimes, as both in Peter and
David it came to pass, as also in others: who doubtless loved the Lord, more
then some others of his faithful people, which never fell in that manner
Peter's answer, and David's Psalms do clearly testify) yea, and such loved
him the more, Luke 7.47. even for that very cause, seeing they obtained mercy
against so great sins of theirs, and fearful iniquity.

Yea and to add a third end, God is highly magnified by others, A third end
why the faithful fall in regard of others.
which know and see this, that he has forgiven so great offenses, in such as
have fallen grievously: who otherwise beholding the heavenly course of such
excellent servants of his, how holy and sincere it was (save in some such
offense) should have been utterly discouraged, yea and like to have despaired
of their own good estate: and the rather for the high opinion that they
conceived of them, if they had not seen or heard of these their falls. For
these 1. Tim. 1.16.
far exceeding those which are in themselves.

Otherwise no fear of falling
they need not fear that God takes any pleasure to cast them down, who
desire to stand (when his property is rather to raise up them that are
fallen:) or that he seeks every advantage, Psalm. 130.3.
against their infirmities, who does not look straightly what is done amiss of
them; Luke 1.54. Gods tenderness over his.
but help their weakness, supply their wants, and deliver them from such
dangers, as they fear, so far as it is expedient; or else make them able to
bear them. For proof whereof, they may remember, how he kept them, when they
had small skill or ability to keep themselves, Deuteronomy. 33.12.
after that they first embraced Romans 5.10.
when they were his enemies, he gave his son to die for them: and now they
are reconciled unto him, and approved of him, as his beloved ones, shall they
not much more be preserved (by his living in glory) from the fearful
judgments, which in his wrath he executes against the ungodly of the world?

Col. 1.23. Sweet comfort to the weak.
Therefore if thou be grounded and established in faith, and hold fast the
beginning of thine ingrafting into Christ, be of good comfort, thy greatest
danger is past: for can he that loves thee dearly, mean hardly against thee?
there with him yea and nay, with whom there is no shadow of change? The Lord
witnessing to that which I say, with reverence and thankfulness believe it:
either thou shall not fall reprochfully; or if thou do, it shall be thus, as
I have said, Note.
even so as it shall turn to thy good: and it need to be to thy great good,
which cannot be without the great offense of so many as shall know it. For
though such as shall perish may turn this which I say, Romans 8.31. 2. Pet.
3.16. Tit. 1.15. Cant. 3.4.
to their own great hurt, as they do the Scriptures also (seeing to the
unclean all things are unclean:) yet if thou should slide, the Lord would
hold thee up, and make thee stand more constantly after. The world sees no
whit of this, but counts it all arrogancy, boasting, and falsehood, because
indeed they believe no more then they Cant. 2.14.
and how safe is he (yea in this dangerous wilderness of the world) in whom thou
dwell, seeing the Lord has said: 1. Ioh. 5.4.
This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith?

And this for answer to these objections: Now as I have promised, I will shut
up this part of Christianity, concerning the renouncing of inward and outward
evils, What infirmities the godly be subject to.
concluding what infirmities the godly shall be subject unto: which shall both
sufficiently prove, that they count not themselves without sin, as they are
charged by many: yet for all this, that they are not companions Luke 17.10.
Romans 7.24.
but that when they have done all, they are unprofitable servants, and say with
the Apostle: Oh wretched men that we are! and also, further then they are glad
to be ruled by God, they fear the same falls that others do. But because
they are not al spiritual, that is, spiritually minded wholly and altogether, as
they are not wholly flesh, that is, corrupt, but both these contraries fighting
together (as the Apostle says) one against the other, are in their Gal. 5.17.
therefore it comes to pass, that they are subject through this
concupiscence and infection which is in their flesh, both to the devils
suggestions, and delusions of the world, and they may be carried after diverse
and strange lusts, and to commit outward sins one after another further
forth, then by the grace of Gods spirit their corruption be bridled, held
back, and subdued. But if that grace be quenched or quailed, then evil
desires are

And this may be, yea and no doubt is, The state of weaker Christians.
the estate of the many of Gods servants: such especially, as for want of good
experience, and acquaintance in the Christian life, and battle, are more
easily deceived, and beguiled then others are. And hereof it is, that many have
been overtaken, and often do slide, and fall daungerously, and are carried from
keeping a good conscience, and from well doing: And diverse commit those sins
which they had long abstained from, hoping that they should never have fallen
into them any more: But what then? These much differ from all wicked.
Are they therefore like to the sundry sorts of the former wicked ones, of
whom I spoke before? No, nothing less: for either they are Phil. 2.12.
bewail it, and are much humbled to see how they have been circumuented, and
cannot be quiet, whiles they seeing God offended, are not reconciled to him
again. And on the contrary, if they prevail over their sins, and hold
under their affections, and keep their consciences excusing them, that so they
may walk with God and abide in his favor; 1. John 3.21.
then are they more joyful then they, who have all that their hearts can wish.
Psalm. 4 8.
And although all have not the like knowledge, how to do and go about it; yet
it is the earnest

And to this purpose I might say much more, whereby all that can judge, may
see, that these sins are of infirmity committed by them: and that they are
haled and drawn to do such things, as in no wise they would, when they are
come to themselves, and when the spirit of God ouerruleth and subdueth their
loose and ranging affections: neither would they have been carried after them,
even then when they were haled to the committing of them, but that they were
weak to perform that, which feign they would have

And this is properly sin of infirmity, when partly of knowledge, What sin
of infirmity is.
but more through frailty, an offense is wrought to the displeasing of God:
and when of such an one it is committed, as because he has his heart
sanctified, would not do it: Note.
and yet because the power of corruption at that time is greater in him, then
the strength of grace, therefore he was overcome of it, and forced to yield to
it.

Wicked sin boldly.
Have they fear before the sin committed, least they should fall into it?
But by what sign do they prove it, and by what reason can they persuade it?
who neither watch against it, neither have their hearts out of love with it:
nay they are so far from striving against it, that they are set on fire to
commit it, and would hate him deadly, which should earnestly dissuade, much
more withhold them from the committing of it: or do they after the committing
Their sorrow is carnal.
bewail it for that God was offended thereby, and for their unkindness against
his majesty, and for his dishonor thereby? It may be for fear of hell, and
damnation, if they be nearly urged, and least it should come to light, and so
bring reproach and punishment upon them; They may bow themselves like a bulrush
for a season. Which kind of men (that I may prove it to be true, Note.
which I say of them) when that pange and qualme is over, are not only merry
and quiet again, when yet they have no word of comfort from God, but are
ready to the like sin again; yea and many of them commit it again indeed
a little while after.

But will any call this, wholesome and Godly sorrow which brings repentance?

CHAP. 12. Of the keeping of the heart once purged, in it good plight afterward.
The heart purged, must so be kept.
NOw I having showed how God makes the heart new, and changes it, before it be
fit to be employed in well doing, and in bringing forth fruits of amendment;
and also how it being changed, renounceth evil both inward and outward: we
must know how to keep it in good plight afterward; that so we may be able from
time to time, to continue Proverb. 4.23. How the heart is kept.
that when our hearts are once cleansed, we should keep them so with all
diligence, that is, watch, try, and purge them from all defilements,

Psalm 119.9.
who was best acquainted with the heart among many thousands, both how evil it
is, and how it is in the best manner to be looked unto and preserved, he has
taught the same: that the servant of God, who has by his mercy his former
life purged by the forgiveness of his sins, must keep it from new infections
hereafter, by taking heed, and looking to the same, according to Gods word.

This is plain to them that have experience in the Christian life, that men
walking among so many snares of the devil, baits of the world, and meeting
with so infinite rebellions, and lusts of their own hearts, as cannot be
expressed, but as we find them out by observing them, are not without Luke
12.35.
which neither they needed to fear, neither should find, if this counsel of
the Prophet were precious to them.

And to this end, that they who have their hearts thus cleansed, as I have said,
may continue them so still, Great labor thus to keep the heart.
they must know that it is no idle occupation thus

And thus the heart being renewed and kept, it is easy to renounce evil, which
otherwise is impossible: for every one that lists may see, With this heart
easy to renounce evil.
both by Scripture, Psalm. 32.4, 5, 6. Hebr. 10.38. and by experience
(notwithstanding our affections are strong, unruly, and most hardly subdued)
with what ease we may renounce and forsake them, and have power over our will
and appetites, man has once felt damnation, the just reward of such a course;
and on the An ill governed heart cause of all disorder.
it is the evil governing of the heart, and letting it loose to folly,
wanderings, and needless fantasies, that causes it to be surfeited with all
manner of iniquity; and the most know not their hearts how deceitful,
corrupt, and unholy they be: I speak not only of the wicked of the world, as
the reader may see, I am feign often to put him in mind, but even of those
whom God has separated from the profane sort to serve him. And although,
according to that which they know of the will of God, they have some care to
avoid offenses; yet do not many of them seek, nor Little acquaintance with
our hearts brings great bondage.
and al for that they are so little acquainted with their hearts (which (in
many) are tuchie, froward, wilful, worldly in a dangerous manner) nor with
Gods mind and will: by means whereof, some maintain dangerous opinions: As
that the law, in no wise, is to be preached; that Papists and Protestants
disagreeing in fundamental points of religion, may yet agree together, and be
saved, and such like. Many also wax secure and slothful, and

Now these and such like, will any say, outstrayings in them, till God by
chastisements call them back again, that they be not the fruits of an ill
ordered heart? even as I said before, it is the ill governing of the heart,
that causes such excrements to come from it, and such disguising of the
person, in whom it breaks out so offensiuely; the which therefore had need to
be looked unto with all holy and religious care: which is the point now in
hand. And although it be the exceeding favor of God, An high grace to live
well, without the whip.
to correct such keep their hearts with all observation and diligence, more

And yet for all that has been said, I deny not, but that the dearest
children of God may possibly, nay easily, as we have seen, and are at
sometime holden under this bondage by Satan's subtlety, some more then others:
The faithful in part thus kept down.
so that for a time they shall be more drowned in the love of earthly things,
or be carried away by those which are sinful, then obtain a delight in
heavenly. But by the spiritual armor of Christians, if they be once well
exercised in it, they may and do thus far prevail, that they recover
themselves again, and get superiority over their hearts, and find and feel
that God is chief, and all in all with them, to delight and joy in him (as I
do not see tasted how good the Lord is) and then they shall cut off numbers of
such earthly and noisome pleasures, as they were wont to solace themselves with
amiss, before they considered more advisedly of it. But will any gather, that
I do make so light a matter of sin (whiles I thus speak) as though I
thought, it might be shaken off as a burre hanging on our garment; which the
holy Ghost says, Sin is not shaken off as a burre. Heb. 12.1.
cleaves fast to us, and is ever about us? For I know sin is raging, and the
devil is strong as a lion in his suggestions and assaults, and hardly
gainsaid, showing himself as an Angel of light, and we seely to discern,
and weak to resist: yet this I must say, that the mighty Lion of the tribe of
Judah is stronger, and 2. Cor. 2.11.
and greater is the spirit of God which is in us, if we confidently believe
and trust thereto, then the sin which deceives and inticeth us to the same.

But we have not this grace (ye will say) and therefore what is it to us? Grace
to vanquish sin. This may be obtained, and more and more from day to day.
we have had it (I say again, so many as I speak of) and have been taught,
and have a promise to overcome by faith: and therefore we may do so still: and
that better and better every day, the more experience we have. And although, I
grant that these things are hard to such as are not thoroughly seasoned David
does declare it, when he was constrained to cry out of Psalm. 51.5.
saying: Against thee (O Lord) I offended, and did this great evil: as if he
shoull have said; my sin had never broke out openly in the sight of men, if I
had not let loose my heart first, in the sight of God.

Such government therefore, as every of Gods servants according to the measure
of their knowledge, may have over their hearts, I wish might be kept and
continued: which doubtless, although it overcome not all temptations; yet should
it weaken them very much, and diminish their strength, so that the cursed
fruits of them should not so easily, nor so often break fourth to annoy them.
Luke 6.45.
The good treasury of the heart if it were carefully kept, would bring forth
better things. If ye ask what; my meaning is, not, that only in Gal. 5.22.
justly, peaceably, patiently, meekely, kindly, gently, A piece of heaven to
live with such as keep their hearts well. Psalm. 120.5.6.
who should be paterns of them. And who can say otherwise, but that it were a
little heaven, to deal with, and live among such? Even as we see it is a piece
of hell, to dwell with them that are of the contrary disposition: As Jacob
must have been constrained to abide with Esau, and as Gods people in their
captivity, did with the Edomits. God of Without it nothing sauory.
nor have favor nor approbation, no not even of common men. But of this we may
complain and cry out, till we have worn our tongues to the stump, without
redress. For the foul stains, and shameful blots which are contrary to the
forementioned virtues, are still usual (as they have been) almost every where,
both in many of the ministry and people, and so will be; as though godliness
were tied to the Church walls, and to the pulpit. And for a further
illustration and proof of the benefit of the well guiding of the heart, this I
have said.

Thus we may see that the heart being well ordered, Fruit of a well ordered
heart.
will neither suffer the Good mood.
this looking to our hearts by fittes, now and then, when the good mood takes
us, as it is too common, so it is most dangerous; and suffers not christians
to see, much less to enjoy one half of the sweetenes, which God bequeatheth
to them: I mean, if we govern and look to them, but as men in the world
commonly look to their outward serving of God: that is, to pray when night
comes, go to the Church when the Sabbath comes, to fast when Lent comes,
and repent when death comes. And so the wisdom of the flesh counsels us
to look to our hearts sometime: To rejoice always, to pray continually, in
all things to be thankful: as the Apostle commands, 1. Ephesians. 5.16. Day
and night to be meditating on the word of God, Psalm. 1.2.
and the variety of the infinite good things contained in it, and aiming at it,
as at a mark, how we may walk after it: Psalm. 119.15. Heart may always be
look to.
oh that is counted tediousnes, and bondage intolerable! And yet none of all
these precepts can be understood of the outward actions of our life, the ear,
and tongue cannot do these things always: but the heart may meditate,
pleases him to ask our hearts, as he does, when he says, My son give me
Pro. 23.26.
should we not think our selves happy that he will take any thing at our
hands, Psalm. 116.12.
when David being a King, wished that he had any thing that would please him?
Another cause why the heart should be looked to, other wise it will not be
ready to any duty.
This taking up of our delight in the looking to our hearts, as we are able,
should the more be sought after of us, if it were but for this cause, that if
we have not rule over them in our common actions thorough our life, we cannot
have them at commandment in the chief services of God. And from hence it is,
that christians of good hope, do complain, Note.
and that oftentimes with bitterness, that their hearts are so swarming usually
with vain thoughts, even whiles they are in hearing and praying: the reason
is, because at other times they are usually so occupied throughout which is
without measure evil) is mortified and assuaged first; How we may be fit to
pray and meditate.
and then still subdued after and restrained, and daily seasoned with good
meditations, and watched over, that it may be kept clean, and fit to duty.

The only way to curb our lusts, is to look to our hearts.
And thus I conclude; that the only way to curb up, and hold in our
intemperate lusts, and evil desires, that they break not out into further
ungodliness, is, that our hearts be first purified through believing that our
sins are forgiven us, and we made partakers of Christ his grace; and so our
consciences appeased: and that they be continued in the same good order
afterward.

Without this small fruit or comfort.
And they, who will not see and follow after this, but think to abstain from
sinful temptations, and serve God in an honest and godly life, howsoever the
heart be little looked after, shall reap a slight fruit of their travail;
neither lead the life which is approved of God (as has been said) nor find
the Matthew. 19.29.
But it comes to pass, as it is written, that as they serve him, so he
serves them: for as they serve not God in heart, and deed, Matthew. 6.6. and
15.7.
but in word; so their peace is not in heart and deed, but in word: their joy,
Note.
not in soul, but in countenance: a false comfort (and that appears in time
of need) as they gave to him a false worship. It is profitable for us to weigh
this: for such as cry out of us, as of Precisians, for teaching and urging
this, do prove, to their cost and shame oftentimes, that they had been happy
if they could have received this our doctrine, howsoever they reproach and
speak ill of our living. Who should not have branded themselves with

It has been showed, how the heart being kept pure and clean, the unruly
desires and appetites which arise from thence, shall be kept under in us, and
the power of them shaken and weakened: this is thus to be understood: that
even as, if our hearts were altogether pure, all our thoughts and desires This
clensing of the heart is not perfect.
so our hearts being purified and cleansed, but vnperfectlie, and in part, our
desires therefore cannot be (in the perfectest and best Christians) altogether
good and pleasing to God, but imperfect: that is to say, many of them evil, and
many which are holy, yet mixed with evil and corruption. Whereby it comes to
pass, that the holiest servants of God, both carry about them the noisome
remnants of sin whilst they live, Hebr. 12.1.
as loathsome rags (for they cleave fast unto them) and also they complain
and groan under them as heavy burdens, Romans 7.
saying, Oh wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us? And again, If
thou, O Lord, should look streightlie what is done amiss, who should be
able to abide it? Psalm. 130.3.
This clensing though weak, is a great privilege.
But yet least wicked and ungodly men should think this a small gift and
privilege, that Gods servants have in this, that they be in part renewed, and
so be brought to think, that there is no great difference betwixt the godly
and themselves, they are to know, that to have our hearts changed but in
measure, so as it be in truth, is a benefit of greater value, then the whole
world: and what marvel if the ouercomming of malice, and revenge (but one
affection) be of greater value, then the winning of a City? Proverb. 16.32.
And whereas they think there is no difference betwixt the one, and the other,
they may understand, that the poor Publicane, Luke 18.9.10.
and the vain glorious Pharisie.

CHAP. 13. Of the sum, and manner of handling this second part of a godly
life: and particularly of the rules to be observed for the effecting of it:
namely, knowledge and practice.
ANd thus (Christian reader) I have set down to thee, one part of the life,
which God requires of thee, whosoever thou art, who look for salvation at
his hands, being a believer in Christ's: that is, that thou should renounce
the evil lust which swarm every where in the world, and ungodly life
following the same: and how this should be done, and how far thou may
attain hereunto, even so far as man's frailty will permit, and not as the
unbelievers: only be sure that thou have this in some measure wrought in thee
in truth. The second general branch of the life of the believer.
But in all this thou have been taught shine as lights unto the world: Matthew.
5.16. Prouer. 19.22*
For this is the glory and beauty of a man, as Solomon says: That which is to
be desired of a man, is his goodness. Of this life therefore, which must be
wrought in stead of the former evil conversation, and brings forth fruits
of amendment, and consists in the doing of good works, I am now to entreat
More hard and excellent to do good, then to eschew evil.
And as this is more hard to attain to, then the other: (as hard as that is)
so it is far more precious, and beautiful to be doing of good, then to
avoid evil; though he is a rare man, who is not to be charged that way.

The which I say, first, that they may see what a great portion they have even
in this world, whom God has framed thereunto, how contemptible soever their
estate be to them, who know it not, neither can judge of it according to the
truth.

Not to rest in that.
And secondly, that they, who rest in it, and can say, they hope, yea see no
great evil in them, may know, that if they be not also given unto good

But the matter is much and large, which must needs be handled in the laying
forth of this point, to show fully and clearly for the simple hearted
Christian, what this part of a godly life is: therefore I will make no longer
stay in any thing (as near as I can) then I must needs.

First then, I will set down some general rules to direct thee how to
practice all duties commanded, Three branches of this second part of this
treatise, and which they are. Objections, if any be. Necessity of rules to
live well by.
which otherwise might be done to small purpose: then I will more particularly
show, wherein this part of godliness, or of doing good, does consist: that is to
say, in duties of holiness to God: and in

And where I say I will give thee rules which shall help thee to practice the
godly life, mark them well: for because this point is not well learned,
therefore many which would gladly live well, attain to it in no good sort to
bring it in credit with others, but meet with many vnsetlings,
discouragements, and coolings of their zeal, yea often times dangerous
outstrayings: neither find the going about it so pleasant, as toilesome and
tedious. And it is so in great part, because it is a work whereto they have
not been trained: but as they partly see by the examples of others, and partly
also do guess themselves, living by faith, or laboring to keep a good
conscience, which the Scripture so often and diligently commends unto us. And
for the better furthering of us herein, these virtues are necessary:
vprightnes, diligence, and constancy.

The first rule to live well, is knowledge.
And to begin with knowledge, as it is in all sciences, professions and trades,
that they who go about to practice therein, must needs have some clear and
good understanding of those things which appertain to the Knowledge what.
such an inlightening of the mind to understand the will of God about good and
evil, that we have with it spiritual wisdom to apply And to grow in this
knowledge.
as every one is able to conceive and attain unto that which I say, that both
he may grow and increase in this knowledge, who is endued with the greatest
measure of it already: and he may not be discouraged that has any true
measure of it at all. This knowledge, S. Peter says, must be joined with faith
(that particular duties, 2. Pet. 1.5. Romans 2.29.
as patience, temperance, and such other like may be practiced) and that not in
the letter only, but in the spirit. And it is that, of which our Savior
Christ says: Job. 13.17.
If ye know these things, happy are you if ye do them.

With this knowledge must go a delight in it. Prou. 2.4.
and desired as gold, and sought after as silver, and not weighed and esteemed
of us, as a thing common and of no value; will with her beauty so inflame our
hearts, and set us on fire with the love thereof, that we shall think long,
till we have been led by it to the practicing of that which we know (being the
way to the King palace) which is far more precious then the knowledge it
self, and will most certainly follow the same. Therefore Solomon says: Prou.
2.10. Without this delight no fruit of knowledge.
If knowledge once enter into thine heart, and wisdom delight thy soul, then
shall understanding preserve thee, and counsel shall keep and direct thee.
And they who have not this knowledge in greatest account, and delight not in
it, whatsoever learning, or Nichodemus, Ioh. 3 10.
a great man in Israel, and other of the Pharisees and Scribes is easy to be
seen.

And this is the cause why many which are learned, and of the Ministry, or
otherwise, witty, and acquainted with the Scriptures, are far from a godly
life indeed, for that they have not their hearts led by Gods spirit to love
and delight in this knowledge of Gods sacred will (unless it be for some earthly
advantage, which they hope for thereby, or for vain glory) more the^ all
other things beside: nor spiritual wisdom to square their actions thereby,
Knowledge an excellent gift.
or do I go about to deface and make both odious? No, I am far from it: but
rather I say freely, that they are great and excellent gifts of God: and by
many degrees, they may be nearer to an happy estate who have them, then such
as want them.

But yet this I say, that many which have them, have not therewith that But
without the salt of grace unsavory. 1. Cor. 13.1.
which only makes them sauourie, nor the love which only makes them fit to
edify (whereas knowledge without it, pusseth up, and the tongues of Angels to
express it, were but as a tinckling cymbale:) Neither have they eye-salue to
see that, except in humility they be content, yea glad to be led in their
daily conversation by the light and help of the same; they have no other
fruit of it then earthly and transitory: in ostentation, and comparing with
others, Thou have made me wiser then my teachers, Psalm. 119.99.
then the ancient, or men of experience, because I have kept thy
commandments. Therefore with the Wiseman I conclude, that the delighting in
this spiritual knowledge, which I have spoken of, is one special thing,
necessary to the leading of a godly and upright life; without Prou. 19.2.
so that they, who care but little for knowledge to guide them, have as small
pleasure in the godly life, whatsoever they think of themselves: to the shame
of such I speak it, The second rule.
who say in their hearts, they know enough for their parts (for if they knew
more, they must follow more.)

Therefore condemning both bare literal knowledge, without the love of, and
delighting in it; and much more the loathing and contempt of it: I proceed to
show, that with such a well affected heart, we must practice that which is
commanded us, Col. 1.10.
that is, seek to walk worthy the Lord, and please him in all things. And
this practice is the second rule to direct us to the life of the believer,

Practice, is first in an hearty desire.
But to begin with the first. We must have our hearts prepared and ready to be
set on work, and employed in any good service to God, or our brethren, as I
showed at large before in the renouncing of evil (and therefore the less
shall be spoken of it.) And this well ordering of the heart, is a most precious
grace of God, as without the which, no good can be well done. But when we have
such awe over our affections, as to choose, desire and delight

Therefore this inward readiness of the mind and fervent desire of the heart
(we see) must be blown up in us, and nourished as a sparkle or coal of fire:
that (as it may be obtained) there may be some ability and strength
thereunto. For the which cause, the Lord requires, that we love him with all
our heart, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
soul and might.

This strength although where it is not known, there is felt no want of it:
and that his business ought to be gone about fervently and with conscience;
Ierem. 48.10.
though they have no great example of such practice in the world, it will
harten them on with courage unto the same, by the help of his spirit, which
leads thereto. And yet if the zeal of Gods house consumed them, as the
Prophet says, it did him; this were no perfection, but that which ought to be
labored for, as every one may attain it; and in the whole course of men's
dealings and duties to God, some measure of it: in so much, as where it is not
found and inioyed of men, they should count it their sin.

And here this one thing is to be considered, that our affections of choosing,
Our affections must be stronger, as the good is greater.
(as in praying to God, rather then giving their due to men.) Also that (in an
equal comparison) the duties of holiness to God, be preferred before duties to
men: and with more bending our force and strength, when we go about to
perform them, rather then these.

And if it be demanded here, how we shall come by such grace, How we come by
this grace. Ephesians. 4.22. 2. Pet. 1.4.
as whereby we shall be able to embrace, choose, and follow the good, which we
know: I answer: that we received such grace, when we first believed in Christ;
whereby our hearts were purified, and cleansed from the strength of our old
corruption: to kill sin, so to quicken us to newnes of life. Romans 6.4.5.


So that if we feel it not usually, and ordinarily, we have lost and forgone
it, either through our forgetfulness, sloth or careless negligence: or if it be
through infirmity weakened in us, we ought to stir up our selves with
cheerful confidence, to the recovering of it again, and not to be content to
be spoiled of so great a treasure. But if this earnest desire after goodness,
and vehement zeal of honoring God by that which we know, be quenched:

I will now go forward with the second part, As we desire, so must we endeavor
to do good. Psalm. 122.8, 9.
which is a branch of the second rule, and helps forward to the leading of a
godly life; that the believers may, by it, be able to guide themselves aright,
and with much ease, in respect of those, who be not acquainted therewith. And
this it is, that in well doing, we stay not in our good desires, and in the
readiness of the heart to do good, but procure, accomplish and perform the
same duties outwardly; that Romans 6.12.13.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the
lusts thereof, neither give ye your

All parts of our bodies given to serve God.
By this we see, that not only the heart with her members, that is, the
cogitations and desires in those which are justified by faith, must be
consecrated to the honor and service of God, but also the body with the parts
thereof; the ear in hearing, the tongue in speaking, the eye in seeing, etc.
that so we should be his wholly: and in one part of our life, as well as
another, do that which pleases him.

No man doubts, but that we should do good works, as well as have Make a
trade of godliness. 1. Tim. 5.
but that we should be diligently given unto every good work, and make a trade
of godliness, to apply and follow it; so that while we do one good duty, we
should not neglect another (which in good husbandry about things of this life
is much regarded:) that few will grant, or be ready to yield thereto: yea and
that our conversation should be in heaven, that is, that our common course of
life should be heavenly, 2. Cor. 6.3.
whilst we live here upon earth: and that we should not only give no occasion
of offense in any thing, but also in all things seek to approve our selves as
the faithful servants of God. Thus much of the rules: the virtues which
further us herein follow, which are, vprightnes, diligence, and constancy or

The first virtue is vprightnes.
The first then of these virtues, which should make our practice both inward and
outward more pure and perfect, is vprightnes, and that is, when in a single and
true heart, we love, choose and desire, and do any good thing, specially
because God commands, Deutr. 18.13 Ephesians. 6.14. John 1.17.
and for that end. This virtue was commended by our Savior in Nathaniel, when
he said: Behold a true Israelite, in whom there is no guile. Many actions,
otherwise fervent enough, for want of this sincerity, are but froth (as were
the hot enterprises of Iehu against idolaters) and cause them who have long
pleased themselves therein, at length, to cry out of their doings (though
admirable in the eyes of others)

There are many starting holes in the den of our hearts, and many ways we
can deceive ourselves, that the good which we do, is not as it seems: but as
it is not all gold that does glister, so the touchstone of Gods word does find
much dross therein: Pretenses in good actions.
yea, the Lords weights of the Sanctuary do prove them light and windy,
which in our judgments and persuasions were weighty and substantial.

We are brought often times to be earnest in good causes, and to further them, as
for friendship of others, and for company sake: so for malice, for our
commodity, vain glory, and for fear of some sore punishment or danger,
Psalm. 130.3.
or other fleshly respects should be mixed therewith (so as we be not ruled by
them) for otherwise our best actions are mixed with corruption.

And thus I conclude this point as the former, and say with the Apostle: 1.
Cor. 1.12.
This shall be our rejoicing (if we have any worthy the speaking of) that in
simplicity, and godly pureness we have our conversation in the world among men:
This virtue therefore (I mean faithfulness, and vprightnes) going with our
practice, in performing the duties which we know, shall both set our selves
about them with more roundnes, and (as far as they can be discerned) shall
cause them to show more beauty to others, and raise more admiration in

Now if this should be thought needeles of some which shall read it, that I
speaking of the true Christian, do urge and require vprightnes and singlenes
of heart in practizing godliness, seeing I have said as much before in the
chapter of renouncing sin: I answer, that it is alike requisite in both: and
that as well we show integrity in the practice of good duties, as in the
forsaking of evil. And thus with the rules, I have set down one of the
virtues namely vprightnes: which is necessarily to be learned and kept of all
such as having obtained the gift of true faith, do set themselves to lead a
godly life: I say, such as have true faith, because no other have any
possibility Necessity of those rules and virtues.
no better then the offering of Caine; although it shall seem to thy self, to
be as holy as the sacrifice of Abel.

But if thou have tasted aright of this gift of faith, and then going about to
lead a godly life; thou being soundly instructed in these rules, before set
down, and persuaded that they with the virtues here added, must guide and
help thee to the right performing of all duty; then (even as skill and
understanding of the rules in any science or trade, with willingness and
endeavor, makes the workman fit to use and practice it) thou shall find
great Unarmed venturing abroad is cause of sore wounds.
that makes them come home with so many deadly wounds, fearful falls, and
grievous offenses, (I speak of the better sort of people, as well as of the
common professors, though the worst seldom feel them) and they shall never
find it otherwise till they do better address themselves and be furnished,
as has been said, to this great work of Christianity.



CHAP. 14. Of the aunswering of some objections about the former doctrine, and
of the other two virtues which help to a godly life.
Object. We cannot do as we desire.
AS first this, whereas these rules have been said to be able to carry the
Christian believer, in a well ordered course of living, some object thus: It
falls out often times, that we have a very good desire to do that, which we
know, pleases God; but we find no strength to perform. And Answer. 1.
But this I say, if this be often and earnestly desired of thee (as it was of
Paul) Gods grace shall be sufficient for thee.

And further, if thou have never so fervent a desire to overcome evil, and to
do that which thou know to be good, and yet have not thy heart possessed of
the favor of God, 2. The best desire without assurance of Gods help is vain.
and taken up therewith, but stand waueringly affected about that matter,
thy desire is not that desire which I have spoken of: neither therefore able to
help thee in that which thou would; it being no fruit of faith. 1. John
5.4.
For this it is, that overcomes all lets in the world, and no other thing,
even this faith I mean, whiles by it we are persuaded that Christ Jesus so
loves us, that he is ready to do any thing which is expedient for us:
because of the great favor that he bears us, whereby we are made able also,
Phil. 4.
and in whom we can do all things, as shall be expedient

For as nothing can separate it from us, so he thinks nothing too good, or
too precious for us. So that he, into whose heart his love is shed plentifully,
is persuaded, that as he has saved him from the greatest danger of hell; so
he will much more save him from the smaller, of being overcome of his corrupt
lusts: and that he, who has bestowed by free grant and sure promise, the
greatest benefit upon him, namely, the kingdom of heaven; will not deny him
the smaller, Romans 5.10. Romans 8.30.
that is, grace to live Christianly here on earth. For he that has given us
Christ, by whom we have the former, how shall he not with him give us other
things also? And if, not as we would, yet that is best which he gives.

Now for the other part of the objection, that Paul himself did not find
grace to overcome the rebellion of the old man, Why Paul overcame not all
rebellion.
that is, his corrupt nature: I say, it is true, that fully and perfectly he
did not: to the end, that he might always have a mark of his unworthiness, and
sin remaining in him, and thereby remember, that it was of only mercy that he
was pardoned, and the grace of God, that kept him from falling away from him.
And for both these causes, 2. Cor. 12.9.
that he might from time to time find sweetness still in the forgiveness of his
sins. But although he was not perfect here, as an Angel; yet was he not
carried of his lusts into gross iniquity (as some dream, because he cried out
and complained, I am carnal, Paul was not carried into gross iniquity.
sold under sin: O wretched man that I am!) And it was necessary that he
should mislike and be grieved with the smallest rebellion or resistance of
goodness, and with some unfitness to his calling which he felt sometimes, and to
other good duties: but yet Gods grace was sufficient to keep him, that he fell
not into

But I have in effect answered this already by another occasion. We may look
for the like grace that Paul had in our measure.
Now to apply this to our selves, and not to be glutted with it as many are,
I say; that we likewise through the same grace in our measure, may look with
good cheer to be delivered from the yielding to our wicked lusts, which most
dangerously incumber us, as he was from his: we being resolved, that our most
loving father (for the tender care he has over us) is always looking down
from heaven, and beholding who is upright hearted toward him (how weak
soever) that he may show himself strong toward him, 2. Chron. 16.9.
and thereby supply his weakness. And thus the desire to keep a godly course
being soundly planted 1. Chron. 28.^
to endeavor at least (which God will accept) though we do not always prevail
over such strong corruptions, as oftentimes for want of such grace do master
us. But in thus speaking, I show what Gods children may confidently look for,
not what every one obtains. And except the sin of incontinencie, against
the which God has provided a lawful remedy, 2. Cor. 12.9. Romans 7.25.
we have both promise from God, and we by the power of our faith, do enjoy
such victory over other sins, as whereby we may walk without just reproof
amongst men, and keep our peace toward him also: this being added, 1. John.
2.1.
and do recover our hope and hold again.

Thus I have showed, how they who have a will and good desire, may look for
strength also to perform in some good sort, the duties which seem so
difficult and impossible to them, so that they need not be greatly troubled
with that objection: howsoever there are many, and those also favorers of
Christian religion, who never find nor feel the same. But because many of
Gods dear servants find it not thus often times, neither are able to say, Many
weak^ discouraged for want of this victory.
that they may feel and find: Many know not their liberty.
and how their estate may be bettered, and their spiritual

Besides, many good people do not know this, in a long time what God has
bequeathed them: nay, many of them never know one of the many sweet liberties
and privileges of Gods children; but only receive so much light from the
father of light (and therefore are rightly called the children of light) as
whereby they see the way to his kingdom: Ephesians. 5.8.
and according to the knowledge they have of his will, thereafter they declare
and show it forth in their lives; but nothing as they might, and as some others
do.

Now to proceed to the other virtues which further our practice of a godly
life: such as receive and desire to attain to the grace which I have The two
next virtues, diligence and constancy.
and to abide constant therein, that they may by these two virtues adjoined,
nourish all good desires, and holy endeavors, after they be once planted in
them: and hold out the contrary, whilst they be not yet greatly troubled with
them: and set on work their knowledge in such practice, as it may well be
seen whose servants they are.

Diligence and constancy bring great matters to pass.
This diligence and constancy, in whatsoever they be used, they bring great
things to pass, whether it be in any trade, or in the searching out of things
obscure and hard to be found out, when only the light of reason is 2. Pet. 1.5.
Peter speaking of the godly life, teaches that all diligence must be added
thereto: Give all diligence (says he) to join with your faith virtue, as if
he should say, that all is lost without it: and Jeremy says, that he is
cursed, Ierem. 48.10. Iam. 1.25.
that does Gods business negligentlie: And of constancy, what says S. James?
He that looks in the perfect law of liberty, and abides therein, if he be
not a forgetful hearer, but a dooer of the work, shall be blessed in his
deed, that is, in so behauing himself.

What diligence.
Therefore, by the first of these two, namely, diligence, let them be ready to
take all occasions and opportunities to the doing of some good, and to shun
idleness and unprofitableness, that so they may bring forth much fruit
redeeming the time wisely, 2. Pet. 1.
Ephesians. 5.15.16.
while they may: and that with a thousand times more gain then others do: and
not as slothful, and unthrifty persons, Romans 16.19. and 12.9.
pass it over idly and unprofitably, for the pleasing and satisfying of their
foolish appetite, for the present time.

Constancy. John. 8.31. and 15.5.
By the second, namely, constancy, and continuance, let them not only keep
their hearts and lives in the same good estate, which by diligence they have
already nourished in themselves, but also wax more fruitful, and Gain of
these. Revel. 2.19. 2. Tim. 4 8.
until their latter years be better then the former, and until they have
finished their course with joy. And being once acquainted with the gain that
these bring with them, they shall do as the merchants (who having their minds
set upon their advantage, suffer not themselves to range after pleasures, but
busily follow their trade which brings in commodity) so Many pay dear for
their liberties.
And because they account it bondage to be held in after that manner,
therefore they find that they pay dear for their liberties, when they be
after constrained to repent the seeking of them, Note.
and yet cannot easily recover their inward peace which they lost for them, nor
shake them off again, when yet most gladly they would.

And for want of these two, and through the contrary, Want of these dangerous.
sloth and inconstant vnsetlednes, in that they do not settle themselves to
one good thing or other, even the most of the godly do not find that sweet
fruit in their life, which is to be found, namely, of safety under Gods
protection from time to time: but by improuidence, and wearines of well doing,
they do by Solomon in two words has fitly expressed them both, saying: Let
the fear of the Lord be in thy heart continually: Prou. 23.17.
which is as much, as a diligent care to please him with constancy therein.

Thus as I have said, to these former rules and virtues which guide us to live
godly, these two are commanded, diligence and constancy. By the one, Ephesians.
5.6.
that we be readily prepared, as we ought to practice good, and so resist
evil: whereas slacknes and no care, or too little, is condemned. By the other,
that thereby we may continually go forward in doing good, and fleeing evil:
1 Thessalonians. 5.3.6. Gal. 5.7.
wherein all staying, ficklenes, or going backward, is very dangerous. Hereto
1. Cor. 15.58.
Awake to live righteously, and sin not, he adds, Be steadfast and
immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord: knowing that your
labor is not in vain. And after; Watch, 1. Cor. 16.13.
stand fast in the faith, quite your selves like men, and be strong. And this
is necessary above all things, that so we may become that simplicity which
is meet for them who are in Christ.

Now that this our diligence and care in all good duties ought to be for
continuance, and even while life lasts; let us know, that the Lord
commands it to all his children: according to that which is written, Matthew.
24.12. Ioh. 8.31. and 15.7.
He that abides to the end, he shall be saved. And in another place, If ye
continue in my and, Ask what ye will, and it shall be done to you. And yet
this might be spoken to small purpose, if the Lord had not promised as much to
his faithful servants; that they shall have grace to persevere given them from
above: as he says by the Apostle: He that has begun this good work in you,
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ: Phil. 1.6.
Also to the Thessalonians: Faithful is he that has called you, 1 Thessalonians.
5.24.
which will also do it. If it be demanded, how he will enable them, seeing
there are many fears in their life of final falling away: the same Apostle
answers this, in the To the end ye may walk worthy of the Lord, (and please
him in all things) and be fruitful in all good works, Col. 1.10.11.
and increase in the acknowledging of God, ye must be strengthened with all
might through his glorious power unto all patience and long sufferance with
ioyfulnes. And S. John speaks to the same purpose, 1. John 4.4.
thus: Greater is he that is in you (that is, the spirit of God) then he that
is in the world, that is, the devil. The fruit of such a course is both an
happy end here (as it is written: Psalm. 37.37.
Mark the end of the upright and just, for the end of that man is peace) and
happiness for ever after. As we read where Paul says: I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, and kept the faith: 2. Tim. 4.8.
from henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord
But I have been long in the former points, and by occasion have showed
throughout the whole discourse of the godly life, that it must be continued to
the end: I cease now to say any more.

Thus having set down these virtues which must guide us to practice the godly
life throughout our whole course, it may easily be seen how every man who is
come thus far, may prove himself a repentant person, and be apt and fit to
bring forth the fruits of amendment in his particular actions, and how his
whole conversation may be such as may beseem a man of God, so far as humane
frailty will suffer: wherein, because we follow Other two virtues, humility
and meeknes. Matthew. 11.29.
we must know, that all our duties must be practiced in humility and meeknes:
for so he says, in submitting your selves to my doctrine, and in leading the
godly life, learn of me to be humble and meek.

As if he should say, if ye be hautie and high minded, so as ye despise the
simplicity of my doctrine, and think it too base a thing for you to be
subject to; or froward and intractable, that in some points ye will hold back,
though in some other ye be obedient, ye can never live godly, as God requires
of you. These therefore must have no place in Christians, either Ministers, or
private persons, but the contrary virtues, as I have said: which are often times
in the Scriptures set down together, Ephesians. 4.2. Col. 3.12.
as well as in this place: that we may

These always necessary.
And these two are not particular virtues which sometime only may have use, but
such fruits of the spirit as necessarily are required in all actions: so that
at no time, humblenes of mind, and meeknes of spirit may be wanting. All these
virtues (I confess) are common, as well to the forsaking of evil, as to the
doing of good: and so understand it, though it be put out of place. But I set
them down here, seeing the former part of this treatise was so large. And

The Lords service is not like the disordered service of many unreformed
gentlemen, where, besides the attending at table and on horseback, the
attenders may run where they will: but it is like to a well governed family,
where all are appointed their office and place, in one thing after another to
be well occupied, and kept from idleness; and yet not discharged thereby, to do
what they will after. So our Savior teaches it should be with his servants,
as with a servant in a family: who when he has wrought in the field, Luke
17.^.
is not by and by discharged of other duties, but then does business at home:

So that the end of one work is the beginning of another: Deuteronomy. 18.
and yet al without toil and tediousnes. For so has God provided, that his
servants may be merry at their work, yea whatsoever they shall put their hand
unto; and the more duties they do, redeeming the time from idleness, and
unprofitableness, Matthew. 11.30. Deuteronomy. 12.18.
the merrier. There is much work in the Lords family, as there are many places
to serve in: And the slouthful and idle ones, howsoever they can have place
sometime in earthly government, yet are they expelled from thence. And this is
that which Saint Peter warns us, that we be neither idle, nor barren, John.
15.5.
And herein is our heavenly father glorified, if we bring forth much fruit.

To this end we must know that Christianity is fitly compared to a trade,
wherein men go from one work to another: and a Christian has many sins to
weed out, and to labor against, and therefore not carelessly to mar all his
work in an hour, that he has well followed sundry days: as he that loses
all that he has by a cast at dice. He has also many duties to look unto,
toward God, his neighbor, and himself: wherein it shall be found requisite
for him to be careful, after the doing of one, to go to another: and Ephesians.
4.3.
And as the Physicians do well direct, that for the preserving of bodily
health, it is good to rise from our meat with an appetite, and not to
ouercharge the stomach: so it is none of the meanest rules for maintaining our
souls health, to keep always an appetite to some new duty, when we have
performed the old, and not to be so wearied in the doing of one, that we be
utterly unfit to go about another.

This one thing being thus from time to time carefully regarded, shall of
their spiritual welfare to all that practice it, and a furtherance of a

CHAP. 15. Of some particular duties pertaining to God directly in the first,
second, third, and fourth commandments.
The second point in this second part of godliness, wherein this performing of
good duties does consist.
NOw the rules and virtues having been set down, which help to the practice of
a godly life, I will show in what points this life consists, and set down a
sum of it: but

But yet to help the weak, that they may see how to draw out of this whole
treasury, and rich hoard of the commandments, for the better ordering of
their ways, through their whole course, that which shall be necessary

Duties toward gods person.
And first of all, to begin with the duties of the first commandment (the life
and light of all the rest) it is first required, that we seek and desire to
know God, Knowledge of God.
though not perfectly (which we cannot do) yet as he may be known of us, as
his word does reveal him to us: that in his nature and properties, Psalm.
73.18.
so that, they say with the Psalmist: Whom have I in heaven (O Lord) but thee?
and who is he on earth, whom I desire in comparison of thee? So that none is,
as the Lord, unto them.

We thus cleaving unto him, and knowing our selves to be safe under his Trust.
that he will help us in all our necessities and tribulations. And from this
confidence, arise many other Christian duties: Hope.
as to hope and look for that help which in confidence we assure our selves
of, from the Lord: yea although means be wanting, yet we give glory unto God;
Dan. 3.
as the three children which being cast into the burning furnace, committed
themselves unto his protection, although at that time they saw no likelyhoode
of help at all. Again, through this confidence, we are not afraid, no not in
greatest dangers, but are patient, Patience.
and without murmuring hold our peace, because we know, Psalm. 3.7.
the Lord has done it: and that which is more, we count it good for us that
we are afflicted, Phil. 4 10. Romans 52. Col. 1.11. Joy. Phil. 4.4. Psalm. 4.4.


And seeing we behold, how all good things do flow to us from God,
Thankfulness. 1. These. 5.18.
therefore we offer unto his majesty, this other duty, in all things to be
thankful: namely, with a kind heart testifying, that all our welfare
comes Request.
And when he thus bountifully imparteth to us all good things, which yet are
but the smaller fruits of his favor, (and yet, if they were not enough, he
would send us more and greater) who doubts that with all our hearts and
strength, we are affected to love him, more then wife, children, house, land,
Love.
or whatsoever is of greatest price in the world beside? yea that in comparison
thereof, the best things of price, are reckoned but as doung? Phil. 3.8. Cant.
2.4.5. Psalm. 16.
And in token of this true love to God, we give our selves to solace our souls
in him, as David, even when he was in danger of his life, did comfort himself
in his God, Desire Gods presence.
but most of all desiring to enjoy his presence in heaven, which shall be with
fulness of pleasures for evermore.

And further, because all which know God, and put their confidence in him, and
love him, are overwhelmed as it were, with the infinitnes and excellency of
his glorious majesty, therefore they are drawn to behave themselves more
reverently, and uprightly before him, Reverence.
then before the greatest potentates in the world: and therefore are prepared
to walk before him continually in an holy and childlike fear, Fear. 1. Pet.
1.17. Act. 9.31.
desiring that he will teach them by

Now besides these duties of holiness which we owe directly to the person of
God, merely spiritual and inward, The second commandment.
there are other whereby we worship him outwardly, which also are parts of this
holiness toward God: it follows therefore, now to mention some of the chief
points of this external worship of God both public and private; and in what
manner it should be used: Gods worship.
but before it is to be known, that he will allow of no other means of Isay
1.12. John 4.23.
And therefore the office of the ministry it self (by which God is truly
worshipped publicly) must not be an office to sacrifice and say mass for the
sins of the quick and dead (which Gods word plainly condemns) neither
must it be any other then that which God acknowledges for his: Ministry.
that is, a publishing and preaching of the Gospel, and glad tidings of
salvation by Jesus Christ to penitent sinners and believers, Romans 1.16.
and a ministering of the sacraments, which he has ordained for the comfort of
them.

Such ministers they must be at the least, which serve him, whatsoever graces
Public prayers.
with prayers by voice expressed, thanksgiving, confessions of sins, Censures.
and singing of Psalms, the fruit of the lips; with the censures of
admonition, and excommunication, as cause does require: which I knit together
for brevity sake, seeing I have only taken in hand, to set down shortly,
what the parts of Gods outward worship are, (not largely to handle them) that
all may see the better hereafter, when I shall come to it, how

Public fasts.
To these may be added, public fasts, when the people of God by some especial
calamities either hanging over them, or already upon them, or for grievous
transgressions against God, do abase and humble themselves more earnestly and
fervently, Joel. 2.12. Extraordinary thanks.
to entreat God against them: Also public thanksgiving for some rare benefit
or deliverance sent upon the Church: In all which public actions the Lord
requires straightly, Hester. 9.
besides, that we should love, desire and procure them by all means that we
can; so, that we show Luke 18.13. John 11.41.
lifting up of our hands, or eyes, as occasion is offered; so casting down of
lifting up the countenance with cheerfulness, as the matter heard requires.

Private worship.
An other part of Gods worship is, when the most of these now spoken of, are
used privately of us: Also the talking and conferring of the word of God, in
mutual instructing, admonishing, exhorting, comforting, or any way else which
is fit for edifying; as singing of Psalms, and thanksgiuings in Christian
families, both jointly and severally, according to their particular occasions
and oportunities, and namely at meat and at rest. And to conclude,

But seeing the Scripture teaches, that he is not a Jew, which is so only in
the eyes of men; neither is the drawing near with the lips and body only,
Manner spiritual.
spiritual: therefore the manner of doing these duties in Gods outward
worship, is also to be learned (as in a word I have touched before) that as in
themselves they are good and godly; so they may, as they come from the
believers, be also sweet and sauourie in the Lords nostrils, namely, that (as
they proceed from faith) so they may be seasoned with holy affections, as often
as

So that we are to know this, that when we shall set upon any part of his
worship, which now has been spoken of, it is highly displeasing to him, to go
about the same lightly, rashly, falsely, hypocritically, and unprofitably: for
that were abominable to him, as a dead sacrifice. But contrarily, we must use
them with all high reverence, being prepared rightly before: well affected in the
using of them: and aiming at the most profitable end which he has appointed,
that so we may be approved and allowed of him.

Now if I should particularly declare how and after what manner, every part of
the outward worshipping of God should be used, as I have showed in How Gods
worship is to be used. The word. Act. 26.18. Preparation. 1. Pet. 2.1. Iam.
1.21. Act. 10.33.
but in some few of the principallest particulars I will show it, that thereby
may be seen what is required in the rest. In the preaching of the word, being
the way to inlighten us, first with faith; and after, to settle and establish
us in the truth; we should come prepared to the hearing of it after this
manner: laying aside all filthiness of heart and hands, which might hold out
wisdom, we being ready and desirous to receive it with a hungry soul: and
therefore not rashly, and little regarding what we go about; neither coming
with a captious and malicious purpose to hear. In the action it self, we
should be thus affected: In hearing. Isai. 61. Act. 2.37.
with our whole soul to mark and weigh the matter, that so we may be touched
2 Thessalonians. 3.4.
and receive comfort by them: by doctrine of duty, to be fully resolved to
practice it: and therefore not to have our heads full of other matters, running
upon our profits and pleasures, or in hypocrisy: and though we take some
delight in that which we hear, yet not to be contented to rest therein,
without the feeling of the true work of it in us. After we have heard, Having
heard.
we should give all diligence to muse and confer of the things which we have
heard, examining them by the Scriptures, with the good men of Thessalonica:
Act. 17.11.
and finding agreement betwixt both, with more boldness to set our selves
forward in every good

This is the right manner of hearing the word of God preached, which the Lord
has taught his people to endeavor after: as whereby he warranteth them
singular fruit and blessing. And although this be but the use and help of one
part of Gods worship; yet if we were alike directed in all the rest, how
greatly (think we) might a Christian be helped and enabled to the true
worshipping of God by the same? which now being not known of many, neither
reverently practiced, is a thing most unsavory and irksome How conference
and reading should be used.
that with high reverence in hope to get profit thereby, and praying earnestly
for the same, we should go about it: whiles we are at it, withdraw our minds
from all other things; and after, apply it profitablie and readily to use it.

How the Lords Supper should be received.
To the Lords Supper, if we desire to find it (as it is in it self an
heavenly banquet) we should see that we come in our wedding garment, meet
guests for such a table, apparrelled with the robe of faith and repentance;
without which, the Lord of the feast will neither look upon us, nor welcome
us, but expel us rather. Matthew. 22.13.
In the time of our receiving, we should be heavenly minded,

How prayer should be made. Matthew. 6.9.
Of prayer also, which shall be more fully spoken of in another place, there is
an holy and reverent use to be made (though many are little acquainted with
it) namely, that we should seriously weigh Gods almighty power, and how
fatherly he is affected to us, which two things should be our pillars to lean
unto, so that we may be the better prepared thereto: that whilst we 1. Tim.
2.8.
feel our selves effectually moved to lift up pure heart and hands unto him
with cheerefulnes: Psalm. 116.13.
and after blessing received, be made more readily disposed to pray often with
thanksgiving. And these are some of the chief duties to God, and in such
manner, as is before mentioned, they are to be performed unto him.

The third commandment. Luke 1.75.
Now further we are commanded not only in his worship, but also in our whole
life, every where to seek his glory: for so he has willed us, that we should
frame the whole course thereof holilie throughout the six days, that so we
may glorify him therein. And who does not see, that this should walk worthy
the Lord in all things, as in the worshipping of him both publicly and
privately, as we have been directed before? That so there may be in these two
commandments, fully laid forth unto us, a sum of all outward duties, which
in the six days we ought to perform unto him: and in the due practice of
both, we may show forth the fruit of that knowledge, acknowledgement, faith,
fear, and love of God, and all other inward graces, which we have bin taught
to honor him with, in our hearts, by the first commandment. Therefore, as I
said, the duties enjoined us in this third, do most fitly go with those of the
two former: that not only in the time of preaching and prayer, and Ioshu. 7.19.
as Joshua exhorted Achan to do; To be short. Whether we eat or drink, 1.
Cor. 10.31. In all things to glorify God.
or whatsoever we do else, all is to be done to the glory of his name. And in
mentioning the commonest of our actions, as our eating and drinking, he
excepteth none; to the end, that we may carry our selves in a stayed and well
ordered course continually, whilst we show that in the smallest matters, and
in our actions, which seem least weighty, we be afraid to offend: as in our
common talk, it be sauourie, and for edifying. And seeing we use the name of
God very often both in our common speech, and particularly in an oath; his mercy,
justice, Col. 4.4. Psalm. 118.5.12.
wisdom, and power are to move our hearts, as often as we have cause to speak
of him, with all high reverence to use the same. But more especially, In an oath.
when just occasion of swearing by him is offered, we should diligently
consider the person of the Lord, how he is a revenger of all such as take his
holy name in vain: and the matter it self, about which we swear, that we
do it in truth, in righteousness and judgment. In truth, In truth.
so that whatsoever be affirmed or denied, may truly and for certainty be
affirmed or denied: and whatsoever be vowed or promised, be promised and vowed
without fraud, and simply. In righteousness.
and that which is agreeable to the will of God. In judgment, In judgment.
that it be done advisedly, not lightly, or rashly, but that we may take
comfort in performing that great duty aright, namely, that we have made
known the truth, which being made known by us, has cut off some great doubt
and controversy.

And so should we in the beholding of the works of God (as the firmament;
with the Sun, Moon, and Stars: the earth with her furniture, In beholding
Gods works.
as the corn, grass, trees, and her large prospect) take sweet feeling of
Gods Majesty, and beauty which shines in them, rejoicing with reverence,
that he has given us this clear glass to behold his face in (although this
we

Seeing therefore we have daily use of these, I thought good to make mention of
them (yet in as few words as I could so large matters) how we ought to use
them: let the residue be learned by ordinary hearing those, who being
furnished with gifts fit for this purpose, are appointed of God to make his
people sound and skillful in them: that they may show to the world, that the
honoring of God, as it is set forth in his word, is another manner of life
then the world is acquainted with, and so brings another manner of

Thus I have spoken of the behavior which inwardly and outwardly, both in Gods
holy worship and in our whole conversation toward God directly, we are to
show in the whole six days throughout our life.

That which follows next, is that part of holiness and obedience which is to
be given to the Lord, one day in seven: The 4. commandment.
Nothing differing from all the three former, Holy keeping of the seventh day.
Exodus 20.10.
saving that, all our own works though lawful on other days,

But because the Lord knows how prone, and ready we are to wearines of well
doing, Variety of holy exercises.
therefore he has not only appointed some part of this day to be passed in
public, and other some in private exercises of godliness; but also he has
given us great variety of both sorts, that so the whole time may be bestowed
without tediousnes and toil; even from our preparing our selves to the
sanctifying of it, at our vprising, unto the last duties at our lying down:
which merciful and wise regard of his, over us, if it cannot move us to give
our selves to practice this part of holiness (whatsoever our excuses be) we
plainly show, that our minds are earthly and carnal, and

Public assemblies.
The public duties, are the reverent assemblies of Christians in the preaching
of the word, in prayer, and administering of the sacraments, on that day
especially to be used, howsoever on other days by occasions often intermitted:
All of them are most blessed helps for the establishing of us in an holy life.
Of the private, some do particularly concern our selves alone: some are as
well for the benefit of others, Private exercises.
as for our own comfort: for our selves, we are to meditate on the works of
God, upon his wonderful works, which he has done for the sons of men;
Psalm. 92.
that so we may feel his goodness many ways;

We are also to think of the doctrine which we have heard, that it may the
easilier be imprinted in us. And on this day we are more freely to consider of
our estate: how we proceed in the religious keeping of our covenant with God:
and how we grow in the assurance of Gods mercy, and our redemption: or whether
we go not back, or stand not at a stay. And every way as our need shall most
require, we are to use our examinings of our selves, meditations and
thanksgiuings on this day, not only for our present comfort; but for our more
fruitful walking all the week following.

CHAP. 16. Of certain duties to men, in the fifth, sixth, and seventh
commandment, the obeying whereof is a part of the godly life.
NOw follows another branch of the second part of this godly or Christian
life, requiring of us righteous dealing toward all men: Where by the way, this
is to be carefully Duties to God and man not to be separated.
who delighting in hearing the word preached, and prayer, and reading (which
are duties directly appertaining to God; yet are very negligent in performing
that which is due to men; as in doing works of charity to the poor, living
peaceably and comfortably in marriage, or in shunning hasty judging of their
brethren, Iam. 1.27.
it plainly testifies that there is in them a wilful disobedience against
God, and that the best of their works are in vain.

And before I enter into the particular duties of righteousness to all sorts of
men, it is here as in the fittest place to be taught, Bear love to al.
which cannot be afterward bear love toward all men even our greatest
enemies; from which ground and root of love, we may be ready to perform all
the duties, which we shall know to belong to them from us, required
particularly in the commandments following: And secondly, that we join with
it an other general virtue, Brotherly kindness to Christians.
which is brotherly kindness to Christians, which are brethren with us, which is
an holy and especial love of one faithful brother toward another. And these
two, 1. Pet. 1.7.
are those which Saint Peter speaks of, when he says, join with brotherly
where this virtue is, they have learned to give every one of the faithful
their brethren (according to the knowledge wherewith God has enlightened them)
the several duties required in the second table. A rare and singular gift of
God; which if we could see the practice of it, what light of good example it
gives, and what profit, it would inflame us wonderfully to the practicing of
it.

Now follow the several parts of righteousness to men, as they are distinctly
set down in the six commandments following, The fifth commandment.
to be performed of Christians, and which help to make up the second part of a
godly life. In all which, Many duties to our neighbor.
although there are many more particular duties to be mentioned

Duties of inseriours.
And first the duty which men owe as they are inferiors to others, and the
superiors to them again, come here to be considered, both generally, and one
particularly toward another. Where this is required of all inferiors, that
they so carry themselves in their whole course to them, which by Gods
appointment are above them, or excel them, that they may show in their whole
course that they honor them: for so the will of God is, not to require

Common to all inferiors.
The duties in general, which belong to all inferiors, do arise from this
one, as from a fountain, that is to say, subjection: which is a voluntary
acknowledging, Subjection. Romans 13.1.
that they are set under those, which are their superiors by Gods ordinance
and appointment. The which when men are persuaded of, they will readily go
under any duty that appertains to them. And Reverence.
as to think highly of them for that person, which God has put upon them: and
therefore also to give them that outward reverence, which is due to them: as to
rise and bow to them, Job. 32.4.
to give them the higher place, liberty to speak before them, and to give
them reverent titles; and submitting themselves to them every way, as it is
meet: which if in love it be not regarded, and the benefit, which God has
appointed thereby to come to their inferiors, considered, that so there may be
a preserving of the dignity and worthiness of such persons and places amongst
men, all confusion and barbarousnes must needs ensue and follow.

Superiors duty.
And for this cause the superiors again for their parts must see, that they
carry themselves toward them as brethren, in all courtesy, saving their
authority: and further also that they go before them, both in all innocence,
and example of good life. And because there are some superiors to us by civil
authority, Diverse kinds of superiors.
as princes and other magistrates; and some ecclesiastical, as Church
officers; some by nature as parents; some by age, as the gray headed, Subjects
and servants.
one toward the other. To such as have authority over them, inferiors must
submit themselves, in bearing their rebukes, and receiving their corrections
willingly, and without resistance, by not answering again, Tit. 2.6.
by stomach or countenance; yea though they suffer wrongfully: which
commandment Saint Peter giving to servants toward their masters, 1. Pet. 2.19.
who are not superiors of the highest power, or of greatest authority, does
much more bind other inferiors to be subject thereto.

obedient only to their lawful commandments; Romans 13.6. Obedient.
so that God be not thereby deprived of his due: for this cause subjects pay
tribute to their Princes: and hold both their goods and lives so, as they be at
their commandment. And servants, which will testify and show, that they
count their masters worthy all honor, Tit. 2.9.
do frame themselves to serve them with faithfulness and diligence, not with eye
service: by the one, seeking their profit and good trustily; by the other, Col.
3.23.
doing their duties with care and painfulnes, even as to the Lord himself.

So all high Magistrates, both Kings, All in authority as Princes. Psalm. 78.
two last verses. 2. King. 11.17.
and such as are in authority under them, owe this particularly to the people,
over whom they are, to regard, that that the people may live an honest and
quiet life under them. So also Masters for recompense to their servants, are
charged by the Lord, Masters.
to show themselves, as well good and bountiful toward them in recompencing
their labor and travail to the full, as besides it, to do that which is just
and equal unto them, the which they for their parts do owe to them again:
which is to provide that they may be taught in the congregation, and at home:
as also of themselves, to see that no necessaries, in meat, drink, work,

Another kind of superiors, are kindred by nature, Childrens duty.
and parents in the flesh, to whom their inferiors and children for the
singular benefits which they receive from them (except they degenerate far
from their duties) do acknowledge much to be due to them again. Among which,
this is not the least, that they show themselves forward in the embracing of
holy instruction according to the ripenes of their years. Job. 1. Luke 2.
That their reverence and obedience continue (of children I speak) even unto
their end, although with Genes. 24.55. 1. Cor. 7.36.
Also that they make no marriages without their consent. That in token of
thankfulness, they be ready to help their necessities. And that they be
careful also to do their duties, Numb. 30.4. Genesis 47.12. Ruth. 1.16. and 3.6.
Parents. Prou. 22.6.
even to those which shall succeed their parents, by way of second marriage: For
their parents are bound to teach them from their youth, as was said of
servants; to keep them from idleness, to train them up in some lawful and
honest trade, to govern them wisely, and kindly, to provide for their
necessity of marriage, 2. Cor. 12.14.
as they shall be able, and as they may do it religiously and lawfully.

Ministers. Matthew. 13.52. Act 26.18.
Of those superiors which excel their inferiors in gifts, the Minister of God
is chief: who is furnished with knowledge and grace to convert many to God,
and to perfect them, as Gods instrument unto the day of Christ's coming. And so
particularly, Ezech. 34.4. and 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. 1. Cor. 9.22.
to lift up the faint-harted by comfort, to strengthen the weak, to direct him
that wandreth uncertainly for want of knowledge, and to wait with patience;
and by becoming all to all, that he may gain some to God. Therefore the Lord
has given him a great honor with them whom he prevails with, 1. Cor. 4.15.
Hearers. 1. Cor. 9.11.
not to be counted their teacher only, but their father: they who do with
gladness make him partakers of all good things for this life, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
and have them in singular love for their works sake. And this they do,
besides the subjection, reverence, and obedience (which they have in common
with all inferiors) who are willing to be taught, and rejoice to be counted
obedient children in the faith.

Strong Christians.
Among these which I count superiors in gifts of the mind, they are to be
reckoned, who are strong Christians, and whom God has endued with a liberal
portion of heavenly grace, wisdom, experience, etc. more then other of their
brethren, and who know their liberty which they have by Weaker.
that it is their duty, not to judge them who use their liberty, which they
have by Christ, neither to count them as profane men for doing that, which
they themselves dare not do; but to think them such, as God will confirm
unto the end: and to consider that they themselves had more need to be settled
in the knowledge of the truth, then to take upon them to censure those which
are wiser then themselves. The duty of the strong is to bear their
infirmities, Romans 14.3.4.
neither to please themselves in the things which they do, but to build up the
weak, and to use their liberty aright, serving Christ therein, and seeking
the good and benefit of their neighbor: which his conscience is defiled and
wounded thereby, and so he waxes the more backward in the service of God.

Excelling in gifts.
But besides these gifts in the stronger sort, such as God has beautified with
any gifts, which others do want, ought to be had in honor and account for
the same, and not saucily and proudly to be contemned: for by such, God helps
forward the welfare of those who do want the same. And namely, Ancient in
years. Job. 32.4.
the ancient in years and gray headed are of the younger sort to be Elihu has
given example in the book of Job; who being in the company of sage and grave
men, himself but young, did keep silence a long space: and when he spoke, he
said, he did so reverence their age, that he was afraid to speak.

And if we can frame our selves to give these duties to our betters and
inferiors, it shall be the easier to regard the dignity and worthiness of
those, which are our equals, which in that one sentence of the Apostle is
taught us: Our equals. Fom. 12.10.
that when the case so stands, that we might seem as worthy persons as
others, and not any thing inferior to them in the judgment of men; yet let us
give over our right unto the^ (if it be any) and in giving honor to them, go
before the^. And when we have had experience of careful practice in giving
this due to our neighbor, we shall both perceive our want, By examining, see
our wants and need of Christ.
and be ashamed to see how manifoldly we sometime failed herein (which without
faithful examining will never appear, by means of our secret selfeloue) and
what benefit we have of Christ's righteousness in this one commandment, to
cover our so great unrighteousness against it, and thereby set our selves more
earnestly John. 13.14.
that we may the more readily yield to other duties which follow.

And this of the duties which we owe to the person of our neighbor: Maintain
our own reverence.
to the which, if we add this, that we be careful to maintain our own
reverence and credit among men, by a course beseeming our holy profession, we
shall do well. Now we are to see what God inioyneth us toward their life. To
name the duties only, and barely to mention them, does little good to the most
that shall read them, either for understanding or practicing of them: and to
stand long I may not, the least that can be said of the particular duties The
6. commandment. Bodily life and health.
and those both to the bodily life, and the spiritual. From whence we must
fetch for our daily practice, all that we are bound to perform, about this
part of duty. And to the preserving of bodily life, health and welfare in our
neighbor, as much as lies in us, it is required at our hands: first, that he
sustain no hurt by us, Hurt not. Exodus 21.22.
or any of ours, as far as we can hinder it, in stripe, wound, bitter taunt,
or hard handling any other way, either he or his, whereby his life might be
made unpleasant, while he lives harmless amongst us: nay though he should
ouershoote the lamb and the lion shall feed together, Esai. 11.6.) whereby we
are made able, and fit to live even with bad persons: Which mildnes teaches
us, to bear much and suffer far, rather then to be angry in our own
cause; Prou. 17.19. Prou. 19.11.
which how weighty soever it seems to us, is no better then folly and
madness: therefore not to desire revenge at their hands, but to wish still their
good.

And for our own parts, wisely and carefully, both in words and in deeds
Abraham did to Lot; and to procure peace, Genesis 13.7.
so far as it may be, without offense to God, or the hindering of our own
salvation: and taking al things in good part, as far as possibly we may. 1.
Cor. 13.7.
Oh how much does he comfort the life, and glad the heart of his neighbor,
whose earnest endeavor it is, to live thus with all men! though it be a gift of
God, which should shine even in the rich themselves, as the Apostle shows,
saying: Charge them which are rich in this world, that they be not high minded,
but easy to 1. Tim. 6.17.


Do good to their lives.
But yet is it further required at our hands, that besides the hurting no man
(as has been said) we should do them good. And indeed, such should our whole
course be toward others, that we might make easy as many men's burdens as we
can, 1. John 4.11.
seeing God in the riches of his mercy, has unburdened us of so intolerable
weight, as pressed us by our sin: even as he has loved us therefore, so from
hence it is, that we have love one to another, as to have care of their life,
and welfare, to maintain it, as their necessity shall require, and our
ability can perform: To manifest it in their miseries by pitying them, and
having a fellow-feeling of the same with them, in pitying the people, Matthew.
9.26.
who were dispersed as sheep without a shepherd, gave us example, to do the
like: And as their troubles and calamities shall be the greater; Pro. 3.27.
so the more speedily to lend our help to them, to ease them, as much as in us
lies.

Show mercy.
That this may the better be conceived and practiced of us, we may take two
examples for all the rest, to show it in: for this being so needful, and that
oftentimes (I mean, to show mercy) and so much complained of, to be wanting,
I will stay a while in it. The one is in the distressed case of servants, who
if all hard measure being offered them, they must yet not be suffered to Job
therefore showed himself to have learned this compassion effectually, when as
he says, Job. 31.13. and 14.
If I did contemn the judgment of my servant, and of my maid, when they did
contend with me, what then shall I answer, when God stands up against me?
For he that made me in the womb, has he not made him? This (all men must
needs say) is mercy to the life of our neighbor indeed, when we shall show
compassion to them, whom we might oppress, as being not able to resist us.

Visit the sick.
The second example is of such as our Savior speaks of, who visited him in
his members (though many other who saw their misery did not so) Matthew. 25.35.
When I was hungry ye gave me meat: Here by his own words, we may see, that
true compassion will show it self by releeuing in time of need, and shuts
not up it self with an unsavory answer, Iam. 2.16.
as James speaks, God provide for you. And as we should show our help,
chiefly to the needy and poor, so ought we ever to be ready to help all
other with whom we live, as they shall stand in need of it, by counsel,
travail or the like: even as Simeon did his brother Judah against the
Cananites: Judge. 1.3.
and the rest of the tribes did Gideon against Midian, Judge. 6.35.
and the Amalekites.

But I will with adding a little more now make an end of this duty toward
the life of our neighbor: That which I have said thereof, may teach, Pity to
the soul.
That which remains, is of the regard and compassion which is to be had over
their souls particularly. That seeing the multitude of bad examples is one
especial imboldening of the world in evil: we, Good example.
who are marked more then others, how we live after the Gospel, which we have
in so great price, ought both to walk warily toward such, as are yet in
unbelief, as well as unblameable 1. Pet. 3.1.
as the Apostle speaks to the believing wives: And who sees not, that good
example and innocent life, does more move the ignorant, and unstayed persons at
the first, then the doctrine, because though they hear it, yet they understand
not the power and authority of it, neither are able to weigh the soundnes of
it, until they see the beauty of it appear in practice: And therefore he
says; Let your conversation be pure, that they which obey not the word, may be
won by you.

With this holy example of life, another duty is required, that all occasions
be taken, and the oportunities used of winning men to God, 1. Cor. 10.33. VVin
and confirm others.
and of observing one another, and provoking to love, and good works, the
fruits thereof, by instruction, by exhortation, admonition, Heb. 10.24.
consolation and such like. If the desire of the salvation of our brethren were
such, when opportunity serves, and especially in company, as that for the
same, we could neglect our own ease, and vain liberties in idleness, and
unprofitable talk; there is no doubt, but by kind and wise dealing with them,
we should prevail with some: especially this one thing being added, 1. These.
5. Help the poor.
(a thing of all other most looked after) that with godly counsel, we pitied
the necessities of those that be in wants, as their case requires, and that
with Romans 12.
and they better prepared, to take good by our counsel and instructions, Phil.
7.
even as Boaz did to Ruth in both, when his kind and sweet words to her with
his friendly dealing, caused her to say, Oh my Lord, thou have comforted me,
Ruth. 2.13.
thou have spoken to the heart of thine handmaid.

These two former duties being rightly observed and duly regarded, The seventh
commandment.
that is, that we honor the image of God in our neighbor, as it shall appear
to us, and that with this humility we join tender love to his life and
person, Not to attempt our neighbors honesty.
will be ready to give his neighbor his due in this commandment, not to
attempt his honesty and chastity, which is principally forbidden in this
precept. So that through this love to our neighbor, and all that is his, we
must live so innocently and chastely, that none may have cause to complain,
that they be hurt or annoyed by us, this way: and that we our selves do warily
shun,

Our minds and bodies must be chaste.
Therefore for the better obtaining of this at our hands, God requires this of
us, that both our minds and bodies be chaste: the one pure from unclean
lusts, desires, and thoughts tending to unchasteness: the other kept in honor
(for so the Apostle calls it) free from all executing of such unclean
desires by any strange pleasures, which he condemns. And therefore that all
the parts of our bodies be kept continent, as well as the face, eyes, ears,
tongue, hands, and feet be turned away from such occasions, as may lead
thereunto.

And this is commanded to the unmarried, and to those which are married;
Unmarried.
but yet with some consideration, and regard had in the same. The unmarried,
that they see, that through an especial gift of God, their abstaining from
marriage be according to the rules before set down. And for this cause, that
they be very wary and circumspect in the use of all lawful liberties, as of
meats, drinks, apparel, sleep, recreations: and that they give themselves
devoutly to all exercises of godliness, and amongst the rest to fasting with
prayer, as they in wisdom shall see cause, always remembering, 1. Cor. 7.32.
that the unmarried are they who may best care for the things of the Lord; how
they may please him. By the which means notwithstanding, if they shall

Married.
The married couples being cut off (as I have said) from all other, save
themselves, must know that their sin is ten fold greater then the others,
if they shall be found either secretly attempting, or openly defiling
themselves, whereby it may be seen, that they do not regard and conscionably
they dwell together according to knowledge, 1. Pet. 3.7.
to perform the more easily all duties one to the other for their mutual
help, and comfort in the communion of their goods, graces and persons.

But though God accounts the marriage bed undefiled, and the use of it
lawful, for the increase of posterity, and the subduing of concupiscence: yet
to the end that Gods people may remove from them much unseemly prophanenes
therein, which the irreligious sort inue^t to themselves, who never use to
look further into their liberties, if they understand once that they be
lawful; and to the end they may have the right use thereof, God has taught to
live in marriage, even as if they were not married, and so live more happily:
whereas to live otherwise, is a great abuse thereof. And as for the Papists
malicious railing on married persons, that they live in ye flesh, and serve not
God, as Pope Siricius: to their shame be it spoken, yt God has made known his
will in this commandment, as clearly as in the rest: and given grace to the^
which fear him, to obey him in the same either minister or private

CHAP. 17. Of some duties to men in the 8.9. and 10. commandments.
ANother part of righteous dealing with our brethren is, The 8. commandment.
that they be not injured by us in their goods, which God has given them, for
their necessary use and comfort in this life: Not to injury in his goods.
And therefore, as we would desire our selves to enjoy with safety, and
without fear, the portion which by Gods Thou shall not steal: Romans 13.8.
and as another Scripture says: Owe nothing to any man but this, that ye love
him. And if we love him, how can we grieve him, in withholding that from him,

Not lay claim to that which is another man's.
So that, where the case is plain, that any thing is another man's, we cannot so
much as lay claim to it, but God is despised of us. But seeing it is doubtful
often times whose the right is; and the most contentions, and vncharitablenesses
arise from hence, In controversy.
that it cannot easily nor clearly be seen into, whose it is indeed: here
therefore, although men without Christ, will not easily be advised, yet the
Lord has provided, that his servants shall be ordered, for the retaining of
love and righteous dealing: That partly they shall forgo somewhat of their
own right, Genesis 13.8. To forgo part of our right.
as Abraham did to Lot (if it shall be thought expedient) rather then to break
the bond of love; partly, if it be in such a 1. Cor. 6.5. Matthew. 5.40.
suite of law may be avoided; and yet if that cannot be, let it in love be
prosecuted.

Thus much generally, to show, that God will have equity maintained in the
coming by, and inioying of our commodities, and no man wronged in the least
part of his goods by us. But for the more clear beholding of our Diverse states.
or righteousness (seeing they are many) it is very expedient, to lay them
forth more particularly, according to the diverse states of men. Therefore, as
some are merely poor men, and by Gods appointment and ordinance, do live by
alms: other can in some sort partly maintain themselves, but not without the
help of others, by borrowing of them: Luke 3.10.
and the third sort is able to lend, or to give, or to do both: therefore
according to these diverse sorts of men, the several points of righteous
dealing one with another, must be spoken of: and those which are beside this,
shall be considered afterward.

The duty of them who live by alms.
They who have no other way to live, or to be maintained, but by receiving 1.
Sam. 2.7. Contentation.
The Lord makes poor, and he makes rich: and therefore he is to live in it
with contentation. As also he may do, if he know God to be his father
through Christ his redeemer: 1. Tim. 6.8.
for there is encouragement enough from thence, to live contentedly and
comfortably in any condition, in the which God shall set him: For want of the
which, it is, that neither poor nor rich are contented without hunting after
that which is another man's. Now as it is the poor man's duty, to be contented
with his portion: so it is in no sort Not to grudge. Matthew. 20.15.
to grudge at other men's abundance; for shall his eye be evil seeing God is
good? Neither ought he so much as to wish the same, and so to injury his
neighbor: but to receive thankfully that which befalls him, acknowledging
such to be Gods instruments, Romans 16.3.4.
and as it were his hands, whereby he ministers to his necessities. And because
the people of God, which either sent relief to the poor of other Churches,
Romans 15.26.
as they of Macedonia, and 2. Cor 9.2. Act. 4.34.35.
as they in the Acts; they did it to encourage them, to remain and abide
constant in the doctrine of the Gospel: therefore the poor which live with
us, must know this, and look to perform this duty also, that having such
encouragement, they make it their chief work to live godly and obediently:
That is to say, Live godly.
to glad their hearts, who refresh their bodies, when they may see their
innocent conversation, and zeal to Godward according to their knowledge.

But I lament the estate of the poor, Just complaint of our poor.
even as I do many thousands of others, to think how few of them are fit to
hear this their duty with any hope to be the better for it: and what an
universal blindness and security is Jeremy his words does appear. Who when he
had, after inquiry, found, that there were few that sought the truth, he said:
Ierem. 5.4.
Surely they are poor; for they know not the law of the Lord: I will get me to
the great men, for they have known the way of the Lord: but these have
altogether broke the yoke, and burst the bonds. God move the hearts of them (in
whom it lies to redress Act. 26.18.
and especially for the obtaining of the forgiveness of their sins, and the
change of their lives.

But I must remember, that I am in setting down the duties of all Christians
about the goods of their neighbors: although entire pity has moved me to
make this short digression. The last duty therefore of this sort of poor
people, is, with the former, that as much as they be able, and their bodily
Avoid idleness.
that they redeem their time from idleness, and consequently from other evil
passing of the same, to do any profitable work which they are fit for, ever
tying their hearts, eyes, and hands from pulling to them, or desiring that
which is another.

The second sort that I am to deal with here, are they, who cannot live by
their labor alone, but stand in need of the help of others by borrowing some
thing of them, that so they may the better provide for themselves, and theirs.
Their duty is, carefully and faithfully to purpose the restoring of that,
which they borrowed, at the day appointed, and that with thanks. The duty of
the borrower. Repay truly.
Kind of these. Psalm. 15.14.
is evil paying. It is further required of them, that they borrow not without
need; Borrow not without need.
as many do, to maintain themselves in play, and idleness: for by that means
they deprive him, who has need indeed to borrow, seeing the If they cannot
keep day.
Lastly, if their simple meaning in purposing to repay it at the due time, be
disappointed; yet their care must be, to satisfy their creditor, and content
him, with promising new day, and paying part, and every way that they can
(except it be forgiven them altogether) to show, that they were not faulty,
nor negligent in this matter.

The duty of the giver.
And this for the borrower: now as concerning such as are able to give, and to
lend, first I will set down their duties in those respects, and how they
should use their goods, to the end they may continue this duty of lending and
giving still: after, I will show what rules of righteous dealing they must use
in the getting and increasing of their goods, with all men, and in all kinds
of their dealings, that so they may be free from this common evil, of wronging
any, in their commodities.

How to give freely. Matthew. 5.42. Romans 12.8. Philem. 7.
They who give, must give freely, not by compulsion, and cheerfully, desiring
thereby to relieve and comfort them who receive it, for charity and conscience
sake; as the necessity of the poor body requires, and their ability Iam.
2.16. 2. Cor. 8.3. Act. 4.35. Numb. 36.12.
and in greatest necessity to stretch out their hand the more largely, without
the which necessity they may continue their patrimony and inheritance, to
their posterity.

The duty of the lender.
The lender is bound to help his neighbor, such an one (I mean) as I have
described the borrower to be: if he be able to forgo it, and for the
appointed time that he has lent it, not to require it again: and to receive
it at the due time without any commodity; much less to compound or agree with
him for any: for whiles he pretends to seek his poor neighbors commodity,
and yet thereby labors to seek his own Exodus 21.26.
or such a necessary thing as he cannot well spare: And yet if he see that it
cannot be repayed without hazard of his undoing, he must bear with him, and
show compassion either for a time, or forgiving it wholly unto him. Matthew. 18.25.


These things considered and wisely regarded, what should it grieve them, whom
God has endued with riches, and the commodities of this life, more then they
need (to the end he may prove them, what liberality they will show to their
poor flesh) to reach out their hand, as they see most Men ought to be moderate
in spending, that they may lend.
and to their own kindred? And for this cause, men ought to know, that they
should be more moderate in spending wastfully upon others (where they need
not, neither does any charity bind them) or upon themselves in diet,
apparel, or such like: considering that he which has made them able to give,
might and could have made them stand in we have the poor always amongst us,
Deuteronomy. 15.11.
that we may do good to them. But all is too little for men's selves, by means
either of a licentious wasting; as excess and needeles sumptuousnes of
clothing, and providing for their bodies, or by a miserable pinching and
hoarding up for their posterity; that they may exceed and pass their bounds;
and that they may match any of their equalles to the utmost: whatsoever comes
in by the year, or by the quarter, they have a bottomless bag to put it in;
none are the better for it, but themselves and theirs: whereas indeed, none
are more the worse for it, then themselves, and theirs, as we see it often to
come to pass; they themselves coming to an heavy reckoning for it, their
children for Two sorts have goods to their destruction.
the one has no other thought abiding with him, but about increasing, though
he know not why, and perhaps have neither child nor brother: of whom it is
verified, that the covetous never does good, till he be dead, The covetous does
no good, while he lives.
like the water in the ice, which never is profitable, until it be thawed. The
other sort go so far in satisfying the desire of the heart, and the lust of
the eye, and take such pride, and iolitie in their life, whiles they have that,
which they would, that in stead of giving and lending, they have not sufficient
at the years The lauishing spenders hurt such as they should do good to.
who might with Job have comforted the hearts of many poor men by lending, are
feign to grieve the hearts of many, and those meaner then themselves, by
borrowing; or which is all one, by deferring of them, who have need to use it
being their own, that they may verify the words of the wise man chap. 5.12.
There is an evil sickness that I have seen under the sun: to wit, riches
reserve to the owners thereof for their hurt.

And thus much of lending, whereby this one thing may appear, Lending
needful.
that lending is an help appointed of God, for the relief and ease of the
poor Exodus 22.25. Luke 6.33.
rather then for the benefit and behoof of such as are well able to live.
Which sort of men yet if in some extremity, they stand in need, and have no
way to provide for it, but by diminishing of their inheritance, or by impairing
their stock and trade, in such a case for a present necessity, shall not
offend, Rich borrowing should recompense the lender.
if they require and seek help by borrowing, for some short time (so as they
be ready to afford the like help again in the like need:) But to do this
for the increasing of their patrimony, or for any long time, and any great
sum; otherwise then by agreement betwixt both parties, that the like
gratifying of his Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, the same
do ye unto them: and contrariwise. Matthew. 7.12*


Now concerning suretiship, Of suretiship,
this briefly is to be said (seeing it is of the like nature unto lending.)
Although it should pity us to see a man fallen into danger to his creditour
through any default; yet no duty binds us to take Luke 10.35. Pro. 22.26.
and 6.1.
that by benefiting him, we should not hurt our selves greatly. But otherwise
we have commandment oftentimes to beware of it: As where it is said; Be not
thou of them who are sureties for debt: And again: If thou have stricken hand,
and entered into suretiship, thou art snared: And so by needeles dealing in
other men's business, they bring upon themselves needeles troubles, and are also
often hindered from following their own calling.

How far we may be surety.
But yet least we should think that in no case, this duty were to be
performed, we must know, that for such as are known of us to be approved
Genes. 42.37.
as Ruben did offer a pledge to his father, for the safe bringing back of
Benjamin his younger brother. But if any such weight should lie upon it, as
that our undoing and utter impouerishing should thereby be procured, Pro. 22.27.
I say with Solomon, Why should thou cause thy bed to be taken from under
thee, when thou have nothing to pay? For of thee it shall be required.

Now the duties of righteousness which follow, are such, as we are bound to
perform toward all in our common dealings, whereby we increase our
commodities: that in none of them, we be justly charged to do them any

Lawful vocation. 1. Pet. 4.10.
First therefore let every man see, that his vocation and trade, by which he
gets his living, be approved of God, and profitable to men, as the Apostle
wills: and therefore, that they be no idle persons, Parasites, Iesters,
Iugglers, sturdie Rogues, Players, or other gamesters, dicers, carders, and
such like. Deal lawfully.
Then, that they deal lawfully in every part of it, that righteousness may be
preserved by them: In buying and selling, that the one give his penny for his
penyworth; Deuteronomy. 15.15. Leuit. 25.14.
fully satisfying also the travail of the other, and cost that he has been
at: and that the seller perform his peniworth as good as is agreed for, Amos.
8.5.
and faithfully: and therefore deceitful ware, unjust waights, unequal
promise is to be kept, Psalm. 15.4.
though to the man's hinderance that made it.

The same I say of hiring, and letting, that neither party alone be regarded,
but indifference used (as much as may be) for the mutual good of both, until
the time agreed upon, Partnership.
betwixt them, be expired. Partnership and fellowship in bargaining, when both
are at the like cost, or the ones labor and travail goes with the others
money, by their mutual agreement, this kind of contract (I say) gives no
liberty to the one to provide for himself, without regarding the other; but
faithfully and truly to deal, that they

Usury unlawful.
These being the most usual kinds of contracts, do show the nature of the
rest, which are in use amongst men, and do leave no place to that oppression
in the world, called usury, or any other such seeking of men's private profit
in their dealings, without regard of the common benefit of both: Regard had of
both parties is no usury.
and the commonwealth of both (as I have said) respected. Which if it were
regarded betwixt both parties, could in no wise be justly complained of;
neither is such dealing of the nature and kind of usury, whether it be in
hiring and letting, or in any other kind of contract whatsoever: but that
common dealing for ten in the hundred, or nine, or eight, or any such like,
which is without due consideration of the commonwealth and upholding of both,
is Matthew. 7.12.
will soon answer all conscionable men, about the question of usury and
oppression, that there can be no use of them in the Church of God, Usury and
oppression have no place among Christians.
nor the Christian commonwealth: the Lawmakers having said of both, as of
witchcraft and of idolatry, there shall be none such in Israel, that is, among
Gods people. And as for teaching others their duty (especially in money
matters) who have not given themselves in full resolution to be guided by Gods
word, Preachers may sooner wear their tongues to the stump, then they may
prevail with them. But there is another thing, of which, some professing the
Gospel, desire to be resolved, and that is about the buying and selling of
annuities:

Of this therefore by so good occasion, as is here offered, I think it
convenient, to set down the will of God and our duties: Of annuities.
and the rather for the ignorance of many about this point, and for the
satisfying and answering of the well disposed Christian. For this purpose, we
are to know, What they be
that by annuities are meant, certain yearly rents or revenues coming in,
for some years space: and that the owner may sell them quite away for his own
behoof, there is no more doubt, then there is of selling his patrimony or
inheritance it self (if it be expedient) which is (as we call it) perpetual.

Now further, Two kinds of them.
there are two sorts of annuities bought and sold among The first kind full of
danger.
And no marvel, when that is bought and sold which the seller has not: I
mean, when there is no such, either for him to enjoy at his time, who has
bought it, or for the other to perform that has sold it: Much like them, Men
must not sell that which they have not.
who sell Hops or Corn, before they see whether they shall have any to
perform or no. In this case, the change of the price causes the one party to
repent him, Forehand bargains seldom end well.
And indeed no former bargains do commonly end without iarres and
controversies: neither ought any to make them, before the proof of their
commodities, except they be both able to bear, and also willing to stand to
the uttermost of the hurt, that may befall them. But to return to annuities:
let not him who is wise and peaceable, meddle with this first kind of them.

Now concerning the second, there is no doubt (as I have said) but that a man
may help himself with his own: The second kind not unlawful.
and therefore such annuities may Yet abused on the sellers behalf.
On the sellers, by fraudulent and crafty dealing: as if he have either sold
the same annuitie before to another; or if he know it to be litigious, and
encumbered, and so he sells sorrow and trouble to his neighbor, in steed of a
commodity. This dealing is so gross, and branded with the mark of infamy
and dishonestie by the Lord himself, that I need say no more of it. On the
buyers behalf, On the behalf of the buyer.
the sin and offense is, when he knowing the other must sell, and within a
certain time, holds him off, as though he cared not for it, to the end he
may have it, not according to the worth of it, and as many other Such buyers
are grinders.
This is a grinder of his neighbor. Thus come in the annuities that gripe more
then ten in the hundred, when the seller might, if he had had good measure,
have made his benefit almost as much more. Some annuities worse then ten in the
hundred.
This dealing, if it be used toward the wealthy, is rank oppression, when
the buyer lies thus in the wind, as it were, and will not give according to
the value: but if it be practiced upon the weak stated, and men behind hand,
it is as the plucking off their skin from their body. If it be asked, what
commodity a man may reap lawfully this way: I say, if he buy the annuitie or
rent of him, How to redress such abuse.
who is wealthy, so as there be plain dealing, he

Restitution.
Now another duty is, to restore to the right owner, the thing which we find,
if we can know him, and not to count it our own. Also to restore faithfully and
without delay any thing which is committed to our keeping for trust, and not to
defraud the party: whether executors of the will of the dead, or guardians,
that take upon them the care of orphans living: that as the beloved Disciple
John being put in trust by his Lord and Master, with Mary his mother to regard
her, was faithful, and took her home to him, Ioh. that Which grace is
commended in Job thorough all the world, where it is heard of, Job. 31.16.
that he restrained not the poor of their desire, nor caused the eyes of the
widow to fail, by long waiting for her request.

Last of all, to suffer all men to enjoy their own, and as neither by play,
lotteries, laying of wagers, neither by force, violence, or any kind of
oppression; so neither by deceit and craft, we seek or procure the hurt of our
neighbor, to increase our own profit. And thus I have set down a sum of the
chief duties, which our God has bound us to perform toward our neighbor,
concerning his goods, that we be found no way unrighteous in our practice him
to live safely by us, as he trusts to do: Prou. 3.29.
wherein though I have laid out nothing in any large manner (which was not my
purpose to do further then need requires) yet he that considers how many
duties here are to be performed, shall see it the more needful to have a
brief rehearsal of them, being so many; to the which, as to a glass, he may
repair when he will, rather then to desire some few of them, handled more
largely, with omission of the rest. In these duties performing, who so sets
himself to delight, and makes it his pleasure to walk after these rules; and
when he can find by due observing himself (that he has taken any thing
wrongfully) to turn back unlawful gain: as his liberty shall be It is joy
to the just to do judgment. And let it be remembered that I here teach them,
Prou. 21.15.
who profess that they are willing to learn, not the scorner. To conclude:
let not only the forementioned sins against this commandment be avoided,
and the contrary duties practiced: but let us every way so use our goods, that
we may be thereby more fruitful in every good work, then we could be if we
wanted Behold, Lord, here are thy five, or two talents: I have gained with them
many more? Luke 19.18.

The next duty wherein we are to serve our neighbor through love, The 9.
commandment.
and to deal righteously with him, is about his name. Herein our love must
show it self to be such, that we be afraid to vex or grieve him this way, as
well as in his person or goods. The sins have been mentioned more at large,
which are committed against this commandment, the duties shall be put in a
narrower room. One of the which is, To rejoice in our neighbor credit. 3.
John 2.
to rejoice in the good report of as many as we can hear, and be persuaded of:
as the Apostle did for the who had so carefully walked after the Gospel her
self, yt by her fervent travail, he had found her children also doing the
same. This rejoicing for the good name of others, banisheth this secret
repining at the same, and envying them for it, Gal. 5.26. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
Sorrow for their infirmities.
and the poisoned desire of vain glory, out of our selves; to the which
belongs this: that we sorrow for their infirmities: so far it ought to be
off from us, to report them, or hear them of others with delight.

Hope the best.
Another is, to hope through patience for better things, then as yet can Ephesians.
2.5. 1. Cor. 6.11. Matthew. 7.1. Tit. 3.2.
remembering what we our selves have been sometime: and therefore not rashly to
judge and condemn such, so much as secretly, and least of all to make them
odious in company by uttering their crimes, or allowing others to do so, of
whom we have good hope. Concerning the rest who sin boldly, I say: Let Baal
plead for himself: for such as defame themselves by their wicked behavior,
are not iniuried by us in giving warning of them. It is also further required
of us here, that as we shall be able, and may get good opportunity thereunto,
To cover faults.
we help to cover these faults of theirs through love, who may be recovered
and brought to repentance: and yet not by flattering them therein, or
dissembling the same (for that is rank Leuit. 19.17.
when we by suffering them to go on in their sins, cause them thereby to
come to some open shame and punishment:) but do we rather, Iam. 5.20.
as the Apostle James expounds this hiding of faults, saying: He that shall
convert a sinner from going astray, shall save a soul; and hide the multitude
of sins.

Rebuke.
Thus we should labor to keep them from an evil name (who are not shameless)
and so from further danger, by this our telling them of their faults; which if
they be not yet gone abroad, may by it be amended: But as for open and bold
defamers of others, they are not to be dealt with privately, when their
slander is spread far, but to be censured by the magistrate,

Not to disclose unmeet secrets.
To this duty belongs another, much agreeing with the former: that is, not to
bewray a secret, when it may safely and without displeasing of God, be kept in:
For both this and the former go so heavily to the heart of our neighbors, when
they hear that we have no regard of them, where it might do them good;
neither do spare, by enlarging of the report of that which Note.
and the whole truth, is not always to be uttered; although all kind of lying
and slander be always to be abhorred. I say further, if we should speak of
men's faults with bewailing them, Not to speak of faults.
or with a desire that they, to whom we utter them, might help to redress
them; yet could we not be justified in so doing, except we have used all means
which we know, to amend them, and (when there is no other remedy) go about
the opening Matthew. 18.15.
as is likest and fittest to reform them, and not please our selves therein:
In which case the house of Cloe sent word to the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 1.11.
that there were dessentions in the Church of Corinth. But here let this be
considered, that all reports of men's faults are not to be admitted, least we
should nourish the slaunderer, Proverb. 25.23. nor all such reports to be
rejected, Paul did the Corinthians: but not without proof, least the
slaunderer should be fleshed: for the which cause David said to Saul in this
very case, why does the King give an ear to them which say, David seeks to
kill thee? 1. Sam. 24.9. It is moreover required of us, that we uphold the good
name of our neighbor, when we be in place, where he is unchristianly and
reprochfully spoken of, that so we may cause slander and envy to cease: and
not to deliver him being innocent, Pro. 14.25. To defend his credit. Act. 26.15.
in such a case, when we may, is little differing from defaming him, our
selves. Which Paul was accused as an evil doer, stood by; allowing the same
against him, who knew, that those things were not so; and if they had rightly
learned to practice this part of duty, would have answered in his defense. But
the neglect of this duty is the greater, if it be done in a public case
before many, as that was against the Apostle, when the Judge will not give
sentence, the deponent will not speak the truth on the side of him, who is
falsely and unjustly brought in question; and the accuser will not let his
suite fall, as they see they ought, and should do: but indirectly at least,
do pursue him, either making a small crime in him to be an odious offense; or
when he is innocent

It is our duty also, by our hand writing, To give testimony.
or any other credit bringing unto him, whose good conversation is approved of
us, to free his name from unjust reproach: yea, and if the case be weighty and
urgent, so far as we be privy to his innocence, not to be unwilling to free
him by our oath. There is yet another thing, wherein our love should show it
self toward our neighbor, as necessarily as in any of the rest: And that is,
by vprightnes of heart, Take all in best part.
and kindness to interpret all such of his sayings and doings, as may be well
taken, in the best part; and not for some little blemish, and as it were half
a fault, to deface the whole: and to be free from surmizing and conceitednes
Matthew. 1.19.
As godly Joseph is commended to have been in judging of Mary; and as the
Apostles, who judged simply of Judas himself, so long as they saw him not
convicted. And this we should do the rather, not to stand upon the uttermost,
as through uncharitableness being able to bear with nothing: For who does not
know, both how prone our nature is to be meddling, and going too far? about
such uncertainties: and also, John. 13.28.
that when we have concluded and given sentence, as though there were no doubt
in the matter, yet it falls out oftentimes, that we were (and that to our
great shame) merely led with rashness, and utterly deceived? (which cannot be
more clearly seen, then Saul against David and Jonathan, both by bare conceit
against both, 1. Sam. 22. and by harkening amiss to Doeg against one of them,
verse. 11. Luke 7.39.
) To our shame, I say, because what shame almost can be greater, then first to
take that in the evil part, which was never so meant? and from so thinking of
it, to proceed to rash judgment accordingly? Like him in the Gospel, who
seeing our Savior to admit a penitent woman near unto him, who had before
that, bin an offensive liver, proceeded immediately to this conclusion: If this
man were a prophet, he would surely have known what manner of woman this We
should censure our selves.
for she is a grievous sinner. But this taking all things in ill part will not
be amended in us, before we begin to censure our selves sharply for known
offenses which lurk in us: wherein, when we shall see how slenderly and coldly
we set upon them, we shall be enforced to confess, that our rigor was too
severe against others, especially for bare surmizes of faults, which had no
sufficient ground. As for those, of whom we through charity think the best,
when yet we sometimes see them prove otherwise, and our selves deceived in
them, I say it makes no matter: we have done but our duty, to be charitabile
minded toward them. And as for them, their sin is their own, and shall
double their punishment, in as much as they have deceived Not too credulous.
Yet let us not be fools in judging well of them, whose minds and purposes we
know to be evil by their words, conversation, and long knowledge of them, or
by such like testimonies of their profanenes and boldness in sin: for that
were unsavory and silly foolishnes: and (whiles we would go about to be
charitable) to show our selves ungodly in calling evil good: Matthew. 10.17.
and to forget the commandment of our Savior, who says, To note out evil
men.
beware of men: therefore much more beware how ye commend them. Of such we
should make no scruple nor doubt to know, and think of them Peter did to them
who were converted, when he said to them; Save your selves from this froward
generation, Act. 2.40.
meaning those who had been their companions.

Thus it behooves us to examine our dealings with our neighbors credit, and
good name, that as we have learned to think and conceive: so we teach our
tongues to speak the best of all men, Tit. 3.2.
and ill of none, whose doings have not in an obstinate and stifnecked manner
spoken worse of themselves: Pro. 15.1.
so that they have cast away their good name themselves (although and not we,
who give that due to them (in making this account of them) which they
themselves seem to desire, and do most truly deserve: So we shall in this
part of righteousness also, as in the former, make our rejoicing sound. But
above all that has been said of this argument, let our chiefest care be, that
we stain not our own good name and credit any way, but maintain and preserve
it.

The tenth commandment
The last part of duty to our neighbor, is to acquaint our hearts with the
thoughts and desires of his good: and to bring our selves to this custom and
practice, To acquaint our hearts with desires of our neighbors good.
that whatsoever in these five former precepts and fountains of neighbourly
duty, we are commanded to perform to him, the same This is a great stranger.
and which should rise up and lie down with us, and throughout our course
accompany us, behold it is at this day, such a stranger to the Note.
that it is almost buried amongst men, save that God of his goodness has some
few, who keep it in remembrance, that the rest may know, Few examples.
that such practice he looks for of all his servants. For though it be
written in the book of God, never to be raced out by the Serpents subtlety,
yet except some lively pattern of it may be seen in men's lives, the practice
of it, as of many other excellent truths beside, do grow into vnaccustomednes,
even as the manifest and clear path, being not usually trodden, is soon
covered with weeds and grass.

And this part of righteousness must find more care in us for the performance
of it, This a help to all the rest.
because the well regarding of this duty makes us the better able love
thinks none evil of our neighbor, nor intends any hurt against him: yet
when his profits, and lawful liberties, and delights are wished to be ours, I
deny not but we can and do persuade our selves, that for all this we love
him: but the Scripture which says, Matthew. 7.19.
as ye would that men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them, shall
condemn us for it. Alas, do we not see, that Act. 26.29.
I would thou were altogether as I am (that is, unfeignedly a Christian) but yet
without the bands which I have.

Therefore let us know, and rest in this, that the mark which we must aim
Rejoice in his welfare.
and therefore heartily desire and wish it from time to time, and in one thing
as well as in another, and give those thoughts or lusts small rest in us, which
stir us to the contrary: That so we may declare, that we have the same
spirit which was in the Apostle; which taught him to say; I wish that thou
prosperedst, even as thy soul prospers. 3. Ioh. 2.
And here to shut up this matter with a word or two of sobriety (which is a
virtue more properly concerning our selves, We ought to live soberly.
rather then the person of God or our 1. Cor. 7.29.
This I say (brethren) because the time is short hereafter, that they which
have wives, be as though they had none: and they that weep, as though they
wept not: and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: He therefore that
looks to these things so, that he live in the use of his lawful liberties,
to make them serve him (that he may better serve God) and not he them; that man
may be said to be sober indeed, and he shall have great rejoicing, whatsoever
the world think of him.

These duties I have thought good to set down together, as it were in one
view, before the eyes of the reader, that he may fetch from hence, light to
show him the way, and matter to season his heart and life, when he shall wax
empty, barren, and forgetful. And for the more large and full handling

And now I having finished that which I purposed about the sins to be
renounced, and the duties to be practiced in a godly life; here understand The
renouncing of evil and the contrary, is all one with repentance.
is nothing else but repentance, and the selfsame thing. And the bringing
forth of the fruits of amendment or of repentance, is all one with that
living by faith, which the Scripture calls the life of the righteous, or a
Christian conversation. The which I make mention of, that none may think, that
the godly life, the living by faith, and the repentant life, are diverse things
the one from the other: which might raise much trouble in many to think: so
that when they have labored much and travailed painfully in one of them, they
should be new to begin in the other. But seeing the holy Ghost in the
Scriptures does lay forth the life of the

And as I said, that this godly life which I have written of, is all one with
the bringing forth fruits of amendment or of repentance, and living by faith,
and no strange nor new or diverse thing from it, thus in few words I show.
Concerning the one, Act. 26.18.
I mean the bringing forth the fruits of repentance, what is it else, but for
the person who is assured of salvation and of the forgiveness of his sins, to
turn to the Lord, and to come under his government, from the power of Satan
and sin? and in full purpose of heart to labor Living by faith and living
godly, all one.
what true godliness is, and how he may be able to practice it. Now for the
other, of living by faith, what is it also but a relying upon the word of God,
with full purpose to be guided by it, either by resting upon his

And now to shut up this point, namely, wherein a godly life does consist: a
little more I will add, of living by faith, as I promised in the beginning of
this treatise, where I showed that this faith to believe the spiritual and
temporal promises of this life, must be conceived and wrought in us, before we
for it is the gift of God) he requires, Phil. 1.29. The godly live by faith.
that we should live by the same faith: and that is, not only to believe
throughout our life, that we shall be saved in the life to come; but also, that
we shall have whatsoever is expedient to bring us safely thither, given us
freely by the Lord in this life: I say, 1. Tim. 4.8.
faith reaches to, and lays hold of the promises of both, even as God has
given us both. So that to live by faith, is a most glorious and rich
prerogative, as we may see: and so should we be able by good proof and
experience to say, if we would be persuaded, but to take a taste of the benefit
and sweetness that it brings: for if we did but taste of it, we would never
suffer our The fruit of such a life.
For by this faith, we are confident, and rest quietly about our salvation from
time to time; whereas others, who live not by it, do waver and are often
unsettled, even the best; and therefore much disquieted. By this, we walk in
newnes of life, and all the parts of it: and by it, we may be assured in our
prayers to be heard: against fearful sins to be preserved; to have the rage
of our strong lusts weakened: and to have grace against them, although not
always to prevail (which were not expedient for us) yet at least, to be in
combat with them, which is ever a good testimony of our safety: for thereby,
we prove that we be of the militant Church of Christ. Yea and to go
further; Faith makes earthly business to be done cheerfully.
by further us therein, that both we may go about it more willingly, and that
it Cast your care on me, Heb. 13.5.
for I will care for you.) Neither do we make reckoning of our commodity what
it shall be, before God do show us; but when we have served Gods providence
by lawful labor and travail, and used the means, we commit the success to
him: and the fruit of our pain, we receive with thankfulness (whatsoever it
be) and that we take for our daily bread. Faith makes our crosses more easily
borne.
And if we be crossed in the good things which we go about (as every calling
and travail since sin came into the world, has affliction and sorrow
adjoined to it) we do here, by faith, consider, that this is by the providence
and good Act. 2.25.
that we find it so, then to our greatest profits and weightiest dealings)
this faith shall uphold us in the quietest estate and most sweet peace: The
unbelievers life miserable.
as the truth is, what a life do the unbelievers of the world lead, who will
not learn what this life of faith means? what sin do they commit in all
kinds of their dealings, to the end they may bring that to pass which they
would have? for in God they have no hope (for if they had, they would be
counseled and commanded by him.) And although this do not appear and break
out, by and by, to the sight of such as are ignorant like themselves; yet I
would have them answer me to this: From whence is it, The proof of it.
that they are often arraigned and forced to cry out fearfully; they are
damned, and there is no mercy for them from God; they have 1. Sam. 28.15.
and that God will be revenged upon their wickedness, though for a while they
bear al out boldly, as Saul did? Therefore be we well assured, that the sin
of such lies at their door: and one time or other it will find them out. For
besides their necessary affairs and business, they run into many needless
and superfluous dealings, which must needs fill their heads with cares, and
their hearts with sorrow: And in their lawful labors, they are so far from
depending upon God for success, that they are ever fearing

CHAP. 18. Of certain reasons, persuading to the practice of a godly life:
which is the
THus I have after a sort declared what the Christians, and the believers life
is, and in what duties it consists: and have disclosed in some sort, the
sins, which instead of this godliness do possess men: The whole I confess
has been large and long: but therefore it must be considered, that the
Christian life is in a manner all the substance of religion, and that which
must give light and lend help to us in all things while we live: and therefore
so great a matter containing all duties of all

And first I will begin with that, which deserves the first place, The first
reason* why the believer should live godly, is, that God may be glorified by
this advancing his.
and of right, ought to prevail with us: that seeing this Christian course
does so highly honor God, it ought without all exception, to be sought out and
attained of us: And how highly God is glorified in it, every one may see, when
even sinful and contemptible persons, who much dishonored him by their bad
conversation, yet after being reformed, are made fit to glorify him? and if
this be in their new birth, and regeneration at their first coming to God, how
much more (think we) shall it be in their life afterward? A miserable caytife
to be made a Kings son, is admirable: but behold, here

It was a great part of Solomon his royalty, that he gave silver, as stones;
What honor God has, by the grace of his.
and goodly Cedars, as the wild fig trees: the Lord gives graces and
possessions, John. 6.70.
but it is a greater honor, that he has of a rude, unbridled and unclean
devil, made a well ordered, sober, and meek Christian: yea a sanctified
person; Esaias. 11.
as the Scripture calls him: for by his holy spirit through the work of the
Gospel, he has made of an extortioner, and oppressor, a liberal and
bountiful giver, Luke 19.7. and 8.
as Zaccheus: of an adulteress, a penitent woman, reclaimed from the course of
unclean life, Ioh. 4.18. and 29. Luke 7.38. Act. 9.15.
as the woman in Luke 7.47. and of a persecutor, a preacher: yea himself a
persecuted man, even Paul the Matthew. 5.16.
The Lord has done great things? And such grace does God give, to them (I
mean) that fear him, Prou. 16.7.
that he causes by their light which shines among men, The best things of
Gods servants, are within them.
even their very enemy; to be at one with them: yea to speak well of them,
and to glorify their father which is in heaven. And yet their beauty is (to
speak as the truth is) chiefly within, and not seen with eye.

As all was not heard of Solomon a far off, which was to be seen at home:
and yet not all seen, that might be known to be in him. The faithfulness,
innocence, and rare continence of Joseph, with other graces which were 1. Sam.
2.30.
Thus does God honor them, that honor him, that he may be all in all, and by
them showed, to be most honorable. And to speak of our own time, wherein we
live, God is not without honor even in this our age.
notwithstanding it afford not so many examples of so excellent gifts and
graces of holy life (though in learning and knowledge few have gone beyond it)
as so long liberty under the Gospel might justly challeng (which sin (I
pray God) be not laid to our charge, but speedily repented of:) so yet we will
not be ashamed to affirm, to the great praise of God, that both many gracious
and godly people, since the reign of our and cause that unfeigned thanks be
given to God by many for them. And that both of the ministry (though nothing
be more ridiculous to the Papists our adversaries) the Lord has raised up
many, who both preach sincerely, and diligently, and walk warily and worthy
the Lord, Col. 1.10. and vnoffensiuely seeking to please him in all things: and
of the people, he has drawn not a few, who do beautify their profession,
and carry In Sion (his Church) shall God be praised: and why? because for them
he has done great things.

The Lord makes the weak strong, the ignorant prudent, and such as sat in
darkness to see great light: holy and glorious is his name: Yea further How God
graceth his children.
to count themselves but strangers in this world: he causes the things of
greatest price, to be little set by of them in comparison of his treasures,
which are not seen: This honor have many of his Saints. The Lord gives
strength in tribulation above hope, and makes anguish and sorrow to become
comforts: Note.
false accusations, and contumelious reports, to be crowns to their heads and
chains of gold to their necks which bear them. And to be short, he teaches
his, to suck sweetenes out of sowernes, and to make good use of all estates:
and they are able to do all things through him that makes them able; Phil.
4.13.
yea persecution it self he makes tolerable, and joyful; and (when our
weakness can see so

If these gifts of God with other such, do not greatly honor the Lord in the
congregation of the righteous, and if they which enjoy them, being gracious and
of high estimation, do not most highly commend the giver, which is God, where
will men say, that God is honored at all? And so does the Apostle require, that
it should be with Gods people: 1. Pet. 2.12. The peace and joy of the godly.
Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil
of you as of evil doers, may glorify your father which is in heaven. And yet
I have said nothing of their peace of conscience, which Solomon says, is as
continual banqueting to them: Prou. 15.15.
Saint Paul says, it passes all understanding: even in this one thing, John.
14.27. Phil. 4.7.
which the Prou. 14.10.
In this one thing (I say) does God get himself great glory: For they
believing in their hearts, they cannot choose but utter with their mouths,
their deliverances, and the wonderful things that he has done for them. And
though they be for the most part contemptible in the world, yet is the meanest
of them more happy, Psalm. 84.11.
then the greatest of the world.

And if these things be well weighed, which have been said of this matter, it
shall not be marueiled at, that the Prophet thus speaks in the Psalm:
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou city of God! Yea glorious indeed,
Psalm. 87.3.
as we here enjoy them (though we have but a small part of our glory in this
life) and so glorious, that if they could be seen with eye, they would so
inflame men with the beauty of them, that they would force them to set all
their love upon them. And thus by the graces, which are in the life of Gods
servants, and which are not to be found in other men, it may be seen, how God
is honored of them; the contrary whereof, is done most apparently by the
ungodly, as much as lies in them. Therefore to conclude this first reason,
except we can like to see Gods name ill spoken of, his Gospel lightly
accounted of, and his person dishonored, and that by our selves (the let us so
lay hold on eternal life, that we press hard unto the mark, for the price
that is set before us, and let the words of the wise be as goades to prick us
forward, Eccles. 12.11.
out of our slouthfulnes; and as nails to fasten us jointly and closely to
Christ our head without hypocrisy, that we faint not neither fall away, but
grow up unto the perfect age of Christians: that so we may give good testimony
that God is truly honored of us, when our conversation shall be such, as his
word lays forth

The second reason.
Another reason, why men should with full resolution address themselves to
pass the time of their dwelling here in reverence and fear, is; because it is
the only estate wherein they can prosper, and be in safety: The prosperity
and safety of Gods servants thereby. Heb. 12.28. 1. Pet. 1.17.
and when they are stripped of this heavenly robe, they are naked and exposed
to infinite falls, shameful reproaches, and dangers, out of the which they
shall find it no easy matter to deliver, and free themselves again. For
this, consider what Solomon says: Prou. 2.10.
When wisdom once enters into thy heart, and knowledge delights thy soul,
then shall understanding keep thee, and counsel shall preserve thee, from
every evil way, and from the strange woman, and from those which leave the
way of righteousness, They which delight in Gods service, find the sweet
benefit of it. Job. 31.35. Psalm. 91.11.
to walk in the ways of darkness. When a man sets himself to seek the
Lord, and is willingly weaned from unlawful liberties, and has made it his
pastime to be well occupied, he shall not fear the accusations of his
adversaries; for he has made innocence his defense: neither shall he fall
justly into the reproach that other do. For why? he has settled himself
against it: when thousands shall fall on every side, yet shall he stand, and
not be removed: Yea the longer he is acquainted with this estate, the better
he shall like it (howsoever to the worldly man it be most irksome and
unsavory) and be much grieved, when through natural corruption and
untowardness, he shall feel and perceive himself to be any whit weakened or
cooled.

They who have experience, best know it.
And how much such an estate is to be desired (as they can best tell which have
any time inioyed it, though such as know it not, find no want of it) it shall
better appear hereafter in place more convenient, when I shall speak of the
privileges of true Christians: yea and though he be drawn by his calling and
necessary occasions, to affairs and dealings in the world, where no
prouocations to break off this course shall be wanting; and be occupied
amongst men of all sorts, which shall be a strong coard to draw him after them:
yet shall he be the more estranged from them, and loathe them, by as much as
they are differing from that vprightnes, which he has purposed to walk in.
Return again.
And if he be unsettled or broken off at any time, yet shall he never

And if any shall think this little, and of small account, which I have
spoken, and among the rest, a man to live unrebukable in the midst of a
froward and filthy generation (for I reserve to a further place, as I have
said, to set down the manifold prerogatives that accompany such a life) let
such compare it with the lives of those, These are free from many evils, which
others fall into.
which count it overmuch strictnes to look carefully to their ways, and they
shall find it by infinite degrees worthy to be wished and preferred: for what
is there in the lives of such men, as have but lie dead in their sin) may be
constrained to commend and reverence them that have attained to it, as knowing
how infinitely they be blessed above themselves: but even such also, as have
received some likelihood of grace from God, yet slenderly going about to
nourish the same,

For it is not enough that we purpose no wickedness, nor evil, For want of
arming many fall where (...) feared little.
but we must be strongly armed always with full purpose against it; especially
that, whereto we be most prone, and wherein we have had by woeful trials,
experience of our weakness. For while we do commit none, yet we make a way for
it to enter into us a fresh, while we become secure, and improuident. 1
Examples of this, Peter. Matthew. 26.72.
This which I say, is manifestly to be seen in Peter, who^ no man will judge so
uncharitably of, that he came into the hall of the high Priest with any mind or
purpose to deny his master: yet his slight regarding of his masters so
weighty admonition (Satan has desired to sift you:) and that rashness of his,
neither casting with himself, what danger might rise by occasion of the place
and persons there (as Christian wisdom would have moved him) neither weighing
his own weakness, how easily he might be snared, having no commandment to be
there: into what lamentable woe and bitter anguish did it bring him, by his
fearful denying and swearing that he knew him not?

And can we, in charity, judge any less of the old Prophet that dwelt in
Bethel, when he hearing of the man of God that came from Judah, 1. King. 13.18.
2. The old Prophet of Bethel.
to cry out against the Idolatrous Altar of Jeroboam, did courteously inuit
him to his to eat no bread in that place: at that word he began to stomach it,
that he being a Prophet of God, should not be believed, and did hastily reply
upon him again, saying, that an Angel was sent to him, who commanded him to
bring him into his house to eat: But the Scripture shows us that he lied.
And the like example is that of Judah the Patriarch, 3. Juda.
who went out in the morning to his sheepshearers, thinking of no such matter
as fell out by the way; Genesis 38.
but meeting with a woman in harlots apparel, having not strongly armed
himself against all sin, agreed and lay with her.

By all which it appears, that when men fear not their frailty, and arm
God directs us, when we commit our selves to him; Prou. 3.6. Prou. 10.9.
so when we willingly betake our selves from his government, we run headlong
into many and dangerous evils?

And yet when I consider the course of men's lives (and those none of the worst)
how egarly and greedily every one, for the most part, is given and set about
his worldly business and commodity, having little thought of heavenly Note.
rather then that ye should fasten upon them such a burdensome yoke of
commandments, as this is, to walk armed against evil. For if ye will force
their thoughts with delectation to be taken up in fearing, and avoiding sin,
and in laboring still to be better, this strict chaining of them, is a taking
away of their whole comfort: for it is death to them, to go about to bridle
have chosen this way of Gods testimonies to walk in; Hos. 14.6.7.
for their souls shall be bound up in the bundle of life, and they shall
flourish as the plants, and grow as the Lily: and fasten their roots as the
trees of Lebanon. Their branches shall spread: and their beauty shall be as
the Olive tree, and their smell as Lebanon. And thus much of the second

The third reason: for a godly life no exercise of religion without this can
profit us.
And what shall we say further? for no exercise of religion, nor godly means of
the best sort can do them any good, who will not resolve themselves to come to
this faithful practice of true religion and obedience to God his
commandments: nothing shall be found more true then this, if we will suffer
it to come under trial. For to begin with the Scripture: What did all the
privileges of the stifnecked Jews profit them, the law, circumcision, Psalm.
147.19.20.
the covenant, and sacrifices? There were no greater prerogatives to any people
or nation under the sun: And they also did in the outward practice of
religion, This is exemplified in the Jews.
join with the best of their brethren, both in keeping the 1. Cor. 10.5.
In many of them God had no delight, but slew them: Many thousands of them at
sundry times perished, for their false heartednes, that when they had bin
delivered out of their dangers, they did not cleave fast unto the Lord, as in
their afflictions, and anguishes they promised to do; but started aside like a
broken bow.

And therefore, how does the Lord take up this complaint against them, Oh that
there were an heart in them, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
that they would fear me and keep all my commandments Psalm. 78.34. etc.
And in the Psalm: When he slew them, they sought him, yea they turned and
sought God early: they remembered that God was their strength, and the most
high God their redeemer: but they flattered him with their mouth, and
dissembled with their tongue: for their heart was not upright with him, neither
were they faithful with him in his covenant. And after that he says of other
generations: Hos. 6.4.
Oh Ephraim! how shall I entreat thee? Oh Judah! what shall I do unto thee,
Psalm. 81.13.
which I have not done? And again: Oh that my people had hearkened unto me!
and that Israel had walked in my ways! I would soon have humbled their
enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries.

Thus we see because they did not seek him daily, in the vprightnes of David
the man of God utters this sweet speech, and the like through the book of
Psalms: Thou have made me (O Lord) more wise then my teachers: Psalm. 119.99.
Psalm. 119.67.
then mine elders, and men of experience, because I have kept thy
commandments: before I knew thee I went astray, but since, I have brought my
feet The religious women, of whom we read in the Gospel, after that they
saw the power of the Scriptures, Luke 8.2.3.
and had their hearts humbled and meekned by the wisdom of them, how did they
grow in holy affections, and Christian duties, painefully laboring to attain
more knowledge by hearing Jesus his sermons from day to day?

For when the word is received into a good and honest heart, both it and all
other holy exercises with it, become profitable to singular uses. The contrary
is to be seen in the godly.
But where men propound not this, with themselves, to be cast into the mould of
holy doctrine, and to be fashioned after it in their lives, it is far
otherwise. For to say nothing of them who from the beginning of the week to
the latter that their hearts are hardened with the deceitfulnes of sin; so
that they walk afterward, in their old ways still: and that they see no
such beauty in the truth, which shines amongst them that they will be subject
to it: though Christ reigns only by the power thereof in the Romans 1.19.
For seeing they have not believed and reverenced that which they saw and knew,
the Lord has kept back his grace from them, which he did not owe them, and so
given them into Satan's hands to make them bondmen in evil at his pleasure.
The which people being not renewed and changed in their minds, and so brought
to a loving and delighting in good things, their lippe-labour in their serving
of God, and time which they give to it, comes to nothing; neither commends
them any whit to him; neither leaves any fruit thereof to themselves.

And yet we must know, that there are others of the same company, at the same
time, and using the same means with much blessing of God upon All prayers,
etc. lost, yea worse.
that they should bestow all their prayers, confession of sins, and hearing
of sermons in vain? I might more rightly say, to their just condemnation in
the day of the Lord: Men will not be made fools in any thing saving in this:
though foolishnes in all other things is not to be compared with this.

(For being lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, 2. Tim. 3.4.
they know that they cannot have it:) but as though the devil were not strong
enough to accuse, and inchaunt them, they do negligently, yea willingly offer
him advantage

Or who is it, which being warned out of his house, yea and that in earnest
manner, will yet delay, and neglect to seek and provide for himself, till he
be cast into the street?

Great woe by profane life.
But concerning the matter which I deal in, if men's profane lives and
slouthfulnes, driving off their repentance from day to day, were but perpetual
beggary, and going about all the days of their lives from door to door, I
would have said nothing (though it were pitiful to see any cast themselves
into such misery:) but they sell themselves bondmen to hell without recovery,
as stubble before the Lords wrath, which is a fire to burn them, and therefore
it requires more earnest calling upon. The Lord commended the unjust steward,
not for his particular act, but because he had done wisely: who, Luke 16.3.
when he had warning to be put out of his stewardship, he provided elsewhere to
be received. But such warning will not prevail, nor such wisdom fasten upon
these men, until, as they have lived in pleasure and liberty of the flesh,
they die in sorrow and utter bondage, and so receiving a just recompense of
their lives, they find, though too late, how true this is, which I say.

And if this be the estate of many, who yet do commonly resort to hear Gods
word, who will read at home, yea and have prayers in their houses, (for What
shall be the state of such as hear not Gods word.
for that the Christian life is not for all this, aimed at, almost, in many of
their actions) good Lord, what shall the estate of others be, who come as far
behind them, Note.
as they do behind the best of Gods servants? even those others (I say) who
being the greatest part of the people, are not troubled with any thought of God
or devil, heaven or hell, throughout the week? but having their heads filled,
and their time continually taken up in matters of the world, and in hearing and
telling news and tales (yet many of them nothing concerning themselves) and
leaving their callings, do busy themselves with other men's matters needlessly,
and spend many days

But I have tarried longer about this matter then I meant: Therefore leaving
them who trouble not themselves greatly with godly exercises, I will return to
such, who are in profession, and in show far before them; and yet because
they do not heartily and faithfully seek to be bettered (I mean) to be settled
in a Christian life, do therefore reap no good by the means which they use.
But some perhaps may think some hardness in this speech, Object. you discourage
us.
do we not therefore repair to the word and use good means, to the end we
may become faithful and upright, and get good by them? and have not they, who
have most profited in godliness attained unto it hereby? why then do ye affirm
(they say) and that to the discouragement of many, that if our hearts be not
reformed, the means do us no good?

Answer.
that it is far from my meaning to raise the least discouragement to any; in
whom, if I knew but the smallest desire to be reconciled to God, I would be
most ready to cherish and to strengthen the same: The least desire of good^es
in men, is to be cherished.
and he that exercises himself in reading, hearing, prayer, God persuade him
ten fold more, if he desire to profit thereby: neither do I doubt, Note.
but that such shall see in time to their great comfort, that it is not in
vain to wait patiently on the Lord, for a blessing upon his own ordinance.
But this I say, when men either think, that they do as much as they need,
while they join themselves to the exercises of religion, and rest contented
therein, and see not that they are enemies to God, under his curse, and without
faith, and therefore without God and see not their wants and emptines of grace,
how they are fraught with many sins uncontrolled, and strong rebellions not
restrained; let not such look to glory in their means using: their rejoicing
is not good, their estate is woeful, and that in no mean degree. They may be
said unto, as they of Laodicea were in the Revelation by the holy Ghost: Reu.
3.1^.
Thou say thou art rich and need nothing, and know not, that thou art
miserable and blind, and poor, and naked: I counsel thee to buy of me gold
tried in the fire, and eyesalue?

And marvel not, that I have said, that such, whose hearts are not purged by
faith, receive no profit by the exercises of religion, as might further be
showed Capernaum, Corazin and Bethsaida: For even the dear children of God,
when they wax wanton against the Lord, Gods children growing careless lose the
fruit of good exercises. Psalm. 89 31.
and grow slothful in performing their duties to God, or do them in a
sleighter manner, then they sometime had done: as he punishes their
transgressions other ways; so does he this one way chastise them, that they
shall feel no sweetness, nor find no savor in the best things they shall do,
or exercises of religion which they shall go about.

And this it is, that we hear many, even good people complain of, that they
cannot profit at a Sermon, their hearts are rouing elsewhere all the time
(almost) of prayer; reading is irksome to them, and they withdraw themselves
Note.
they have waxen weary of their reverent attending upon God (as all good
things does the flesh soon turn into wearines) and begin after the manner of
men, with whom they live, to seek their unlawful liberty some way, not being
circumspect enough about ye keeping of the best things, in price and
estimation: and when the Lord sees this, he takes from them the privileges
which they enjoyed before; he dimmeth the light of their minds, that they see
not so clearly; and shuts up their

With what joy (may it be thought) did David perform the duties of religion
after his heinous sin in the matter of Bethshabe and Vriah? when it is clear
that he slept in it (as it were) all the time before Nathan the Prophet was
sent to awake him, and bring him to repentance. Or what comfort (is it to be
thought) had Jonas in thinking of his happiness, or upon any part of the true
worship of God, which yet had usually been his whole delight, after he that he
laid himself down to sleep in most great danger, Jonas 1.5.6.7.
in which the Heathen mariners fell to prayer, and came to him to awake him:
and after, being urged to examine himself by them, did not very hastily come
to the confessing of it.

To omit others, the daily experience that Gods children have of their many
complainings, vnquietnesses, discomforts, and such like tediousnes (which need
not to press them, but for the conscience and remembrance of some Tit. 1.15.
cannot receive into them the sweet and wholesome liquour of his grace, by what
outward exercise soever they present themselves before him. Thus much of the
reasons, why the believer

CHAP. 19. Of answers to certain objections brought against the necessity of
practicing this godly life.
ANd now that I have added these reasons to the description of the Christian,
which believes in God, I would cease to say any more of this matter, if I did
think, that men, who This straight course not easily yielded to. Act. 26.28.
For they who do thus, do not only themselves walk after the rule which I
have set down, aiming thereat, as at a mark, but also desire that many other
were as they be.

But the multitude of such, as have either no faith, nor grace, but only hear
our doctrine, who yet profess that they look for salvation by Christ, do
think, that this which I have drawn out of Gods word, and set down

And therefore, I would meet with some of the objections, which they allege,
why they should be no further dealt withal, but suffered to go on as they do
in a fruitles, dead and dull manner. Some of these say, First objection,
against the godly life: this life cannot be led.
they hope their desire is to please God, although they cannot do it as some
do: and namely, such as endeavor to follow this doctrine which in this book I
propound.

And that which has persuaded and moved me to this, is, (as I partly said in
the first entrance) for that I see many of good hope, and some not without a
right and true beginning in this holy course, to be kept at a stay, Many long
kept at a stay.
or driven back, and seem not to know what the Christian life is, nor in many
years to come thus far, as to be persuaded how pleasant and profitable it
is, and by how many degrees to be preferred without all comparison, before any
other course. For many of the forwarder sort, though they would not willingly
forsake it, yet complain, that they find much tedious heaviness, strong
Complain of much tediousnes.
Some which are weaker, are under deadly dumpes, strange questionings, whether
they shall go forward or no, Doubt of going forward.
and such small comfort they find in their profession, that they declare
plainly, that they are far from the staiednes which I speak of: and this not
at the first only, but many years after they have liked well of the Gospel.

Diverse others account the Christian life, mopish, solitary, Objection.
Christian life mopish.
and such an estate, the which they hold great wisdom to avoid; that I say
nothing of the Atheists, whom I vouchsafe no answer. Now therefore except
these can be otherwise persuaded, that the godly life is neither irksome in it
self, Romans 8.12.
whereto they are not debtors, neither without great comfort; yea even in
tribulation (through hope which deceives not) but such an estate, Romans 12.12.
as has caused many for the delight they have found in it, to refuse all
other, which could not stand with it: except (I say) they can be thus
persuaded, what likelyhoode is there, Phil. 3.8.
that they shall ever be brought to be acquainted with it?

For answer to all, let such understand and know, that this Christian life is
not to be peeced up with some good actions in the which we may rest, Christian
life is not in some good actions. Mark. 6.19.


And that it must be thus with the people of God, and may possibly be also,
that of the Prophet does plainly declare, that the man which may rejoice Psalm.
119.97.98.
lift up his heart to God: but who does so love his law, that he meditateth in
the same all the day long, as he himself did, meaning this, that his thoughts
should lead him to God from time to time; and when they are occupied about
evil, or ranging in the world vnprofitabile and amiss, that he should by and
by without dallying, or delay, call them back again. And what (think we)
does he mean in another place, when not speaking particularly of himself, but
generally of all which are the Lords, Psalm. 1.2. Psalm. 119.9.
he says? The blessed man does exercise himself day and night in this, that
he may please God (as his word directs him) and have peace thereby

Phil. 3.20.
And it is the same, which the Apostle meant when he said, our conversation
though we are on earth: teaching therein himself and all other Christians,
that their whole course (so far as man's frailty would permit) (and how far
it may permit, let this treatise out of Gods word testify) ought to be a
settled and constant carrying of themselves (as I said before) throughout their
lives in such sort, as they might show and approve themselves to be men of God.
Examples of godly men.
If we desire to see examples of these things, the Scripture sets out many
unto us: and namely the life of our father Enoch, that in his time, Enoch.
Genes. 5.24.
which soon after the creation of the world was corrupted, he did yet walk
with the Lord: as if it should say, he did so live in the world amongst men,
that he had yet, through his life, an heavenly and most happy

Abraham. Genes. 12.7.
Abraham, though he be not exempted from infirmities, yet from the first time
of his calling unto his death, what a rare pattern did he set before the eyes
of men in his example, of a man consecrated to God, and not earthly minded? For
wheresoever he came, he set up an altar unto the Lord: declaring thereby, that
no change of place, time, or company, could withholde So when he had leisure
after to return, Heb. 11.15.
yet he refused; because he sought a better country, namely, heavenly,
witnessing still more and more, that his obedience was sound and faithful,
Genes. 12.4. Compared with Genesis 25.27.
by looking to another inheritance, until an hundred years were fully
complete in an holy course.

And of Job, how clearly does the holy Ghost witness this, Job. 1.1.
whereof I speak? In so much, that he not only withdrew himself, and departed
from the corrupt examples of the people of his time, but also had a particular
regard Job. 31. all.
For proof whereof, his strong faith with patience, prayers and sacrifices do
testify the one: his just dealing with all men, and mercifulnes to the poor,
with rare wisdom in governing his own family and in carrying himself toward
all, do show most clearly the other: All which were not at times, but usually
and ordinarily performed, and through his course of life looked unto and
continued.

And yet another thing I must needs add (as I am persuaded) very admirable:
Job. 3.25.
that he did use to acquaint himself in the midst of his prosperity with
the looking for a change, and did learn in his greatest abundance to want: Job
forgoing his goods without any great grief did enjoy them when he had them,
without any great love. Therefore love thou the world little while thou have
it, so thou shall lose little when thou forgoest it.
because he considered how fleeting and momentany all things were: and that his
prosperity was lent him only for a short time, and was not a patrimony or
inheritance to him for ever: So that when he was afterward tried with loss of
all (which was exceeding much) it might appear, that he was but little moved
with it, because he had loved it but a little, when he did enjoy it: The which
gracious man thus using the world, as has been said, holding all so
strangerlike, while he had it, and so willingly foregoing it, when God would
require it, how could he do it, without a diligent looking to his ways, and
the directing of the thoughts of his heart in a very particular manner, and
that in and Note.


As for Moses, although it was a rare grace, Moses. Heb. 11.24.
when he was of full and ripe years, to refuse to be maintained as the son
of Pharaohs daughter, and to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; yet it
is more marvelous, how in example he went before the rest, in the things which
God required: and shining daily more and more, as the Sun till the noone
tide; not weary of his service, as many are, but liking better of it, the
longer experience he had of it: so that there was no good being elsewhere to
him: and so accomplished eighty years in that righteous and holy course.

David's practice, besides the Lords commendation of him, David. Act. 7.46.
that he was a man after his own mind: so that we may see more particularly,
how he passed his time, that one place of his Psalms does clearly show, Psalm.
119.10.
where he says: This is the course of my life, after the which I frame my
self, as the blessed of the Lord also do: with my whole heart I seek thee, O
Lord, as thy word teaches me: the which so far as I have received, I lay it
up, and hide it in my heart, as treasure: and so far as I do not understand
it, I desire to be further taught of thee: I use to speak of thy wondrous
works, and of thy wisdom: I take more pleasure in thy testimonies, By these,
with many other such properties of a godly man mentioned in the same Psalm, we
may conclude without doubting, that a mind thus exercised was not void of a
life full of answerable fruits: Psalm. 55.17.
And three times a day he did use to refort to God ordinarily in prayer and
thanksgiving, after a solemn manner, 1. King. 15.6.
besides other occasions often moving him: that save only in that one matter of
Vriah the Hittite, we seldom read of a man more taken up of an heavenly
heart, then he was.

I make mention of these holy servants of God, the more particularly setting
down their course of living, their properties, and their whole estate, sifting
themselves daily, Lam. 3.40.
to search and find them out: neither withholding themselves from new duties,
which they have not been wont to practice, but teachable and ready to hear,
whatsoever the Lord has to require of them. we may please God in reverence,
and in fear.

Neither is it my purpose in all this, to persuade, that believers must have
some godliness (for that must be attained to, We must grow.
already; of all such as I direct my speech to) neither that they should rest
in that which they have: but look upon such to follow them, who in the
Scriptures are set before them, as the forwardest Christians, Phil. 3.13.
and holiest examples: So that they acquainting

So shall they know by experience what this means, which I speak of, namely,
to walk with God continually, and after a certain manner (although wandering
on the earth, Double benefit of Christ's death.
wrapped in with infirmities) to have their conversation in heaven with him.
And so shall they more clearly and fully behold the benefit of Christ's death;
that it was not only to save them from eternal death, and to bring them to
everlasting life; but also to work the death of sin our most deadly enemy,
and to mortify it, and to purchase

Therefore to conclude this matter: seeing the godly and Christian course of
living is not a serving of God when we think good, but from time to time; nor
a looking to some of our actions, when others are not regarded; nor an estate
unpleasant to the spiritual man, whom the holy Ghost directs, but easy,
sweet, and comfortable; seeing also we have heard by many The elect must take
up this yoke.
that the elect and beloved of the Lord shall yield to the embracing of it, and
must take up the same, though it be a yoke to the corrupt lusts not yet
subdued: and that such as see not cause to submit themselves to Gods
commandments one as well as another, but will take their liberty in some
evil, after the desire of their hearts, cannot glory with any sound peace of
a godly life.

And consequently, that the life of the common Protestant, Life of the common
Protestant no godly life.
which counts it precisenes to be abridged of any liberty that he has been
wont to use, or yet likes to enjoy (how unlawful or offensive soever it be) is
nothing less one will come to the light, Ioh. 3.21.
that whatsoever is not as it ought to be, may be made known, and so removed.
But he that will not be touched, nor suffer his actions to be censured, nor
reproved, though he be far from this practice, but pleases himself in the
things which he does, is (without all question) fraught and filled with infinite
evils, and a bondsman to his own lusts, whatsoever opinion he has of himself,
and let such a one know, that his damnation sleeps not. But many of these
with who^ I have to deal, such as go for good Christians, Another objection
against this godly life.
and who in sundry of their doings are of us well to be liked (though God
judges the heart) many such (I say) do keep at a stay, or content themselves
with this, that they do no great Object. 2.
by whom they might take any great light to amend. To speak plainly, None now
live so.
they think there are none in these days, who do follow the steps of the
holy fathers, whose lives I commend: which kind of persons may be easily
convinced, and I will say no more, then I needs must. The truth is, that the
general state of those men, who embrace the Gospel, is much to be bewailed.
For although they are infinitely the worse, by reason of the swarms of
Atheists, Papists, Familists, and others, both Heretics and Machiuilians,
which with their stinking breath do poison many thousand inhabitants, which
dwell in the land amongst them: yet besides this, the abomination is great
without his flock is but small, Luke 12.32.

But notwithstanding this, in some places, and those many, throughout her
Majesty's dominions, where the Gospel has been soundly preached and
painfully, Many good lights amongst us.
especially in an ordinary ministry continued: such particular The communion
of Saints the sweetest life.
and be highly praised for them) with whom to have lived, and bin conversant,
has bin the next choice unto heaven it self, and to the communion of Gods
Saints there, which some of them do already enjoy.

Their names I spare for sundry causes; but such they were, whiles they Psalm.
19.12.
that in serving God there is great reward, and that godliness receives many
blessings, 1. Tim. 6.6.
as the fruits of Gods promises, even in this life.

And they do not as many, that is, give over and faint, as though the Christian
life grew wearisome and tedious to them; but the longer they have continued and
hold on their fellowship since they knew first the power of the Gospel: Phil.
1.5.
Yea many there are at this day (to Gods glory be it spoken) who have so
effectually tasted how good and sweet the Lord is, that they have been
encouraged to add to the times, and to their travail in the service of God,
as prayer, reading, for one hour in the week many, and for a little labor in
looking to their ways, A vvorthie growing.
watching their hearts, and searching out their sins, much and often: for the
profit which they have found thereby.

Christians must grow from their first untowardness in Gods service.
And whereas they have sometime gone about these spiritual duties untowardly,
Their growth must be seen in duties to men, as well as to God.
before they come to it? And yet if they should rest in these, I would not
think them worthy so great commendation, not adjoining therewith other duties
to men. But when they have found such delight in the former worshipping of God,
they have also walked more roundly and fruitfully in Matthew. 13.32.
under the wings of their good example.

Saul did so account of David (when he spoke according to sound reason) and
made him swear to him, that he would be kind and friendly to his posterity
after him, 1. Sam. 24.22. And such honor have the Lords people.

And therefore to turn a little to these obiectors, let them not think that
our age affoordeth none, which are fit to be examples to them; What use of such
lights must be made. Prou. 14.6. Psalm. 16.3.
but let them rather be wise to discern them (at least, that which is pleasing
to God in them) which is not hard to see, for those which are willing to
understand, but Let them reverence, and be in love with such as excel in
piety and virtue; and with the precious things which are in such: let them
aim at this also, that they may be like them, and not lie still in the
darkness, to the which they are accustomed. And such of them, as God has
blessed with some better liking of knowledge, let them love and frequent the
company of such as desire neither to be idle, nor unprofitable, seeing he has
set such amongst them, to far more great and singular purposes, then they can
by carnal eyes see or discern. Let them labor to see their own wants, cause
them to make much of those who may help to supply them, and of whom they may
learn to come by those graces, which they should without

And if they carry themselves in such humility, and reverent account making
of their betters, in whom there is a greater measure of Gods gifts, they shall be
no longer led with their former doubts, whether any are before them in the
Christian life, but they shall praise God highly for setting such lights and
examples before their eyes, by whom they may be directed: and when they are so
far enlightened, they shall soon alter their language, and speak with new
tongues: as they in the Acts (chap. 2.13. compared with 2.37.) who in their
prophanenes, railed on the Apostles, and said, they were drunken with new wine,
in the fore part of the day: but being converted by Peter's Sermon, they men and
brethren, asking counsel of them, whom they had so abused, rather then of any
other; what they should do to be saved. And this for answer to the second
objection.

CHAP. 20. The last objection against the godly life answered.
THere is yet another objection, that I will answer, and it might be a great
weakening of the holy courage of the servants of God, if they should not be
well fenced against it. And this it is: The third objection: against the godly
life.
Seeing we teach publicly the same, which I have before set down of the
estate of the godly, and profess without fear, that thus the people of God
must David, Peter, and others. It is therefore good (say they) for all men to
profess no more then others do, that there may be no great wondering, when
any great trespass shall be committed by them. To which kind of men, for the
better settling and quieting of Gods weak children, I answer.

Answer.
By the grace of God, bragging is far off from us, as we also heartily desire
it may be: 1. Pet. 1.17. and 4.1.
neither do we go too far, his word being our warrant. But we are not
afraid to utter that which we know; nay we dare not do otherwise, though it
be against our selves, as much as others, if we shall set light by it at any
time: neither fear we, that shameful falls, shall any thing the sooner take
hold of us, for speaking the truth boldly, but removed more far from us,
Prou. 19.23.
whiles we are nothing more afraid, then to offend thereby. And if either our
pride or boldness should break out so far, as that it should cause the Lord
to chastise us, Bitter fruit of declining.
or that we should be so careless, and improuident over our selves, that Satan
should again bewitch us with the deceitfulnes of sin, Mich. 7.7.
but to bear our burden of an unquiet mind, and the reproach due to us
thereby, and our punishment, which shall befall us, because of our offense: We
shall recover.
but though we should so be overtaken, yet shall we rise again: and though
many of us should fall from our stedfastnes; yet for all that, this is true,
namely, that God will have the holy and Christian life, which I have set
down, practiced of others: and howsoever we should be turned out of the way
for a season, and whatsoever might become of us; yet he that is able of stones
to raise up children to fear him, will provide true worshippers of him,
whatsoever become of us: and the truth of God remains, that such as will be
worshippers of him, 2. Tim. 2.19. Fall of David.
must depart from iniquity.

As for David, by the great wisdom and goodness of God, his fall was a glass
to behold Gods mercy in, not to imbolden any to sin thereby: and that like
trespassers who possibly might despair, 1. Tim. 1.16.
should not cast away hope of forgiveness. The sin it self arose from the
nourishing, and giving place secretly to his heart in such unlawful desires
(as by his eyes were occasioned) such as in this treatise I labor to call men
from; as appears by his own Against thee, O Lord, Psalm. 51.4.
against thee have I done this evil: as if he should have said, though my
offense be horrible before men, yet from hence it came, seeing I feared not
before God secretly, whiles yet the offense came not forth openly. And this I
say, that we may learn to beware of inward temptations, and outward occasions
of sin, and boldly profess to do both.

And thus I having answered this doubt of David, that no wise body need to
take hurt by it: yet because I know how some do draw such examples to liberty
in sinning, and even this one example as much as any other, turning it against
themselves, which they should take good by; I will add this one David did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord, 1. King. 15.6.
and turned away from nothing, that he commanded him, all the days of his
life, save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. As therefore it was no
usual thing with him, neither did he often thus offend in cases so well known
unto him: so it is no cause why we should be discouraged from a sound course,
for fear, least we should fall after the like manner, but watch in all things,
that we may be the further from such fear.

Peter (to say somewhat of him) before Christ's ascension, Peter's fall.
howsoever he was faithful, and in many parts of his life commendable, yet
had he no such he takes no pleasure in their troubles, neither delights he
in their sufferings, much less does he take advantage of their infirmities.
Lam. 3.33.


He draws them out of deep dangers, when they have plunged themselves into
them. And if we provoke him not, If we provoke not God, no fear of soul lusts.
there is no fear of reproachful evils to be sent upon us by him: and
therefore, if we count it pleasure to that we shall be kept from fearful
falls, Note. 2. Pet. 1.10.
rather then to be afraid of them, by being too godly: Neither was Peter thus
armed, when he so offended, but as we may easily see, therefore he fell,
because he was naked and unarmed.

And so it is with all others in this case, that so dishonor God as he did.
Now if he did fall, and we may also fall, whiles we are yet not without
confidence in God, what is to be thought of our best actions, if we should do
as many would have us, namely, to show and profess no more then others do; and
so make common professors examples, to be rules for our lives: what should
Object.
they can live no otherwise then they have done, nor discontentedly say, we
would have them take no delight in any thing; but husband and wife must sit and
look heavily one upon another: neither may neighbors be merry together.

For such may understand, to the first point of their objection, where they
say, they cannot leave the course, in the which they have lived (that is in
small

Great folly not to desire a better condition.
And being so, I would ask this of them, who is he, which having lived long in
a cottage full of penury and wants, cannot frame himself to a more wealthy
estate, if it befall him, and to enjoy greater abundance of all good Note.
And yet what comparison is there betwixt these things, and the high degree of
felicity, which in the Christian course I propound, in respect of the
deceivable, vain, and painful pleasure (for so I may most justly call it)
which they enjoy, who follow their old custom, and lust of their ignorance?

Therefore they must needs confess, that their blindness is to be bewailed:
also the heardnes of their heart, and deep unbelief, which holds them at
this stay, that howsoever we can bring them tidings of a better; yet having
been long bewitched with their darkness, and sin, as the people were with
Simon Magus his sorceries, Act. 8.
they cannot change their old course.

All carnal delights only lost.
To the second part of their objection, where they with misliking, say, we would
have them delight in nothing, that they have, as wife, children, goods,
neighbors? if I would have them live after such rules as I prescribe them:
Answer. Ephesians. 4.22. Romans 7.5. and 8.7.
I answer: that their whole conversation must be put off indeed, wherein That
ought to be no strange thing to them, which is so common a truth in the
Scriptures; even all that they hold of their own, Romans 12.1.
both in heart and life, as far as can be, must be avoided: Matthew. 16.24.
and therefore their lightness, rejoicing in evil, taking pleasure in the
creatures more then in the creator, and the making of these things their chief
delight: all these with corrupt mery-makings, must be pruned off from them,
(even as we would pare off the vnderboughes which suck up the sap and juice
from the good vine branches:) which, if they were fit to see it, have
troubled themselves and others, more then all their fond liberties have
pleasured them, and therefore both they and others should be the more

he walks safe and sure who walks uprightly. Prou. 10.9.
And he that does otherwise, and peruerteth his ways (as I have showed how, by
going from


CHAP. 1.
I Have set down a description of the life of the believer: by the which all,
who desire to be acquainted with it, after they have obtained the gift of
faith, may walk godly and safely through their pilgrimage, even so many as
have at any time in truth began, and gone about the same. Now seeing this
Christian life is vpholden and continued by means, Christian life is vpheld by
means.
and every one ones whereby they shall be able in truth as hard as it seems,
to lead this

Now as this does wonderfully declare the goodness and kindness of our God, in
ordaining of them for our exceeding great benefit and comfort: so we must know,
that it is required of us, and earnestly looked for at our hands, that we use
them with such care and constancy, as that they may be most profitable unto
us, that so we may find that fruit of them which God promises.

These means whereby God has appointed that his people shall continue, What
these means be, and their kinds.
and grow in a godly life, are such religious exercises, whereby Christians

The public helps and which they be.
The public, such as are used in our open assemblies: ordinarlie, these are The
private helps, and the kinds of them.
to honor God, as it becomes us: therefore, God has commanded us to use
private exercises; whereof these eight be chief. First, watchfulnes,
meditation, and the armor of a Christian; unto the which, is to be added our
own experience: and these properly belong to every one alone by himself. The
next are the use of company by conference and family exercise; and these are
properly to be used of a man's self with others: the last two, which are prayer
and reading, are common to both. The necessity whereof is so great, The
necessity of the private.
that if they be not known and used rightly and in good sort, the public will
prove but unprofitable, and the whole

And of the helps or means to continue a godly life, which they are, and the
kinds of them, thus much be said. Now I will (as I promised in the entrance
into this treatise) more fully show, what every one of these, is; and what
force they have (God working thereby) to uphold the weight of a godly life:
That all who list to consider it wisely, may see it, and so many as will use
these means, may prove, and find it themselves. And first I will begin with
the public: and afterward, speak of the private. And I will so handle and
speak of every one (according to the skill which God has

Neither let this trouble the reader, that I have made mention of some of the^
by other occasions in some other places: for whereas it may be objected, that
these means called helps, are spoken of in other treatises of this book,

And more particularly of the armor and of the parts thereof, this I say:
because otherwise, I must have given a watchword about it afterward, when I
come to speak of it in due place: that though I speak of all the parts of it
by occasion in one treatise or other; yet there I speak of them for the most
part, as particular duties to be done in our several actions: but here I speak
of them, as of such duties as must always abide, and be lodged in our hearts:
and that we may have the^, as a Larderhouse, always full of good and wholesome
victual, and not as one dish to serve for some occasion; where

CHAP. 2. Of the public helps to increase godliness: and namely, the
ministry of the word.
Truth.
For besides that they are by good evidence and testimony proved to be the
very truth and word of God (not the fantasies of man's brain) which he
wills us to Ioh. 5.39.
sending us unto them, if we desire to know his mind and will toward us:
Authority.
so the authority of them is such, that by whomsoever it be gainsaid or called
into question, we need not be troubled at it, and so be discomfited: no
although it were an Angel from heaven (if any such thing were possible) much
less the man of sin, Gal. 1.8.
who yet chalengeth authority to be heard before them.

And that we may not doubt, but that all Gods will is revealed in them, we are
taught, Sufficiency. 2. Tim. 5.16.
that they are all-sufficient, that is, contain whatsoever is able to make one
either an inheritour of salvation, or a true Christian, in which two consists
true felicity. Now for the plainnes and evidence of the heavenly Plainenes.
that is contained in them, by the means which God has used, and the order
that he has taken, for laying out the sweetness and beauty of them, they are
in the most necessary points, easy to be understood and conceived even of the
simple and ignorant. For besides that, he has commanded them to be reverently
and distinctly read in the assembly, Ephesians. 4.11. Exposition, and preaching.
he has given unto his Church most excellent gifts (I mean pastors and
teachers) to interpret and teach his whole counsel out of them; and to show
the people how to profit by the doctrine of them: and to make the right use
thereof, in such wise applying the same to them, as if they had been
particularly, and only appointed for them. And in like manner, he has
provided to have these his holy Act. 17.11.
confer the Sermons which they hear, in their own tongue, with the
Scriptures; and so find more clear light and comfort by them. All which being
considered, it may not hardly be gathered, what a singular help, a sound
ordinary ministry of the word is, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. 1. Pet. 5.2.
to build up more strongly a weak Christian in a godly life. For we must
consider that God has appointed this preaching of his words to perfect the
faith of his elect, and therefore S. Peter charge the shepherds to feed the
flock of Christ which depends on them: and our Savior ( Peter's John. 21.15.
that as he loved him, so he should feed his lambs and his sheep. And it
being preached with authority and power to persuade (not as the word of man,
1 Thessalonians. 2.13. Heb. 4.12.
which is but weak and frothie, but as it is indeed the word of the living
God) it is mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, working
in the people of God as a kind and forcible medicine upon a disease, and so
becomes the power of God unto salvation to them.

Benefit to the unregenerate.
But to say nothing of the benefit, which this ordinance of God brings to the
unregenerate, who as yet walk in darkness (for it is not pertinent to my
purpose in this place to speak of that, which yet is a mighty and great 1.
Cor. 14.24. Act. 26.18.
and from the power and bondage of Satan unto God) to omit that (I say) behold
the manifold uses and daily helps that the regenerate and people of God have
by it. To the regenerate.
First therefore, 1. Knowledge.
they are cleared from error and darkness about religion, and manners (wherewith
otherwise they are fraught and much encumbered) and grow more sound in the
knowledge of the truth, and see more particularly The virtues of the pearl.
that they must needs find the less fruit of the Christian life (as if it
were not to be inioyed at all) and so become more dim paterns of holiness to
others. Wherein this is more, 2
that they who use these means diligently and reverently, do grow settled and
established in their knowledge from day to day: whereas others, who are
destitute of this gracious help (do what they can) must want this (although
they may have some benefit by private reading) if they lose not somewhat of
that which before they had.

3
it cheereth them in their heaviness: it calls them back from their
wanderings. I speak briefly of ample and large matters (wherein I might be
long, and that also not without the readers good liking and desire) it raises
them up if they have fallen: it counsels them in their doubtful cases; and
wherein they are to seek of advice: and by experience of Gods dealing with
them in all estates (how he blesses them in well doing, and contrarily) by the
experience, I say, which they have, this preaching of the word of God
ordinarily, is a mean whereby they are fast settled in a godly course, 4
and keep well when they are well, rather then fickle and inconstant in the
good carriage of themselves, as

And yet to this (as great as it is) do even they who have had as weak
beginnings in the Church of God, as any other of their brethren (by this
heavenly direction taught out of Gods word) attain and grow unto. For when in
a sound, plain, and orderly manner, Gods will is laid forth in preaching,
this help many do get by it, that they do gird up the loins of their minds,
that is, learn to lay aside, and cast off that which would hinder them; their
inward corruptions especially: they prepare themselves to follow the

Besides this which I have said, The fifth benefit of ordinary preaching.
the true Christian by his ordinary hearing is taught, to give some part and
time of his life to reading of the Scriptures, and other good writers, as is
said in another place; and that with good fruit, The sixth.
And when a man is framed thus by the ministry of the word, he becomes a
light and an example unto others, in token that he has found great help by it
himself.

Therefore if he may by the preaching of the word ordinarily be led into all
truth necessary for him to know, and be delivered from error in religion be
established and confirmed in the knowledge of the will of God; if he may be
reformed in his affections and life daily, more and more increasing therein,
and ouercomming himself better thereby; if he may both be brought to bestow
some time of his life (as his calling will permit) in reading, and so as that
he may find profit thereby; and finally if he may become an example in time
unto others: I may boldly affirm and conclude, that the ordinary preaching of
the word is a singular means whereby God has provided that his people should
grow and increase in a godly life. Now then, they so using it, as they have
elsewhere been taught, namely in the second commandment, that is, coming to
hear with meekenes and hungry attentive in hearing, and applying it to
themselves, they reap the fruit, which I have said.

And if this be easily granted and yielded unto, I say no more but this: I
would to God that they, who are in great account for their religion, and do
often and commonly hear the word, did find it so, and did reap this fruit by
it, and were helped al these ways unto godliness, which (God does know) is
seldom so. And therefore where this sound and plain teaching is wanting, how
much more must the people needs be out of frame? But where the diligence,
skill, love, and plainenes in a good order of teaching cannot be found fault
with in the Minister, it is certain, that the fault is in the hearers:

Now if in this one means, so great help may be gotten, what may be thought,
when this and others go together? But I conclude with this exhortation, 1. Pet.
5.2. 2. Tim. 4.2. Luke 19.44.
Feed the Lords flock which depends upon you: and be instant in season and
out of season, O ye Ministers of the Lord. Know the day of your visitation, and
the by preaching, O ye people, who live under the ministry of the word: lay
up now in your harvest against the time of your necessity: and this be ye
persuaded of, that ye shall have need of all that you gather. Seek to enjoy
this liberty of the ministry of the word, ye that want it: and if ye may
enjoy it as easily and with as little pain, as you do your market, think it
worth your labor, if ye can no easilier come by it: Prou. 23.23. Matthew. 9.37.
and buy wisdom whatsoever it cost you, but sell it not, whatsoever ye may
get for it: pray the Lord of the harvest to thrust forth laborers plentifully
into the harvest, Ioh. 4.35.
ye that are white unto the harvest to be labored amongst, and desirous to be
brought into the Lords barn.

Lastly, all ye that have the oversight of the Lords ministry, see them teach
soundly, plainly, faithfully and diligently, who are called to it: and go
before them your selves painfully, as lights and good examples: that many
thanks may be given, and prayers made to God by the people for you, when you
shall give them so good occasion to remember you, and for warming their hearts
and comforting them with such good diet for their souls and liberal
provision,

And thus much of the first public help for the increasing and nourishing of
a godly and Christian life, in all such as have truly entered into it, that is
to say, the word preached.

CHAP. 3. Of the second public help: namely, the Sacraments.
P. Martyr, M. Calvin, M. Beza, and to ordinary teaching.

And this also I will do with as much brevity as I can: Therefore first
seeing the Sacraments are helps necessarily adjoined unto the preaching of the
word, and do visibly confirm and ratify that, which the word does teach: and
the covenant betwixt God and the believer made, The Sacraments confirm that
which the word teaches.
is most surely sealed up, and effectual on both parts by them, thereby it may
appear, what helps they are, both to the strengthening of faith, and
encouragement to godly will never call his sins to a reckoning: but will be
his God, John. 13.1.
and love him to the end through Christ; for the making good of this promise,
he has put to his seal, and has caused the same his promise and will to be
established in the sacrament, by so evident and infallible a sign as cannot
deceive. Now therefore does not this sacrament always remain to the faithful
receiver, to whom it is made out, and granted; a clear witness, that
whatsoever benefit is promised, is his: and as often as any doubt hereof might,
through weakness arise to the party, is it not hereby sufficiently removed?
Romans 4.11.
seals of the righteousness of faith.

And as God has thus couenanted for his part; What, God and the faithful do
covenant, each to other in the Sacraments.
so has every believer again in his own behalf couenanted to trust in God
always, to endeavor to walk before him continually in vprightnes of heart,
and innocence of hands: Now of the truth of his heart the sacrament is a
sign; which he having received, has openly professed thereby, that he has
given and consecrated himself unto the Lord, and is now no more his own, to
live as carnal will

Is not then the Sacrament a continual spurrer forward of him to perform his
covenant? Is he not by the fresh remembrance of it, encouraged against
temptations, wearines of doing his duty, and such other hindrances? Romans 6.2.
Does it not cause him to say against them all, how can I that am dead to The
Sacraments are mysteries to the unbelievers, but not so to the faithful.
live any longer in it? So that although to others the Sacraments be a mystery,
and hidden thing, and as a book written in Hebrew or Greek, which a simple
man opening finds nothing profitable for him, but says I cannot read it
(and yet the book contains most fruitful matter, if a skillful reader
takes it in hand:) although I say, he who is ignorant, find no help nor
benefit by the Sacraments; yet the true believer having been soundly instructed
therein, beholds much in them, to encourage and set him forward in the godly
life, having as sure hold of Gods favor, and help by them also, as the same
God, who cannot lie, is to be believed.

This may for the edifying of the simple, be seen particularly in the
Baptism how it is and help.
baptism and the Lords supper. For every faithful Christian which has been
baptized, may as long as he lives, have this benefit thereby, that as by his
ingraffing into Christ, he is one with him, and therefore sees that while
Christ lives, he must and shall live also: so he having thereby perpetual
union and fellowship with him, does draw strength and grace from him, even as
the branch does from the vine, that so he may live the life of a Christian. If
then he have that power of renewing him (which is signified and sealed by
baptism) namely the power of Christ's death mortifying sin, and the virtue of
his resurrection in raising him up to new life; is not baptism throughout his
life a forcible means

The Lords supper how it is an help.
So in the Lords supper, the faithful communicant, by the often receiving of it,
is not only by the bread and wine assured that his soul may be comforted by
Christ, and so inioyeth the same; but also is spiritually strengthened to all
good duties; so that he finds a most sovereign help by it, to grow up unto
a perfect age in Christ Jesus. And this shall more appear, if we consider how
manifoldly the faithful Christian is furthered, and set forward in the well
framing and amending his life thereby, both in preparing himself to it before
it come; Wherein worthy receiving consists.
in the action and present use of it, when he does The manner of preparing our
selves to the Lords supper.


And for the preparing or making him fit to receive with profit, this is the
keep his heart diligently to the renouncing, and subduing of all sin, and
ready to any duty that he shall be called unto. Fourthly, and more
particularly, but be reconciled to them, and at peace with them, as he desires
to be with the Lord. And fifthly, that he being thus qualified, desire (as he
shall have opportunity) to be partaker of this Sacrament, and to receive the
benefit which God offers by it. And this is the manner of examining a man's
self: unto the which rules he that is suitable, he is a welcome guest to the
Lords table.

But because much sloth, forgetfulness, darkness, corruption and weakness do
soon gather together, and so grow up even in good men, to the choking of
these forenamed gifts of God, that such as have sometime found all these What
is to be done, when we cannot prepare our selves.
be weakened, dimmed and decayed, that they do not rashly put themselves
forward to it in that case; but speedily seek to recover themselves again, by
a due examination of their estate according to the forementioned rules: Which
if they do then more hardly and difficultly obtain, and going about it, cannot
see clearly that they are thus furnished, as they were sometimes, they may
thank themselves; the fault is their own, for that they did so long neglect
the same, and did not labor, when they were well, to keep well

And can this preparation be any less then a great help to all, How
preparation to receive worthily is an help to live well.
which shall enjoy it? He who was before snared in the world, who had been
filled with strong corruption, as with poison, fallen into some particular
sins, who

How the faithful should be at the supper of the Lord. John. 6.55.
Now to come to the action itself, when a man rightly prepared, inioyeth the
present benefit of the Sacrament, and there is comforted and made glad (which
is meat indeed) and his blood (which is the only wholesome and sauourie
drink) are prepared for him; how can he but be much heartened and be set
forward in a Christian course, when he shall be thus revived and quickened in
his soul with the spiritual duties which by true faith he feeds upon, and
that no less sensibly, then he eats the bread and drinks the wine?

And yet thus much I will say, that if this merry making at the Lords board,
were either in hollownes on the behalf of him that bids (as it is with many
men who inuit other to their table) or only a temporary even a continual
feast; it has therefore great force to stir up the party to honor God. And
from hence it is, that the communicant, as one admiring the goodness and kindness
of God there declared to him, and of himself felt and inioyed; breaks forth
into praises and says, Cant. 2.4.
as is figured in Solomon his song, O Lord, thou have made me drunk with the
wine of thy seller! how sweet is thy love, and thy kindness past finding out?
Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render to the Lord for all his mercies?

Is it hard now to see, is it hard now to judge, how this heavenly banquet the
flesh strives against the spirit, as well herein, as in other works of it;
yet the faithful communicant in his measure, finds his heart ready to yield
up to the Lord in this heavenly banquet, no less, then I have said, even the
sacrifice of praise and thanks, though all do it not in a like measure.

And even so to come to the third point, it is of the same force, after he has
received the Sacrament, After receiving the faithful communicant is fitter to
live godly.
and inioyed the benefit therein bestowed upon him, to hearten him on, and
strengthen him to every good work; even One help being used, another is not
to be neglected.
as the weakness of it does require, as some public, some private: so he has
made this amongst the rest to be one, by the which, as by the rest, a godly
life is

Which I thought very meet to add, because of all other helps to the practice
of Christianity, I am persuaded, that the Sacraments are least thought, or
found to be so: and that they are used for the most part, without the benefit
which God has joined with them, that is, in ceremony only. And this wholesome
or right using of them, because it is little seen or inioyed; therefore is
there such negligence in repairing to them, and irreverence, disorder, yea and
profane behavior in the administering and receiving of them, which is the
principal matter that is to be regarded about the Sacrament, and looked unto
both of the minister and people.

1. Cor. 11.30.
the Corinthians example does testify and prove.

CHAP. 4. Of public prayers: also of the private helps in general.
THe public prayers solemnly offered to God in the congregation, and praising
of him with Psalms, is another of these public helps. In the which, if that
mind be in us, with the which we have been taught to come to all holy
exercises, and so be prepared for them; who doubts but that we may receive
much help by them? yea and the that they shall be heard in all things that are
good for them, even the most excellentest, and do then empty their hearts by
confessing their sins, and with the rest of the godly, lift up their spirits
and voices together in praising him; is there any doubt, but that they are
afterward in private more cheerfully bent to serve him? And in that the
ignorant (which in the best places is the greatest number) take no more profit
by them, it is not long of the exercises, but that they are unfit to receive
benefit by them: and a preiudicate opinion in some that they can take no good
by them, and therefore partly in ignorance, partly in rash zeal, they give
themselves to Matthew. 18.
and God present amongst us to assist us, as he has promised; the very
ordinance of God (who is the author of them) does promise a blessing thereto, as
often as we are partakers of them. So that if we come with reverence, and a
feeling of our wants, with an earnest desire and confidence to obtain the
things which we pray for, in true repentance, we shall receive fruit of them
accordingly. But herein a preiudicate opinion, which is a rash judgment, does
much harm. What holds some from public prayer.
For by reason of this, that the Ministers have been, for the most part
disordered persons and ignorant, and too many remain so still; and thereby
have brought themselves, by Gods just judgment, and their Ely did, into
dishonor and discredit: it has come to pass, that through rash and
preposterous judgment, many have had an evil opinion of that, which has been
done by them, and of the serving of God which they have used; and therefore
have thought that they have had good cause to sequester themselves from being
present at the service of God, which is performed by them; and thus they object
against it.

How others are withholden.
and such only to be allowed and offered up to God, as by extemporarie gift
are conceived and uttered according to every ones necessity: which opinion is
also to be reformed: Of both which I will say somewhat being objections, though
otherwise it be besides my purpose to discourse of them at large. This I say,
as I have taken in hand, that public prayer, as has been said of preaching
and Sacraments, is a great help to godliness, to all such as have any measure
of true godliness: or else it is long of themselves, who, through the ignorance
and darkness that is in them, do not know, that they ought to pray always with
all manner supplications and giving of thanks; and therefore

For to fortify this that I say, to the first objection I answer; Answer to
the first objection.
although it be not to be denied, but that the example of ignorant and
unreformed, especially notorious persons in the Ministry has done, and does
much harm; yet if either they cannot be convicted, or if their crimes be such,
as cannot remove them out of their places; there is just cause of grief, that
such should have any thing to do in Gods matters, which are so weighty and to
be dealt in with all high reverence: Yet, if this burden must be borne, I ask,
if ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. Ioh. 16.24.
And as it is far from me to be a patron of such, or to justify them: so
yet, while we may enjoy the ministry of better, I would not refuse to be
partaker of the prayers which are offered up by them. Who can blame him, who
desires to pray with better then they be? and yet better to join with them
sometime, then to leave the assemblies public altogether.

Concerning the next objection, Answer to the second.
that though the ministers be not offensive is no sin: and therefore ought
not to be offensive to any.

If it be said, how can men repeat the same form of words daily, as they do
in the reading of public prayer, but it must needs be coldly done, and so
abominable to God? I answer, it is not the often praying for the same things,
that makes it odious to God, but when it is done with an vnreuerent,
unprepared, and corrupt heart; for custom, not fervently and in faith. And
further to satisfy them, they may know that in all Churches, and the best
reformed that they would allege, there is a prescript form of prayer used:
and therefore they who are of mind, that it ought not to be, must separate
themselves from all Churches. Also if a set form of prayer were unlawful,
then neither were the Lords prayer (which is a set form of prayer

But these thus answered, I will proceed, persuading all good Christians to
lay aside contention, and endless, and (many of them also) needles questions The
book of Common prayer in the Letanie, and exhortation after Baptism.
or behave themselves in that action. But seeing they have liberty to hear
Gods word preached where they may most commodiously enjoy it, (for so they are
willed not only themselves, but to call upon their children to hear Sermons,
and the Ministers are urged as well by their preaching, as by their living, to
give good example) therefore to take their part in both, with cheerefulnes and
thanksgiving: And in singing of Psalms, such as can not read, should attend
to them who are nearest them in the congregation, that they may join with
them, and consent to the action of praising God lift up pure hearts and hands
to God. And as for such as refuse to come to take part in the worship of God,
altogether, as the Brownists and such like, let them bear their shame before
men, and their peace shall be small to Godward, while they sit at home with
their own bare reading for their diet, who scorn the best liberties of the
word

Now having described and showed the nature and use of the public means,
Necessity of private helps.
I think it needful before I do more particularly enter into the discourse
of the private, to say somewhat of the necessity of them, as well as of the
public. For that thousands of the professors, The private helps in little
acquaintance with men. And that also with some of the godly.
and of them which are of

For these causes therefore, and such like, this is to be known and holden in
firm persuasion, that the private are (in some sort) as needful as the
public: for they may be used at all times, whereas the public cannot; as in
persecution. For it being of necessity that as our bodies, so our souls
should have some daily refreshing: therefore seeing the public cannot daily
be

For men's coming to Church (besides which a great number know no other serving
of God) cannot do that good to the best Christians, The public without the
private, cold.
which is to be looked for, if it be not accompanied with these: as may be
seen in every part of the public worship of God. For hearing of the word read
and preached, does little profit, where it is not joined with preparation to
hear reverently and attentively, and where it is not mused on after, yea and
as occasion

Even so, what use do such make of the Lords Supper? who (for the most part)
besides that they cannot tell how to prepare themselves to it; so if some
Ministers, more careful over the peoples souls, then others, do teach and
examine them about the knowledge they have, yet cannot they be brought speak
even of the better sort of Christians, as well as of others) who sees

So to say the same of the public hearing of prayer in the assembly, it is
not only to be doubted, that they pray there in hypocrisy, drawing near to
God with their mouths, their hearts being far from him, if they do neglect
to pray alone, and secretly to God, and in their family: but also the public
prayer grows common with them, that is, wearisome, a bare ceremony, and for
fashion (so far is it off, that they be eased and comforted by it) as I can
prove by too sure experience at this day, in such as have not learned to make
conscience of private prayer, but do separate the one from the other.

No excuse for neglecting private helps.
And by this which I have said, it may appear how necessary it is, that the
private helps should be used of al such as have their part in the public. And
besides, as our necessities do require it, so the Lord commanding the same, he
has given time and liberty from our other business and duties either in
family or otherwise, to use holily and continue the same: So that our worldly
affairs ought to give place to them, which through ignorance many count
ridiculous, and foolish; and others, though they will not speak so grossly,
yet being given over to the world so griplie, will put aside little, or no
business for the serving of God. Although it is manifest, that where God

These few lines I thought good (before further discoursing of the private
helps) to set down, that they which use them conscionably, may not think
that they do any more then they ought, and have need of: they who use them
but slackly and coldly, may bestow greater diligence therein, and that amongst
all sorts they may be had in better regard, if they desire to see good days
here upon earth.

CHAP. 5. Of the first private help, which is watchfulnes.
ANd to begin with them, according to the division made of them, in the
entrance into this treatise: the first private help is Watchfulnes: worthily
set in the first place, seeing it is as an eye to all the rest, to see them
well and rightly used. And it is a careful observing of our hearts, and
diligent looking to our ways, that they may be pleasing, and acceptable unto
God. What it is.
And first, that it is an observing of the heart, Solomon Above all
observations, observe thine heart: for from thence comes life. Prou. 4.23.
And that it makes a man to look diligently to his ways, who so is watchful
indeed; let the words of the prophet testify; I thought I will take heed to
my ways, Psalm. 39.1.
that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth as with a bridle. And
that by both these, God is pleased, it appears by the contrary: For so it is
said, Hebr. 10.38. He that withdraws himself from living by faith, my soul
(says God) shall have no pleasure in him: even as he delights in the
contrary. This is in sundry places of the Scripture commended unto us, that
we should have a great care how we live, and watch over all our ways. Saint
Peter says, 1. Pet. 5.7. be sober, and watch: as though he should say,
notwithstanding we have sobriety, It must go with sobriety.
that is, a well ordering of our affections, which is a most fit virtue to
keep the life in frame; yet without watchfulnes, it will be lost, and depart
from us. Matthew. 26.41. Mark. 13.33. etc.
So our Savior joins it with prayer where he says, Watch and pray, least
ye fall into temptation: As giving us to learn thereby, that the force of the
one, is much weakened and abated without the other: and that men shall make but

And both render their reason why watching over our selves carefully, should be
a companion to us: seeing without it, we are by and by plunged into many
noisome temptations by Satan, and our own sinful hearts. Besides, The
necessity of it.
the necessity of this one help may easily be seen in our own experience,
by the contrary sin, carelesnes and security. For what does more easily
grieve the holy spirit of God, and quench it in us, then that whatsoever
chaseth away godliness? or what does so set open the door to all confusion?

And further, because of the urgent necessity of it, 2. Tim. 4.5. What manner
of watchfullnes we should use.
Saint Paul warnes Timothy not in some one or few, but in all; and therefore
at all times, in all places, with all persons, and by all occasions. It caused
that holy man of God King David to covenant and profess this, that seeing he
saw he could not discharge duty to God, without an especial regard and taking
heed to his life (by reason of Satan's vigilancie: Psalm. 101.2.
) I will watch or do wisely (says he) till thou come unto me: I will walk in
the vprightnes of my heart, in the midst of my house. And that I may not be
thought to speak absurdly, because I speak otherwise then most men's practice
does approve, view other Scriptures, and thou shall see this truth more
clearly: For I must make this foundation strong; seeing there is a great
weight to be set upon it. Heb. 3.12.
Take heed that there be not at any time in any of you an evil heart: this
that he says at any time, what can it mean less, then that from time to
time, the heart, and the manifold affections and desires thereof, should be
looked unto, and taken heed of, least thereby the Lord should be offended? etc.

This taking heed therefore to thy self, and to thy heart especially (because
from thence the words and actions do come) must be thy companion from time to
time, and thou must set this watch before the door of thy lips, and thou must
be well acquainted with looking diligently to thy ways, that it may go well
with thee, and that thou may prosper. But if thou be a stranger He that
watches best, sleeps sometimes.
(for otherwise he that watches most warily, cannot be free from offending)
look to find many wounds in thy soul, and to want many comforts in thy life.

And this I may boldly say, is the cause why many, and those not evil men, do
make many iarres in their lives, and break often into unseemly actions, and
do many things against their holy profession, which they by and by cover with
the gentle name of infirmities, when indeed they do rather

Much evil for want of watching.
And because this is seldom welcome to men, and little in use; therefore is a
well ordered and settled course, which should be diligently kept of them, a mere
stranger to the^. But contrariwise, because they are secure for the most part;
therefore they have at least both their hearts out of frame, and their lives
void of good order. For what other thing is to be said, when those which go
for religious shall be so hot, hasty and furious, that they are not fit to be
lived with, 1. Sam. 25.10. 2. King. 5.25.
as Nabal? Others so untrusty, and so hollow, that they cannot be dealt with,
as Gehazi? Alas, I am weary of so often reprehending, and complaining of the
unreformed qualities and actions of the most part of them who go for
Christians, and many of them (it may be thought) are so

How a Christian must frame himself to it.
But they must go about it, to purpose and set their mind and delight upon it,
if they desire to be the better by it. They must be content in this behalf, to
be dealt with as children, whom we will not suffer to handle, much less to
play with knives: and as people distracted are kept in from water for fear of
hurting themselves; so must Christians abstain, as the Apostle says, and by
all means weane themselves from that which their hearts would naturally most
desire, 1. Pet. 2.10. What he must weane himself from, who is watchful.
Psalm. 131.2.
even their evil lusts which fight against their souls to destroy They may
not be so bold as to venture into any company, without respect, nor to fall
into any talk which likes them, nor to give themselves any liberty in their
desires; the prophet says, he behaved himself as one weaned from his mothers
breast. And as experienced Christians cannot but remember how they lay open to
danger and offenses by all occasions, before they became watchful, and since
do see, what a benefit it is to them, and keeps them in safety on every
side: so they may easily know and be able to discern, how ill it goes with
all such as walk not accompanied with it: which by little and little must be
gotten, especially, because it is one of the helps, yea and that of greatest
use (as I further will show in the next treatise)

But as our Savior admonishes us, prayer is to go with it, as that which
does quicken, Prayer must go with watching.
and (as it were) put life into it, and that causes it to be continued with
much cheerefulnes, and little tediousnes, whiles we consider that God will
bless it unto us, even as by praying we believe: therefore he says, Watch and
pray, least ye fall into temptation: where also he does (and that

And for mine own part, I thank God, I can say, that many godly Christians
VVatchfulnes is counted too strict, till men be well acquainted with it.
for want of experience may at first, think the urging of this watching, to be
over strict; yet after further insight into it, as both commanded us of God,

As for them which object, that they cannot be so mortified as some are, The
answer to them who say, they cannot watch.
nor be always observing themselves as some do, contenting themselves with
that which they have, I say, it is a speech much unbeseeming Christians,

But to let them go, see thou, whosoever thou art, who desire to walk watch
in all things. And this is the rather to be marked and learned, because it
lends help to all the other rules which hereafter follow, for directing thee
in all the actions of the day, as I have said: Because (as it follows) neither
in company with others, We must watch in the particular parts of our life.
nor alone by thy self can thou please God, nor in prosperity nor
adversity, except thou be wary and watchful to be led by Gods word
therein. Paul to the Ephesians gives this warning: Ephesians. 6.13.
When ye have put on the whole armor, and withstood the enemy, by it; yet
after take heed that ye stand fast: least by the subtle and continual
attendance of the enemy, your fall be the greater. Which may easily be, if we
consider amongst how many occasions and prouocations we walk, and how
shiftlesse we are to avoid them: yea rather how ready of our selves to like
well of them, and give place unto them.

Why we ought to watch.
Our evil lusts, wherewith we be full fraught, do carry us headlong into
sundry iniquities, in so much that we can go about nothing, but we may
feel (if we can discern) that some one or other of them is in our way to hurt

If we be occupied in holy and spiritual duties, we have shame and hypocrisy
on the one side to hinder us: dulnes, wearines, untowardness, and many such like
poisoned corruptions, on the other side to break us off. If we have to do in
things lawful, and indifferent, and of their own nature not evil, as
recreation, or earthly business, we are secure and careless how we do them: we
have boldness to defend our selves, be the manner of doing them, and our end and
purpose never so vain and evil. If we go about any evil thing, we have
reason and strength of persuasion from the pleasure and profit to go Eccles. 7.
and not to look to the end, as we ought to do: but all sound reason to
dissuade us is weak, the devil showing himself at such times as a tempter,
who yet will afterward come to us as an accuser, when we should repent.

Therefore if we be not skillful to know these disordred lusts, diligent to
epsy, prevent and avoid them, and so have this foresaid watchfulnes over our
lives, as a helpful companion with us; it cannot otherwise be, but that we
commit many things unbeseeming us, contrary to the holy doctrine which we
profess to follow; and that in many things through the whole course of our
lives. Now when a man is thus carried of his intemperate

For hereby the Lord has freely granted us to find and enjoy another When
one is not watchful, some one cross makes many blessings unsavory.
then the most do know or believe, even a peaceable life to Godward, safe and
sweet, I mean, so far as of sinners in a vale of misery may be inioyed;
which whosoever be void of, although they have variety of earthly pleasures
and delights, yet one vexation coming among them, shall make all comforts
unsavory and irksome unto them: Examples. Exodus 8.
As may appear in Pharaoh, when but some one of the plagues Nabuchadnezzar,
Dan. 2.
when he had his fearful dream: and in Balthazar, when in the midst of
his iolitie, that fearful and unwelcome handwriting on the wall at midnight
was seen of him: Dan. 5.
and among all these there is none in whom this does more lively appear, then
in Haman, who for all his wealth, honor and promotion, could not satisfy
himself, while one mean man, yea a stranger, Mordecai, refused to bow to him.

And to come nearer to such of whom the true God was more heard of or known,
the same may be said of Saul; who although he were a King, yet when the Lord
answered him no more, his heaviness was deadly: 1. Sam. 28.
of Nabal was as a stone: and of Zidkijah, 1. Sam. 25.
who for all his boasting of the spirit of God, yet being a false Prophet and a
flatterer, was driven to hide himself from chamber to chamber, 1 King. 22.
when the arrow of the Lord was sent forth against him, when the Kings shelter
could not keep him, as Michaiah told him. All these when they had but some one
disturbance in their life, how did it make all other delights unpleasant unto
them? So that I may truly say, that as the life which is passed in watchfulnes,
is free from many, and those also the greatest discomforts, and filled with the
contrary peace: so whatsoever a man inioyeth according to his hearts desire,
yet

And what cause there is to urge this part of Christian duty of continual
watching, we may see by the example of our grandmother Eve, 1. Tim. 2.14. How
the best have offended, when they have not bin watchful.
who being in the estate of innocence, and therefore the liker to have been
kept from evil; yet seeing she was not circumspect and watchful to hold close
to the commandment, we see she became the cause of transgression unto her
husband, and consequently of the universal misery of her posterity. The like
we may see by the example of king David, whom though the Scripture does when he
walked on the roof of his palace; 2. Sam. 11.2.
behold how the devil had laid a bait for him (which he, as wise as he was,
could not discern) and by his subtle and secret handling of the matter,
caught him in his snare: So that he received such recompense for the letting
loose of his heart at that time, both in outward reproach and inward anguish and
bitterness of soul, that by good right should make other men cleave fast to
watchfulnes, and be faithful unto the Lord; yea and to beware with all
diligence, that they dally not with the baits of sin at any time, nor give
their hearts the bridle, until they be that they would adioyne herewith this
godly watch, a special nourisher and sauourie and poudred with salt; that
their actions be such, as they may defend with peace of conscience against
their accusers; and that they labor to suppress, and to bring into subjection
even their wicked thoughts and desires, and weaken even the body of sin it
self, I mean the old man with his lusts. For behold and this know, that even
amongst those who rejoice in the testimony of a good conscience, such do
always honor the Gospel most; most stop the mouth of the gainsayer, and do
carry themselves most constantly and continually in an even and good course,
so far as they have knowledge, who have been Other gifts much beautified by
this: and contrary.
and who have determined with themselves to stand upon their watch from time to
time. And on the other side, such as in who^ many good things may be seen (I
speak both of teachers and hearers) and are for sundry causes much to be
accounted of; yet being noted for rash and unstaid in their actions, and not
so much looking to themselves, by wise government of themselves, have done the
less good to others by their example, and have caused the other gifts which
they have to be the less regarded. God be gloried for the good that is done by
this in many: but if it were more commonly embraced and taken up of many more,
who for knowledge are able to season and give light to numbers, they should not
be most in disgrace The watchful observing of men's traditions, is far off
from this.
stand much upon their diligent keeping of the customs of their mother Church,
and the precepts of the same, who might therefore seem to themselves, and be
thought of others to be before others in godliness: let all know, that this
which I have said of watchfulnes, leaves not the least piece of commendation
to them. For they watch to keep the obseruances of men; but watchfulnes must
be used for the obeying of the comes not of faith, that is, of assurance of
the favor of God, and consequently that he will bless it (for this faith,
which they call the Protestants faith, they utterly renounce) without which
yet, Heb. 11.6.
it is impossible to please God.

Now to grow to an end about this matter. It is further to be marked, that
(because true Christians, and the dearest servants of God do complain of some
especial infirmities, wherewith they find themselves more troubled then with
any other) they must be more suspicious of, and vigilant against them, then
others. And because the devil does more easily wind them into some sins, then
others (as he sees their disposition and inclination, and thereby the We must
specially watch against that infirmity, which most anoyeth us.
do count it no offense, though they pass their bounds very greatly in
wantonness of eye, in liberty of speech that way, or secret desires, of though
they see themselves snared therewith; yet having through long custom nourished
their hearts in such loathsome delights, and too faintly misliked their offense
when they saw it, have brought themselves into bondage to their lusts.



For thus they say in their confession: We have sinned against thee, O Lord, 1.
Sam. 12.19.
but especially in asking us a king, besides all our other sins. And as it
troubled 1. Sam. 8.19.
and Samuel was sent from God to tell them what a manner of one he should be,
if they would needs have one contrary to Gods mind; it is expressly said, that
the people would not hear the voice of Samuel, but answered, nay, but there
shall be a King over us, and we will be like all other nations. Therefore as
their sin, whereby they did most offend God, put them to greatest trouble: so
must those especial sins, which have prevailed against Gods children, be
most watched against and avoided.

An illustrating it by similies.
And as in an house which has many and great commodities, and yet some one
sore annoyance, as a principal chimney casting smoke, with great speed that
shall be redressed, more then other things, which yet are to be regarded
likewise: so in the life of sound Christians, wherein many good blessings

And this help (as I have declared how) if it be used, and the means
faithfully practiced from time to time, The fruit of such watching.
let no doubt be made (seeing God has promised success thereby, even greater
grace in the use thereof, then the sin shall be able to resist) let no doubt (I
say) be made, but that they shall master it, so far, as it shall bring
peace; unless it be the case of unmarried

This advise how unsavory and unwelcome soever it be to such as are wedded to
their lusts, and will offer no violence to them: yet such as know the smart
that is raised by this sin, and that sometime the dear servants of God have
been deceived by it, will be glad to be directed and helped against it. And
that which I have said of this, I may say of pride, worldlines, anger, malice,
revenge, unjust dealing and lying, that as every man is more easily overcome
of, or hurt by them, more then of other sins; so he

But if men be either ignorant of this duty, or cannot be persuaded to set
themselves to the entertaining of it, and to get acquaintance with it, they
must look to live destitute of a chief part of godliness; or if it be but now
and then in some especial actions and parts of our life, regarded and looked
unto (as it is done of them who are not greatly experienced in the practice of
Christianity) it will make the godly life in great part to be bereaved both

Our hearts must not range where they list, nor our delights be fastened where
we please; but our eyes, our tongues, our ears, hands, feet, and the whole
powers of our minds, If we be but turned out of the way, we must speedily
return. Phil. 2.12. Prou. 28.14.
and members of our bodies must beholden within compass. In so much, that if
we see, we have but broken out of our constant course a little, and that our
consciences begin to check us, we should tremble to think what we have done:
and fear always for the time to come, least we should offend. We must watch
when we are well, to keep well: and when we have been deceived, to return
speedily again: we must watch in trouble, against triefnes and impatience: in
prosperity, against wantonness


NOw follows the second, which is Meditation: What it is.
And that is when we do of purpose, separate our selves from all other things,
and consider as we are able, and think of some points of instruction
necessary to lead us forward to the kingdom of heaven, and the better
strengthening of us against the devil and this present evil world, and to the
well ordering of our lives. I say of purpose, seeing we both must Matthew. 6.
as our Savior commands us to do, when we pray privately (these two being
companions) as in our chamber privately, or in the field, or some commodious
place,

And I say lastly, that we must there set our minds on work, about the
cogitation of things heavenly, by calling to remembrance some one or other of
them which we know: and so debate and reason about the same, that our
affections may thereby be moved to love and delight in, or to hate and fear,
according to that which we meditate on; so that we may make some good use of it
to ourselves. And this spiritual exercise of meditation is even that which
puts life and strength into all other duties, and parts of Gods worship. And
this the holy Ghost reports of Isaac the Patriarch, Genes. 24.63.
that he went out into the field toward the evening to meditate. Which had not
been commendable, if he had not used so to do (seeing it is the right kind of
such holy duties to be often in use) being taught of his father Abraham, who was
the friend of God, and very familiar with him, and therefore (we may be sure)
had much communion and talk with him. As also our father Enoch did, who for
proof hereof, is said in his whole life, to have walked with God.

And this are all such as desire to take any good by it, to know: that they
must be acquainted thoroughly with this sweet and heavenly communing

For otherwise we may muse and think upon any good things, and ponder our
words and actions which we do, to see them done aright: which yet is not this
kind of meditation that I now speak of, but that watchfulnes mentioned before;
which is a wary regarding, and taking heed to our ways, in one thing after
another. Which yet the Prophet calls meditation Psalm. 119.97. Josh. 1.8.
as where he says, All the day long do I meditate on thy word: and in Joshua;
Thou shall meditate day and night on the book of the law: which we know,
could not be understood of meditation by intermission of company, or other
actions, and business, but in their whole course a circumspect care and regard
that they might be done after the word. And the matter of this our meditation,
The matter of meditation.
may be of any part of Gods word: on God himself, his wisdom, power; his
mercy, or of the infinite variety of good things which we receive of his
free bounty; also of his works and judgments: or on our estate, as our
sins, and the vileness of our corruption, that we yet carry about us, our
mortality, of the changes in this world, or of our deliverance

These and such like are the matter of our meditation, and as often as we go
aside to think with purpose and desire of heart upon these things, or any of
them, for the better calling of our minds out of the world, then we are said
to meditate: so when in or about any of these, we sigh, moan, complain to
God, or rejoice, and are quickened in our hearts by such occasions, even

By this understand, what manner of exercise meditation is: Even such an
exercise it is, which is required of thee from time to time (as may be
convenient) through thy life, that by recording holy and divine things,
especially those which may make thee sound in the matter of thy salvation, a
little time (when thou may best) may be bestowed of thee to dry up thy
fleshly and The necessity of meditation.
How necessary this heavenly exercise and recourse to God is, may easily be
conceived, for that the hearts even of good Christians are so seasoned with
unsavory thoughts, desires, and delights of folly, vanity, and much other
naughtines (seeing the best are changed and reformed but in part) that they
think it utterly impossible to bring them to any better point; and therefore
many by this error do not greatly go about it: yet if such noisome poisons
be suffered to lurk and remain in them, we know, they do not only, as sour
weeds choke the plants of grace in them, but also grow up, and bring forth
most noisome and dangerous fruits, as by woeful experience men feel and try.

What our meditations should be of our sins.
there is no means so available, as this considering often, and deep
meditating on them: namely, what swarms of wicked cogitations and lusts, do
lodge in the heart, and to find them out, also to bring them into a vile
account, to be weary and ashamed of them, and so to entertain better in their
room. I say there is no help more available to hunt and purge them out,
because although by the word we know them, by conference we do revive the
remembrance of them, and by reading we do both: yet all these run out of our
riuen heads, Heb. ^.1.
and abide meanly with us to suppress our corruptions, and to tame our hearts
until we bring our selves to often and much musing and debating of the

Now when we see so far into the danger of them, and be wearied with the
noisomnes of them, that we will tie our selves often to gage these hearts of
ours, to sift our thoughts, to accuse and condemn them, Meditation purges out
sin.
as we find cause by the filthiness and shame of them, and herein will deal
truly, as we love our souls: then do we begin to break the knot of such
cursed swarms, and to chase away the lurking litter of profane thoughts and
desires out of our hearts; then we wax more watchful against them after, and
make more conscience

And so much the more we are to think it, because it is well known by
Scripture, and tried by experience, that our hearts are deceitful above
measure: and thereby we bear our selves in hand, Our hearts are deceitful.
that if we do once obtain Romans 2.28. Zach. 12.12.
if we do not find our hearts in our secret meditations (and when we search
our thoughts alone by our selves, how they stand affected) that we can feel
unfeigned hatred of evil to be in them, and love to goodness: we do but
deceive our selves. And in every little trial, we shall find it otherwise
then we would think: I mean, that sin sits nearer and is faster glued
to us, then we did imagine.

For as he which goes to war, is first trained and made fit to use his
weapon at home: We must set against our sin in our private meditation,
before we can cast it off in company.
and the scholar tries masteries privately, before he come forth to dispute
openly: So a good Christian will try what he can do against his affections
and sin, alone by himself in his solitary meditation, and resolve against
the same (accordingly as he sees the difficulty thereof to require) before he
can in his common dealings, with all sorts and companies, be strong from
temptations and falls, and free from offense giving in his words and deeds.
And therefore on the contrary, this is the cause, why so many bewray
themselves to be hypocrites before men, for that they have no trial of the
truth and simplicity of their hearts alone by themselves,

Oh how does this communing with the Lord in secret, and debating with our
selves about our mortality and corruption, and of his favor in vanquishing
them; how (I say) does this, as ointment mollify our hard hearts, and make
them to relent, and does relieve them pleasantly with the sweetness of it? How
does this estraunging of our selves from worldly impediments, draw us into
near and heavenly communion with our God? How does it make us acquainted with
the manifold rebellions of our nature? with our blindness, security,
earthlines, and infinite other loathsome filthinesses,

Other sweet benefit of meditation.
Oh the fruit and benefit, which by our meditation and private prayer we reap,
is so great (the spirit of God changing our hearts thereby, from their daily
course and custom more and more, and bringing the heavenly life into more
liking with us, and making it more easy and sweet, which with the men of the
world is so yrkesome and unsavory) that none can well

And as the Scripture notes, how the men of God, who are most commended there
for their piety, as Moses, David, Paul, and others, were much taken up of this
exercise; so I dare boldly affirm, that the most godly of our

2. These. 3.4.
Who have been ready and willing long agone, if they might have had any plain
direction to teach them how to use it; to prevail (I say) with them, to have
it in greater reckoning, for the near and inward acquaintance which they may
have with God by it, as by little and little they shall be enabled. But the
truth is indeed, that it is new and strange to such as have not been
accustomed to it, Meditation, a stranger to many.
though people of good hope: in so much, that when they hear by the word

To say somewhat therefore of the impediments first, The lets of meditation,
are diverse.
which hold Gods people strangers from the use of meditation with profit, they
are of two sorts: The first let and the remedy thereof.
The first is, when a Christian knowing this duty to be required of him, goes
about it, either in the morning (as I here persuade, if it may be) or at any
other convenient time, but he has no matter in readiness to meditate upon: he
is empty, barren, and utterly to seek about what to bestow the time, Want
of matter.
and his cogitations: for although he has heard many things in sermons, and
wants many graces, which might drive him the rather to meditation

Which when he sees, and thereby that he cannot proceed in the duty which he
has been taught to perform, and desires also to do the same: he is
exceedingly discouraged, made heavy hearted, and thereby the more Luke 16.2.3.
from their purpose one way, they will seek the accomplishment of their desire
many other ways, rather then to be frustrated.

Now against this Let, I have set down hereafter in this treatise a way to
remedy it: unto the which I refer the reader; that is to say, certain

These or so many of them as he may conveniently, when he goes about it, if he
has no other thing more necessary, and in the best manner that he can be
directed (through the counsel of any who is able) these (I say) are

The second let, and the remethereof.
The next impediment of the first sort that hinders a Christian from
meditating, is an unfit mind unto spiritual and heavenly duties, as when it
being carried after other desires, is slow and unwilling to be occupied in
cogitation or consideration of any holy matters: and therefore lets pass
this meditation, as finding himself utterly unable to enter into the same.

The remedy to both, as they can receive it, is one and the same; although not
to both alike easy: yet seeing they are both the Lords, let them bring their
minds to these considerations, and say with themselves, I have received a mind
to please God, to be teachable and ready to any duty: I have opposed I am not
a debtor unto it: how can I then yield to this untowardness of my heart, and so
sin against my God? Where are the manifold and comfortable privileges, which
he has given me, that I might be faithful to him? Am I weary of my peace,
and do I haste after mine own sorrow? Lord therefore bring back this ranging
heart of mine from the deceitful dreams, or fears, or doubts that it has
been snared in: and restore it to the liberty which it was wont to enjoy, that
is, to solace it self in thy favor, and communion with thee, and to count it
my greatest happiness to commune with thee, when I may. And this gift being
decayed, through

Thou Lord chargest me, thus to seek thy face, even thy sweet presence, which
I have gone from, and for a time been blinded, as having no ability to muse of
any good things, and have not seen that I was seduced, till I perceived that I
had lost this sweet liberty: now therefore (O Lord) show thy loving kindness
in my distress and weakness, and restore to me this liberty of my mind,
which many of thy children do find.



The third follows, and that is want of opportunity, and leisure, The third
let, and the remedy thereof.
by reason of necessary business taking up the time: unto the which may be
added this, that there is no convenient place to some, wherein they may go
apart from company, as the seamen, or such as must go far from their
dwellings, when they should use it, as having neither choice of room, and yet
the same taken Luke 10.42.
whom I exhort, to weigh (as it behooves all such to whom this belongs) that
one thing is necessary: and that the ordinary works of their callings are
not to put this duty out of place: for if they do, it is by the unskillfulness,
or untowardness of them who commit this fault: but the one of them is appointed
of God to go with the other, and both of them to stand together to the
upholding of their inward

Now to return, if any through necessary lets shall be constrained to let

The other lets are such as hinder us from the good and profitable use of it,
Two abuses of meditation. The first, to use it slightly, and so to make a
ceremony of it.
when we break through the three former, and these may rightly be called
abuses of it: and are two, which in few words I set down thus. The first is a
commonnes or customarines in it, when we through persuasion that it must be
continued, do it houerly and slightly, and so make a ceremony of it, not so
much looking how our hearts are well affected in and by it, as that we The
remedy, we must be persuaded, that it is worthy to be delighted in.
Which sin is easily and soon committed in private prayer also, and such
like good exercises, when our minds are not holden with a taking delight in
them: and hereof it is, that all the serving and worshipping of God is with the
most, but only for fashion: of all which it is said by God in the Prophet; In
vain do they worship me. Esai. 29.13.


The second is when, although we be desirous to use it, The second, when we
be clogged and fraught with fantasies and cares.
and that for our help and edifying, yet our heads are so full of trifling and
wandering fantasies, or worldly matters, that we cannot mind those heavenly
things, which are so contrary to them: And from hence arises a wearines of
it, and an hastening to more liberty, that our hearts may raunge where they
list, which is that at any time an evil heart. Heb. 3.12.


Even this (I say) is the cause why we cannot have our hearts at commandment
in meditation and prayer to attend upon God reverently, when we would. For when
we have at our pleasure given them scope through the day to fasten their
liking where they have desire, it has been hard for us to weane them from it,
when we would. And whiles we will be at this point, it will never be better
with us in our meditation: The remedy, we must carefully set our selves
against the corruption of our hearts.
no although God has appointed the same to be an especial help to the well
framing of our lives, and that our minds be brought into an heavenly estate
thereby, if we would frequent it: yea although we appoint some especial time
thereunto, yet shall

And till these by little and little be dried up with the flame of heavenly and
fervent affections, vnsually possessing our hearts in stead of them, it will
never be otherwise with us but worse and worse. And it is a thing to be wondered
at, that seeing none of our actions any day can be well done when our hearts
are not good, and so preserved and kept (which without circumspect care and
watch over them cannot be) it may be wondered at (I say) that we

Therefore as the Lord by his Prophets has cried out against the people in
sundry ages, that they perished because they would not understand, Psalm.
91.11.12 13.14.
nor at all consider their estate, and as there shall be an end of their
deceivable delights, although they cannot be brought to think of their end
and account: so he speaks as plainly, and has done from time to time of
this, that although in the world we shall have tribulation, Ioh. 16.33. Ioh.
15.19. We must have our conversation heavenly. Phil. 3.10.
even we whom God has chosen out of the we are strangers here, we cannot
neither may we place our hearts delight and felicity here, but our chiefest
comfort must be to have daily communion with God, and to have our conversation
in heaven, with him, (unto the which, meditation is a singular help) and what
weighty matters soever we be busied about, yet to remember our maker in them
all, that he be pleased and trusted in of us.

And in that many, even of Gods servants do (through their corrupt nature)
loath this heavenly Manna (I mean to be often and daily in musing on the things
which concern their peace) and have their teeth set on edge with the
deceitful pleasures of worldly men, Men lose a great part of their sweet and
blessed living here, seeing they will not use meditation.
who know no better: even to ponder them in our heart, to have them in mind,
to make them the matter of our cogitation, It is utterly unbeseeming, that the
weightiest matters should be slightly regarded.
delight, talk, and practice; yet that Christians of good hope should not be
better acquainted with this heavenly course, nor be occupied thus, but by
fittes, very seldom and coldly, as if God had been

So that although I cannot say, it is no part of their thought, which should
season all their thoughts (as I may say of many lying protestants, who do
shun and fly all consideration of heavenly matters, least they should
trouble and disquiet them:) yet it is too manifest that they savor too
slenderly of Gods presence and company; who shun it, by being strangers to
this meditation, whereby they may have fellowship and company with him.

Therefore to remedy this trifling out the time when we go about to The
former remedy more fully and clearly set down.
and not be carried at that time after wandering, we must remove that which
hinders us from it: I mean we must tie up our loose hearts throughout the
day from their deadly custom of ranging after vain, fond, and deceiuable
thoughts, dreams and delights: we must weigh how little worth this is, to have
our cogitations fastened upon things transitory, much less about those which
are filthy, but rather bring them to be taken up in those which are heavenly.
This we are called unto: and until we can learn to do thus, that how
weighty soever our dealings be, yet we count this the chiefest to keep peace
with God, and ever fear to offend

Now that I have set down the necessity and profit of meditation, whenever
we list to use it, and the especial lets thereof, I will now in that which
follows, Rules and examples of meditation, follow.
only help the reader with some rules to guide himself the better herein,
until it be more familiar unto him (and then he shall use it better Four
rules to direct unto meditation.
as the reader may easily gather them as rules. Here therefore I will set them
down together.

The first is, that he, who desires to have help by meditation, 1 Rule.
do weigh how slippery, fickle, bad, and wandering his heart is infinite ways,
Ierem. 17.9.
to his exceeding hurt; and that he must of necessity appoint some set time,
to check, reclaim, Psalm. 55.17.
and weane it from the same.

The second, 2
that he watch over his heart (having been so often deceived by it) throughout
his whole life, and have it in suspicion, that so it may be more fit to be
drawn to such heavenly exercises, and be stayed therein, Pro. 4.21. etc.
and

This being observed, 3
let him (if he be able) draw matter of meditation and prayer from his own
wants and infirmities; from Gods benefits; from the changes and mortality of
this life. I have before set down, what he should chiefly meditate upon: of
love, humility, meekenes, peace of conscience, the glory of Gods kingdom,
his love, and the contrary: but especially of that which for the present time,
shall be most auailable.

If he cannot thus do, let him read before, some part of the hundred and
nineteen Psalm: some of the epistles of the Apostles: Christ's sermons, 4 Ioh.
14.15.16.
or

Now follow the examples or particular meditations, which I thought good to
adioyne to that which has been said of this matter, to teach the ignorant; and
to help even the stronger Christians, when they be not so fit to help
themselves; and never out of season or unprofitable to either of both: I set
some of them down more briefly, that they may give occasion to the persons
when they are fittest for brevity, to discourse of the matters

But consider and be resolved of this one thing, that thou must nourish and
hold fast a love and liking of this duty: so that when thou art barraine and
unprofitable in thine own sense and feeling, yet thou may then be willing to
be well seasoned by it, and restored to thy former grace again. For if thou
be not so affected, thou shall find no savor in it, as neither in any
other good help whatsoever: Prou. 27.7.
seeing to him, that is full, an honey comb is And though I set down the
points that thou should meditate on in sentences not applied to thee: thou
must apply that which is set down generally to all Christians, to thy self,
as if it were spoken only to thee.

Particulars to muse on. Psalm. 73.25.
As thus for example, if thou would meditate on this point (The Lord is all
in all, and who is like unto him:) think after this, or the like manner, in
applying it to thy self: O Lord, whom have I in heaven but thee? and whom do
I desire on earth in comparison of thee? For thou art my portion and my joy, of
whom I make my songs even in the night season: I sigh to be unburdened, and
desire to be dissolved, and be with thee: Oh when shall I come into thy
glorious presence? etc. And Rejoicing.
it is both wisdom and our happiness to rejoice in our own going forward, not
in other men's: and in proving our selves, we may rejoice in our selves, not in
other, Gal. 6.4. Lift up thine heart to God, and pray him, that it may be so
with thee.

Christian life.
and frame himself after that Christian course, first before God.



Watchfulnes.
that he may have peace thereby, it is well.



Of falls.
It is no way tolerable to lie still, if a man be fallen, Ierem. 8.6. but to
have

Although in a well ordered course, Privilege of a godly life in trouble.
all crosses and encumbrances be not utterly removed: yet many by it are
avoided, and others profitably sustained, Prou. 19.23.

It is some grace to use prosperity well, that is, that a man may cheerefullie
Rejoicing
we may gather, that the benefits of God make us merry, and not our resting
in this favor of God.

It is a good thing to rejoice in our Sabboths, and communion with Gods that
God is our portion in all estates and places. Psalm. 119.57. 2. Cor. 5.16

When many earthly troubles take hold of us at once, Crosses.
we must carry our selves very soberly and graciously, if we be not unsettled
from willingness to duty by some of them: Frowardnes, impatience and forgetting
our selves being so ready, by the smallest occasions, to break out of us.

We seldom enjoy commodity, when we doubt of the lawfulnes or conueniencie
Worldlines.
but the Lord makes it as sour and discommodious in the end.

We seldom have in great price any thing below, as house, land, etc. but

Rejoice not at the first hearing of heavenly things only; but more soundly
continue it, when thou know them more soundly and better by experience.

Prepare and look for affliction before it come, least thou be besotted with
Afflictions.
that the burden of trouble may be easier when it comes.

In the midst of tribulation (because that easily oppresses) think of the
David, and Psalm. 77.



When thy heart can rest in God, and the pleasures which come thereby,
Sobriety.
take in hand all thine affairs soberly, that thy joy be not quenched thereby.
It would make one wonder to see, how by such occasions the heart is unsettled.

Deadnes of spirit, Of falls.
loggish unprofitableness (if not wound) take hold of a

The Lord is not far off from us, nor hard to be entreated, when after any

Of the manifold vexations that fall into our lives, Troubles.
we may observe that the most of them do become annoyances to us, through our
own fault: that we either prevent them not when we may, or bear them not as
we ought, or make not use of them as we might do. Conference.


The talking of the commodities of this life is so sauourie and sweet to
flesh, that being in it, we hardly get out of it, no not when better things
are

Calling.
When our callings become a pleasure to us, to discharge them faithfully for the
Lords sake, what outward helps of blessing soever God sends us, they shall
make our lives so much the more easy and comfortable: but these without the
other are but deceivable vanities. Col. 3.23.


Affliction. Luke 22.39. Ioh. 18.2. Dan. 6.10.
in the same he was taken and betrayed; but yet he continued his godly custom
even till he was led away: so must we look to have our best places of prayer
and walks, made traps for us: for the subtlety of the world know our haunt,
and where to find us. But let us persevere, that if we be taken even

Moses, Exodus 3.11. compared with chap. 10.25, 26. and the Apostles, Act. 5.41.

When matters of more importance then our salvation is, fall into our Matthew.
6.33.
let us be occupied in them with more feruencie, then in that: but if there be
no such, why should we more earnestly look after them? and why should not that
be with greatest delight wrought on, and looked after?

Love of God.
How can we say, we love the Lord, when we be not ever willing to go home to
him, and in the mean while to be as near him in all communion, as we may?

Godly life.
Christianity and practice of godliness is compared to a rich and gainful trade
(Prou. 3.14.) wherein little profit comes in, except it be well followed, and
diligence used in it, and one thing not let nor slacked for another.

To have a willing mind to be well occupied, and matter about which we may, and
time to bestow therein, and freedom from lets therefrom, is an estate much to
be made of; and yet for the most part, they who have almost all outward
encouragements, cannot tell what to do with them.

Of death.
Whereas the very name of death is fearful, when men hear that they must be
ready to suffer for the Gospel (and therefore many are dismayed) we must know
that we are the more unwilling to hear of it, 1. Pet. 1.24. 1. Cor. 7.29. 1.
Ioh. 2.13.
because we accustom our selves to love this world, and our life here, too
well; which must be less set by. And God, by diseases, and the miserable
estate of things in this world, and by many other means, can make our lives
loathsome and death

VVatch and pray.
It is needful, besides our set times of prayer in the day, to have often recourse
to God by watchfulnes and prayer, in all our dealings; least we go too far
in surfeiting our hearts with them, and (as we can) to look to God secretly,
Nehem. 2.4.


Whatsoever taste of good things we have gotten, Privilege.
and how sweet soever they seem; yet it is certain, that God has yet much
more then we can think of, if they be the matters which we have in greatest
price: but being set light by, and the means neglected which preserve them,
they die.

That estate is to be made much of, A good estate.
wherein we are not only delighted in serving God by the duties we do
presently; Psalm. 119.16.
but also as joyful to think of them which are to come, and the more, the
better they be.

It is a singular mercy, Privilege.
that we take comfort and delight in the things which we hope for, and in the
service of God; which to the world are most

The more sure of Gods favor thou art by faith, Faith.
the more humble also thou art, and not contrarily, Matthew. 15.27.

They are worthy of great punishment, Fulness.
who set light by the plenty of that grace, the crummes whereof Gods hungry
servants do set great store by.

What is more lively to our understanding then the heavenly and spiritual
course of a Christian, in comfort and godliness, throughout the Scriptures; as
Romans 5.4.5? and what is more unlike it, then the lives of men?

One especial point of profiting, is, Sight of our misery.
to know our own vileness and misery better daily, that so we may come to know
the inestimable bounty of God,

As excess of eating and drinking do bring sloth and sleep: Luke 21.38.
Iam. 5.5.
so surfeiting our souls in pleasures, cares, etc. rocketh us asleep, and
makes us unwilling and unfit to see what is amiss. In steed whereof,
sobriety, that is, a ruling of our passions, and watchfulnes are to be our
daily companions. 1. Peter 5.7. Psalm. 5.8.

We must not flatter and deceive our selves with the calling to mind of the
forwardnes and care that has bin in us in times past, Phil. 3.14. How needful
it is to set our selves to go on through difficulties.
hereby to gather sloth unto the flesh, which is ready to take the smallest
occasions that may be to to despise the shame of the cross, Heb. 13.13.
although it be even to the thrusting of us out of the world: and therefore much
more in prosperity, to be fruitful in all good works. Ioh. 15.8. Col. 1.11.


Seeing it pleases the Lord to let us know, that we have this precious and
blessed liberty, all the day long to be with him, to enjoy his presence by
faith, Deuteronomy. 33.18.
to solace our selves in bold affiance in him, and that for all good things;
and

When men receive not the word with meeknes, that it may be ingraffed in them,
Perseuarance,
Iam. 1.21. and do not so hear, that they may believe (Act. 14.1.) but take a
taste and a liking, at the most: I deny not, but for some cause, one may hold
out longer then another: but if they go not forward, ye shall see them fall

When we are afflicted, and the wicked spared, our state seems to them most
vile. When we are both in prosperity, they seem more happy, the^ we. When
they and we be both afflicted, they count our state happier then their own:
But especially when they are afflicted, and we spared, Exodus 14.25.

Depend on God.
We may not assign the Lord in what place, state, condition, or in what
company we would live, but as strangers wait on him, even as the hand-maide on
her mistres, for whatsoever he will allow us. And when great afflictions come,
yet not to be discomforted, nor unquiet, but cheerful still through

We are ready most commonly to be called away by death, before we be fit, or
have learned how to live.

There must be growing daily.
Look what care, conscience, zeal thou had, when thou first imbracedst the
Gospel, what reverent admiration at the excellency of it, and what love
toward it; the same at least retain, and be sure thou keep still
afterward. And howsoever thy heart was weaned from the inordinate love of the
world, and vain delights, which might quench those which are spiritual:

One sin or other commonly trouble us.
If a man be a diligent obseruer of his course of life, he shall seldom find
himself free from all kinds of offenses, but one shall trouble him much, if
another be weakened; yea and without much faithfulness and strength of grace
shall prevail against him. But if there be care, that they weigh not down the
affections in being too much taken up of them, it is well: for the Christian
man's life is a continual battle, and when it cease, we are ready
Subtlety in our living does most deceive our selves.
or on the right to fall to evil and danger.

As we are subtle to beguile our selves, so we do especially in this one
thing, that where we either are perceived easily, when we be out of the way, or
be afraid of ill report; there we can frame our selves to sobriety, and to
the keeping of measure in our lives: which is no sure token of peace and safety
to our hearts, though for the present time we avoid offense. But where we are
daily conversant, and therefore shall have more occasions to run into some
trespass (especially with our inferiors, before whom we think we should not
regard how loosely we behave our selves) there we look not so carefully to our
selves, 2. Cor. 1.12. Job. 31.13. To lose grace.
which should most chiefly be don of us.

By this, that we see that grace is given to a Christian at his first
conversion, to have victory, and to get strength over great sins, long
delighted in; it appears how they abuse grace, who have long been counted the
Lords people; when they many years after, do yield and give over themselves to
sudden and weaker temptations, and are easilier overcome of them, though they
have less force in them.



It is wonderful, that a man knowing that he shall not enjoy the grace now
that he had twenty years agone, except he be as careful to keep it, as he
was then to come by it: yet that men shall be so loath to strive for it by such
holy endeavor of hearty prayer, when they wax weak: and though they be
resolved never to offend in the reprochfullest sort; yet that they love to
linger after the same in affection and desire, which neither they can have
without unutterable woe, neither dare set their minds to enjoy, though they
might.

Keep down carnal liberty, and thy spiritual liberty shall be great; and

No man can live long and comfortably, as Psalm. 34.12.13. unless he fly from
evil and do good, and that betimes, Eccles. 12.1. and why not? seeing heathen
men got learning and friends in their youth, that the waywardnes and tediousnes
of their old age might be mitigated.

Seeing in age we are awaked by the least voice of a bird: and yet take no
pleasure in the sweetest noise of the musical instruments: By the first we
learn to be partakers of that rest and Sabbath which belongs to the people
of God; from the which, God commands in the Canticles, Cant. 2.7.
that we be not awaked. By the other we are to learn, that being washed and
well

That we must remember God, walk with him, and serve him by days and not by
weeks, and months only: that proves Psalm. 90.12. Teach me to number my
days: where he sets himself to it by days and daily.

The godly may do that with delight, which is tedious and wearisome to the
wicked, that is, to walk with God at large and at liberty, Psalm. 119.45. and
take pleasure in good things, whereby they may avoid many troubles utterly
which would oppress them: seeing the greatest sins bring the greatest

Such variety of good things is in Gods word, that we may have by the
meditation thereof, good provision to keep our lives from shameful evils: and
though by Satan we should be turned away; yet by our knowledge and experience
we may return (who else can?) and when we cannot do good, yet we may keep
from evil.

While we have peace in the land, we are at variance in our towns and houses:
and when we have all, we are often times not at peace with God.

Husbandmen long for their fruits; but we do not so, for that which we

If we can rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, then are we Christ's friends;
and therefore dear unto him, Luke 15.6.

If all stolen liberty cost men as dear, as rouing fancies do some, they
would make small haste after them, Psalm. 51.4.11.

Few do make due reckoning of the benefits which they presently enjoy,

Never better liking in health and bodily welfare, then when we are most
heavenly minded.

In this time of hardness of heart which is in the greatest number, and this
spirit of slumbring, this is to be most lamented: that there are few to lay it
to heart, and morn for it; but senseles, or taking part with them.

Seeing the most find no savor in prayer, and yet the Scripture charge us
never to be weary of it, know that there is precious fruit of it: and that is,
when we praying in faith and repentance are answered from God;

Many professors do not only drown themselves in the world, but also when
they come in company, they poison others, with casting the smoke of their
naughty hearts upon others: so far off are they from checking themselves,
for any of their sins.

There is no just cause of doubting of Gods favor, by our outward afflictions,
or our inward infirmities (both which yet do often cause us to doubt) but by
sin, which we willingly commit, and lie in: and it is just Peter Luke 22.62.

When we are well humbled, God will cease to afflict, Matthew. 11.29. Let the
desire of them, who think they have it aright, be sound, that it may begin
well: secondly, fervent, that it may grow: and constant, that it may continue;
then it shall seek for reconciliation with God: which in a touched and humbled
heart is a sign of faith; and will after grow to greater strength, for the
hungry desire after grace is a sanctified affection; yet has the wicked no
whit to think his state good, fleshed for all this: for they have only
flitting desires to do good which come to nothing; but the other has
reformation of life with it.

Let outward afflictions the greater they be, as losses, disgrace, diminish the
infirmities which are inward of the mind (as impatience, and rebelliousnes of
heart) not increase them.

Before sin be committed we extenuate it as Esau; after it is committed, we
contrarily aggrauate it, as Judas. For the devil comes first as a tempter;
after, as an accuser.

We shall never want somewhat to exercise us, sin, or trouble: neither were
it profitable for us, to the end we may be ever in combat.

Though we do a good thing, yet if it be not in knowledge, it is sin, Ioh.
13.17.

No good thing abides long with us in his strength, and beauty, without new
quickening: yea quailing and deadnes sometime grows upon us, what means
soever we use.

We cannot rest in any estate, how prosperous soever, except we see the Lord
go with us to guide us.

We should not suffer our selves to be carried from the best things, whatsoever

When we feel any wearines in a godly course, by what occasion soever it be,
the devil has met with us. Complain therefore and relent we, for our
unkindness, and wandering from God, and he will be found, and return right
soon. Hos. 4.3. Cant. 3.3.

It is well proved, that faith and godliness are the vpholders of our joy and
peace, Romans 5.1.6. and 2. Cor. 1.12. and that they make an hard estate easy;
and a prosperous, fruitful. 2. Cor. 6.10. Act. 9.31.



God is not only the same to us in afflictions, that he has been, but will be
felt more sweet, when the world becomes more bitter.

That seeking of ease, profit or pleasure, ought to be restrained, which
holds from seeking the common good of others.

We may observe, that when our Christian state is at the best, it is no better
then it had need to be: but when we consider how many ways we might
decline, we may thank God it is no worse.



A great difference there is, betwixt the continual observing and viewing of
our life from day to day, and the doing of it by fits now and then: in the one
we are safe, cheerful, and fruitful: in the other, rash, offensive, and
after unquiet for it, walking in fear and with little comfort.

If thou will find Christ sweet, thou must ever find sin sour.



It is to be feared, that many professing the Gospel with some liking, do
only generally aim at godliness, and therefore they have many vnsetlings and
rangings out: but they do not particularly look to themselves; therefore they
gather not experience, nor find any great fruit of it.

Fear ever to offend God, and thou need fear no other peril: as ill
tidings, Psalm. 112.7. Exodus 20.20. for he keeps thee, Psalm. 32.7. and 91.11.

It is strange, that we having no good part in our life, but through the well

They who can neglect, and set meanly by a little vain glory and credit with
men, may gain and enjoy much peace with God.

A man by Gods spirit shall do a thing well, which another without it shall
do very ill: Josh. 6.4. compared with 1. Sam. 4.4.

Look not to tie God to thee in thy need, who regardest not him in thy ease.
1. Sam. 4.5.

They are rare men, who are not led by their passions into extremities, seeing

Many at their death hold that they ought to be godly: but is it not good at
one time, which is at another?

He is a rare person, who is in favor with God, when he afflicts, Psalm. 2.
verse. 12. and he often afflicts; because we should believe that he will
deliver us.

It is folly, yea madness, to be heavy to death for any earthly thing, when
yet a man desires nothing more then life.

All our life ought to be a providing for a good end: and a keeping away

When the Scripture tells us of the happiness of the Church, as Psalm.
89.11. and 87.3. we may think we come short very much, when we esteem not our
estate better then the best of the world.

If we would ever through the day be at peace with God, and know we are
pardoned, we must be ever ready to remove our sins, which raise a
controversy betwixt us.

We would willingly please our selves in some unlawful liberties, when we have
pleased God in some duties. But a wise man will keep well, while

The more grace we perceive in any man and constancy, and the more he is like
to God, the better we ought to love him, as Christ did John, and contrariwise,
Ioh. 13.23. Psalm. 15.4.

This is a worthy thing: when in fear of, or by great afflictions, our
innocence and repentance is so sound, that we have bold confidence to

Where there is wilfulnes in sinning, there is great difficulty in relenting:
as also no power nor boldness in believing.

As for such as count it more then needs to seek and to make chief
reckoning of godliness, let them learn what these Scriptures mean: are they
not for use? Psalm. 87.3. and 84.11.12. One day in thy house (O God) is better
then a thousand elsewhere: And Psalm. 4.8. Try out therefore the truth of
them.

When we become to the highest degree of serving God with much travail, yet
we abide hardly and a short time therein: at least much unprofitableness and
barrennes will meet with us again after, even by means of our corrupt
hearts: which being so, we need not think that we be too forward, when we be
at the best.

Many beginning well in godliness, have fainted and quailed, or been justly

When petty troubles arise in families and other ways, we should stay our
selves thus: These are small, in comparison: and I must look for greater. Heb.
13.5. and 12.4.

The careful observation of our hearts and ways, is an especial mean to
keep us from evil, and to see our infirmities better, that we may bow to God
and obtain pardon of them.

Where new knowledge is not sought, there is the less savor in, and use of
the old: and when men make not good use of the old, the seeking of new

Seeing the conscience is so tender, and so soon pricked, a man would marvel
how they do, who make many breaches therein, and solder them up slenderly and
easily.

Men having experience of Satan's malice and continual dogging them to evil,
it should teach them to trust better to their armor, and less to themselves.

Dispose thy outward affairs with wisdom, and so as thou spend not overmuch
time about the same, when thou may do it in a little: whether it be in
company by talking thereof (for commonly when we enter talk

If any of Gods children will wax bold against the Lord and break forth to
seek liberty amiss, he shall surely smart for it. Psalm. 89.31. If mine own
children break my laws and keep not my commandments, I will punish their
sins with the rod, and their offenses with the scourge. And if they sin
openly against their conscience, they shall one time or other, and one way or
other, come to smart for it openly: As Josiah, 2. Chron. 35.22, 23.



Men have never too much wealth, but the more is ever welcome: Why should not
we do the like in spiritual things, even whosoever has most (1. Cor. 14.1.)
and greatest part therein? For a while, we find sweet savor in an holy
estate often times: but the strength of fervent desire is soon cooled many
ways, namely by fear of outward troubles, and losses, etc. for if that take
hold once, it eats deeply.



Where we suspect that conceits grow, if we go not about to pull them up,
they will be too deeply fastened in a short time.

Though a man pray and meditate and keep a better course in his life then some
do; yet if he do it but slightly, that the flesh prevails much in hindering
the well performing of it, all will soon come to naught, it

It is good so to task our selves with duties, one or other at all times and
in all places, that so doing we may cut off occasions of much sin.

Let no sin be slightly passed over or committed: For when it comes to
remembrance in trouble, it will be an heavy burden, and pinch us to the heart.

Seeing in age our company will be tedious, and we shall be left alone without
company, let us learn in our youth, to join the Lord to our company; Ioh.
14.22. Revel. 3.20.
and to have him our familiar: that we may be never less solitary,

He that can sin freely, and give it no vent out again, by repentance,
though he will not see, nor remove it; yet seeing he knows he must, Lam.
3.40. he shall not thrive nor prosper in Gods family, nor taste of his
dainties by faith.

Sundry necessary observations for a Christian, fit also to meditate upon.
1. THat we keep a narrow 1. Pet. 1.15. Psam. 39.1. Ephesians. 5.15.
watch over our hearts, words, and deeds

2. That with all care the Ephesians. 5.16. Col. 4.5.
time be redeemed, which has bin idly, carelessly, and unprofitably spent.

3. That once in the day at the least private Col. 4.2.
prayer and meditation be used.

4. That care be had Luke 14.15.16. Heb. 10.
to do, and receive good in company.

5. That our family be with diligence and regard Deuteronomy. 4.9. and 6.7. Genes.
18.19.
instructed, Prou. 31.27.28.
watched over and governed.

6. That no more time or care be bestowed in Col. 3.2.
matters of the world, then must needs.

7. That we stir up our selves to Heb. 13.16. Gal. 6.10.
liberality to Gods Saints.

8. That we give not the least bridle to wandering Col. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.3.4.
lusts and affections.

9. That we prepare our selves to Matthew. 16.24
bear the cross, by what means it shall please God to exercise us.

10. That we bestow sometime not only in Dan. 9.3.4. etc. 20. Lament. 1.1.
mourning for our own sins, but also for the sins of the time and age
wherein we live.

11. That we 1. Cor. 1.7. Tit. 2.13.
look daily for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, for our full deliverance
out of this life.

12. That we use (as we shall have opportunity, at least as we shall have
necessity) to Iam. 5.16.
acquaint our selves with some godly and faithful person, with

13. That we Eccles. 7.4. Phil. 1.23. Revel. 22.20.
observe the departure of men our of this life, their mortality, the vanity
and alteration of things below, the more to contemn the world, and to continue
our longing after the life to come. And that we meditate and muse often of our
own death, and going out of this life, how we

14. That we Deuteronomy. 17.19.20. Josh. 1.8. Psam. 1.2. Dan. 9.2.
read somewhat daily of the holy Scriptures, for the further increase of our
knowledge, if it may be.

15. That we Nehem. 9.38. 2. Chro. 34.31.
enter into covenant with the Lord to strive against all sin, and especially
against the special sins and corruptions of our hearts and lives, wherein we
have most dishonored the Lord, and have raised up most guiltines to our own
consciences, and that we carefully see our covenant be kept and continued.

16. That we 1. Pet. 1.14. 2. Pet. 2.20.21.22.
mark how sin dies and is weakened in us, and that we Matthew. 11.8. 1.These.
5.22.
avoid all occasions to sin.

17. That we Revel. 2.4.
fall not from our first love, but continue still our affections to the liking
of Gods word, and all the holy exercises of religion Iam. 1.19.
diligently hearing it, and Iam. 1.22. Romans 2.13.
faithfully practicing the same in our lives and conuersations: that we Eccles.
4.17.
prepare our selves before we come, and meditate and confer of that we hear,
either by our selves, or with other: and so mark our daily profiting in
religion.

18. That we be often occupied in Ephesians. 5.20. Psalm. 116.12.13 and 118.15.
meditating on Gods benefits and works, and sound forth his praises for the
same.

Phil. 1.23. 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
exercise our faith by taking comfort and delight in the great benefit of our
redemption by Christ, and the fruition of Gods presence, in his glorious and
blessed kingdom.

20. Lastly, that we make not these holy practices of repentance common in
time, nor use them for course.

And these I have set down to help thee to meditate. And who sees not now, by
that which has been said, that a good heart may be able to meditate? That as
the exercise itself is both very needful for all Christians, and many ways
gainefull, so none may have just cause to complain, that they cannot tell how
to make use of it. But let us remember, that besides the Persuasions to use
meditation.
which otherwise would be yrksome and painful, even to them who are best
able to pass it well. And therefore to neglect it, shall not only be gross
unthankfulness: but a charging of the Lord with a work merely needeles. Let us
also, for the better heartning of ourselves hereunto consider the uncertainty
and shortness of our life, and the warnings which God has given us of our
mortality, not only by the doctrine of his word and common experience, but
more especially, within these few years, by taking from us so many worthy
instruments of his glory, Just cause to complain of the want of meditation in
all sorts of men. Luke 23.28.
that we might the more shake off the burden and weight of the inordinat
desire of living here, as boults from our heels.

But as it is too true, that the righteous perishes, and no man almost
considers it, that they are taken away from the evils which shall meet with
such as remain behind: so, who is meet to hear our Saviors words, weep
for your selves, and therefore to muse and think deeply of it, that he may
do it. So that meditation should be one with us, whatsoever should be the
other: That it might not be verified in us, which was complained of by the
Prophet Jeremy: I stood and hearkened when God reproved the peoples security,
Ierem* 8.6.
to see, if any would return; but there was none that said, what have I done?
As if he should say, there was none, that pondred in his heart, how God was
offended. 1. Tim. 4.15.
Paul willed Timothy to meditate and thoroughly exercise and season his mind
with the doctrine which he delivered to the people, even to be taken up of it,
that both he himself might be thoroughly seasoned with the doctrine for every
part of his life; and that he might feed his hearers the more plentifully.

Especially in the minister.
But alas, how slightly is the Apostles admonition regarded of a number even in
the ministry? who, though some of them read much, and teach good things in
their sermons, when they do preach: yet have they small use of their
knowledge; neither deliver any thing by their own meditation, more then they
find in their commentaries; whereas, if they did, they should draw abundant
matter out of their private readings. Besides that, many receive whatsoever
they find in their books, seeing they meditate not upon it: and so, as they
can the less speak privately of the same things (which they deliver
publicly) to the edifying and consolation of him, who demands a question of
them, seeing they speak only out of the book:

As for the objection of the one or the other, that they have the world to
Objection.
and to care for (for this is the probablest defense that they have, for the
omitting and neglecting of it) they should know it to be their sin, that they
will thus set God against himself, Answer.
as though he should command them to do that, which hinders them from an
other duty commanded. Nay rather, they should think, that following of the
world to be too much, which is not moderated and ordered by the due considering,
how far, and in what manner they should deal in the world: that is, not to be
hindered from holiness by it. If they be rich, they have the less cause to be
holden from it, by worldly care. If they be poor, they have the more need of
it, to moderate their care, that it exceed not, nor carry them to unbelief.
For it must We should not beheld from meditation, by worldlings example.
which is godliness. And what example so ever they have of the contrary in the
multitude of worldlings, among whom they live; yet they must know, though
others will not, that they are not set here in their places, and callings, to
do as loose and retchles servants, when they go to market: who when they
should buy provision for their masters

Neither should they be like bad husbands, who reckon what they have coming
in, but not what must go out of their hands, who are not like to uphold their
occupying long. But they must be like the wise builder, Luke 14.30.
who looks whether he be able to make an end, when he has begun: So should
they every while, be looking and wisely considering, whether they take the
course to finish the building of their christian life, even to the full
perfecting of it, which is another manner building, then any made with hands.
And he that will meditate on this seriously, and such other good things as
further this, he shall inherit a building made without hands, which is
immortal. And he that loves to smell on the sweet savors, more fragrant
then Aarons ointment, which in his Soliloquies with God and in his meditations
he receives of him, even the sweet odors and graces of the spirit; he shall
smell of Gods presence in his talk, company, and dealings: which will
testify, that he came from God. And especially on the Sabbath, when the whole
day is appointed of God to it, and the like spiritual services (the word
preached giving so gracious occasions:) that man shall be able to say, that
meditation is a wonderful help to faith and a godly life.

CHAP. 7. Of the third private help, which is the armor of a Christian: and
of the first three points of it.
THe third private help is the armor, which was next mentioned among the
rest. This being not so clearly understood, nor the use of it so well seen
into, requires a more full handling, then I purpose to use in the most of the
rest. assaults of the devil, that he be not led by, nor overcome of them, nor
of the manifold bad passions and evil desires of his own heart, which
otherwise will draw him continually after them. But before I proceed any
further, I will set down the points, worthy to be learned and practiced in
and about this armor, that the reader may see better how to make right use

First therefore I will show what this armor is, and the chief parts of it.
Four points to be considered touching the Christian armor.
Secondly, that a Christian life cannot stand without it, nor be practiced of
any, except he be armed, as God has taught and appointed him to be. Thirdly,
how it is gotten and come by, and how we should put it on. Fourthly, how we
may, by the help of it, practice godliness from time to time, and be able to
stand fast in our Christian course, and resist in the time of danger. By all
which, God will make us able to live christianly, which is to have our
conversation with our God, as he requires.

The first point shows what the armor is.
The whole complete armor therefore, is the spiritual furniture of the gifts
and graces of the holy Ghost, by which, God does deliver his from all
adversary power, and bring them to the obedience of his will. I speak not
here of those who are to be called, but who are effectually called already:
and they by the help of this armor, 2. Cor. 10.4.
do not only cast down strong holds of temptation, and overthrow
imaginations, and every high thing which exalts it self (in the opinion of
him that is tempted) against the knowledge of God: but also bring into
subjection every evil thought in them, to the obedience of Christ. And this
armor is that which is set down to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.14.
the parts whereof Truth or sincerity; righteousness; the shoes of peace, or
preparation to bear the cross; The parts of the armor.
faith, the helmet of salvation: which in another place he calls, hope, and
the word of God. This is the full furniture of a Christian, by the which the
Lord has taught him to fight against the devil, and his instruments, and
thereby to prevail, in and through their captain and head Christ Jesus.

And although there are other points of armor set down in other places of the
Scripture, yet are they but parcels of this, or the same in other words
expressed. Neither shall there need any other: for he who is attired and armed
with this, shall not in any point be unprovided, or to seek of strength in the
time of need. But yet does not every man see by and by how these

What sincerity is.
Sincerity or vprightnes is that weapon of the spiritual warfare, and that
fruit of the spirit which should accompany the whole conversation (not some
few actions of a Christian) by the which he is simple and without fraud and
hypocrisy bearing sway in him, both toward God and his neighbor: and it may
the more clearly be discerned by considering the person in whom it is found,
namely an upright man, whom (in the description of Nathaniel) our Savior
Christ calls a true Israelite in whom there is no guile: which virtue
although it be a part of the Christian armor, Psalm. 32.2. Matthew. 5.8.
yet that it is rare, not only the best do see, but even the bad sort do
complain: according Solomon: Prou. 20.6.
Many men will boast, every one of his own goodness, but who can find a
faithful man? that is to say, who will prove himself to be such an one
indeed, as he will seem to be, by word and show? For to say the truth, men
are so infected with hollownes and glozing, and through custom and continuance
therein so confirmed in it, that until God changes the heart, Ierem. 13.23.
Ieremies words are true of this one, as of other evils, It is as possible for
him who is accustomed to evil, to return and do good, as for the black
Moore to change his skin, or the Leopard her spots.

And this verity consists as well in holding and keeping the truth, I mean
the sound knowledge of the word of God in our judgment, as the

Now therefore if this be sincerity and vprightnes to be free, not only from
double heartednes and halting, but also, to be ready to yield a francke assent
and practice to the truth; and also if this virtue be one part of the
Christian armor: he who is void of this, must needs lie open to great
danger, both by error in opinion and by corruption in life: for he wants that
which should defend him. And contrarily, he who seeks to please God
unfeignedly, his conscience bearing him record, that he has some true measure
of this sincerity, and still labors after it, that is, to be simple and

Righteousness is that part of the armor, What righteousness is.
and such a gift of the spirit whereby our hearts are bent to all manner of
goodness, and righteous dealing, approouing of it as most excellent, desiring
fervently and delighting in it; Prou. 28.1. Psalm. 7.
and that because it is good: and disliking and hating all naughtines and
evil. And he who looks to be preserved in manifold temptations to Phil. 1.11.
that he may cause others to be in love with it also. Which virtue so shined in
Joseph, that sundry times, when he might have wrought evil without fear of
revenge to his brethren, who had given him strong occasion, he how can I do
this great wickedness and so sin against God? Genes. 39.9.

He that sees into this virtue, and likes it so, that he will be wary that he
commit no unrighteous thing against God nor man, as far as his knowledge
guides him, but setleth himself to do that, which is pleasing both in the
sight of God, and before men: he has this part of armor, and is fenced with
the brestplate of righteousness. Such shall say with Job, Job. 31.35.
If mine adversary write a book against me, I will put it behind my back
(read it, who will) and David toward Saul, 1. Sam. 24.17. that if it could be
seen with eye, it would exceedingly provoke men to be in love with it. And let
all mark how fitly these two sincerity and righteousness, or innocence do
go together.

To be prepared with the shoes of peace by the Gospel, is this, Shoes of
peace*
that we having received forgiveness of our sins, and assurance of salvation
through Romans 5.1.
and thereby found most sweet peace to our conscience, we are now by this
Gospel, as they who are ready to take a long journey, shodde and prepared to
be ready to deny our selves, and to take up our cross, and follow Christ,
throughout this our pilgrimage. This part of armor did our merciful father
see meet for us, his weak children, seeing we are so dismayed at the
beholding, Luke 22.57. Luke 22.33.
or hearing of troubles to be at hand, although before they come, we were
cheerful. He would therefore that we should not faint, nor be discouraged, no
not even by them: but lift up our heads, and be of good comfort, seeing they
are but for a short time, and our peace is continual: Phil. 4.7. Ioh. 16.33.
besides that, for the exceeding greatness of it, it passes all and therefore
it is able to keep our hearts comforted, even in our tribulations, through
hope at least. Which our Savior foretold, that the faithful should have, but
he armed them most graciously against them.

Neither is there indeed any other thing, that is able to stay us from deadly
unquietness and bitter anguish at such times. For seeing we are going to God,
and that must be through most dangerous ranks of cruel enemies, as through a
wilderness of robbers, this is our encouragement to go on manfully, in that we
know by the doctrine of the Gospel, that we take our journey to God who is at
peace with us. He therefore, who has this peace by the Gospel, is armed with
this part of Christian armor, called the shoes Romans 8.31. Psalm. 27.1.
if God be with me, who can be against me? the Lord is my salvation and light,
whom then should I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then
shall I be afraid?

Faith.
To have this shield of faith, is to build our persuasion on Gods faithful
promises, that Christ Jesus is ours: and that God has given him to us, to
obtain forgiveness of our sins and salvation by him; yea and all other good
things also, Romans 8.32.
meet for this present life: As the Apostle says; He that has given So that
he which has embraced these precious promises and rests upon them, as
certain and not doubtful, no more to be removed, and unsettled, as (if it be
well weighed) there is no cause he should: he has this part of the armor, and
therefore shall not be overcome by those fearful temptations of Satan to
strong distrustfulnes, Col. 1.23.
which as fiery darts be deadly to all which are not thus armed with a true and
sound faith: and such an one may be rightly said, to put on the Lord Jesus,
which cannot be done but by faith.

What hope is. Romans 12.12.
This hope is a joyful longing, and steadfast desire, Luke 2.30. (as we may see
in old father Simeon) and looking for the performing, and accomplishing to hope
perfectly, 1. Pet. 1.13.
that is, confidently and constantly to the end, as the Apostle speaks, for
such gracious gifts, as he

And all this we do, because we have hope from God of all good things which
shall be meet for us; yea and all this we do, not after the flesh, or because
we have whatsoever heart can wish, or eye lust after (for our God indenteth not
with us after any such manner) but because we have some measure of godliness
with contentation, and have learned to be persuaded, that to that all things
shall fall out to us for the best, because he has so promised. Romans 8.28.
And if it were not for this sweet hope, our lives should be most wearisome,
except we should suffer them to be merely devilish. And without this of the
armor of hope, all other hope is vain and deceitful, and as the rush without
mire and moisture which withers: and as the spiders web which is suddenly
swept down.

Lastly, the armor of the word, which is called the sword of the spirit, The
word of God.
is to be well instructed in the sound and living knowledge of the Scriptures,
and to digest the same, and season our understanding with it, in such wise,
that we may know the will of God, and have the same in remembrance, in the
things which most concern us (as we can) that thereby we may at all times, and
in all cases be readily led by it. That this may be a light to our feet, Psalm.
119.105.
and a lantern to our steps, as the Prophet teaches: that so neither
heresy in opinion, nor error in our life which shall be dangerous, 1. Pet.
3.17.
may carry us away from our stedfastnes in our Christian course: no nor so much
as deceive us secretly, but we may be able to draw forth this sword of the
spirit, and to say, it is written* that so no such thing may be done of us.

Such knowledge therefore of good and evil, cannot be wanting in us, nor the
daily increasing of it be neglected, but fore and perilous wounds 2. Cor. 3.18.
Prou. 1.6. Prou. 9.
He knows nothing, as he ought to know. For the fear of offending God is the
beginning of wisdom, and he that keeps (that is) faithfully indeuoureth to
keep the commandments of God, is most wise. And so speaks our Savior to
his Apostles: Ioh. 13.17.
If ye know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them. This knowledge
therefore, and the experience that we learn by it, how we have prospered, by
living after it; is that part of Christian armor, which is called the sword of
the

And thus I have given the reader a taste of the armor of a Christian, what it
is: who by due consideration of the power and use of every part of it, may
easily see, that he who is furnished with the same, may be able to do
wonderful things, in respect of him, which goes to work by his own advice
and power, or (which is all one) by mixing it with the word of God. And

The second point, that the Christian life cannot stand without it.
Now to go forward to the second, which is, that the Christian life cannot

And most sure it is, to him who will look into it, that all other good helps
to godliness, as prayer, reading, conference, though in themselves very
profitable; yet they do Christians the less good, if they be without the
armor. And therefore when the Apostle had taught the Ephesians to practice the
particular duties of Christianity, he sends them to this armor, to enable
them to stand fast therein, without the which, the devil (he tells them)
would with his subtle baits and delusions, draw them from whatsoever he
exhorts them unto; yea although they had desire to be obedient to the Ephesians.
6.13.
Thus he writes, saying: Take unto you that whole armor of God, that ye may
be able to resist in the evil day: that is, in the hard time, when Satan
bends all his force against you, and proclaims (as it were) open war; as
well as when the danger seems to be smaller: and having done all things,
that is, resisted your enemy, stand by the strength thereof, and keep your
selves armed still against new assaults. By this it is clear, that seeing the
devil is a professed enemy of ours, and one that wounds us secretly, when
we are not aware, and is at hand to do us most harm, when we do not so much
as dream of any such matter: it is clear, I say, that if we be not prepared
against such dangers, we must needs be sore hurt. Who goes forth naked

That which I say in general of the whole, will better appear if we go
through every particular part of it. For who will adventure to go barefooted
among thorns and stubbes, yea to run upon the pikes, but he will be Shod
with the preparation.
who will be bold to go thorough the manifold storms and tribulations of this
life, which rise up in his way, in every place, not to prick his feet, but to
pierce and go thorough his heart: as it is said of Marie her troubles, that
they should pierce thorough her soul, even as a sword, Luke 2.35.
which goes to the intrailes: who (I say) will go thorough these storms, but
he will be well armed against them, and strongly prepared and settled to stay
himself upon God by the peace and comfort which he draws from Christ's own
words, even these: Though in the world ye shall have tribulation, yet be of
good comfort, for I have overcome the world?

And that which I say of this one kind, I may in like manner say of all the
The shield of faith.
and every of them. Who can be free from despairing of Gods mercy (which is a
fiery and venomous dart) or else from dreadful doubting and fear (which are
companions thereunto) or (which is as deadly and dangerous) from presumption,
vain hope, and deceiving of himself, which has not the shield of faith; and
is not certain thereby of eternal salvation; and of the favor of God to
guard him in this life? And though this man had no other thing to make him
unhappy: yet who does not see, that even this is enough to make al his
pleasures unsavory, if he should either feel the one, or might be persuaded

Besides, what is his life (even at the best) when he has no trust in Gods
manifold promises? And although these things being not seen with eye, be as
little thought upon of the most part in the world; yet the Scripture has
concluded, that there is no sound peace to any such; yea rather that the devil
has, as a raging lion, his paw upon their throat ready every hour to take
away their soul: as the Apostle shows (though this seem less, seeing it is
not known nor felt) whereas if they were shielded by this faith, and that in
their need, it should not be so with; them but thereby they resisting him, 1.
Pet. 5.7. Iam. 4.7.
he should fly from them.

The breast plate of righteousness.
to show how impossible it is to be in safety without the other parts of the
Christian armor; how can any man walk innocent and harmeles among his
neighbors, though others should walk so toward him, except he has put on
the breast plate of righteousness; Prou. 3.30.
and armed himself with this cogitation, to do no man any wrong; and not
only so, but also to do no other iniquity or evil, which might offend any,
or wound his own soul? How many ways shall he be carried to sin against
God, and his neighbor? I speak not of an unbeliever, who can do nothing but
sin; but even of a Christian, who has an heart which hates sin: yet even
he, if he indent not from time to time a fresh with his heart, against all
unrighteousness,

And therefore it is that S. Paul teaching the Corinthians how they should be
apparelled with the parts of Christian armor, as purity and vprightnes, 2.
Cor. 6.4.5. etc.
knowledge of the word of God, and with patience and long suffering, which hope
ingendreth, does among the rest, commend to them this one, by his own example,
the armor of righteousness, both on the right hand, and on the left, that is,
in prosperity and adversity, that so they should give no occasion of offense
in any thing, but in all things approve themselves as the servants of God.

The svvord of the spirit.
The same may be said of the other parts of the Christian armor, that I have
said of the shoes of peace, of the shield of faith, and of the breast plate of
righteousness. For if there be not some clear and sound knowledge of the word
of God (which as a sword may cut the bands of sin asunder like a cord) how
shall a Christian be able to discern the deceitfulnes of sin, but be led by
it and taken with it, as with a bait? How can he choose, although he be
zealous and desirous to do well, but to be led into many errors, and so it is
written, to the contrary? The girdle of truth.
So if he be not girded, as it were, with sincerity, that he may be adorned
with it wheresoever he become, and all other good gifts of God in him be bound
together by that, that he has them in truth, that he delights in them
indeed; Prou. 20.6.
how shall he be infected with hollownes and hypocrisy, what show of holiness
soever appear in him?

The helmet of hope.
To conclude, what can there be in his life daily, but fainting,
vncomfortablenes, and sundry discouragements, whiles he is weaned from the
foolish and vain delights of this world, and sees not the pleasures of heaven
with like to a broken tooth, and sliding foot? But by this hope, tediousnes is
removed, and cheerefulnes to wait contentedly in this pilgrimage for a full
deliverance, is obtained. Therefore how truly may this be said, that the
Christian life, without the armor of God, cannot be continued?

For if every part of it be so needful throughout our life (as has bin said)
who sees not, that even such an one, as has received grace from above, by the
preaching of the Gospel, to be borne a new, and to be begotten to a lively
hope; yet for all this, shall not thrive, nor prosper, without diligent and
usual nourishing of this new birth in him, nor grow up to a perfect age in
Christ, delivered from the hindrances by the world and the devil, except he be
strongly armed, as God has taught him to be?

This is so truly verified in all Gods children, that even they who are not the
forwardest of others, yet if they have any strength against evil at any time,
they have it from God thus, even by the means of the armor. If they light
rejoicing in a fleshly manner, vain hope, fantastical dreams of peace and
safety, where none is. And for want of this, their lives also before men are
kept from showing forth light and good example in one thing, as well as in
another: yea rather, they are harbourers of sundry evil qualities, in so much
that few are encouraged to wax better by them, nor to suspect that any thing
is amiss in them, but are hardened to go forward in their old course still.

And if it be thus with such, as have some good and sound beginnings in

And now by this which has been said of the armor hitherto, it is the easier
to understand what it is, and what the parts of it are, The third point is how
the armor should be put on.
and how the Christian life cannot stand without it. Now I will proceed (as I
have promised) to the third point in this matter concerning the armor, namely,
how it should be put on, and be worn, that so we may better see how to take
that good by it, which God offers us. For which end and purpose it is to be
made partaker of all things pertaining to life and godliness, 2. Pet. 1.4.
and therefore is not destitute of any common grace of a true Christian: having
them, as a child lately borne, all the parts and faculties of soul and body,
though weak in all: amongst which, these that are here compared to armor, are
principal.

This being so, a faithful Christian need not wonder, when he is willed to
have this grace, and parts of this holy armor in a readiness; he need not
wonder (I say) where he shall have it, or doubt how to come by it: Luke 17.31.
For we see he has it already; and as our Savior Christ said; The kingdom
of heaven comes not by observation, neither shall men say, lo here, lo
there; for the kingdom of heaven is in you: So (I say) this armor, which God
has appointed to defend his militant Church withal, from infernal slavery,
it is not to be seen, nor to be gazed upon with the eye, but it is in the
faithful, and possesses their souls, even now, when many will (perhaps) ask
how shall we come by it? or, where is it? For if any should imagine, that he
has it not after believing (as through ignorance he must needs) can such an
one choose, but be exceedingly troubled about this, how he should come by it,
and put it on? Col. 3.13. Ephe. 6.13.14
for such a charge the Apostle gives.

and the most feeble Christian has an upright heart, and some spiritual
wisdom

Objection.
But ye will object, why does the Apostle will us to put it on, if we have it
already? and will say, this doubt is not yet answered, neither can ye tell
what he means by that, when he speaks thus, Put on the whole armor? To
this I answer, that his charge is, that Christians should not have this
spiritual armor, as men in time of peace, have bodily armor hanging by, and
rustie, and utterly unfit for use; but as soldiers have theirs in battle,
that is, girded to them, and put upon them, and this also whiles the battle
continues:

Ephesians. 6.14. Col. 3.13.
This is his meaning when he says, put on the whole armor: and in an other
place, put on tender mercy, and kindness, as the elect of God. For our battle
lasts all our life long; and our enemies be deadly, and all our strength is
by our armor: Therefore who sees not now, that a Christian can safely be

For through the unskillfulness of men in the right use of the armor, and

Now to have the feeling of every part of this armor (faith against distrust
at any time, hope against fainting, vprightnes against hypocrisy, knowledge
against the deceitfulnes of sin, righteousness against all kind of iniquity,
and the preparation of the Gospel of peace against crosses) to have (I say)
this armor in a readiness to safe cundict and keep us throughout our life in
the practice of our Christian direction, this is to be done: Watchfulnes
continual, and prayer hearty and often is to be used of us; Matthew. 26.41.
which also is prescribed of the Apostle himself, when he says (after he
wills the Ephesians to take to them this whole armor) pray always withal
manner of prayer, Ephesians. 6.18.
and watch thereunto with all perseverance, etc.

We see God will have us persuaded that this whole armor may be had and put
on, and therefore to pray to him for it. But in any wise, these prayers he will
have to be made without doubting and wavering, Iam. 1.6.
without which manner of praying, we cannot look to receive any thing. For it
has pleased our good God, seeing we are so prone to doubting, to give us a
most sure word of promise, of all such things as we have need of, that if we

He that heartily craves this, as a thing which he cannot be without (seeing he
asks according to the will of God) and that which God commands him, as we
see Ephesians. 6.14. he has and obtains the same which he desires, 1. Ioh.
4.16. and Matthew. 6.7. ask and ye shall receive. Genesis 21.16.17.
For if Hagar praying in her distress was heard, when she saw not how; and if
our Savior did say to the woman of Samaria, if thou had but asked, Ioh.
4.10.
I would have given thee water of life: is it to be doubted of, that Gods dear
servants shall be denied their requests? If a natural father will give that
which is meet to his Ephesians. 6.14.
yea and also take? yea and such a gift, as without the which, we cannot honor
nor serve him aright?

This I speak to hearten and encourage all, to pray often and earnestly (which
is in so little request in the world) for this gift, that they may know that by
this means, they shall put on this holy armor of God, especially when they
shall herewithall, watch, that they do receive strength by their prayers,
indeed so to do. And if this be not found and obtained by such put upon us
the whole armor; as David's dealing with Goliath does prefigure, 1. King. 3.9.
Psalm. 51.12. and 77.5.
and the example of the Saints of God for the particular parts of it; as by
their especial necessities they have been provoked: as Solomon for wisdom.
David did thus usually stir up his faith, which was the putting on of it,
which before lay by, as it were, unoccupied, and so of the rest. And to get
wisdom, whereby to be prepared for the cross, and to bear it meekely, Iam.
1.6.
the Apostle wills to pray without doubting.

With our prayer, holy meditation is to be used of every part of our armor,
treatise concerning this matter. Stir up, and persuade thy self hereto, by

And when by reading, hearing, or conference, thou shall see what help comes
by thine armor to the well framing of thine heart and life, and by meditation
sometime on the several parts of it (as I have prescribed) and have duly
weighed and mused upon the same, to affect and season thy heart therewith, and
by prayer have with confidence desired of God, that even thou particularly
may find, as thou shall see cause, thy self strengthened with every part
of this armor: when (I say) thou have done this, then have

For then shall thou, having this grace of believing, hoping, righteous living,
vphight meaning, etc. bring forth the fruit of it, as thou shall have occasion
through the day, that is to say, to give credit to Gods promises from time to
time: to hope at one time, as well as another: to be upright and without fraud
in one thing as well as in another; and yet remember that I can speak to thee,
when thou art at the best, but as to a man subject to infirmities;

The armor being put on, must be kept on. Phil. 4.4.
But with all this, it is to be known and regarded, that as it is thus to be
put on: so it is after the same manner to be kept on. For example: for the
retaining, or recovering of this one piece of the whole armor, I mean peace,
or rejoicing, Prou. 15.15. 1. These. 5.16.17
which we should not be void of at any time, continual prayer is required:
for he having said, rejoice evermore, he adds, pray continually. And as Saint
Paul says, that by this putting on of the whole armor, a Christian may stand
fast in the evil day of temptation, Ephesians. 6.14. 2. Pet. 1.5.6.
which is the hardest time: So Peter says, that if we give all diligence
hereto, that we join with our faith, virtue, knowledge, patience, etc. (which
who knows not, that it is cheefely done, 2. Pet. 1.10.
by watching and prayer?) we shall never fall, that is, dangerously: to take
any great hurt, or annoyance thereby. Whereby, he shows that he agrees with
Saint Paul, namely, that for the furnishing of our selves with the graces of
the spirit, which are the several parts of the armor; continual care and
diligence be used by prayer and watchfulnes, which is the only way to put and
keep it on.

But here let the reader remember and consider to whom the Lord speaks, when
he wills to put on, and to have in a readiness this armor against Even the
weakest Christian as well as the strongest, must wear the armor.
and to lead a godly life, is utterly unfit for this armor, and has neither
mind nor desire to it, neither can possibly put it on: so on the contrary not
only the stronger Christian; but also the newborn babe, and he, even the
weakest youngling in Gods family, who has never so small ability to resist
sin, and withstand the same, God has bidden him to take it to put it on. It
is munition appointed to him of God, to save him from danger, even the
greatest that can be raised against him: who therefore shall withhold him from
it? It keeps his soul and his life; what should therefore make him so
slavish to fear, and full of distrustful fantasies, and discouragements, as
to cast away his weapons, and wittingly to offer himself into the lions mouth?
Every such therefore must put forth himself to be more bold with reverence, to
take unto him this armor which none can want with safety) when he sees who
incourageth him, even he that is able to strengthen him, to the obtaining of
that which he sets him about, namely, God all-sufficient. He must be more to
keep his crown, and honor, even this holy armor, Reave. 3.11.
which is more precious to him, then life it self, and suffer none to take it
from him.

This I speak for their sakes, who desire, as much as I exhort them to: 2 Thessalonians. 3.4.
who yet do but weakly know, that there is such armor, or that it has any
such use to make a Christian strong against sin and Satan: much less do
themselves receive any such benefit by it, to their knowledge; and yet are not
without it, that they may see their case better then they have thought it, and
that God has provided for them far better, then they were persuaded.
Therefore let them, for whom God has provided this, not only not be ignorant
of it hereafter, but neither let them be slothful, or backward to get

And therefore let them urge themselves (if they wax cold or untoward) to use
the means before mentioned, whereby this armor is put on and held in a
readiness. And if the means themselves grow unsavory with them, ordinary
prayer (I mean) and watchfulnes, as they may easily do, if the heart be
discouraged or set in evil delights, let them drive out that devil with
fasting and prayer, and give no rest to their eyes, nor ease to their hearts,
until they have in some comfortable manner, recovered their first love and
strength, which they had once by this armor; I say, let them not rest till
they have recovered it again.



CHAP. 8. Of the last point, which is the benefit of this armor.
ANd thus to come to the last point in hand, he which will learn to put on
this armor, and to go clothed with it through the day, shall find every
thing true which God has spoken, and I have here set down unto him; that is,
that by resisting the devil, he shall fly from him: and having these parts of
it fast tied to his soul, the depth and subtlety 2. Cor. 10.4.
For as S. Paul writes to the Corinthians, The weapons of our warfare are not
carnal or bodily, but mighty through God, to cast down holds; even
imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. So
that, whether the devil and his instruments do assault by craft and deceit,
or by force and might, the Christian being armed, as has been said, and
furnished with that strength, shall mightily prevail against them, and
preserve himself.

Such is the power of this armor, that even of one part of it, the Scripture
1. Ioh. 5.4. 1. Pet. 5.7.
ascribing to faith alone victory over the world, and all the deceits of it.
S. Peter likewise says, that he who is steadfast in faith, Mark. 9.23.
resists the devil himself. So our Savior says, All things are possible
to him that believes. For all things are not only possible, but also easy
which we do desire, having a promise of God, for the performing thereof, upon
which we firmly rest. As the benefit of this one part of our armor, faith,
is singular great, and the power of it mighty: so it may be said of the rest,
and namely of a pure heart.

For even this one is able to carry us thorough strong temptations, that we
shall not halt, and deal hollowly, as men of the world do, but simply and
Matthew. 5.8.
according to that which is written; Blessed are the pure and upright in heart.

Now therefore, if some one part of this heavenly attire and armor be so
helpful, and of so great use, what think we the whole to be? Yea, as I said,
to be clothed with the whole complete armor of a Christian, is such a safe
walking against the subtilties of the devil, the allurements of the world, and
the deceitfulnes of sin, that a Christian may be unwounded, whiles he goes
through many dangerous attempts; yea and enjoy most sweet communion

As, in particulars, he being resolved to put on, and to cloth himself with
righteousness, and preparation for the cross, by the defense and shelter of the
doctrine of the Gospel, whiles he is to war here in this life, shall be
brought hereby, to meekenes, patience, and long sufferance with ioyfulnes,

Likewise, he who has set himself to seek wisdom as gold, and to lay up
understanding as treasure within him, he shall be taught the good and perfect
way, when others shall ever reele and fall; yea when they shall walk in
by-waies, Prou. 14.6.
and be wandering (although seeking it) and that for ever, he shall see the way
before

And the like fruit I would set down of the rest, but that I have done it
already, and would not grow tedious, seeing much matter to arise. If therefore
we can like to be accompanied with this holy train; and love to go armed
with these weapons; with that measure of knowledge which God has taught us,
and to enjoy new increase daily; armed with righteousness and godliness which we
can reach and attain; vpholden in that hope, Psa. 119.11.12
which

And all such as conceive the matter which is presently handled, should think
this advice and counsel so needful for them, of going thus armed thorough the
battle of this life, that they should not think themselves ready have put on
the Lord Jesus with his wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption:
that is done, when by faith they count him theirs; that so they may as far as
Christ can help them (and wherein can he not?) want nothing. And when by the
help of this, we shall be defended against the evils of the day (for behold
and this know, that to this end is this mighty armor bequeathed us by our
God) then have we acquitted our selves well, and brought the work of that day
to a good end, that so we may do one day after another.

And thus to bring this whole matter of the armor to an end also: whosoever
thou art, who can be persuaded resolutely, to be thus armed thorough to be in
love with it, for that thou shall see a continual use of it, and no estate

Neither makes it any matter, how ignorant thou art (for that perhaps may
discourage some) if thou have knowledge enough to see this to be the best of
all other ways; nor how weak thou art, if thou be strong enough to be
persuaded to walk in it: and guess what thou shall want of that which I have
said, when God shall give thee an heart thus inclined, as bidding farewell to
all courses which he approoueth not, to settle thee in this, which he
commends to thee.

And when thou see that thou art acquainted with this armor, and how it
helps thee daily to live innocently and christianly, then consider what 1.
Sam. 25.34.
and then as Abigaile said to David, when thou shall reap such fruit of it,
thou shall not repent that thou tookest such counsel: be glad of them, be
highly thankful for them, more then if thou had found great treasure:
weigh what protection against the devil, thou have thereby: what safe conduct
from falls: what fear and doubts thou art delivered from: what mists of
ignorance, as scales from thine eyes, are plucked from thine heart: what
strength against thy strongest infirmities thou find; how easily thou may
turn into the way again, if at any time by weakness thou have slipped: yea
consider moreover what peace to thy conscience thou there is no condemnation to
thee; but also that God now fights for thee and makes thee fit to resist the
deceitfulnes of strong temptations, who were before so faint and impotent in
resisting them.

In few words to speak what I think meet, concerning this matter, thou can
never sufficiently esteem of this blessed estate, although thou art not
utterly free from all temporal afflictions thereby. Often times shall thou be
thinking, it is too good to continue: till thou remembrest that there is no
shadow of changing with God. Often times thou shall wonder to see, what a

Objection.
Now whereas it may be objected, who, or where is the man, which finds Answer.
that there are many such, who to the peace of their conscience enjoy it; and I
as little doubt, that there are many more whom I know not: And yet I am
persuaded, that thousands even of Gods dear servants are holden

For let all know this, that the suffering of their hearts to take their fill
in the delights of this world, and little pains taken in musing upon this
heavenly

Now if they count this burdensome, they must be content to be brought to
shame sometimes for their doings, and sometimes to terror

But that none may be troubled at that which I have set down of the power and
use of the armor: as thinking that which I have said, Objection.
but a mere Answer.
and yet none can understand me (if he mark) that I think sin and our lusts
to be easily overcome, which I call furious and raging; or cannot be crowned
except we strive lawfully, that is, steadfastly: yea and that for all our
armor, we being unskillful, or faint and timorous

All this I say: and yet in the weakest estate, we are not forsaken of God,
though in some distress for a time: 1. Cor. 4.8.
nor swallowed up, though we be in sorrow: nor in despair, when we be in some
discomfort, but when we are at the lowest ebb, that in some temptation we
yield and be overcome of it: yet even in that we are not so miserable as others
who strive not at all, but are for a while left to our selves to see our
weakness, that afterward we may gather more strength, and (as it were) fetch
our breath, that we may take better hold, and resist more valiantly; especially
when through any of our own defaults, Josh. 1.8. 2. Cor. 10.4.
when (as Joshua) we have promise of the victory, the weapons of our warfare
being mighty.

And thus I have showed, how the third help, namely the Christian armor is an
especial furthering of us in a godly life. Two objections. The first.
But because I know, that this which I say, will seem to some very doubtful,
and scarce like to be true, that for want of putting on, and keeping on this
Christian armor, their estate is both vnglorious and uncomfortable (who yet
are of this mind, that they may be Christians good enough, though they know it
not) I will therefore satisfy such as I can, The second objection.
in few words. Other some think, that although it is fit and meet for strong
Christians, yet that weak ones ought not to be troubled with the seeking for
it, but may content themselves to serve God as they can, without it: their
reason is this, least whiles we lay

These two objections indeed, the wit of man after the hearing of this present
doctrine of the armor, will be ready to put forth, and he that is past both
these doubts, and troubled with neither of them, I think (nay, I know) that he
has overcome much, and has well profited. For the satisfying of those who are
weaker, I will answer a little to both. To the foremost, why should any think,
The first objection answered.
that they may be good Christians without this, seeing they must needs grant,
that if they walk nakedly, they cannot walk safely (every man being a blind
guide to himself:) I deny not, but that a

For the second objection, The second objection answered.
that it seems to be too heavy a burdening of weak Christians, to impose
and lay it upon them, it is as unsavory as the former. For they who are newborn (which sort is the weakest and feeblest

But it may be, that some beholding diverse zealous and godly Christians, (for
in respect of the common sort they may so be accounted) who have bin not had
use of it, therefore that weak Christians should not be forced thereunto.

But of those men, which have seemed forwarder then they are, I have here no
fit place to deal further with them: only let them consider what danger it
carries with it, to have been in likelihood of goodness, and now not to be:
Prou. 4.18.
and whether this be with the righteous to shine daily more and more, as the
light does, unto the perfect day. I conclude that which I propounded to
answer, that the putting on the armor of a Christian, is not too strong meat
for the youngest that is nourished up in Gods house, nor too weighty a burden
to lay upon them, but the very same, which of all other things they

CHAP. 9. Of our own experience, and what a special help it is to the
leading of a godly life: Also of the use of company and family exercises.
Of our own experience.
I Have showed how the forementioned three private helps, (watchfulnes,
meditation, and the Christian armor) are What it is.
which is called the sword of the spirit, that is, the word of God: and that
knowledge which we learn by proof and trial for the bettering of us. I call
it a branch of it, seeing there is another besides it: and I say, it is the
knowledge which we gather by proof, seeing

Now, if we will see more clearly what this experience is, consider of it
after this manner: Compare it with experimental knowledge in all trades and
sciences, what a difference there is betwixt it, and bare and naked skill in
the same without experience. So it shall the better appear what this is, in
matters which are heavenly and spiritual, in respect of the bare knowledge,
that men have by rule or instruction only. He that has been trained up in an
occupation, it may be, he has got knowledge and skill in his science or

Even so it is in the spiritual trade. For a man that has bin taught soundly
and plainly out of the word of God, and catechized in the principal points of
Christian religion, is able by the help thereof, to make a confession of his
faith, and give an account of the hope that is in him: and to answer soundly
to

Such a thing is experience: for he considers, observes, and applies it
makes us wise in all things, which are profitable to godliness, and eternal
life: in so much, as our life is little worth if it be not helped by this. For
till we begin to mark how true every part of Gods word is, and that God does
daily execute that in the world, which he says in his word, he will bring to
pass, we reverence it not, neither regard it, but only in speech and in show:
the workers of iniquity, we fear not to do ill: and so on the contrary,
till we find how sweet and pleasant a thing it is, to be gathered under the
Lords wings, and what a shelter and defense he is to his faithful servants,
we make no reckoning of his service, but it is unsavory and unwelcome to us.
But the experience of Gods dealing toward us, and of the carriage of our selves
toward him, in what course we best prosper and find most rest to our souls,
this brings the true fear of God, which is the only wisdom. For the
Experience of the fruit of a godly life, the best mean to continue it.
that we have seen that it has always gone well with such as are upright in
heart, and innocent in their lives, and with our selves, when we have walked
after the same rule; and that when we have kept our selves from the
defilements of the world, we have seen good days, and lived comfortably: this
establishes us in the same course most firmly and constantly afterward: and
when we have observed, that God has punished security, an ill conscience,
rashness, and wilful sinning (as they are very blind to take heed to our
selves, that it may go well with us.

So when we are able to say we have in our troubles humbled our selves to God,
confessed our sins, and sought pardon in faith, and had hope to see a good
end of it, Experience how affliction has best end and is a rule for ever
after. Psalm. 120.1. 1. Sam. 17.34.
and patience to bear it, and have (though it seemed very unlike for the time)
found and obtained it; this is a clear demonstration to us, that therefore in
the like trouble, we shall find the like blessing by the like means using.
And this experience never fails, if we rightly ground it, that is, if that
which we have marked to be wrought by God, Psalm. 77.10.11.
David, both to be comforted in his affliction, because before he had so been,
and also to be constant in a godly life, because that he had marked that it
ever brings a peaceable end. Psalm. 37.37.


And what marvel should this be to any, who are trained up in the Lords
house? For this we know, that as in all trades or sciences, the beginnings are
hardest and fullest of discouragements; so it fares with Christians, namely,
that their first entrings are most doubtful, and fullest of weakness: yet who
cannot remember that even then, God wrought most lovingly for to regard their
weakness) whereas otherwise they must needs have been driven to great
extremity?

These and many other such like, why has the Lord done them, but that his
children should mark and observe them, to learn experience by them against
the times which shall come after? and that they might safely and God has
delivered us, does deliver us: and we trust in him, that yet hereafter he will
deliver us. Also 2. Cor. 1.10.
if they shall seek him in the same dutiful manner that they were wont to
do? Esaias. 59.1.
For the Lords hand is not shortened that he cannot help, but is nearer to
them, Romans 5.5.
as they are better acquainted with him to believe it. So that as men who have
found out the way to bring in profit, cannot be dissuaded from it: even so it
fares with these.

Woeful that men learn not experience.
even by marking Gods manner of dealing with his servants: yet that so few
should be brought to this wisdom, and persuaded to seek out the best and
happiest way, Prou. 14.6.
which yet is not hard to them that would gladly find it. For I must speak
the truth, and God he knows it, that few set themselves about this work to
get this experience, when yet they have often smarted for their foolishnes: but
for all that they love to lie in it still, more foolish then children, who
cannot be made to come nigh the water, when they have once been in peril of
drowning: and so they verify the words of Christ, Prou. 1.22. O ye fools, how
long will ye love foolishnes? Which Physician heal thine own disease. But
they who turn their thoughts, consideration, wisdom, and study, to this,
marking what is the blessed course of life, and how it is attained unto: as
they shall declare that they are wise; so shall they be sure to find a
singular help to godliness, which they shall never repent of travailing

It follows in the next place, that we see, how God has provided no less
help for us in company, which because we have much use of, The fourth and
fifth private help.
and occasion to be often in it, Of the use of company in family exercise, and
conference, etc.
therefore least we might possibly return out from it worse then we went into
it (as the most companies are such as do make men more corrupt then they were
before) therefore the Lord has taught his people how to carry themselves in
all their meetings with others, in such wise, as not only they may shun the
harm which is easily gotten therein, but also have much help and furtherance
thereby to go better forward in Christian duties. But this point is handled at
large in the next treatise.

CHAP. 10. Of prayer and the parts thereof, thanksgiving and request,
whereunto is added confession of sins.
The sixth private help.
Having now made mention of the two first kinds of the private helps, the
third follows, containing the helps which may be used by ones self alone, or
with others also: as prayer and reading. Prayer is a calling upon God according
to his will: and has these two parts: thanksgiving, Thanksgiving.
Thanksgiving is that part of prayer, in which, we being comforted by some
benefit, which in favor God bestows upon us, are drawn to love and praise
him, and show forth the fruits thereof. In the which description we see three
duties to be required of us, and three motives or persuasions, Three
persuasions to move to thanksgiving.
to draw us to perform them. I will first mention these latter, and then
proceed to the duties. The first motive is knowledge and remembrance of some
benefit received or promised us. The first. 1. Sam. 25.32. Genes. 24.27. Luke
17.15.
Which may be seen in the thanksgiuings of all Gods servants; as in David
after that he had received the sauorie and seasonable counsel by Abigaile: and
in Abraham's Aram. The same may be said of the leaper, when he saw that he was
cleansed, after he had made request for it to Christ. And where there is no
knowledge and due consideration of some particular mercy, how can there be any
true, and hearty thanksgiving, howsoever in words there be a protestation for
fashion sake? as in them who say, we must thank God for all, when yet they
consider of nothing that moves them thereto.

The second.
The second motive to thanksgiving, is joy and gladness of heart for the benefit
which we think of, or call to mind: As appears by the psalm, in them which
returned out of the captivity, Psalm. 126.1.2.
saying; When the Lord brought (that is, turned away) the captivity of Sion
(his Church) we became like them that dream: then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with joy. And except we find such sweetenes in Gods
benefits either already received, or by faith embraced, being promised; the
duty of thanks can in no good sort be performed: But that is verified which
is commonly spoken, that is, a work is untowardly done which is not
cheerfully gone about.

The third.
The third thing that should move us to this duty of thanks, is that which is
most fit to work the foresaid joy, and that is a persuasion, that the benefit,
for which we give thanks, comes to us from Gods fatherly love: Psalm. 116.5.
to 16.
For if we should fear that it is sent as a snare to entangle us, or to heap
hot coals upon our head, and to make our condemnation the more just, small
sweetenes should we find therein, but that which would be quenched with that
fear, and by an accusing conscience.

As for example, what hearty joy, or sound thanks could that of the Luke 18.11.
and in countenance showed the other, when he had not this persuasion? But God
be thanked, it is not so with his beloved ones: but they knowing that their
most loving father has given them his Christ, which is the greatest, does much
more of favor give them all other things, which are of less account; which
both rejoice their hearts, when they remember any of these his blessings, and
stirs them up to a much more hearty performing of this duty.

And as these three former things must be found in us to move us to true
thankfulness for our comfort: so to make it effectual three duties are
required. First, a continuance of our love to God. Secondly, Three duties
required in thanksgiving.
a desire to set forth 1. Love of God.
when we may see the fruits of his favor on every side, whither soever we
turn our selves, and the same every morning renewed? Even as the Prophet says:
I love the Lord, Psalm. 116.1.
because he has heard my request, and for his great and many mercies, which
there he reckons up. So that they, whose love is set upon the gift it self,
and the benefit; being little affected toward the giver and bestower of it,
how wide soever their mouths are open in giving thanks; they are far from
the right offering of thanks to God.

2. A desire to set forth his glory. 2. Cor. 4.13.
that God might be known and believed on by others, that they might come out
of darkness: neither can we satisfy our selves in seeking to advance and
magnify him. As we may see in David, who being stirred up by the
consideration of Gods benefits, had this affection in him, thus declaring the
same: What shall I render to the Lord, for all his benefits? As if he should
say, Oh, Psalm. 116.12.
that I knew, and could satisfy my self herein. And where this affection and
desire is, can it otherwise be, but that by all good opportunities, there
should be an expressing, and an acknowledging of this his goodness? Even as the
same person sets himself down to us for an example, I will praise the
Lord, Psalm. 111.
and elsewhere in the congregation in heart and tongue: and with instruments
well tuned and of many kinds.

Now with these before mentioned, if this last property be adjoined, 3. A
further proceeding in obedience.
that we walk worthy his kindness, and within holy compass, which is to do
the will of our heavenly father, then do we rightly perform this duty of
thanksgiving. The which one, if it be wanting from the rest, makes them all
lame and maimed, and as odious to God, as the mortlings and untimely first
borne of the beasts, which were offered to him in sacrifice. And how with our
thanksgiving reformation of our lives should go, Moses shows, by setting
down the danger of the contrary, saying: Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11, 12.
When the Lord thy God (in steed of remembering his kindness and bounty) but
fear and serve him. So the Psalmist says: Psalm. 50.16.
What do thou taking my word in thy mouth, either in thanks, prayer, or
speaking of it, and hate to be reformed by it? And these are the three
duties, necessarily required

Thus I have showed what thanksgiving is, and what properties are required in
it, to the end it may rightly be performed to God. Now then, if this duty be
thus performed of us, in adversity as in prosperity; for so God will have
them do, who worship him aright, Job. 27.10. and alone by our selves, as well
as in company with others, that so we may be free from hypocrisy in offering
it: must it not needs be a singular help, with the rest, unto godliness? 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
I say, when we shall many times from day to day, think upon Gods loving
kindness, how great it is, and has been toward us, and find sweetness in his
benefits, as being persuaded that we have them in Gods favor;

Then we cannot be ignorant that thankfulness is one help, and that not the
least, to the continuance of a godly life: whether we understand it of that
solemn thanksgiving, which we adioyne ordinarily to our supplications; or
that which now and then we do use in a more brief manner by Confession of
sins another help to a Christian life.
And this of thanksgiving. With this we are to add supplications, which also
contain confession of our sin: all which three are indeed but one action
generally, but particularly have every one of them an especial and several
use. Therefore it follows to show, in what sort we should make confession of
our sins, and our private requests to God, that they may much more be helps
to godliness altogether, when one part, even thanksgiving is so great an help
alone.

And first, of confession of sins, as in order it is to be used, next unto
thankfulness: and afterward, of the making or offering up of our requests and
suites unto God, 1. Ioh. 1.8.9. Psalm. 32.5.6.
and namely, for the remission of sins, with the which, it is Four things in
confession.
first, when we feel our sins odious, and burdensome to us. Secondly, when
we accuse our selves of them to God. Thirdly, when we confess them to him
(having examined our life) and that we stand at his mercy deserving to be
condemned. And fourthly, when we abase our selves thereby, and so David's
confession, after that Nathan the Prophet had accused him, saying, thou art the
man, even this great offender, he answered, 2. Sam. 12.13.
I have sinned: in which one word, he found and showed al things that are
required in a true and penitent confession: that is, that he both had Psalm.
51.4.5.
he may see them particularly described. The same may be said of Daniel his
confession in the ninth chapter; Dan. 9.5.
and in the Publicanes, when he knocking on his breast, and looking down to
the ground, as ashamed to look up, said, God be merciful to me a sinner. Luke
18.13.
All these are likewise in the confession of the prodigal son. The first in
these words, he came to himself, and entered into consideration of his life
past, with himself, whereby he felt his burden so great; that secondly, Luke
15.17. Verse. 21.
he comes and accuses himself to his father; and thirdly, what he thought
of his deserts, Verse. 19. and 21
which also does clearly lay forth his abasement.

What manner of confession therefore we should make ordinarily in our prayers
to God, by this may be seen: (if it be otherwise framed, that is, out of our
own brain God will reject it) and then shall we not (as many do, to their
little comfort) coldly confess our sins in general, nor for fashion, 1.
Sam. 12.20.
but in particular, and those especially, by which we have most offended God.
Now this confession being from time to time often made unto God, shall not suffer
us to go far, and lie long in any sin, but hunt it out, before

And as for the objection of them, which say, Objection.
that the often coming to perform this duty, will make it common, and without
force to kill our sin: I answer them thus: Answer.
God having promised by this and such other

Thus I having showed how thanksgiving and confession of sin should be used,
and being so used, what helps they are to godliness, it remains that I speak
to the same end, of request making to God: Request another help to live godly.
how that ought to be done, that the like fruit may be reaped thereby: Of the
which the less shall need to be said, seeing this point is after handled, and
What request is.
in which we earnestly power out our suites unto God, in contrition of heart,
according to his will, with a comfortable hope that through Christ we shall be
heard, and therefore forsaking the sin which might hinder our suite. Wherein
briefly note these four things necessary to be joined with this duty
whenever we go about it.

The first is, that we show this contrition of heart, 1. Sam. 1.15. The first
thing in request.
by being pressed with feeling our wants, unworthiness, miserable estate, and
manifold necessities, Luke 18.13.
and according to the rules before mentioned: For he can most freely make
request to God, who can most heartily accuse and complain of himself. And our
praying to God, is but cold and counterfeit, when we be not touched with our
own vileness, and so consequently, Matthew. 5.3. Psalm. 145.19. Matthew. 15.28.
the better feel our necessities, which we desire to have relieved. But if
this be, we shall neither pray in lip-labor, which God abhors, Luke 18.1.
nor think our selves too good to wait Gods leisure, if at first he grant
not our requests, but continue them as he commands.

The second thing in request.
The second is, that we ask of God no other things, then by his word he 1. Ioh.
5.14.
and so doing, we shall not pray in vain. Therefore the Apostle says, this
assurance we have of him, Ioh. 13.14. and 15.7. and 16.24.
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. Which rule, as
it suffers us not to hunt after our own desire and will: so it is no small
benefit, that whatsoever we stand in need of, asking it according to his will,
it shall be given us. And who would desire to have that, which our loving and
most provident father does not see good for us? which if it content not some,
mark what they get thereby: For they ask, but they obtain not, because they
ask amiss: and further, they lose all their labor The third thing in request.
being done in ignorance of his will. From this second, arises the third, that
seeing we have so great encouragement, so precious promises of so many and
great good things, as God has bequeathed to us; Iam. 16.
therefore we should quicken our selves to come in faith and confidence, and
often times and cheerfully to this duty. Even as men do come cheerfully, and
with good hope go to their approved neighbors in their necessities to
borrow, when they have often promised them to lend. And no marvel it is
though there be both seldom praying, and untoward John: Ioh. 16.24.
Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full) both because we have
many things throughout our life, to make us sad and heavy; and also because we
are by natural disposition so slow and unwilling to this duty, and
distrustful when we offer it. And if we be not so fully resolved of this, for
want of experience, that both we ought, and may with cheerefulnes come to pray,
and with gladness be occupied in it (considering, Three effects of prayer.
Of the which effects of it, I will briefly set down some, and they are
especially three.

The first. Iam. 4.8. Ioh. 16.26. Revel. 3.10.
that by prayer we are made acquainted (a great word to speak) yea and in a
sort familiar with God, and know his mind and will, and how he is affected to
us, being admitted to speak to him. The second is, that it gives life to Gods
graces in us, which before lay in us half dead; The second.
as faith, hope, care of duty, until by the bellows of prayer they be
revived in us: for we are dull, forgetful, unprofitable, faint in hope, and
our comfort dimmed ofttimes; when yet in, and after prayer, we are well
refreshed again, even as the fire is quickened by blowing: as in that worthy
example of Queen Ester is to be seen; who being timorous (as we may gather)
before prayers made to God, was mightily encouraged and strengthened The third.
that it reaches out to us in our greatest need, the good things and gifts of
God which our souls desire; as it is written: Ask, and it shall be given you:
Matthew. 7.7.
yea such things, as we thought sometime had not been to be looked for: joy in
heaviness, light in darkness, and hope for despair, as by the song of Anna 1.
Sam. 2.1.2. after her effectual prayer, 1. Sam. 1.10. The fourth thing in
request.
But I will end with fourth and last property of prayer; that when we pray we
bring not with us the sins, which will turn away the ears of the Lord from
hearing us. And these sins are any which be not repented of, but lien in, or
nourished in us, secretly at the least, and not renounced: Prou. 28.9.
This Solomon confirms in these Who so turns away his ear from hearing the
law, (and so any part of it, Psalm. 7.4.
being of like and equal authority) even his prayer shall be abominable. And
David agrees with him saying, even as he powered out his requests unto God, if
there be any wickedness in my hands (for all my prayer) shall that excuse me,
shall not thou, O Lord, find it not? But when our requests shall be made to
God with these properties (for in such manner does God require them to be
offered unto him) the Christian who observes them, shall reap no small fruit
thereby: whether he entreat for remission of his sins, or for any good thing
whereof he stands in need, or against any calamity or burden, wherewith he
shall be distressed; yea he shall thereby

But when all these three parts of Gods worship now spoken of, Iam. 4.8.9.10.
1. Sam. 7.7.
shall reverently and humbly be adjoined together, I mean thanksgiving,
confession of sins, and request (which ordinarily in our prayers ought to go
one with the other) how much more gainefull (think we) are they to the poor
Christian soul? especially seeing by confession of sins, he acknowledges
himself a guilty person, and debtor to God, that so he may be the slower to
run further in debt with him. By making his suites, he declares, that he is
a beggar, and stands in need of all things, as having nothing he be fallen,
this prayer of faith will raise him up: if he be heavy, this will comfort him:
if he be dull, this will quicken him. Oh, who can reckon up the infinite and
marvelous commodities that come of prayer, if it be accompanied of the
forementioned

Therefore I conclude, that seeing it is a present remedy to the oppressed
heart, a preserver of the godly mind, a giver of strength to the weak, an
especial means to make a man fit to live in every estate, wherein God has
set him, etc. I conclude (I say) that it is a strong and mighty help to the
godly life. For pray well, and live well, and keep thy self in case fit to
perform this duty, as thou have been directed, and thou shall not need to
fear in thy life, any great annoyance. But how this, with some other of the
helps, are to be brought into use every day, that the fruit of it may be more
certain, shall be set down in the next treatise of the daily direction, which

CHAP. 11. Of reading.
The seventh help is reading.
THe next help to godliness is reading (as often as may be) the Scriptures and
approved good authors. The which exercise and duty, that the Christian, whom
I go about to inform, Rules about reading in general.
may find it an help to the furthering of him The first rule.
and the book of God laid aside, and covered with cobwebbes, or not so much as
in our houses at all. For let the best know this, that if they use not reading,
they shall find much more encumbrance in their life, vnsauourines, unquietness,
unfruitfulness, and vncheerefulnes, with other such, yea though they use other
helps.

The second rule.
And secondly the same in effect I say of them which read seldom, even when
they must needs, for fear or shame. Both these faults are too commonly

The third rule about reading.
Thirdly, seeing books, which are fit for the building of them up in godliness,
must be read of them, therefore they must not bestow their time in reading
filthy, lewd and wanton books, no nor needles and unprofitable books,
Eccles. 12.14.
the reading of many such being but wearisome to the flesh, and vanity: much
less superstitious pamphlets, and Machiuels blasphemies (which it is a shame
should be suffered to come into men's hands) nor the subtle devises

But the books which are to be read, are the holy canonical scriptures, and
other sound and godly authors, as I have said. The 4. rule.
Wherein this as a fourth rule is to be observed, that in the reading of the
Scriptures, they read not here and there a chapter (except upon some good
occasion) but the bible in order throughout, and so, as often as they can; that
so by little and little they may be acquainted with the histories, and the
whole course of the scriptures (having before the grounds of Christian religion
laid) and

And in reading of other good books, they are to be counseled rather to read
some one or two well penned, either of the whole Christian religion, or any
particular argument, and matter, and them often, rather then a leaf of one and
a chapter of another, as idle readers use to do for novelties sake. Often, I
say, because a good book is of the most part of Christians little seen into,
at once or twice reading over, much less the use of the doctrine of it reaped
and inioyed of dull heads, slipperie memories, and weak practisers, such as it
is too well known, that the most Christians are. And therefore the most not
having leisure to read many books, shall find most profit by diligent

Now as concerning the manner of reading; Rules more particularly about the
manner of reading.
it must be with an hearty good will to learn and profit thereby, desiring
God to prepare us with reverence: to lighten our understandings, that we may
conceive that which we read, and settling our selves for the time of our
reading to be attentive, and Romans 15.4.
wisely to our selves (seeing all that is contained is written for our
instruction and comfort) as persuading our selves that all precepts of duty
and good life, are set down to direct us (not others only) to the practice of
the same: that all sin is forbidden us, and that all the general promises
which we read to be made to the Church, are to be believed of us, whether
they appertain to this present life, or to the life to come; and the comforts
that accompany them.

Likewise, that all exhortations and admonitions quicken and stir us up from
coldness, deadnes, and drousines: and all reprehensions to check us for faults
escaped: and all threats to fear our boldness, and appale our security, which
is too easily and readily kindled in us, that so we may make that use of them,
which the Apostle requires when he says, that all Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, convince, to correct, and
instruct in righteousness: and thereof in matters as well concerning God as men;
and amongst men, all particular kinds: and therefore Prince and subject, noble
and base, men and women: and more particularly in families, husbands and wives;
parents and children, masters and servants. Thus to read, that thereby we may
be made fit unto every good work, and to glorify God thereby, to search the
Scriptures: Ioh. 5.39. Act. 17.11.
and (with the godly people of Berea) to compare our hearings, and our readings
of them together. For reading is much commended to be one of the three duties
that make us happy, the Apostle saying thus: Reave. 1.3.
Blessed is he that hears, and reads, and keeps the contents of this
book.

But this one thing I cannot omit, that the benefit and comfort of this
exercise of reading being so great, and the substance of the Scriptures being
so brought to light as it is, A proof of negligent reading.
and such variety of good books being granted us of

Two observations about reading.
And herein these two things, I think meet to add, in regard of some
Christians; that such as have not the gift of reading, may endeavor to follow
the foresaid rules, The first.
by using the help of others: exhorting all by their loss The second.
The second is, that besides the former rules, such as have better helps of
understanding, memory and leisure, do, besides their public hearing, note
their doubts, and as they shall have opportunity, seek resolution of them, at
their learned pastors hands, or of some others: and mark the coherence of the
Scripture, how it hangs together: and the agreement that one place has with
another, that thereby that which seems dark in one, is made easy in
another. This shall suffice to have said, for making some better use of
reading, then commonly men do. And though there are other things besides
these, which the learneder may take profit by: yet they being

For he that shall consider, how many ways the conscience is appeased, the
judgment enlightened and enlarged, the heart persuaded, the memory relieved,
the affections moved; and in a word, the whole man drawn by that which he may
read, shall not need to doubt how great the benefit of reading, together with
the other helps, is. And that it being used as often as possibly drink of the
water of life, out of the sweet fountain of Gods word by reading. And of

CHAP. 12. Of the extraordinary helps.
NOw follow the extraordinary helps, which are not commonly nor daily in use,
but sometime, The extraordinary helps to a true Christian life.
and that according The first extraordinary help; is solemn thanksgiving.
What it is.
The first is when in some rare and unlooked for deliverance out of desperate
danger, we do by the commandment of God, and examples of the godly before
us, in a most fervent manner, yield praise to God for the same, and rejoice
heartily in the remembrance and consideration of it, tying our selves (as it
were) in a renewing of our holy covenant, more firmly to the Lord, and testify
both these by signs of unfeigned good will to our brethren.

Hester and Mardocheus, that I mention no other, for brevity sake: An example
of it.
who being with the rest of Gods people in those countries, marked out, and as
sheep appointed, by Hamans subtlety and cruel malice, to be slain; did yet
by prayer and fasting obtain deliverance, when to man's judgment, Ester 4.16.
and 9.1.
all hope was past: and not that only, but also their hearts desire against
their adversaries, with great favor of the King (whom God had made of an
heavy enemy a mighty friend) and much wealth and prosperity: whereupon they
caused a day and time to be appointed, Ester 9.18, 21.
in the which the Lord might be praised; and they might express their
rejoicing, and send portions one to another,

And this is that solemn thanksgiving, which I call one of the extraordinary
helps to set us forward in godliness: It is to be used according to the
occasion.
which of all Gods people by the like occasion is to be offered up to God,
differing (as ye see) apparently from this duty daily performed, as in
feruencie of the spirit; so in other solemnities: beside a longer time of
continuing the same. Publicly.
This duty (when the occasion of it, belonging to a whole Church, is publicly
performed) ought to be accompanied with the preaching of the word, to quicken
the assembly to the more lively professing of their thankfulness, accordingly
as their solemn feasts under the law, were with an holy convocation. And if
the cause Or privately.
or a family, or some few, then it is to be offered in private of them (whom
this great benefit concerns) with Psalms, and praisings of his name,
speaking of his works, and reading Scriptures tending to that end: as Psalm.
105. Scriptures fit for it.
106.107.

And because I find one place very fit for this purpose, which teaches a most
right manner of the practice of this duty, whether we shall be occasioned
publicly or privately to do the same, I thought it very expedient here David,
at the setting up of the Ark of God in the tabernacle. Some of the words are
these: Praise the Lord, and call upon his name; declare his works among the
people: 1. Chron. 16.8. to 16. and 29.10. to 15.
sing unto him, sing praise unto him, talk of all his wonderful works:
Rejoice in his holy name: let the hearts of them that seek the Lord, rejoice.
And this of solemn thanksgiving.

The second extraordinary help is fasting. What it is.
The other extraordinary help is fasting, joined with most fervent prayer. And
this is a most earnest profession of deep humbling our selves, in abstinence
with confession of sins and supplications (for the greatest part of the day
at the least) to God, to turn away some sore calamity from

2. Chron. 20.6.
that is to be understood, either of some sore affliction outwardly hanging
over us, or the whole Church, or already upon us; or for some grievous sin
committed, or long lien in of us. The which when weaker means remove not from
us, these are enjoined us of the Lord, Dan. 3.18. 2. Cor. 12.9.
to deliver us from them, wholly or in part, or else to stay us, that we may
rest our selves on God, that his grace shall be sufficient for us.

And here we must know, that to be required, which I said to be in thanks,
whether private or public, that to enable us to this duty the rather, we must
in the one, use the benefit of sermons, and fit scriptures to stir us up
hereunto, and in the other to meditate of the like scriptures privately, for
the well 2. Chron. 20.12.13.27.28.
and the end of it to be with comfort, which is the right manner of taking it
in hand. Now therefore the nature and quality of this

To say more of the means and helps, I have not thought it expedient.
Therefore to end this whole treatise of the helps, these few cautions I would
Cautions how to use the helps mentioned in this treatise.
(to the end thou may have the right use of them) namely to understand them
well, and consider thoroughly of them, and of the commodity, which they may
bring: and so with a quiet and meek heart set upon them, in that manner that
thou have them set down unto thee: And encourage thy self hereunto by this
reason, that seeing some one of them has so great force, to the well framing of
the heart and life (each in his kind) then all of them together, being so
used, must needs bring a more large and liberal blessing that way. Have them
in high account.
But as they are precious and have an excellent end, so hold still that account
and estimation of them, and use them with all high reverence, as frailty will
permit, Use them not for fashion.
and not for fashion Use them constantly.
either in the first entrance, or after longer continuance: yet if by unawares,
or any other way, these faults escape, be diligent and ready to epsy them, If
they wax unsavory, give no place to such deceit, but moan to God for the
former grace.
and hide them not, but checking thy corrupt heart, confess it to the Lord in
secret, and he will hear thee and forgive thee; and then set upon the use of
the forementioned helps, freshly and sauourly again as thou did before.

There remains only this, at what time, so far as we may know it, we
should use them, and which of them should be used every day: and which,

The end of the third treatise.
THE FOVRTH TREATISE, DIRECTING THE BELIEVER UNTO A DAILY PRACTICE OF THE
Christian life.
CHAP. 1. Of the sum, order, and parts of this treatise.
NOw that I have showed who is a true believer, and This treatise is
necessarily to be joined with the former.
that it is seldom seen and hardly found so. Generally (I confess) it is
obtained: but particularly it is with them, as with the surgion, and resist the
devil, and overcome his sin, shall find it hard and awke in particulars,
and on one day as well as another to do it with peace, except he have full
resolution as well as knowledge and skill how, to use and apply the means
every day to the diligent observing of his ways,

The general sum of this treatise.
And this is it, which I mean in this treatise, to acquaint the reader with,
namely, that the godly life, which is to be continued by the many helps before
set down, is neither left to men sometime to be practiced, and at other times
may be neglected, nor generally (which is far off from Gods meaning

I have had experience how hardly such have been able to hear a kind and
friendly rebuke for foolish jesting, swearing, unseemly talking, etc. but they
have counted it precisenes: there is no doubt, but they will impatiently bear
it, to have their whole bad course controuled and brought within compass. Some
good Christians think strange to be held in compass every day.
It is out of question therefore (I say) that both such as I have here spoken
of, and many better then they, and which have the Christian life in more
reverence, then many such, having given themselves much liberty in their
lives, will think it strange that every day care should be had over their

Such therefore, as are ready to cast any mists of fleshly objections before
the eyes of the simple, and most of all to put out their own light, that
thereby they may be hindered from seeing the pathway of this christian
direction, to the end they may not walk in it, I exhort to hear me patiently:
To whom, as to all other who shall regard it, I offer a cleerer knowledge of
the

This was the principal end of my writing, The end why this treatise was
written.
even to help to bring the yet with their deeds they deny him, Tit. 1.16.
and the power of godliness also. And likewise though the Christian life be in
some account with others, yet it comes to pass, Note.
that it is not in chiefest reckoning with them above other things, without the
which it is never practiced to any purpose. Which is one great cause, why both
many weak Christians are not better then they

For they see in many hot professors, that there is no even and constant course
kept in the practice of godliness one time as well as another, and in one thing
as in another. Generally we say all (as I set down before) we must live
godly: Few do resolve to live godly every day
but in particular the godly life is seldom and hardly found, even amongst
those who say so. And as for any certain time when this should be practiced
(as no time should be free from some part of it) though we affirm that it
should be so to the end of our life, it is so little considered, that it of
wisdom is easy to him that would understand, Pro. 8.9) so a great number
(who gladly would) cannot tell how to go about it.

For many a one may approve of a Christian life, and give good precepts to
another, finding them in the word, which he never followed nor practiced in his
own life. And thus, whiles it is not found nor seen by experience, what is
the beauty, fruit, and comfort of this Christian life, but amongst Note.
I say more, it is vile and in no reckoning nor account with many, without
which they forgo a great part of their happiness. It is not missed among men,
nor asked after, though it be the best of all other.

It might worthily grieve him who knows the gain, beauty, sweetness, and
honor of it, to see so many hunt after all these, where they cannot be come
by; and if they be attained, yet as a flower they soon fade and are one day
in the godly life is better then a thousand elsewhere: Psalm. 84.10. Prou.
8.11.18.
yet what courtesy is amongst men who should begin to make proof of it? and
what holding back is there, least they should do too much? And therefore that
this Christian life may be brought into some more estimation and reckoning with
men, then for a long time it has been with the most, I have taken some little
pain to unfold and lay out this happy estate, and to teach a more sound use
of it, then the most that profess, have acquaintance with, by showing how it
is to be made an every days work, and to be brought into daily practice,
that so the A simile.
when the several rooms of it, are with their furniture particularly viewed,
and not confusedly beheld.

Daily directing of our lives after Gods word, is a safe and peaceable estate.
For by the faithful observing of our lives through the day, and taking heed
thereto by the help of such rules, as God lays out to us in his word, a
yoke, Matthew. 11.29.
as it is meet it should be) so easy, safe, and comfortable. And thus having
declared what I intend and propound in this treatise, with some reason thereof,
I will show how I mean to handle this point.

First therefore I will by good proof declare, The parts of this treatise
four.
that the believer and true

Secondly, I will show what this direction is, and what are the parts thereof.

Thirdly, I will help him against all thoughts of counting it too tedious,

And fourthly, I will add an enlargement of the direction and parts thereof,

CHAP. 2. Of the first reason, why there ought to be a daily direction to guide
the believer.
THerefore to come to the first point, because it is like it will be denied to
be necessary, by many, whose practice little sauoureth of it, I will set
down some reasons to prove the necessity of it, namely, that we ought to
bring the godly life into every days practice: and that not at adventure, as
every man thinks best, before he have learned how to go about it, but to be
directed therein by some certain rules in the word of God, without which, he
shall fail exceedingly, whosoever he be. These I will set down, both to take
away all scruple and doubt from the weak such, to disgrace and discredit (as
much as lies in them) whatsoever is

And first to show, that Gods word does direct the Christian believer, how he
should live every day (and therefore that it is to be known and practiced)
all that list, The first reason, consisting of proofs out of the word. 1. Pet.
1.17. 1. Pet. 4.2.
may easily see, by that which the Apostle Saint Peter writes, namely, that we
(who call God father) should pass the whole time of our dwelling here in
fear: and that we should spend as much time as remains of our life, not
after the lust of men, but after the will of God. Now therefore if we be
commanded to live in the fear of God and according to his will, the whole
time of our dwelling here, unto our end; then are we commanded to do this
Heb. 3.12.
as we may attain to it: Whereunto belongs that which is written to the
Hebrews 3.12. Take heed that there be not at any time, in any of you an evil
heart, therefore not any day.

To the which most lively agrees that which we read in the song of Zacharias
the father of John Baptist, Luke 1.75.
Luke 1.74.75. who testifies that, God had sworn that he would grant unto us,
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him in
holiness and righteousness before him all our days without fear. By all which
it follows, that we should call in our hearts and affections from carrying us
disordredly, and against duty every day; and in one day as

For it is too manifest, that this is far off from the very persuasion of
many, Many, if God be publicly worshipped on the sabbath look no further.
who are yet to be hoped well of, and yet rest in this, that so as the sabbath
be passed in religious exercises, it is not so great a matter, if the other
days be parted betwixt God and them: I mean, they look not to be called to
when they come together, 1. Cor. 11.17. But what may then be looked for of such
upon other days?

Many of good hope think it not needful to live godly every day.
It is too manifest, that it is not so much as settled in the judgment of many

CHAP. 3. Of the second reason, of a daily direction consisting of two branches.
But let us proceed to other reasons: Therefore, Prou. 10.9. Gal. 6.16. Psalm.
119.9.
for further proof thereof, I say, that seeing it is commanded us in the
scriptures that we keep a certain course in serving God, and walk in a
certain and plain beaten way, namely, after the word; and the What is meant
by this daily direction.
and confused living according to knowledge when we think good. By a certain
direction I mean, not that the self same particular actions and duties should
be every day, but yet all evil avoided every day, and such good done as in our
calling and life shall be occasioned.

And seeing it is so, if we dispense with our selves to lay aside this care
any day (as though it were allowable before God, and lawful for us so to do)
even that liberty taking is our sin, and that intermitting of duty any

But for proof of both points of this reason somewhat is to be said, that so
weighty a matter, and so hardly persuaded to many (namely, that every day we
are to follow some certain direction for the well ordering of our lives
througout the same) may not depend upon my bare report and credit.

For the first point therefore, that a Christian must be directed in his whole
life, The proof of the first part of the second reason, namely, That a
certain course of godliness is commanded in the word. Psalm. 119.9.
and therefore may not be left to his own discretion and government, that
which is written in the Psalm does clearly prove it: when a question was put
forth by David the man of God in the person of a young man (who of all other is
hardliest kept in order) for the edifying of the whole Church, saying: By what
means may a young man, who has had his sins pardoned, cleanse his ways
afterward, that so he may be blessed? He answers the question himself, thus:
Even by taking heed thereto according to thy word, O God. And as he taught
this in doctrine, so he brought his own

For they object through the ignorance that is in them, and other infirmities
carrying them, as a whirlewinde, that they are not to be urged to follow this
word of God so particularly; for it distracteth them sore, but every man in the
state he is in (they say) is to carry himself, as he thinks good in his
common actions and business: they hope men be no children, to be appointed what
they should do: when yet, God cease not to sound this Whether we eat or
drink, etc. So that I may well answer them that God has not only left his
Scriptures among us, to the end we should in such a loose manner look after
them, and fall into gross errors for not knowing them, and so become nothing
the better for them: but he has taught us to draw (as it were) a copy, and a
certain platform for our lives out of the same, the poor, the rich; the old,
the young; the married and the unmarried: all are (I say) to draw out of them,
direction for their use.

And what other thing is contained in the words of the Prophet? for in saying
that we must take heed to our ways, that is, our course of life and the

And therefore it is not to be counted as a common sin, but as the head of
many sins, that (as though the Scriptures were among us but for fashion, or for
the deciding of some rare and hard doubts, and controversies in religion, which
is but one use of them) the most think themselves by their natural wit and
skill, able to direct their ways: which opinion with their practice, God in
times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, Act. 14.16. And
this be said for the proof of the first part of this former reason: namely,
that all their actions must be squared after the rule of Gods word, throughout
their life.

The second part of this reason, namely, The second part of the second reason:
namely, that it must be brought into practice every day. Prou. 28.14.
that it ought to be daily and every day, and so through the day, the saying of
the Lord does clearly prove: Blessed is the man that fears always. And
again, 1. Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do else, do
all to the glory of God. And to Joshua, 1.8. Thou shall meditate and exercise
thy mind in this book of the law day and night: as if he 1. Tim. 5.10.
Paul also when he writes of the widow that should be chosen to look to the
poor, describes her by this one note, whereby a good Christian is discerned
amongst men, namely, if she have been daily given to every good work.

And he whom it may well beseem us to follow, did not only make it his daily
trade to be directed by the doctrine of Gods word, but even through the day
did the same, dividing (as it were) the day into one good Oh Lord, what a love
have I to thy law? Psalm. 119.97.
all the day long is my meditation in it, that is, I am musing still how I may
please thee, whatsoever my actions are, which I go about; Again, Psalm.
71.15.^^
Every day will I praise thee: Even so (if it may be) let us be doing good, and
that in an holy and right manner every day, and when we cannot; yet let us
avoid and shun evil. But if thou will do neither, nor endeavor after the
same constantly from day to day, then renounce Gods word, and do what thou
lustest.

And why should not men's hearts be daily given to the Lord, who is most worthy
of them? what have we to do in the day more necessary, as it shall appear
one day to all, who now will take no knowledge of it? Weigh what I that in thy
heart and life thou may every day serve him: does the holy Ghost, Prou.
4.23. and 25.25. when he says, Keep thy heart with all diligence; and
again, let it be in the fear of the Lord continually, does he (I say) mean
any certain time, or one day, and not every day? so when rules for praying are
given, are they not to direct us in all our prayers for ever? If thou say,
why is this then so strange to men? I say, first naturally men desire to
satisfy God with a little, and soon to have done with him, and few will weigh
particularly and daily, what they ought to be,

Objection.
Again, if ye say, why are we troubled with these novelties now, more then in
times past? I say, men are content to have such things to be novelties unto
them, Answer.
with which they desire not to be acquainted: for else, these are not novelties
in the Scriptures, and that is seen, seeing there are diverse, given to every
good work, that is, to aim thereat, though when they have done all, they may
find themselves to be much behind hand, and unprofitable servants?

Act. 24.16.
And what meaning else has this Scripture? Herein I exercise and occupy my
self, that I may have a good conscience both before God and men always, that
is, before God and men) which include both inward and outward actions:
likewise, the word ( always) and to have restrained it to sometimes. The like
saying is in another chapter: To the which thing hoped for, Act. 26.7.
or to the which promise made to our fathers, our twelve tribes serving God day
and night always, do trust to come. He says not barely day and night, even
early and late, yea and always, that is to say, constantly, and with
continuance.

And as these and such like Scriptures do prove that a godly life should be
always and every day: so in other places of the word, the same thing is set
down in another manner, as by that in the Psalm may be gathered: where the
Prophet expresses it by the means and helps, whereby such a life is led,
Psalm. 145.2.
that is, by prayer and praises, saying thus: every day, or according to the
Hebrew words, (...) on every day, I will bless thee and praise thy name for
ever and ever. So that howsoever few aim at it, that they may by their own

CHAP. 4. Of the third reason of the daily direction.
FVrthermore, if so many parts of a daily direction, as will sufficiently
direct a man, be enjoined in the word of God, to be daily used, then a certain
and daily direction is commanded

In all these (I say) with other such, we are directed in the word of God, and
how we may every day, as well as some one, serve God in them, as occasion
shall be offered, which shall more clearly be seen afterward in sundry
particulars. Which if it be so, what ordinary actions in any lawful calling
are to be done of a Christian through the day, but God has in his word guided
him how to do them, in such wise, as he by the help thereof, may with peace
and comfort bring it to an end: and contrariwise, he that knows his will
therein, and walks not after the same, shall neither find peace in his life,
nor happiness after. Which, if it were duly weighed and considered,

But because I think it will be looked for, that I should prove that by the
Scriptures, which I have said of the parts of the direction, that so many as
Solomon in one sentence directs to both: for when he had said, Prou. 6.22.
The commandments and instructions should be always bound to our hearts,
that is, had in continual remembrance, and tied about our necks, that is, as
jewels had in special account: he adds; that at our awaking, they shall As
if he should say, if the word of God be carefully kept in mind, and held in
precious estimation, it shall guide us from the morning to the evening, even
from our vprising to our lying down: so that, God has not left the governing
of our lives in our own hands, as though he had taken no order for them, but
has appointed in his word how the whole day should be passed.

And further where I said more particularly, that the Christian life, which we
are daily to lead, consists in a careful declining from all evil, and
contrariwise in well living, and bringing forth the fruits of faith and
amendment of life: and also in the use of such helps and means, by which this
faith and The parts of a godly life to be practiced daily.
That which I say of the helps shall be proved afterward. And for the parts of
good life, which we must needs practice daily, they are, that we should be
daily occupied in those good works, which in our place and calling, we can see
to be required of us: as brotherly kindness, love, sobriety, patience, just
dealing toward all, mercifulnes, meekenes, and such like. And these be like
necessary all the days of our life, as in any one; so that it is our sin,
when we do the contrary.

Furthermore, the works which must of necessity be done daily, are to carry
our selves both in prosperity, and under all blessings rightly, that is,
cheerfully, thankfully, and fruitfully: and in our afflictions patiently and
with contentation. And who does not know, that these both should be daily? In
prosperity.
For, first that praises and thanksgiving in our prosperity are required to be
daily, as long as that estate abides, consider what the psalmist says, my
tongue shall talk of thy righteousness daily, Psalm. 71.24. and that meant
Saint James, 1. These. 5.19.
Chap. 5.13. In our prosperity to sing praises, and Saint Paul wishing us to
give thanks in all things, brings us to the same duty every day.

And although the word (daily) be not there mentioned, and where he rejoice in
the Lord always, Phil. 4.4. yet who doubts that he can mean any less then
this, when he says, in all things: even such, as come to pass daily and
every day? and yet even this word (daily) is in other Scripture used. Lam. 3.23.
For as the mercies of God are renewed daily upon his: so Gods people are in
the example of the man of God (whose praise is so great in the Scripture)
taught, that as they enjoy them every day; so they are every day to sound forth
his praise thankfully and cheerfully, as such who feel and acknowledge
thereby, the exceeding sweetenes of Gods loving kindness and benefits, and that
is to make the true and right use of them.

In afflictions.
And as daily praises are to be offered for benefits, so must the patient and
Daniel did daily, and three times in the day, Two things required about
afflictions. Iam. 1.5. 2. Chr. 20.3.4. Lam. 3.27.
Dan. 6.10. But about afflictions God requires these two things of us: the one
that we should prepare and make ready our selves to bear them as from him, in
such quiet manner, as that we be not unsettled nor troubled at the heart by
them, when we hear of them: the other, that when Psalm. 32.6.7. 2. Sam. 15.26.
and through the encouragement which we have from him, we submit our selves
(even as our neck unto the yoke) willingly to go under them. Now though no
wise man doubts, but that Gods meaning is that we should be patient and
obedient in one as well as another, and one time as well as an other; yet that
it may plainly be seen, it is to be known, that both these are given us in
commandment every day.

For first God has taught us in the fourth petition (give us this day our
daily bread) so to pray for all things needful to this present life, First
that we prepare our selves for them, before they come.
as his most wise providence sees meetest and best for us; and therefore if he
in wisdom our daily bread; or else we understand not what God teaches us to
pray for, nor what we offer to him in making that prayer. For we desire of God
in it blessing fit for the time, wherein we are every day: and therefore not
only in peace and prosperity, the blessing of thanks, etc. but under
affliction, patience, contentation, and such like graces, even the thing of the
day in the day, as Agur says, Prou. 30.8.
that is, every thing in his time, and as the time requires. For in
prosperity, the time requires one blessing; in affliction another: that so
we may hang on God every moment.

Second, that we bear them rightly, when they come. Luke 9.23.
The other thing about afflictions is, that we bear them willingly when they
come every day. And this is that which our Savior Christ teaches, when he
says, he that will come after me, must deny himself, and take up his cross
daily: and this is an other part of our duty in the day, so needful to be
looked unto, as none more.

So that God has taught his, that whether their life be incombred with
afflictions, or whether it be passed in the use, commodities and benefits, they
shall in both estates learn of him how to be directed daily. Yea and to shut
Moses in Deuteronomie: Deuteronomy. 33.12. Matthew. 26.41.
The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety under his protection all the
day long. When Christ says watch and pray, least ye fall into temptation, what
day, or part of the day, does he warrant us to be free from danger, without
these means, as experience also shows?

By these things which I have now spoken of, namely, daily to be given to every
good work, and to look to our selves, that both in prosperity and adversity
we be daily well ordered; we see that a Christian may be able to

But yet the means and helps, whereby a godly life is preserved daily, Helps
to a godly life are to be used daily.
and least I should not so particularly handle them in the direction following,
I will in few words set down: and show, how God has enjoined so many of them,
as do necessarily help to the practice of godliness, daily to be used; and
though not the same, yet one or other, as prayer, meditation, exhorting one
another, praise and thanks, attending to the public means of the word daily,
as often as we may enjoy it. These means God does not only inioyne daily to
be used, but also in such wise, as he who weighs how the commanding of them
daily to be used, goes with the commanding of the godly life daily to be
continued by the help of them, shall cleerelie see, that God meant not coldlie
and ceremoniouslie to

Prayer and praises. Psalm. 55.16.17 and 119.164. Prou. 6.22.
For prayer and praises, in David's example thrice in the day, we are taught to
offer them: besides occasions at other times of the day, which a man that
looks well to his ways shall find to be many. Watchfulnes, which is a due
considering of our ways, and a taking heed to them, is required to be through
the day, Watchfulnes. Psalm. 119 97.
and all the day long, not on some, more then other. Our exhorting one
another, Exhortation. Heb. 3.13.
is commanded to be daily, as we shall have occasion, howsoever the practice
of it be strange, and out of use with many Christians, who yet Reading. Josh.
1.8.
As for reading the book of his law and speaking of the infinite wisdom of
God revealed in the same, howsoever that place of Joshua does not so precisely
and strictly tie them to every day, as other scriptures do to prayer,
thanksgiving, etc. (because the day may possibly be passed in the service and
worshipping of God aright without that, but not without these: and a good
Christian may necessarily be hindered from that, by other duties for a time
more necessary) yet who doubts, How far we are tied to them daily.
that even that was commanded by the Lord to be usual and often, that is, so
far daily used, as Public hearing. Pro. 8.33. Act. 2.46.
as may be gathered by that in the Proverbs, in these words: Blessed is the man
that watches daily at my gates, and gives attendance at the posts of my
doors. And the like is the saying of Saint Luke of the godly who were in
Jerusalem, that they continued daily in the temple, hearing the Apostles
doctrine. I go not about to tie any (as I said) to the use of the same
particulars every day, which cannot possibly be used every day, but only of
those that may: and of the rest, but one or other, that we may be well able to
answer for the Christian passing of every day. The sum therefore is this,
that God has commanded, and in his word set down so

CHAP. 5. Of the fourth reason.
ANother reason for the persuading of us to look to the daily guiding of our
selves in some certain manner, is, The danger that follows the neglecting of
it. Matthew. 26.41. Heb. 3.13.
for that he, who will let loose his heart any day or time of the day to any
intemperance, or unlawful liberty, does fall into some of Satan's snares, and
is caught with the deceitfulnes immediately, some way or other, if he be not
hardened also: yea though he be the best of many, he shall find to his cost
how needful the counsel of the Apostle is, watch in all things; 2. Tim. 4.5.
and therefore at all times: so that there shall be no time wherein he may cast
off fear of evil, that so he may be the man which is spoken of, Blessed is he
that fears always. Prou. 28.13.
Yea he shall find that he is more weakened and indaungered by one days
negligence in little regarding his soul and his actions (whiles other things
of less value are carefully looked to) then in an hundred, wherein his care
and conscience were continued, besides that, he shall not easily recover
himself again. For although God keep his children from many evils, while
they desire it: Psalm. 32 6.7. Psalm. 91.11. 2. Sam. 7.14. 2. Chron. 16.9. Prou.
10.9. Psalm. 89.31
the envious man watches all opportunities, yea when men least suspect it, to
sow tares with the good seed; to unsettle them, Matthew. 13.25.
to steal away their heart and love from God, to give it unto creatures. And
therefore much more, when we have remitted our care, and left off our watch
(whereby he knows and sees, Matthew. 12.44.
that we are now as an house swept and trimmed up ready to receive such a
guest) much more (I say) does he then take his opportunity to enter and keep
possession in us more strongly, and so depriueth us of our former liberties.
And even as Sampson, when his locks were clipped off, was afraid and troubled
at the voice of his wife, saying: Judge. 16.20.
The Philistims be upon thee Sampson; but yet thought with himself, I will
arise and escape their hands, as in times past, but could not: so when the
devil has secretly stolen our hearts from our true treasure, even from
attending upon God, Psalm. 130.5. Psalm. 123.2.
and has fixed them upon some other thing, as pleasure, profit, advancement,
or such like; we thinking to do as in times past, when we had our hearts at
commandment, do go about it in vain: For our strength which we had
sometime, is gone, and we by seeking liberty amiss, and shaking off the Lords
yoke, do find we keep our hearts with all diligence: And again, Prou. 4.23.
Prou. 23.17.
Let thy heart be in the fear of the Lord continually: which a man would
think should be understood by us of one day as well as another, that it be not
neglected at any time. For although God will direct and guide us in the way
wherein he has set us, as I have said, yet out of this way (if we will needs
wax weary of it) we shall find nothing but awknes and crossing of us,
wandering and vncomfortablenes, stir up the gifts of God which are in thee,
and that powerful grace, which thou have received, daily pray to have renewed
in thee, by such direction as may be given thee, and thou shall find thy self
to be set forward with such ease, as thou will beware that thou forgo it not
again.

Moreover, if any would shake off this doctrine, as sifting him more narrowly,
then he can well like of: and therefore would for the seeking of more liberty
to the flesh, cavil at these Scriptures, as misalleaged, such an one must
needs maintain, that there is some time, and some days, more liberty given
to man, then at other times, and on other days. But he is driven from Take
heed that there be not at any time, Heb. 3.12.
in any of you an evil heart, and so a departing thereby from the living God:
If not at any time, then much less any day, wherein are many times, seeing it
is manifest that there are many times, yea hours in the day, wherein the heart
may start aside from God, that is, from doing his will: So that nothing shall
be gained by resisting the truth, but it shall turn to the swifter damnation
of them, which do it. Men may say (I deny not) that it is hard to have that
rule over their hearts: but it will not serve them, to the rejecting of the
truth (which God has brought to light

Jllustration of the former matter by similitudes.
And if we see this in common reason, that a man which has a long journey to
travail, as an hundred or two hundred miles, will not count this sufficient
direction, to go on Eastward or Westward, as his way shall lie, or by a general
rule only; The first.
but will take a particular note by what towns he must go every day, and how
he must pass from one to another: what marvel should it be, that they who
are to travail this great and long voyage to the

Even as Moses teaches us, by his own example in the Psalm, where he says:
Psalm. 91.12.
Teach us, O Lord, to number our days (that is, to consider the shortness of
that we may apply our hearts to wisdom: that is, in those few days thereof.
And as the Steward of some Noble man's house does not make a general reckoning
and account of much money laid out, but writes the particulars, daily and
hourly as he gives out and receives, that he may not be deceived: The
second.
so and much more (as the Christian life is more precious then all earthly
treasure) does the wise man look daily to

To the same purpose of daily looking to our ways, The third.
our Christian life is compared to a course or race: that as they which run
keep their bounds and course, and go not aside out of the way: so should they
who run in the Christian race, look before them, and see that they keep in
their way, and not run on uncertainly, or wandering they know not where,
whither, nor

It is also compared to an high way, The fourth.
in the which if we guide and keep our beast, although it be laden, it comes
safely to the market with the carriage or burden: but if we suffer it to go out
of the plain way into cartrakes, and to climb up to the brows and rough
ways, it is cast and wearied: so if we keep in the known and beaten way, we
go on our Christian course safely, although with some difficulty, and with
many incombrances: but if we pervert our way, and go out of it, by and by we
fall into danger, Prou. 10.9. Psalm. 89.32.
we know not how great: as by woeful experience many fearing God have found it
with them, who then wished they had been circumspect, when it is too

So it is compared to a rule, to guide us: that as well in our talk with
other, The fifth.
as alone by our selves, in our earthly business, as our spiritual service of
God: in our affairs abroad, as well as our dealings at home, and in one thing
as well as another, we should have certain direction for every part of it. And
the very same thing did the faithful servant of God S. Paul teach Timothy, 2.
Tim. 3.10.
his beloved and natural son in the faith, by his own example when he said:
Thou have known my course, and manner of living, etc. as if he should say,
what has been my daily carriage of my self (for else he could not have
spoken so) and particularly, that it has been beautified with faith, love,
patience in

The same is to be said of other faithful servants of God, Genesis 5.22.23. Genesis
6.5. Heb. 3.2.
as Enoch walked with God: Noah was a just and upright man, and walked with
God: And Moses was faithful in the house of God. Which speeches uttered of the
holy people of God in those times, wherein things were set down more darkly,
what can they testify of them less, then this which I say?

So that it is manifest, both by the doctrine of the word of God, and also by
the examples thereof, that not only there ought to be a general guiding

CHAP. 6. Of the fifth reason, six, seven, and eight.
The fifth, that daily direction is fittest to keep us well, while we be well:
and to raise us up being fallen.
FVrthermore, if a certain direction daily to guide us, does best keep us well,
when we be well, and when we step aside or wander out of the way by any
occasion, if this be fittest to bring us easily to consideration of our selves,
and hold us from going further from God: if (I say) it be the best and fittest
estate, thus to order well, and settle our lives, in comparison

I mean such as have only a mind to do well in general, but do not do
pull down again that, which they had builded, and cause their holy profession
to be ill spoken of, and the former

All good Christians being alike subject to sin, must alike be fenced against
it.
For they being subject to the same infirmities, occasions of offending, and
prouocations inward and outward, unto the which the best armed people

The sixth reason drawn from the ten commandments, being perpetual.
this appears clearly that God looks for it, that Christians should every
day be directed as well as some one day, by the order that he has set in the
ten commandments. For whereas all duty to be performed of us, is either
to be showed toward God or men: he to teach us in what sort and manner this
is to be done, has thus set down his will unto us, saying. Concerning my
self, A commandment, a perpetual rule to worship God by, daily.
for the six days throughout the week, year, your whole life, worship and
serve me, both inwardly and outwardly, as in the three first commandments I
have bound you; and on the seventh day, as the fourth commandment inioyneth.
And this is your direction in all duty to me for ever. And to live with men
daily.
Concerning

For though all see it not, neither consider it, what then? Shall the will of
God be of no effect, because of the ignorance of men? but they who see the will
and meaning of God aright in them, see no less the^ this, that I have said.
Neither let any object here, that there is no other direction given us, then
generally to follow the commandments for our guide, seeing every commandment
is

The seventh reason, holiness should be on all days. Gal. 4.10.
But further, that we should thus be fully resolved every day to live
religiously, that we should not esteem one day above another, neither
attribute holiness to one, more then to another, and so neglect one in regard of
another. Objection.
And although it may be said, that they in so putting difference in days, did
therein show themselves superstitious; but we are not so to be judged of,
though we do not as carefully worship and obey God one day as another:
Answer.
I answer, that both in that place and to the Colossians, Col. 2.16.
he rebuking that sin of putting difference in days, does condemn as well
our security, who seek not to glorify God as sincerely and holilie, on one
day as another; as their superstition who

The eight reason drawn from our conversation. Phil. 3.20. Phil. 1.27.
And to conclude, if our conversation must be in heaven, even whiles we live
here on earth: that is, if our whole practice and course, not some part of it,
ought to be squared out after the heavenly pattern of the word of God: then
who sees not, that we must be settled after some godly direction one day as
another, to glorify God in our conversation? Objection.
Neither let any object, that because the several actions of our life are many
and infinite, therefore no certain rules can be propounded to be followed of
us: Answer.
for as many as they are, both throughout the day, and the whole year, yea
our life; yet may they all be brought under, and fitly referred to a few rules,
which will show when we

And if it were not thus, that we both may and ought to be daily guided by some
certain and good direction, and have our hearts also readily disposed,
ordinarily and for the most part, throughout the day, unto every good work:
then in vain should that be written, which being spoken of David must be
practiced of all the faithful: I beheld the Lord always before me (that is, I
lived by faith) that I might not be shaken, Act. 2.25. Or if we will say, we
need not that constant heed taking, it must needs follow, that our hearts
would be ranging out so many ways amiss, that we should be driven to
exceeding toil to bring them back again: and yet should not always the life
of God in us should weakly and little be discerned. Lo, such effects would
follow this looseness and libertie-taking, when according to that which we
know of God, we should not honor him as God. Romans 1.21.
As I am my self privy to it, that it is the case of many weak brethren, who
yet (it is to be hoped) fear God: and yet for that they will often take liberty
which God allows them not, ( stolen waters being sweet to them) they
purchase for an inch of vain pleasure, an elle of sorrow; and when they would
after come back again to an holy course, either they dare not, or know not
how to do it, or be ashamed: as the idle scholar is to go to his book again,
when (through his negligence) his fellows are got before him. And Note.
And therefore we may be sure, that much more the disordered life of many
professors, and civil persons whose irreligious lives are covered with some
outward exercises


I Having now proved, The second part of this fourth treatise.
that the word of God sets out unto us direction for our lives every day: it
follows to show, what this direction is. And although it may in some sort be
gathered by that which has been spoken already, yet to the end we may more
clearly see the will of God, and our duties for the the troubling of the
memory; nor so few, but that they yield great furthera^ce A description of
this daily direction.
is a gathering together of certain rules out of Gods word, by which we may be
enabled every day to live according to the will of God, with sound peace: and
therefore the following of such direction is a faithful and constant endeavor
to please God in all things every day, as long as we live here to the peace of
our conscience, and to the glorifying of him. Let this description be opened
more plainly, and then I will set down the parts thereof. And before I go
further, I think meet to give the Reader to understand, that I set not down
this, as prescribing any other direction, then Gods word has taught: but
whereas through common ignorance and Cor. 8.12.

And if it were not so, what comfort could we have, who see daily, that they
are blessed which keep them, as Psalm. 119.2. and.8. Luc. 11.28. Blessed are
they which hear the word of God and keep the same: as is to be seen by
conference of other places, as 1. Chron. 28.7. If Solomon thy son shall
endeavor to keep my commandments, I will establish his kingdom for ever: And
in Hosea, 6.3. then shall we endeavor our selves to know the Lord. In which
places, the keeping of Gods commandments is interpreted by the holy Ghost in
the Scriptures, to be an indeuouring to

For it is a near companion to the fear of God, even a fruit of it, which
must be in our hearts continually. Prou. 23.17.
Which is to be marked the rather, for that we see how commonly it is neglected
many days of Christians, and how they think it mere bondage to be tied to
this care of looking to their ways, without which yet, Mat. 26.41.
they lie open to all the craft and malice of the devil, being taken of him at
his will. Ephesians. 6.14.
And therefore it is, that when the Apostle has charged the Ephesians to take
unto themselves the whole armor of God, he adds, that they must stand fast in
it, and give Ephesians. 4.27.
no place to the devil. So that as we Act. 24.16.
And this meant the holy Apostle, when he said: I endeavor always to have a
good conscience both before God and men.

The third thing in this description is, that our endeavor be hearty and
constant.
hearty, and not constrained or hollow, that our beginning may be good as
well as our proceeding; and constant, that we faint not, but hold out therein.
For many make fair shows, but they are not sound and true from the heart, and
therefore soon vanish: other mean well in practicing that which they have
been taught, but seeing they do not strongly renew their covenant from day to
day, and that with as good courage and desire as they began first, and
nourish and preserve integrity; they therefore break off and wax faint and
weary, before they have brought their work to an end, that is, before to be
unfaithful in our covenant.

The third thing in this description is, whereto our endeavor shall tend: The
third part of the description. Luke 16.13.
even to this, that we may please God in all things; for God will not admit
any can we serve two contrary masters. This is Saint Paul's prayer for the
Colossians: That they might walk worthy the Lord, even that they might please
him in all things, Col. 1.10.
and in the Epistle to the Hebrews: Pray for us: for we trust, that we have a
good conscience, Heb. 13.18.
desiring to live honestly in all things. Now, who does not see, that this is a
work of great weight, and requires the taking up our hearts wholly from other
hindrances, that we may attend to this? And therefore this much condemns the
backwardness and rebelliousnesse of such, as look not after this duty:
especially we may say so, if we add the other two points in this description
mentioned: as, that this must be daily, and continue to our end.

always) when he says. Act. 24.16. Herein I do exercise my self, The last
points.
that I may have a good conscience both before God and man always: that is,
both through all the days of my life, and to the end. And hereto agrees that
of Solomon, Prou. 4.26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
ordered aright. If all our ways must be ordered aright, then no day can be
excepted, but every days actions and ways must be ordered aright. So Paul
Act. 26.7. when he would note the constant and continual course of the fathers
in a godly life, says thus: The twelve Tribes instantly served God day and
night. And this daily walking with God, is the life which honoreth God, 1. Cor.
10.31. and that

By this which has been said though it may in some sort be gathered, and that
of the most of Gods children, how the day ought to be passed of them; yet for
the simpler sort, who^ I do chiefly respect and regard through this my whole
labor, for their sakes I say, I will add unto this direction somewhat more
particularly a brief sum of such rules, as of necessity must guide us, and
which do bind the conscience to a daily practice of them, which I may call the
necessary parts of it, and they (among others) are these:

CHAP. 8. Of the necessary parts of the daily direction, being the second
branch of the second part of this Treatise.
FIrst, that every day we should be humbled for our sins, as through due
examination of our lives by the law of God we shall see them.

2 Every day we be raised up in assured hope of the forgiveness of them by the
promises of God in Christ.

3 Every day we prepare out hearts to seek the Lord still, and keep them fit
and willing thereto.

4 Every day we strongly, and resolutely arm our selves against all evil and
sin, fearing most of all to offend God.

5 Every day we nourish our fear and love of him, and joy in him more then in
any thing, and endeavor to please him in all duties as occasion shall be
offered, looking for his coming. 2. These. 3.5.

6 Every day our thanks be continued for benfites received, and still

7 Every day we watch and pray for steadfastness and constancy in all these.

8 Every day we hold and keep our peace with God, and so lie down with it.

And this is the direction which every Christian must practice every day in his
life, and these are the necessary parts of it, which may not be omitted any
day at all without sin: nor carelessly and wittingly without great sin. To
the which, Object.
if it should be said, that they are dark and hard to be understood, much more
to be put in practice; yea and although they could, yet do they Answer.
as that he knows thereby himself reconciled to God, and so have sure hope
to be saved, and to be one of them, whom God has chosen out of the world from
the rest which shall perish; he can easily understand the meaning of this
direction, and the points and parts thereof, and is fit to be directed by it,
(as for any other, it is but to accuse and convict him of infinite iniquities in
his life, Romans 7.
and of guiltiness of eternal damnation thereby) although through the law of
his members, which rebel against the law of his mind, and through ignorance,
and the malice and subtlety of the devil, he be much distracted on the other
side, and hindered from that

But this is the battle, which he must feel and have with his lusts, and
which every true believer must be exercised with daily: and yet this resistance
and rebellion against Gods grace, How the believer should be enabled to keep
the rules of direction.
which he feels by this corruption and sin daily, is a most fit whetstone
to sharpen him the more to embrace and follow these rules in this direction set
down, because he shall see, that by

Now whereas it is objected, that although it should be practiced, Objection.
yet it is not a sufficient directing of him, for, and throughout the day;
seeing every rule and point has not his certain time set down, in which it
should serve, and in the which it should be required: to this I say, Answer.
that we must not imagine, that there is any such direction, as though thereby
we might keep from sin any hour of the day: but this direction teaches,
how by the wisdom of Gods spirit according to the measure of our knowledge,
we may be led through every part of the day in peace and safety, and do all
watch over their heart, and life; and by all, to find and obtain rest to their
souls.

And although through infirmity, which is in the best, Although through
infirmity we come short, yet much ease shall we find in serving God, by
following direct.
they shall never fully reap the fruit, which the rules do lead unto, for
they fail through sin that cleaves to them, that they have often most sweet
communion with God, and hold their sin in great subjection to their
admiration, which was wont full sore to imbondage them. Neither shall this
seem strange or doubtful which I say, if it be well considered.

For has not the Lord promised to make his children partakers of the divine
even the grace of his holy spirit, whereby they shall fly the corruption that
is in the world through lust? has he not said, 2 Pet. 1.4.
that if they watch and pray, they shall not fall into temptation? but be
delivered from evil? Math. 26.41.
and that if they resist the devil, he shall fly from them? and by the armor
of a Christian they shall stand fast against all infernal subtilty? And has
he not said, Math. 6.13. Iam. 4.7. Ephesians. 6.14.
that the weapons of our warfare are mighty, casting down strong holds, which
seemed impossible to be cast down? has he not taught us that he is greater
which is in us, then he that is in the world? 2. Cor. 10.4.
has he not promised them his spirit the comforter, which the world cannot
have, 1. Ioh. 4.4. Ioh. 14.17. 1. Cor. 10.13.
that they might not be here as Orphans and desolate? and that he will lay no
more upon his, then he will make them able to

And what should I say more? has he not given them singular prerogatives, that
they being vpholden by them, The prerogatives of a Christian.
may pass by the deceivable baits of the world, that they may not poison
them? And by this little which I say, of a great deal which might be said out
of the Scriptures to the like purpose, does not God harten and encourage his to
trust in him for that strength and grace which shall be sufficient for them? 2.
Cor. 12.9.
and has he not taught them daily to think much of these things? Now then,
when his poor servants

And when they shall be well and thoroughly persuaded (whatsoever the wandering
and inconstant course of the most be) that God requires of them, as his
friends, and not using them as servants, is it to be marvelled at, that they
accept of it daily? and when they have tasted once, that this may be their
usual and ordinary diet (this sweet communion with God, I mean, which was
wont to be but their feasting now and then) is it to be thought strange, that
they

No, no: if God once persuade his, that they may walk in his favor every
day, and with more acceptance and better welcome, then when they could have
but a small glimse of it, once in a week, month or quarter, they will not
starve when they may banquet, Note.
they will not eat achornes with swine when they may be fed with Angels food,
they will not joy in the company of wicked men, Ioh. 14.23. Reu. 3.20.
when they may have communion with the God of glory, and with his dear
servants departed out of this life by the good memorial which they have left
behind them: and with those which remain here still; Psalm. 16 3.
being such, as in whom the Prophet had all his delight. Neither confidence,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; to solace themselves in earthly things (which
bring great bondage) with the sons of men.

Indeed I deny not, but whiles Gods people are tied short of the clear knowing
their liberties, and are holden in blindness and ignorance of these things, as
many are, but that they are also kept in unbelief, not being persuaded, that
God affoordeth such liberties to them: and then moreover, the penury of good
examples to go before them herein, do much hinder and hold them back from
inioying their part in them. But who doubts if they knew these things, and were
persuaded of them, but that they would be as joyful to hear of this heavenly
and happy news, as they were to have the tidings

These and such like, which God does admit his dear children unto, should be
taught them often, and plainly, and wisely, and fitly applied to them. Ministers
should dwell in them: 1. Tim. 4.16.
and know by themselves, who have in a long

And yet (which is most pitiful to think) through this, that few are by
diligent Note.
and therefore they seeing how hard it is to get necessary helps for this
life, and that care to be in greatest request among men in the world, even they
also grow sick of the same disease, and while the chief thought is how to
live, and their help small to live daily to God, they have lean souls, and
now and then, only are in a well ordered course, and that with much ado, so
far is it off, that they have any daily taste of heaven in this life.

Note.
Math 6.33.
First seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness. And therefore I have
written this treatise particularly of the daily directing of the people of God,
who have already consecrated and given over themselves unto his service, that
it may put them in mind, that this their covenant with God is to be renewed
daily, and their best care to please him, that ever they had, even their first
love, to be still continued, and that they must daily abide in his love. And in
a word, Ioh 15.10.
the rules which I have before set down for the keeping of the heart in good

But I will return to that from which by occasion I digressed: that is to
Habac. 2.4.
when it says: The just shall live by his faith. And which is said to have
been the life of our fathers (who yet were much more darkly led and guided then
we) as is to be seen in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where it is said of
Abell, Noe, Abraham, and many other: Heb. 11.13.
All these died in faith, in the which they had lived and continued And Paul
spoke it of himself, who was an example to all Gods people: Gal. 2.20.
I live no longer, but Christ in me, and the life that I lead is by faith in
the Son of God. This form of direction, that we ought to be guided by every
day, or any other agreeable to the Scriptures, is both by good reason, and the
testimony thereof proved unto us to be that which we must follow, that so we
may live by faith (as I have said.) For (to say a little for the instruction of
the simple) seeing every day is one part of our whole life, wherein we are by
great likelihood in danger to offend and provoke God, yea even then when we
have the fewest stops in our way to hinder us, and most helps to further us,
it stands with most sound reason according

CHAP. 9. Of the illustration or more full declaration of the former part of
the direction.
The first point of the daily direction.
FOR the first point, that we must be displeased with our selves, and humbled
for our sins every day, as ignorance, deadness of heart, rashness,
uncharitableness and wrath, Humiliation for sin.
or any other, that shall give us occasion: yea, even the body of sin it self,
that verse of the Psalm. 51.3. does prove: where David seeking pardon of his
sin, acknowledged it to God, saying: I know mine iniquity, and my sin is
ever before me; the^ no day to be forgotten. So the Apostle says, the sun
must not go down upon our wrath, Ephesians. 4.26.
meaning thereby, that we must soon the sun may not go down upon our wrath,
neither (by the like reason) any other Job. 1.5.
And if Job when his sons and daughters did feast together for the preserving
of love every day in their course; if he (I say) did command them to sanctify
and cleanse themselves every day, and did in like manner, offer burnt offerings
for them himself every morning, because he thought they had some way
displeased God, would he (think we) on other days, when they were like more
to offend, Psalm. 6.6.
new guilt by sin arises against us: that if David for his great and grievous
sins, did every day wash his bed, and water his couch with tears, for a space
(as he testifies:) can we think but that he kept some proportion on the other
days (although he had not ever the same particular cause) in lamenting,
bewailing, and acknowledging his sins? especially seeing we read of him, that
three times in a day his usual manner to praise and pray unto God. And if the
wicked are said not to be up and ready any day, as the Prophet speaks,
until they have wrought some mischief, (so natural and ordinary a matter it
is with them:) should any doubt, but that we should hold it for one piece of
our chief work, daily to cast down our selves before the Lord, and to humble
our selves, in the hearty confessing of our sins? And it was one of the
principal things that God meant to teach us, by the morning and evening
sacrifice, and prayer daily in the law of ceremonies. But I would all good
Christians did as duly and conscionably perform this duty to God every day,
and bind themselves resolutely thereto, as the word of God does clearly prove
that they ought

The second point follows, namely, The second point.
that every day we ought to be raised unto a cheareful and lively believing,
that our sins thus bewailed, Forgiveness of sin.
confessed and repented of, are forgiven, and freely remitted unto us, for and
through the only and sufficient satisfaction of Jesus Christ. And for the
proof of this, it is sufficient, that these two are never parted, but go
together, as Peter says: Repent, and ye shall receive the forgiveness of your
sins: and in Hosea the people were thus taught to seek and come by it: Act.
2.38.
Return unto the Hos. 14.2.3.
and receive us graciously: and he will hear your rebellion, and love you
freely, for his anger is turned away from you. And our Savior commanded his
Apostles to abide in his love, even as they had tasted how sweet it was. Now
then, Ioh. 15.9.
if every day we ought to turn from our sins, we ought also every day to
embrace the promise of mercy. Besides, in that the Church of God is taught
this for an article of her faith, to believe her sins to be forgiven; and the
articles are firmly and constantly to be holden and believed, and all
unbelief is sin at any time: therefore as we are to be raised up by faith in
Christ's merits,

Again, as in our common prayer which is called the Lords; which serves for
ever to square out our prayers by, Peti. ^.
and therefore for every day, the word ( this day) is expressed, serving for
every day of our life; that we may know, that there is no day of our life,
wherein this prayer in effect is not to be made; no day wherein we pray not for
our daily bread, even all necessaries for this present life: so is there no day
in which we ask not, and so in which we ought not to enjoy it by faith, I
mean, the forgiveness of our sins. Lamen. 3.23.
of which this is chief; then we also must in the same manner embrace them by
faith as our own, and so partake them. So that this binds the conscience
also as the former, that every day the true Christian must be persuaded of the
pardon of his sins, and that no day he should loose his part in so great a
treasure, though it is to be feared, that many good Christians enjoy it not.
Neither indeed can this second rule be faithfully observed and kept, but it
will cause all the other to be well looked too and regarded. Bring we therefore
our hearts daily to count it our treasure, that so they may delight in it: (
for where our treasure is, there will they be also) and then we have well and
wisely provided for our selves in

The third point is, that when we shall be strongly haled after sin, (for The
third point Preparation and arming of our hearts against evil, and ready to
good.
to keep them well disposed and armed against all sin, and most of all, our
special infirmities, that we let them not loose at any time in the day, to be
hardened with the deceitfulness of any sin, but kept with all diligence
posssible, from the love and liking thereof, that so our outward actions may be
well ordered. Therefore is that charge given in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Heb. 3.12.
that our hearts be not made naught, and rebellious at any time, and therefore
by consequent on any day, whiles we suffer them to be hardened with the
deceitfulness of sin. And agreeable to this, the Lord in Deuteronomie,
aunswering Moses (when he brought him word, that the This people has said well
all that they have said: but Deuteronomy. 5.29.
oh that there were an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all
my commandments always; then it should go well with them.

So that we must see such necessity of holding maisterie over our hearts, and
keeping them in fear of offending, that we may make a daily practice of it,
and so keep them for continuance: neither can we otherwise show our Mat. 22.37.
Thou shall worship the Lord with all thy heart and soul. For they who are
every while off and on, unsettled in their hearts, can never be long well ordered
in their lives: Prou. 4.18.
therefore the Lord requires this constancy, that we must every while be
looking to them, even always, that so we may be out of danger. Behold how
needful a thing this is, to keep and hold this maisterie over our hearts
daily: when nothing goes well forward, where they with the affections of them
be not well ruled. But this shall be showed in the next section following.
Neither let men object their necessary business (though they will not plead
for carnal liberty, they say) and multitudes thereof, which will distract

Now from this heart well governed, The 4. Flee evil,
the next two points (as two arms of a tree, from the body or stock) do
issue and come: The first, 5. Follow good.
that we should ever keep from evil: which shall not be hard, if always and
every day we be held in fear of offending, as we are directed before. The
second, that we to please God, and therefore in all things; and as was said in
Deuteronomie, to keep all his commandments: which all may see, cannot be if
we have not our hearts so prepared to seek the Lord, that we may be ready in
one duty as well as in another, to show our selves obedient. Deuteronomy. 5.29.
All which three, namely, 1. to have a heart to fear God, 2. to fly evil, 3.
and please him in all things, in that one Scripture before mentioned are
required daily to be found in us; so there is no man but may easily see reason,
why it should be thus: first, seeing the one cannot be without the other:
secondly, the keeping of such agreablenesse betwixt our hearts and lives is our
beauty and honor. And on the contrary, it is most harsh and offensive, when
they which

I will say somewhat the more of these two, seeing it is one of the chiefest
causes, why I entered into this present treatise, as may appear by that which I
have already said: namely, that the Christian should be every day free from
all reproachful evil: insomuch as if by any occasion he be turned out of the
way, yet he should speedily return, and also that he should be daily given
unto every good work, watching his opportunity thereto, that so he may have a
good conscience in all things, and may bring forth much fruit, that God may
be glorified. Yet I mean not that he should spend the whole day in reading, A
godly life daily, consists not only in the exercises of religion.
or other religious exercises (excepting the Sabbath) but in one lawful thing
or other about his calling; or any other in stead thereof, which may be as well
defended, and as pleasing to God as the duties of his calling.

More particularly to appoint or prescribe is hard, We may serve God in our
ordinary and meanest works.
and this is plain enough for every true believer to understand, and apply
unto himself: for I exclude not the commonest and meanest services and works,
so as they be such as God allows, and without vicious affections gone about
of him: as in the The man in his.
plough and cart, sowing and reaping, and all work thereto belonging, if he be
called thereto; or other work in the man of occupation, as he has been
trained up and fitted for: as also all provision of things necessary to the
maintenance of his family by lawful skill and honest means; and paying, and
receiving of that which is due.

The woman in hers.
In the woman, to have care, that all be frugally and thriftily done within the
house and without, which is under her hand; that she be diligent to see her
children christianly brought up according to their age, her household to have
all that is meet in due season: Prou 3^.
and more particularly among the rest, spinning, sowing, knitting, being done
as to the Lord, and being those works may be neither idle nor unprofitable. And
these I name in some particular manner, lest any should think, that I go about
any newfound out holiness to tie Christians unto, as some will be ready
enough to imagine and think, when they shall see and understand that they must
every day be well occupied, (which few will be tied to) and doing of one good
duty or other.

And yet this I add, that as these and such like must be done, and in one or
other of them the six days must be bestowed, yet (I say) this must be added,
They must be done by faith.
that all these lawful works must be done of them in faith, that is, they
must know that God commands such works to be done of them, Not for carnal
respects.
or shame of the world, or because they would be rich: all which are carnal,
sensual and devilish respects, as I said before in forbidding all vicious
affections in men's lawful actions; neither do they please God which thus go to
work. Committing the success to God.
And further they must do these lawful works in persuasion and confidence
that God will bless them therein, and give them good success, and take that
for their daily bread and blessing, which God in their thus-going to work,
does bestow upon them.

And lastly, they must do these without adding the common sins, Avoiding the
common sins that profane ones join with them.
as swearing, lying, negligence, idleness, falsehood and deceiving, cursing,
quarrelling, impatience, and contention. These and such other of their own
devising the wicked do bring in, among the lawful works which God commands
them to do, and mixeth such evils with the doing of the works, which of
themselves are good, Men disgrace and mar their lavvfull callings, by their
sins.
that they utterly mar, and deface them thereby, deprive themselves of Gods
blessing, and it causes their callings and trades to be meanly accounted of,
and in discredit with such as are not able to judge, as though none could use
them better: whereas others as poor as they, and as much put to their shifts,
yet taking better direction, and depending on God, and carefully abstaining
from such sins, as are wont in the most to accompany

And thus would God have Christians go to their work, and do all their cutters
of wood, and drawers of water: and they that are of meanest place in families
may live godly in them while religion rules their actions, and while they
desire to do them as they are taught in the word of God. The true Christian
only may, and ought to be merry at his work.
And they who go to work after this manner, may be merry at their work, and
merry at their meat: and yet I mean not as the profane and earth-wormes, who
sometime are merry when they have more cause to be heavy, seeing neither they
nor their Rejoice thou and thine, Deuteronomy 12.18.
before the Lord thy God, in all that thou put thine hand unto. And again:
Serve the Lord thy God (that is, Deuteronomy. 28.46.
in that thou art appointed by him to do) in ioyfulnesse and with a good heart
for the abundance of all things. And this is the mirth and joy of heart, which
the Apostle wills us to take our part in, saying: Speak to your selves in
Psalms, and Himnes, and spiritual songs; singing, Ephesians. 5.19.
and making melody to the Lord in your hearts, with thanks for all things
through Jesus Christ. In this sort has God allowed his servants, who have
learned and are resolved to obey him in all things, to rejoice, and go about
their worldly

I have also spoken this by occasion, for the satisfying of the simple-harted,
that they may not think that (in requiring that we should live every day in a
godly manner) I do urge any to leave off, and lay aside their callings and
business: and yet this I show to be required by the Lord; how, and in what
manner those lawful works ought to be done of them, that he therein may be
pleased. And so I conclude, that the believer ought every day to arm and
conversation must beseem the Gospel; remembering what the wise man says:
Philip. 1.27. Eccles. 9.10.
All that thine hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power, for there is
no work in the grave whither thou go.

Which if it were persuaded thoroughly to men, that it ought to be so, and that
it is as necessarily to be looked after, as their maintenance, health; yea, or
their life it self (which none well advised will deny:) then should there not be
this posting it off from one to another, which now there is: nor this doing all
to his glory, 1. Cor. 10.31.
which they that refuse, do refuse godliness it self: And there should not be
this parting of stakes betwixt God and our selves, that sometime we will be
forward, and sometime backward, in some things obedient, but in others denying
our obedience, which causes such patching and peecing of duties, Heb. 12.14.
as is far from holiness, without which yet, we shall never see the Lords
face; whereas yet by constancy in duty, and keeping of a daily course, therein
much dullness, deadness, barrenness, sloth, idleness, and the fruits
thereof, lewd lusts, and many such dangerous evils should be avoided, with
which even many good Christians (to their great heart-smart

The sixth point:
The sixth point of our daily direction in thankfulness: I mean, a renewing of
this duty to the Lord every day, Thankfulness.
that so we may still see and acknowledge our selves indebted unto him, and be
the fitter to go under any of his fatherly chastisements, which he shall lay
upon us, which without it, will press us down, and raise bitterness in our
hearts: and also that by it, we may the ofter call to mind Gods many
kindnesses, to cheer our hearts, which are too soon forgotten of us. The
Prophet Jeremy forces this daily duty to be continued of us, Lament. 3.23.
when he says, that the mercies of God are renewed upon us daily: and what
follows upon that, but this, that our hearts should conceive, Psalm. 118.7.
Let Israel now say, that the Lord is gracious, after his bountifulness had
been declared unto them) how much more ought we to praise the Lord daily for
his mercies renewed upon us?

Therefore, did David the faithful servant of God force himself to perform
this duty as too slouthful in his own judgment, though we read of none more
continually occupied in it, Psalm 103.3. saying: Praise thou the Lord, o my
soul, and all that is within thee, praise his holy name: and further he that
he will be ever setting forth his goodness, and praise his name always.

And yet that none may hinder this duty in us by saying, we are not bound to
follow, no not good examples in all things, let us well weigh the commandment
of God by the Apostle, 1. These. 5.18.
saying: In all things be thankful: as if he should say, that our whole life
ought to be a thanksgiving; and therefore it is no life, when we cannot be
thankful. And what the thankfulness is which should daily be in us, look in
the former treatise.

The seventh point:
The next duty to be daily performed of us, VVatch and pray.
is watchfulness and prayer: of which two, as the first ought to be
continual, even to ouer-see our whole work in and through the day, and to
look before us that all may be done to our feet from falling:) so this
latter, namely prayer, is to be as an help and handmaid unto that.

And although I prescribe no certain rule, nor set hour to the solemn
performing of this duty, 1. These. 5.17.
because we are taught to pray always, at any time as we shall have fit
opportunity, yet ought our hearts to be lifted up to God often, having ever
occasion: and sometime solemnly, and by set prayer

And can any be ignorant, when our Savior taught us to pray every day our
daily bread, but that we should pray every day for grace to be guided aright
and comforted, there being as great need of it, and more, then of the other?
The same thing he meant, when he uttered a parable to them to this end, that
they ought to pray always, and not to wax faint: but ever willing, though not
ever able. So that the life of a Christian is no day well passed, when prayer
(as it has bin before described) is not one member and part of it.

The last point of our direction is, that we by means of all these, The eight*
Peace.
as our faith, and fear of displeasing God, etc. may keep and hold fast our
holy and most sweet peace with God, and our rejoicing, 2. Co. 1.12.
which is the fruit of this Christian walking, and an inseperable companion
unto the same. I have peace, which passes understanding, be not broken off
betwixt God and us. If it be asked how this shall be; the Apostle says, Romans
5.1.
If we be justified by faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, we have and do enjoy it.
And we have heard, that the Lord has both given liberty, yea and commandment
to his children, that they should daily believe and lay hold on eternal life,
and rest themselves in the assurance of his love: and how can this exclude that
peace which we speak of?

Nay, our rejoicing in the Lord, which is rather a degree beyond this always,
that is, Phil. 4.4.
at all times, that none may imagine that I mean, we should only some one
time in the day or other possess and enjoy it. Neither indeed is any part of
our life any day pleasant unto us without it. Therefore the Apostle does very
fitly meet with an objection of ours in the forenamed Scripture, thus: that if
any of us dare not presume so far as to take our part in continual rejoicing
in the Lord, or if we should think, that the Apostle was not well advised in
offering so great liberty unto us, he repeateth his words thus (again, I say,
rejoice:) as if he should say, you who are careful over your selves, and over
others, (for to such he speaks) be ye merry and joyful in the Lord from time
to time, 1. These. 5.16.


Now I have showed what are the necessary graces which should accompany the
life of the believer daily, I wish him to view the^ all at one sight together;
to see if he may well be without any of them: as without certainety of the
forgiveness of his sins, without fear of offending God, a thankful heart,
and cheerful watching and praying against evil, etc. And he cannot walk
void of any of them, so yet: he must not think but that there are other
particular actions beside these, but they be all to be well ordered and
Advertisement to the Reader about the direction.
that it is their sin, when they are not guided by these rules in the daily
course of their living: I say, when these accompany them not, whatsoever their
calling is, or the actions which they are occupied about, it is their sin,
whether it be of ignorance, that they know them not (which is the less, if
they be willing to learn:) or carelessness, or wilfulness,

And that it may be thought more necessary to be daily guided in this manner, we
must know, that these graces which I have spoken of, are not at some one time
or other of the day to be thought or spoken of (think not this to be my
meaning, in saying we must have them every day) for so, we might possibly be
little the better for them (as if once in a day a man should pray, give thanks,
look to his ways, to his peace, etc.) a man might do all these and the like,
and yet not of necessity well guided for all that, through the day: but this I
mean, What the believer is to understand by the direction.
that this holy furniture should cloth and beautify our Note.
our watching should not cease, we should keep our selves from evil the whole
day, and so likewise be ready to one duty or other, and we should cherish our
weak faith from time to time, Heb. 10.35. and cast not away our confidence,
Flowers for a Christian to smell on.
retaining minds thankful, and walking in the strength of our prayers, though
we be not ever uttering and expressing in words either prayers or thanks.

So that our hearts may be well seasoned with these, as the chief things, The
unruly heart, the chiefest trouble that a man has.
we be every day in greatest danger; I mean, the loosenes and disorderednesse
of our hearts: for they, as they be never unoccupied, but prone to evil a
thousand ways; so if they be not bridled, holden under, and suppressed, they
are so soon fixed upon some object that comes in the way, that they carry us
headlong after it, we being then impotent for the time

Some fruit of it.
And from thence arise (I speak of the better sort of us) great heaviness and
unquietness, to see such chaunges wrought in us: and this is the best that
comes thereof, until we recover our selves again, if a worse thing follow
not, that we fall not into some further unsettledness and distemperature, which
will cause no small annoyance. Now what is a like remedy Daily direction, the
chief remedy against it.
as to have our hearts daily fenced thus with watch and ward against them, as I
have said, to hold such sin execrable always, to keep in love with piety
and goodness, to retain hope and confidence that God will make us strong
against them, to live in his favor still that we may want nothing that is
good, and to enjoy most sweet and sound peace to comfort us so to our liking,
that we may not need to have greatly or gape after such allurements, which are
no better then deadly poison? What (I say) is like this precious remedy, to
keep us in safety every day? Which God has gives his heart to the Lord,
that it may be taught all these rules of the daily directing of a Christian,
can tell how true this is, and what reward is found and enjoyed daily of such
as take delight in them.

But many Christians, who bear a good affection to the Gospel, Some
Christians (say what may be said) will go no further in practice of religion,
then they be already
and generally mean well, yet will not particularly trouble themselves (as
they count it) to be brought in their whole course within a narrower compass,
and to a more near acquaintance with the Lord, yea when they hear that it is
to become by, but would feign bear themselves in hand, that they are

as deaf as the adder, as dumb as he that opens not his mouth, Reu. 3.17.
The wicked shall wax worse.
and as unprofitable as the salt that has lost the savor, and is good for
nothing but to be trodden under foot, and cast upon the dunghill.

Neither let the people of God count this any burden to be thus directed:
Encouragement to the teachable
but it is their flesh and corrupt wisdom which burdeneth them, whereto they
are not debtors. And what do I persuade unto, but the use of, and continuance A
bewailing of them who rest in their state, not seeking to be bettered.
o people to be lamented and ever pitied, that they being borne to great honor
even here in this life, should forgo it so contentedly, and suffer others to
enjoy it: whom I require to hear me, saying unto them, that if they were wise
and well advised, though they might live as their heart desires here, and
should never be called to their account for the same, yet they would fly from
a licencious life, being but a sweet poison, and would rather then a thousand
days otherwise: which many heathens in their kind, and according to the light
and knowledge they had, as Cato, Scipio, and others did, that is, in moral
virtue and honesty, to the perpetual shame and just reproach of many which go
for Christians.

And this is that which I go about, that in this shifting and godless world,
some who are very willing already to be guided well, but are unable to direct
themselves, may have some help by this which I have written: who if they
should be hindered thus, namely, that they think, for all that can be said, yet
there will be wanderings out of the way, earthlinesse of mind, frowardness,

And to uphold our selves in holiness thus as it is required of us, no less
1. These. 4.3.
then the daily keeping of our hearts in this estate, which I have set down.
For although while the heart is thus looked unto, (as it would be of us, if we
counted it the necessariest work that we have to do throughout the day) while
the heart (I say) is thus looked unto, every thing does well follow our hands,
and much good is done in our lives: so yet, except we make great provision,
that this work may be daily and constant, we cannot choose, no not the best of
us, but we shall commit many things in our lives unbeseeming our profession,
and smally to our own comfort. And howsoever the rebellious world cannot away
with it, yet (as I said before) all the godly, if they knew it, and so far as
they do know it, do aim at it, and

I confess, all are not in a like measure enlarged, either by knowledge to see
the excellency of it, (as I have said) or in heart to desire it, seeing they
are not acquainted with it: but yet when they do see, how God of his abundant
The flesh will spurn against daily direction.
and rebel and be discontented with this, that all unlawful liberty should
ever be denied unto it. But as they shall see more clearly into this blessed
estate, and have daily more experience, both that God does give them power to
mortify and overcome themselves, and make this holy course sweet unto them,

For if it were men's pleasure and delight throughout the day to be well
occupied one way or other, and in all that they should go about, to have their
hearts ready to guide them aright therein, all other gaine-saying desires of
the flesh should soon be withstood and resisted, and the occasions, by which
they were wont most of all to be hindered and withdrawn, should be shunned and
avoided. And this may much set them forward in this course, that if they seek
to retain constantly any one of these eight rules, Follow one of these rules
thoroughly, and all the other will be familiar.
find rest to their souls, and filled with thanks: and so I say of the rest,
if they know this point of Gods will, that he requires it, that one of them
should daily go with the other, as indeed the one cannot be without the other.

And if any say, belike I go about to make men perfecter and holier, Objection.
then the Lord ever did, and to persuade, that they may serve God without
strife Answer.
that I go about no other thing then this, that Gods servants may be best
fenced against the common corruptions which are in the world through lust, and
may honor God in the best manner, and themselves live with the most comfort,
and that they may know and be persuaded, that he of his mercy has provided
this sweet pathway to heaven, for his poor servants, who are despised in the
world. And they who have not as yet experience of this seasoning of their

But now I having spoken of the foundation, that should be laid in the heart of
all Gods people, upon which the building of a godly life every day is to be
set, and without the which (endeavored after of every one) it can in no wise
stand; and that is, an heart endued with the several gifts of the spirit,
which I have set down; I have thought it very meet and necessary to add
Objection.
And this it is: why men are not directed how to lead their lives daily, and
to govern their tongues, as well as to rule and beautify their hearts, and
why they have not direction how to do all their outward actions daily: (for of
these, they say, no rule has been set down in this whole treatise) but only
of the well ordering of the heart; whereas that touches but some part of men's
duties in the sight of God: but all other things are left (as it seems) to
our own discretion, which are to be done in the eyes of

To the which I answer, that the heart of true Christians being kept thus
purged from evil, Answer.
and seasoned graciously, (as we have heard) good life and behavior will come
from thence, Pro. 4.23.
as Solomon says: and according to the diverse occasions, which shall fall out
to every one daily, his knowledge shall and will guide him either in his
calling, or in the supply of it, by other necessary duties: but more
particularly, they must not look that there can be any certain direction
given of the outward parts of our lives, which of them should be done every day:
No rule is nor can be given, what outward works are to be done daily, seeing
they are variable and infinite.
because the actions of our lives are variable for the most part and
innumerable, as all do know; and therefore cannot all be done upon

But further, and to the more full satisfying of such as would desire it, this
I say; that although there can be no certain and perpetual rules given more
particularly, which are as necessary one day as any, (except we would lay
burdens on Gods people which he himself has not done) and those concern

CHAP. 10. Of outward duties of life, most commonly to be done daily,
THE first, that we awake with God. The first outward duty: To awake with God.


That is to say, that as soon as we have broken off our sleep every morning,
we bend and resolve with our selves to give unto the Lord the first fruits of
the day: The same more fully.
and that either directly, by thanksgiving, confession of our sins, and
request making for our selves and Gods people, we lift up our hearts to God in
a brief manner: or indirectly, that is, though we tie not our selves to this
manner and form,

The second, that we provide (if it may be) solemnly and upon our knees, The
second outward duty. Morning prayer. Hos. 14.2.
to make profession of our repentance by confession of our sins, requests
made to God, with thanksgiving, taking to us words, as Hosea speaks, that is,
with our mouths uttering them, preparing our selves by meditation hereunto.

The same more fully.
(if it be possible) we make this our first work of the day: and in our
confession, let our special sins be mentioned, by which we have most
displeased God: Hos. 14.4. Psalm. 111. and 116.1.
in our thanks, let some particular favors of God be remembered: in our
requests, let us crave pardon of our sins with faith to obtain it, and all
other necessaries; and namely, that we may well go through the day, and have
Gods blessing in all that we shall set our hand unto in the day. To proceed the
better in all these, let us meditate either on some of Gods mercies, or our
own sins, or on some other things profitable; that by meditation and prayer
before we enter into our affairs, we may be the better prepared to pass the

That (if it shall then be most expedient) we with our minds still kept well
ordered, betake our selves to our calling and vocation. The third: Our calling.


That is, The same.
that we willingly and diligently set our selves to perform duty in that
work or service, for the which we are fitted, and to the which we are called:
and therein abide as we are able, except any waightier matter draw us from it:
assuring our selves, that we please God no less therein, then in obeying his
other commandments. And that we be therefore cheerful

The fourth: The right use of company.
That in all companies we behave our selves, as we are taught of God, and as it
becomes us: especially so, as we leave no ill savor behind us.

The same.
That is, seeing some part of the day is usually bestowed in company: therefore

The fifth: Solitariness.
That we do not ill spend the time in our solitarines, or when we be alone.

The same.
I mean, that at such times, as wherein we shall be free from company, we have
the like care of our hearts and behavior being alone, that we were taught to
have of them both, and of our talk in company. For example: that in our
behavior we attempt or go about no evil, as stealing, whoring, or committing
any unlawful thing, etc. and concerning our hearts, that we suffer them not to
wander after needless and vain things, but hold them within this compass,
that either our thoughts be of those things which are lawful, as the well
ordering of our business, and yet that also with moderation: or of things holy
and spiritual, as the glory of the life to come, Gods love that we must
redeem the time to the best uses we can, and in conscience most approve of; or
if our thoughts be at any time of things evil, that it be only to bring us
into further hatred and detestation of them, and not to engender and raise up a
liking thereof in our hearts, which Satan ever intends, though we had no
such meaning, nay rather purposed against it, when we first entered into thought
of them.

The sixth: Prosperity.
That we use our prosperity and all the lawful liberties of this life,
soberly, and so as we seek to be the better by them.

The same.
Forasmuch as our merciful father bestows upon us many great blessings where
we be strangers, both in token that he can afford us them; and to show, that
piety and the fear of God are not without reward, no not in this life. 1.
Tim. 4.8. Therefore it behooves us to be circumspect and wary, that we swell
not, neither be insolent, because of our prospering; neither idle and loose in
our lives, and so abuse the same to carnal liberty: but to be more rich and
fruitful in all good duties both to God and men; because we know, that he
which has received much, of him shall much be required, Amos 3.2. Amos. 3.2.
And that herein is our heavenly father glorified, John. 15.9.
that we bring forth much fruit, John 15.9. And so we have the right use of
Gods benefits, which is a greater treasure then the benefits themselves, 1.
Kings, 3. 1. King. 3.
as we may see by the fearful ends of such, as had many great blessings, but
regarded not how to use them Psalm. 37.36. Luke 12.18.20.
.

That we be ready to receive our afflictions meekly and patiently, The seventh:
Affl^ctions.
and so be found indeed where we are tried with them, that our patient minds
may be known to all.

The same.
does not the Lord chastise us, for that he takes any pleasure in our
sufferings, but of very love sends them for our benefit, namely, Lam. 3.33.
to weane us from the excessive love of the world, and to purge out our dross
thereby, 1. Cor. 11.31.
that we might not perish with the world, but have proof of our faith and
patience: Iam. 1.2.
which causes the greatest joy of all other. Therefore we must not fret and be
impatient in them, but confess, that they are necessary and meet, as often as
God sends them, and therefore wait to see a good end of them; 1. Pet. 1.6.
that so we may have experience of great good by them, Romans 5.5.
which may make us hope for the like after, and that without fainting.

The eighth: Family exercises.
and such other helps to maintain the knowledge and true worship of God, and
of true happiness amongst us.

For seeing we are forgetful of our duties, The same.
and easily drawn away by the world, we have need to have daily and often
access to God, and our servants especially, who have little other private
help. These exercises of Religion are, prayer, reading, chatechising and
conference, with singing of Psalms, etc. and that these or such of them as are
common to the whole family, be used at the most convenient times when the
family may come together: and that we endeavor to do the same together twice in
the day at least, providing

That before we lie down at night, The ninth: A viewing of the day at our
lying down.
we look back to the works of the day, how we have passed it, that where we
have had blessings, we may be thankful, and proceed in the like course after:
where we have faulted and failed, we may reconcile our selves to God, and so
lie down in peace.

The same.
and some particular benefits to give thanks for, and to power out our
complaints in special manner, it is meet (as we shall be able) that we should
thus view, and go through the several acts of our life in the day, calling
them to remembrance as we can: that where we shall see that we have received
help and strength to live well, and to keep peace with God by the rules and
duties prescribed, otherwise then we were wont before we did so particularly
observe our ways, we may with praise to God, rejoice and take comfort in our
gain, and more constantly hold out in the same course; and where we Heb. 11.13.
and so show our selves to be pilgrims and strangers as our fathers were.

And these are the duties of our lives, falling out ordinarily, and most
commonly to be done every day, at least some of them, and none more usually
then these, which I have added: that thus, while these are well looked to,
Again the daily direction is described.
To whom and to all other I say, that it is no less then a daily, and careful

And because we are not, neither can be, always settled to abide at home in our
own houses, where it were easier to keep some even and equal course in our
lives, as we are directed by Gods word, yea and sometime we be forced to be
taken up both in the travel of the mind and body, more specially about some
weighty matters, in which case we shall be ready much more Note.
or the contrary (as unusual matters do more easily unsettle) that in these, I
say, and such like, when any shall fall out, we be more careful at such times
to be fensed against all such occasions, then when we be void of them: and
that we do this, as we love our peace and communion with God.

CHAP. 11. Of the benefit and commendation of the Direction.
NOw I will proceed to the third point, namely, The third part of this fourth
treatise.
of the necessity, profit and comfort of the daily direction: and then more
largely speak of these nine duties, seeing a Christian shall find so great use
of them, that he may Note.
and that he teaches us what manner of guiding us this daily direction is
(both which have been proved unto us:) who can doubt, The daily directing of
our selves, a great gain to us.
but that it must needs be a thing of great account and reckoning, and of
singular use, and gainefull? especially to all such as being of an upright
heart, are yet not so exercised in the Scriptures, nor so experienced (by
means of the darkness and blindness that yet is in

Besides, many such enjoy not the ministry of the Gospel ordinarily, but as
they get it by their painful travel abroad; and many (the more is the pity)
do not tie themselves conscionably to preach the most necessary doctrine to
their people, yea (I may say with grief) are altogether unfit to do it: and
the diligentest Preachers and best able (for the most part) tarry not long to
season the hearers thoroughly with such matter; but by death, Many things to
hinder from daily direction.
or other show them the easiest and plainest way to escape and come out of it,
1. Cor. 11.17.
as God has showed us?

And therefore for mine own part, I have endeavored in this work to do the
same: and although neither fully nor perfitly to set down in a little room
that will of God which is dispersed throughout the canonical Scriptures; yet,
so far as God has revealed unto me, that, which I count the best treasure
and commodity, that God has bestowed upon me in this transitory life; and that
which how small soever it may seem in the eyes of any, yet of

The reason is great: for that, whiles we walked before without some certain
direction, we were never long settled, especially with religious minds, how to
bestow the day nor the parts of it, in the actions of our lives, neither how to
begin, nor how to end it; and therefore were much wearied and distracted with
forgetfulness and rashness (I speak of good people) unsettled often, and yet
knew not how, neither how to return again. But since we have been guided more
clearly and particularly, What benefit it brings.
we have seen much better how one thing comes to be done after another, and
one duty not neglected for

No other can well set themselves about it, but shake it off, as they do al
other good things: Who are fit to use it.
which I thought meet to put the reader in mind of, that although he shall not
see this doctrine commonly practiced in the world, yet he may not think it for
all that, any nouelty which Gods word does not

But let such understand that they are not fit to make their use of it. They
must be other manner of persons whom I speak to, or go about to persuade: for
they who will weigh things advisedly, shall consent (I doubt not) to that they
here on earth be absent from God; and so likewise that the christian life is
not such, or so pleasant as the Scripture every where affirms it to be; which
is nothing else then to charge it with falsehood and lies: but many of Gods
dear servants do know it, and find by experience, that this Christian life
has no match, abounding in delights; yea, and those most sound, permanent and
unspeakable.

To return therefore to them whom God in mercy has called to assurance of
their salvation, for they by such direction as I speak of, shall see the
Christian life more easy by many degrees, then ever they found it whiles they
walked after no certain direction before: Particular use and benefit of it.
such (I say) both poor and rich, Minister and people, one and another, may
learn, and that every day through their life, how to keep company, how to be
solitary, how to be occupied

Besides, Other benefit of it.
we may by the benefit of it so be occupied in our earthly and common
business, as from the same we may come readily and willingly to heavenly
exercises (whereas the most come untowardly:) and also in the same business we
may have our minds heavenly, and therefore our actions

And whereas many even of good hope are wont to complain and say, that longer
then they be in praying, reading or such like exercises, they cannot keep in
any well ordered course, any long time in the day together, but are distracted
like others of the world which use neither reading, nor prayer: yet we by the
help which God gives us hereby, when we necessarily intermit them, and cease
from them for a time (being occupied in our calling or other profitable duties)
we (I say) may hold a good and well ordered course in our other actions and
business in and through the day notwithstanding. A third particular use and
benefit of it.
And more then this, when we can bring our hearts to look carefully to this

And here for the better encouragement of the reader to look more carefully
into this matter, and not to be dismayed by the strangeness and
vnaccustomednesse of the thing to the which I persuade, An example of some who
embraced this doctrine, how they profited by it.
I will faithfully report unto him the speech of sundry Christians, long
taught, and of the best sort of such as had profited by the preaching of the
Gospel (as far as I could judge) in those parts. When they first heard of
any form of daily directing them, whereby men are taught to be every day kept
in the same holy compass,

But it appeared to be a fault in all three sorts, by this that they did
afterward correct themselves. For when they saw further into it, and weighed

After this, they were advised, and exhorted to go about the practicing of it
according to the several points thereof, How to deal about the direction to
make it profitable.
after the right and clear understanding and due considering of it; and to
show faithfully, how they felt it to help them forward in well passing the
day, more then when they walked without it in the world: and which points of
it, they found hard to be observed: and how they were let, or what liberty
they found more by it, in had set their hearts to seek the Lord some while
before. For they said, when they did consider, that God ought as well one day
have his due at our hands as another (which they had not thought upon so
thoroughly; but now by the help of this, they began to see more clearly: and
that it was nothing beseeming the greatness and goodness of God, that he
should be served by fits, and uncertainly; some day a little, some day nothing
at all) they confessed, that they framed their minds of conscience, to look to
their ways more constantly and carefully, and that in one part of the day as
another: and more especially, that they did usually consider of, and call to
mind Gods love and kindness in his many mercies much more often, then in times
past when What fruit these men reaped by the help of direction.
that they were able with chearfulnes and without tediousness to pass the day
in their calling, and in the performance of other necessary duties either at
home or abroad as occasion was offered, which they could never do before, for
any long time together: they were not unsettled by matters about family, nor so
easily and readily passing

And above the rest, this did exceedingly comfort them, that whereas they had
often times before that, been much shaken with fear, that they should not with
any peace persevere to the end: now their experience in subduing their as they
should increase, so should their comfort increase, 2. Cor. 1.12.
whereby they should be made able to bear them. So that this daily tying of
themselves to record and think upon Gods kindnesses toward them, in that he
had made them happy, both here, had given them sure hope of happiness for
hereafter, and the submitting themselves to be guided daily, did greatly Great
differe^c^ betwixt a daily guiding of us, and an uncertain.
For is there not (think we) a great difference betwixt a daily, and a seldom
or uncertain view of our estate? betwixt a particular observing our ways, and
a general course in Christianity? For although men may have without such like
help and direction, oftentimes their hearts well affected, yet will it be
nothing like with the^, as when they do with a resolute and constant purpose
above all other things look to this one, and not to be removed from it, seeing
it is the best of all, 1. Cor. 10 3.
daily and through the day to hold fast the profession of their hope with joy,
and to be careful to please God in one thing as in an other. For then does
Christ's Marie reach also to them, that they count one thing needful; and they
have chosen the good part, and it shall not be taken from them: when they can
testify to their own consciences, that in their weighty businesses and
dealings, and in their matters of pleasure and profit, they be thus
indifferently carried about them; that this one thing is still counted needful,
that is, by faith to rest in God, and still to be ruled by his word.

But to end my report of these Christians, for proof of that which they say of
the benefit of the daily direction faithfully observed: they allege

But know we, that this kind of serving God, both may be, and is, and has
been (God be thanked) used of many of Gods servants, though I will not say in a
like manner, and ought to be of the rest, as every one shall be able to see into
it. And therefore I purpose to thrust no fancy nor conceit upon any, but that
which all well advised persons must justify, to be the commandment of God:
and which bewrays too plainly, that many professors of the Gospel have not
so much sought for the sound practice of a

For though the sect of the Family of love, the Church of Rome, and sundry
other lying spirits do fancy a course which the Scripture knows not,

But from whence is the difficulty that it is no more in practice, being a
What is a special hinderance from using daily direction.
but from hence, that they will put no diligence thereunto, to observe their
ways in which they prosper, and contrariwise? also there is no aunswerable
travel, nor labor for skill and experience in this Christian course, to that
which is in all other; but every little is tedious to them and wearisome. They
are seven years at other trades to learn them, though they be apt to them,
and forward in them, before they are thought fit to occupy by themselves.

But yet without seven years or seven months diligent exercising of the Note.
who can be persuaded to be guided by religion and the rules thereof, but seven
weeks constantly, I may truly say seven days: for if he who would but so long
give over himself to live by faith, and walk with God, he would never seek
to be loosened, and set at liberty again to his old life, but would renounce
it utterly, so great should his advantage be in this course and trade.

And as I know, that this is the maine and greatest cause, why so few are Note.
they shall find it harder to practice a christian life after seven years
twice told, then the hardest trade after half seven. And as it is with many of
them who never Note.
but peeced and patched up the same with here a good deed, and there another,
and in being sometime devout and zealous, the most of their actions being
unregarded: and of many of them it may truly be said, the power of godliness
was never thoroughly rooted and settled

These rules and the like for the daily directing of a Christian, are to be
well conceived and approved in our conscience to be such as are very fit and
profitable to guide us, (the which, whosoever has the spirit of God, does or
may discern) because they are according to the word of God, and practice of
his children, and so he yields to them: and of every such they are duly and
daily to be regarded, so far as God gives him to conceive of, and see into
them: this indeuouring to practice them will bring a man increase daily of
sound liberty and freedom from bondage to his boisterous passions and unruly
life, and recompense an hundred fold in sweet peace all his loss in

And seeing they will work upon the simplest whose heart is upright, and which
the Lord has opened to conceive them, therefore when thou see that thou art
such a one, and that thou have felt them, (these rules of direction I mean) to
persuade and draw thee on to follow them, An exhortation to use it, and against
the making of it common.
forgo not this liberty, neither fall from this holy beginning, neither quench
thou this flame of grace: but cherish it in thee daily, and trust not the
fleshly wisdom of thine heart, (whereby thou might be discouraged) seeing
thou have often proved and found it deceitful: but inquire into it still every
day, lest some poison by fasting and prayer. Provide that thou may continue
it, and happy shall thou be both here and hereafter: and if thou think this
be little that I say, tell me how thou shall speed better any other way.

Think not upon the many years in the which thou art to continue it, to easy
yoke and light burden to thee by many degrees, then thou were wont. And while I
exhort thee to the diligent regarding of this daily direction, I do not call
thee either from seeking knowledge, or from the practicing of any necessary
duty which might be required at thy hand: but I encourage thee to both; as
that thou should so store and stuff fit unto every good work in the day.

This is such a guide as is able to carry thee safely, as I have said:
howbeit, if it shall please God to bring to light a plainer and sounder, be
ready to embrace it; but rest thankful to God in the mean season for the
help thou Note.
Let not that be despised in a scornful manner, which men well understand
not; nor upon stomach refused or misliked, which they sufficiently weigh not,
and all because it cutteth off many parts of bad behavior, which they cannot
readily cast off, and depriueth of vain liberties, which they were wont to use
when they knew no better. He that frames himself faithfully to be led by any
one of the forementioned rules constantly, will desire and shall obtain a
part in the rest as I have said: although there be not present strength to
accomplish that which he desires, seeing faith in him is weak, whereby he
should come by and attain it. And to such I speak, not doubting to assure

And as I desire to help these, so I would be glad to satisfy others, as much
as I can, though they be as yet further off from eternal life then they.
Objection.
And therefore if any such shall demand (when they have seen and considered
these rules for their daily direction:) What shall men do through the day
besides the looking to their ways and hearts, as is before set down? for
nothing (they will perhaps allege) has been said of the sundry actions and
the particular kinds of the dealings of men, which go through their hands in
the day, which are things indifferent, and may either be done, or left undone:
and

To such as would ask this question, Answer.
not much differing from another before propounded, I answer: that none may
imagine, that I go about any such thing as to prescribe what particular
actions, companies, or dealings every Christian should use and be conversant in
every day, (that were no less absurd then impossible to dream of) or of
things indifferent, which of them he should do, and which are to be undone: but
this I say, whatsoever behauior, Titus. 2.11. namely, Tit. 2.11.
to live soberly, righteously, and godly) let them avoid them: and whatsoever
going about them, or manner of doing them, will not suffer them to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts of all sorts through the day, let it be far
off from them; as in their talk, ieasting, scoffing, quarrelling, idle words,
and all other vnbridlednesse of the tongue. In their behavior, lightness,
loosenes, sauciness, sowernesse, loftiness, stubbornness, and all
unrighteousness, let the^

Which, they who are careful to live under an ordinary ministry, shall in
time more particularly be acquainted with: so shall they find most sweet and
sound peace to their soul, and have their life multiplied with true comfort.
And if they think this hard, as though they should sustain some great loss
hereby, what do they loose but that which they are well rid of, (although no
other gain were to be gotten hereby) even that which only troubled the^,
namely, 1. Ioh. 2.16. 1. Pet. 2.11.
the lust of the heart, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. All which
fight against their soul, and after their fill in them, will bring them to
destruction.

CHAP. 12. Of the declaration of the first duty of awaking with God.
The fourth part of this treatise.
AND of the first three parts of this treatise, thus much. Now for the better
understanding of the nine last mentioned We should accustom our selves to
good thoughts at our awaking with God.
and to accustom their thoughts to be holy, I mean indeed so much: that so
soon as they awake, they should be taken up about heavenly things, ( for where
their treasure is, there should also their hearts be) as to think of Gods
kindness and love toward them, and that they abide still in his favor, as at
any time before: the remembrance whereof at our first Three good fruits of
holy awaking with God.
Also by this means, they provide well for the better keeping their lives in
frame all the day after: without the which regard had, in purpose to perform
it as soon and as well as they can, they are so ready to range and go astray
one way or other, that although they did lie down the night before in peace,
and with quiet and meek hearts; yet, the devil (as we know it well) watching
his opportunity, they may easily be

All which being considered, who does not see, how great a mean this kind of
awaking with God is, and how worthily it may be reckoned for one of our duties,
to endeavor to take up some time thus when sleep departs? Neither let any
object, that this is more then poor Christians can attain to (for all such
would feign attain to that grace, if they were taught how, and directed) the
Lord having framed and fitted them for it, even by this, that he has made them
Christians, and therewithal has given them hearts, which are willing
thereunto: but yet every man in his measure, and as he has received of God,
which gives to no man nigardly, who seeks heartily. And

Only this caveat and watchword I give, that if through barrenness in good
things thou art not able to set thine heart a work (when sleep is gone from
thee) to fasten upon somewhat that is profitable to thy soul, Use what means
may be, to give to God the first thoughts.
or to thy companion, if thou have any with thee: arise, if it be convenient:
if not, and that thou feel thy heart to be carried unto profaneness, or to
cause thy mouth to sin any way, check thy self, rebuke thine heart, and so
take occasion, O Lord, Psalm. 5.3.4. and 119.147.
thou will hear my voice early in the morning. Early in the morning will I
direct my words unto thee and will look up: and in the Proverbs, Prou. 6.22.
Wisdom shall commune with thee when thou wakest, and guide thee when thou
walk.

The words of the Psalm, although they be not to be understood only of the
time of our first awaking, yet they include that time, as well as any other in
the day: but that place of Solomon does plainly show, that it ought to be as
usual and ordinary, to set our hearts on work about some holy and heavenly

but otherwise they have little regard of many their actions: and yet their
prayers

And as for such as say, they have other matters to think on as soon as they
be awake, and they cannot bestow their time after that manner, it may please
them to know, that as for the time (if their heart were ready and did know how
to do this duty) it might very sufficiently and well-nigh be performed in so
much time (for a need) as the Lords prayer distinctly uttered might be said
over in. For in such a space might a Christian lift up his heart to God, and
salute him with an holy remembering of his fatherly kindness,

Therefore with thine heart thus seasoned (if it may be) address thy self to
be ready to any duties which thou have to do, and be strongly persuaded and
confident, that God, who loves thee so dearly (as in thy prayer thou
beleeuedst, and in thy thanksgiving thou did acknowledge) that he (I say)
will be with thee, to guard thee from all adversary power of Satan and his
instruments, Ioh. 14.16.
which might rise up against thee, and by the comfort of his holy looks down
from heaven, 2. Chro. 16.9.
and beholds all the earth, to show himself strong with them, which are of
an upright heart toward him: and therefore be encouraged thereby, with
confidence to set upon any duty, and to withstand any evil.

And further, remember that thou art armed by God with all furniture meet for
the servant of God, with faith to believe all Gods promises, with hope to be
kept from fainting, with righteousness to perform all duty, with sincerity to
do it with a single heart, with knowledge of the word of God to direct thee
aright, and with the preparation of the Gospel of peace to be shod against
troubles and dangers in thy voyage to Gods kingdom. Remember

CHAP. 13. Of the declaration of the second duty, of beginning the day with
prayer.
NOw when thy heart shall after thy first shaking off thy sleep be lifted up
to thy God, set thy self to the next part of thy duty; prayer, Dan 6.10.
confession of sins and thanksgiving in solemn manner upon thy knees; casting
off and renouncing such foolish and fruitless thoughts and fantasies as were
wont and If it may be, begin the day with solemn prayer.
if it may so be, let it be the first work that thou shall take in hand in the
morning season (except in time of sickness, when thou keep thy bed, and
then join it with the former rule, and make of both one: and pray shortly when
pain gives thee no further liberty, but yet fervently and more often.) But
if it cannot be thy first work, yet let not thy deferring of it be a breaking
it off, if thou may perform it: neither let a light occasion cause thee to
defer it; for such shall never be wanting, especially thine own
unwillingness, or sloth: but when for some especial and weighty cause thou

And to express my meaning about this more plainly, remember and acknowledge
the kindness of thy God in benefits daily and hourly received both to soul
and body: and sometime particularly, And herein thanks.
that so thou may be more nearly knit unto him, and delight in him. For daily
and often thankfulness to God is of great force to subdue thee unto God, and to
maintain a thankful heart in thee all the day following.

And let another part of this morning worship of God adjoined to this, be an
hearty recording and viewing of thy sins, And an examining and confessing of
sins.
a bewailing and confessing of And request.
confidently looking for pardon of them, that thus thou may find the death of
Christ daily fresh, sweet and sauorie to thee, which the most do make too
common and unsavory.

And pray also in faith for grace and power to mortify thy sin, and to those
which are yet without, Col. 1.3.
and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, may be brought home: that thus
thou may both testify thy love to them, and daily remember and consider, how
thy self and all other do depend upon him for whatsoever is good and
necessary.

And to help forward this duty the better, some meditation or musing Also
meditation.
and season it with grace, were a thing most requisite, as every one may be
brought to it. As for example: sometime, of our mortality; of the uncertainty
and slipperie estate of all things under the Sun; of the change of persons,
times, estates; of the glory of the kingdom of heaven: sometime of our
salvation, to make it more sure; of the duties we are to do in the day, and how
we may keep our selves from the defilements and sins, which we are in danger
to fall into; of the occasions by which we are most like to be led to evil;
and of the helps and means, with the sundry privileges of a Christian,
which we have to withdraw us from the same; and sometime of

And because meditation is much out of use even among Christians, and therefore
it will be found the harder matter to go about and take it in hand; I have
therefore set down In Treatise 3. at the end of Chap. 6. Of meditation.
some meditations of all sorts, both briefly and in larger manner to help
those, which without help cannot draw matter from their own experience to
meditate upon, as I have before set down a short Treatise about the same; that
through the help of both, they may want nothing about this duty and Christian
exercise,

And by this thou may see, what this part of the duty tends to, and what
it requires of thee, and how thou should perform it. And as for The gain
of this is great.
And as concerning them, which make a light matter of it, saying: that they are
not now to begin this exercise in the morning, but do and have continued it,
and yet they see no such fruit to come of it: To such I answer, that I fear
that to use it as I have set it down, No common thing to use prayer aright.
is not so common in practice, as diverse do take it to be: or else they should
not say, that little profit comes by it. For all such obiecters are
undoubtedly far from the right use of it; and one of these ways they swerve
from it: that either they come not unto it as Incense, ascend up to God. The
least of these faults may easily hinder the profit and darken the beauty of it.

I doubt nothing, but that at sometime diverse Christians in an holy and right
manner do discharge it: but reverently and confidently to do it, laying

But howsoever it be with such: the holy Ghost has greatly helped the frailty
of Christians hereby, who are by natural corruption (cleaving fast to them)
provoked in the morning as soon as they are up, to be raunging abroad in the
world, and according to their delights, dealings and occasions to be carried
after them, either in vanity of mind, and lightness; or in unquietness,
contention, quarrelling and worldliness, minding little for the most but things
earthly: and entering after this manner into the day, do for the most part go
further from God all the day after. For this cause the holy Ghost has taught
them, that they should prevent these daily inconveniences, by taking up their
minds and hearts to far better uses: that is to say, that after their awaking
with God, they should (if it may be) repair to God more solemnly, which is
done by meditation of Gods power, mercy, etc. by thankfulness for benefits
received and promised, by freeing themselves from guiltiness of Gods wrath, by
confessing their sins, and praying for the benefit of forgiveness, and for
grace in the day against the evils thereof, and for good government throughout
the same; that they being well seasoned thus

And (to speak more plainly) that they being thus well fenced with this
spiritual reviving of their minds, and hartening of themselves against all
assaults, before they enter into the field with their enemy, they may be well
armed against the battery of temptations and prouocations, which will
undoubtedly meet with them: and so keep their lives from the force of them,
and from hurt by them in far better manner, then such can do, who being naked
and destitute of this furniture, do lie open unto them, whatsoever conceit
they have of their own wisdom and strength.

discharge of the duty, in such sort as they may rest therein with peace,

This only remains to be added: that we must consider, that these duties

But for as much as all other duties go well forward, whiles the heart is kept
in love and liking with these holy exercises, and not otherwise (for pray well,
and live well; and contrarily:) therefore this grace and heavenly affection
cannot, neither may well be wanting in the servants of God. Insomuch his mite
(with the poor widow) willingly, having no more, has done as much as any
other who having

CHAP. 14. Of the declaration of the third duty, about our callings.


First therefore I will prove, Three points handled in this chapter.
that all Christians must live in some lawful vocation.

Secondly, that they must with practice of other godly duties, faithfully and
diligently walk in the same.



And for the first of these three, The first point: All must live in some
lawful calling. Genesis 3.19. Ephesians. 4.28.
it is clear by the words of the Lord himself ( In the sweat of thy face
thou shall eat thy bread:) that all men are bound to travel and labor
(though not with the hands) in some painful estate of life, wherein they may
serve God, and if need be, they may provide for themselves and theirs. At least
wise, they may be good members in the Church and Commonwealth, as is meet for
them to be, not idle and unprofitable. may live a quiet and peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty: and therefore very unmeet it were, that any
inferior to them, 2. These. 3.6.
should raunge and live without compass in the world inordinately, as though
they were exempt from the Lords government. But I, as I have set my self to do
throughout this book, will deal only with those who having submitted
themselves unto the will of God in other things, are therefore ready to hear
his voice in this.

All such must know and religiously persuade themselves, if through ignorance
and long custom therein they should think otherwise, that they must of
conscience betake themselves to such an estate of life, lest otherwise living
without a calling, as rogues, thieves, cousiners, common gamesters, parasites,
and other disguized persons, The danger of not living so.
they should loath labor, live upon others, and wax idle; and so run either
into heresy, sects, curious questions, and fond opinions, or else into loose
behavior, and wicked company: and then finding no savor in their religion,
should fall away from the truth, and grow senseless, and frozen in their
dregs and filthiness. As, not only we may read in the Scriptures, that
some have done, which also were members of the but went about from place to
place, and settled themselves in none, neither could be persuaded by the dearest
of their friends so to do. But although a man could assure himself, All should
abhor the living without a calling.
that he should never fall to such a depth of sin, through the neglect of a
vocation and following of a lawful trade of life (as

The 2. point: Men must labor diligently therein.
But to say no more of this first point: the next and the nighest degree
hereunto, that may be, is; that many walk loosely and carelessly in their
calling, and are slothful and negligent in the performance of the duties
thereof (whereas they should faithfully and diligently be taken up in their
honest Men ought to be diligent therein, seeing they have six days thereto in
the week, and but one Sabbath.
has sufficiently declared, that they cannot attend only to spiritual
actions, as prayer, meditation, reading, every man to abide in that same
vocation, 1. Cor. 7.20.
wherein he was called: 2. These. 3.6.
to withdraw themselves from every brother that walks without laboring, that
so he might be ashamed. And that one place of Solomon is worthy our
consideration, to the persuading of us to faithfulness and diligence in our
calling, and to loath sloth and idleness, where he says: The sluggard
lusts, but his soul has nothing: Prou. 13.4.11. Prou. 20.4.
but the soul of the diligent shall have plenty. And again: The riches of
vanity shall diminish: but he that gathers them with the hand, that is, with
his own labor, shall increase them. And again: L. pro. 18.9. and ca. 24.30,
etc.
The slothful man will not plough because of winter, therefore he shall beg
in summer but have nothing: yet a woman that has a diligent hand, builds and
vpholdeth her house: with many other such better is a little, Prou. 15.16.17. L.
pro. 17.1.
even a dish of green herbs with peace and love, then a stalled ox with an
unquiet It is the more lamentable to see how numbers degenerate in this point
to their own great hurt, and drawing others after them. Some not so well
advised and stayed as were meet for them, are ever meddling in other men's
matters, and leaving off their own calling spend much time in prying and
searching into other men's living, titles of their lands and leases: and busying
themselves needlessly, yea and often times to the great hurt, offense and just
complaint of them, with whom they live and seek to have to do. Others, as
busybodies, and as though religion consisted therein, Ill parts in
neighbors, hindering diligence in men's callings.
do as it were make a trade of observing other men's faults, neglecting too much
their own: and sow dissension, and set debate betwixt neighbors, and with Men
should not deal above their ability.
yea, and skill also many times, occupying their trades with other men's goods;
and whiles they keep within no bounds, by aiming at great matters without any
warrant, do gain less then nothing for their labor, and disable themselves
to their own calling: besides this, that their unwise dealings that way, and
departing from that business, which they were more fit for, and that they
cannot dig, and to beg they are ashamed. There are many other ways beside
these, drawing men from their callings, which seem pleasant, but the issue
thereof proves far otherwise: whereby many and those also of good hope, have
given themselves to seek their liberty, and to be unburdened from their
callings, wherein whiles they remained they thought themselves to be in a kind
of prison; and therefore till foolish experience had taught them how they had
been deceived, could 2. These. 3.10.
which says: He that labors not, let him not eat. And again: that man is
borne to labor, as the bird to flying. But they depart from the ordinance of
God, and show that (howsoever they profess themselves to be religious) they
fell to these indirect courses from diligence in their callings for want of
religion, which only does rightly direct men how to follow them, as it does to
order all other things aright. But it may well be a duty of some

But whiles I commend faithfulness in men's calling, and find fault with
negligence therein, I attribute no godliness to the very act of laboring;
neither defend, Every good labourer is not a good Christian.
that they are good Christians all, who are diligent workmen, and painful
laborers in any calling; magistracy, ministry, or any other. I have said
otherwise to them which mark well my words: only this I say, that to a
faithful Christian who reformeth and studieth daily more and more to amend his
life, diligence in his outward calling is no small help to live well and
godly, and to keep him from many evils: but otherwise, if there

The third point: that our walking in our calling diligently, pleases God.
But the right following of our calling (to enter into the third branch) is in
such manner and sort to use and walk in it, that it may be no let nor
hinderance to us from exercises of religion, and growing in grace thereby: for
no such labor does God approve of. But contrariwise, we must so play the good
husbands, that we become not worldlings, and such as find more sweetness and
pleasure in our earthly dealings and the coming in of our profits, We must
so use earthly dealings, that we neglect not spiritual duties. 1. Cor. 10.24.
then in our heavenly traffic through the practice of Christianity: we must
so follow our own business, and shun meddling in other men's

And this kind of walking in them, is highly pleasing and acceptable to him.
Moses was faithful in all Gods house: and Joshua in his place: and Job who had
much to do in matters of profit and commodity, yet was a rare pattern to all
men of using the world aright;

The necessity and benefit of this in a Christian, few do sufficiently know
or consider. For all are naturally given to seek liberty amiss, Pro. 9.17.
and stolen waters (as it is in the Proverb) are sweet: and many who zealously
profess a godly life, not painefully following some lawful calling, do by
woeful practice

Now to the end we may thus chearefully go about them, as knowing that God
allows such works of ours, and so thereby be disposed more readily to other
parts of duty, (which we see to be no common thing in the world) first this
must be considered: Ios. 1.8.
that it is the Lord that sets us in our callings, and has promised to be
with us, and to give us good success in them, and to help us bear all
tediousness therein; and further, By what means our callings may further us in
godliness. Colos. 3.24.
that he has willed us to do all such duties for his sake, in such manner as
if we did them unto him, and from him to look for a reward. Now what true
Christian is The Minister hardly delights in reading as heavenly a calling as
he is in.
The written: He that wins souls is wise: and they that have instructed
others, Dan. 12.3. And therefore of others whose calling is not to be occupied
through the day in that heavenly manner, how were it to be looked for; if they
should not of conscience tie themselves thereto, and walk chearefully and
faithfully therein? But when men shall know, and may be bold to remember and
consider, There are many encouragements, to follow our callings diligently.
that they are appointed by God to bestow the most part of the time in their
callings, (though they be not merely spiritual actions) to the end that they
may with better appetite return to exercises of religion again after; and
that they have a promise of blessing therein: The first.
with what peace may they be occupied in them, and overcome that tediousness
and wearisomenesse, which would otherwise cleave unto them? The second.
Furthermore, we shall not be unsettled by the works of our callings, nor
wearisomely cast them off, when we shall be able to see, that we have practice
of most duties in Christianity therein, as diligence, obedience, faith,
patience, truth, etc. and thereby

The third.
Thirdly, we shall not be hindered from duty by our labors, but furthered
thereby in the ways of godliness, when we consider that the Lord has made
them the chief means of our maintenance, assuring us, that we shall be fed:
that so we may put away distrust, and depend upon God joyfully, and not be
driven to depend upon unconscionable men for necessaries.

The fourth.
Lastly, Gods people, by a faithful and diligent walking in their calling,
Blessed are they in the field, and in the house, their stock and store, etc.
Now I have said that which I purposed of this point, for the directing of them
who stand in need of this instruction, how to use their callings aright: a
little I will add, to answer such doubts as may arise in some minds, from that
which has been spoken.

And first it may be demanded, whether gentlemen, Objection.
and other who are blessed with abundance of things necessary for this present
life, Whether gentlemen are tied to a calling.
shall be bound to some certain calling, wherein they should serve God by
their travel therein, benefit others thereby, and keep themselves from the
dangers Answer.
I speak to such as are willing to be reformed: and to such I say, If they be
called to bear any office, What they should do, who bear office.
let them attend upon it, and seek to be fit for it, and worthily discharge
it: and therefore let such be acquainted with the laws of the Realm, as well
as with the laws of God; and be counselors and helpers to their neighbors
about them: that they may be beloved of them, when they shall see, that with
christian conversation they shall enjoy other parts of good neighborhood by
them also.

And seeing they are to serve their Prince and country with body and goods,
advice and counsel, both in peace and war; What they, who bear none.
they ought by all means to study how to prepare themselves to turn the many
hours and days, which the most of that estate spend in games and pastimes, to
other more profitable and necessary uses. Let them also be the first who shall
provide Heb. 10.24.
. These, one or other of them, are the works of their calling: wherein they
shall be lights to other, render a good fruit of their wealth to God, and
cause many to bless God for their love and labor. And what can they less do
then this, if they do but consider, that of them most shall be required who
have received most Amos 3.2.
?

Buy wisdom whatsoever it cost: but sell it not whatsoever ye may have for
it. And if they be wise, let them enjoy the more liberty in the reading daily
of the Scriptures and other good books: which is, with other such like
exercises of study, the chiefest and principallest commodity, which they
reap by their riches: I speak wisdom to them, which are

The second objection.
I will proceed to another objection: The poor Christians would (they say) take
pains willingly in their callings, but can by no means maintain their charge:
Answer.
what therefore shall they do? To whom, as I can say no less, but that they
must not for all this, cast away their confidence, but believe that God has
many ways to deliver and provide for his, and that it has not been lightly
seen that God has been wanting to his, no not in their outward need; and
therefore though their trial should be unto death, yet to trust by lawful
means to find help: The poor who cannot follovv a calling, must be relieved.
so I must further say to others, who (neglecting By the wise care of the
distributes or ouer-seers. Deuteronomy. 15.11. And by other who have more then
needful. Iam. 2.13.
and such also as having superfluity, and much more then necessary food and
apparel, yet are not rich in good works, neither do good to the poor, which
are amongst them for that purpose. Judgment shall be to such without mercy,
because they show no mercy: who if they be living members of Christ's body,
which is the Church, must pity the bowels, and glad the hearts of their poor
brethren. But rare are they, who do any more this way then they needs must;
though men's left

I am sorry to speak it, but it is too true, that of such as need the help of
others to the maintaining of them, there are too few who have ears to hear
Ier. 5.4.
as the Prophet says: and know not the ways of the Lord, nor the judgments
of their God. But for the few that do fear God, I say: let them so go to their
work, Persvvasion to the poor to contentment.
as I have taught al true christians to do; that is, that they make it not an
uncomfortable toil, but wait for the promise, that they shall be fed Psalm.
33.19.
: and stay up themselves by the examples of the poor widow, and Man lives not
by bread only: and again, Deuteronomy. 8.3. 2. King. 4.7. and 1. King. 17.14. Psalm.
34.10.
The Lions shall be hunger-bitten, but they that fear him shall not want: and
again, The Lord has many ways to deliver his: and know they thereby, that
sooner shall the stones be turned into loaves of bread, then they shall be
forgotten, and starve for hunger; or else, he will provide better for them.

But to leave this, I may not omit one other objection, The third objection.
which is much amongst men: that whereas I have taught, that if a man be never
so good a labourer, and diligent husband, and so walk painefully in his
calling, yet none of all this commends him to God, if he be not religious
also; men reply and say, that such of all other are most negligent in their
business; as servants Some will have no servants that are religious, to do
their work.
are found oftentimes at their book and at prayer; other of them sitting idly,
and little regarding their masters advantage: whereas they who occupy not
themselves about religion, but are held in by fear, or drawn on by hope of
reward, are for their masters profit, and go to their work lustily. Whereupon
some have gone so far, that they have usually uttered this speech: that when
soever they make choice of servants, they will never choose any which are
religious. Which latter speech (I answer) if it were not added, Answer.
the former part might more charitably be interpreted.

For it is not to be denied, but that as in other states, Many servants that
profess, are hypocrites. 2. King. 5.
so there are many hypocrites Gehazai and many did whom we read of: against
whom I denounce by the word of the Lord, that they shall bear the punishment
of their iniquity: But to grow to this absurdity from thence, that all
religious servants are such, and that they would not choose such to be servants
to them; the least sin that it can be made, is: that it is a rash and a
carnal speech, and so much the more faulty, by how much he that utters it,
goes for the better Protestant. For such declare that so their business be
done, they can bear any rudeness, brutishness and disorder in their
servants, and so the dishonoring of God thereby: for all such behavior must be
looked for, more or less, in such as are not religious.

Again, whereas they in that speech condemn all which profess, it is well
known, that there are many servants who in their particular calling, in that
they are servants; as well as in their general, that they are Christians, do
glorify God highly, and shine as lights in their places to the shame of their
accusers. And yet such masters might judge of their servants religious and
christian practice by their own, that all duty is not by and by to be looked
for at their hands, which have some love and liking of the Gospel. Are they
themselves so unblameable in their whole course, that others may not see as

Lastly, of men's vocation this I add: that I have not so urged the necessity
Note.
For that is now their calling to trust in God, and to hope for that relief,
which shall be sufficient for them, as they did before their decay.

Furthermore, neither would I have any to think, that this which has bin
spoken, does simply deny a christian man liberty to alter and change his
calling: which although it ought not hastily nor lightly be done (seeing it is
very probable, that a man may be best able to deal in that, wherein he has
been trained up and experienced) yet upon necessity and the decay of his
former trade Luke 16.3.
, and upon other sufficient and weighty considerations (of which sort there
may fall out many) he may enjoy liberty so to do: which to

And thus much be said of this matter concerning men's outward vocation: whereby
among other things this may be seen, that although the most do complain that
they are much hindered from a fruitful walking with God, by their earthly
callings; yet that is their error, or some way their great sin: for a man
fearing God may preserve faith and godliness by a wary and Christian walking
in them, and practice many christian duties in the same; as patience, and trust
in God, etc. and consequently may please him therein to the great contentment
of his own heart. And therefore, if any man find his calling to be a let unto
him from serving God religiously, and well spending of the day, let him Luke
8.18.
is (we see) much to be regarded; and other duties of equal necessity, when
that must wholly or in part be intermitted, must be performed. But this is to
be understood according to the helps and encouragements, that The minister
has more means to further him by his calling, then a private man.
the Minister in respect of his calling, which is to be occupied in reading and
teaching of other, and whose labor is a mean to help him forward in a godly
life, because it is an acquainting of him with the Scriptures and the mind of
God so properly, as cannot be said of other men's labors: the minister (I say)
in such respects, owes more duty to God (which he may also be So the
vvealthy, rather then the poor.
in that he needs not be careful or pensive about necessaries, (but it is
his great sin if he be) has more liberty to remember God, and to set upon
duty with cheerfulness, more then the poor; who is through mere necessity
constrained to his great grief, to cut off many times of reading, conference,
and of public hearing (which for the most part, the other need not:) though he
be not thereby discharged from fearing to offend God, etc.

And whereas men allege, that the rich is let by reason of his wealth, and
therefore cannot so easily apply himself to walk in a sound course: not what
he does, but what he ought and may do, is to be considered. For as he

And according to this equity, the ancient Christian, who through long John
writing to the elder Christians to put them in mind, 1. John. 2.14.
urges them by the same reason, saying: I write unto you fathers, because ye
have known him which is from the beginning. As if he should say: Ye have
experience, that it is no labor lost to serve him: but ye having had
acquaintance with the godly life, and the blessed fruit of it from your youth,
ye are able upon so good and long trial, both to proceed constantly your
selves in your course, and also to hearten on the younger.

Note.
they (I say) who have inioyed more blessings of God then other of their good
brethren, ought by good right to go far before them as shining lights, both
in variety of duties, and in more gracious performance of the same; and sooner
return when they perceive themselves to have wandered, and more firmly to
settle themselves to hold out in their good course. And therefore it behooves
them to gain all occasions, Mat. 25.23.
Well good and faithful servants, because ye have been faithful, etc. enter
into your Masters joy.

CHAP. 15. Of the declaration of the fourth rule or duty, directing us in
company.
NOw follows an other duty for the guiding of us in company: that is to
say, when by any occasion we be in place with others, that with the same well
ordered hearts, with the which we have been taught to discharge other

And because all companies among men are not for and concerning traffic in
earthly dealings, and matters about this present life, as bargainings and
covenants: Company meet in diverse respects:
but some are among neighbors and friends, partly for the increasing of love,
and partly to make merry; and othersome by other occasions, Especially two.
wherein we have more liberty to benefit our selves one by another to
Godward, as having no weighty dealings to hinder us: and then of the other
which belong to the affairs

In both which generally, A general rule in both.
this is a general rule to be observed in all companies: That we fear
danger, and be harmless in them and without offense, leaving no ill savor
by example behind us: but more particularly, Note.
More particularly in some.
the mark which we are to aim at in all our familiar companies is this, That
we should not rush unadvisedly into them as most men do, but determine before
to do good in them to others as we be able, and to help them forward unto
eternal life by all good oportunities we can; or purpose to take good of
others, as occasion shall be offered.

Mat. 18.7.8.) is according to the Scripture, that as we should draw
understanding out of them, Pro. 20.5.
whom God has plentifully enriched with it: so we should be moved with pity
and compassion toward them, who are ignorant and careless: or though they
were neither of both, yet many wants and infirmities at least they have, as we
our selves have; Col. 3.12. 1. These. 5.13.
and therefore have need beside the preventing of other dangers, to be
exhorted, stirred up, called upon and instructed; that so both they and we
might be edified and built up in our most holy faith, Jude. 20. Prou. 10.20.
Iam. 5.20.
and have our love and mutual peace confirmed betwixt us: that so our lips
may feed many, and through Gods goodness we may be means to turn some from
going astray out of their way; 1. Sam. 23.16.
and we may have also cause to thank Jonathan and David enjoyed in their
meetings, the one by the other.

And to what great purpose shall it be to inioyne watchfulness over the other
parts of our life, if in company we have not an especial regard of it,
thereby to take all good opportunity to make our companies profitable? For
daily experience teaches how many occasions of offending God, and of troubling
our selves are offered and occasioned therein: and were we not better be absent
one from another, then in such sort meet together? Besides, what an unruly
member the tongue is, though it be small, Iam. 3.6.8.
the Apostle declares The dangers that are by company.
how many companies shall be found, where one is not the worse for another?
where one corrupts not the other? where there are not fallings out, quarrels
and debate; or profane and endless talk of the world, ieasting, vain and
idle speech, if not filthy communication and ribaldrie; or where there is not
buying and selling of those which are absent? And as for lying, Hos. 4.2.
swearing (as Hosea speaks)

The most tolerable communication amongst the rest, which is used, is (as I
have said) to be deep in and about the world and matters of commodity;
wherein, as I deny not but that there is a lawful use permitted to men,
sparingly, They should move Christians to seek to prevent them.
prevailing and continuing thus in most companies, cause the servants of God to
bewail it, seek to stay and to hinder it; and every one for his own part,
both Pastor and people, as much as in him lies, labor earnestly to redress
it?

And therefore what is more needful about our company, then to have it ever
in purpose to learn and get somewhat where we may in company: and Seeing our
companies ought to be other.
that we had made better use of our companies, then the most seek to do, or
then we in times past had done our selves. And whatsoever exceptions may in
probability be brought against the performance of this duty, which after (as
convenient place shall require) I will answer; yet for those who rejoice in the
hope of the life to come, when they meet together, it should not be counted
hard amongst them, to meet with this mind: that they might make the best use
of their company in some good talk about such things as might be profitable,
Even to do good, or take it.
and for the mutual edifying of them; provoking Heb. 10.24. Heb. 3.13.
as seeing and feeling causes thereof, and what decay of it there is; for so
has the Lord commanded: Exhort one another daily while it is called to day.

The Heathens provoked themselves mutually to love.
And, if among heathen men, friendship was increased by aduising one another,
and by good turns done and received mutually one of another; should not
Christians much more bind themselves one to another, as by other pledges of
love: so by this one, that there be drawing on to duty, to grow in the
knowledge of the Gospel, and to avoid the dangers which might otherwise be
fallen into? That so there might be more mindfulnesse one of another in
absence, when there was reaped so great good fruit of the

By reason of men's callings and distance of places, there is seldom meeting
amongst good men: Seeing Christians can meet but seldom, they should be the
better for their meeting.
if therefore when they meet, they should not be the better one for another,
they might repent for good cause, that they had lost their gain, which in that
time they might have had in their calling at home: beside that, it would accuse
them after their departure, that they had neglected so good oportunities, which
when they would, cannot be enjoyed. Note.
I know there is cause why this should be looked unto, even amongst good
people, seeing through the corruption of nature, the devil lays stops enough
in the way of the best: whereby, although he cannot bring them to

So that Christians whenever they meet, either of purpose and by consent,
either for neighborhood and (as we say) to make merry, or by any other
providence of God, and yet not about traffic or earthly dealings; this Pro.
25.11.
and taking the best occasions thereof and oportunities thereto; they
beginning, who for their gifts are fit to bring on the rest; not entering
beyond their skill and reach, neither the one crossing the other: but through
love bearing one with another, and one helping another (for love is their
greatest vpholder:) and therefore either conferring of the things which they
have learned, The manner of Christians meetings together.
or stirring up themselves mutually to hearing of Sermons, to diligence in
going forward, to inoffensiue walking, and also singing of Psalms together:
and if there be any occasion of reproving, exhorting, admonishing, or
comforting

The simplicity of the times has been such, Much more this ought to be
infamilies.
as men have met lovingly together in this manner, provoking one another
thereunto: but it is iustled out with a proud conceit of their own wisdom,
who count it too base now to converse together after such a manner. But as this
duty is to be mutually imparted among neighbors: so much more it ought to be
in use and force Job permitted his servants to do; Job. 31.13.
that thus peace and godly unity may be maintained, and all may grow up and be
edified more and more. Which duties we are not to doubt, to have been performed
in the families of the noble governor Joshua, and of Cornelius a valiant
Captain, Ios. 24.16. Act. 10.
so far as there was knowledge of the same amongst the^, seeing it is said:
That the fear of God was in those families; and such living together in one
house, does give good testimony, that God has a little Church there indeed:
but of this

But seeing there ought to be no less use of all these fruits of company
betwixt the godly Pastor and his people, Also betwixt the pastor and people.
then amongst those whom I have mentioned: therefore let the former rules most
especially be observed of the^, and somewhat more; that is to say, mutual
consent betwixt them, that their conference be of the things which are most fit
for the estate of the persons: which, by good warrant from God, (who requires
such wisdom, labor and love) and approved experience of men, should be after
this manner: That such as are ignorant, and yet willing to be taught, should be
taught (question-wise) the grounds of Christian religion, and the way how to be
with by them for their instruction, about any particular doubts in the

But to proceed: it is an harder thing for a man which fears God, to have
Hard to make good use of meeting in ill company.
that is, the liberty of good talk in the company, when he shall by occasion
light among such as are not of his own mind; and the worser the persons be,
the harder. It will be counted harsh, if not ridiculous, among such whose
tongues (as they speak) are their own, to use them as they list, though the
best way be taken for entering into it.

Here therefore, another consideration is to be had of us for the making of
best use of the time: How we should go about it.
namely, that we wait for some fit occasion to be offered by some of the
company; which (though they purpose no such thing) will from their talk arise,
if we attend upon it as Paul did before Agrippa: if not, then speak we of the
works, judgments or blessings of God which are among Act. 26.28.
the rather to fasten upon it, so far as it may be done without suspicion of
flattery, and hurtig of them. By which manner of dealing, I have often seen the
evil which began among men, and appeared; to be stayed and suppressed: and
attendance given to better communication, being wisely and kindly offered.

But here, love toward them must show it self, which will make our labor
seem small to us, Note.
while we seek all oportunities to win them, and How to strengthen our
selves to that.
yea or any other, we should bethink us of somewhat before; as of some good
questions among them, of whom we might learn; and some other good matter fit
for edifying, as the company should require, it being such as we might do any
good unto: especially

The which if Preachers of the Gospel especially, and other Christians would
consider, I know it would be far better with the people, and much more good
done in many places, then there is now for want of it, and they themselves
should have no cause to repent it. And though there should be We ought not to
be discouraged from edifying talk by any occasion. 1. These. 5.11.
yet ought we not for all that to be discouraged, forasmuch as we are commanded
to use edifying talk: and we see, that good things take not always effect by
and by, but afterward in time, as the Lord sees best, it may prevail with
them; as also we may see it appear in many in some part of their life, and in
others, (many times) at the day of their death: and yet if no good should be
done is it not to be liked that evil is removed?

But if men which fear God, be not resolved to seek such profitable and
Christian uses of their meetings, in some sort when they may be inioyed: I
would wish them to think, Better to be at home in our calling, then abroad to
do worse. Eccles. 5.2. Mat* 12.36.
that it shall be better for them to attend upon

And as for them which object: that they have not been acquainted with such
communication when they meet, and therefore look not after it; they should
rather blush at their ignorance, and want of experience in so manifest a duty:
for our talk should be to the edifying of the company: Col. 4.6. Ios. 1.8. 1.
Tim. 4.12.
and all ought to follow their teachers in it, who are commanded to be
examples to their flock in the same: Be an example in communication. Neither
let any please themselves in this, that they will not look after such
preciseness: It were more to be commended and better to be liked, if they had
said, They were sorry, that they had not their benefit in such a sweet
liberty, A wise and sauorie speech of a learned man.
as God has

But to go a little further: if it shall fall out that we be to our grief in
company, as beset with scornful, profane and brutish persons, so that we see
no opportunity nor place for any good, it shall be our wisdom to keep our
selves from having any fellowship with their unfruitful works of darkness;
using Sampsons wisdom (when we fear any such thing) by sauory ridles or
Shun ill company.
And this is to be done until we can conveniently depart from them, and be
careful after, that we fall not into the like company again: For so does
Solomon counsel, Pro. 14.7.
Prou. 14.7. Depart from the company of a foolish man, when thou see not in
him the words of wisdom. I speak of such company as one spoke of Rome: If he
go thither, at the first time he shall see an ill man: if he like so well that
he go the second time, he shall know him: but if he will

But in other companies we must be careful (as has been showed us) that we
banish evil, and endeavor after some good, both for our own benefit and other
men's; Col. 4.6.
as it shall be the discharge of a good part of our duty (who are commanded
that our talk should be gracious and poudred with salt:) so it promises great
blessing to all such as are careful in looking to the same; as they have
seen, They who have used good speech longest, can best report the fruit of
it: both to young beginners in the Gospel: and also to stronger Christians.
who for these twenty or thirty years have had experience, that it has
profited them greatly who have carefully used it, in comparison of those who
have not regarded it: so that not only the first beginners in the practice of
Christianity, have been well stirred up to care and conscience,

It may be a shame for us in the going about a duty which has great promise of
blessing, to be slacker then Heretics, Papists and Sectaries are in that
which is but the device of their own brain; who by often talking of their
religion and opinions, have drawn many into their errors.

As for those who object against it, that it is more then needs, and they see
not that men are tied to it, and they meet to be merry: I say to the first part
of the objection, that they who like it not in friendly and familiar meetings,
Ephesians. 4.29.
but the words of the Apostle shall lie dead: That our communication should
minister grace to the hearers. For answering the second part of their
objection, I have proved as much out of other Scripture: so that none should
account that an imbondaging and tying of him which God requires, whose service
is perfect freedom; and let them look who have a commandment from God to use
it, what defense they have by the corrupt

Col. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.4. Iam. 5 13.
For the last point of their coming to be merry, I answer: that if they be
merry in honest and seemly mirth, they will not be against good
communication, which seasoneth their lawful mirth that it may not pass
bounds: Note.
and let them suspect, that it sauoureth too much of the flesh, which they
account honest mirth, if for it, the other become irksome unto them: Note.
and yet this I would say further of their merry talk; though communication
of things lawful and indifferent, be to be allowed, yet I would (if I might)
choose, (when there is liberty for both alike) always to prefer that which
is holy, and to edifying.

And (to conclude) so I would be taken, in that which I have uttered concerning
this matter, that how meet and profitable soever I affirm this communing A
caution about godly talk using.
ought to have regard of their weakness, and to bring them on as we see they
may in best sort be prevailed with: and let this be well regarded of us, for it
is far from me to beat any such thing into their heads, as to make them
think, that our religion allows no talk but of the Scriptures; when both it
allows, and we deny not, but (any thing which has been said notwithstanding)
that the learned may have their talk of learning, the magistrates

But this is to be observed generally, that in all these kinds of meetings,
whatsoever the persons be, we leave no ill example among them, which as an ill
savor, may cast such a rank smell in the company that it procure as well
shame and sorrow to us, as hurt and offense to those which are present, and
reproach to their profession, as also an imboldning of the bad to be worse. And
thus much for the use of our company in the which we have no necessary dealings
about the things of this life. Of reproof or admonition.
To the which I will add the Prou. 18.13. Ios. 22.12.
much less for that which is no sin (though in our conceit it be so) but a
thing indifferent: How it should be.
and we must beware that we be not justly to be charged with the like offense;
for then we take away the grace and force of our reprehension, Math. 7.9.
unless it be known that we do warily decline such sins our selves: and
with a mind to reclaim him and turn him from his sin in love Prou. 27.6.
Gal. 6.1.
and he that tells the truth shall find more favor at length then he that
flattereth: and for a private offense, privately; though if it be open and well
known, it maybe in the company of many and more sharply, as the offense is
greater and the person, 1. Tim. 5.20.
one that may be more offe^siue, as a minister; always laboring that it may
appear, that God finds the fault and reproves, and not we who are but his
instruments to do his will. But this age has most boldly, It is little regarded.
yea scornfully despised this ordinance of God: which troubles the consciences
of many good Christians; Leuit. 19.17.


Of exhorting. Act. 11.23.
And as for exhortation, which is a stirring up of them to proceed in the ways
of the Lord, as Barnabas did the people in the book of the Acts; and as Paul
does often require it to be used among Christians: so doubtless he that
labors in such a work, 1. These. 5.11. Heb. 3.13.
does discharge an excellent duty. But he must be a man so free from worldly
encumbrances, and so looking to the necessity of the performing of it,
(through the coldness that is in men) and to the good that comes by it, that
he may stir up this gift in himself, whosoeeuer

But here I cannot omit to bewail the unseasonable speeches of some, as also
uncharitable, and discouraging: that (as though they saw no use of these
duties, namely of exhorting, admonishing and reproving; nor of the Apostles
commanding, that they should be continued) ask: What Papists any convert from
their popery hereby: whereas it is well known, that the common sort of them
admit small talk about religion, their common answer being this, They mean
not to reason; except the learneder sort of them, who of a wilful and
malicious mind against religion and Prince maintaining it, do of Heb. 13.22.
which is written: I beseech you brethren suffer the words of exhortation.

For consolation also and ministering comfort, it is another worthy duty: when
in men's bodily sickness or trouble of mind, Of comforting the heauy-harted.
or otherwise in their Act. 8.39.
what can be like comfortable to him? For he shall Job. Job. 33.23.
So when another in case of bodily distress or necessity, shall in like sort
be spoken to, as the woman of Canaan was by our Savior, saying: Matthew. 15^28.
O woman great is thy faith, be it to thee as thou desire; what a reviving of
her was it (think we?) Not much unlike to the dealing of Boaz with Ruth, a
desolate and poor widow, and a strannger; which caused her to break forth
and say: O my Lord, thou have comforted me, and spoken to the heart of thine
handmaid. Ruth 2.13. Philem. 7.
For if the diseased person be much cheared by Physic bodily, what marvel
though spiritual comfort work upon the soul mightily? It should be in
request therefore, above all other private matters, even as it is the
waightiest: Upon the soul.


As for other companies, they are of another kind: some about honest
refreshings, some about bargainings, couenants-making, and other agreements;
and some about suites, debates, controversies, and such like: and although
there Civil company how to be used.
yet they must be all gone about and done in such wise, as that they may be
suitable and correspondent to the other parts of Christian life, that there be
no breaking off our comfort with God by loose and careless doing of them, but
that we hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: neither that there
be a following of the fashion of other men in them, but that we being armed
with such grace as is fit for those occasions, may show, that we are attired
with the furniture of Christians, which we ought continually (as with seemly
apparel) to be clothed with, to make our whole conversation comely.

How recreatio^ Rules.
wherein a part of company keeping is taken up for the most part, The first.
which is an exercise not separate from godliness, of some thing that is
indifferent for the necessary refreshing of the mind or body, or both: who
doubts, but that God has taught his servants how to use it; although others
will never come under any rule or government? For they who will not be subject
in other parts of their lives to Gods commandments, much less will be
controlled or directed by them in this: wherein they imagine they have free
liberty to use it as they list. Such therefore as do claim the benefit of
it, must be as careful to use it aright as to look to enjoy the liberty of
it, not as they who if they once get 2
but when we have need of it through weariness and other unfitness: for to
that end the Lord appointed such intermission for us. And though some desire it
not greatly to drive away from themselves annoyances of mind or body thereby;
yet to othersome it is not to be denied in either of both those respects, they
being careful to use it; as God does allow: and in going about it, because
through the corruption of our hearts we become easily unsettled by 3
it shall be very expedient to strengthen our selves by some looking up to God
in our use thereof, that we may take no hurt to our souls whiles we refresh
our selves; seeing all the creatures of God are good, to the faithful vser of
them, if they be received with prayer and thanks by which they are sanctified:
and he who counts it too harsh and sad a matter to desire grace of God to use
it aright, may well fear that he shall offend in it.

4
For the kind of our recreation: it must be honest and of good report, that so
we give occasion to none by our liberties taking so unseasonably, to embolden
others against conscience. 5
The manner should be in moderation of our Command. 10.
as anger, choler, contention, strife, coveting that which is our neighbors,
and such like: and in moderation of the time, how long we continue it,
remembering that it is a refreshing tanquam somno caterisque quietibus, as he
says; that is, as a man that is wearied, does desire rest, and to give
himself to sleep that he may be refreshed by it: and it must not be an
ouerlaying of our selves, or a toil unto us, or wearying of us, so that
necessary duties of the day be omitted by it; 6
neither get such an interest in us, that we cannot leave it when we should.

7
Our companions therein should not be men of evil name for corrupt life and
notorious offenses, but such as be ready to hear of it if they be ouershot.
Ephesians. 5.16.
that we may not be servants to our lusts. And as this may somewhat direct us
in companies where we meet to refresh our selves; so he that is not willing
thus to use recreation, shall wish in time, that he had never been acquainted
with it: Pro. 21.17.
besides that, it is not said in vain: He that loves pastime shall be a poor
man.

Now for other companies in which we meet about our earthly affairs, God has
taught us virtues fit to uphold and carry us through them, as all other parts
of our life, in peace and in good sort: whereas without them, full dangerous
hurts might easily take hold of us therein, by such means as we little suspect.
Therefore to speak particularly of our bargainings and other covenants, In
bargaining, how we should behave our selves.
they ought to be without hollownesse, deceit, undermining and such other
unconscionable dealing; that so we may be simple and our meaning good, Note.
our words plain, our agreements reasonable, our promises kept, our covenants
performed, except consent on both sides to the contrary: but where the
advantage should fall out against the poor and needy, there mercy

Jn suites and controversies, how.
In suites and controversies great charity is to be showed; and in this to be
showed, namely; that although no compromise can be made (which if it may with
any indifferency be obtained, is in no wise to be neglected:) yet that the
question or case betwixt us about words, goods, or other matters, may not turn
us from the pursuing of the thing to the persons, nor to break

Strong patience also must be labored for to bear the cost, the travel, the
toil and tariance, with all other griefs and molestations, which fall out
thereby, or may possibly be offered us, until we see the end and issue. But
especially if it should stand with the aunswering for our selves in accusations
of any crime before the magistrate: with this patience, Act. 5.
would wisdom and christian courage with modesty and meekness be
necessarily adjoined. And by the help of these the Lord has brought to pass,
that the frowning looks, and cruel faces of tyrants and persecutors have not
been feared, their

And to shut up this fourth duty, let this be added: that not only in our
companies we be harmless and give good example; but every way and in all our
dealings with men, whether they be privy to it or no, innocent and Note.
and the rather, for that we are so naturally given to regard and seek our
own profit, whosoever sustain loss thereby; and therefore to be always
thus resolved, that rather then any should have just occasion to complain of
our injury or hard dealing, we are ready to depart from some piece of our
own right, as Abraham did to Lot. And because it is most men's calling, Genesis
13.8. and 9.
every of the six days to have dealings with some other, therefore let the
true Christian arm himself with this mind, even thus to live and converse
with them in all that they have to do with them: for many of them are so
deceitful and unconscionable, that they will abuse the most innocent and
honest Christians with 2. These. 1.7.
that they may have no such accusations come against them at even or in the
judgment day, nor provoke the Lord to measure out to them after

Yet one thing remains, which most fitly is here to be placed: Observe and
reverence the graces of God in others.
that seeing we shall in having company, fellowship and affairs with sundry
men, behold many gracious examples among the rest, as worthy patterns of
godliness, that we be diligent to mark and learn, Note.
and follow whatsoever in the^ may better adorn and furnish us, as the Apostle
taught: Be ye followers of me, 1. Cor. 11.1. Mat. 11.29.
as I follow Christ: and that we carry not that high opinion of our selves, as
that we stand in no such need of others because we have somewhat more then the
Iam. 4.2.
rather then envy and disdain them, that we may with all speed seek to enjoy
the same our selves: and much more to follow the good examples of such as are
commended to us in the Scriptures; as Abraham the father of the believers in
faith, Moses in meekness, Joseph in chastity, David in the love of Gods
worships and holy exercises, Caleb in constant following of the Lord to the
end, etc. This the holy Ghost exhorts us to, in the Epistle to the Hebrews:
Follow the faith and conversation of such, and consider what has been the end
thereof. A necessary watchword for numbers in this age, so degenerated from
the godly

The examples of such therefore as I set down before, shall be no small help,
being often before us, to chase away from us frivolous and hurtful fantasies,
faintness, discouragements and weariness of well doing; and cause that the
multitude of contrary examples shall not hurt us by their pride, boldness and
licentious life; and to join us fast to Jesus Christ though not now seen of
us; and that we may hold the profession of our faith with joy unto our end.

CHAP. 16. Of the declaration of the fifth duty, how we should behave our
selves in solitariness.
NOw I will pass to the next duty: which is, to guide and teach us how to carry
our selves and pass the time, when we are out of company, solitary by our
selves alone. And this it is, that seeing a great part Psalm. 119.9.
that if we desire to reform our ways, and so to live blessedly, we must take
diligent heed to them all, one as well as another, as Gods word directs us:
so this being one part of our ways every day, (for the most part) to govern
our selves christianly at all times when we are by our selves alone, we must
have a special regard and

Sundry occasions to sin, in solitarines.
For who is able to reckon up all or the most part of the occasions, whereby we
are moved and provoked to offend and let loose our hearts to sin, when we are
alone, and how infinite kinds of evil we may be brought unto at such times,
when there is none present by fear or shame to hold us from them? Nay I say
more, the most iniquities which are done in the sight of the Psalm. 51.5.
Against thee only (o Lord) have I sinned: as if he should have said, I
offended thee secretly by ungodly desire, before I proceeded in the sight of
men to give offense.

And so says another Scripture, 2. Sam. 11.2.
that David walked on the roof of his house, and saw from thence a woman, etc.
And to show more fully, that it is a fit time for the Devil to occupy our
heads in sundry kinds of evil when we are alone, Genesis 3. Matt. 4.
it is noted that our graund-mother Eve was set upon by Satan

Now then seeing the case so stands, who does not see, what need there is of
some good help to keep our souls from annoyance at such times? Be not
unoccupied in solitariness.
And not only so, but also to stir up our selves unto the doing of such
duties, as we shall see to concern us most: that so we may make this solitary
part of our life (which is not small) to be suitable and correspondent unto the
rest.

And for some plain and certain direction herein, we may consider the things
which we are occupied about in solitariness. What are the things which we
are occupied about in solitariness.
Now we know that all matters which go through our hands or heads while we are
out of company, Either think on our sin, to overcome it:
shame and danger of it, how hard it is to renounce it, how God is provoked
thereby, and therefore how to be abased under it; and so in confidence crave Or
on things indifferent, to dispose of them:
let us with good advice think with our selves how to dispose of it to our
peace. If neither of both these give us occasion to be occupied, then let us
watch such good opportunity of being alone to make benefit of the time, by
setting our selves to muse upon some holy things, (as the love of God, our
mortality, Or muze on heavenly, to joy in them.
etc.) or enjoy the liberty of talking with our God by prayer, thanksgiving,
reading, rejoicing in him, etc. or, if we have any other necessary duty to be

Yea, if we will be thus circumspect and watchful in this time of our
solitariness, Mat. 19.29.
(it being that, which he cannot allow) shall receive even here an hundredth
times more contentation, peace and comfort, then he should have had by
following his will and desire therein, etc.

And whatsoever strangeness and absurdity any men shall think this to be,
Objection.
to have such an eye to our selves, that our well ordered course be not broken
off, in the time when we shall be alone, (by setting our selves about things
holy, or disposing of things lawful, or watching carefully against those which
are evil; and that we may not be at our own choice to do or desire what we
list and think good, without this strict tying of us to some certainty) they
which will not be contentious, I trust shall easily be answered. Answer.
To whom, this I say for answer, (much like as I said to them who thought it
too hard) and let it be well weighed: that there is no time wherein we shall be
alone, in which one of these three shall not be necessary, or wherein

Indeed I do not deny, but that as we carry flesh about us, which is a burden
to weigh us down, so we shall never discharge this duty, nor so purely follow
this direction for the well taking up the time when we be alone, as were to be
wished: but yet for all that, we must learn and endeavor to follow the rules
which are given us, and that daily better and better, and not to suffer our
selves to pass such times securely and without regard, or full purposing of
well bestowing the same as we are directed, although we shall not attain fully
to that which we would. For if this be intended of us faithfully, as every one
is enabled of God, we shall not need to repent us of the time so

And what shall we aim at in laboring to be thus directed, more then the
dear servant of God David did, Psalm. 19.14.
who as he prayed God that the words of his mouth might be always acceptable
in his sight in what company soever he should come: so did he likewise, that
the meditations of his heart might please him, wheresoever he should become. And
so in another Psalm he testifies what his practice was: namely, that he did
hide his word within his heart, Psalm. 119.11.
that he might not at any time either in company or alone sin against him.
And let all know, that it comes from a most dangerous custom of giving their
hearts liberty, (when they are by themselves alone) that they range after

That which remains to be said of this point (Using our solitariness aright)
is, that as I have set down the rules by which we ought to be guided Five
caueats or admonitions.
whereas I have said, that when we be free from the works of our calling, and
out of company, after we have entered into the affairs of the day, The first.
one use of our solitariness is, that we may deal about things lawful, and
bethink us how we may best dispose them. Many things are to be considered,
about this for the avoiding of danger: as, that we beat not our brains to
search curiously into others to judge and censure them, neither busy our
selves in their matters needlessely, 1. Tim. 5.13.
as Paul speaks of women; that is, further 1. Cor. 10.24
then we are called thereto, and so may become helpefull to them: which thing
whiles many neglect, they spend much time in thinking of those matters which do
nothing appertain to them; and in the mean while, make themselves the
unfitter for their own necessary duties.

2
Furthermore, we must take heed, that while we deal in our own matters, 1.
Tim. 6.9.10.
we drown not our selves in the cogitation of earthly things over long, that
is, further then need is, and so we begin to take sweetness, and feel our
hearts brought in love with the creature and the commodities of this life; and
thereby to have our love weakened toward the Creator. For this is not
christian wisdom (though it be the wisdom of the world) to increase our

3
Mat. 6.6.7.8. Mat. 15.8.9.
Again, whereas another use of our solitariness is, that we should bend our
minds to holy and heavenly things when we are alone; this is a special caution
herein, that we do not for all our often recourse to this duty, go about them
with the less reverence, whether we go to prayer, or set our selves to
reading, or enter into any meditation. The which admonition I know to be very
needful, for that I see many to set less by and lightlier to esteem the most
holy exercises of piety, even for the co^monnesse of the^: who yet, when they
first inioyed them, could never sufficiently commend, esteem, or have Ioh.
5.35.
For as our Savior Christ says of John Baptist: John was a burning light,
Gal. 5.7.
and for a season ye delighted in him; and as the Galatians ran well for a
time, but were let: so I may say of this, that diverse for a while take
pleasure in the use of private helps to godliness; but they are soon broken
off, Mat. 24.12.
their hot zeal is quickly cooled. And this (if they were well rooted in the
beginning) is, for that they do not daily nourish the estimation and love of
them, nor see daily the necessity of them: but many days suffer them to be
omitted, which they would not do, if they did not begin to be glutted with
them. Therefore resolve thy self of this, that thou have daily need of such
holy exercises, and to have some time in the day by thy self alone

4
Another thing to be taken heed of here, is: that thou think not ouer-wel of
thy self, for that thou shall do somewhat more in the service of God, then
others; and for that cause look to be borne with in some of thy faults. We
are herein too like Peter, (though in other parts of godly feruencie we come
short in following him) that whiles we look to one thing, what grace we have
received, we half triumph before the victory; little or nothing marking Phil.
3.14.

Finally, for the use of solitariness in renouncing things unlawful, 5
thou art to beware, if at any time when thou art alone thou entrest into the
consideration of the manifold sins which reign in the world, and some of
the^ such as do sometime much snare and take hold of thee, that thou be not
secretly 2. Cor. 11.14.
For the devil can change himself into an Angel of light, and cause that to
seem the greatest pleasure unto thee, which is rank poison; nay, (which is
more) when thou go about to disgrace it to thy self, even then to be
brought to like and be snared with it. 1. Tim. 5.4.
And as Saint Paul has given charge to Timothy, and in him to all true
ministers of the Gospel, that when they should execute this one part of their
ministry, namely, to exhort young women, (which was a good thing) they should
beware they mixed it not with evil, by unchaste thoughts arising in their
hearts; and therefore he says, Note.
but not that which will slay thee: and the strength of thine affections, being
set on fire by a deep impression of that which they like, will more forcibly
hale thee forward, then a bare weak desire to avoid the sin, shall be able
to

To this end remember, how Judah going forth about a lawful and honest thing,
namely: to see his sheepeshearers, intending no evil; Genesis 38.18. Even while
sin is disliked in some sort, it is revived.
yet because he went not armed, he defiled himself by the way with an harlot.
To the like end many more examples may be brought. And hereof it is (to
illustrate that which I say, by an instance or example) that sometime such as
have lived in malice with their adversary, do (upon better consideration)
purpose how they have been haled and drawn to unclean desires, till they have

And is it any marvel? For when they are thus ouer-matched by Satan, (that
while they go about to think of the renouncing of their sin, they are
brought contrarily to like of it) this disadua^tageth them sore much more, and
holds them more strongly in fear and persuasion that they shall still live
in bondage and subjection to it, then if they had never at all gone about to
resist it: A simil.
as he who makes a fray, when he has proved the strength of his enemy, and
has felt and perceived his own weakness to be far greater then he looked
for, is much discouraged from attempting the like another time. And many of
these sleights are in our common adversary the devil, which diverse true
hearted (yet unexperienced) Christians not knowing nor

Thus in some sort I have showed how we should look to our selves when we are
alone, and how we should be occupied in that time of the day wherein we are
free from the works of our calling and from company, that is to say: In
keeping our selves from idleness and vain wanderings, and if it may be in
doing some good, at leastwise ready and prepared thereto, that we may always
even alone as in company suspect our selves, and pass our time in fear, and
be mindful of Satan's enterprises. Also such caueats or cautions as Marcus
Tullius Cicero may be one, Heathens examples may shame Christians in the use of
solitariness.
who although he knew not Christ nor his doctrine, yet he had such a continual
love to learning and virtue, that as his writings do testify how he was
occupied in the eyes of others; so this one of his sayings shows, how he
passed his time alone: I being weary (says he) of living amongst wicked men,
with whom all places in a manner do swarm, I betake my self unto
solitariness, as much as I can; yet that none may think me to trifle out my
time idly, (that I say no more) let my books (which were many volumes)
speak, how in my solitariness I have been occupied.

But let us hear another which was before Tully, whose example is recorded
Cato, expressed in his own words, thus: Publius Scipio African, the first of
that name, was wont to say, That he was never less idle or unoccupied, then
when he was free from business; and that he was never less solitary, then when
he was alone. Which speech manifestly declares, that he did use to think of
weighty matters, when he had laid the doing of them aside for a season; and
that he was wont to commune with himself, when he was alone.

So that, neither he was idle at any time, and yet that he had no need of
company to find him occupied. And whereas most men cannot tell what to do when
they have not some work to set themselves about, but become utterly Scipio a
Heathen, who could occupy himself in no better things then momentanie and
earthly; as moral virtues, government of commonwealths, and the searching out
of natural causes of things: which all are done by man's reason.

But o woeful people we, that the like cannot be said or truly reported of us
Scipio, when he had been much taken up in civil affairs and dealings amongst
men, could with pleasure and delight think by himself alone of things
profitable, of wisdom,

But we, if we have taken a little pain in company, we give our minds the
bridle in our intermission and solitarines, to think of that only almost which
they desire: and as for serious matters we blush not to say, We will not meddle
with them, but lay them aside: whereas who doubts but that (the end of all
our knowledge being Use and practice to keep our hearts in an heavenly manner
subject to our God from time to time) we have far greater need of meditation
and keeping of our minds in frame, then this Scipio, or such

And therefore seeing I can no otherwise help to redress this wretched
custom of neglecting this benefit and liberty of often meditating, and
profitable using of solitariness in them, who might well use it: I will say no
more but pray for such as know not by experience how good and gainefull it is,
in stead of all idle and vain wanderings and fantasies, wherewith they swarm

And I will not cease to bewail the unhappiness of the men of our days, who
in the usual and daily trifling out of their precious time, declare that they
are ignorant of their best portion, which is, to have daily communion with God;
but are wise to deceive themselves in forgoing it for folly and sin. And
therefore it is no marvel, though of many wise and learned, yet there are so
few, which both find an heavenly sweetness in their own lives, and are fit to
season others therewith, because they are not often and usual daily with the
Lord in their soliloquies, that is, in their communing betwixt God and
themselves in their prayer and meditation; Exodus 19.20.21. and also ver. 9.10.
and in having recourse Moses the man of God had.

Which part of Christian comfort both might and ought to be more generally
enjoyed of the servants of God, without either the least sauouring of Monkerie,
much less without the establishing and the bringing in of it again, which
some profane Protestants little knowing the use of, will be ready (I doubt
not) to imagine and say: as they pervert all other things to their own hurt.
Although I could wish that they had no earthlier minds (I allow not their
doing) then some of them had, who first left the dealings of the world to live
apart out of company. As for the Popish progeny, who would be thought (as it
were, by apish imitation) to follow and be like them,

But to return: although I commend solitariness, I would yet thus be
understood, that such as are troubled with melancholy, by means whereof they
are much unable to govern themselves, and the rather through strong and
vehement temptations, when they are oppressed with them; that such (I say)
should not be pressed with it and urged to it, to be long or much alone, for
fear of casting themselves into further and more dangerous dumpes and
extreme heaviness, as experience has taught, till they may be stronger, and
therefore with less danger may be permitted to the liberty of it, as other
Christians.

CHAP. 17. Of the declaration of the sixth duty: Of using prosperity well.
THE next duty to be observed, is: that with the same sanctified and sound
heart we enjoy all our lawful liberties and commodities of this life rightly
and soberly, from day to day, whiles the Lord grants them unto

It is not hard to understand what I mean by prosperity: properly, What is
meant by prosperity.
even all pleasures and delights, which may lawfully be enjoyed of the servants
of God in this life, as health, riches, friends, peace, marriage, and all that
appertain Mat. 9.23. Iona. 4.8.
we must know that it is a most difficult thing to possess them without great
danger to our souls: and therefore the living in such an estate, as to abound
in many good blessings of God, (which the world counts happiness) is
compared to a slipperie way, in the which a man is ever sliding and ready to
fall. Now then, An hard thing to forgo things which we love well.
to look to our selves daily that we be not hurt, what less work is it, then
as if a man iourneying all the year through, yea and all his life long, should
be constrained continually to be looking to his feet and steps? which thing
how unwelcome it would

Now the case being like in this part of our travel and spiritual journey;
therefore that we may be free from the hurt which might meet with us herein,
these two points shall be needful to be considered and learned: First, The
two general points of this chapter.
how hardly in prosperity we walk safely from day to day toward the kingdom
of heaven: secondly, how and after what sort we may do it though it be hard,
and how we may grow to the right use of the same: which who so attaineth unto,
shall find no common, nor small ease in his life over others do,

And first, although a man should much better perform all Christian duties
every day, The first point in this sixth duty.
who has fewest afflictions to draw his heart from them, and who has most
helps by peace and wealth, to set him forward therein: yet (as men go to
work) we see it is commonly clean contrary. For by reason of this, that men
are so readily carried to use all earthly things amiss, even to their own hurt
and hinderance, and so hardly brought to be the better by benefits; it comes
to pass, that it is found by experience with us for the most part, as we read
in ages past that it was with men then: that is, the more that a man has of
these earthly commodities, Note.
the less he is enriched with spiritual

Yea, and this is the more to be marked, because some of these, whiles they
have been under the cross, The greater sin, to be unfruitful in prosperity,
when it has been purposed in affliction.
have been humble and kept within good compass in their lives, and have had
often recourse to God in their prayers (as they In sundry kinds of Gods benefits,
little good done. Act. 9 31.
which yet is the end that the Lord has in giving them. If they have rest from
persecution and trouble, and enjoy peace in their days, how many do with the
Churches mentioned in the Acts, take the benefit of it; that is, to edify and
build up themselves the more strongly in knowledge,

And if their plenty of Gods outward benefits be such, that they may eat of
the fat and drink of the sweet: yet how many find the Lords service more
sweet daily to them, then they find his outward benefits? But they do rather
after the manner of others, begin to rest in them many times and to say, Here
is good being for us: whereas the more men have, the more they should look
that they serve him with joy for all their abundance. And further, if they have
time at will, wherein much good may be done to themselves and others, Ephesians.
5.16. Psalm. 90.12.
is this their chiefest care to redeem it to every good use because the days
be evil, and to apply their hearts to wisdom, seeing they

Wherein, for the satisfying of them to the full, if the public duties of
Gods worship in the family (which should be daily continued for the benefit
Numbers through long peace and prosperity worse then sometime.
when many of the gentry of this land and others, who had for certain causes
justly moving them, for sundry years together banished out of their houses the
use and practice of dicing and carding, with such profaneness and disorder as
accompanies the same, have within these few years (as though they could no
longer forbear) brought them in again: A lamentable fruit of their wealth,
peace, and prosperity Oh what good might have been done in the time of this
long peace.
what good might have been done through our land in this long time of peace and
plenty, and how the opportunity, even the time of our visitation (as fit for
holy duties, as fair weather for harvest) has been ouer-slipped, (that I say
no more) it ought justly to wring out plenty of tears for so great
transgression.

But I will contain my self. Riches, one piece of prosperity, hardly well
used.
Our Savior speaking but of one part or piece of prosperity, namely of riches,
says: Oh, with what difficulty shall they who have riches, enter into the
kingdom of heaven? If he speak thus of riches, what (think we) is his
judgment of them which with riches have Prou. 18.11.
and thereby he is bold to do many things wilfully, which he durst not so
presumptuously do if he had them not. They are baits, and do often draw his
heart to be set upon them, that whiles they are in request and chiefly
accounted of, there may be no place for better things to rule and reign there,
although for shame and fear they are not altogether rejected; even as it may
be said of play: Where that is entertained, good books are little red and
occupied.

Ioh. 6.27. Mat. 6.33. 1. Tim. 6.6.
that the great riches [godlinesse] should be much more sought after: If, I
say, we should consider this, we should enter into a very maze. By which, and
many such like, it may with bitter complaint be lamented (of the which we have
bin long admonished:) that Religion in these many years of our peace, has
brought forth much

And that this which I say, may not be understood only of riches, know we that
all lawful liberties do work the same effects, that men, for the most part,
Psalm. 119.67.
become worse by them, as in the Psalm the Prophet declares: Before I was
afflicted I went astray, that is, when I had my liberty: and therefore this
shall serve to show, with how much ado they which have them, walk daily in a
Christian course; and the rather, the more variety of earthly delights they
enjoy with them. Now therefore it being thus, what cause have all such as are
lovers of the truth (who^ God suffers to live in peace, health and
prosperity) Deuteronomy. 6.11.
: When thou have eat and art full: beware lest thou forget the Lord. But I
will proceed. Therefore as I have now declared the one of these two points,
that is, how hard it is, to use prosperity aright: so I will go forward with
the other, namely how this maybe, that we may well use it, that it may be no
snare nor hinderance to us.

And to this end we must consider, how nearely we are knit unto the same The
second point in this sixth rule.
how naturally we desire to have all that our hearts do long after without
regard, whether it be good or evil for us: which causes us to esteem of all
such things more highly then becomes us, and therefore to set our greatest
care upon them, and to seek to enjoy them, whatsoever better things we loose
and deprive our selves of for them. This inordinate love which we bear to any
lawful liberty or blessings pertaining to this life, must be by all means
possible weakened and abated in us, which we have too much through our own
folly strengthened and increased. And to obtain this, as we shall be able,
some persuasions I will briefly set down. First therefore, this spiritual
drunkenness is to be expelled, and the inordinate Eccles. 1.2.
are; and how uncertain hold we have of them, even when we think our selves
most certain and sure of them. And further, by valuing and pricing them
thereafter, as the Lord himself teaches us to do, 1. Cor. 7.29.30 etc. Luc
12.15. Prou. 23.4.
saying: The fashion or shadow of this world passes away. And again:
Happiness does not consist in the things which a man possesses; and of riches
which is counted the chiefest of all the rest, he says: Why do thou weary
thy self to grow rich? cease from thy wisdom: why do thou cast thine eyes
upon them? for they are nothing.

The second.
Also, we shall by little and little break off this near knot of amity betwixt
our hearts, and earthly peace and prosperity, (as well as we love them) if we
will suffer our selves to be persuaded, how many ways we be in danger of sore
plunges by means thereof: and that the Scripture gives them many titles and
names drawn from the effect which they work in most men, as that they are
snares, Mat. 13.22.
thorns, choakes, because they entangle us, prick, and hold in and Paul, that
they pierce us through with many sorrows, 1. Tim. 6.10.
being mere vexation and affliction of spirit, when men have given themselves
after the course of the world, to seek what is the sweetness of them. Few
Jobs do know and find out the deceiptfulnesse of riches, until after they have
proved it, they complain too late, and in vain begin to repent, and say: We
are deceived.

Besides, The third.
it is an especial good help to weaken the love of these earthly things, if
we often record, that they are not our own, but borrowed: Luke. 16.12.
and therefore, as no wise man rejoices for the stock of money which he has

And if we could possibly think what hurt they have done us, The fourth.
even our selves already (for what vnsetlings from a Christian course do we
(in a manner) sustain, but they are one cause of it, if not the only?) I am
persuaded, if we could rightly think but of this one thing, we would abate our
greediness, and put the knife to our throat, as the wise man wishes in the
like case; Prou. 23.2.
that is, to restrain our appetite. But as experience has taught, that men's
latter thoughts are, for the most part, better then the former (as they may
well

Furthermore, The fifth.
it would not a little help us forward to a slight and mean estimation of all
earthly prosperity, if we would daily accustom our selves to muse upon the
examples of such, as have inioyed the sundry commodities as plentifully as any
of us do, and yet have been taken from them, and

And it is another special mean to the contemning of the world (though it go
against nature) to use to visit them, The sixth mean.
as others also in their sickness (as we shall be able) and there mark how
they then speak of them; that so we may see, how little good their commodities
can do them, in comparison of that good which they have kept from them, and
considering how greedily The seventh.
should have more excellency in them then every one sees. And besides that, by
going into the house of mourning, we may see and so be put in mind of our own
death and departure, which cannot too often be thought upon, and which is the end
of all flesh; that thereby we may somewhat more like strangers, learn to use
the world after: besides the thinking that we must give an account how we have
gotten and used them.

Thus I have in some sort, showed how and by what means the love of all
earthly things shall be weakened in us, without the which we can never use the
lawful pleasures and profits of this life moderately and rightly: this one

And now upon this which has been said, it clearly and necessarily follows,
that if thus we get superiority and dominion over our hearts and affections in
the use of earthly things, then our actions and dealings about these lawful
liberties, shall be well ordered in the sight of God and men, to the great
quietness and peace of our conscience: for the righteous is bold as a Lion.
For who does not know, that as the heart is affected either well or ill: Luke
6.45.
even so it draws the words and works after it, to be like and suitable?
which is the cause why I labor to persuade

And when we can contain and keep our hearts from coveting and desiring any
way to use our prosperity unlawfully, we shall neither iniure others Noe, so it
will be in and until the coming of the son of man: They eat, they drank,
married wives and were married, etc. that is, they chiefly regarded these things
rather then the manner how, or the end why; and more then they did consider,
wherefore the Lord set them in this world. And this be said of the first branch
of

Objection.
Yet to such as object and ask, If I will debar them of their mirth and
Answer.
I wish they prospered in health, strength, earthly commodities and peace, so
as their souls might also prosper. And I thank God I am not so envious
against the welfare of any of my good brethren, but that with the Apostle I can
and do pray, Act. 26.29.
that they might be altogether Christians; that is, true and faithful servants
of God without the bands or other hardness which some other of Gods people do
sustain and go under.

But seeing prosperity is a slippery way, it is meet that all such as desire
to be free from dangerous falls, should look diligently to their steps: and
seeing 2. Pet. 1.12.
to take heed that they stand sure and in safety. It is not enough, (think we)
and a great favor of God, that he give us liberty to enjoy his earthly
benefits, unless we abuse them to the fulfilling of our fleshly desires? Does
Christ allow us any otherwise to take our pleasure on the earth, then that it
may not hinder us from following him by temperance and soberness, by
humbleness and meekness, the way to heaven? Or does he bestow more on some
then upon others, that they who have much should set on edge the teeth of
others by licentiousness?



It is the Lord that says by his Prophet: Let not the rich rejoice in his
riches, Ier. 9.23.
nor the strong in his strength, nor the wise in his wisdom: but he that will
rejoice, let him rejoice in this, that he knows me. And it is our Savior
which says: Woe be to them which now laugh, for they shall houle and weep:
Luke 6.25.
woe be to them which are full, for they shall be hungry. And again: Son,
Luke 16.25.
thou in thy life Lastly, Job. 31.25.
Job that was dear to the Lord, said: If I have rejoiced for that my hands
have gotten much, and for that my riches are great, even this were to deny the
Almighty. Therefore know we, that our rejoicing ought not to be earthly: yea,
as a godly man may not be glad for that he has much, going no further; seeing
that were but to be tied to the creature, and to rest in a broken and a
deceiptfull stay: so neither may he rejoice in any other earthly thing
whatsoever, but he sets it as well as riches in the Lords place, from which
it ought to be banished. Now the heart of a Christian is the Lords temple and
dwelling place; Pro. 23.26.
and he it is that must dwell there, as he himself has said: Give me thine
heart, my son.

That must be where the treasure is: it must have no other treasure in heaven
but him, nor any on the earth in comparison of him. So that it may be seen of
all such as desire to be satisfied, that God has not given to his faithful
servants earthly prosperity to nail their hearts to it; Psalm. 73.25.
but to prove them, whether any thing be sweeter to them then he himself who
has given it, that is, whether the gift or the giver be in greatest request
with them; and that all which he gives them, might be an occasion to knit them
nearer unto

And I have not denied in all that I have said, but that it becomes the best
of Gods servants to labor for earthly maintenance, that they may be able to
give rather then to receive, and that without any just offense they may do it:
and that they ought to acknowledge it for a great mercy of God, that he
reaches out his hand to help them with necessaries, even here where they be
strangers, and to provide for their bodily necessities; and therefore to be
thankful, yea and joyful in this respect, that they are freed from much care
and distrust, and have the way made more easy thereby to the heavenly

And so to conclude: it remains that we in no wise rejoice, nor put our
delight in any transitory thing, but with most great diligence we use all
earthly benefits of God daily and throughout our life, moderately. And this is
to enjoy our prosperity aright, and to make that part of our life sweet and
sauorie to us indeed which is passed therein. And this is that which I have
thought

CHAP. 18. Of the declaration of the seventh duty: Of bearing afflictions
rightly every day they come.
THE next part of our life not yet mentioned, is that which is under the cross
and in affliction. Our duty here is, that when and so often as it shall please
the Lord to try us therewith, and to change the course 1. Pet. 4.12.
and count it no strange thing to be exercised with it; and the rather for
this reason (as the Apostle admonished the godly of his time) that we are
predestinate thereunto, Romans 8 29. 2. Tim. 3.12.
even to be like unto Christ in afflictions; and also, seeing through many of
the^ our way lies to the kingdom of heaven.

And all may see how needful it is for us to hearten on our selves by these
How we may bear our afflictions rightly.
to be willing to bear our crosses meekly and with cheerfulness, because we
do so soon shrink back at the hearing of them, Ioh. 11.8.
as the Apostles did when they heard that their master would go into Jury
again, where the Jews before had sought to stone him; and seeing they be so
unwelcome to us by nature, although we be subject to many and sundry, Heb.
12.11.
and that daily. It must not be with us, as it is with the most: that is, that
we love not to hear of them when we have been awhile free from them, and so
hope still for earthly peace, of the which we have no promise: but rest
persuaded every day, that our heavenly Father knows what is best for us; and
as he sees affliction or freedom from it to be meetest, so he will always

To this end we are admonished of the Prophet, Lament. 3.27.
to accustom our selves

Furthermore, to this end that we may be ready to wait upon the Lord Job. 1.6.
we must consider that every day Satan intends mischief against us, and he
knows our weakness to be greatest in bearing the cross, and therefore will
not leave us unassayed as much as in him lies: and not so only, but also will
terrify us with this persuasion, that they be greater then they are, and fear
us with the often and much thinking of them, that our sorrow may be increased.
Against all which his cursed undermining of us, we having so great
encouragement from the Lord, ought to be thus stayed: that such of them as we
can, we may avoid; and the rest, we Reu. 3.19.
seeing our God will have us persuaded, that of very love and faithfulness he
corrects us whenever we be corrected of him. But because we fail many
times in observing these rules, and therefore find not grace then, to bear
them aright, whiles they are upon us: nor afterward get any wisdom,
experience or comfort thereby; we must diligently and faithfully mark, We
must mark how we be affected in and under the cross.
how we be affected under them: that if we should be oppressed with confused
and unprofitable heaviness, distrust or any other dangerous passions, we
might learn before, that they be no fit companions for us; and sooner get out
of them, after we epsy them in us, and so betake our selves to better

And that this labor be thought no more then necessary, we must know, that by
Troubles we do not only mean great and unwonted losses, long sicknesses, Not
only great troubles, but also those which are common, must be borne meekly.
persecutions, and such like: but those also which fall out very often and
commonly, as unkindness and discourtesie in neighbors; unthriftiness,
unruliness and disobedience in children; unfaithfulness and negligence in
servants; discommodities and harms in family matters; with such like: all
which to bear, without unquietness, impatience and vnsetling our selves out
of the Christian course, must be thought no mean nor small gift of God; nor
without daily and continual watchfulness and wise regard to be attained

And I do the rather make mention of these troubles, which for the most part
arise in our families as well as other ways, because many Christians do think
through ignorance, that we are not to be directed in these common things, nor
to be called to our reckoning and account for offending by impatience, anger,
backbiting and heart-burning against any man, and for such like passions:
which declares, that as it is an hard thing for Christians to walk in the
uprightness of their hearts, Psalm. 101.2.
by perfourming other duties in the midst of their houses; so it is no less
hard and rare in this bearing of discommodities and other troubles, to show
themselves lights and examples to the rest of Luc. 9.23. Iam. 5.10.11.
that every day we arm our selves against the fear of such as may come, and
against impatience by such as already are come upon us.

Let us think it no toil to watch and look to our selves thus, if we may by
this means be rid of that which is toil indeed, yea greater toil; and ease
our selves on the contrary, an hundred fold. For we shall not only provide
well hereby, Romans 5.5. Psalm. 120.1.
against those which are present: but as experience and proof Joshua by this,
Experience is a great help in trouble.
that he had often times believed Gods promise, and found that he never failed
him trusting in his word which he had spoken concerning victory over his
enemies, or deliverance from them? Insomuch that he after some proof of Gods
keeping promise with him, in bringing him over the river Jericho and the city
Ay into his hands, in the battle against the five kings of Canaan; he
triumphs in his hope of conquest, (the Lord having promised to him victory
over them) and therefore says to his soldiers and men of war, before he
overcame them: Ios. 10.19.
The Lord has delivered them into your hands, and therefore be of good courage.

And what other thing made the Apostle Paul in great afflictions to stay
himself upon God, and to cast his care upon him, but this experience and long
proof which he had of Gods tender care over him. It was (I say) that which
made him express the same in these words: 2. Cor. 1.10.
God has delivered out of great tribulations, and does deliver daily, and I am
sure also that he will

It is a great point of wisdom, to learn of God, It is our wisdom, to be
guided by God in bearing our troubles. Hest. 4.16.
thus to bear our trials and troubles, that first we commit the ordering and
disposing of them to him Hester did, by fasting and prayer of faith: secondly,
that we use all lawful means whereby we may have a good success and end, as
she did in going to the king for help against Hamans devilish devises: and
then the third will follow, that God will turn them to the best. These three
in one short verse the Prophet sets down together, saying: Commit thy way
to God, Psalm. 37.5.
and be thou doing good, and verily he will bring it to pass.

But if we will not be directed by the Lord in bearing our afflictions, (as the
rebellious heart will be soon ready to cast off his yoke) but will take
counsel of flesh and blood, as Saul and many such have done, Psalm. 73.3. and 4
yea and David at that one time (though smally to his comfort:) then this shall
follow, either How we add new troubles to the old.
that we do both add new troubles unto the former, and make them which God
sends upon us,

And of this seventh duty thus much: whereby we may see, how necessary it is
for us daily, beside the well beginning of the day and care for right using our
prosperity moderately, that we be also very watchful, that our afflictions
Lament. 3.33
And here mark, that as poor and rich are both taught

CHAP. 19. Of the declaration of the eighth duty, namely: Of using religious
exercises in our families.
UNTO all the former duties which we must labor to perform, this is to be
added (to the end we may enjoy as many liberties as we can:) that with the same
well governed heart, which we have been taught to bring to the perfourming of
them, we look that both in the morning and at even, as it shall stand best with
the well performing of other duties, we and the other parts of our family, do
reverently worship God together; that is to say, that we solemnly upon our
knees make confession of our sins, and requests to him with thanksgiving. And
because it is required, that the word of God should be Genesis 18.19. therefore,
that when we may conveniently, we instruct them as they be fit to conceive, in
those things which are most necessary for them, training them up to answer to
the same; and that they be encouraged to have acquaintance with the Scriptures
Tim. 3.15. that so the word of God may dwell in them plentifully, Col. 3.16.
and to edify themseues in singing of Psalms to the praise of God, and the
putting of themselves in mind of the heavenly melody and rejoicing, which they
shall have with the Lord and his Saints in his kingdom. Even this (I say) is
another of those duties which is as often as may be to be performed in our
families; I say, as often

And whereas by the examples of Gods holy servants, this duty of calling Psalm.
55.17. Dan. 6.10.
what cause is there why we in whose days the light of the truth shines more
clearly then it did in theirs, should be behind them in any such duties
sometime by our selves, sometime with our families, until we might say: that
we have been suitable to them, in testifying our love to God whom we obey in
perfourming them, and the religious care of our own good which we are sure can
never be enough? As for the daily continuance of this duty from time to time
throughout our life, although I doubt not but that many do it now and then, who
yet will not tie themselves unto it constantly, and

And first, it may please such to understand, The first reason concerning
duties in the family.
that our necessities do require it one day as much and as well as another
(except necessity hinder, as has been said before) seeing some are rude, some
worldly, some ignorant, and the best are forgetful: and we find, that every
day brings with it sufficient cause to renew our faith and strength against
sin, and all kinds of discouragements, and to honor and praise God (if it be
well considered) for his daily favors and kindness. For such duties being in
use daily, do hold us from some evil, which we should otherwise do.



And that we come the oftener and more chearefully hereunto, as often as

Again, it is meet that we should in this sort have our recourse to him
Aarons ointment: so we being conversant with him in this heavenly manner, may
hereby, as by a sweet preservative, keep our selves from all annoyance of
Satan and the world. And therefore it is no wisdom for us to be long from
him in this manner, especially having such free access unto him whenever we
list. This reason should the easilier persuade us, because we see how by
occasion of earthly dealings, our earthly minds draw us to be altogether
earthly: in our talk one to another, churlish, Examples. Abraham. Genesis 18.19.
Abraham is renowned of God for his diligence and faithfulness in the
perfourming of these exercises of religion in his family: for instructing
them, and therefore (no doubt) praying with them, seeing all things are Joshua.
Ios. 24.15.
1. Tim. 4. Joshua also who professed openly that he and his household would
serve the Lord, did, not darkely, declare therein, that the chief parts of
Gods service were not neglected, that is, prayer, Act. 10.2. Cornelius.
thanks, and the teaching them their duties. And Cornelius having this
commendation in the Scripture, that he feared God with all his household: and
besides, that he was given much to prayer; has left sufficient testimony,
that both he prayed with his household as well as privately by himself alone,
and also that he labored and used the means of instructing the same, whereby
he might bring them to that fear of God which was in them. Therefore seeing
such worthy servants of God have gone before us in the performance

For this may all see and easily know, that God has commanded that parents and
fathers of families should rehearse his laws continually unto their children,
Deuteronomy 6.7.
and (as it were) whet their memories with them by talking of them in their
house, and when they lie down, and when they rise up, and to bring the word of
God into familiar acquaintance with them: which is no

By the which commandment we may see, how this latter age of ours is
degenerated from the holy custom of religious exercises in our families, which
were in use so many thousand years agone. For there can be no time found
throughout the day, nay the whole week, in many Christians houses, to be
occupied about such matters; and yet (which makes their sin the greater) how
are they let from them? by more weighty occasions? No: but partly through
ignorance, so that they could not; through the trifling out of the time in idle
and unnecessary talk or folly: and partly through continual taking up of it
in one worldly thing or other, or nourishing teachinesse 1. Pet. 3.7.
by which their prayers (as well as all other good things) are broken off:
whereas they should do it by themselves alone also, rather then neglect it with
their household; the Lord so requiring of us the one, that we should do the
other also; and not so tied us to one time, that we should look after it at no
other, (for it should be often times, as we heard in Deuteronomie:) but thereby
teaches us in wisdom to appoint to our selves

And as for the fruit of this duty, if it be performed with reverence of us
as the Lord himself has taught us, Ioh. 16.24.
it is an opening of the door of his treasury unto us; as we who have any
experience, can truly say: That by it we have not been meanly enriched. So
that such prayer and holy exercise is suitable and answerable to the other parts
of christian duty which are to be performed throughout the day, as by the
other duties before mentioned may appear. And so our prayer (as I said before
of the use of it in the morning) shall be an help to godly life, to make us
live better: and our good life

Therefore (to say no more of this point) because I have before set down after
what manner we ought to pray, and present our selves before God in every
Christian exercise, if we purpose and endeavor constantly to continue the same
about evening and morning; there remains no more but this, that we take heed
to our covenant indeed, and that we break it not off by every light occasion:
neither give place to such lets as Satan will raise up in our way; as, by the
untowardness of our heart, by sleep and slothfulness, the coming in of
strangers, and occasion of ordinary business; neither use it for fashion:
yea and this let us know, that if the ruler of the family perform

CHAP. 20. Of the declaration of the ninth and last duty: Of viewing the day.
NOW the last duty remains: that thou must with the same wel-ordered heart,
whereby thou have been taught What a Christian should do at or before his
lying down.
how farfoorth thou have walked with God in it as thou art directed and taught;
and wherein (as thou art able to remember) thou have offended, whether thou
have remitted thy care and watch, and how thou have wandered thereby after the
desire of thine own heart. That thy soul may rejoice in the blessing which
thou have found, (so far as thou have been guided aright) and thou may by
this experience hope more confidently, that thou shall with more ease keep the
same course hereafter: and for thy strayings and infirmities Ioh. 5.
and be the more careful to sin no more in that manner. This I am sure every
sound-hearted Christian must needs approve of, and think him in good case who
thus lies down to his rest. For this is indeed to lie down in peace and
safety, that it may be suitable to his awaking and entering into the day on the
morning.

And the benefit and fruit of this travel who would not be glad to reap and
enjoy, which is, continual safety and a prosperous estate, whiles 1. Ioh. 2.2.
and to expel and banish it, and so reconcile our selves to our God (as it is
said: If any man sin we have an Advocate) before our lying down, what a
quiet and sweet estate is this like to be?

Objection.
But it is (will some say) an offering of great violence to our selves to do
thus daily, and more then Gods word imposes upon us: therefore except it be
proved to us by authority of Scripture, we will leave it to such as list to be
subject to it. To whom I answer: That the violence which is offered, is but to
the flesh, Answer. Romans 8.12.
to the which we are not debtors; and therefore are not to take

The words of the Lord, which I allege to this purpose are these: Be angry,
Ephesians. 4.26. and 27.
but sin not: let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place
to the devil. In the which words there is more required, then in this place I
urge: but yet, even that also. For the Apostle teaches, that if anger be
kindled

A reason.
Now we know, that other sins are in a like detestation with God that anger
is; and therefore that they must be no more suffered to abide within us then
it: and consequently, if we be privy in our selves to any like sin that we
have offended, we should expel and drive out the same as poison, that it

But here if any think that this was not intended of the Apostle, that we
should before we fall asleep, consider how we have passed the day; neither
will I precisely urge the hour or time so particularly: (for indeed he
requires

Besides if it be required by the holy Ghost in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Heb. 3.12. Another reason
that we take heed that there be not at any time, and so any part of the day,
in us an evil heart, we being forgetful and slow to observe such a charge;
can any deny, but that he does there as well require, that we should sometime
Job. 1.9.
And if Job (as we read of him) did every day of his childrens banqueting
together, offer sacrifice to God and pray for them, and command them to
cleanse their hearts and sanctify themselves, (for so it is said that Job did
every day) adding this reason, Lest they might therein offend God: is it any
marvel, if we in our own person do retain this care every day, and use this
practice? For even as men who are in great occupyings, do not only write their
takings and their layings out, Pro. 3.22.23.
that we may procure to our selves thereby most sound safety, and provide also
the better for the time to come to do the like, and that with more ease. There
is nothing against this duty so much, as the profane custom of the world, to
whom all goodness and controlling of their licentious courses is unsavory,
and therefore unwelcome and ridiculous. But let such go: know we, that if we
desire to give an easy reckoning to God at our latter end, it is our wisdom
Note.
that we have dealt too slightly; yea hollowly sometime, and too much favoring
our selves in passing by many particulars, which we were willing to be
forgotten and buried.

That which we may read in heathen Poets, as Pythagoras, and others concerning
this matter, The heathen poets did urge it.
may and ought worthily to put to shame a number of Christians. They wrote,
that a man should look back at the end of the day, it be cast off, or
neglected and untowardly taken in hand, but when they Bradford, (who had much
inward communion with God) that he was never satisfied in the duties he did
through the day, and namely in praying at the Chapel (when he was fellow of a
college) and in his chamber with his puples, until he had also powered out his
heart to the Lord by himself alone. But yet

After what manner a Christian should view his passing of the day at night.
AS concerning the first this I have thought expedient to say: When thou go
alone by thy self for this purpose, first call to mind the several actions
(as thou can) from thy first awakening: how thou did awake How a
Christian should view the passing of the day.
then had occasion to be in some company, and how thou did look to thy
self therein: if at another time in the day thou wast alone, or at exercise of
prayer in family or at meat: in another part of the day had some cross
befall thee, and some ill news brought unto thee: or if thou have dealt and
communed about worldly affairs, buying or selling, how thou did it, and
what care thou had therein. These or any other like unto these whatsoever
actions or the manner of them, or whatsoever the cogitations and desires of
thine heart have been, whether they were good or bad, call to mind



A form or example of viewing or passing of the day, when we are ready to lie
down at even.
I Thank thee, o Lord, for my awaking with thee, An example thereof.
and that with a willing and ready mind I entered into the day after, with
calling upon thee (if thou did so) and for that I had liberty and
opportunity thereto: and that afterward I went cheerfully to the duties of my
calling, or supplied the omitting

Thus, as these or any of them have been done of thee, call them to mind, as
thou can, and how they were done: and as they and such like are the chief
actions to be done in the day; so proceed in giving thanks for doing

I also thank thee (o Lord) that in these actions and parts of my life, I have
not done them in opinion of any goodness in me, but by thy grace: and have
thereby humbled my self for my sins, and embraced pardon by faith: and by
the same faith, have been holden from many sins, and kept in doing many
duties, as love, mercy, uprightness, and the works of my calling:

The second thing which I said I would add, was the use of this doctrine. For
the use of the doctrine of this Treatise, The use of the doctrine of this
Treatise.
Of daily guiding thy soul and life, it may be gathered out of that which has
been said of it; and out of this last pattern or example so far as thou see
nothing in it, which God approves not. And that is in few words: that every
day and through the day, thou weane and withdraw thine heart from any such
noisome bait or provocation, as suffers thee not to arise in the morning, to
walk through the day,

Here follows a prayer, containing the sum of the life which is to be daily
led of a true Christian.
A form or pattern to teach and direct a Christian how to begin the day with
meditation and prayer, and confession of sin, and thanks after he has first
awaked with the Lord: containing in it the matter of this Treatise, necessary
for him to practice throughout the day following, and for every day. The sum
may be drawn out of it more briefly.
The entrance.
O Lord God most mighty and merciful through Jesus Christ, let that
Thanksgiving.
This draws from me (as there is exceeding great cause) unfeigned thanks,
with joy unspeakable and glorious, especially for that I see, thou have done
all this for me, even the unworthiest of other: that for my sake thou gave
thy dear son to death, that he might bring me to everlasting life: that to
me among other, thou would have the glad tidings of it to be brought and
preached, to the end that I may know my self as surely to be one of thine, as
if I were gathered up with thee: that thou assurest me, that through thy power
I shall be enabled

And further, that thou have not only bestowed these great privileges upon
me, which are proper and peculiar to thine own children, but also have in most
gracious manner provided for the continuance of these unto me, and ministered
abundantly unto me the good things of this life: as, to live under a most
Christian and religious Prince and King defending and maintaining the Gospel
against all Antichristian malice and tyranny and other adversary power, and the
same truly and sincerely preached, and by whom our lives, liberties and livings
are peaceably continued. I thankfully also acknowledge

These thy mercies with many other daily renewed upon me, both to the
Confession of sin.
For besides mine original sin wherein I was conceived and borne, my whole
life (before I was called to know thee to be my Savior through 1 Pray for
pardon, and so for the right use of this manner of beginning the day.
and humbly sue unto thee (o heavenly father) for thy dear sons sake Jesus
Christ to pardon still my sins and corruption, who do confess, that I offend
thee so often in the day as I cannot express: and this morning to receive me
graciously into thy favorable protection, that I may be satiate and replenished
with thy loving kindness, so, that all the day after I may retain the savor of
it; have my heart so sweetly seasoned with it, that I may find and feel all my
actions as good things to proceed out of the good treasury of it: and not to be
fleshly, rebellious and corrupt, as proceeding from 2 Prayer for discharge of
duty in our calling, and for blessing in it.
that we should be occupied in some travel and work profitable to the
commonwealth, which also may keep our selves from idleness, incline my heart
to obey this thy commandment, not only for other causes, but chiefly because
thou will have it so, and with cheerfulness that may shake off tediousness
and untowardness, as far as of my frailty may be obtained. In the works of
my calling let me keep my heart from all distemperature, disorder and
rebellion, and contain my self from every evil way: in the good success 3
For that part of the day which is passed in company, that it may be aright.
and let my mind be stable and well settled to follow thee, though the actions
of the day be many and variable. In all companies let me frame my self this
day, to be harmless and innocent at home: let me be wary against the common
evils which are in families, as brawling, disagreeing with any, anger,
uncharitableness, reuiling, provoking, or being provoked by others; but
forbearing and 4 For the right use of solitariness.
call to mind the companies that I have been in, and not with 5 For
cheerfulness in Gods service.
as at a mark. And whereas (most merciful father) we 6 For confidence in all
estates.
to go forward in my several duties. Let me in all these and other actions
this day, hold fast my confidence in thee, that thou have a fatherly care over
me, both in turning my afflictions (which it shall please thee to send) to my
great good, and granting me many sweet 7 Just dealing to all, and mercy to the
needy, and to hurt none in goods, name, etc.
from thee of a fatherly compassion and tender care, I may greatly be vpholden
and comforted. And whatsoever I shall have to deal in with any man, though I
be not in presence with him, let me ever give that which is due to him, as
far as I see it to appertain to me: especially in the commodities of this
life, that none may have any just cause to complain of any injury done by me:
neither may I have any wound of conscience at any time for such gain or
substance, and the rather for that I am given too much to look after mine own
right: 8 For the right use of prosperity and adversity.

Here remember to pray for outvvard benefits and success in earthly dealings.


and with this, let mercy and compassion be joined, that I may as thou have
enabled me, glad the hearts of such thy poor 9 Against unsettledness by any
occasion.
let me in no wise 10 In sliding to return speedily, and not to lie still.
if I should be overtaken with any forgetfulness, and unawares be prevented by
Satan, slipping 11 For locking back and examining the actions of the day.
to have thee at any time against me. Lastly, I most humbly beseech thee, that
I may so warily carry my self throughout this day in all that I go about, that
I may not be unwilling to view my doings and what has been done amiss, at
evening, and reverently After request made for good life, put next a request
for the reverent use of all good helps; as, this beginning of the day, or for
the well practicing of the godly life.
that so I may have just occasion to humble my self and confess my sin to
thee, and may make an end of all breaches, not lying down in any of them
unrepented. Let me count this no burden nor toil to do it, (as the most of
the world do, who thereby provide so many after-reckonings for themselves, that
they cannot answer one among a thousand of them.) And by all my weaknesses,
neglects of duty and out-strayings let me not be discouraged to leave off this
daily looking to my ways, but to increase my care rather. Majesty. And for
the nourishing and preserving of this Christian liberty in The armor.
arm me with the armor of a Christian, that my particular actions may by the
help thereof be well ordered: that by the armor of faith I may be able to
believe all times, and be kept from doubting and distrust in thee what
occasions soever may be offered me of the same; that I

This prayer is not set down to urge any to use it daily, but as any shall
see cause; and sometimes to stir up those that feel themselves dead and
unfit to pray, by reading it over: and every thing in it, so far to be
applied, as the state of the person shall require.

The end of the fourth Treatise.
THE FIFTH TREATISE, SHEVVING THE LETS
CHAP. 1. Of the sum and order of this Treatise, and how it agrees well with
the former.


He that faithfully uses the daily direction set down before, or the like, He
that is guided and directed by the former doctrine is in little danger.
shall be furnished daily with the munition that a Christian shall need against
his greatest enemies, and (as I have said) shall find rest to his soul daily:
which the word (according to the measure of his knowledge and faith) ready to

Now therefore it might seem needless to say any more about this matter. And
indeed this I say, that he who is settled firmly in the practice of that which
is before set down, shall find every day less to hinder him then other, and
the Christian life more easy to him. But because we are not ignorant of
Satan's enterprises (who, But they must know what dangers will be in their way.
as he is first hardly cast out, and with much ado: so he is afterward more
fierce and subtle to hinder such as have escaped his hands) therefore I will
not bear the reader in hand, that this direction, or the like, will be as
easily observed and kept constantly, as read and learned, lest he finding it
otherwise, should be discouraged and set further back: but as I

Besides these, there are some which desire to please God from their hearts
though not acquainted with any direction how to be guided, but come far
behind them: The weaker and the stronger Christians must be helped.
we must therefore seek, how to proppe up and bring on the^ which are thus
weak, as well as give rules to the strong; and endeavor to bring them by little
and little to this estate, as well as teach the other how to keep in the good
course which they have attained to. Finally, we must in a wise and tender
regard of their frailties (as forgetfulness, earthly mindedness, Christians
must learn how to return when they are gone out of the way.
coldness, slothfulness, also of their ignorance and other wants of

Now although, as often as a man practices not this or the like daily direction,
it is certain that he is let; yet every one sees it not to be so by and
by, neither how or by what he is let; much less how to redress it:
therefore is this place and treatise of the lets most needful, to show what
lets will lie in our way to hold us from following good direction, and from
practicing

And therefore I have thought it expedient to signify the same in this
chapter, and that my purpose is, to speak in the whole treatise following, of
these and such like matters of purpose, for the help and comfort of such as
cannot yet find the Lords yoke to be easy, nor his commandments pleasant and
sweet unto them at one time as another, in one point as in another,

Now the maine and chief lets are, the devil with all his force, subtlety
What is meant by lets.
even whatsoever may hold us back from peace with God. Now all these and every
of them is able to break off our course in godliness, that we shall not bend
our minds otherwise then in some general sort and manner to worship God, and
live with men: and although they prevail not so with all, that they break off
their course altogether, yet some one part or other of the godly life shall be
neglected; and so one day after another, it shall continue with them in such

And first generally I will set down the properties of the devil, as, First,
of lets in general.
his malice, subtlety, cruelty and the like, by the which in sundry sort he
works upon the hearts of poor Christians, and deceives them infinite ways:
and together with these, I will set down the encouragements which God has
given them against the same, which be far greater then many of them do think.

Then after, of the particular kinds of them, and what they be.
And secondly, more particularly of the several kinds of lets and hindrances

CHAP. 2. Of Satan's properties and attempts against us in general:
TO begin therefore first generally, even he it is, Satan I mean, that
withstandeth us in every good thing, (as I have said before) and leads us
amiss many ways, 1. Pet. 5.8.
although we see our selves set free from the infernal woe. And therefore it
is, Job. 1.7.
that our hearts cannot so soon be raunging though it be never so little, but
he is ready to meet with them and set them forward in some evil; The devil
meets with us on every side:
and by his most sly subtlety, he fasteneth our liking and our affections
Both by prosperity to snare us and by crosses to vex us, at home and abroad,
as wealth, beauty, friends, liberty, peace, and all blessings; and
contrarily, losses, sickness, disgrace, etc. If that we be at home, he works
by domestical affairs: if abroad, he takes occasion from thence. So that
wheresoever, or whatsoever we do or be occupied in, the Scripture teaches us,
that he is about us how good soever we be, if not in us as in the men of this
world: and that which is most When we least suspect it.
he does most craftily deceive us when we do least suspect it. More
particularly to lay forth this, I cannot here conveniently.

If therefore men be ignorant or unexperienced of his working and properties in
themselves, it is not to be maruailed at though they bear their deadly wounds
about them through his incessant malice and subtlety: for it is not possible,
but that every natural man one way or other should be deeply bewitched, made
senseless and foolish with pleasures, profits, dreams of earthly happiness
to come, fear, security, hard-heartednesse, or some such like. And this is
the estate of the world at this day; even thus are all unbelievers deceived,
and holden (as it were) in bands; and cannot, either

It is not to be denied, but that in this manner, Satan besetteth all people,
(though little observed and seen of unbelievers) and most of all, us, Luc.
22.31.
whom he is openly and resolutely set against. All of us therefore are to know
his enterprises, properties, practices, vigilancie, his malice at all times,
and in all actions and companies: and how by his diverse sleights he deals
according to the occasions offered, and as our weakness may most easily be
discouraged. But what then? are we therefore to faint? God forbid. We may not
faint though we have the devil against us.
I say further, (as before) if he does not only kindle the concupiscence that
is within

For we know, that even these, Reason why.
although they cannot but trouble us for the present time, yet shall turn to
our exceeding good, by making us to set more store by Gods protection then we
did before, and to abide under his government more continually; seeing we do so
soon smart when we shake it off (as it were) never so little. When therefore we
shall perceive our selves to

The Lord would have none of his to be raunging from under his wings, and much
less (if any be fallen through infirmity, or beguiled by Satan's subtlety)
would he have them think, that he will therefore shake them off: who has made
it manifest and well known in the Gospel: Luc 15.6.
That he seeks This must be thoroughly persuaded unto Gods children, that they
may neither be discouraged (as they must needs be otherwise) in their falls,
from suing to God: and yet, 1. Ioh. 2.1.2.
not boldly abusing his lenity, but well encouraged by his great love to
return to him again. For although the devil be a mighty enemy and cruel,
Properties of the devil. Reu. 12.10. Reu 12.3.
for which cause he is called A great red dragon; and The accuser of the
brethren; and as subtle, vigilant and malicious, as he is strong: yet they for
their parts are not naked and altogether unarmed: neither does their strength
rest in themselves, but they derive and draw it from one that is mightier then
he. They have liberty, Colos. 1.11.
nay commandment to be strong in the might of Gods power, that is: to be

They must also consider, who and what manner persons they are; not enemies
Other reasons to strengthen against Satan. 1. Pet. 2.9. 2. Cor. 6.18. Romans 5
10. Romans 8.1.
and therefore not like to be unnaturally forsaken or left to themselves in
their need and necessity: and if when they were enemies they were reconciled
by his death, how much more being reconciled, shall they be saved by his life?
and being already delivered from the greatest fear, that is, of damnation,
they may be well persuaded, that the combats which remain to be betwixt
Satan and them, cannot be deadly and to their overthrow, but to exercise their
faith; that after they have trusted God a little and waited upon him, Heb. 10.36.
to see his helping hand here, they may after their conflicts receive their
reward.

This I speak not to make any slack and careless, but to encourage them
against these lets which follow, Incourageme^ts may not make us slack.
which by his subtlety shall seem greater then they are: that they may not be
faint-hearted and discomforted, seeing there is no cause. For it has pleased
the Lord and so he has promised, by striving, Iam. 4.7. Heb. 10.37.
resisting Satan, and suffering a little, afterward to take them into glory:
(as our Savior himself did go that way, Heb. 12.2.) and yet not to be without
honor, even here (if we judge rightly) where and whiles (to the judgment of
the flesh) they are in the midst of reproach. This caveat I give unto the
believers before hand, putting them in remembrance that I must oftentimes call
them back to the consideration thereof: that they may be

And they must be warned to learn wisdom by their experience, that when they
shall be able in sundry trials to escape and be delivered from the foil and
peril which they feared, We must learn wisdom by experience. Romans 5.4.
and to see that God has vpholden them therein by faith in his promise and
hope in his help, and that thereby they have been taught to use such means as
have brought a good end of their co^flicts; they may afterward be emboldened
to wait for the same grace again, in the like necessities and straights: and
so to grow to have that acquaintance and communion with God, that they may with
confidence look to obtain greater things at his hands then these, and to
encourage and hearten on others

Now if any should fear, that all this looking to our selves is more then
needs: Our greatest provision against Satan, cannot be too much.
he is to know, that if our hearts were sound, and so kept without liking of
evil (as sometime the meanest Christian feels it,) there were no danger to
be feared, no not from the devil himself, much less the world, according to
that of Solomon: Keep thy heart with all diligence, for thereout comes life:
Prou. 4.23.
and they who have any experience, find nothing more true, then that they walk
at great liberty, when their hearts are well ordered. But seeing few can hear
this saying, that our hearts should be holden in subjection to Gods will from
time to time, and our desires and thoughts (though fond Romans 2.1.


And thus it comes to pass, that besides the hinderance we have by our Al
Satan's pursuings of us, tend either to overthrow our faith, or to hinder a
godly life.
some of his bad sleights and practices are more particularly to be laid
forth, which though they be many and diverse, yet may be fitly drawn to these
two heads: Either they do all set against our faith; or else directly aim at
the extinguishing and burying of godly life in us: wherein if the devil can
prevail against us, he has gotten what he would, and we have lost that
wherein our glory stood.

CHAP. 3. Of the devils troubling the weak believer about his faith: and if he
do not prevail against him one way, he seeks by another.
AND first for the former, to declare how he troubles the weak faith of Gods
children (for I omit to show, how he leads them captives who are in his
snares, being Satan's malice against weak and new called Christians. Reu.
12.17.
cruelty and diligence do evidently appear in the newborn Christians, which
are made the children of God by faith; as S. John says: The dragon made war
with the remnant of the woman's seed which keep the commandments of God, and
have the testimony of Jesus Christ. How many heavy discouragements he
presses down their weak faith withal, that they may shake it off utterly,
and be persuaded infinite times that they have none at all, Peter do prove,
saying: Simon, Simon, Luc. 22.31.
Satan has desired to winow you, that is: to scatter and cast you out. And
how mightily he prevails with many for a season so far, that they are
altogether in a manner without comfort, the dispersed Churches in the Apostles
time knew then, and they now know best who have felt and found it so.

Also it would hardly be believed, if both Scripture and experience were not
clear witnesses in this behalf, how he terrifieth them with their own wants,
ignorances, infirmities and vnworthinesses: also with fear of shameful
falls, which it seems to them that they are unlike to avoid; and the rather
when he brings to their remembrance such good servants of God, as

Besides these, what vnsetlings does he work in them whiles he fears them
with this, that for all their care they shall never hold out in their faith and
holy course of life unto their end; but by persecutions, and other afflictions,
which shall be stirred up against them, or by other prouocations they shall be
turned back? All which with many other, he oppresses them with: and all to
the end they may cast away their hope and confidence, and conclude resolutely,
that they have no faith. The which though the sleepie and drowsy

For wherein can he show his malice more fully, or verify the Scripture more
clearly, Mat. 13. Genesis 3.
which says: That he is envious man? and again: That there shall be enmity
betwixt the seed of the woman and the Serpent, and that he The small taste of
true faith, is most sweet to the vveake. 1. Ioh. 5.13.
Indeed, this is to be granted, that even their weak faith which they have,
is sweet unto them; and God does sometime show them, how happy a thing it is
to be in his favor and freed from condemnation, Saint John thus speaking to
them: I write unto you that beeene, that you may know ye have eternal life.
And by reason of the little taste and fruit of their weak faith, God so
vpholdeth them, that they can never be contented to forgo it: and therefore
would they most chiefly be occupied in thinking of it, to nourish and
strengthen it (if they knew how and were able) as being their chief treasure.

But the devil knows, that there are all those ways which I have before How
they should help themselves against all lets that trouble them about faith.
till they grow better acquainted with the nature and property of Gods
promises, namely, how true, unchangeable, and perpetual they be; even as God
himself also is: also except they prize them above all other things, and send
up earnest prayers to God daily and often for this faith to be rooted in them:
which they must do most willingly and gladly, as

It is also to be granted, that God does ordinarily stablish men's faith the
sooner and more easily by the clear, Further helps.
sound, and most skillful and wise applying of Gods promises by his Ministers
and messengers, whom he appoints to that work: (and as this is done more
weakly and darkely, the greater and

But although they be free from this danger; yet the devil working upon their
infirmities, casts many more mists before their eyes then we can reckon up,
whereby he keeps them under. Yet all this is done by the most wise providence
of God, disposing even these hindrances which Satan lays in their way, to
the most earnest stirring up of them to fasten and lay hold on his mercy;
besides the which, they see nothing but deadly unquietness. And this use all
such weak ones are to make of their doubting, What use vveake believers
should make of their discouragements. Prou. 8.33. 1. These. 3.2. and 10. Ezekiel.
34 4. Esa. 61.1.
fear of condemnation, Mat. 7.7. Mat. 92.20.
Peter: I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; Luc. 22.31. Ioh. 7.37.
and to whom he says: Seeing ye thirst after the water of life, I will give it
you. But if they be stayed by these means in time, (as it is the thing to the
which they must come) and be vpholden thereby, the Lord so blessing them; yet
the devil gives them not over, even then, as though he were vanquished and
overcome. For the present time indeed, he being thus resisted, flies from them
(as Saint James says) having done his best, and yet has not prevailed against
them: which to their singular comfort they may observe, Iam. 4.7.
that The devil leaves not off to troub^e the weak believer, though he be
vanquished. Luke 4.13.
as though he feared they were too mighty for him: but departs for a little
season, as it is written; that as one taking breath, or gathering new strength,
yea rather as one chafed, he comes more eagerly and fierce afterward. Now,
if he can drive them from their hold; the discomfort which they take thereby,
does weaken that courage and labor to be well governed in their lives, which
was in them before, how small and weak soever it seemed to them to be: Mat.
12.45.
and therefore they that have such tender consciences, and being (as I may
rightly term them) bruised reeds, to the end they may not be broken and so
holden

Now if by Gods blessing and their diligence, they find some stay to their
faith, and rest to their soul thereby; and then become more secure by reason
of their former good success (as it is too common a thing, that Gods children
When the devil preuailes not against the believer one way, he attempteth
another: By dravving him to presumption.
and void of that serpent-like wisdom till they have been taught by longer
experience:) let them know, that he watches his opportunity to set upon them
some other way; and namely, to draw them to presumption and too bold trusting
in God without certain ground of his promise: and he takes occasion thus to
do, from their former believing in God, and leaning to his favor in time past
when they sped so well thereby. This subtlety is so secretly wrought, that
they shall hardly perceive, yea or so much as suspect the same, especially
having small knowledge and being uncircumspect in observing their thoughts and
ways. And whiles they think their estate to be right happy and good, they
are led through this boldness What fruit that brings forth.
as, into privy pride, or a good opinion of themselves, etc. slight and
negligent use of means public or private; and thereupon, an aduenturing
perhaps to do that which is shameful and reproachful to them.

This the devil did hope to bring our Savior Christ unto, when he saw his
firm confidence which he had in his Father, at his first tempting him to
distrust: Mat. 4.5.
for then he persuaded him upon the hope he had in God, to cast himself down
from the pinnacle of the temple, and not to fear any danger. But though he
found no such thing in him as he looked for; yet in Peter, he assaying the
same, was not disappointed. For he having with great commendation made
profession of his faith, was too presumptuously carried immediately

And do not many by the like occasion fall and offend daungerously? As, because
they are the children of God, Many, seeing they believe, think they shall be
allowed in their actions done of ignorance:
and for that they trust in him, and therefore knowing and confessing that they
are beloved of him, they hope he will not suffer them to fall greatly, but will
keep them though they see not how?

For would it be thought, that such might be brought to be so blinded in that
which they do, And they think also, that they are iniuried, if they be not
approved therein.
as to think, that if their course be not liked (when it is indeed justly to
be misliked) nor their opinions approved though they be fond and unsound, yet
that they are hardly dealt withal of those which think so of them? And thus it
comes to pass, that many dare be bold to neglect Peter by name, and in other
of the chiefest Apostles, does plainly prove; although it is greatly to their
shame, and little to their comfort which are in this estate: neither shall

But this I have spoken first, that I may admonish those who have found
themselves delivered from the fear of Gods wrath sometimes; yet, Let all weak
believers take heed of the least presumption.
to beware of all boldness and presumption in the least manner, and to look
carefully to the preserving and maintaining of their faith by all means, and
learn to live by it while they have Gods word a light to their steps: for by
it they abide in Gods favor, and are further vpholden in their Christian
course; and without it, if they will be bold to venture as little children
without a stay,

Secondly, that they may advisedly consider (their faith and confidence
assuring them of so great good things from God daily) that this love of God
constrains them to give themselves over to God as they are able: and
therefore in reverence and holy fear to carry themselves so, as they have the
word a lantern and light to their steps, Psalm. 119.105.
and to suspect all other boldness to be rash presumption; which the Devil
according to his wonted manner and custom labors to draw them into, that he
may hinder them as much as he can, from inioying the full fruit of their faith
here, although he cannot altogether deprive them of salvation it self. In
humility let them think

And let not this be spoken to the weak Christians only, Let stronger
Christians also be well armed against presumption.
although they are most easily deceived thus for want of knowledge or sound
experience: but let the best also know, that it falls out often times in one
hour or day, when men wax somewhat more careless in upholding faith and a
good conscience, which comes not to pass in many years. And for such as
are in fear and danger of this, Mat. 15.27. and 28. Prou. 28.14.
let them know, that the greatest measure of faith

CHAP. 4.
AND thus I pass to another of his sly and malicious practices, beside
tempting of us to utter unbelief and presumption. For if he prevail against
us neither of both these ways, but that we set our selves as we have been
taught, to uphold and prop up our weak faith daily; yet he does most strongly
assault us, watching all oportunities thereto, that we may not be rooted and
stablished therein; The devil holds them who have attained faith, to be often
to seek of it.
that after much labor and many prayers we shall be doubting from Ephesians. 6.14.
yet because it is the preserver of our life and peace, and that whereby all
the benefits of Christ are conveyed unto us throughout our life, therefore does
he hold the most It is strange to many Christians, to hear that they must live
by faith. Heb. 10.38. 2. Cor. 5.6. Heb. 10.22.
And he makes that as harsh and strange to many even of Gods servants to
hear, That the righteous live by faith; and when they have buried and lost the
power and operation of it, that their life is no life to be accounted of: even
as it is strange to the most of the unbelievers, to hear, That we must draw
near to God with the assurance of faith at any time or at all.

And from hence it is, that among holy Christians, (though weak I must needs
say) these speeches are heard: What must we ever believe, and daily hold our
faith? as though this were a matter not heard of, and a speech doubtful: Romans
1.17.
when yet the Scripture shows plainly, that we must walk from faith; and
that, not only to more assurance of justification, but to a greater measure of
sanctification also: that our life may be a living by faith, according to that
which the Apostle says to the Galathians: Gal. 2.20.
In that I now live (in the flesh in this mortal body) I live by faith in the
son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me. By the which words
it is manifest, that in his own person he shows how the faithful being
united to Christ by

Now therefore if the justification of Gods people, and the holiness which
they show forth in their lives, do arise from hence, that they believe God
has promised them 1. Pet. 1.5. Take heed faith fail not:
strength to wait for salvation and to live well: then it must needs follow,
that faith failing, men's strength to the doing of any good thing utterly
fails also. And therefore if we be persuaded, after we have once received
grace to believe, that we are thereby well enough, though we labor not to grow
daily, But labor to grow in it.
and to hold fast thereby the hope of forgiveness Heb. 11.6.
without faith it is impossible to please God.

And as the people of Israel in that one part of their life daily rose up
persuaded, Ios. 6.14.
and for proose thereof did every day compass them, blowing trumpets of rams
horns, as they had been commanded: so in our longer conflict not with Jericho
but with him, who is called the Prince of the world, this our faith is to lie
down with us, and to rise up with us, and through the day to accompany us. And
nothing is more to be lamented then this: Though there be but little faith, yet
it is not missed.
that though it be rare and seldom found in the earth (the Devil holding men
in unbelief strongly, as it were in bands) yet it is not wanted or once
missed: and the godly themselves (for the most part of them) scarcely have any
great use of it, in respect of that which they might have. Neither is this
point made so

And for that so few are to be found, who having had comfort by it twenty or
thirty years agone, when they first heard of it and received it; or in later
years, as many (it is not to be doubted) have also had (for I dare not be so
uncharitable as to judge otherwise of them:) for that such (I say) who have
inioyed much comfort by it, do not now; nor have since that, inioyed the same
still: what is the cause of it? Is it any other then this (that for sundry years
Prou. 15.15.
Such therefore as see what the devil pulls from them by darkning and burying
this sure trust and confidence in God, How to remedy this let.
and how it goes from the^ covertly as the Sun from her line, before they be
aware if it be not well looked to: such (I say) must learn to put themselves
forth, and consider what strong hold they have (and they must stick to it)
when they may say: Psalm. 27.1.
The Lord is my helper, whom then shall I fear? and again: I should utterly
have fainted, but that I believe Such must learn of Gods servants to wax more
bold with reverence, Psalm. 22.4. and 5. Job. 13.15.
and resolute: and seeing as David says, Our fathers trusting in thee, were
not confounded, therefore to cry: Though thou kill us, yet will we trust in
thee. And such must leave that worldly wisdom, whereby they thought it
needless and foolish to nourish it in themselves daily; and must become fools
in the estimation of men, that they may be wise by the testimony of God, to
keep their faith as they would their life; and that, by often recourse had to
the Lords promises which fail not, neither change; provoked thereto by their
daily infirmities and wants, thinking often and much of the^, and praying for
grace to apply them to themselves, and growing stronger by experience: that
thus they may clearly see Gods loving Act. 2.25.
that they may not be shaken: so shall they not be snared in Satan's ba^ds, 2.
Pet. 1.10.
as otherwise they must needs be, neither greatly fall (I mean, to their hurt)
although they be not free from temptation. These are the chief hindera^ces of
faith, whereby the devil troubles Gods servants, holding some in fear that
they have none at all, who yet sometime have felt the contrary: drawing others
to presume, etc. and keeping others from confirming it and growing therein
daily, whether we respect faith in the particular promises of this life, or of
life eternal. And these last mentioned, though they are not said

CHAP. 5.
NOw it follows that it be likewise showed, how he lets the believers from
a godly life: Satan hinders from a godly life.
so that even good Christians and they who fear God, shall yet be kept back
from many duties, which both they would do, and are heavy and wounded for not
doing them; he Satan lets the unregenerate from duties diverse ways.
for discovering of such, by the way before I speak of the impediments which
hinder Gods children, I will (as I promised) briefly set down some of those
lets whereby he hinders such altogether from practicing a godly life, though
they think themselves sound Christians, and yet are not, but do lie: Revel.
3.9.
that they may glory in themselves no further then they have cause, that is,
nothing at all; but may know that they who are let by these, are not godly;
and that true

Now these have an heart long accustomed to evil, The first let.
(which were not hard for them to see, if they would enter into the sifting of
it:) and by means of this, they cannot give themselves over to be ready to do
Gods will in one thing as in another, but think it foolishness to do so: and
the best of these do but perform some outward task of prayer and confession
of their sins, for fashion or fear or some such like cause; but not looking
for any strength thereby, to be any whit the more godly; neither in their
actions will be tied to be otherwise directed, then as seems good to
themselves.

The second.
neither will they labor for it by applying to themselves the promises of God,
but hope their state is good without that; so that their life, when they be at
the best, is but a bold presuming of Gods mercy, without any warrant: and
therefore either in that false confidence they die, whose estate (yet) cannot
be good; or else when it pleases God to awake them out of that spiritual
sleep, Psalm. 78.35.
they confess the truth plainly that they are in woeful estate. The third. 1.
Sam. 15.24.30. Ioh. 3.20. Psalm. 50.21.
And therefore they are unwilling to enter into consideration of

The fourth.
Neither are they long persuaded, save only in their good mood which lasts
not, that the godly life is the only happy life; that is, to live as I have
described it; namely, to have our conversation in heaven, and to mind such
things especially above all other, whiles we are abiding here on earth: but are
strongly settled in this opinion, for the most part, that their own (though

The fifth and sixth.
To conclude, either they are snared in sects and opinions above their reach
(which cannot stand with godliness:) or else they are so ignorant of the will
of God in the Scriptures, that if they had no other incombrance, that were
enough to hinder them from so much as entering into a godly course:

These, (that I rehearse no more, which are infinite) yea, even some of them
are sufficient hindrances from a godly life, in whom soever they be found: so
that, although the most will put themselves forth for godly, yet being branded
with any of these marks of Satan, they shall sufficiently be known to be
far off from such as they would be taken for, namely, true Christians. For
remedy, such as are willing to seek after any, I refer them to the first
Treatise of this book: wherein I have showed what way such should take

The lets of Gods people from some proceeding at least in godliness, are
generally three.
Now I will proceed to set down the lets, whereby Gods children are holden from
practicing the godly life. And seeing many weak Christians can easilier tell
that they are hindered from it, then they can tell what hinders them, as it is
in bodily sickness: I will therefore lay open some of the lets, whereby the
Devil does chiefly stay and hold them back from going forward; and direct
such as are troubled with them, how they may in some sort be helped against the
same. Three general lets.
And these generally are three, (to the which the

The first general let contains 3. special lets.
Of the first sort I set down especially three: (for I do not undertake to
mention all particulars, which were infinite) the rest will be discerned more
easily The first.
when the Devil holds us out of a settled course in godliness which all the
godly ought to live in daily, though he cannot break it off altogether. The
second is the want of our first love, The second.
though we hold and keep some course in godliness more then many do. The
third is, The third.
want of a sufficient ministry, though we be troubled with neither of the two
former.

If these three be not in our way, I see not much which may greatly hinder us.
For if we be resolved to consecrate our selves wholly to God while we live; and
endeavor to nourish and preserve that feruencie which at our first calling God
wrought in us, so that such holy sparckles be not quenched; and

But while I show how the Devil hinders us, Satan has no absolute power.
Job. 1.12. Math. 8.30. 1. Pet. 5.8.
I do not mean that he has any absolute power or authority of himself, but
as God gives it him for

And this gives him knowledge of our minds more fully, who understands the
same by the least show and inclination of our affection and will; not He
knovveth not our hearts and thoughts.
(for that is proper to God only) but by his long acquaintance with our nature
from Adam to this day: this makes him not only to expect any outward
signification of speech or gesture to conceive our intents and purposes by; but
also out of our universal corruption (whereof he has continual proof) to
discover the vanity of our minds, and the thoughts of our hearts: which after
he has found, he sets us forward (as he sees occasion whereto we must
inclne) to disobey God and his holy commandments.

But I will return to the lets whereby the Devil deceives the simple, that
they shine not as lights to honor their profession in a godly life. Ye first
special let in the godly from holiness, arising from Want. They tie not
themselves to any direction. Math. 5.19. Psalm. 50.23. Phil. 1.27.
The first of beseem the Gospel. Now therefore if we pass the day, and look
not before

Some do propound to themselves a course of passing their time and framing of
their lives in some points commendably, (as for example: in their calling to be
occupied in some labor) but do not religiously behave themselves

They are no wiser nor deserve any greater commendation then the former, who at
some times and for a season keep and observe such order and direction to lead
their lives by, as they have learned out of the holy Scriptures; It is slightly
done.
but by little and little they fall to do it in a slight and common manner, even
for fashion in great part, and rather through custom and for shame (and so
wax soon veary) then with delight and comfort: and all because their hearts
go not with their actions constantly, neither do they regard or look to their
consciences in one thing as in another, that they may be kept in peace. In all
which though they cannot so much be blamed for any great Jonas, when he fell
asleep notwithstanding his sin, Jonas 1.3.
after he was told of the great danger which did then hang over him.

Heb. 10.35.
where is their strong confidence which they should not cast away? their
fervent prayers, their fruitfulness in sundry duties when they

The remedy to all these is appointed by God, The remedy
and brought to light by his word, and inioyed and practiced of sundry of his
faithful servants, who were sometime kept void of it by the envious man, as
even many thousands of them are still by his malice deprived thereof unto this
day. And this remedy is, first that we suffer our selves easily to be persuaded
that all our speeches in the commendation of a godly life in general, are but
wind, except we faithfully Is, to be daily well settled.
and therefore provide (as we may be taught) and that above all other things,
to give to every part of the day some duty; or when we be weakest, that we
mind no evil, (as in the former Treatise of my book I have proved) seeing the
Lord in appointing the day to the several actions which are to be done in it,
does not pass by and omit these (wherein men think they have greatest
liberty to forget God) namely, eating and drinking; but yet with them
extends his charge to all other things also, 1. Cor. 10.31
saying: Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do Is it not for this
cause, that we are rebuked of our Savior, Luc. 16 8.
saying: The children of this world are in their generation wiser then the
children of light, etc. namely, for our improuident and shiftlesse regard of
our growing on in a christian course to heauen-ward; when yet the men of the
world, if they be disappointed of their earthly commodities one way, will shift
for them another? If we find this impossible in all points, shall we therefore
yield and give place, and seek shelter for our untoward hearts, which would do
no more in the service of God, then we have done in times past? or shall we
aim unto no further perfection then we list? And if there be hardness in
practicing some part of christian duties at the beginning, yet 1. Cor. 10.31.
even our chiefest and only work is, to see God truly served and honored of
us in one thing or other.

For such as cannot better direct themselves, I have endeavored to be some
help unto them in the former treatise, By the doctrine of the former Treatise.
until a perfecter may be come by. This or any other which thou approuest in
thy conscience, use reverently and acquaint thy self with it, and thou shall
find it sweet and gainefull: leave not off the practicing of the rules of it,
or the like, by little and little; for then shall thou never gather any sound
experience of the good that is gotten thereby; For does a man go out of the way,
Ier. 8.4.
and not return again? Yea, tie thy self resolutely to a daily walking with
God in faithfulness, for it is as a watch tower to keep from danger, and as
an hand continually to hold up from falling: and constantly give credit unto
him, that as he has promised to his, rest with himself for ever; so he will
also keep them by his power to the day of resurrection.

This confidence being preserved, and hearty prayer often used, and
watchfulness

And that do they prove unto us, who although they are not altogether

If therefore through our neglect of these we be otherwise fallen into Satan's
hands then we were wont, there is no other remedy but that we bear our
punishment for a season, even heaviness and reproach, because we have sinned:
but although we have thus fallen, yet let us rise again, Micah. 7.8. Hosea.
6.1.
and that betimes: for he has smitten us, and he will heal us. Let us not
harden our hearts against God when he has so justly chastised us, but as humble
children, let every of us say: My father, my father, we are ashamed that we
have turned

I stand the longer in this point, because I have experience by many, how
hardly they dare or can be persuaded to crave pardon with confidence, after
that they have been carried by their rebellious hearts to offend in somewhat,
Psalm. 32.5.
which they knew to displease him. Of whose weakness regard must be had: and
for such especially have I taken this labor in hand, though I know that for
such as have experience, less might have served.

And yet whose case soever it shall be of us all in trial, Iona. 1.5.
we shall find it no Deuteronomy 29.19.
and to give them liberty to sin who are already too forward that way; this
I say: That as the people of Israel perceiving God to be justly displeased with
them Exo. 33.8.10.
they durst not presume to go to the tabernacle to seek the Lord, who in
displeasure was departing from them; but they sought him a far off, that is,
standing in their tent door and worshipping: so let those who see their shame
and nakedness by sinning against God, blush and be ashamed; yet, because he
never takes away his loving kindness from those whom he loves, let them show
themselves as guilty persons, though at the first afar off, and with much
difficulty 1. Ioh. 2.1
that they may be received again.

And thus I have made mention of the first let which hinders from godly life;
even the want of daily direction to serve God by: and have showed how Satan
holds Christians in dangerous unprofitableness, by keeping them unsettled in a
godly course; and withal have set down some help against the same.

CHAP. 6. Of another let: The leaving our first love.
The second special let arising from want
NOW follows the second let in this first sort, that is: that many such as do
hold on in some Christian course, do yet lose and fall from their first love,
not for a short time, as they before mentioned, but even for years and days as
they say: when yet, they having once received it of the Lord at their first
effectual calling and conversion, it ought to grow up with them and accompany
them throughout their life, to make every part of it more sweet and
comfortable.

But that it may the better be seen what our first love is, I will in few
Act. 26.18.
We are to know therefore, that when God first called us from darkness to
light, and from under Satan's tyranny and fear of hell to see our selves
delivered from them, which we saw were by our sin due unto us; Hos. 14 5.
and that yet for all that, he would pardon our sins, receive us graciously and
love us freely, Ioh. 14.24. What our first love is.
whereas before we were his enemies: this astonished us, and after due
consideration, inflamed our hearts and caused us to admire this kindness of
his, and to esteem and prefer it before all pleasures, and to have our
hearts knit to him for it: for this love of his constrained us to love him most
fervently and dearly again. 2. Cor. 5.8. Romans 5.5. Ioh. 15.9. and 10 Ioh.
21.15. Psalm. 116.1. 1. Ioh. 5.1. Romans 10.15. Luc. 7.47. Psalm. 119.97. Gal. 5.6.
Heb. 10.32.
Which our Savior Christ knowing well, asked of Peter in that case, if he
loved him not more then the rest; even David also calling the same to mind,
brake out into these words, saying: I love the Lord, because in the sorrows
of death he heard and delivered me.

Thus when we first saw the exceeding love of God and Christ to us, we could
not (I say) but love him sensibly and heartily; and therefore our brethren; and
so his word and Ministers that brought us tidings of it: for we no sooner
believed, but faith that works by love, wrought this in us. And seeing Ioh
14.16.
and one in another, as they have persuasion of their true conversion; and do
therefore other duties readily, which others will not set upon, nor go about:
and this is that which the Scripture calls Our first love. Thus fervent are
Gods children in the beginning, to the admiration of many; Reu. 2 4. Math. 2.12.
and no duty is thought too great for them to perform to him, as he thinks
nothing too good to bestow upon them. Yea, it may truly be said, If ever we
loved, Phil. 3.8.
we loved God and Christ more then any thing; as Paul shows to the
Philippians: and our brethren; as it is in the Psalm, Luc. 10.42. Psalm.
119.97. Psalm. 16.3. Gal 4.15.
All my delight is in the Saints: and the Ministers; as Paul speaks, I bear
you witness, that to do me good, you would have plucked out your eyes.

Now then, to come to our purpose, when this love shall wax cold (as here our
Savior charge many with it, and many now a days are justly to be charged
for it) is it not an intolerable treachery? When we shall let slake in us the
consideration of such love of God to us in Christ, which never fails, Ioh.
13.1.
nor changes toward us; and we thought sometime, that it could never be
forgotten of us: is not this slaking of our love toward him, a just cause of
complaint against us? And do we not declare thereby, that either we be grown
dull, slothful: forgetful, or that we think, that the Lord has ceased
Hos. 1.
or have (as adulteresses) broken our faith to our first husband?

Whereas we having so long enjoyed the privileges of his people and citizens,
should now much more do so, and look confidently for the promised reward, our
salvation being now nearer then when we first believed. Romans 13.13.
For why should pleasure or profit, wealth or favor, things present or to
come, put out of place that love of God in us, or cause us for the^ to be
rebuked? Why be more at the last, then at the first; Reu. 2.21.
as our knowledge is more, and our experience greater? And therefore who sees
not cause sufficient, that our affections of first love should continue?

I may justly make a heavy complaint of the decay thereof in many Ministers,
whose glory and crown it was sometime, 1. These. 2.19.20. Ioh. 4.34.
to see the peoples profiting in godliness, as Paul says; whose meat and
drink was, to do the will of their Father, and who did well prove that they
loved Christ more then all other things, by their diligence in feeding his
sheep and lambs: Ioh. 21.15.
and what prey or booty soever they have met with, and got since, sure I am,
that some of them do sometime wish those seasons past, were now present still.
And whatsoever Ioh. 5.35.
John was a burning light, and for a season ye delighted in him? who neither
can honor God, as then they did, nor give that light to other? All which I
wish to consider that which was said to them that had offended in the like
case: I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first love:
Remember from whence thou art fallen and repent, etc.

Thus I have in some sort laid forth this first love, which God by his spirit
works in all his elect children when he first brings them home, and makes
them to know how greatly they are bound to him for their so admirable
deliverance and happy conversion. And herewith I have showed, how easily both
teacher and hearer leave and depart from the same, and fall from it, though
otherwise they keep some course in serving God; as the Church of Ephesus did,
whom yet the Lord reproved sharply for that they had lost this. Reu. 2.2.
For thus he says: I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and
that thou can not bear with them that are evil, etc. Nevertheless I have
somewhat against thee, that thou have left thy first love.

The cooling of love foretold.
Our Savior likewise in Saint Matthew foretells, that this should be one thing
among many other worthily to be complained of, That in the latter days (in
which these wherein we now live, Mat. 24.12.
are reckoned) the love even of many good Christians, (as also of such as
seemed by good likelihood to be so) shall decay and wax cold: whereby, what
other thing did he mean then this; that men's affection in the worshipping and
serving of God, the zeal of his glory, love to their brethren, and feruencie
toward the preaching of the Gospel, should be sore and much abated over it
was in the beginning, when they first embraced it and were enlightened by it to
believe in him. And as though he would teach, Hard to recover our first love
being lost.
that it should be a very hard thing to recover this Take heed in time.
to look heedfully and carefully to nourish and preserve that holy, pure, and
first sparkle of grace kindled in them, against all that might come in the way
to quench and put out the fame.

As though he would say: Although all piety and christian care of honoring
God be not extinguished in men; yet if they decline thus far, to suffer their
earnest and fervent affection and love to God and goodness, to be cooled in
them: The danger great:
even this is a blemish not to be borne or allowed; and a sin, Paul speaks
to the Thessalonians, when he says: These. 5.19. Col. 3.1.
Quench not the spirit: as if he would say, The work of grace wrought in you
by the spirit of God, to fix your delight on heavenly things, and not on the
earth; and whereby ye were carried to set up in your hearts, the Creator and the
things which he commands, before the creature: this work of the spirit
destroy ye not; neither let your fervent desires and holy affections which have
been kindled in you thereby, be as fire which water quenched.

Now then, if the words of our Savior both to the church of Ephesus, and his
prophecy of that which should come to pass in the last days, how the love
even of the godly should wax cold (which he spoke as a thing both admirable,
and to be much lamented;) and withal, this exhortation of the Apostle, Which
many find and feel.
of not quenching the spirit, be of any weight with us: why is it at this day
with many (which are of good hope, that they appertain to God) as it

For in many it may be seen, of whom it may as truly be said, that they are
nothing like the people which once they were, when they first embraced the
Gospel. Giving just cause to others to lament their case.
I might justly make the complaint of any which have been but abated in their
zeal and fervent love of good things, (of which sort there are innumerable:)
but I would I might not also charge numbers that they are disguised, being so
far off from forward and zealous professors (which once they were) that (as
Saint Paul complains of the Corinthians) they are now full; yea, they think
it mere foolishness to hunger after knowledge, 1. Cor. 4.8.
and as newborn babes, to desire the sincere milk of the word, 1. Pet. 2.2.
that they may grow thereby: who if they think much to be still called babes,
and so to desire milk; yet I hope, though they be men grown, they must still
hunger after strong meat. But howsoever it be, and howsoever some have
degenerated from their first love more then others, it is too fearful to see,
(I say not, how many have no affection, neither bear any hearty good will to
the sincere preaching of the Gospel, neither at any time ever did: Heb. 5.14.
for who can number them?) but it is too fearful (I say) to see how many of
them are changed who began well: and (as the Apostle says) Ran well; Gal.
5.7.
but they have been let in such wise as they obey not the truth.

Signs, or effects thereof.
neglect of private conference and of exhorting and edifying one another,
untowardness to good works and shaking off love to the brethren, embracing
the world and the entertaining of ill companionship, with hart-burning against
the Preachers for telling them the truth, whom sometime they loved and
reverenced highly; and if the making of no conscience of open sins, where
secret and small ones could not sometimes have been abidden: if (I say) these
and such like in men, where the contrary have been, be signs that the first
love is cooled and sore decayed; there are enough, who give just cause of
complaining.



And can it be any less then our great sin, To keep our first love, a hard
work.
to have our hearts going after strange delights, which shall shoulder out
this which is the greatest? I grant we are renewed but in part, and that much
corruption remains to cloy and incumber us; and through Satan's malice and
vigilancie, not only to hinder, but even to hold under goodness in us;
especially through so many occasions and prouocations as we walk subject to in
the world. But yet for Yet a duty commanded by the Lord,
may we not shake off our feruencie and diligence in doing the Lords work. And
although we cannot avoid it, but we shall be nearely laid at, and narrowly
beset with all manner of hindrances, both allurements and discouragements; so
as we shall be broken off again and again: yet must we therefore know, that
our life is called and so we must find it, even a continual battle with our
lusts worldly and unruly, and our affections unmortified: and we must accustom
ouerselues hereto carefully, Who also encourages us thereto.
seeing the Lord has promised, to teach our fingers to fight and our hands to
war: that in time we may be expert, rather then cowardly to faint, or
trecherously to run away.

Yea but ye will say: We are ignorant in many points how to behave our

And thus much of this second let arising from want of some necessary

CHAP. 7. Of a third let in this first kind, namely: The want of the ordinary
preaching of the word of God.
AND now to make an end of this first kind of lets, The third special let,
arising from want.
we are to know, that there is another want which Satan labors to hold us
in, and the fittest of all other to 2. Tim. 4.1.2
with love and diligence taught so often in the week, as the people can
conveniently attend upon the same. Which being the light of the world, and (as
it were) the Sun that warmeth all the creatures of the earth with his
influence: so it can but warm and inlighten them who are within the sound of
it, as the Sun does that part of the earth to the which he can spread his
beams. Note.
And although many upon whom this heavenly light shines, are not made
fruitful like a garden by the heat of the

God be blessed for those which are painful laborers, but yet for the
infinite thousands who know nothing, neither can know, I would that all which
will be called the Lords Ministers, did diligently and faithfully prophecy,
and that the Lord would pour his spirit upon them plentifully for that
purpose. If Peter could say no less, but that it was meet, Number. 11.29. 2.
Pet. 1.12.13 Believers must be daily put in mind of heavenly things.
whiles he continued in this tabernacle, to put the people in remembrance of
heaven and the way to it, yea though they were stablished in it already no
more to be removed:

But this is a large field to walk in, and not of me in this place to be long
Mat. 9.38.
and establish the liberty of the Gospel preached by authority, and continue
to us the glorious light and sweet and deep insight into the will of God
thereby, which we have attained, and many more might also have done the same,
under her Highness most prosperous reign and long peace: for whom many thanks
be given to God amongst us.

Now seeing by the wanting of this sound ministry ordinarily inioyed, even
the most of Gods beloved do want the greatest part of their best privileges,
What they want, who want that.
or full weakly enjoy them, let all welwillers to Sion procure this as much as
in them lies, both by their fervent prayers and other Christian endeavors; and
let such as desire to be more free from Satan's snares, provide whiles they
may, to be partakers of this benefit. As for such as enjoy it, and price it not
above all that they have, or ever can enjoy in this world, but esteem it as a
thing which they set little by, yea and could want it well enough, Mat. 8.11.
and 12.
I will say no more to them but this: Many shall come from other places to
seek comfort there, both from East, West, North and South, and shall sit: Amos
8.11. and 12.
and that of Amos: Behold, the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send
a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but for
hearing of the word of the Lord. And they shall wander from sea to sea, and
from the North even unto the East shall they run to and fro to seek the word
of the Lord, and shall not find it.

They who should weigh, how the Devil has labored in all nations and
throughout all generatio^s to hinder the passage of the Gospel, (as, if that
one book of the Acts of the Apostles only were perused, does appear in

For how should a poor Christian rise up when he is fallen by any occasion, or
come into the way again when he is strayed out: or how shall he be
strengthened being weak, or be comforted in his heaviness; if he have not
this at hand ordinarily, to bring tidings of Gods will to him, and every way to
supply his many wants: even as if the trumpet sound not, who can prepare
himself to the battle? Therefore it is, that there are such maine blocks

For it is to be lamented, to see how few can rightly use such liberties and
make their profit of them while they enjoy them: as to draw out of their
teachers, understanding, and humbly pray and labor for spiritual wisdom
whereby they may have the right use of their knowledge in every particular
action: and in the spirit of meekness to help build up one another, and to be
lights to the ignorant by giving good example; Solomon including many hurts and
dangers in one word, Prou. 29.18.
saying: Where that is wanting, the people perish.

The same I say of other helps to the building up of a godly life, The not
using the daily helps to godliness, is a great want that much hind^reth a
Christian.
which I have spoken of in another place, that if we suffer our selves to be
hindered by the Devil from the daily and reverent use of them, he shall
sufficiently prevail in holding us back, that we shall not flourish as plants
in the Lords orchard: I mean if we do not consecrate our selves to God, pray
and meditate daily as Heb. 10.24.
and to take good by examples of one another: and if we be not more humbled by
our chastisements, and our hearts more enlarged to serve God by his daily
benefits: but trifle out our precious time after the manner of men of the
world, finding no such savor in any of these as we do in earthly delights,
namely, eating, drinking, Mat. 24.38.
sleeping, playing and dealings about our profits; the Devil has what he
seeks at our hands, and keeps us far enough off from our best portion.
Finally, the want of our whole armor, or any part of it, The want of daily
keeping on the armor, is a great want.
whereby we defend 1* Pet 2.2. and 2. Pet 3.17.
and grow in grace and in the knowledge of our savior Jesus Christ: for which
end it is among us.

The remedy of all the other wants, seeing it is a faithful practicing of the
Prou 23.23.
and consequently from the sweet fruit which he might enjoy thereby. The
which I speak to this end, that he may be on the other side more encouraged
resolutely to give over himself thereunto daily: seeing thereby all these
evils and perils of this life so unwelcome and so much feared, may be in great
part avoided.

If any object, Objection.
that these first kinds of lets (though not so particularly) are set down
before, and the remedies, as here they are, and therefore that this is Answer.
to let the^ see that a well ordered course is a remedy for and against all
diseases: and therefore I mention the manifold lets in this Treatise, which
come in the way to hinder it, that they may see the better to set themselves
against them, and not to think their labor lost, which they are moved to
bestow in acquainting and exercising themselves thoroughly in the practice of
Christian direction from day to day, as it is drawn from Gods word. And thus
much of the first kind of lets, whereby the Devil hinders us through wants in

Many vveake ones troubled with fear of their own wants, without cause.
Now I have showed how the Devil troubles many weak Christians by the wants
before mentioned, here I think not amiss, to show how some are troubled by
fear of their own wants without cause. For experience teaches, what deadly
heaviness he raises up in the hearts of many of Gods dear children by
occasion of their wants in grace. And among the manifold hurts which he
brings by means thereof to many weak Christians, this one is not to be
omitted: what grievous and sore discouragements he oppresses many tender
consciences with, while they epsy some gfts of God

In which state he drives them to find out in themselves many disorders and
falls, sundry out-strayings from their Christian course, and how they cannot
prevail over their corruptions; and so makes the innocent souls, not only
to think that they be far worse then they are, but also troubles Some are
long troubled in this manner.
And in this case he keeps some of them many years together, persuading
themselves that none are so bad as they, nor such hypocrites, etc. when yet the
things whereof they do most accuse themselves, are mere infirmities, and not
any gross or palpable trespasses. This description of them (that I say no more
of them) who sees not how apparently it bewraieth the Devils malice and
subtlety in hindering, yea snaring them (as I may say) in

Now if they are blessed who fear and who are troubled for some wants in
grace, Prou. 28.14. Mat. 5.3.
who is so blind that he sees not, that even by this which is their sorrow, and
in their own account even their misery: yet by this (I say) they prove
themselves to be blessed and happy? The special remedy for these is godly
boldness, Remedies: Godly boldness.
to consider what God has done for them in giving them such hungring hearts
after good things: which could not be, except they had tasted of those sweet
graces already, and had some part or portion of Thankfulness.
They must be persuaded to more hearty thankfulness to God, and see this
their humility, meekness, love of God and desire of heavenly things, to be
just causes hereof. Their unkindness to God they do well to acknowledge, and
that is an especial grace of God in them; and that they find in their nature,
rebellion against goodness: but yet, not so, that they show themselves more
unkind by not confessing that they have much cause to

And therefore let them believe, There is great cause of rejoicing in that, for
which they are heavy.
that their estate is rather to be highly accounted of, (even as it is) seeing
the thirsty (as dry sponges) drink up much grace, and the humble shall find
rest to their souls; then that for some wants of grace they should cast down
themselves half desperately, as though God regarded them not, when yet their
estate is the estate of all Gods children: among whom, even the best have many
wants of grace, and know but in part, nor believe but in part, although they
have through experience learned better then the other to sustain the same. For
where faith is in Gods promises (without which they cannot heartily love
heavenly things) they

Of small beginnings come great proceedings; of one little sparckle, VVeake
beginnings in grace being sound, promise great increase.
a mighty flame; and the talle Oaks were sometime but small akornes: he has
well begun, who has in truth begun; and he has much, who feels that he
wants much: and he who in an humble and a meek spirit hungreth after
knowledge and grace, has made good proceeding toward the

CHAP. 8. Of the second kind of general lets: namely, The unmortified
affections wherewith he oppresses the believer. And first, Of fear that they
shall not persevere: and of pride in their gifts.
NOw I having showed how the former kinds of lets should be removed: the second
kind follows, which contains the sins and corruptions that are in us,
whereby the Devil has exceeding great advantage against us, to hinder us from
this heavenly course which we should walk in. And they are, besides the
ignorance and blindness that is in us, (of which I have spoken before) our
unruly and unmortified affections, and the worldly lusts: which if they
prevail and be suffered to rule in us, they thrust and have gotten some
strength in a good Christian (though that be never 1. Sam. 12.19.20.
Even as the people said in Samuel of their wilfulness: We have sinned many
other ways, but especially in asking a King: so I say, that sin seems to a
penitent christian (when he comes to himself) most odious, wherewith he has
felt his heart most entangled. But to prove that true which I said; so does he
cry out of the rest, when he remembers how he has been deceived by them: a
worldly and greedy mind seems most The first kind of them, is fear and doubt
of perseuering, by means of afflictions, etc.
till God give them release or deliverance: and that is, A fearful doubting of
their perseverance. I mean, that poor Christians shall not so soon begin to
be drawn out of the world, to any lively hope of salvation and care of
pleasing God, and so have escaped one bondage, but he plungeth them into
another; holding them under dreadful fear and distrustfulnesse, that they
shall not persevere to the end of a godly life, especially in sore trials, and
when persecution and strong temptations shall come.

It easily takes hold of vveake ones.
And this fear he does fasten upon them the more easily, seeing that affection
of fear is most nearly glewed to them: and besides, when they see examples
Mat. 10.28.
saying: Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul: but rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell: Phil. 1.28.
and Saint Paul: In nothing fear your adversaries, etc. How it lets them.
troubles the pure water) and consequently holds back the instruments of
the body from practicing well any kind of duty. In these fetters therefore of
fear, and most painful and irksome streights, he holds them: or if any
escape, and so begin to rejoice in their hope again; yet shall they not
attain thereto, nor grow therein, (distrusting themselves, and resting in the
promise of God) nor be delivered out of their fear but with much difficulty
and striving: and yet if they be, it shall not be at once, but by little and
little; while the word of God soketh into their hearts, as the soft reign into
the hard ground. For I must confess, Example of it in the disciples.
not only at their scattering from their master at his apprehension before
his death, though he had with many persuasions and strong reasons prepared them
for it: but even while he was yet conversant with them? and namely that one
time, when he went into Judea to raise Lazarus from death? Who answering said
to him, when they heard him provoke them to go thither: Master, John. 11.8.
the Jews sought lately to stone thee, and do thou go thither again? As if
they should have said: Except they The example applied.
that how great comforts soever we have inioyed by the heavenly doctrine of the
word of God which we have heard; yet as if we had never received any, when we
hear any news of trouble coming toward us, we are on the sudden so taken
and oppressed with it (yea though it be but a little) that it vnsetleth us out
of our present estate of peace and quietness wherein we were, and wholly
possesses all our senses, and scatters our former comforts, as if they never
had been any: whereas the Lord has to that end vnder-propped us before with
strong consolation, that when afflictions come we might the better bear them
and John, besides many other places: These things I have said unto you, John
16.33.
(speaking of his comfortable doctrine, which he had before taught them) that
in the midst of your tribulations ye may have peace in me.

This fear and faintness therefore under the cross, How Satan troubles us
with this let.
we must know the Devil will strongly assault us with, and thereby buffet us
so reproachfully for that we rejoiced so, yea and boasted of Gods favor before,
and yet now in our afflictons we find not deliverance many times, but we are
rather made ridiculous to the world thereby, and a gazing stock therein:
besides the fainting of our own hope, which is more then all the rest. He will
insult over us Where is now your God? Let him deliver you now, if he love you
so dearly; or else know, Mat. 27.43.
that ye have put your trust in a bruised reed: renounce him therefore, and
shift for your selves, except ye will miscarie; for there is no help for you
in him: even as his cursed instrument Rabshakeh, Captain of the King of
Assyria, did persuade Ezekiaes men, not to trust in or depend on the God of
Israel in their trouble.

How to remove it. Heb. 13.
And therefore that we may find some ease in our troubles, let us gather Goliahs
head: and our faith is the hand in which we must hold it. Psalm. 30.5. 2. Cor.
4.17. Heb. 12.11. 2 Cor. 9.10. Iam. 1 3.
And thus God says in his word to all his: This short trouble of yours, is to
bring you a long comfort afterward, when ye have endured it a while: and they
are sent you, that my power may appear in your weakness, and that you may
have proof of my grace dwelling in you; as faith, hope, love, humbleness,
obedience: and to make the world contemned, and all that is in it (as our
fleshly lusts, 1. Pet. 2.11.
which fight against our solues) to be renounced, that they may not annoy us:
and to cure many diseases, as carelessness, high mindedness and too much
ease-taking in the world; for the rod brings wisdom; Genesis 42.21. Romans
8.28. and P^al. 119.71. Hos. 6.1. Psalm. 120 1. Mat. 5.12.
Joseph's brethren said: We suffer these things worthily, for that we sinned
against our brother. They are not (I say) sent, but for our good; and they
drive us more fervently to God; and cause us to call on him: yea, and they make
us happy whiles we suffer them, (and like unto Christ himself, who was called
the man of sorrows) and give us matter of rejoicing after: and therefore we
should be thankful for them. Psalm. 50.15.
But we do not a little bewray our unkind dealing with God, who are so unwilling
to hear of them. For it is no less then a great gift; Phil. 1.29.
yea, a privilege unto us, as the Apostle says: To you it is given for
Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake.
And what unquietness does it raise in us, when we refuse and impatiently Ioh.
16.7.
It is expedient for you that I go: Lam. 3.27.
and therefore endeavor to bow and submit our necks unto the yoke, praying for
that power which our God sees we have need of, 1. Cor. 10.13. Iam 1.4. Dan. 3
25. 2. Cor 4.9.
assuring our selves of help in due time, yea though he sometime defer it.
For if he call us to suffer, he will most certainly succor and deliver us:
that so we may find it verified in us which is written: We are afflicted on
every side, yet not in distress, persecuted; but not forsaken; cast down,
but we perish And the meditation of this shall (through Gods goodness) be a
preservative to us in our afflictions.

1. Pet. 5.7.
Saint Peter teaches such as are distracted with these fears, so that they
unsettle them and disquiet their minds, to cast their care upon God, for he
cares for them. Phil. 4.6.7.
And the same in effect, says Saint Paul: Be nothing careful and pensive,
but in all things let your requests be showed unto God in prayer and
supplication with giving of thanks: and the peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall preserve your hearts (from Satan who seeks by
unquietness to take your peace from you) and settle your minds in Christ
Jesus. So that, if God have either any credit with them, that they dare trust
him in saying, Ioh. 10.28.
so that he is able to help, they may with reverence be bold in their
distress to look for it, and promise it to themselves; and yet so, that as
they trust in him, so they tempt him not, but pray for it in token that they
believe in him, and use the means to remove such pensiveness from them.

Moses, Peter, etc. who after greater grace received, believed more strongly.
But if they neglect and pass by such remedies, and so fall from fear and
doubting to boldness and presuming, that is, to go from one extremity to
another, they are grossly bewitched, and must be taught by experience to
provide better for themselves. Which I say, The heed of indirect means, and
deceivable remedies.
seeing many are carried to use indirect means; as, by forgetting their fear,
putting it away by merry company and pastime, or by hoping that no such thing
shall befall them any more; and so wax secure and careless: and thus not
only they are deceived in looking for that which shall not come to pass,

But besides these lets, the Devil has another way, The second unmortified
affection is, Pride and an ouervveaning of themselves. Revel. 3.17.
whereby he hides the full beauty of the Christian life from many who have
well begun, namely, by raising in them a proud conceit and opinion of their
profiting in knowledge and godliness: like them of Laodicea, who said, they
were rich So that when they have but newly begun, yet they shall think
themselves to have no great need to go forward: and by that means they never
attain to the sweet privileges which are to be inioyed of them, even in this
life. Example of it in the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 4.8.
And after this manner he puffed up the Corinthians when they had received the
Gospel, as by the Apostles writing to them here, chap. 4. and elsewhere, it
appears: Now ye are full, now ye are rich, and reign as Kings: thereby
showing them their slacknesse in proceeding to grow forward in the knowledge of
Christ, and their loathing and wearisomenesse of pains taking, and their pride
and contempt: which was no small enemy to their profiting.

In the Apostles.
who when our Savior told them that they should receive great light of
knowledge and other increase of grace, when he should send down the holy Ghost
upon them; they but dimmely understanding him, imagined that they had them
already, saying: Now speak thou plainly, and thou speak no parable:
John. 16.29.
imagining that they had the full understanding of his speech, when they
misconceiued his meaning. Such as I speak of, being strongly possessed of this
ouer-weaning of their gifts, is no small enemy to true knowledge and
godliness. But this use the Devil teaches men to make of Gods gifts, even to
be the worse for them, and to wax insolent by means thereof when they
Dangerous effects of it.
but a waxing weary of learning any more then they know, and a neglecting of
diligence Judas: Mat. 27.5. So that they verify the saying of our Savior,
that for not using it well, Luc. 19.26.
they lose even that grace which they had.

The remedy. Reu. 3.17.
Such are taught to prevent this danger, by acknowledging that they are poor,
and blind, and naked, and therefore to furnish themselves yet better: and
seeing they attribute so much to their own wisdom, to learn of the 1. Cor.
3.18.
that they must become fools, that they may be wise: and that they know
nothing as they ought to know: and whatsoever they have, yet to hunger and
thirst after more, and to covet spiritual things still, and to pray with the
Prophet: 1. Cor. 14.1. Psalm. 119.12.
Lord, teach me thy statutes: and not to please themselves in that which they
have practiced already, comparing themselves in a blind manner with those
which are like, or rather far behind themselves; but be better acquainted
daily with their own wants, weaknesses and corruptions, that more strength may
be gathered against them: and to look upon them, which in the Scriptures, and
now, are set before them, as the forwardest Christians and holiest examples.
And as this is the remedy to avoid these snares of the devil

In this case therefore we see what a benefit of God it is, that he has
appointed us daily an examination of our ways, Examine our ways.
that if at other times, any unbeseeming thing should have passed us; yet we
might by this laying our actions Note.
But if the devil enter so far as to fasten hollownesse and falsheartednesse
upon us, which is, when we are not willing to see our trecheries; or in seeing
them, yet counting them no great disgrace or matter of accusation against us,
(neither are we willing to rise out of the sins which have passed us,
bringing pleasure or commodity unto us:) here as the devil beguiled Eve
through his subtlety, so he has done us. What is to be gone about in this
case, but that we duly and seriously consider that which the holy Ghost has
said in the Proverbs: Pro. 28.13.
He that hides his sin shall not prosper; remembering this, Psa. 32.4. and 5
that though it go sore against our nature to shame and confess against
Another unmortified affection: Sloth.
which we so shamefully cast off?

If otherwise, he seeing our disposition, shall carry us to luskishnes,
sloth, idleness, so that this saying in the Proverbs be verified in us: A
lion is in; or any other of that cursed litter, that we begin to take sweetness
therein which is no better then poison; and that the works of our lawful
calling wax loathsome and unsavory to us; and the means to uphold
godliness, become unwelcome; or other parts of the Christian course, irksome
and tedious: do we not know, that as we sow, so we shall reap? and if to the
flesh, that of it we shall reap corruption? What is to be done then of us, but
this: namely, That we look to the root and fountain of this mischief?
Remedy.
And if it be grown by little and little, trace it out by footsteps: know that
thou art beguiled. For thou before did delight and take pleasure in
godliness, as finding no safety elsewhere, and renouncedst all whatsoever
might hinder and hold ease slays the foolish: Prou. 1.32. Prou. 14.12.
and the way that seems pleasant to the flesh, is the way to death. And how
hard soever it be to go back out of this course, yet God has encouraged thee
thereto infinite ways; especially by this one, that he (in any thing that he
sets thee about) will be with thee, and not leave thee, nor forsake thee:
Ios. 1.9. Ephesians. 3.19.
but will give thee more then thou could ask or think, and therefore much
more that which thou do desire. The longer thou art led by any such
slavery, the more hardly thou know thou shall find recovery.

CHAP. 9. Of other unruly affections; tetchinesse, peevishness, frowardness,
etc.
AMONG the inward lets of godliness, (I mean the unstayed affections of the
heart) though the particulars are infinite, this is not the least, when it
waxes tetchie, peevish and froward either against persons or things being
crossed by them, that we cannot 1. Sam. 24.7.8. and 25.13.
(as David could not be angry with Saul for all the injuries with which he
pursued him, and yet was carried headlong by his passions against Nabal for one
discourtesie offered him.)

And if in this tetchinesse, we have to do and deal with men, our
perverseness, Paul and Barnabas: Act. 15.39.
when they dissenting betwixt themselves about taking Mark into their
company, were so snared, that they departed one from the other; and with no
less offense to others then check to themselves, brake off their fellowship
for a time.

In such a case therefore, this is to be done for the redress of it: that
seeing it is an high offense to God, Remedy.
a needless and fond troubling of our selves, and a bereauing us of godly
wisdom, yea and of common reason, (that I Zac. 12.12. Mat. 7.7.
and such dislike of our corruption (and namely, of such impotencie for want of
grace) shall be the next way to recover it again: and when we have seen what
we have gained thereby, or rather how much we have lost; that (as our Savior
admonished in the like case) we go our way and sin no more in that manner,
lest a worse thing befall us. And this for a taste of the corruption.

Now when we shall consider, how many of these sores there are to blemish, An
other: is weariness of well doing.
wound and feeble the soul, that it may be (as it were) in the several powers
thereof made unfit to every good work by one or other of them; Phil. 2.12. 2.
Pet. 1.5.
why we call upon men, as the Apostle teaches us, that they should work on,
that is, hold fast and maintain the assurance of their

But if we escape this snare, are we out of danger? Nay, An other unruly
affection that much troubles us: weariness in going forward.
he has many more to catch us in. For through our ignorance or unbelief, he
makes the Christian life seem so difficult and tedious to us, that we shall
wax faint and be weary of proceeding therein, or at least in special duties
thereof: who knows not how fickle and inconstant we are in all good things,
and how soon unsettled? Insomuch that oftentimes, even when we have renewed our
covenants after some fall, or dangerous coldness espied and repented of; yet
shall we by little and little, fall to our old bias again. Now if herewith Moses
from them, Exodus 24.18. and 34.28. Exodus 32.1.
being but forty days.

I do not speak of the unfitness and natural untowardness of the mind, or
unaptness of the body to Gods worship, or to the duties of our particular
callings, which being sometime in the best of Gods people, are by moderate and
honest recreating of them (if they cannot otherwise) expelled and shaken off:
Romans 7.19.21.
but I speak of the unwillingness that the flesh feels to hold on
constantly in duty, further then it likes; and that is, not utterly to cast
off the yoke of Christ, but to serve God and it self too. For there is nothing
more desired

And this is so true, that even the best after they have renewed their covenant
Gal. 6.9. 1. Cor. 16.13.
And again: Stand fast in the faith: quite you like men, be strong. And thus
if we curb not in the unruly affections and lusts, which would soon fasten
upon us, and do not often record our many sweet liberties which we find in
serving God, (which shall also be greatest, when we have continued longest:) we
shall find this too true by our own experience, namely, what wearines

For as the diseases in the nether parts of the body do make the heart heavy
and the head to be distempered, and they being healed do ease and quicken both:
even so, these unmortified affections of ours being out of order, do trouble
the soul and disquiet it; and therefore the well ordering of them, is a
singular chearing and comforting of the soul and mind. Herein therefore we
must know and be persuaded that Gods grace shall be sufficient for us, Remedies
against these corruptions.
will weaken them in us, and will make the way easy unto us every day more and
more unto the godly life, and take away the difficulties which stand up to
hinder us: even as we see how he encourages us thereto, Mat. 11.31.
saying: My yoke is easy and my burden is light. Moreover, though the devil
cannot break us off utterly from a daily care of pleasing God, Satan
labors to unsettle and discourage us with reproaches.
yet he will so labor to unsettle us with reproaches, ill opinions unjustly
conceived of us, false reports and disgrace with our betters, which shall meet
with us in every place; that we shall be much disquieted, if not unsettled for
the time, or stirred up to bitterness, and take counsel how we may be
revenged, with sundry other discouragements: even until we enter into Mat.
5.12.
namely, that the Lord is not changed toward us for all that, but wills us
to rejoice, saying: If you be ill spoken of for my sake and the Gospels,
rejoice and be glad; for great is your reward in heaven. But whatsoever may
stand up in our way to provoke fainting and weariness in our christian course,
we have strong and many persuasions against them: as, that we shall reap our
reward without weariness, Gal. 6.9: even a crown of righteousness, 2. Tim.
4.8. But because the matter arises more large then I looked for, (although I
study with all brevity to set down the diverse kinds of untamed affections,
barely with their remedies) I will therefore shut up this second

So he sometime provoke us to unjust anger, (which is no better then a short
madness) especially when we can say, The last of this kind of ill affections
here mentioned, consisting of many.
we had cause offered us: so easily does he turn our affections against us,
which God teaches us to use to good ends and purposes. At some other time, he
poisoneth us with deadly conceits and heartburnings against such as we
dislike; also with looseness and lightness of heart; also with rashness and
hastines, wherein we do nothing well; with lumpishnes and melancholy, and with
diverse such like:

For the remedying of these and such like, this is no small help, that they
set themselves to mark their disposition and inclination better, to what sin
they are most prone: and besides, except they have a wise care to keep
themselves beseeming the Gospel, especially in those parts of their lives
which lie open to greatest dangers, that therein they be best furnished: and
if they take a foil and sustain a check to their conscience, yet to seek
the curing

CHAP. 10. Of worldly lusts: and namely, The love of carnal pleasure, and the
BUT further, as he finds best opportunity, he deceives us many other ways;
and namely, in taking up our hearts in endless, foolish and vain desires of
things, which we neither can nor ought to enjoy; as the lust of the heart, of
the eye, and the pride of life: and so feeding us with the air, even with most
vain and deceiptfull dreams, besotteth us with too much pleasure-taking in
transitory liberties and commodities of this life; which pull our minds as

I mean by these, all sorts of worldly lusts, which are more noisome and
dangerous then the evil affections mentioned before: though (one would think)
we had little need to be shaken and distempered with greater then they, but
rather study how to make them weakened and subdued in us. These worldly lusts,
are lusts of the flesh which belong to the present state of this life and
world: as the exceeding love and desire of pleasures, riches and estimation,
is, Carnal pleasures.
when he shall be drowned in sensuality, and the sottish pleasure of the
body, Prou. 31.30.
Favor is deceiptfull, and beauty is a vain thing. And what is the cause of
this? for it would not easily be believed, that a true Christian should fall so
far. How it comes to pass, that Christians fall thereby.
The cause is this; that he having given his heart liberty to desire stolen
waters, and to count them sweet, when he should rather have loathed and cast
them up as vomit, and have made a firm covenant against the nourishing of
such delights; and he having given his eye leave also to feed it self with
such sights: he was made utterly blind. And that being done, his prayers became
feeble and weak (though sometime attempting it) to expel and drive out such
sottishness; but it lodged in him, Sampson; Iud. 15. Example thereof in Sampson.
a man of great gifts (as may be gathered by the story) but made so impotent
by the look of a woman, that he yielded himself to her lure most
reprochfully: and being caught with that which was precious in her, became a
fool in Israel, who had been wise enough before to rule the whole land. And
to this bondage does a man, What an heavy estate it causes. Pro. 6.27.
endued with grace, bring himself, when he will not see the danger, which he
cannot but know is ready to meet with him: For can a man take fire in his
bosom, and not be burnt? No more may such an one, who will be carried of his
raging lusts, look to be free from great evil and danger. But behold
further, what goes with it? even this, that he Iam. 4.17.
unutterable; and the rejoicing of the wicked, insatiable. Note.
And yet this is not so to be taken, as though it could be no otherwise with
any of Gods people; for many are free from that slavery, who yet have the same
allurements: but they give not place to their unruly desires, believing that
which is taught them, How dear it will cost them. Oh subtilties of Satan,
hardly to be discerned! and deceiptfulnesse of the heart, not to be trusted!
Abraham, who does loath and abhor such wickedness: and yet to be taken in
such a time, that they should be ready to venture upon that which must needs
work their undoing; and to wish that, by the enjoying whereof they were better
be dead! But I must say, such do purchase to themselves the just fruit of
their labors: for though they may be sealed up by the spirit of God to
salvation, (for of such only I speak) yet what then? Beware of the least
occasions, especially where we are weakest.
Ought they not therefore to be more holy, and beware of the least occasions of
emboldening them to sin? And of all other sins, to be No preciseness to
beware of sin.
that we cannot be too circumspect and wary: and that it is no preciseness,
to beware of the deceiptfulnesse of sin at any time, or in any place A simile.
is freest from burning; and he who goes far off from the brimme of a river,
is safest from drowning: A word to the wise is more, then an hundred stripes to
a fool. And I pray God, that numbers of them who mock some for their
preciseness, Pro. 17.10.
have not often times just cause to blush and be wounded for their bold sinning,
I mean, as well the sin which I now here speak of, as other kinds: and all
for this, that they were no more precise. For if they may be deceived and
overcome who are thought to be strict; namely, If the wariest be sometimes
deceived, much more the secure
when they will at sometimes

But to return to the godly, how good is it to learn and be able to hold in
these fleshly lusts, as it were, with bit and bridle; that no such woeful
things befall them at any time, neither that they make themselves fools in
Israel, How to avoid the danger. Ioh. 15.10.
nor spectacles to the profane world to become their pastime? All which they
shall avoid, if they make their greatest reckoning to abide in the favor of
God from day to day, and hold fast the assurance of it, Mat. 11.29.
and not count it too base a thing for them to do: Secondly, if they continue
under Christ's government, Col. 3.5.
but follow their particular callings diligently: And last of all, if they will
shun and avoid the occasions and objects of such mischief; and namely, Genesis
39.10.
those which we read that holy Joseph did eschew in the like case, being
tempted by his whorish mistress, that he would not hearken to her, nor come
into her company.

Another way which the devil lays open to obscure and weaken the godly life
in us; and that, by another of these worldly lusts, is: The second worldly
lust. Cares of this world, or worldliness. Heb. 13. Peti. 4.
to fill us with noisome cares about the things of this life. A common evil
under the Sun; and not Prou. Eccles. 4.4.
as Solomon speaks: I have seen a rich man, as if he had nothing: And
again; There is one who has neither son nor brother, yet there is no end of
his travel, neither is his eye satisfied with riches, neither does he once
say: For whom do I labor, and deprive my soul of goodness? This thorn
where it grows, it suffers no good thing to grow by it, but choaketh it,
and ouershadoweth any other gifts of God whatsoever. For a worldly mind is a
monster of many heads, and infecteth the unwise with her poison, that not

But in describing of this, I cannot use the like brevity as in the former.
Paul sets out this sin which is compact of so many, this root which has
so many branches, 1. Tim. 6.10.
when writing to Timothy and charging him to make this his text in preaching
to such as have riches, he says: The love or desire of money is the root of
all evil: which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows; Again: They which will be rich,

By the help of this Scripture and some other, I will first lay out some of
the branches of this root, and some of the heads of this monster which
deuoureth piety and religion so fast; and the deadly danger that comes from
thence, and the remedy against it: that all these considered, we may see what
just cause there is that men should be circumspect in this behalf, in a more
especial manner throughout their days, besides the general care which they
have over their lives. And first a little, of the sins of this kind committed
in and about the affairs and dealings of Christians, (for my purpose is to
awaken

Dangers in worldly dealings: Greediness.
In dealings, some of the sins which good men are like to fall into, are:
Greediness in seeking and getting their commodities, when they consider not
who is hurt thereby, so they may get; nor what danger they purchase themselves
in things which are more precious: with the which as a daily companion goes
Hastiness and rashness, Rashness in couenants-making, etc.
when covenants and promises When riches increase, the heart is on them.
that it may be seen apparently, we be much unsettled and almost made drunken
thereby; as when we first enter upon our inheritance and commodities, when they
come in more roundly by the rising of prices, or great gain in our bargains,
or any such like.

Looseness and lightness.
Another evil of this sort, is the deceiptfull looseness and
light-heartednesse Earthly rejoicing.
when we have success to our liking, and gain coming in. And from this
arises rejoicing in our wealth (which Job durst not do, but said; That had
been a denying of God) and pride of life, as also a lifting up our hearts above
others, Pride etc. Job. 31.24.25.28.
living in pleasure and wantonness, excess in diet and apparel, and
nourishing our hearts as in a day of slaughter, disdaining our inferiors,
repining at our betters, with a greedy and hasty seeking to go beyond our
equals; and infinite others like: for even in these may Gods servants be
drowned.

And so on the contrary: if we thrive not, Fretting when we thrive not.
nor attain to that which we Deuteronomy 7. We depend not upon God for the issue.
So that before the issue comes, we do not with contentation rest upon God,
and meekely commit the success to him: no, but rather unquietly and
distrustfully carry ourselves until the trial come. Besides these, there are
other kinds of offending, which a Christian man may fall into: as when he shall
ouer-lay himself with such multitudes of worldly dealings, We ouerlay our
selves with worldly dealings, and no time left for better uses. Prou. 23.3. Our
fully herein.
that there can be no place nor time given to holy exercises of prayer, or
regard had of christian walking in his civil or common actions; but all the
wisdom which God has given him to far more excellent purposes, is bestowed
this way, even

I grant it is to be allowed that Solomon says: A diligent hand makes rich:
and, The slouthful comes to poverty. But that none may be deceived What
diligence is good. Prou. 3. Prou. 28.
let him be the interpreter himself what diligence it is which he allows to
grow rich by; even such and no other, as will give him leave to seek wisdom
as gold, and to lay it up as treasure, and to labor for understanding above
all things: such also, as in the midst of his diligence to become rich, he be
afraid to offend: and such, as it may not be his travel that he does most
look after. Such an evil is to be seen in the world (I mean, even amongst
men otherwise well to be hoped of) that they do not mark, when the sweetness
of gain coming in is felt, how godly duties grow as bitter and unsavory to
them, which was wont to be otherwise with them. Last of all, besides these
before named, in christian Other ill kinds of dealing.
as iniuring one of another, whiles either by deceit in bargaining or
otherwise it be offered; or whiles violence be showed, oppression and rigor,
and there be none against them able to resist it: more particularly, whiles
men, contrary to Gods commandment, do put their money to usury.

If in this sort or the like, Deuteronomy. 8.
we should be provoked in our affairs and dealings to go to work, (as it is
the manner of the most to do) we should so blemish, Other abusing of riches out
of worldly dealings.
reproachful and uncomfortable. But I have hitherto laid forth only some of
the diseases that grow out of a worldly mind in men's dealings: but there is no
less evil incurred of an earthly minded man, though otherwise religious,
(even whiles he is free from all affairs) whereby his profits and substance
are increased. For he who does not yet see the deceiptfulnesse of richs, how
they blindfold the heart that it cannot see clearly the beauty of
christianity; alas, how is he led about of his fantasies (like a fool) to Luke
12.20.
) and before the time be expired he is taken away from all, like the

And thus his spiders web which with much care and long time was in working,
is now suddenly swept away in one moment. It were infinite to say that which
might here be uttered, and to very good purpose, how many ways and how far
the poor soul may be led to deceive it self; and finally to be utterly
undone being altogether bereft of all heavenly furniture, through the foolish
and sottish dreams of earthly felicity, which do oftentimes fasten even upon
good men sometime unawares, through the corruption of the heart and the
commonnesse of this evil which they see in the world.

Men, slaves to their riches.
All which how clearly do they prove, that riches are commanders and masters,
and men slaves and servants to whatsoever they will force them; and get such
secret love and liking in their hearts, that it will be a matter of great
difficulty to break their fellowship, and yet a greater vexation of the heart
when it must be broken? There is such a near agreement and liking betwixt our
nature and them, that we can talk with them as with a friend; and are led by
them to many evil purposes and ends. So that we may possibly be brought to
abuse them to the satisfying of our lusts, both in excess, licentiousness,
pride and the ioynting of our adversaries; and what not (that I say not much of
the deceiptfulnesse which there is small hope to make men Philem. 7.
And yet to comfort the hearts of their poor brethren with the^, Luke 21.34.
That we beware we be not surfeited with cares of this world, and that we make
them not thorns and choakes to hurt and annoy us.

By these or any of them, or the like, as every Christian is most prone to
offend: Great heed to be taken.
so if he shall not wisely and circumspectly prevent the same by this Christian
watchfulness through the day, besides other helps before set down, avoiding
all occasions and weaning his heart from all noisome love

I have showed some of the abusings of worldly goods, both in men's dealings
Some of the better sort, not vvilling to bear how to use riches aright.
it is too apparent, how honest and good Christians have (for the most of them)
no heart to hear how they should use their worldly wealth, how many dangers
they are subject unto thereby, and how their love is glued to the same; but
they think themselves able to guide themselves in using and disposing of their
riches and commodities: therefore do they fall into no mean or common dangers.
That whereas they might have liberty above

CHAP. 11. Of the remedies against this worldly lust: namely, Covetousness and
excessive love of riches.
But to set down somewhat more clearly and distinctly for help and redress
of this sin of covetousness and worldly lust, because I have somewhat
largely spoken of the same: I could wish that the remedies and reasons The
second point about this matter, how to redress it.
where they have not as yet broke out in many of Gods people) that the remedies
(I say) and reasons against them were well marked, and also the direction how
to use them both, (as follows) duly regarded. And to begin with the remedies
which I will here set down, they are four, even as the reasons also are.
First, he that desires to be free from great blame and offense by the use of
worldly goods, and consequently to hold fast his peace with God thereby, (as I
know not what moral action is more to be desired) let him look to this as he
would to the avoiding of the collicke or stone: The first remedy.
That no man be hurt or 1. These. 4.6.
See that no man oppress or defraud his brother in any matter. So that, as we
will be sure that none shall wrong us, so far as we be able to resist it,
(and therefore we need not be bidden to regard our selves:) so because few of
us will be careful to see others with whom we deal, to enjoy their right, but
will be ready rather to pluck from them; therefore is this charge given us
toward others (not a little foiling to this sin of worldlines, if it be
regarded.)

The benefit of this remedy.
For then we shall be free from all the sins against our neighbor, condemned
in the eighth commandment (as far as we can discern them) both

The second remedy is: not only that we hurt them not, The second remedy: To
do good to all.
but also that we do them good. Which is to be understood of all with whom we
have to do. Even as that Scripture teaches, confirming this rule: namely, That
we should owe nothing to any, but this, That we love them. Romans 13.8. The first
sort to whom we should do it. Princes.
And this reaches (and is of us to be performed) to four sorts of men: (1) to
Princes: (2) to teachers: (3) our own families: and (4) to others, our poor
neighbors and brethren: to all which, we owe a several duty not to be
neglected. For breuity sake to our Christian Prince we owe tribute and other
duty by our goods, Romans 13.7.
as The second: Gods ministers. 1. Cor 9.14. Gal. 6.6.
to the upholding and maintaining of the Ministry and the Gospel preached:
which due, they who being able, are not ready to discharge, but draw their
necks out of the collar: besides that, they show they are neither friends nor
favorers of that holy ordinance of God; so they prove, and that too truly,
that they reap small benefit by the The poor man's duty in this case.
So that even the poor who are able to give nothing, are in no better case, if
they be not in affection and good example with the best and forwardest, in
token, that if they had ability, they would not be behind others in that duty.

The third sort to whom we owe this, To make the^ partakers of our goods, The
third: Our family.
are our own family, as wife, servants and children: who must have this
performed by us, to have all good necessaries provided them at our hands, as
food and raiment, with what soever else convenient for them; that they may be
the better encouraged and more enabled to live christianly, and to walk in
their callings diligently and cheerfully. And if we be occasions to them of
neglecting their duties, by pulling from them any of their necessary worse
then infidels. And yet on the other side, 1. Tim. 5.8.
will not the Lord allow us to fall into any other kind of ill dealing, Note.
as coveting that which is another, or irreligious seeking to increase our
own for the maintaining of our charge: but that care and travel of ours, in
our particular calling, which auoideth both these; (that neither religious
worshipping and serving of God be neglected of us, nor our neighbor wronged
nor iniuried by us) that is the manner of providing for our families, which is
beseeming and meet for us.

The fourth: The poor.
(so that the giving of that to them which we owe them, may help to hinder and
abate covetousness in us:) this last sort, I say, are the poor, Deuteronomy. 15.11.
whom we shall always have among us (as our Savior says) that we may do good
to them. Ioh. 12.8. Not to hurt them.
Therefore much more we must take it as granted, that we may in no wise hurt or
wrong them, which we may not offer to any other, (though with some, all is fish
that comes into the net (as they say;) and they care not who forgo it, so
that they may have it. To show compassion to them. Iam. 2.13.16.
) We must know further, that to these we ow mercy Lay somewhat aside for this
purpose. 1. Cor 16.1. 1. Tim. 6.18. 2. Cor. 9.6. 2. Cor. 8.7. Romans 12.
) And for the performing of these duties, let somewhat be laid aside as God
blesses us, either quarterly as we receive it, or otherwise, as God brings
it to our hands; not thinking the tithe of our gain and sauings in the year
to be too much for them. The Apostle wills men to be rich in good works and
not nigardly; and God calls Giving a grace.

The third remedy. To take heed that riches be not means to dravv us to sin.
And these do concern our selves, as the former teach us how to deal with
others. The first of them is, that they hurt us not: that is, that they be not
means to draw us to much sin, which will as poison in the body, Solomon
speaks of: that they be not to us as they be to the most, our strong holds.
The riches of a man, Prou. 18.11.
says he, are his strong holds: and make him, as the Apostle says, to be high
minded. For thus he writes to Timothy: Charge them who are rich in this world,
1. Tim. 6.17. Riches puff up the mind. What comes of it.
that they be not high minded. For if they puff up our minds, and make us
swell, they will draw us on to any sin: as licentiousness, idleness,
vanity and boldness in evil, whiles we think we have that which will bear
us out, and hold us up against any which might rise against us; until the
fruits

This is some part of the hurt that riches may do us, even as they do procure
and bring all these with many other to the men of the world; as agreeable to
Salomons words: Eccles. 5.12.
I have seen an evil sickness under the Sun: riches reserved to the owners
thereof, to their evil. These sins therefore, with their like, Sins of the
poorer sort, about riches.
may have worldly minds as well as the other; and are more like to covet, to be
discontented, fret, and to use unlawful shifts to come out of their wants:
whereby no small hurt does ensue unto them. All which, How to avoid them.
true Christians must learn to resist and withstand, and to see what allowance
God affoordeth them, and not what their greedy appetite would desire. And
besides

The fourth and last is this: The fourth remedy: That we provide, that we be
bettered by our wealth.
that we not only provide that we be not hurt Psalm. 16. The vvealthy have more
help to godliness, then others:

More time and freedom to religious exercises.


that in the wealthy estate there are many more helps hereto, then are to be
found in the needy and poor, (this being granted, that both sorts fear God,
with whom only I have here to deal)? For first, they have more time and
freedom then these, to all exercises of religion and the worship of God, both
public and private: I mean, they may ofter enjoy the preaching of the word,
have recourse to reading, Christian conference in good company,

Now if any here will object and say, (as indeed he may, Objection:
Most are worse for their wealth.
if he mark the course of the most wealthy at this day, yea even of those who
will seem religious:) That these benefits of God do rather draw me^ away from
feruency and forwardness in a godly life, then further and help them thereto:
Answer:
I answer, Such are bad users of good things.
it is the sin of the persons who are so unthrifty users of Gods blessings,
and their gross unthankfulness to him, who do thereby provoke him to take
away his bounty from them, or to give it them in his wrath and heavy
displeasure. For I am sure the Lord teaches them the contrary, namely: that
where much is bestowed, there much shall be required: and that this is the end
of the abundance of all good things which he gives us, that we should serve
him with ioyfulnesse and with a good heart. Deuteronomy. 28.47.
Indeed, as men go to work in the world who have received great riches at

This good therefore we must see that we do to our selves, who have received of
him the commodities which many of his dear servants do want, As we prosper
outwardly, so see that our souls thrive.
that we hold the profession of our hope with joy from day to day, that we may
say it truly, that our souls are much more well liking by the abundance

But to go further: our riches should do us other good, beside that which I
have spoke of. What further good our riches may do us. Luke 16.9.
For we should make them our friends to help us into everlasting habitation:
so our Savior counsels us, saying: Make you friends of your riches: and
that is, by laying them up in the Lords hands while we be careful to bestow
them on Gods poor Saints. For thus, we giving them to the poor, do lend them
unto the Lord, and do (as it were) put them in his even an hundredth fold, Mar.
10.30.
in peace (which passes understanding) in this life; (though not always in
riches again) and in the world to come, eternal life. Yea verily, such acts
shall not be forgotten, but shall be witnesses and testimonies of our faith:
(for why do we give but because we believe in the living God, Heb. 11.6.
who is a plentiful rewarder of all that seek him, and the savior of all
that believe in him? Revel. 14.13.
) and the works of such shall follow them. Even thus should we do ourselves
good with them: and therefore we must not think all too little for our selves
and those which are ours. Men make themselves drudges for their children.
And it will one day be wished, that we had thus done good to our selves by
them, rather then to be Eccles. 5.15.
This is an evil sickness, that in all points as we came, so shall we go: and
what profit have we, that we have traveled for the wind, that is, in vain and
for nothing? Oh the good that many might do with their goods (I say not, to
others, but even to themselves) if they were careful to bestow well but some
part of that which they have!

But this is no place to bewail such cases: neither have men almost any ears
to hear, or hearts to lament such neglects of duty. To conclude therefore The
fruit of all these remedies.
) which if we did carefully look to, who sees not, how it would chase away
the grossness and danger of this foul sin? And therefore much more if all
these remedies be used: (1) that we do no man hurt: Note.
and if we did wisely shun the sins which by riches we are provoked unto
(as needless spending, and nigardly sparing, and their affinities) and take
benefit to our souls, and by more religiousnesse look after the life to
come; we should bind this sin in bands and chains, which will otherwise

And the poor (whom in this argument I have little mentioned: Direction for the
poor.
who are not therefore free from covetousness, though they have no great store
of riches) shall best testify, that they be not (as the most of their
condition) tainted with this sin, if they hold fast innocence, contentation,
yea thanksgiving: that is, if they hurt not others by ill seeking goods; but be
content with their estate, though it be mean, and thankful to God for it,
seeing they deserve not even the poorest estate. For of both, this may be said:
If their conversation be in heaven, that is, governed by heavenly rules, then
may they well go the snare is in vain set for that which has wings:
therefore, they flying and mounting with the wings of watching, meditation and
prayer, over the snares which are laid for them, shall safely avoid the
deceipts of him who seeks to entrap them. And this be said of the remedies
against worldliness and covetousness: the reasons follow briefly, which
should dissuade us from the same.

The first is: seeing we cannot enjoy them long, The first reason. We cannot
enjoy our wealth long. Luke 16.2.
but either they shall be taken from us, or we from them: and yet this short
time is also uncertain, as in the parable of the steward is declared, to whom
it was said (even as it were unlooked for:) Come, give an account of thy
stewardship, for thou may be This is the slipperie estate of all things here
below: as by Scripture is proved, all to be vanity; Eccles. 1.1.
and by experience which teaches what alterations and changes there are every
where, both by death and otherwise: which while it is laid to heart, and
seriously thought on, does much quail the pride of life in us: and therefore
also will weane us from the love of the world, and to the contempt of it.

The second reason is: seeing the riches of this world are not our own, Riches
are not our own, but borrowed. Luke 16.12.
but borrowed, as our Savior Christ says: If ye have not been faithful in
another man's goods, who will give you that which is yours: where he likeneth
them to things that a man borrowes of his neighbor. Now we see, that no man
wealth, as though it were our proper heritage, when the owner is every day 1.
Tim. 6.6.
what madness is it to be counted? And yet if it were our own, it were the
smaller riches; godliness is the great: and though we are occupied about many
things, yet that one is necessary.

2. Tim. 2.4.
And if he that goes to war, does not entangle himself with the affairs of
this life: ought not we much more to be free from snaring of our selves with
the goods of this world, when neither they are our own, and when we are called
to another manner of battle, where they are sure to get no victory who are
entangled in the world? But these words [mine and thine] are so commonly in our
mouths, that we give manifest proof thereby, that although we know that our
goods be borrowed, yet we do not greatly remember or Knowledge and grace, our
proper goods.
knowledge and grace. But let this be enough to the wise, that for this very
cause they should love them little: because they be but borrowed.

3 If we be not faithful in the smaller, much less are we in the greater.
The third reason, which ought to persuade us to use the world soberly, that so
we may not be tainted with worldliness, is this: For that if we be not
faithful in this, (which is but little in respect of the great and precious
treasures of salvation and happiness) we will not, neither shall be faithful
in them, but shall show our selves not too mean as we bear the world in hand
when we profess, that we seek eternal life by the Gospel preached: but
shall Luke 16.10.
And yet our Savior affirms it to be so, saying: He that is faithful in the
least, he is also faithful in much: and he that is unjust in the least, is
unjust also in much. And who does not see it to be so? For he that will wound
and trouble his conscience for a little commodity, will he not much easilier do
it for a greater? and he that will ieopard his salvation for a penny, will he
not much more do it for a pound? and he that will hazard it for a pound, will
he not do as much for an hundred?

Objection.
Neither let any object this: That some will endanger themselves by a great
Answer.
who will not have their hand in small pilfring. For, as that is no proof of
faithfulness in the persons: so it cannot overthrow Christ's words which cannot
be resisted, that is to say; If a man will make shipwreck of conscience and
credit for a small benefit, he will do it much more for a greater. A great and
maine reason doubtless, The abuse of riches, a heavy witness against men.
why a man should be true and trusty, plain and simple in and about worldly
things, and commit no unrighteousness, neither offer any injury to enrich
himself thereby; when that shall be an utter discharging him of the favor of
God, and a frustrating of all his hope of heaven and happiness. Therefore if
we look for any benefit by Christ, any comfort by the Gospel, and any
communion with the Saints, and in a

The fourth and last reason to persuade hereto, is this: that we shall give We
shall give an account.
whether they be good or bad; so especially of our getting, using and forgoing
of our goods and commodities: as appears by the parable of the talents, Math.
25.14.
delivered to be occupied, till it should be demanded how they were employed:
Luke 16.2. How it shall be demanded.
and by that of the steward, who was called to give an account of his
stewardship. The account which shall then be demanded, shall be according to
the doctrine which has been set down in the four remedies: namely, whether
we

By this we see, we may not deal and behave our selves about these earthly
commodities, as we shall think good: for we are but stewards and disposers of
them, as the owner our Lord and master has appointed. Wherein as we have
failed, we shall have little cause to rejoice, considering that whatsoever we
have gotten and gained, yet the worst is behind: Note.
even our account giving, which we shall not be able to yield, no not one of a
thousand. And but there is mercy with the Lord, Psalm. 130.4.
and plentiful redemption: yet it is, that he may be feared of us for the time
to come, in occupying our goods and talents as he has commanded: and it is
also for them that tremble, when in remembering and thinking how ill they have
used them, Ier. 8.6.
they say penitently within themselves, What have we done? But to the rest
shall be tribulation and anguish, when they not wisely casting their reckoning
before, shall be urged to it by the Lord, they being utterly unready for it. In
this regard therefore, as in all the former, we see good cause to withstand
carefully this sin of worldliness.

These are the remedies, Direction how to use the remedies and reasons.
and reasons which persuade to give a foil to this we shall not need to doubt,
but that we shall be blessed in our

A preoccupier.
And yet this I will add: (because I know that the matter which I have set
down for the redress of covetousness, will savor but harshly in the taste of
worldly minded Christians) that I do not in all that I have said, speak or
except against any liberty that God allows his people, about the use of the
world (for some will be ready so to gather. This forbids the use of no
lavvfull liberties.
) For concerning skill and wisdom in men's trades, dealings and occupyings, I
am so far from counting them points or properties of covetousness, that I
hold them for comely ornaments, if they be not choked and ouer-growne with the
weeds of their corruptions. As in particular.
Yea I say more, that ignorance and unskillfulness (if ye except Gen 41.35.36.
is both lawful and meet, and that no more be spent, then for necessary and
comfortable use; to make provision also of things needful in the fittest time,
so as it be without fraudulent dealing in fore-hand bargains; also good
husbandry, wariness in their doings, sure bindings of men in their contracts
and covenants; and sufficient security (for mortality sake) even betwixt the
best, by writings or witness; and a taking heed of suretiship (as Solomon
wills) that one be not undone by another; Prou. 6.1.
diligence also in men's callings; with such other like: religion and Gods word

Note.
And all to this end, that the more outward dangers a man can avoid, the more
free he may be to live godly. But seeing it falls out commonly, that the
wisest are the worldliest, and these forementioned liberties are much abused
of earthly minds, and such do too easily pass their bounds, and much nigardly
nipping go under the cloak of frugalitie and honest sparing; therefore these
forementioned liberties (which being well used, are also commendable virtues)
grow into ill report among the ignorant and unstayed: which otherwise are not
reproachful, neither deserve any blame. And this I have spoken to meet with an
objection, which might rise in the minds of some by

As for them who say: If they had riches they might joint their enemies, and
stand against them, and do many other things which now they cannot for want of
them; it is not worth the answering. For God does not give these his blessings
to men to bestow them on their lusts, Titus 3.14.
but to profitable and necessary uses. And where men do not make that
reckoning of them, and learn not to be masters over them rather then to be
servants and slaves to them; what one among a thousand is the better, but the
worse for them?

CHAP. 12. Of the third kind of general lets: whereby the believer is hindered
from foing forward in a godly course.
Which are outvvard things, not evil of themselves.
by afflictions and chastisements; by prosperity and abundance, or variety of
Gods blessings; by family matters at home, by our worldly (yet lawful)
dealings abroad; by that Mat. 24.12.
by such as are mighty and in authority, who (yet) ought not to be terrors to
to such as do well: and to be short, by other things innumerable; yea, Romans
13.3.
to say the truth, we go about nothing in the world how lawful soever, no not
our prayers themselves, and hearing of Sermons, which are the holiest actions
of our lives, but from them all does he take occasion to hurt and wound our
souls: as I will for the better instruction of the Reader, in as few words as
I can, set down and show; to rouse and stir up such as have care to do well,

And to touch these in order: First, Afflictions ill used, great occasions of
vnsetling of us.
how justly is this to be complained of almost universally, that for all the
encouragements we have to the patient and well bearing of our afflictions; yet
rare is the man, who is not made worse, and whose heart is not hardened against
God by them, Heb. 12.11.
rather then the person more meek and humbly minded? For if they be heavy and
grievous they do often times raise bitterness and impatience: and if they
continue long, The right use and end of afflictions. Heb. 12.7. Psalm. 119.71.
1. Cor. 11.31. Iam. 1.2. etc.
The Lord has taught us in many parts of his word, that his corrections are
sent from him to all his beloved ones, as from a most loving father, and for
their great good; that they may not perish with the rest of the world, but have
trial of their faith and patience thereby, and so most sound joy: so far is
it off, that he takes pleasure in hard handling of us, but does all for our
good: yet how many are so wise, as to make these uses of their afflictions, as
God would have Abuse of them.
but contrarily, are led by the devil to impatience, fretting, frowardness
and most painful pensiveness: all which do vex them more by many degrees,
then the troubles themselves. For this does he often ring in their ears: Iud.
6.13. Psalm. 34. 1. Cor. 10.13. Romans 8.28.
How can it be, that he loves you, and yet afflicts you thus? Again, God
has taught them, that he has many ways to deliver his; and promised, that
their afflictions shall not be above their strength, and also that he will send
a good end of them: which being weighed, were enough to uphold them: but Satan
washes away all such encouragements, and carries them headlong from resting
upon Gods word with peace; and yet for all this his prevailing against them,
they see not themselves to be made his bondmen. Job, when he said: Lay thy hand
upon him, and thou shall see that he will curse thee to thy face: and although
he was deceived in Job, yet he having had long trial of the nature of man,
spoke the truth in the general, as having long proved, how readily it is
carried to unquietness

He therefore who has learned in prosperity to want and be abased, and to
look for a change before it comes, Remedies.
that he may not in the same be changed from a godly mind; he it is that shall
be delivered in the time of affliction from manifold disturbances, yea although
they be sore and great. But if our troubles be many and grievous, (as no man
can warrant himself to be free from either) it is to be known, that all the
privileges of Christians, and their whole armor, will be little enough for the
enabling of us to stand safe and upright in them, and to keep our hearts in
the peaceable and faithful serving of God. And otherwise, our froward nature
being suddenly Ioh. 16.33.
I have given you many comfortable instructions, that in me ye may have peace
when tribulation comes. And I have not marvelled when I have often heard,
that many vexations and bitter anguishes of mind have possessed the lives of
some Christians by reason of their crosses: who having many commendable parts
in them, have not for all that, such Romans 5.4.5.
and namely, hope which experience brings; it can no otherwise be, but that
there shall arise many vnsetlings, discouragements

But to say somewhat of other occasions by which the devil hinders our
proceeding in a godly life: The devil hurts us much by prosperity.
if we live under abundance and outward blessings of God, enjoying health,
peace, sufficiency of all things for this life, are we then free from danger
on his behalf? Nay rather, then is our peril greater, when we have so many
more strong allurements and deceivable prouocations to set our delight upon
the things of this world, then when we were Who is the Lord? and to forget our
selves to be mortal men, Prou. 30.9.
when we be not in poverty, wants and sorrows, like the common sort of
others: and to make our riches, peace, health and such like, our strong hold.
Prou. 10.15.
But these are not the one half of his sly practices, by the which he makes
prosperity (as much as in him lies) to be our bane, even as it is to men of
the world: for he subtly makes drunken our hearts with the love of our
goods, and so holds out the love of the christian life and the true love of
God from us: 1. Ioh. 2.12.
for the one that happiness consists not in the things which a man
possesses: neither that the rich man is the happy man, but is most commonly
the miserable, the woeful man, and he, whom the devil does so much the more
easily draw to grievous iniquities because of his prosperity; and when he has
rocked him asleep, then he secretly murdreth and wounds to death his soul,
no less palpably then Iael did the body of Sisera. Iud 4.21.


For who doubts of this, that as prosperity it self is Gods blessing, and
2. Cor. 4.4.
It is the prince of this world that blinds men's eyes, who believe not the
Gospel; that being in darkness (whether they be poor or rich) they may not
be able to see how to use their estate aright. And our Savior says: It is the
devil, Mat. 13.19.
who steals the word out of men's hearts, when they have heard it (whether
they be poor or rich:) so that although it teach them both how to walk; the
one in contentation, the other in lowliness and doing of good works; yet
neither of them is a whit the better: Mat. 19.24.
can no easilier enter into the kingdom of God, then the camel through the
eye of a needle.

Neither let any man object, that the devil deceives not a godly man thus:
for except he have learned to use his prosperity aright, as in Gods word he is
taught; 1. Tim. 6 17.
as, not to be high minded, but to be more plentiful in good Paul speaks of,
but the mean and small; and except he have learned to want also, as God shall
try him: if (I say) he be not thus armed, even he who is otherwise the child
of God, may be haled by the devil to dangerous evils, and to a grievous
overthrow, and that by the occasion of his prosperity and welfare. The right
use of prosperity.
And therefore it is an especial point of wisdom while God gives us peace,
health, and a safe enjoying of our outward commodities, to take heed that we
rest not in them, neither make them or any other to be fleshly holds or proppes
to lean upon: for full easily they will be cast down with very small blastes
of adversity and

But let Gods loving kindness showed to our souls, (because it is renewed
upon us every day) provoke us in all estates, to be true and faithful to him:
and let us not serve him for his outward benefits; although I deny not but
that we may have more liberty thereby, both to do our duties to him and to
our brethren, and that more plentifully then in wants and necessity. And as it
behooves us thus to use prosperity, as that we may not abuse it: so, Luke 19.8.
yea, if there be cause, to make restitution as Zacheus did.

But to proceed: Another occasion the devil takes of quenching grace in us,
Another let, is by family-matters.
by family-matters: about the which he so busieth and occupies our heads,
that right good Christians do perceive themselves sooner to take hurt thereby,
Note.
then they can epsy it; and see themselves unsettled thereby, before they are
aware. And that is, in the variety and multitude of worldly affairs, The
better sort overtaken this way.
attain not to this grace in household A cause thereof.
For both they themselves have been wont through custom, to be hasty,
forgetful and vnwatchfull in these matters; and have seen it so common a
thing with others to do the same, that although they come even from prayer, or
from a Sermon, yet can they hardly speak or do any thing about their business
and dealings, but they shall too easily show and bewray, how far they be from
having their conversation in heaven, while they are occupied here on the earth;
and that, it being a thing so common to be unsettled, wounded and sore shaken by
earthly dealings and commodities.

And another great cause there is of this sin, and that is: Another cause.
a persuasion 1. Cor. 10.31.
Whether we eat or drink, etc. And again: Do these things, as though ye did
them not.

Now when men give this liberty to themselves, not to be directed by God in
their most common dealings, and when the devil has brought the^ to this
point: who sees not, how every thing which they are occupied about, Fruits of
the heart unsettled, by occasion of family-matters.
is made a let and a snare to them, and becomes a block in their way, which
they stumble at? A man shall not speak to his wife, but he breaks into
frowardness: one neighbor contendeth, falls out with, and raileth at

A wise man will therefore (I hope) better consider this, How to remedy it.
and learn to disburden himself of multitudes of worldly dealings and
business, seeing they suffer not the mind to be free: and to subdue his
affections, so (as I have before with that part of the armor which is
requisite against this point of Satan's

Change of company an other lot. Genesis 19.30.
Furthermore, the devil takes occasion by change of company, dwelling and
acquaintance, to steal away men's hearts from goodness, as he did thus deceive
Lot; and to neglect the use of good means publicly and privately, as the
manner of many is; and to change religion (as they say) with the place. Good
company, rare.
And no marvel, when neither the word of God meets with them where they
become, to awaken, instruct and admonish them; neither good neighbors to
observe and provoke them to love and good works, nor to admonish them, 1. Cor.
15.
when they have turned out of the way: but contrarily, evil talk and company
is found in stead of them: for such force we read to

Godliness not set by in the world, but contemned.
Again, when we see how little account holiness and christian practice of duty
is in the world, either in high or low, for the most part; yea and that wise
men are grown to count it mere foolishness and niceness, to make conscience
to do those duties, whereunto our knowledge leads us; is it not (think we) a
strong cord to draw us after the multitude, The godly, by this occasion,
stumble.
especially when they who boldly contemn goodness, shall yet be seen to be
merry and lusty, and without fear as though they had done nothing but that
which they can justify, and as if there were no fear of the judgment day at
all? How mightily he prevails even against the godly by this occasion, the
example Psalm. 73.8.9. etc.
For when I saw (says he) the wicked, licentious, and to talk presumptuously,
and set their mouth against heaven, etc. yea (and more then this) to utter it
boldly: [How does God know it?] and for all this, yet they prospered in the
world and increased in riches: Certainly, I (said he) have cleansed my heart in
vain, and washed my hands in innocence. So that the licentious course of bad
men so commonly continued, and

But how much more (think we) shall we be imbondaged and kept back from
beautifying the Gospel daily in our conversation, Beware of familiarity with
the ^^cked.
if we shall be so unwise as to like of, and join our selves to the company
and familiarity of such? For then must we grow to be of one mind with them: for
two cannot walk together (as the Prophet speaks) but they must be of one
mind: Amos. 3.3.
therefore Solomon advises us, that we should depart from the foolish man,
Prou. 14.7.
when we perceive not in him the lips of knowledge. q.d. if he declare his
folly (that is, his wicked state) by shameful sin, and by his speech bewray
that he has no savor in good communication; but despising and scorning
knowledge and instruction, and hating to be reformed. And again: Prou. 13.20.
He that walks with the wise shall be wise: but a companion of fools shall
be afflicted, that is, take part with them of their punishment. We read of
Joseph, Genesis 39.10.
when he was importunately urged from day to day by his whorish Mistress to
adultery, that he not only consented not, nor hearkened to her to lie with
her, but would not so much as be in her company. And that was a special
cause, why David Saul, when he reconciled himself kindly to him, 1. Sam. 26.25.
and bad him come again, the second time: for he knew his Court was full of
flatterers, liars, slaunderers, and malice-bearers. But the allurements to ill
company are so forceable, the persuasions so many, and Satan's sleights so
subtle to deceive, even those who have some fear of God, that they prevail
with too many to their cost, while the hope of pleasure, profit or preferment
does blind their eyes in such wise, as they do not only quench, yea and so
grieve the spirit of God in the^, that thereby they be left destitute of the
power and effectual working of it: but also are led captives by the devil
into many sins, and are snared in them, as the bird in the net, that they
cannot

For help against this let, let us be made as wise as we may, The remedy
by the former counsel and example to shun it: but if we be once woond into
it, common persuasions or ordinary prayers will do us but little good, (though
even they are far enough from us, when we be brought to like of such
fellowship) nay, that kind of devil is not cast out easily, but by fasting and
prayer, etc. And yet this is not so to be taken of us, as though the Scripture
did not give greater strength, then that these or such like temptations should
overcome us. For if we enter into the Lords sanctuary, and weigh upon what
slipperie places the ungodly stand, and how soon they are cut down (when

But it were endless to set down all occasions whereby the simple who would do
well, are hy the devil beguiled. Many other occasions whereby Satan beguileth
us.
Our outward senses he so poisoneth that we shall have no right and pure use of
them if we be not well stayed, (and yet it shall belong before we can epsy and
see it;) that one shall not hear 1 We cannot see our enemy, but we have our
hearts rise against him. 2 Nor hurt our foot never so little, but we curse. 3
If a thing go not forward as we would, we fret and become impatient at it. 4 If
we be provoked never so little, we storm. 5 If we be told of a fault, we swell
and conceive ill, Prou. 9.7. 6 If we be absent awhile one from another, we wax
strange. 7 If we be merry, we wax light, etc.


What go we about, wherein we may not sensibly and easily perceive, that the
devil is at hand to hurt us? so truly is it said, that he raungeth about the
whole earth to bewitch, not the ungodly alone (whom he has sure enough
already) but even Gods people; as may clearly be seen and felt of us, if we
give him never so small advantage. This I have said of some of the lets, to
stir up the Reader to observe others by them; as, coldness, deadness of
spirit (a near companion to slouthfulnes) which causes men to say: A Lion is
in the way, when they have quenched the spirit of grace in themselves, which
sometime made them willing and ready to their duties. Then, Delay a word in
season is like apples of gold and pictures of silver; so is a thing in season:
and we have been taught, not to drive off from day to day. To these may be
added, a carelessness in observing and looking to our hearts and ways, which
grow fast upon us: a yielding too readily to temptation; whereas we ought in
such cases to put a knife to our throat, and weane our appetite, Pro. 23.2. A
common custom and boldness in sinning: Job 9. Profaneness: which yet ought
not to be among Gods servants, Heb. 12.16. Looseness of the eye, ear and
tongue: though the holy Ghost has commanded, that we should be slow to
speak, James 1. and our Savior has willed, to pluck out such an eye, Math.
5. and both teach, Prou. 15.32: That he who turns his ear from instruction
(much more if he should lend it to evil words) despises his Solomon describe
a wise man, saying: It is the wisdom of the prudent, Prou. 14.8.
to understand and his way. This I have said, that the Reader may see what
manifold lets there are, first in our selves through the corruption that is
within us: and

He who shall be found willing to live after a Christian direction daily, shall
more easily be brought to fear, and so withstand these and like occasions,
that they disguise him not, making him to seem as other men, who fear not
God. Wherein more specially, we must look to our selves, that we wisely avoid
and prevent the occasion of these, seeing we know how we

And by these impediments from the constant holding out in a godly life, What
observations are to be gathered from this doctrine of the lets.
it may be seen, that it is no idle occupation to be a true Christian, and to
continue so: and that his work is not a ceremonious tasking of himself with
reading some prayers or other things, when he thinks good or be enjoined it;
The first.
both of minister and people, if they were not tied to it. The second.
Also we may see what need the servants of God have, to guard themselves
strongly, and so to abide, as has been showed before: and to be acquainted
with Satan's crafts and policies, and by what means they be repelled and
resisted. The third.
And that their temptations are sometime so forcible, that they are not subdued
and overcome, The fourth.
but give them a fall into some open sin, (for the which cause S. 2. Cor.
5.20.
Paul admonishes, that men quench not the spirit, 1. These. 5.19.) yea into the
same sin after repentance; but to the end they may rise again by the
remedies appointed for them by the Lord himself in that behalf. And here we
may see The fifth.
sometime aloft in vain hope and confidence, that they are safe and in good
estate, and yet nothing so: and at other times, cast down and plunged into the
depth and bottom of fears, yea of very dispairing: which was the estate of
Peter, when neither he, nor any other (when he forsware his master) thought he
could have been pardoned. And this is their misery, that they are ever for the
most part carried (when they be not well stayed and fast settled in faith and
hope) into extremities. And yet (a thing most admirable) they are never safer,

And as they are in no estate safer, then when they are thus exercised: so
would not they themselves be put out of that course, neither are weary of it,
though they deprive themselves of many liberties thereby; but desire to hold
The sixth.
) Furthermore, by these impediments with their like, so many and sore, the
faithful may see what they are beholding to God, and how deeply they be
indebted to him, that for all the rage and violence of their temptations; yea
so sore, as sometime they may commit a sin of presumption, Psalm. 19.13.
and be in some kind of dispairing: yet God sends a calm again, Psalm. 77.11.
and a deliverance out of their deepest sorrows and fears. For as Jacob
wrastled with the Angel; and when he was hurt, would not depart til he had
blessed him: even so, the servants of God have conflicts with the Lord
himself: Genesis 32.28.
who keeps them down with one hand and holds Exodus 8. Psalm. 23. Job. 13.
the more they murmr and rebel:) but they when they have the greatest
sufferings, they strive to trust in him, and in some measure do so; and are
strengthened with greater power of Christ, and ioyfulnes: Col. 1.11. Also they,
though they feel the power and rebellion of sin, as well as the other, Psalm.
130.1. etc. Prou. 9.17.
yet they hate it with a perfect hatred, and would not be Math. 7.22.
neither lay they hold indeed of pardon. These observations Gods servants may
make by this doctrine of the lets, and many other such, to their singular
benefit. And what should I say more? For it were infinite almost, to say all
that might be said to the like purpose.

Now it remains, that in few words they be put in mind, that they acquaint
themselves better and better with the Christian life; and daily delight and
solace themselves in it, I mean, in one part or other of it (for it has The
great remedy against them all.
) For howsoever there fall out many difficulties in their lives; yet know they,
that they shall be fewer and weaker, as they themselves grow more in knowledge,
and stronger in faith and other grace. And although before they be brought to
yield themselves to them, many dark mists are cast before their eyes, to
extenuate and make small the sins which they should commit, both by hiding
the punishment, and covertly obiecting the

CHAP. 13. An example of a Covenant made by certain godly brethren, declaring
what
AND because I have showed what impediments our unstayed affections and worldly
lusts are, from a constant course in a godly life, and what remedies are to be
used against the same: I will add an example of the practice of diverse well
minded Christians, wherein the weaker sort may see this more clearly: seeing
examples help

In the year 1588, there met in a Christian man's house certain well minded
persons, which dwelt in one town together, with whom also the Preacher of the
place did meet at the same time. Their meeting was for the continuance of
love, and for the edifying one of another, after some bodily repast and
refreshing. And yet know, that they were no Brownists: for they were diligent
and ordinary frequenters of public assemblies with the people of God.
Neither were their meetings Conuenticles, for the disturbing of the state of
the Church and peace thereof; as many imagine that there can be

Some accusing and complaining of themselves, that they had not used their long
continued peace and liberty of the Gospel to the end for which God did send
both: but that they had been dim lights. The rest consenting, and by occasion
offered among them all (well nigh twenty persons) sundry reasons and proofs
were set down, to make their complaints more

When they had proceeded thus far, it was demanded, whether there were no
way to come out of this wearisome and unprofitable life, not beseeming such as
embraced the Gospel. If there were any: what might be the fittest and best
remedies to come out of such bondage (for they counted it no better:) and
betwixt them they agreed upon certain, with such good liking, after they heard
and conceived them, that it might apparently

Now it may be, ye look to hear what fruit there came of this: surely even
this meeting was a great whetting them on to enjoy the public ministry more
cheerfully and fruitfully afterward: and this mean with others, both public
and private, did knit them in that love, the bond whereof could not be broken,
either on their part which now sleep in the Lord, whiles they here lived; nor
in them which yet remain, by any adversary power unto this day. And this I set
down to this end, as well that godly conference may be had in more account
among Christians; as principally, to show what hindrances there are from a
faithful proceeding in a sound and godly course, and how necessary it is,
that all good remedies should be used

The true report of a conference, had betwixt certain well minded Christians,
(Anno 1588) who saw that they had not lived according to the knowledge which
they had, nor to have answered to their profession, as they might and ought to
have done: containing a complaint of their coldness and negligence, with
remedies against the same; and a covenant to return to God by repentance:
profitable for many in these days.
An entrance into the matter.
WE weighing advisedly and by due consideration here of late, the glorious and
goodly beauty of a Christian life, as it is commended and set forth in the word
of God; how full of heavenly comfort it is said to be unto all such as make it
their treasure; and how amiable, yea and fruitful also it is (in whomsoever it
be) unto others which truly know the price and excellency of it; and we so
dimmely and darkly beholding the image of this in The complaint.
that we have not walked with the Lord, as by diligent marking the examples of
other dear servants of his, we have found that they have done: nor honored

That this complaint therefore may justly be made, The first proof of the
justness of this complaint.
it appears in all those duties pertaining either to God or man: our selves
or other. For in all we have failed manifoldly: whereas yet by mean or
indifferent heed-taking, in great part we might have done better. Concerning
God, we have not purchased such glory to his name, and showed forth his loving
kindness to the sons of men, as we ought and might have done: neither
glorified his Gospel, The second proof.
Further, it may appear hereby, that we see we have not profited in the
knowledge of the will of God answerably to our time, and to the helps which we
have inioyed for that purpose. Seeing the negligent seeking of knowledge by
study, is one mean to come by knowledge, we must not cease, till we can have
delight in study and reading.
For many of us are as yet but weakly settled in the chief points of christian
religion: much less are we fit hearers, with ready minds to put in ure any
doctrine which shall be necessarily, soundly and faithfully delivered unto us.
Nay, we must needs confess to our shame, that the means to come by knowledge,
have been very negligently used of us: as, seldom reading; and in hearing, not
usually preparing our hearts before we come, with casting off the sins which
might hinder us, and coming The third proof.
So that this has not been our delight, but with much irreverence (for so holy
and heavenly a service) gone about. Moreover, we have not so tamed our corrupt
nature, and so set our selves against the same in many particulars, so as we
have prevailed over it in our temptations: (for we have thought this too
tedious and irksome for us:) but we have favored exceedingly Joseph (Genesis
39.) did in onetime; Moises (Hebr. 11.24.) in another. Yet the means which we
use sometimes to obtain grace, if they were continued, would bring to pass
some effects this way not to be complained of: therefore seeing we thus fail
herein, The desire accomplished, does (without great grace) make a man more
secure and in greater danger.
we must needs complain bitterly. And what is like to be a greater hinderer
of true godliness in us, then this tender bearing with our selves in our
sins, as being hardly brought to offer any violence unto them: when yet we
know, that the smallest even of our evil lusts, do fight against our

And as concerning the danger of favoring our selves in our sins, though
secret and smaller then many sins seem, these fearful effects have
followed: that having winked at the smaller, we have rushed and been plunged
into greater: and not chasing away light and wandering desires, we have fallen
into deeper and more dangerous delighting in the^, The dangerous fruit of
favoring our selves in our sins.
which having once taken hold of us, could not with ten times so much ado be
removed: yea by this slight striving against some, we have been overcome of
many and sundry other. Some have taken great hurt by worldliness, decaying as
fast

Our comfort has been flattery, and deceiving of our selves: our feruencie
and zeal, which ought still to have increased, has been benumbed and

Another proof, that this our complaint is just, is: The fourth proof.
that we have not so grown in grace and in the fruits of godliness, that we
have been hereby amiable in the eyes of God and of his good servants, neither
have we taken up Act. 5.41. We have not taken occasion by Gods blessings, of
liberty, peace, health, fellowship one with another, prosperity and such
like, to be more fruitful and cheerful in doing all good duties, as occasion
has been offered: lowliness, meekness, kind-hartednesse, faithfulness to
men, sincerity to God in the good things which we have done, have often and much
been wanting: very sparie and niggardly we are in prayer, meditation, trial of
our selves, and laboring to know sin that lists to weigh it. Our little
watching of our hearts against folly, or of our

The fifth proof.
And from these accusations arises another: that we take too liberal an use of
lawful things; never suspecting that any hurt or danger can thereby

Another proof of this our just complaint, is: that we have had little feeling
of the wants and miseries of others. The sixth proof.
To see how many thousands walk ignorantly; other many, in security,
hypocrisy, superstition, etc. many to have fallen away utterly, after they had
received a taste of the Gospel: who should not be moved at the beholding of it?
and pity them, as much as in him should lie? and not to be content, that we our
selves should do well, whiles we see The causes of these defaults.
not in meekness, love, compassion, bearing as there has been cause with
them, or heartily seeking to win them unto God.

The first.
The cause hereof was no one; but yet chiefly our evil hearts: which for all
What corruption may be rooted out: and what are so hereditarie, that they
cannot.
so that it is not easily brought to relenting, nor to be touched, and to melt:
and so good meditation and the fruitfullest doctrine does hardly affect us.
Frowardness, which disquieteth and distempereth the whole life; peevishness,
when we cannot abide any word uttered, but it is taken in ill part, and most
rank poison gushing out against them that displease us; and impatience and
unquietness under our afflictions and crosses, are in it: hypocrisy also. It
is also idle and slothful in

Earthly-mindednesse is another stream running from this fountain, when we
are drawn to the love of the commodities of this world, and are led with a
desire of growing rich: which snareth us, and calls back our minds from
living holily, and causes such as wisely resist it, not to have their treasure
in the earth. In prayer great coldness and weariness of well-doing possesses
(as it were) this heart of ours, when by any occasion we have attempted it:
anger, malice and reuengement, in degree one exceeding the other, course of
life to be utterly unholy?

But now, when these shall be let loose in us, when they are not holden in as
it were with bit and bridle, when they shall govern us, and not we them, The
second cause.
but we become slaves and servants unto them: how can it be otherwise, but that
our lives should give little light unto men and glory to God; and for all our
profession of the Gospel, and the account that we make of it, yet that the
forementioned offenses be found in us? And this is the second cause why we
bring forth no greater fruits of amendment. For when our hearts which in
themselves are too evil, shall wander where they will without check, and feed
themselves by occasions without controulment, little watching over them, or
keeping in of them with diligent care and observing of Iam. 4. Resist the
devil and he shall fly. And in this estate we have pleased our selves most
commonly, A cause of the former cause.
because we have sought ease to

Oh, it has been a death to us, when we must be rowzed out of our
luskishnesse, and be enforced to grant, that such a life has been but mere
security: when we must confess much against our selves (which hardly we have
been brought unto;) and yet not rest there, till we have also obtained of our
selves to cast it up as an unsavory gorge. For when in our decay in grace we
have feared secretly, that all has not been well with us; and yet for all
that, because we would feel no smart, and it was irksome and tedious to us,
to think that we must enter into a streighter course: we have lain still in it
as long as we Prou. 1.32.
so truly is it said, That ease is a sweet poison and slays. We dreamed like
the Apostles in their foolishness, of an earthly happiness: that it was the
sweetest life of all, Mat. 20.21.
to think what riches and treasures we had already, and more hoped to come
unto daily: to feed our appetite with thinking on our outward peace, in hoping
(though without warrant) that it should be continued: to imagine how we might
here be settled after our

Now we falling into this fond ease, loathed to take such pains in running
Prou. 24.10. Hitherto it belongs, that we were so untoward to the use of any
good means: I speak not of the loose and negligent using of them, which was a
fruit of this untowardness, (for that has been

And yet another cause why so little good has been done, The third cause
we may remember to have been, that we have looked so narrowly to the lives of
others, to gather hurt thereby; not remembering that we should follow none
further then they follow Christ: of which, some being of the better sort, and
others of the common, we have taken exceeding great hurt by them both. For
these Psalm. 73.12.13.
we begin to think that it is but vain for us, to labor greatly after
innocence, and to shine as lights, which (we see) is little regarded. And so we
grow to justify our own course of life, as very sufficient and well liking to
the Lord: yea and besides this, we gather some rubbish

For as concerning their best actions and most commendable duties, we do not
use to have them in reverent admiration, especially if the persons be

And these are the special causes, that so justly much fault may be found in
our lives; The fourth cause, which is compounded of many.
unto the which briefly these may be added: that we have not been careful to
be strangers to such companies, where we might be easily corrupted, or cooled
and discouraged: neither taken occasion to be in good company, or to have made
profit of the same when we were in it: but in a common manner spent such
times, either in endless or needless worldly talk, or some other way
unprofitably; rather framing our selves to their humors, and to approve of
their evil custom, then bethinking our selves how to stop them.

A fifth cause has been: that we have not labored to nourish our delight and
joy in the benefit of our redemption: The fifth cause.
but diminishing the price of it, as though it were nothing so great and
precious as it is commended to be: or soon forgetting it, for that it is of
small account and little reckoning in the world; do feed upon vain and
deceivable pleasures: and so taking part with the world, do also with the
world grow unseasoned with grace: and therefore every such man after his manner
becomes unprofitable. For when we begin to make a common thing of that
assurance of our salvation, (which without comparison is the chiefest and most
precious treasure of all other) and do not maintain and preserve the
preciousnesse of it by all good

And last of all, that we having sometimes felt our selves unfit to be well
occupied, The last cause.
we have fallen to idleness: and therewith acquainting our selves, have (for
the time) neither espied it to be a fault, and so resisted it in the beginning,
by mislike of the same; neither have betaken our selves to our callings

CHAP. 14. Of the second part of the Covenant, namely: The remedies against the
complaint mentioned in the former Chapter.
NOW forasmuch as in the weighing of the truth of these things, we could not
but be grieved heartily: (as who can behold so great depth of corruption and
the fruit of the same, so many ways with deadly vncomfortablenesse threatening
his confusion, but must needs seek and use all possible means, speedily to
pull himself out again?) we therefore immediately after the due consideration
of our woeful condition, turned our selves to bethink us, what remedies we
might apply to this fall, if thereby we might The first remedy
we thought thus, and took order as follows: that such of us, as did find
our falls to be so great, and our offenses so dangerous, that either for our too
too great delight in them, or long lying therein, we could not by our usual
prayers and humiliation, or by help of any ordinary and daily practices of
repentance, by hearing the word and preparing our selves for the Lords supper;
come to peace of conscience, and obtain confidence and godly boldness with
the Lord: such (I say) should humble our selves before the Lord with

After this, our covenant was to know our hearts better: how evil they are:
what falsehood, fickleness, lightness and such like naughtiness, The second
remedy.
and variety of corrupt affections we carry about us; that thereby we may be
enforced An evil heart marreth all.
as by occasion we shall be moved to do, we shall both walk in continual
unsettledness, and in an uncomfortable estate, because we can go about nothing,
but some one of these or other shall be espied to carry us some way amiss in
the same. And thus we purposed to note and find them out in us, by a diligent
view of and taking heed unto our ways, that so we may be in daily combat with
them. A worthy work therefore and commendable we saw it, to take knowledge of
them, and not to be content to be blind in the beholding of them (because we
are neither easily brought to confess and see them; and yet that he which
hides them shall

Now further, because the knowledge of our hearts, (if we stay there) I mean,
The third remedy.
of the manifold evil lusts of them, does make us the more headie and greedy
to fulfill them, when we know them by the law of God to be condemned in us: we
have further faithfully determined to watch over them with all diligence, that
neither any of those which have already been mentioned, neither any other (as
far as we may know them) may lurk or have

So that as by the Romans law, it was straightly enacted: that their springs
should be carefully preserved from all filth which might attaint and poison
them, that their rivers and water conduits might be sweet and wholesome: so it
must necessarily be, that the heart of man being once renewed and made clean,
it should be kept and continued so; that being a good treasury, good things
may be brought out of it continually of all sorts, as occasion shall require.
King. 15.8.) seeing in all their actions some one or other portion of it is
ready to corrupt and stain even the best of them, so that not the holiest
parts of Gods worship can purely and holily be fulfilled without the careful
holding in of it: it is worthily and for just cause, made one part of this
wholesome remedy of the well ordering of our lives. So that, if any be given
to seek the liberty which God has not allowed him, to let loose his heart
after any folly and vanity, and counts it too great straightness and
precise curiousness to keep a dominion and a superiority over it, so as he
might thereby bring it into subjection; he is justly

Now this watching over the heart, that it may be with the more fruit, With
watching, there must go fear of offending. 2. Cor. 7.2. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Pro. 28.14.
must have accompanying it a suspicious and jealous fear, lest at any time it
break forth into such delights as are worldly, carnal, etc. Of the which
fear, for the great good that it does those who are led by it, the wise man
says: Blessed is the man that fears always, that is, his evil heart in one
point or other, and therefore takes the more pain about it. This being so
Psalm. 19.14.
but when the meditations of our hearts shall please the Lord, that the words
of our mouths, and the practice of our lives shall also be acceptable in his
sight. To conclude this point: it is again to be remembered, that we weane our
heart from earthly delights: which oftentimes tickling it with a pleasant
sweetness, do steal it away from heavenly Note.
but first to awake our selves, to be amazed that we should let go the strength
and hold which once we had; to rebuke and check our selves sharply, till shame
and sorrow for so offending, may humble us: and then we may be bold to assure
our souls, having an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous,
that we are received of him again.

The fourth remedy, compounded of many.
And to the end, that in this work we may more happily go forward, and this
watch be the better kept: our purpose was to avoid carefully all outward
hindrances, and to avoid occasions of quenching Gods spirit in us, as we
shall have wisdom to see them: as, too far entering into dealings or

That is to say, as follows: We do acknowledge, that our negligence and
irreverence in these, have so greatly deprived us of fruit in understanding
and judgment, as well as other ways, that before our hearing we trust we
shall prepare our hearts by casting off that which would hinder us: namely,
rebellious

And to sharpen our desire to hear and read the more willingly, seeing

The fifth remedy.
because experience has taught us that we easily lose that in the world
amongst the manifold incombrances, discouragements and dealings thereof, which
we learned of the Lord by any good means; we have faithfully couenanted for
the better keeping of our hearts watchful, and safe from evil, once in the
day (if it be possible) to set apart a time from all other law full and
necessary duties, for meditation and private prayer, to the seasoning of our
hearts with grace, and to the stablishing of them against all temptations,
afflictions and other hindrances. Not, to free our selves hereby from other
times of communing with the Lord, as occasions shall be offered, and necessity
shall require: but because our untoward hearts would otherwise draw us

And because the morning when we arise, is both meetest to be employed

And because it is hard, especially for private persons to have always matter
in a readiness, which is profitable to meditate upon: (for he that shall be
furnished herewithall, must be one which has a daily observation of his life,
without the which grace, even the learneder sort shall be to seek:) therefore
some points were set down for those which are least able to help themselves;
that by some few of those which are very fit and available, they may set
themselves on work, and by them learn to find out others like unto them,
which do most nearly tend to the well ordering of the life. By which means
appointed and found out for their help and furtherance, if yet unfitness of
mind and an untoward heart shall hold them back, being troubled with cares

Lastly, we concluded to observe, what fruit we reap by these remedies: what
release of our strong and usual maladies and diseases: The sixth remedy.
what weakening of any such lusts, as sometimes had strongly prevailed against
us: Also

Persuasions to use this direction.
by which we may raise up our selves out of any declinings from a godly life,
we added some reasons to persuade us thereto, for as much as we may be sure
that hindrances and discouragements enough shall meet with us to withhold us.
First this: The first.
that by such a course and seeking to walk with God, as the former remedies do
direct us unto, we are brought to a most sweet and holy communion with the
Lord: in comparison whereof, nothing is to be desired. For it is an honor and
prerogative which the world neither knows, neither can attain unto, To get
principality over him, who is the prince of the world, that is, the devil;
and to obtain grace against our own evil hearts in well ruling them: which
is a

Moreover, howsoever this indeuouring after a godly life, The second persuasion.
has ever of the world been little regarded; yet the happiest and men of
greatest commendation Enoch and thereabout to this day, who testified this
daily looking to their lives, to be the best thing of all. Now if by these and
such like persuasions we be brought to like of it, An admonition or caveat.
we faithfully couenanted with our selves to use these remedies which have been
set down for continuance, and to make our beginnings sound and substantial;
so as they may be able to bear and uphold the weight of all that shall press
them down. For although our temptations be strong and many, yet may none of
them prevail thus far, as to make us

An admonition: that this direction be neither left off, nor used for custom
only.
After this, we said: that if we with diligence continue it, we must beware we
make not a common thing of it; so as, though we use it, yet no fruit nor

To the better attaining hereof, we may understand, that we may grow to a
commonnesse in a good thing two ways: either when we be in prosperity; in
which estate, it will be very hard to see our great need to use feruencie and
zeal in holy duties and services of God, when we see variety of earthly
delights

Now though we fall not this way by means of our prosperity, (for that were
very gross) yet if we should more covertly deceive our selves by thinking
thus, that we have sufficiently profited by this direction now, and therefore
may cease; and neglecting to see our wants, dangers, infirmities and
discouragements which are in our way (as in time past) and so cast off this
travel: do accustom themselves to some commendable course: who when Sam. 7.4.
Hester and Mardocheus, Hester. 4. Iehosaphat, 2. King. 20. and others) we
confess our sins with melting and broken hearts, yea our particular sins
of murmuring, impatience, fretting and such like; that so we may be received of
our heavenly father for his Christ's sake, to mercy and forgiveness.

THE SIXTH TREATISE SHOWS WHAT
CHAP. 1. Of the sum of this Treatise: the reasons why it is set out: the
order of it: and of the diverse kinds of privileges.
THe next thing which comes in place to be spoken of, is concerning the
privileges and liberties, which God has bequeathed unto and freely bestowed
upon his people and beloved servants. I do not mean any of his benefits which
he suffers the ungodly to enjoy, (which yet are far more sweet and sauoury
to his children than to them) but I mean those which are peculiar to the
faithful, whereof the other have no part nor portion. The which, The wicked
have no part in the privileges of the faithful.
although all the faithful enjoy not, and therefore feel not so great
contentation in Some of them proper to some of the faithful in respect of
their calling.
I know that of those many and great blessings which the children of God
partake, some are peculiar and proper to some in respect of their callings,
offices and places, which are not common to all: but I intend to make mention
only of those, which one may possess (although not in a like measure) as well
as an other.

And this I do for sundry and diverse causes: partly, Three reasons why this
doctrine is handled.
that the godly may see their riches in some sort as well as other men know
theirs; and knowing them, The first reason.
either by the baits of this world, by their own forgetfulness,
faint-heartednesse, distrust or other weakness of their own, or by Satan's
malice, put out of the possession of them, or any of them; yet by considering
and remembering these or some of them, they might be able to return home again
from whence they straied, and that more easily and willingly than many do, or
think it possible for them to do by any means; especially when they shall
see that wheresoever they cast

The second reason.
Another cause why I set down these privileges of Gods servants, is, that the
wicked which wander from God, and are not in his favor, may see, what they go
without, and what great good things they deprive themselves of, by their
sins. By forgoing of the which, (to say nothing of the deceivable and
miserable estate wherein they live) if they should but weigh and consider what
they lose and forgo, which others enjoy, and they likewise might,

The third reason.
Lastly, that I may hereby (if possibly) help to bring the Christian life into
some better credit and account, both with the one and with the other: which to
my no less grief than admiration, I see to lie as dead wares little asked
after, in the world. For many, even of the godly, do not esteem of the
Christian life, and of the wisdom which should govern us, as they ought to
do, that is to say, Prou. 8.11.
as of a treasure more to be desired than any earthly thing, be it

If any, on whom this rebuke does justly take hold, shall contrarily answer,
that they do honor the Christian life and delight in it, although they do
mislike indeed (they say) that men should be to precise in urging others to
duty,

Now particularly I will set down some of the chief (for who can mention
all?) of the which though some have been made mention of by occasion

The first kind of our privileges and prerogatives, The kinds of the
privileges.
which true Christians have allowed and allotted to them of God, are such as be
inioied in this present


OF the first sort, this is one (which the rich men of the world, who want it,
cannot purchase with all their substance:) I mean, that they may know and be
persuaded that they are beloved of God, and that their names are written in
heaven, and therefore although they be strangers here for a while, yet that
they shall undoubtedly be saved; whiles in the mean season, Luc. 12.32. Luc.
10.20.
to know so much of Gods will and mind, to be partakers of so great a
treasure, as the mighty ones do confess is utterly hidden from them. Now for
proof of it, that God allows them to know it, what is more manifest than
this which is written by Saint John? Behold, what love the father has given to
us, 1. Ioh. 3.1. Ioh. 1.12. 1. Ioh. 5.13.
that we should be called the sons of God. And again: As many as received
him, to them he gave prerogative to be the sons of God, even to them that
believe in his name. Also: These But this matter having been largely handled
in the first chapter, may with fewer proofs satisfy such as desire to hear
more of it.

Therefore as this is not to be doubted of, that true Christians know
themselves, or may by some evidences, (even the weakest) to be beloved of God,
and that they shall be saved: so how great a privilege this is, let them
learn (who set little by it) of Christ himself, who has valued it at a
greater price Mat. 16.24.
What shall it profit a man though he should win the whole world, if he loose
his own soul? or what shall a man give for recompense of his soul? Now if
the knowing of this secret, that God loves us, be a privilege of so great
account, yea though a man should know it but dimly, and if he should know it
but once in all his life: what a manner of privilege then is this to be
accounted, Romans 1.17.
that we may grow from faith to faith, and from a darker knowledge of it to a
clearer from day to day, A Christian may have better assurance of his
salvation, then any man can have of the things he holds in this life.
and that, with better assurance then we hold any thing in this life by seal,
writing, witness, or any other way that law can devise? For indeed the benefit
of knowing this so great a

This privilege is the greater, seeing the longer we enjoy it, the better we
know it.
But thanks be to God for his unspeakable mercy, who has provided, that the
longer we live, the better we may know it. For the longer that we have believed
Gods promise, and been acquainted with it, who doubts, but that we may much
more clearly be persuaded of it, then in former times when we first believed,
and when we had not as yet so often considered it, nor so deeply weighed what
might hinder and weaken our faith, or come against it? 1. Chron. 28.7. God
requires nothing more, then an unfeigned care to please him.
our own care to please God to be unfeigned though imperfect (more then which
nothing is required of us) and that the best of Gods servants have had the same
infirmities as well as we, and that we have liberty, when we see our weakness
to seek pardon of the same at the hands of our good God; these and such like
considerations after longer time, when we have often weighed, God has given us
greater strength of faith, and strengthened us to wax more confident, even as
we have withal become more humble and obedient. So far is it off, that this
assurance the longer time we have inioied it, should be further off from us.

Objection against the sure holding of this privilege, answered.

On cause of doubtfulnesse is, the neglect or careless using of the means
whereby faith is confirmed.


And as for that many object, that sundry of Gods children, after they have

Besides, there are others which though they offend not that way, A second
cause is, distrust.
yet they give too much place to distrust, having no just cause, by an evil
conscience, which is the greatest enemy to faith: and hereby they deprive
themselves of the benefit of this faith and confidence. Ps. 77.9.10.
Which kind of people must labor to stay themselves by the persuasion of such
Scripture as is written of purpose for their comfort, as: Take my yoke upon
you, and ye shall find rest to your also: A contrite heart God will not
despise, etc. Mat. 11.29. Psalm. 51.17. Mat. 12.20. Psa. 43.5. But to return,
seeing they may hold and abide in Gods love, and hold fast this knowledge of
it, the longer they live, they see this must be granted them also: Ioh. 10.28.
That none shall take them out of the Lords hands or custody, but that he will
care for them unto the resurrection day.

Wherein this is a further degree flowing from the former, that this love of
God being shed into their hearts plentifully by the holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. This
privilege is the greater for the joy it brings.
it makes them more quiet, joyful and better satisfied, then all that can be
desired of them besides, according to that which Saint Peter says: Though we
see him not, yet we believe in him, and we rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious. 2. Cor. 5.1.
in his militant church here) and have an house not made with hands, but
eternal, in his triumphant hereafter? who does not see, as the former ages
have found and felt, and they who yet remain on earth shall find, that to all
other things, even the best, there is an appointed end? And therefore the joy
that men conceive for them, is but flitting and momentanie, not unspeakable and
everlasting. So that the peace and joy which arise from the certeinty of our
salvation, is woorthely rekoned as a singular privilege, in as much, as it
does not only exceed all worldly treasures; but Reu. 14.3.
and the other have no part in it.

And further, this should better appear, This privilege is the greater by
considering the woe of the reprobate, who want this.
how great a privilege it is to be beloved of God, if we could possibly
conceive the dreadful fear of the reprobate in desperation, and how little
comfort such an one takes in all his wealth and delights which he has in this
world (in whatsoever price and account they are with fools:) but would give
them all for one quarter of an hours feeling of Gods loving kindness and
sweet countenance toward him, if it could be inioied, and the sound peace and
comfort that comes with it. And therefore if any will know the benefit and
greatness of this privilege, with the assurance of heaven and happiness; as
partly may be gathered by Luke writes of the Epicure in the Gospel, Luc. 16.24.
saying: Oh that the tippe of a finger were dipped in water to cool my tongue;
for I am tormented in this flame. For want of the joy of this privilege, the
vain delights of the world are hunted after. This privilege is yet greater,
seeing it may be inioyed daily and to our end.
And without it, (I mean, where this is not inioied) I do marvel, that
vain, deceivable and transitory, yea loathsome and filthy pleasures are so
hunted after, as they be: even till they iustle out all remembrance and regard
of heavenly things altogether. And this sweet liberty peculiar to Gods
children, which I now speak of, is so much the greater by this, that we may
enjoy it all the day long, and so throughout our life, and are not stinted nor
tied to one hour or time wherein we may possess it: and also Zach. 8.23. And
if there were no other privilege, but this one to be inioied, whiles we live
here; yet were our portion exceeding great, seeing so many thousands who hear
of it would think their estate right happy and good, if after many years
pain and heaviness in seeking it, they might enjoy it.

But, glory be to God on high, these are not all the precious benefits and
prerogatives, which God has willingly bequeathed his servants, besides all
other outward blessings which they have in common with the unbelievers. Of
these therefore, or some of them, which either they do, or may enjoy

CHAP. 3. Of the second Privilege: namely, That God is with his always after
he has assured them of his favor.
But to pass to the second: if they might only know, that they shall be saved
after they depart out of this world, and should in the mean while be neglected
and left as orphans, desolate and exposed to all injuries and discomforts, the
privilege, which I have spoken of, should be the less (although nothing is to
be God has a special care of his, even in this world. Romans 5.5. Ps. 30.6.7.
Luc. 13.34. Deuteronomy. 32.10.
to have a fatherly care over them, even in this life also, and to testify his
love plentifully unto them many other ways: which special care he has not of
other, though he suffers them to live. 1. Tim. 4.10. Also he is their shelter
from tempests and storms of troubles; and keeps them safe under his
protection, as the hen does the chickens under her wing: yea, he keeps them
as the apple of his eye; and counts them his friends, communicating with them
his secrets, 1. Tim. 4.10. and Mat. 10.30. Ps. 1.3.
and declaring and making known to them the hidden treasures of his kingdom,
and in every estate will save and uphold them by his providence: Ps. 23.1.
if he be with them (as he is) who can be against them? if he honor them, Romans
8.31. 1. Sam. 2.30. Ps. 1.1.
whose disgracing of them can hurt them? yea, if he make them blessed, who can
deprive them of it?

But when I have said what I can of their estate, I must confess I have said
little, so great and precious are the particular prerogatives which they have
bequeathed unto them. And yet behold, And in this safety they are, when his
anger is kindled against others.

Ps. 2.12. Behold the greatness of this privilege in one part of it:

Hebr. 1.14. Namely, the honor that they are in thereby.


in this high account they are with God always, when his anger is kindled
against other which are his enemies. The greatness of this privilege is set
forth also by this title that Christ gives them, of being called not servants
but friends.

Ioh. 15.15. Also in that we are sons, heirs and fellow heirs with Christ.
Rom 8.17. Exodus 19.5. Furthermore, the godly are the treasure of the Lord, and
therefore the delight of his heart.


even so by many degrees, the honor of being servant unto the most high, is
far greater than all other which here may be attained.

And yet as though this were not enough to be called The servants of the
Almighty, Christ himself sets out their estate to be yet more glorious,
when he says: I have not called you servants but friends, to whom I have
communicated my secrets and mind, unto the which a servant is not commonly
admitted. And yet even this is not so admirable, if it be laid with that which
in another place is written: That God has adopted us to be his sons and
heirs, yea fellow-heires with Christ himself. Not much unlike hereunto, is
that which is If ye will keep my commandments, ye shall be to me the most
precious of all the earth, though all the earth be mine. If the godly be his
precious treasure, how can they but be delighted in of him, safely kept also,
and preserved from all that might annoy them? and being so dear unto him, how
will he suffer them to want any thing that is good? And therefore Kings for
their honor they are called, though not earthly, inferior to the angels
indeed; but yet, through hope, the most precious people among all nations,
though all the earth be his: The godly are also called kings for their honor.
Exodus 19.5.
whereby they rule over Satan the prince of 1. Ioh. 5.4.
that he which has faith, overcomes the world: that is, makes that, which
is in it, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life,
to be subject to him. An honor which Kings and Princes, for the most part,
attain not unto: for many of them as well as of others, worship the beast, and
offer to him their crown, and willingly submit themselves to his slavery. And
this honor which he bequeatheth to his faithful ones, is one

And yet in that there is no end of this, but that he will continue it toward
them throughout their life, God will continue this honor to them.
and that in more certainty and assurance, it is so much the more to be had in
admiration: whereas in the mean while, they who are none of his, nor nourtered
in his family, which is his church, cannot enjoy the least part of this
liberty, they cannot believe nor be persuaded of any such thing at any time,
neither dare they promise to themselves, that he will be with them, and be a
shelter unto them; but for want thereof they smart, being hardened in their
hearts, and let loose after their own desire, to commit

This prerogative (I say) the wicked men of the world, and unregenerate, not
only have not while they remain in that estate, The wicked have no part in it.
neither do so much as fervently and constantly desire it, nor cannot; being
no more able, then the blind man is to see, or the newborn child to walk:
and therefore in stead of these liberties they are still in bondage, and for
the most sweet dainties of gods children, they are fed with draffe, even with
fancies, dreams and deceiuable pleasures. But contrariwise, that which was
spoken to Mary the mother of Jesus, Luc. 1.28.
thou being freely beloved of the lord, he is ever with thee afterward, to
preserve thee whom he has loved: the same may be verified of all gods
children; after he has once received them into favor, forgiving them all
their sins, Whom God once loves, he loves unto the end.
he is with them ever after, to watch over and care for them; that so they may
be presented safe before him, when he shall appear for their everlasting
deliverance.

By which it may be seen, how excellent and how much to be desired, the estate
of the poorest of Gods children is, The estate of the poorest child of God, is
far better that the best of the ungodly.

Experience teaches the truth of these things. Ephesians. 3.19.


above the flourishing youth that lives at hearts case, or the mightiest
monarch or prince that is unreformed. It might seem therefore, that even this
honor that God gives to his servants, Elisha, yet have they more with them,
then against them. 2. King. 6.16.
For the angels of God do pitch their tents about them to keep them. Psalm.
34.7.
And how great a prerogative this is, they can best tell who believe it,
although they must needs commend it who do but hear the report of it. For
they know and have experience of it, who receive these promises into their
hearts by faith, and believe that God will perform the same unto them, who are
not at any time deprived of them but only through their unbelief.

I grant, that all gods children enjoy not this, neither say I any such thing:
Why they enjoy not this constantly.
the strong and the middle age, there is more granted by God, then is inioied
of them: not that God does in words seem to offer that, Note.
which he means not to perform, but because men either know not, or believe
not through satan's malice, what their liberties are: or if they do, Men not
knowing, or but faintly believing the liberties of the children of God, deprive
themselves of much comfort that they might constantly enjoy.
yet it is so faintly believed, that they are holden back by every occasion
almost, to forgo and be dispossessed of them. Which all must grant to be
through their own fault, which may easily appear to him who is willing to see
it, thus: whereas the spiritual riches, which beautify the soul, are the
greatest riches, and therefore should most be sought after, esteemed and
delighted in: many even of good

And this in few words is the chief cause, why not only earthly minded men
attain to nothing, but even some such as have received the first fruits of
the spirit, grow not to any great experience what the excellent estate of a
christian Note.
if men taste but a little of belief that their sins shall be forgiven them,
they hardly go any further to daily proceedings in their faith (though they
are taught that they should grow from faith to faith) and so to live by it,
Romans 1.16.
but stand at a stay for the most part, ever ready to call into question,
whether they have it or no. What are such the better for the infinite good
things, which God has in store for his, which also diverse of their brethren
enjoy already, in respect of that which they may attain to? but rather as
though they were no such, they walk either heavily, nothing able to bear off
the discouragements which they meet with, by spiritual helps and
encouragements which they have not; Iam. 4.6. 1. Ioh. 4.4.
but that the eye should believe it, and find it so then? And again the
greater is he which is in them, namely the spirit of god, then he that is in
the world, that is the diuill?

And yet al these and other such excellent privileges which appertain unto
them, All the privileges of the godly are no more then God saw needful for
them. 1. Pet. 1.6.
are no more then God did see they should stand in need of to help

Psalm. 87.3. Romans 5.5.
The Lord has done great things for us, as it is written: Honorable things are
reported of thee, O thou city of God. And if it were not so, and if the love
of God were not sweetly shed in our hearts through the holy ghost; yea, if we
were not persuaded that the Lord is a plentiful rewarder of them that seek
him, Heb. 11.6.
and that all the afflictions of this life are not worthy the glory which shall
be showed upon us, we might soon be caused to cast down our countenance and
be discouraged: 1. Ioh. 3.3. Revel. 2.13.
who are not only strangers here and therefore

CHAP. 4. Of the third privilege: How God gives grace to his children to
But that it may better appear how great this privilege is, (and so I may
proceed unto the rest) let us further hear, what worthy and singular fruits
do flow from this fatherly ear and most loving providence of God over his,
and accompany the same thorowout their lives; which though they arise and
proceed from the former, yet I will set them down as particular privileges
distinctly by themselves. And because it is not so easily seen and conceived
of many, much less believed, I will more particularly lay forth the same: and
The first branch of it.


Now concerning the first; namely, the holy life which God teaches them to
lead, this is not the least, They have grac to live well. Mat. 11.29. 2 Pet
1.8. 1. Tim. 5.10.
I might rightly say there is no greater treasure here to be inioied: that they
need not count the Christian life combersome, unsavory, and an heavy and
tedious burden as the most do, but an easy yoke, an estate wherein they need
neither be idle nor unprofitable, but readily prepared unto every good work.
Now that they may be able to do this, to be settled constantly in a godly
course, and wise to prevent and avoid the hindrances Ps. 119.1* 2. Ps. 1.2.
yea a singular privilege, when the prophet calls him an happy man that is
enabled of God thereto? and Christ himself teaches, that it is the chief
happiness which can be inioied in this life, to keep the word of God which we
hear, Luc. 11.28.
that it may direct and guide us? yea, that one day in his house, Ps. 84.2.
that is spent and passed in the militant church and as his servants do, is
better then a thousand in any estate besides?

And although it be an estate full of happiness, yet let no man marvel that I
say Gods beloved ones may have this liberty and prerogative to walk and Phil.
4.13.
for the Lord inableth them thereunto by whose power they can do all things;
he gives them an heart not defiled and unclean, Ezekiel. 36.27. The reason.
as it was sometime, but purged and cleansed in good sort, and therefore now it
is able to like and love his will which sometime it loathed: and they who
believe and are persuaded, that God will bestow and does daily offer this grace
of sanctification unto them, they receive it, and thereby are strengthened to
do that good in their life, which they can love with their heart, and which
they approve of and allow in their judgment.

Now if this liberty of Gods servants be not either known of some good
Christians, or not believed, Why some good people enjoy not this. Ps. 77.7.
I deny not but even they (as yet) may go without to believe the promise of
God, (which is, that he will strengthen them against

Against the which their remedy must be this, that they resist steadfast in
faith: 1. Pet. 5.7.
that is, that they yield not to this distrust, which long has oppressed them,
but by little and little suffer themselves to be persuaded that their case is
far better then they conceive (which shall never be hard to persuade them:
God has not taken care of his, to leave them in the midway. Ioh. 14.18.
who found true deliverance from the spirit of bondage) and that the Lord has
not taken them into his favor to leave them at six and seven (as they say) in
the world, and to make them shift for themselves as orphans, and The believer
shall be set at liberty from his speciallest sins.
and by the same faith shall more and more be vpholden daily; until they see
themselves set at great liberty, and that it was the diuill who before held
them in fear and bondage.

Objection.
The common objection will here be put forth unto me: that they would (if they
durst be so bold) believe with all their hearts, that God will subdue and slay
their sin and lead them forward to live godly, if they could first overcome
Answer.
which he does unto others. But to answer them, I have said before, that they
have no power in them of their own whereby they may weaken any sin in them,
but this they must obtain by faith, as well as grace to live: and that
commands them to do, so that they may know, it pleases them that they should
do so. 1. Ioh. 3.23.
And till that: they are holden from their own right through the devils craft,
who hides from them (as their evidence) this confidence in God; even as, if a
subtle man should keep back from his neighbor, any part of his land or
living. I conclude therefore, that Gods Ps. 130.3.4.
and will not look straightly upon them) have this prerogative, that they may
lead their lives acceptable to him: What the liberty of a Christian is that he
may and ought to attain unto.
and if they be careful to know, what liberty he has given them whereby they
may obtain ableness thereto, they may walk worthy the Gospel indeauouring
to please him in all things, and so to be unrebukable in the midst of a
wicked and froward generation; although (as I have said) through the devils
tirannie and the unbelief of their own hearts, many even of them, are far
from inioying this privilege.

The which, as it is accompanied with happiness it self, so that it may be
seen to be a privilege indeed peculiar to them, know we, that as for other it
No wicked man can live godly.
which at sometimes will seem more holy then the rest. The wicked (I say) have
no fitness nor aptness to receive this grace [To live godly] no more then a
dead man is fit to rise again and walk, or the black Moore by washing to
change his black skin. And therefore although they like well enough of the name
of it, yet that they are such as deny the power of it,

Romans 8.7.
that the ungodly are not obedient to the will of God, neither possibly can be.
Romans 7.9.
For I my self (says Paul) when I was in darkness and lived after the
lusts of mine ignorance, was greedily set to commit sin. Therefore if it be
impossible for a man vnrenued to forsake some particular sin, but by infinite
degrees much more impossible to cleanse his heart, from whence only good life
can come; it is most certain and clear, that all wicked men, while they abide
so, are far off from this privilege, To be able to lead a godly life: and
therefore that is peculiar only to Gods children to do so.

CHAP. 5. Of a second branch of the third privilege.
ANother branch of this privilege or honor, that Christians have above other
men, (which though it necessarily accompany the former, yet because it best
appears, when it is particularly laid open, and helps much to strengthen
the weak, and to comfort the best) is this: They may be kept from great falls.
Pro. 19.23.
that they may be kept and preserved Walk not offensiuely toward them that
are without; except he had seen, how they might have attained thereunto.
Therefore the prophet says: Ps. 119.10.11.
I have hid thy word in my heart that I might not sin against thee; and
again: Let me not wander from thy commandments; and again: I swarued not
from thy precepts: Psalm. 119.110.
they are the joy of my heart. And the same spirit guiding Gods people, they
are like minded to him; and would not wander nor swerve from his will. And the
cause of this

Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Joshua after Moses death, Samuel, Daniell, Job,
Examples thereof in the old Testament.
with others many in the former ages of the world, how do stories report of
them? After they had any near acquaintance with God, they committed not Job.
1.2.
(I speak not now of their virtues) but they departed and withdrew themselves
from evil, even as God had chosen them out of the world; to verify that which
is written: Heb. 11.13.
All these lived and died in faith? The Apostles after they had received more
fullness and greater measure of the spirit, were far from the scandals and
offenses, which before were usual, and daily rebuked in them, and committed of
them. Yet to show what need the best have to be kept by God continually,
sometime the devil prevailed, as to make breaches amongst them; though we
seldom find any of them to have been thus

Examples in the new. Act. 16.1.
So, some of the churches have been commended to us to have been so far off
from shameful falls (as the Thessalonians, the churches of Smirna and
Pergamus) that they were good examples and lights to others. So, sundry persons
in the new Testament, as Timothy, Demetrius, Priscilla and Aquila, who were
well reported of. All which with others, as they are set forth for us to
follow: so who doubts, but that they found in their lives more sweetness and
delight then others, The freer from sin, the freer from punishment.
who were also Gods children as well as they, but not so free from manifest
crimes and open sins as they? Now when they are thus kept from grievous and
shameful falls, it follows most necessarily, Psalm. 91.11. forasmuch as
these always follow them.

By this that has been said, it may without any difficulty be gathered, what
great liberties the true Christian has given him of God. But seeing such as
have not experience of that which I say, do hardly think it to be true, it
shall be necessary for such to know another thing; and that is this: That God
has made such a way to the performing of all this that I have spoken of, They
may serve God with joy and delight.
that he shows us, how this may be done with delight (which, we know, puts
away tediousness:) both the practicing of the Christian life which I spoke of
before, and the renouncing of the contrary sins which I now speak of. The
want of delight makes godliness wearisome.
that whereas godliness is so unsavory, yea wearisome to the most, yea even
unto many such as will talk much of it, and preach it also; in the mean
while, this should be inioied of any by the grace and goodness of God: That
they may turn from their old sins; and contrarily, serve him with delight.
And that the true Christian may rejoice in the doing of the will of God: John
4.34.
our Savior Christ, who in all obedience to the commandments was willing to
be an example to us, professing to his disciples that it was his meat and
drink to do his fathers will, taught us also who are his members and one with
him, that we should endeavor after the same, and may Mat. 11.29.
(for all our strength of sin that remains in us) the Lord would not have
said, that he has made his yoke, that is, obedience to his word, easy for
us, and his burden (as the flesh counts it) to be gentle and light to us.
John interpreting shows how; saying: 1. Ioh. 4.5.
All gainsaying power of the devil himself is resisted by faith; that is,
while we believe, that God will give us strength and victory against the same.

Again, if we might not be able to find sweetness and pleasure in this
walking with God, why would the Lord himself say in Deuteronomy: Deuteronomy. 12.18.
Rejoice before the Lord in all that thou shall set thy hand unto, that is, go
about throughout the day? and in another place: why would he reprove Israel
for not serving him in ioyfulnesse and gladness? Deu. 28.47.48. In all kinds
of particular callings.
whereby God teaches that this grace should be labored after in our
particular callings: that the husbandman, Col. 3.23.
that we may be merry, and even find delight in the heavenly life, and in
flying the corrupt behavior and bad example that is in the world (and that,
with much more contentation Ps. 119.14.
All the pleasures of the earth are not to be compared with this wisdom, Luc.
1.75.
to be persuaded, that Gods service is perfect freedom, and that it is sound
pleasure to walk with him. And to say the truth, our life must needs be
mopish and tedious, if it were not thus: and all that we do should go
untowardly forward, as the froward servant which is sent against his will,
goes awkely about his business. But God making it delight and pleasure to us,
we may set our hearts thereupon, not by fits, but mind it wholly for the most
part, and principally Mat. 6.21.
and look what a man delights in, that will often and every while come to
remembrance and be thought upon: and by that means it is no more tedious and
wearisome, as sometime it was, but the cheifest matter of al other that
possesses us. Therefore the prophet of God when he would in a certain place
speak of the delight that he had in the statutes of God, he adds this as a
fruit thereof: Ps. 119.16.
That he had them continually in remembrance, and did not forget them.

And thus it comes to pass, that many of Gods servants may be seen to be
drawn up unto God, and in their speech, behavior and whole course Hebr. 11.6.
in such wise as other marvel thereat; the cause is this: They be resolutely
persuaded, that their labor is not lost that way, yea rather that it is the
pleasantest estate, and they find delight therein. And therefore they need not
be as others, whose hearts are strongly carried after strange desires, but
through Gods guiding of them they may be set on things heavenly, seeing they
have made them their delight and joy.

Oh weigh what an exceeding privilege this is, that both prayer and practice
The Godly much troubled with rebellion, though they serve God with joy.
they are not void of them for all their liberty and enlargement; but

But this which I have said of the remainder of sin and of rebellion of
nature abiding still in the best of Gods servants, I would have well to be
marked, for that many will be ready to take occasion otherwise to cavil and
quarrel Objection.
For thus they reason: If you can go forward thus easily in a Christian life
that you can take pleasure in it, which to so many Godly people is toil, it
seems that you are not hindered, nor clogged with the rebellion of the old
man, which is our corrupt nature, but that his force and strength is
extinguished and killed: whereas the scriptures tell us far otherwise; Ps.
51.5. Romans 7.23.24.
and the best men that ever were borne after the manner of men, felt it, smarted
by it, and complained of it. Therefore (say they) you set before us such a
Christian as is no where to be found.

Answer.
But to all this I answer somewhat more fully than I did before: that if it
Ioh. 8.
as the heavenly spirits do. And as our Savior Christ, seeing he could never be
convicted of any sin when he was here upon earth (as his words prove, Which
of you can accuse me of sin?) therefore when the Prince of this

And although with delight we go forward in duty both to God and men; O
wretched man that I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? So that the old man is not
killed, nor his strength extinguished: we say no such thing, but abated indeed
and weakened much, as well as pardoned, through the grace and power which we
receive daily from our Lord Jesus Christ by faith. And this for answer unto
the former objection: whereby it may clearly be seen, what I

Nay, is it not an high degree of honor, that we may from day to day be
admitted to rejoice before the Lord in the duties which we do, even all that
Note.
that they would choose to lie in prison all the days of their life, rather
than they would be thus yoked, as they account of it? O therefore, praise the
Lord, all ye servants; the Lord I say, who does so wonderful things for his:
for in this is that Scripture fulfilled, which says: Honorable things are
reported of thee, that is, Ps. 87.3.
which thy God has done for thee, O thou city, or people, of God. And if it
were not so, that the Lord has done so great good things for his people, how
could that be true which is said in another place, of their happy estate; that
it is better to be a doore-keeper in Gods house, Ps. 84.11.
because we are there in his service and under his government, than to dwell in
the tents of the ungodly

If it be further demanded: Where are such as enjoy this prerogative in their
lives? I say, I know no cause, why Gods people, which have an acquittance and
discharge against the day of judgment and the wrath to come, and have sound
knowledge and assurance of their salvation, and of Gods fatherly care over them
while they live here; I say, I know no cause why all they should not have some
good and lively resemblance of such persons. For did they hold fast this
persuasion, that God has given this liberty unto them, the Devil (who it is,
which injuriously deteineth it from them) should deceive and defeat them no
longer in the gross sort and manner that he does. But this I must Note.
) earthly pleasures and profits (yea, though lawful) must be in meaner
reckoning with them. They are too eager and greedy in their dealings, and their
hearts especially must be pruned of much dross and rubbish: as,
unwillingness, untowardness in the using of those helps by the which men may
wait upon God with ease from time to time.

Also men must think it the greatest liberty, to have their hearts readily
framed and disposed to their several duties; and be persuaded, that nothing
Unruly affections interrupt every good course entered into.
which are every while ready to break off the best course that can be entered
into of them. And if we think it much to be inioined thus to curb up the old
man which most hinders from going forward with delight and readiness,
consider what injury we offer to the Almighty, By not curbing the old man we
offer wrong not to our selves only, but also to the Majesty of God.
that whereas nothing goes forward well that is unwillingly gone about: so
neither should this work of the Lord do in us, except we should provide so,
that much untowardness and awkenesse in Gods service (which is wont either to
break it off, or to be the greatest hinderance therein) be removed or at least
resisted. Which shall not be hard to do, Joshua and other his faithful
servants have done: which grace if it may be obtained of us (and who does not
see clearly that it may?) I mean, that all true Christians may obtain
willingness and cheerfulness in their daily duties doing, and to be much
freed from the contrary untowardness and unfitness, which is the greatest let
that can stand in their way: if (I say) God have provided so mercifully for
his, that they may with delight walk in his ways, set themselves to watch
against their infirmities, and so in their An invaluable privilege, to form
earthly business with: heavenly minds.
(which the unreformed cannot in the least manner attain unto) I conclude this
privilege as the former, that the Lord has in giving this gift unto his
children, bestowed an invaluable blessing and prerogative upon them: and let us
wait for and enjoy it; and when we fail most, acknowledge such weakness,
that we may find release of it from God: and if any of his find it not,
neither see it to be so, it is their unbelief which depriueth them of such a
treasure; but when they enter into Gods sanctuary, they shall see it far
otherwise.

This were worthy to be harkened after (some perhaps will say) if we might Job,
David and Peter it may appear. These two objections (of great weight
doubtless) I must first answer, before I go further. And first of the
foremost: though they, I mean the Godly, be not void The godly find a strife
between the flesh and the spirit for three causes.
For there is left in the most holy a strife betwixt the spirit and the flesh,
and that for this purpose, by the lord himself even in his elect, (as the
Apostle teaches by his own example) not No Christian while he fights with
sin and satan, though he receive many and great wounds, yet not giving over,
can be said to be vanquished.
when we shall see the good Christian to be ouer-matched, as it were, and for
the time driven to hard distress by sustaining the shame and reproach of some
evil action committed, or rank rebellion nourished, which is no less then if
a man should in war loose some member of his body; yet must we not think that
the spirit has yielded it self unto the flesh, neither has been overcome of
it, though sore and greuiously wounded, if it shall by the feeling of the smart
which it took by the sin committed, gather again greater heart of
detestation against it, and strength and courage by spiritual armor to repel
satan's poisoned darts for hereafter.

Job, ye will say: Examples.
How could he cry out as he does in the third chapter against the day of his
birth; cry out I say, yea howl, and charge God, but he must needs show
himself to be overcome of the flesh? There is no doubt (I grant) but that his
adversary the devil did now make full reckoning, that he should fall into very
loathsome blasphemy, and utter desperation: and it cannot be denied, but that
he was carried very far out of the way. But yet, as he is not to be freed
from all fault; so he is not to be further charged then he gave just cause,
forasmuch as the Lord himself does so determine the controversy in the end
(whose sentence no man doubts, but that it was most righteous:) that although
he reprove him, yet Job sinned many ways, but yet through humane frailty. Job
sinned of frailty, not of set purpose.
For his intemperate speech proceeded not from a settled and constant purpose of
the mide, but was wrung from the exceeding greatness of his grief and pain,
which hindered for the time all sense and light of faith and judgment in him.
For in that he thought, he could by no other means be earnestly wished
deliverance from his sufferings, but asked it not of God, it bewraied Job
himself to confess. For who does not marvel, in that so great trouble and
anguish of his, that he uttered not one word either against his wife, or
against his friends dealing so unwisely with him, and so sore provoking him,
The weightinesse of Jobs affliction considered, argues his patience to be
greater then his impatience.
that he could be moved to any impatience at all, being stricken down with so
many and weighty blows of sorrow; as that he could keep any measure therein,
that he neither brake out into rage against them which so vexed him, nor into
blasphemy against God (which satan labored most especially to have brought
him unto.) Neither is he to be counted an impatient man, who does not by and by
resist and overcome all vexations of body and torments of mind, with such
strength and constancy as were to be wished; but he, who so goes to work,
that the hellish spirit in the end prevails over him and has the upper hand.
Therefore, most wisely and fitly Iam. 5.
does the apostle James admonish: that in judging about Jobs conflict, we
consider not so much, what came to pass in the combat and fight, as we mark
the end of the battle, that is to say, that God did inwardly uphold his
servant, and pronounced him an happy man: and though he suffered him to be
very grievously tempted, yet never beyond his strength, which he in most fit
time and season did support him with. And what one among all the Saints of God
has not proved and found this true, if we mark and consider their words and
their lives? Let thus much be granted therefore, that the flesh raged in Job,
and so, that he offended grievously; and no marvel, for he was a man: but yet
(God himself being judge of this matter) he never

Of Peter likewise this is to be said: As the Lord Jesus had done much for him,
and given him many privileges, even as to other of the Apostles he had done;
yet in that dangerous plunge of his, being the greatest downfall (a man would
think) that ever any good man might sustain, he neither sinned against the
Holy Ghost, neither was wholly drawn from his hold, and subdued by Satan.
Peter's denial of Christ was only in word, his heart not consenting. The
causes of it were two: Rashness and fear of danger.
For although he denied in word, that he knew Christ, yea and that with a curse
called for upon himself, if he knew him; I say more, though his Christ. But in
the mean season, that spirit which had taught him that Christ was the son of
the living God; and Peter's faith never lost.
for which Christ prayed that it might not fail nor be overcome, was not
extinct in him, nor utterly lost. For if it had been so, he would have joined
himself in familiarity with the Jews, and have complained, that he had all
that while been deceived of his master: whereas on the other side, he went
forth and wept bitterly, and declared many Peter, as though I went about to
make his sin small and light; which (surely) I am persuaded, did deserve
eternal death a thousand ways: but that if any have sinned of infirmity or in
any such manner, as Peter did, (and yet, besides the unpardonable sin, one
would think that none could be greater) yet that they should not cast away all
hope, and so despair; but that they should be persuaded, that the way is open
to salvation, if they have the faith and repentance which Peter had.

Of David and others, the like may be said; but I have stayed too long in these
examples. I will return now to the privileges and liberties which the Matt.
16.
The gates of hell shall not prevail against them: and therefore I may be bold
to affirm, Luc. 10.
that they having their names written in heaven already, and this being
testified of them by the Lord himself, That they shall be kept safe unto the
resurrection day, and that none shall take them out of his hands; that they are
in great account with him, and highly esteemed of him, as was said before. And
howsoever the They that are honored of God are most honorable.
yet is their estate most honorable, because they are honored of the
Almighty, and from the greatest fear of danger they are delivered. Is a
valiant and noble gentleman in disgrace, because (whiles he goes under great
perils for his country, and hazardeth his life for his Prince, and goes
through many hard adventures) he is reported of to be confederate with the
enemy: when yet he is beloved and renowned (and that for just cause) of Prince
and Peers? No more is the servant of God to be reputed vile, and his estate
contemptible, for that (whiles he goes about to honor his God, and in his
life to express his exceeding kindness) he is both then and therefore set
against by the devil and his ministers, Paul, because he was buffited by the
messenger of Satan, that is, after great exaltation and glory a little before,
now immediately not only deprived of the feeling of it, but brought to so
contrary an estate, that he was deeply ashamed to think he had been so high;
was he therefore deprived of that which yet he was made to hope for? Nay,
therefore the Scripture puts it out of all doubt, saying after: That he
triumphed 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
as he says himself: I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith: from henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness. Therefore we see, how God keeps his from shameful evils,
while they believe that he will do so, and makes an holy and Christian life
their comfort. And yet all these and other such excellent privileges which
appertain unto them, This and all other privileges are no more, then every
Christian has need of to pass through this vale of tears.
are no more then God did see they should stand in need of (as I said in the
former privilege) to help them bear the burden of tribulation, reproach and
other discouragements which here meet with them: which would

CHAP. 6. Of the fourth privilege: How the godly may rise again when they are
fallen.
The 1. point.
THe fourth privilege does most fitly go and agree with these If any believer
be turned out of a good course, he may boldly return.
yet this liberty they have given them of God, to return to him, with certain
persuasion that he will never cast them off, but will receive them into favor
again, from which it seemed to them that they were debarred: whereas they, who
were never converted unto God, can have no such warrant, neither desire it
unless it be in their fear. And yet I speak Jesus Christ the righteous, 1.
Ioh. 2.2.
who is a propitiation for their sins, to the end they may be encouraged to
rise up out of their falls again.

And if it were not thus, that they might be received again after some
grievous offense, what encouragement were there to any Christian, to strive
against We offend him highly, if we do not.
and return to him again as to our father; but also, he commands us so to
do, and looks for it at our hands, and is offended if we do it not; as may
plainly appear by his own words in the prophet Jeremy: Ier. 8.4.6.
I waited and looked, and there was no man that said: What have I done? Proofs
of it.
If God wait and look for it, that such as have peruersly offended, should
return; The first.
and takes it ill at their hands that they do not: is it to be doubted,
whether they may or no? Yet more may be said to this purpose. Me thinks that
which our savior Christ speaks to Peter, is admirable: The second.
who was not content to teach him this doctrine among other, Of the return of
a straying sheep; but because he would strongly arm him against despair, at
the time when he should fall into that deep gulf of denying him, he says
unto him,; Simon, Simon, Luc. 22.31.32.
Satan Wherein most lovingly and wisely, although covertly, he forewarneth
him, that though Satan should drive him far from his standing, and almost
gleane him out from the rest of his fellows, as an Apostate: yet for all that,
he should not remain separate from him, and through unbelief afraid to come
home to him again, but in any wise think that he must return: and for more
sure token thereof, he should afterward convert others; seeing by his
experience he should be best able to persuade them, as having most deeply
fallen himself and therefore might hardliest of others have been raised up
again and pardoned. Jesus speak thus to him, and in fit season, lest Peter
after his fall should have been afraid to arise: for which cause also, he did
encourage him; when sending to his disciples to meet him in Galily, he
expressly named Peter among the rest, saying: Go tell the disciples and Peter
that I go before them into Galily, lest Peter should else have thought that he
had not bin worthy to be counted a disciple. Mar. 16.7.

And if it were not so, that all weak ones falling by any occasion, might be
raised up again, and the poor wandering souls brought home, but must utterly
perish and be lost, to what end should these and many other like Scriptures
serve: Brethren, if any be fallen by infirmity, thou that art spiritual, that
is, Gal. 6.1.
help to hold them up in the spirit of meekness; that so they may be fast
settled in their former faith and hope again? And also, the parable of the
straying sheep upon the mountains, Mat. 18.22.
which with all diligence was sought up again till it were found, and not let
go and lost for ever? Besides, who knows not, that it is one use of the
ministry of the word, as we read in the prophet Ezekiel, to strengthen,
Ezech. 34.3.
confirm and stablish those, who having had a taste of the life to come, yet
are haled and carried from their stayed course by the deceitfulness of sin
and the world? also, to heal the sick and to bind up the broken, etc? For
the which cause, the Apostle desired to come to the Thessalonians often, 1.
These. 3.13
to supply to return, contrary to that cursed opinion of the Nouatian
heretics.

What a benefit this is.
Which if it be so, who does not see, what and how great a benefit and
privilege it is to all that have fallen into any grievous crime, (at least as
they count it) and so have their faith weakened, and their comfort appalled?
For to a man in that case nothing is more comfortable, as by the words of Elihu
in the book of Job, Job. 33 23.
most lively appears, saying: When a man shall be so wrought upon by the word
of God, that for fear and inward anguish he turn away from his own work,
that is, his old sinful life, and refuse his meat which was wont to be most
pleasant unto him, and sorrow take hold on him upon his bed, etc: if then there
be a messenger of God, one that can tell him

This doctrine must wisely be received. We may not be imboldned to sin by it,
that even as it is with all thankfulness to be hearkened unto of the afflicted
in mind, and such as mourn in Sion: so likewise, that in no wise it Nor
slightly repent on it.
or seek pardon the more slightly and houerly, because God receives such
sinners to mercy.

Both which respects because they are worthy to be regarded always in this
case, and for that an example very fit for this purpose comes to my
remembrance, I will in as few words as I can, lay forth the same. In the book
of Ezra the priest, Ezra. 10.1.2. etc.
we read, that he and many of the people of the captivity after their return
home, cast themselves down before the house of the Zechania the son of
Iehiel a godly man, answered and said unto Ezra: It is true; we have committed
a most heinous and wilful offense, in ioining our selves to strangers, and
marying wives out of them: but yet, that we cast not our selves into deadly
despair, Two points are principally to be observed.
(as such a transgression of Gods law might easily carry us unto) let us know,
that there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. Wherein, these two points I
observe principally among many others: First, Gods mercies are not slightly to
be sought for.
that as neither Ezra who had great knowledge in the law of God, nor Zechania,
nor the people which Secondly, when God is rightly sought unto, there ought to
be no doubt of obteining mercy.
although they knew that there was hope to be conceived of pardon; but saw
cause to humble themselves before God in the confession of their sin, and
prayed for the remission of it with tears, and made a firm covenant to put
away their strange wives: so yet, when they sought unto God after this holy and
hearty manner, then did they

And so it ought to be with all gods children: that when they have been
supplanted by the devil (for all their care and watchfulness,) then ought
they to embrace this sweet remedy, and fly unto it as to an anchor; That God
will be entreated of them: and so with more thankfulness and humbleness to
walk forward. If any therefore abuse this liberty to licentiousness and
boldness in sinning, they shall bear their punishment; and let them be sure,
that their sin will find them out. Thus we having seen clearly and plainly

I remember the days and times (as I still see often the experience of it)
wherein this glad tidings would of heavy and afflicted consciences have been
esteemed above gold, if it could have been fitly applied to their disease,
Experience teaches, how such have languished who have wanted this benefit.
and if they standing in need of it, might have been assured from God of such
welfare: I remember (I say) such times, and the desire of many therein; who yet
for want of that, have lien languishing, and been filled with heaviness for
Israel, and of many generations of them? Judge. 2.4.
and namely at Bochim, when they repented by the message of the angel? and
also an other generation after them, whom Samuel, 1. Sam. 7.4.6.
after long straying from God, brought home? and of some of the Churches in the
Revelation; Reu. 2.4.
as namely, the church of Ephesus? that they stood in need of this
encouragement, who having left their old first love, although good things were
still John from the Lord, that they were so far gone, that it was time for
them to consider with themselves from whence they were fallen, and to renounce
their sins, and repent of them, and do their former works; that so they might
again receive sound comfort? whose sore, when it should have come to be felt,
would have turned to another manner of vexation, both longer continuing and more
deeply pinching them, if by this counsel from God it had not been prevented.

And such as in this age are subject to the same weakness, No greater comfort
than this to a poor sinner.
as having sometime laid hold on Gods favor and mercy, yet have afterward
fallen into some sin against their conscience, must hold this for a singular
privilege:

This doctrine where it is received, honors God highly, God is highly
honored by this doctrine.
and causes for this truth and doctrine with all their might, it is because
they are not they The hard-hearted have no benefit by it.
if hard-hearted or double-minded persons might be partakers of it. But they
laboring to shake off godly sorrow for their sin, and check of conscience,
all that they can, and as long as they are able, by mirth and pastime or in
continuance of time to forget it; if for all their shifting and fencing it off,
the Lord sometime strike them with terror, and hold them under by strong
hand, and cause them to quake: yet they do not seek his face, but either bow
themselves only for a day like a bul-rush, as Ahab; or else they are swallowed
up into utter despair, as Judas. Neither can such have any release at all. So
much the greater favor let others (I mean, Gods servants) count it, that they
may in their repentance for their sin, hope steadfastly for pardon; yea, and
ought to say every one unto their souls: Ps. 43.5.
Turn unto thy rest, O my soul: for the Lord has heard thy groans, and
rejects not thy prayers. Why art thou cast down and disquieted within me?
wait on God, he is my present help: for he is more ready to grant, than we to
ask. For if the son of God make them free, John. 8.36.
then are they free indeed. An exceeding privilege is this to them: and
therefore who sees not, that they resting thus persuaded, may be of good
comfort?

It is to be lamented, that the poor Christians should loose this benefit.
For indeed, this privilege is given of God as a remedy; and therefore Math.
18.10. Zach. 2.10.
Oh that they knew, that their tears are put into the bottle of gods
remembrance, and how ready he is to receive them into favor, and to blot out
all their offenses; who has therefore said: See that ye despise not one of
these little ones: and again, Rejoice and be Sion, etc. for I will dwell in
the midst of you: and to his prophets and ministers; Comfort my people,
comfort them at the heart.

The teacher is many times more in fault then the learner.

The want of seeing the bountifulness of God, is the cause of great and
continued heaviness. It is pity that any do arrogate it to themselves
unjustly, that which belongs not to them.


And further I say: Oh that such had been rightly grounded in faith at the
first; which has been as much, or rather more, the fault of the unskillful
builder and teacher of them, then their own. For this may most truly be
affirmed, that for want of well grounding them, they have upon every light and
small occasion been shaken and unsettled in their faith; as, in the least
accusation of their conscience, in any affliction, or in the fear of death.
But if they could see the bountifulness of gods love toward them, how
unworthy soever

And thus (to draw to an end of this matter) I trust it does appear what a
singular privilege this is, that the Lord grants free access to those, who
after their conversion have sinned any way against their conscience, to bewail
their sin before him, and to be persuaded of forgiveness of the same: which
being known of them, they need not hold back from him, as many of his dear
children for a long time have done; but come home again, and that early,
seeing God who has smitten them, will heal them; and he, Exodus 34.7.
who

CHAP. 7. Of the fifth privilege: namely, The gracious helps by which he has
granted them to grow in faith and godliness.
ALl this that has been said of these four privileges last mentioned, will
be granted in general to be true I doubt not, for all professors are literal
and speculatiue Christians: they say, and do not. But when this doctrine
should be brought to use It is a great privilege, to use the helps which God
has given to his.
and taught them to use, they may be able to enjoy the foresaid liberties
(which without them, and by their own strength they can not so much as go
about) and to prevail so far by inioying them, that they may find their
lives more sweet and comfortable, then other can in what estate or condition
soever, if they have not their part in them.

And that it may be seen that these helps are privileges, (as I have said)
And namely prayer:
as for example: What a benefit is it, that by prayer we may come unto our God
for whatsoever we have need of that is good for us, and may obtain it? that we
may come to him, (I say) break our mind, lay open our grief and commune
familiarly with him as with a friend, when we will: he never being weary of
us, Ioh 15.15. Mat. 7 7.
nor taking scorn of us or rejecting us? when yet, to have this access to an
earthly prince but at some time and for some one pleasure or other, is few men's
cases to obtain, and hardly inioied. But this is yet more, that we know how to
come before the Lord with confidence and reverence, If we know how to pray.
so as we

Of watchfulness to say a little also: what a treasure is this, that whereas
the diuill deceives thousands, Also it is a goodly privilege to be watchful.
they being not wise and wary to escape his sleights; yet he teaches his,
far greater wisdom and care to take heed to themselves? for he draws some
to whoredom and uncleanness: some to vain and dangerous expense of the
precious time in play and folly: some to hunt after the wealth of this world,
with pined and hunger starued souls: and undoes others after sundry other
ways; when yet we may by watchfulness shift and shun

And so I may say of the viewing of, and looking back unto our whole course of
life in the day, An other is, to view the day at our lying down.
when we are ready to lie down at night: What a sweet liberty is this, that
whereas the most are either stung or wounded at night with the remembrance of
their evil spending of the day or a great part of it, or some

For as he has promised to bless the using of these helps, so he draws our
hearts to believe it that he will do so indeed, For we believe that which God
has promised. Ios. 1.3.
and thereby to look for the accomplishing of his promise even as certainly,
as if it were already performed; as Joshua did in all the Lords battles which he
fought for the people of Israel, when God had said of the whole land of
Canaan: I have, or (which is all one in God) I will give it into thy hand; he
believing that he would do so I have given Jericho and Ai into thy hands, the
king of Jerusalem with his band of other kings and their men of war, the king
of Haser with all the kings and people that came with him, Ios. 11.6.
whose multitude was as the sand of the sea shore; what was his munition or
armor, but his faith? wherein lay his strength but in this, that he believed,
that the God of heaven and earth was stronger then all they; and that he which
Hebr. 11.30.
that by faith the walls of Jericho (a thing in reason most absurd) yet by
faith, and not by battery or strength or policy, they fell down. The same I
might (but for avoiding tediousness) say of many other; who believing, that
God would bless the same means, which he commanded them to use, have with
great courage interprised them: Genesis 6.22. Hebr. 11.17.
as Noah in making the arc, Abraham in offering to kill his son; who if they
had not believed, that God would bless their endeavors and turn them to their
great good, would never have attempted the same.

And thus having made this matter plain by examples, I will now proceed Joshua
having promises given him of God, believed them and thereby prevailed against
difficulties and discouragements: so Gods servants having the like promises,
are strengthened by God to believe them, as he was, and by believing them
obtain that which is promised. For God promises, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
that by the helps which he has given, he will enable his people to get
victory over their sins, to lead a godly life: and when they fall by any
infirmity, Mich. 7.8.
not to suffer them either to faint and despair of forgiveness, on the one
side; or to make light of their sin and to be careless about it, one the
other side. Dan. 9.5. 1. Sam. 12.19.
These promises therefore whosoever believe, they by the helps which they use,
obtain the

This was necessary for me to say, how and in what case the means and helps,
which we use to the constant practicing of a godly life, become effectual unto
us; namely, when we believe God that he will bless them to us. No fruit of the
best helps, if we use them not in faith. Iam. 1.6.
And indeed otherwise, let not men look to receive any thing thereby; which
the apostle James affirming of one especial help, namely of prayer, is as
truly said by other occasions, I have before set down in the third and fourth
part of

2. Pet. 3.17.
or whether we suffer our selves to be plucked away with the error of the
wicked, and so fall from our steadfastness. For if we find not our lives, and
our whole course in all dealings and affairs through the day, to be so passed
as that we have peace to Godward throughout, and with peace lie down at even,
it is our own sin; God has taught us, and also provided how it might have
been otherwise with us, if we had been but

And to speak more plainly, if we do not so begin the day with thanksgiving,
How the day is to be begun and continued.
confession of sin, and prayer when we may do it conveniently, and so arm
our selves with the whole armor of a Christian, so watch and pray after, so
use Christian exercise in family, and remember Gods bounty toward us; and
lastly so look back to our passing of the day, that we may see by all these
that we have been guided by God, and that we have been holden in our course
without any just cause to wound our conscience: then it is the diuill,

And whither through ignorance, we know not how to be safely led through the
day; or that which is little better, although we know, yet for slougth, or for
that we love darkness more then light, What it is to neglect duty, or to
commit offenses.
we let pass many known duties, or suffer sundry offenses to pass from us in
the day: it is all one, as if we would suffer our selves to be deprived of our
own proper inheritance by some cousener, who shall tell us that it belongs
not unto us, when yet we are able to show clear and sufficient evidence for
it. For when the Lord shall Revel. 3.11.
Let no man take away your crown; then the devil shows himself manifestly
in detaining it from us. And therefore we must remember that to use these
helps rightly, The sweetest liberties of a Christian are wretched bondage to a
man of the world.
is no bondage nor servitude, as men of the world count them, who strain
themselves and strive mightily to be delivered from the holy and spiritual use
of them, and not to be tied thereto: we must rather be persuaded, that they are
most precious liberties, peculiar to gods dearest servants; and a singular
benefit of God, that in such a dead world, and frozen age as we live in, we may
be counted meet, and made able to honor our God, (which to most men is
tedious) and to have peace with him throughout the day; and that we may be
taught of him to use the helps thereto, which

And if we be thoroughly persuaded of this, that it is a liberty, a benefit,
and honor to us, to hold our minds willing from day to day to the reverent
use of them; and be resolved, that we have no work more needful to be done of
us any day then this: we shall not need to doubt of such fruit hereof, as is
not to be repented of; even such, as will cause us to confess that the means
and Note.
by every light occasion to omit and neglect them, or slightly and houerly to
pass them over, I testify, A slight and formal using of the means will not
profit.
that we shall get no good by them, no more than the common sort do: but as
they have lost their beauty with us; so we shall lose our fruit of them.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding.

For be this known to the profanest and proudest contemner of God, The beauty
of the worship of God is too glorious for the armeyes of profane persons to
behold.
which That which is common to all, is no privilege.
For otherwise, how could they properly be called privileges, if they were a
like precious to good and to bad? or were in as good reckoning with the one,
Note.
as

Who they are, that are constant in the service of God.
(though full weakly at some time we do it) and look for fruit by them, and
enjoy it: and when we see what blessing he gives us thereof, (as he does, and
that very great, to the end that we may have the better experience how many
ways he keeps promise with us, and how he inricheth us) then we wax more
constant therein, and are the more hardly withdrawn by any occasions from
holding out in the same. This (I say) we may do, although with grief it may be
spoken, that many even of us, are too far off from inioying this liberty as
we might do. But let all such know, that it is their own sin, who cannot
therefore praise God for this sweet help, while they be not the better world
count us fools; and be in good saftie, when their danger shall be great.

Now I would have proceeded to lay forth before the Christian Reader an other
privilege, which in this place would very fitly come in; and that is, that God
has surely provided, that they who are thus far beautified and blessed of
him, shall thus continue unto the end: but seeing it is the last that is
inioyed in this life, it shall have the last place among the temporal
privileges. But yet I thought not amiss to mention such a thing here, both to
stay them which after the hearing of so blessed beginnings and proceedings,
would be glad to hear of the end answerable to them both: and also that they
may look for it in the place assigned.

CHAP. 8. Of the sixth privilege: namely, of the right using of prosperity.
NOw the next privilege that I think may most fitly be joined with the
former, is: how the Lord has taught his the right use of prosperity and
adversity, and how they may carry themselves in peace, and be upright in both
estates: two of the most principal Prosperity a slipperie estate.
and riches and honor, health and friends, with all the other lawful
pleasures, profits and liberties of this life do deceive and undo God
teaches his to stand in this slipperie way.
and so directed that they need not be taken in these snares, nor make them
their bane which are given them as blessings: this grace therefore if any shall
be found to enjoy, they may be worthily said to be privileged above other men.
Now to prove this, that Gods children may use the world rightly (which is
impossible for any other to do: The wicked cannot.
) I do not mean, that because they have right unto earthly things through
Christ, and are heirs with him of the blessings of the world, that therefore
they do soberly and as they ought use the same; for many even of them, are (I
confess) far from it, and therefore that which they want I labor to help

How he teaches his to do it.
For when he causes this doctrine to be taught them: Of the contempt of the
world, of contentation in their estate, of moderation and sobriety in lawful
First by the scriptures:
and therefore to apply it to themselves: he makes them prove how this
doctrine works in them, and try themselves by it, that where they see
themselves to have gone beyond their bounds, they may return and bring their
feet back into the way of his testimonies: he, through the same doctrine,
seasoneth their hearts, and wholly possesses them with the love of it, that so
their wants may be supplied, and they thereby may grow better practiced in this
sobriety. And although the inioying of earthly commodities be an alluring
bait, Luc. 14.18.19. Dan. 4.27. Act. 12.22.
and easy to Nabucadnezzar, Herod, and others: yet the scripture gives
greater grace, as to Daniell, Job, and others who determined not to set their
hearts on them.

But besides this, through further benefit of the scripture, God causes his,
Also by experience and observation of things: Dan. 1.8. Job. 1 21.
to set often before their eyes, the daily changes of all things under the sun:
Ps. 102.26. the death of noble personages, friends and acquaintance; the most
flourishing flowers to fade, and loose their bewty, and nothing to continue in
one estate: and by the often and deep considering of these, their hearts are much
apalled, and the pride of life greatly abated in them. And as they grow daily
to see more clearly their gain hereby, By meditation also of their gain
hereby.
and that without these meditations upon

Thus (I say) the Lord frames his, to the contempt of the world, The effect
hereof.
and to Job in that, when he said: If I have made gold my hope, Job. 31.24.
or have said to the wedge of gold, Thou art my confidence: If I reioiced
because my substance was great, or because Therefore if these be great riches,
liberties and privileges to enjoy; I mean, to have contentation in our
estate, yea to be thankful to God in all things, not puffed up with
prosperity, to acknowledge the uncertainty of our commodities, and therefore
not to rest nor put confidence in them, nor to desire the increasing of them
simply, much less by any indirect means, but to let them serve for the
necessities of our brethren as well as for our own uses: now therefore, if
these are the precious gifts of God, and yet that God frames his servants to
endeavor, and in some sort to do all these

But when all this is said, me thinks I hear diverse to object thus: We doubt
nothing of the truth of all this, but that there have been such mentioned in
the Scriptures: but what is that to us? where are they in this our age who may
be brought forth for such examples? I say, if the men could not easily be
found, yet that hinders not the doctrine to be true: but further I say as the
truth says, Ios. 1.5. As God has done to others, so he will do to us; and
his goodness is not abated toward us, more then it was in the ages past: yea
rather, Esa. 59.1.
we have more near acquaintance with the will and mind of God, then Heb.
8.11. Act. 2.17.18.
God has visited his people in a most gracious manner, bestowing his gifts and
pouring out the graces of his spirit upon them abundantly. All which laid
together, what can be gathered less then this, that when his children hear by
the preaching of his word, Note.
all things under the sun to be transitory, vain and soon flitting away,
and themselves also with them daily drawing unto an end, riches uncertain,
beauty deceitful, health ever changing, friends always dying, etc. but that
he causes them to believe it, and therefore not to rest upon them? It is most
false that some say: My goods are mine own, and therefore I may do with them
as I lift.
So when they hear, that they may not use them as they list, (no not the
lawfullest of their liberties, as possessions, recreations,

The Christian must be persuaded that it is Gods work which he goes about:
and also, that God will strengthen him thereto.
For when they once be resolved, that it is the work which God sets them
about, and that he will strengthen and fit them for it, it does mightily
encourage them to take in hand and go about it: even as on the contrary,

But to return to that which I said, How the godly do rightly use their
lawful liberties.
that the Lord inableth his to govern themselves in the use of their goods and
lawful liberties (which is a great privilege:) that I be not understood
amiss, I think good to express my mind more clearly. If any should gather
or think, that I mean all Gods people do enjoy this liberty and prerogative:
I answer, that I am far from that Who shall enjoy this foresaid privilege.
they who believe it, that God will make them fit for it how unfit soever they
are of themselves, they shall enjoy it. I have propounded to prove no other
thing. For by this it may appear, that seeing Gods children may be made
partakers of such a treasure, which but few of them do enjoy (and of the
unregenerate not one can:) therefore they beholding what he has bequeathed
them, They that attain not to this benefit, provide ill for themselves.
they shall show, that they provide ill for themselves, if they attain not to
that, being so great a benefit which God has so freely bestowed upon them.
There should need no more unto such, but this: that they may know, that he has
granted it out unto them freely, and calls them every where, to the Pro.
16.32.
than to win a city.

As for those who count this honor, preciseness; and this imbondaging Christ,
Phil. 3.18.19.
they turn the grace of God into wantonness, they make lawful liberties to
become unlawful through their ill using of them. Of whom this I say, The
cauillers at this doctrine are under heavy and speedy condemnation.
which I soon as they perceive that they have gone too far, and have passed
their Joseph, Moses and many of Gods dear servants did before them.

But if it be asked: Why has he given them to one and not to another? I
answer: Seeing one sets more store by it than another. I speak it to the
shame of those who give occasion, though they be otherwise well to be hoped of.
For the custom and boldness in this sin of intemperancie and worldlines
which we see in the most men, does draw after them and their example, some even
of those which are religious; causing them to have their teeth set

CHAP. 9. Of the seventh privilege: Concerning the afflictions of the godly;
and namely, of the first branch of the same; that is, How they may be free from
many of those troubles, which do light on and meet with the unreformed.
NOw follows the prerogative that they have about afflictions. Of the which
although they are not void: yet if we diligently Ps. 32.10.11. Secondly, he
delivers them out of many, which otherwise would sore oppress them, when
yet he leaves others in them still. And thirdly, he teaches them, aright and
well to bear them, when he thinks it not meet to deliver them. And of these
three, I will handle

Concerning the which point, it may easily be gathered by that which has been
said of the former privileges, how true this is: The godly escape many
troubles altogether.
that many troubles never take hold of such as walk after those rules which I
have spoken of, and which enjoy the said privileges: and seeing all Gods
children be such as may do so, therefore even they may be delivered from many
troubles and afflictions (one as well as another) which yet the ungodly and
unregenerate cannot escape. For they whose hearts are cleansed and sanctified,
so that they truly hate all manner of sin, and more specially renounce in
their lives the sin which they know; who endeavor to have a good conscience
in all things, The greatest sins bring the greatest punishments.
and the deepelier does God draw his bow against them: and wherein is the
scripture more plentiful, then in this argument and matter? For sin, Genesis
3.17.24.
which without sin had never been known in all the world, with the casting
off our first parents and their posterity out of the favor of God. Through
sin, came all kinds of plagues and punishments upon men; Deuteronomy. 28.44.
as hunger, nakedness, diseases, the pestilence, bondage to enemies and
invasion of them, imprisonment, loss of goods, loss of life, and such like.
For sin, both person and place, whole cities and villages have been
destroyed: Genesis 19.
from the king to the beggar, both Pharao and the rascal soldiers that
peirced Judas the pursebearer who was also the traitor; even all these did by
sin purchase to themselves the reward of iniquity. All which plagues, they
which were void of those sins and the like which they committed, were freed
from.

But I shall not need to say much of this matter which is clear in all men's
eyes: and yet I must say that which I do in this place, because it is the
ground of this discourse. For if this be true, that troubles and punishments
are the fruit of sin, and that they who decline and go aside from the way
of sinners, The freer from sin, the freer from trouble.
shall not taste of them; it follows that the children of God who do so,

All the godly do not avoid the sorrows which they might do here.
namely, that sundry of Gods people do draw upon themselves many troubles
through their own default, which they might have been void of, and do
trouble themselves when God does not trouble them: and it is one cause why I
did enter into this work, to teach such how they may live more at ease and in
safety and without many encumbrances Note.
even of Gods children, do persuade themselves through ignorance of the
scriptures ( Math. 22.29) that forasmuch as they hear, that we must go
through many tribulations to the kingdom of heaven, 2. Tim. 3.12.
therefore it can be no otherwise with us, but that we must of necessity smart
and be afflicted as often and as many ways as we are; which is nothing so: for
many troubles and dangers we might shun and avoid by taking heed to our
selves, as Gods word teaches us, yea and as his spirit inableth us also to
do; which yet through our folly, security, slougth and such other faults of
ours, too often do vex and disquiet us, and make our lives utterly unsavory
and unpleasant Many trouble themselves greatly by their corrupt affections:
do cause a great part of their lives to be filled with unquietness, anguish
and irkesomnesse, (then the which what can be reckoned greater troubles) and
that, through impatience, anger, fretting, rashly meddling in other men's
matters, and intemperately following and dealing in their own; which unbridled
affections others of their brethren wisely and carefully seeking and laboring
to resist, prevent and govern, are not molested nor troubled with?

Or who sees not this: that, even men who deserve to be well thought of for
many causes, And many other, with those which ouerrule them another way.
yet in some particular things refusing to be directed aright, and following
their own will, and carried by their evil affections, take liberty Heb. 12.
and for the inioying of the pleasures of sin for a season.

But these troubles because they are inward, are not of so many nor so easily
seen and discerned as were to be wished, although too many, both godly and
wicked, do often both find and feel them. They bring also upon themselves
outward troubles by their sins.
I will therefore show this in It is proved by many particulars.
But to prove that they trouble themselves with all these by their sins, is
it not a shame to them, when they be found to have been deceivers, liers,
boasters, Prou. 21.17.
So by surfeiting come diseases; and ill posterity by ill education, with too
much conniuencie and liberty giving; and by rash and unequal marriages as
hasty repentings for their conceived griefs, if not departings one from the
other; and an haughty

And what are the troubles of the world, if these be not? and yet who sees
not, that all these and their like are drawn upon many Christians by their
sin, as sore corrections from God, seeing they do, and may easily, through want
of care and watchfulness, often offend thus. And true it is, that they might be
well avoided, if sin were taken heed of and resisted, and by labor and
watchfulness the unruly heart subdued. Neither let any answer me, that this
cannot be attained: for I affirm, God gives grace to overcome these sins.
that God gives such grace unto frail men Note.


And by this which I say, let it be considered, what ease and peace and
freedom from many troubles this sort of men enjoy in their lives, which others
go without; and what sorrow and calamities some fill their days with, which
both they themselves, and many others might be void of. So that it is not as
What quiet some find in their lives more then other: and how.
and their lives might be many ways and in sundry respects more pleasant and
quiet then they be: which causes some that see it to be thus with diverse
Christians, (and yet that these their troubles are not for well doing, but by
their own folly and procuring) causes them (I say) to be so far from the
love of true religion as they be: for whose sake, Note.
if we will not do it to make our own lives more comfortable, we should
abstain from offenses; seeing the woe that is pronounced, will otherwise,
Math. 18.7
certainly come upon upon us: Woe to him that causes another

Objection.
But such men are ready to excuse and answer for themselves, saying, that all
cannot be alike, nor all cannot do as some may: which objection unless it be
of pure simplicity, is a sign rather that they will go forward, then seek to
recover. Answer.
But whatsouer, or whose soever it be, I answer, Let the weak endeavor To him
that has, it shall be given, Luc. 8.18.
and he shall have abundance: and he that seeks in humility, shall find and
enjoy plentiously: and he that reuerenceth the gifts and graces of other, shall
have a part in them himself, and not envy other for them.

And as for the troubles which we speak of, let no man think that we may
rejoice in them, Iam. 1.2. 1. Pet. 4.15.
seeing we are dehorted from them by the Apostle Peter, saying: Let no man
suffer as an evil doer; seeing they are for just cause upon us to vex and
disquiet us, rather then that they can be any matter of joy and gladness to us,
except by godly sorrow they bring us to repentance, which (alas) is the least
Ier. 5.25.
For so does the prophet tell us, that our sins keep many blessings from us.
And if they be our sins, that is, our known sins, our wilful sins, and
those which are committed through our own default and folly, then let us
thank our selves, and let us charge our sins, and not the Lord; in that,
while we suffer so great and many troubles by them, we have reaped thereby the
just fruit of our own

And this is that which I have gone about to prove, for the comfort of my
brethren: that many of us who belong to the Lord, do find more troubles and
afflictions then we need to do, and that through our own sin. And therefore
I conclude, seeing it is so: that the Lord who guides his servants in a

Oh that this might enter into them deeply and do them good, To whom chiefly
the comfort of this doctrine does appertain.
for whose cause chiefly I have spoken it; I mean, many of Gods people: who
although they have some love to their brethren, and embrace the gospel
heartely and reverently, and have many other good things in them, (it behooves
1. Sam. 8.19. compared with 12.19.
yet will they by no means be counseled to redress that which is amiss: in
whom it is no hard thing to see, how dear they pay for their liberties, which
they will have whatsoever they cost them. They

Their defense, Excuses for men's sins.
for that they do not more particularly direct their ways aright, is; that
Jesus Christ has given them liberty and set them free; and that they have no
discretion, who urge their brethren so strictly; and such like: which all are
but fig leaves to cover their nakedness. For they see (though they would
not) oftentimes, that thus living they please not God: neither (if

These therefore I exhort to consider with no worse minds than I have written
it, what has been said: and the Lord give them grace so to do: yea, and let
such godly Christians whose teeth yet do sometime water at the dainties of
those, though they see what sorrow and reproach they sustain for them,

But now that I have showed, how the Lord does preserve them from sundry, yea
infinite troubles, Many shun to be truly religious, because they would avoid
trouble. Luc. 16.25.
who set their hearts to walk with him in one thing as in another, (behold,
such honor and prerogatives his servants may have) I cannot pass by the
deuillish (and yet foolish) policy of some who do shun to be religious of
purpose, because they would be void of sorrow and trouble. They sing the song
of the rich man in S. Luke, that in their life time they will have their
pleasure whatsoever it cost them when their reckoning comes 1. Cor. 15.
and of the Epuicure; Let us eat and drink, etc. and say with the young man in
Ecclesiastes: Eccles. 11.9.
They will rejoice in their youth, and enjoy the delights of sin, though it
be but for a season. But they mark not that answer to him in the Gospel:
Thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure, therefore now thou art
tormented; nor to the young man, by the Preacher, what was said: Know, that for
all these things, God will bring thee to judgment. No such thing (I say) they
do consider; but all that they observe, is this: How the better that men are
for the most part, the less they are set by, as it is said: I have seen the
just to perish in his justice: and the less men fashion themselves after this
present world, the

Again, they see that as the most part of men among who^ the godly live, have
them in some indignation and vile acount; so that they do by means thereof,
The foolishness of them that do so.
sustain mocks, taunts, checks and complaints before their betters, with
cruel threatenings, and in persecution times that they are conuented,
imprisoned, railed on, yea and often times put to death. These things (I say)
they only look at with carnal eyes, and therefore are easily brought to
beware, that they come not near their course: but they neither consider, that
they suffer Mat. 5.12.
and therefore that they are blessed; neither, that they themselves and such as
they are, live in darkness and after the lust of their eye and heart, Eccles.
7.8. Job. 21.13.
and that their pleasures wanze away as the cracking of thorns under a pot,
and afterward they must come to their heavy and unwelcome account. Besides
this, though they have sorrow and vexation daily in their lives, by means of
their sin, unless they break it off through foolish mirth and vanity for a
while: yet partly they see it not, neither count it any; as to be cast into
fretting, frowardness, strife, debate, etc. And if they do purchase any
trouble by their deserts and ill doings, as shame, charge by the purse, and
other punishment; yet they will choose to suffer much this way, rather than

And now let all wise men judge, what these kinds of men have gained by
following their sinful course: let (I say) the uttermost of their gain and
pleasure be considered, and what troubles they have shunned in shunning to live
godly. Ps. 32.10.
But when they have done, seeing the Lord has sufficiently confirmed this:
Number. 32.23.
that plagues abide the ungodly, and (that they may be sure of it) that their
sin shall find them out; let none look to provide well for himself that way,
namely, to shun and be far from the sincere practice of a religious and
godly life, to the end he may be free from troubles: for he can no other way
more certainly and speedily multiply them. And whereas it is objected, that 1.
Cor. 11.32. 1. Pet 1.7. John 16.20.
or such as they suffer for good causes; and so weep and lament, when the
world is iocund and merry: and therefore they turn ever Romans 8.28. Eccles. 8.12.
as I shall have occasion to show more plentifully in another place more fit
for that purpose. And to conclude, let all know this, that though a sinner do
evil an hundred times, and God prolongeth his days; yet that it shall be well
with them that fear the Lord, and do reverence before them. And thus much of
the first point in this second branch of this privilege, that the godly may
live void of many and great troubles: and therefore, that such as do not, may
thank themselves for it, whether we understand inward distrust and fear, or
outward punishments that are fruits of sin.

CHAP. 10. Of the second branch of this privilege, concerning the afflictions
of the faithful: namely, That God delivers them out of many, when the
wicked still remain in theirs.
THe second point is, that they may also assure themselves, that the Lord will
deliver them (and that of very favor) out of many troubles, though they see
not how: even as I have showed, God often delivers his altogether:
either before they have long lien upon them, or at least, before they have
been driven to any extremity by them, and before they have had their course;
as in the deliverances of David, mentioned 1. Sam. 19.20.23.24. and 26.
chapters thorowout, is to be seen. And this he does as often as it is expedient:
Ioh. 16.7. 2. Cor. 12.9. Prou. 11.8. And the wicked come in their room.
when in the mean season he deals not so with the unbelievers, but when the
other escape, they come The godly escape out of trouble by the Lords delivering
of them, and the wicked are come in their stead. Now for proof of that which I
said [that God delivers them out of many] what is more plain then that which
the prophet says: Psalm. 124.1.
If the Lord had not been on our side, (may Israel now say) if the Lord had
not been on our side when men rose up against us, they had then swallowed us up
quick, when their wrath was kindled against us, etc. But praised be the Lord,
who has not given us a prey unto their teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird
out of the snare of the fouler, the snare is broken, and we are escaped. The
Apostle proves it also in his words: 2. Cor. 1.10.
We would not have you ignorant (brethren) of our affliction which came unto us
in

The dangers of Gods people under the government of king Ahashuerosh, who
knows not? How had that wicked Haman by malice and subtlety obtained of the
king, commission to take their goods and put them to death? Esther. 3.13. etc.
and. 7.10.
The day was set, and all preparation made for the bringing of it to pass: and
yet before it could be effected, how did the Lord at the humble suit of
Mardocheus Hester in prayer and fasting, seeking unto him, turn away the
plague from them, and delivering them, bring their enemies and Haman the first
of all the rest (as he was the chiefest) into their room? even as Daniel was
delivered out of the lions den (the Lord shutting their mouths that they
should not hurt him: Dan. 6.23.
) but his accusers being thrown in after that he was delivered, the lions had
the mastery over them, and brake their bones or ever they came at the ground of
the den. The whole story of the Bible is full of such examples: wherein this
is most clearly to be seen, how God has delivered his, trusting in him, from
and out of many and great dangers and

And yet I would all should know, that I do not bring these, as I might many
others to this end, only that I might prove that God has delivered his
children out of troubles: Genesis 21.15. 1. Sam. 31.8.1.
for so has he done the wicked also (as Ishmael in the wilderness, and the
Philistims from Saul:) neither is that the thing which either I intend; or if
I did, were that any privilege or peculiar blessing to the godly, forasmuch as
the wicked may have their part in it as well as they: But I bring these
examples to prove, The godly are delivered in gods favor.
that Gods people may be sure that he will of fatherly love deliver them from
many, namely, when they have sought Hos. 6.1.
that as it is he that has smitten them, so he shall heal them. And in that
they have used those means for their deliverance, Ester. 4.16. 2. Chro. 20.3.
which God has taught them to use, namely, fasting and prayer with confidence,
as Mardocheus, Iehosaphat, etc; and in that they have rested upon God, as they
did in the Psalm 124. Hose 14.4.
8. and 20.7, and not on a bruised reed, as oft-times Israel did; and in that
when they do look for deliverance certainly, they have first a promise
thereof from God, Joshua 11.6. Judge. 7.9.15.
as Joshua had against the king of Hazor and his company; and Gedeon against the
Amalekites and the Midianites: when they do (I say) obtain deliverance thus,
and after this manner, this is a singular

The wicked not so.
And thus are Gods servants only delivered out of their troubles: the ungodly
have no part with them in this fellowship. And yet I do not say, that even
they are always thus affected and furnished with this grace, always to
believe and look for it, Yet the godly do not always believe this.
as often as God delivers them out of any dangers and troubles (that is it
indeed which they should daily aim at:) and yet they can have no sound comfort
to their hearts more then other men have, unless they do thus wait upon God
by sound hope, and seek to him in their

Objection.
What profit may we reap by the examples before Objection.
that deliverances out of adversities and dangers are not privileges, except
they have a promise thereof from God before, The fathers had particular
promises, but so have not we.
and believe the same:) What is that to us will these men say, forasmuch as God
does not at any time speak unto us, as he did in ages past unto our fathers?
Iehosaphat indeed, they say, might well and easily be persuaded, 2. Chron.
20.17.
that God would give the Moabites (his enemies) into his hand, when he by his
prophet had said to him: To morrow go out against them, Ios. 11.6. Judge. 6.14.
and the Lord will be with thee. So Joshua, and in like manner Gedeon: but where
has God thus spoken to any of his faithfullest servants in this last age of
the world, parsonally or

I answer: Answer.
That God does not indeed speak to us after that manner that he did to our
fathers, as we are certified in the epistle to the Ebrewes; 2. Tim. 4.8. Hebr.
1.1.
but has left his whole mind to us in his word, wherein he has so fully
declared his will in all things as is sufficient, and in the weightiest matters
he has spoken as plainly to us as to them. And concerning this one thing,
namely, God in the chiefest matters has spoken as plainly to us as to them.
Romans 7.25. Iam. 4.6.
of delivering us out of distresses and afflictions: if they be inward (as
sins and corruptions) he has promised (if we believe the same) that he will
give John 14.13. and 15.16. Romans 8.28.
and howsoever he do in our sufferings, that which he does, shall be the best
for us. And there was no other thing said to the body of the church in the
former ^g^s, but general promises which were made to all the faithful
(excepting that for some especial causes some particular promise of
deliuerence was made to some certain persons, and for weighty causes; and yet
those were not made for all times, 2. Sam. 15.25.
nor in all David, who being driven out of Jerusalem by his son Absolon
rising up against him most traitorously and unnaturally, said unto Zadok the
priest, Carry the ark of God again into the city: If I shall find favor in
the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and the
tabernacle thereof: but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold here
am I, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes.

It it clear by this, that David in his trouble did not know whether God would
deliver him or no; neither did he know what the end should be; nor had any
promise from God, that he should return again to Jerusalem in peace, and
behold the arc and tabernacle any more: yet David sought to the Lord, Sidrach,
Misach and Abednego: who when they heard the straight charge of king
Nabucadnezar, That whosoever should not at the sound of the instruments of
music fall down and worship the image which he had set up, should be cast
into the midst of an hot fiery furnace immediately, answered the king and said:
O Nabuchadnezar, Dan. 3.17.
we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. Behold, our God whom we
serve, is able to deliver us from the hot fiery furnace, and he will deliver us
out of thy hand, o king; but if he do not, be it known unto thee (o king) that
we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have set up.
We see they knew not whether God would deliver them or no: but this they were
persuaded of, that he had a most tender and fatherly care over them, and would
show the same in the time of their need; and if it were for his glory he would
deliver them. etc.

And now (to return to our selves) if we in our tribulations be thus vpholden
Note.
we have behaved our selves as it became us, we have sought to him aright as
his word teaches us: and if we after this obtain deliverance, God has heard
us, he has kept promise with us, and we have received good proof of our
faith. And who can deny, but that it is a great privilege when we obtain
deliverance thus? and thus doing, although we be not delivered, yet we rest
persuaded (howsoever our weak nature hold back) that the Lord has done
justly and well; hoping with such confidence, as of frail flesh may be
obtained, for answerable 1. Sam. 28.7. Iona. 2.8. 1. Sam. 25.37. Math. 27.5.
Ps. 73.13.14. Iona. 4.4.
and namely, Saul with other, who waiting upon lying vanities, forsook Gods
goodness: neither are stricken with deadness, as Nabal when he heard heavy
tidings; nor with distrust and despair, as Judas; neither with complaining and
murmuring at God, as his own children sometime when they are not vpholden by
faith, are forced to do. And yet if we have deliverance any other way, as by
carnal policy, subtle shifts, or the like, (as I do

And thus I conclude this other point, affirming, that as it is a singular
prerogative to us, that we may be kept from many troubles altogether, which
other cannot be freed from: so it is no less honor, privilege and favor,
that we may be delivered out of many (which others shall not be delivered from)
as I have showed and proved in this present point; but yet then only it is a
privilege (as I have said) that we may be delivered, not when we use unlawful
means for it, but when we look for it thus: [If God will: if he see it good
and Note.
for fear that when it comes we shall be inconstant: whereas, if it were
otherwise, much heavenly comfort might be reaped in our lives, which now is not.

CHAP. 11. Of the third branch of this privilege: That we may have
THe third point of this second branch now follows, which is no less then a
great privilege it self beside the two former, and that is: that the Lord
teaches his children aright and well to bear those afflictions, which he
thinks meet to try them with and to hold them under. So that they may not
only endure and go under them patiently and contentedly, Ps. 119.71.
but also receive much good by them, as they themselves be constrained to
confess. And as the Lord teaches his people to make this use of their
afflictions: John 16.6.7. 1. Pet. 1.5.6.
so every one of Luc. 9.23.
that they look for them

It follows therefore next and most consequently to declare, how the poor
people of God may come by this wisdom: and then to show, how it guides them
to make such profitable and good use of their crosses and chastisements, as no
other but they are able to do the same. Saint James going about to persuade
the Christians which were dispersed by reason of persecution, to receive their
afflictions meekely and joyfully, (fearing that there were not many which could
do so) showed them; that it was for want of this wisdom Ia. 1.5.6.
If any man want wisdom let him ask it of God, who gives to every one
plentifully, and casts no man in the teeth: but this watchword he gives:
That they must see, they ask in faith, and they shall obtain it. Then for our
instruction and edifying let us know, that, if we desire to be partakers of
this privilege, How we may take good by our afflictions:
to welcome our afflictions, to bear them Romans 8.28.
that All things work for the best to them which love God; so we must be wise
to think the same of our own afflictions: and if we cannot easily be so
persuaded (as no man is for the most part) we must be earnest with God, Petit.
3.
and that often and from time to time, that our will may yield to Gods will, and
we may think that good for us which he thinks good.

And to the end we may bring our hearts to this, let us weigh to and fro, what
we can object against it why we need not submit our selves unto God: For God
sends them to that end.
and to keep us from further hurt, (for he has no worse end in chastising of
us) that then we may remember, in all things to be thankful, and take up our
cross readily and welcome it, seeing we know the end of it. And let it not be
thought much that I say, He has no worse end in afflicting us: for we ought to
be persuaded thoroughly of this, that the Lord our God loving us, he cannot
intend our hurt in the least manner, howsoever it shall please him to exercise
us. Lam. 3.33. 1. Pet. 1.6
For we may be sure, that he afflicts not willingly, John. 16.7.
) It is expedient that I go away from you, for otherwise the comforter cannot
come unto you: so would he have us to think, that if it were not for our
troubles we should never have such comfort as we have, Heb. 12.11.
which does certainly follow the patient bearing of them.

And here consider the causes why God sends them to his beloved ones: which
being known and rightly weighed, Reasons why God afflicts his. Ps. 34.17.19.
and 2. Cor. 1.10. Romans 5.4.5. Iam. 1.3. 1. Cor. 11.32. Ps. 119.67.
are of sufficient force to work their great benefit and comfort. First, that
they may have experience from how many 2. Cor. 4.9. and 6.9. Gods children are
never forgotten, though they may seem for a time to be neglected. Ps. 20.8.
Ioh. 16.22. 1. Sam. 30.6.
we shall be sure to find it so, to our exceeding comfort.

And although for a while we be tried, and therein may seem to be neglected
and forgotten of him; when others shake off the Lords yoke, and shun the
troubles by an evil conscience, which he lays upon them: yet when they shall
after be plunged into dangers without recovery, then shall ours be at an end,
and our reioicing never cease nor be taken from us. Through this faith David
comforted himself in his God, when wicked men consulted to take I have held my
peace, because thou (o Lord) had done it: Ps. 73.1.
and that God was most loving unto him for all that. And so when by this
wisdom and faith he had waited patiently on God, he reaped experience and
gladness as the fruit thereof, which he himself expresses in these words,
saying: Ps. 119.71.
It is good for me (o Lord) that I have been afflicted. And the like speeches
he uttered at sundry times in many of his psalms, which for breuity sake I
omit: whereby it may be gathered, that from time to time he was thus vpholden
in his troubles; and therefore

The same may be said of Abraham, both at many other times, and namely when he
left his own country and his fathers house, to go to a place which God
should show him: where he being a stranger and had not a foot of ground to
possess, yet having leisure to return, would not; Heb. 11.8.
but waited upon God to know his pleasu^^^: which he would never have done, if
he had not been persuaded, that the affliction was best for him, which God did
try him with. Ps. 105.19. Ps. 105.18.
Joseph had no other thing to uphold him when he was sold, put in prison, and
his feet pinned in the stocks.

If any man want this wisdom, let him ask it of God, and it shall be given.
Lo, he excepteth none (which do not except themselves) of such as know what
faith is, and who are able to ask in faith (as all the Lords may be bold to
do;) for he adds: But let him ask in faith. And: Act. 2.21.
Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved: for, how can we
call upon him, Romans 10.14.
on whom we have not believed? So that if any such be destitute of this
wisdom, they may

But to satisfy some, (who, I know, are many) which looking to the Apostles
words [ that all turns to the best to such as love God] and look no further:
whereupon they conclude, if God will have our troubles turn to our good, what
need we take any further thought about the matter? I answer: Though God
promise to turn our troubles to good, yet we must not be careless under them.
They which believe that, will not be careless in their afflictions, how they
be affected under them; whether they lie down blockishly and senselesly under
them, or whether they storm and be impatient in them: but will do as David did
in all his troubles, (who laid them to heart, and prayed for grace to bear
them and for deliverance out of them, though he was sure God would give a
Daniel also did. Dan. 9.5.
) And if they behave themselves wilfully, carelessly or foolishly in them, they
shall see them turn to their exceeding hurt and vexation: so far is it off,
Ps. 18.26.
that they should reap good thereby, they know not how. For the Scripture,
which teaches that afflictions are sent them for their good, does not profit
them, if it be not mixed with faith in them that hear it, Heb. 4.2.

But if they believe that Scripture to be written for them, and apply it; then
they receive their crosses from God as sent to them in his love, they murmr
How they may profit by afflictions.
neither refuse to be chastised of him, but are thankful, and therefore labor
for patience, that it may have her perfect work: yea and further, if they can
find any sin in themselves which might draw these corrections of the Lord
upon them, they heartily turn from it with all possible speed, that so they
may more confidently entreat the Lord to turn away all the tartness of their
affliction from them. And they which after this manner behave themselves under
the cross, although they perform these duties but in weakness, shall find
their troubles, howsoever for the time irksome unto the flesh, Heb. 12.11.
yet to be gainful many ways and in many respects unto their souls.

Uses of afflictions.
For they shall give them a proof of that grace, as meekness, trust and
confidence, Lam. 3.27.
yea greater than they thought possible that ever Iam. 1.2. Col. 1.11. Romans 5.4.
in the end at least, with hope in the midst of them, which shall not make
them ashamed.

Therefore if the servants of God may enjoy these with many other such
commodities by their afflictions, and have so good liking of the Christian life
that they will not forsake it for the greatest of them, I conclude this third
branch as the two former: That the Lord has not left their afflictions upon
them to vex them, and make their lives wearisome and unpleasant to them; but
that they should receive much good and benefit by them. And although they be
not without sharpness, yet the Christian life has so many sweet Animi
securitas, conscientia bona, causae fiducia, plurimum valent ad sustinendas
afflictiones.
makes even a hard state easy, or at least tolerable. And these privileges
which I have now spoken of, who can sufficiently marvel that our glorious God
does communicate to mortal men, yea vile sinners, which were once without God
in the world? I confess in setting them down, that I am much astonished to
think of his unspeakable kindness; especially because I have mentioned no
vain speculations or dreams of man's

CHAP. 12. Of the eighth privilege: Of growing in grace.
NOw as it cannot be denied but that these forementioned graces are singular
privileges: so (to pass the next) we are not to be Ephesians. 3.19. The 1 point.
God gives to his, greater grace then they could ask:
and will give more grace and greater measure of his heavenly gifts, then they
before they had them, could either ask or think. And this is worthy to be
considered with the former, as a further increase and higher degree of the
fruits of his love, that he does so largely and bountifully reach out his hand
unto them, that thereby they may be enriched as far beyond the beginnings of
their true happiness, as their beginnings were beyond their first condition
before it in the judgment of all men.

For cleerer proof hereof, we are to know, As in particular may be seen.
that he makes them to grow Note.
and ofter and easilier; and so over their lives and actions, their tongues,
their hands, their eyes, their ears. The Lord gives them far more
enlargement in prayer, then in times past, and constantly to bestow more time
in all the helps to godliness, and to scour off much rust and rubbish of the
rebellious old man and their evil qualities, as they have and see greater
reason why they should do so: yea, he works more sound comfort by the holy
Ghost, and more constant

All which the Apostle, knowing that they were dainties prepared for the Lords
beloved ones, and a great treasure, (although hidden from the world) did daily
wish and pray for, that they might be given to the church of Colossa, as he
shows in these words: After that I heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and
love toward all the Saints, I ceased not to pray for you, Col. 1.9. etc.
that you might What have I said concerning this privilege, which the Apostle
has not fully contained in these words? And yet what people are there (being
but lately turned to God as the Colossians were) which might not think, that
the graces which he put them in hope of, Ioh. 16.13.
and encouraged them to look

Examples.
Which thing may lively be seen in Moses example, if we compare the time
wherein God did first call him to go to Pharao to bring away his people from
the bondage and slavery in the which he held them in Egypt, with the days
which came after, when he brought them from thence. For when he should first
go, he showed great weakness to be in him; himself an unmeet person to go
before a king; Exodus 4.11.
and the burden too great for him to go under; as by his own words may appear
when he says: Who am I, that thou should send me unto Pharao, and that I
should bring the children of Israel out of Egypt? But Exodus 10.17.
but rather (as it plainly appears) Pharao was sore afraid of him; as in that
he confessed to him (in great anguish of heart) his sin, and desired that he
would sue unto the Lord for him (acknowledging that he could much prevail with
him) that his plagues might cease. Behold herein one of the greatest matters
(as is the fear and face of princes:) he which was afraid to look Pharao in
the face at the first; was afterward, through strength of faith by cleaving to
the Lords commandment and promise, able to do his message to him with
exceeding courage and boldness. And if in this one grace and gift of God he so
increased, (which of all other seems the hardest) thereby

And no other thing did our Savior Christ mean, when Nathaniell acknowledging
him to be very God for that he saw a token thereof in him, Nathaniell, because
I said: [I saw thee under a fig tree] beleeuest thou? Behold, John. 1.52.
thou shall see greater things then these. For thou shall see the Angels of God
ascending and descending upon the son of man: that is to say, thou shall see
far more clear signs of my Godhead; thou shall see my father from heaven,
upon earth to witness and testify the same in most familiar manner: so that
the light which now thou have thereof, and the faith by means of it, and thy
love to me, and the comfort which thy soul has thereby with other graces, are
in comparison nothing to that they shall be; even as a grain of mustard seed
is unto a tree that has boughs and branches. Math. 13.31.
And what other thing would the Lord have us to learn but this, by these
speeches, that the prodigal Luc. 15.17. Mat. 15.27.
was taken again as his natural son? and the woman of Canaan, which desired
but with the whelps to be refreshed with the crumbs which fell from their
masters table, had granted her, for her great faith, all that she would, even
the childrens dainties? Even so has the Lord provided wonderful things for
them that fear him; as it is said in the Psalm: Very glorious And as it is
written: Who would have said, that Sarah should give suck? and that the barren
should be fruitful? so who would say, that they which had in a manner nothing,
Numb. 11.28.
should abound in many graces? What was Joshua before he was chosen in the room
of Moses his master, to be governor of such a mighty people? but after he
believed him which said, Even as I have been with Moses, so will I be with
thee; he found that Ios. 1.5. Ios. 24.15. etc.
which he in no sort was like before to have been partaker of. What was there
in Solomon to discharge so great a province as he entered upon in his father
David's 1. King. 3.12.
he obtained the gracious wisdom which was marvelled at throughout the world.

The Apostles themselves the first three years after they were called to
follow Christ, had no great matter in them above other Christians: but after
that our Savior had sent them greater measure of heavenly grace from above,
who does not see by the history of their acts, how unlike they were unto such
as they had been? I do not mean, in the visible gifts of the holy Ghost
which were extraordinary; but in faith, in joy, in duties of their callings: as
he told all the eleven at his departure from them: John 16.12.
I have many things to say to you, but you cannot receive them now; yea rather,
you hardly understand but the day is at hand, when ye shall not need to ask
any questions. ver. 23.24.25.
And Peter, after he feared God, yet was dismayed at the words of a seely
damsel: Luc. 22.57.
but after greater grace received, was not afraid of the mighty, no not the
high priest. So were sundry of the churches: as that of Thessalonica, Act. 5.29.
who for all that their beginnings were famous (as appears in the first
epistle of Saint Paul, which he wrote to them) yet did they increase mightily,
1 Thessalonians. 3.7.
as may be seen in the second: for thus he writes to them: 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.4.
We ought to give thanks to God always for you (brethren) forasmuch as your
faith increases exceedingly, and the love of every one of you each to other,
abounds: so that we rejoice yea we boast of you to other churches, because of
your patience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations

And therefore from so many testimonies (which in this matter so hardly
believed, have been alleged) I think I may boldly affirm: that this is
another, yea and that a most worthy privilege, which the Lord grants out
unto his children (and he that is wise will regard it:) That they may grow and
multiply daily in the graces of his spirit; yea, that they may excel
themselves by many degrees: except we will say, Esaias 59.1.
that Gods hand is shortened in these latter days more than in former times;
or his promise untrue.

But I confess I am glad to know this privilege for mine own comfort, This
privilege causes much comfort, if it be duly considered.
and to speak of it to the stirring up of many my good brethren in this cold
Ephesians. 4.1.
) as also to awaken them who having made good and commendable beginnings long
agone, yet have taken discouragement from making answerable proceedings,
although it be written: 1. Tim. 4.15.
Let thy profiting be seen of all. And I deny not, but that the devil Though
there be many things to hinder it, yet there is also much to help to greater
grace.
but (God be thanked) they are not least unfurnished, nor unprovided of all
helps against the same, if they were acquainted with the will of God but as
they might be. Such therefore as see themselves faulty and weak this way, let
them learn of them which have better experience in the ways of God than
themselves, and which do more chearefully go before them: that they by their
example may more soundly and constantly go forward. For why should it not be
with the Lords plants in his orchard, as it is in an husbandmans?

Moreover, we see in all societies one comes awke and untoward to an
occupation, learning or any trade; yet in few years is able to guide others:
which plainly shows how he has profited himself. And can any thing be truly
said, why he which is but a young Christian only, such an one as is a lively
member of Christ, though as yet he be to be thoroughly grounded in the principles
of religion; yet can any thing (I say) be truly alleged, why he should not in
a few years be well grown and increased himself, and able also in those Heb.
5.12.14.
that as he was inexpert in the word of righteousness when he was a babe: so
after experience he may be stablished?

For to what end are all those goodly things revealed in the Scriptures: How we
may grow from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. Ps. 103.5.
and from grace to grace; and that such as are aged and well grown, should
have their inward senses of their minds exercised to discern good and evil;
and that we should, whatsoever we have attained unto more than others, Ps.
119.11.12. Romans 15.4.
yet seek to increase daily more and more? To what end (I say) are such
Scriptures and many other of like sort? Are they not written for our
instruction and edifying? The Scriptures are plentiful in proving this.
Or else, do we think that they should lie by us unknown, and we not to meddle
with them? Which if we will not Note.
) and the rather, for that our gain and the blessing of God is far more
certain in that, than in the other? Why (I say) should not we of the
ministry first and principally; and then the several congregations and
people which are taught and guided by us, Prou. 4.1^.
not only shine as lights in the dark world, but daily more and more, as the
morning light does unto the perfect day? And to be so far beyond our first
beginnings in loving and obeying that which we know, that as we were then
ready and forward in a little (when

But alas, how rare a thing is this to find either in the one or in the other?
which causes this and such other worthy prerogatives of the faithful, as are
spoken of in the Scripture to be in small account, seeing few examples are
found of this practice. And by this it may be seen what is to be understood by
growing, and what this privilege is, in the laying forth of the which I am now
occupied: namely, that a true Christian may be able to see and in truth to
affirm, that he inioieth far better liking, greater freedom, much more

And yet as great as it is, The Lord thinks it not to great for his.
I have showed that the Lord thinks it neither too great nor too good for his
children, but has bequeathed it unto them, and given

But if these and such like be not their stops and stays, let not any object
and say: that they desire with their hearts to be partakers of this privilege
and benefit, if they knew how: for if they were willing to be persuaded, to use
those means with that free and ready heart, constantly and daily, which they
sometimes are willing to do, their desire should quickly be accomplished, and
they made partakers of that which they wish; and that is, always to make
reckoning of that to be their chiefest treasure, To grow in grace and in the
knowledge Note.
and to think there is nothing more to be regarded, nor of greater weight and
necessity, then to bestow the day and the several parts of it as they are
directed, and as many of them also have done sometime, that they may see
themselves to go forward.

I appoint to them no new or strange way; but faithfulness and constancy in
keeping of that which already has been showed them; and the same or like
direction for the daily governing of themselves, which has already been

But seeing there are many of Gods dear servants, who being by the malice of
the diuill either altogether deprived of teaching, or seldom taught, or not so
taught that they may grow; here I am enforced to bewail their estate, and
mourn with them, exorting all such, that as they see any further light and
liberty then in times past: All must be ready to grow to that grace which they
may attain to.
so they endeavor to go forward, though they cannot attain to that which
others may. And withal I say unto the other which may profit better, as having
greater helps, that they forslow not the time, nor neglect to reap the
benefit daily which thereby is offered them. For as in the glory of the
kingdom of heaven the highest degree of happiness shall be inioied, because men
shall then be wholly subject unto God, and obey

As for them, which think there is no nearer fellowship to be inioied with
God, while they are here on earth, then they themselves have attained unto;
nor any greater measure of grace then they are partakers of: let them enjoy
their opinion alone, till they be ashamed of it: let us rather hope (to the
further glorifying of God) to see that to be our ordinary diet, Note.
which has been sometimes our banqueting cheer; I mean, to be able better
and better

CHAP. 13. Of the ninth privilege: That the believers shall persevere unto the
end.
NOw out of this proceeds another as necessarily, as it self arises out of
the former; and that is, Perseverance unto the end, and continuance in faith
and repentance. For as he which grows The godly shall continue to the end in
a good course. Ps. 37.37.
and by the same a proceeding from grace to grace; he makes an easy way for
him to perseverance, granting this unto him as another privilege: That he
shall not revolt and turn aside with the workers of iniquity, but shall hold
out in this holy course unto his end. This appears to be true by the
Scripture which says: Phil. 1.6.
He which has begun this good work in his, will also finish and make an end
of the same. Ioh. 6.39. and 10.28.
This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. And
again: None shall take them out of my hands. Therefore if God will finish the
work that he has begun in his children, if he will keep them safe until all
danger be past; that is, to the day of the resurrection; and if none shall take
them out of his hands: it is manifest that all such as are grafted into Christ
by faith, and who have been effectually called into the number of Gods
children through the preaching of the Gospel unto the sure and certain hope
of eternal life, setting their faces daily toward the same; shall be safely
conducted home, and abide in the same

But as great a benefit as it is, That they shall continue to the end; God
lets them know it that they shall:
yet if the Lord would hide it from them, and keep them from the knowledge of
it, it should be much lesser: and therefore this is further to be added, that
they which know themselves to be the Lords; may also know, that they shall be
preserved and kept safe against all adversary power of the devil and his
instruments, and so persevere unto the end. For although it seem to be a
mystery and a secret, that the determinate will and counsel of God concerning
this matter should be known; Though it be a secret to the world. 2. Cor. 4.3.
Ps. 25.14. Ioh. 15.15.
yet it is a secret unto such only as lie in darkness and in the shadow of
death, which through unbelief are not able to see into it because it they hold
this in persuasion, though they see not how by any thing in themselves, Reasons
why they shall know it: The first. 1. Pet. 1.4.5.
1. John 5.13. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.
as Saint John teaches: I write unto you that believe, that ye may know that
ye have eternal life: therefore they may know, that they shall be kept to the
end that they may also enjoy the same.

The second.
Furthermore to persuade this point more strongly to Gods children, (of whom
many are long held in doubting of the same) and for that it is by the Rome
flatly denied: we ought not to doubt of this, but that as God has been with
other of his servants in all ages; Ios. 1.5.
so he will be with us which are his in this age, or which shall be his
hereafter. And therefore as he has given them a good end of their pilgrimage,
although not without many combats and conflicts: so will he do also unto us
which remain, after we have suffered a little, 1. Pet. 5.9.
as the Apostle speaks. Even as Moses, Caleb, and Joshua with others, suffered
many things after they first became faithful unto the Lord; yet because he had
chosen them, and had promised to be with them, therefore he also did gather
them up to their fathers, and they finished their course in peace.

The third reason.
Besides this, all such as in whom the Lord makes his word to take root,
framing their hearts to be good and honest to receive the same into them, and
so to be fit to all Christian duties; Luc. 8.15. Heb. 3.6.
they through patience continue and hold the confidence and reioicing of their
hope unto the end, (even as the good ground yields her harvest in due
season:) when in the mean while, sundry give over, recoile and faint, who
seemed for a time to be as forward as the best. And to conclude these reasons:
what is he amongst the people of God, who for any long time has had proof of
Gods fatherly kindness, in granting him increase of knowledge, faith, peace of
conscience, and the like, but in his first entrance into the Christian course
he thought it wonderfully Note.
and once learning to know by what helps and means he does cause his to go
forward, he has grown up to setlednesse and constancy, he has found much
liberty and ease (as I may say) in the true worshipping of God: even so, it
seems not a small matter (doubtless) to any of Gods faithful servants when
they deeply consider of it, to think that they shall pass safely through all
temptations and tribulations, especially seeing they find within themselves
many wants and weaknesses, many fears and likelihoods of fainting and giving
over; and do How they persuade themselves of a good end.
when they weigh the force of Gods promise, who has warranted a good end unto
them, and the many helps by which God has provided to bring them well home;
they rest quietly, cast their care upon him, and trust that he which has said
it, will also do the same.

The which persuasion when they have once fastened upon, 4 The fruit of the
knowledge of perseverance.
(and the ofter they think on it, the more surely they shall hold it) it is
hard to say, how it reuiueth and gladdeth their hearts: it is a treasure
inualuable, when they once

These therefore, when they once know and believe it, receiving it with such
joy as I have said, do not (as carnal men imagine they will) abuse this
precious liberty to looseness and licentiousness, as not caring what they
do, or how carelessly they look to themselves, seeing they have a promise from
God, that they shall persevere in his favor and in a godly life unto their
end. They do not (I say) by this occasion wax slothful, worldly, idle,
vain, The second fruit of it.
or

It must needs the less appear (I grant) how glorious the death of many good
Christians is, 5 We must not always judge of men by the manner of their death.
because they do not live under the ordinary preaching of the Gospel; who,
except God do work in them the more extraordinarily, must needs die with
less signification of faith, patience and comfort: neither does he grant to
all a like ending of their days, nor to show the like tokens of an happy
departure; neither ought we to judge of men thereby. But this is more certain
and sufficient to uphold us; that of a good life comes a good Mark the end
of the righteous, Ps. 37.37.
and ye shall see that the end of them is peace. And so it shall go well with
the people of God, howsoever any of them may as a fatherly correction, and for
the example of others, receive such a manner of death, as might breed question
and doubt of the favor of God and of an happy end: as the Prophet of God
which came from Judah to Bethel to rebuke the idolatry of king Jeroboam, for
that he was not obedient to the commandment of the Lord, but did eat bread in
that place which was forbidden him; and therefore was slain by a Lion in 1.
King. 13.24.
And Iosia the good king of Judah, who for his rash going out to fight with
Pharaoh Nechoh king of Egypt, 2. King. 23.29.
was slain of him. So it may please God for causes best known to him (but yet
always just and most certainly for his own glory) to take away some of his
good servants suddenly: and to visit some other of them with loss of their
inward senses, understanding, of the use of reason, memory, etc. for such
effects some kind of deaseases does work; so that, in that estate they shall
speak they wot not what. In the which condition it may be, A good Christian
may possibly offer violence to himself, not knowing what he does.
that satan may (even as he does in the time of sleep occupy their brain,
and delude them sometime with fearful dreams, sometime

Which I do not speak, as minding in the least manner to move men to think,
that it is but a light and small matter to cut off unnaturally the natural
life, He that does so advisedly, is a murderer in the highest degree.
which God as a most singular earthly benefit has given: for as it is
fearful so much as to hear it named; so all they that do it, being in
perfect remembrance and knowing what they do, shall be sure to smart for it,
as for committing the highest degree of murder.

But as no man blames a young infant, nor rateth it for casting the hat or coat
into the fire, as he would a child of five or six years of age; the one
having sufficient discretion to know it does evil, the other not: so it is
with the two kinds of people, which may possibly deprive themselves of life:
the one knows what he does, and therefore shall be sure to pay dear for it;
the other does not: and having before that pange and distraction in times past
witnessed an holy and christian heart by an unrebukable conversation, he is
not to be judged according to that one action, the which he always abhorred
when he had perfect and sound remembrance; and when he did it, did he knew not
what.

And if we do what we can to comfort him, which against his will and through
the malice and tyranny of the diuill, was suddenly forced to utter some
blasphemous word against the majesty of God; and think that by good right we
ought to do so: how much more ought we to have a charitable judgment of him,
who having ever since he first gave profession to the gospel, been well
reported of the brethren and of the truth it self; has at one time when he
wanted his right and sound judgment, fallen into this heinous trespass?

And thus I having answered that which might seem to breed greatest question
of the perseverance of the godly in the favor of God, (which case 2. Cor. 6.1.
etc
And whereas persecution amongst Mat. 5.10.
then to suffer for righteousness sake: and the pain of body upon the death
bed has been found far to exceed it.

But if corrupt and slougthfull flesh should think it great gain to accept of
life in that danger through denying Christ and renouncing the truth, No cause
to desire to live, when we must needs dishonor God.
we should consider, what anguish we should live in and what a hell, when we
have deprived our selves of all comfort from God, as having renounced him; and
when we could not live but with those, who suppressing and persecuting
godliness, Eccles. 7.1.
which is better to me then all that are past, seeing I am now going into
everlasting glory?

Lastly it ought to be considered, that as the three children said: We have a
God that can deliver us: but if he do not, yet we will fall into his hands,
and commit our selves unto him, as unto a faithful keeper, not being
unmindful of his promise, which is: Call upon me in the time of need, and I
will deliver thee: Ps. 50.15.
And again: When they shall draw you before rulers, for my sake, Mat. 10.19.
beyce not And this which the Lord says of his present help in our necessity,
he will most certainly perform, we believing his promise, and waiting for the
accomplishing and fulfilling of the same.

So that in the partaking and inioying of all our privileges, we see, that
this faith is required to be as the hand by which we should receive them, and
whereby we hold and possess them and all the comfort that comes with them:
and without it, we have no part nor portion in any of them; neither those which
more especially concern the life to come, as the salvation of our souls;
neither this present life, as the other fruits of the spirit, which I Heb. 4.2.
fire nor water, then we have of it.

Here therefore I think very meet to admonish the reader of this one thing:
that seeing the diuill has no greater advantage against us in our weakness,
disgrace and fear, then by setting before our eyes the terrible conceit and
cogitation of persecution and cruel death thereby: Reason 1.
therefore store and stuff thy self with strong munition, I mean, variety of
those scriptures which may animate thee, and which have enabled the worthy and
holy Martyrs of God to set light by the fearefullest torments; particularly
these: Mat. 10.28.
Fear not And again: 2. King. 6.
we have more with us then against us: And: Greater is he that is in us, then
he that is in the world: And that in the epistle to the Corinthians: There has
no temptation taken you, 1. Cor. 10.13.
but such as appertains to man: and God is faithful, which will not suffer
you to be tempted above that ye be able, but will even give the issue with the
temptation, that ye may be able to bear it. These laid together do mightily
prevail (we believing withal, 1 Thessalonians. 5.25.
that he is faithful who has promised, and calls us heereto,

2. Reason. Romans 8.18. 2. Cor. 4.13.
Also in another sort these: The afflictions of this present life, are not
worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us: And again: Our light
affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far more excellent
and eternal weight of glory, while we look not on the things temporal which
are seen, but on things not seen, Romans 8.17.
which are eternal: Also: If we suffer with Christ, we shall also be glorified
with him. All which duly considered, with the like, are able to make us bow to
the bearing of such difficulties, as our merciful father shall see meet to try

The examples of our Savior, his Apostles, and other holy martirs, whom we
count blessed which have suffered for a good conscience, have no small force to
persuade us. Of our Savior it is said, when the holy Ghost wishes Christians
to run with patience the race that is set before them: Heb. 12.2. and. 3
Look to Jesus the author and finisher of your faith: who for the joy that was
set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the
right hand of the throne of God. Consider therefore him that endured such
speaking against of sinners, lest ye should be wearied and faint in your
minds. Of the Apostles, Paul writes this: We are afflicted on every side, 2.
Cor. 4.8.9.10.
yet are we not in distress; we are persecuted, but not: 2 Cor. 6.9. and. 10
And again: Chastened, but not killed; sorrowing yet always reioicing; as
poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing yet possessing all things. Heb.
11.36.37 38.
Of the Martyrs this is said: They were tried with mockings and scourgings yea
moreover by bonds and imprisonment; they were stoned, they were hewn asunder,
they were slain with the sword, they wandered up and down in sheep skins
and in goat skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented: whom the world
was not worthy of; they wandered in wildernesses, and mountains, and dens
and caves of the earth. Oh how should

Whosoever forsakes house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, Marc. 10.29.
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake and the gospels, shall
receive an hundredfold now at this present, and in the world to come life
everlasting:) I say, beside this, alas what a poor life is this that we lead
here? where few Come lord Jesus, come quickly: Reu. 22.20.
we desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ.

But to end this discourse, seeing God has taught his children to provide for
the hardest, and how they may persevere in a good course unto the end, even
through great tribulations and persecutions, and much more, when they have an
easier passage without them; let this be holden as the greatest of all the
rest, that they have this as a singular prerogative granted them of God, To.
8.38.
and that thereby they may say in reverence and confidence: Nothing shall
separate us from God, neither life nor death, neither things present nor things
to come.

Secondly, that we use often to meditate of the vanity of all things, and of the
contempt of the world, and set our minds on things heavenly; Col. 3.1. and. 2.
that so we may preserve and continue that liberty.

Thirdly, that we hold fast our reioicing in Christ daily. 1. Cor. 5.31.


Fourthly, that we mortify all sin, and keep it out of love with us: Col.
3.5.
which is a plucking out of the sting of sin.

Lam. 3.
which is a part of denying our selves: so we shall welcome and go under
greater when they come, yea even death it self. And let us know, that he who
endeavors not to hold fast these, is like to find any other estate harder and
full of weariness.

And thus much be said of this privilege, Of the perseverance of the godly
unto their end: and so of all the other which are inioied in this life. All
which although they be of so singular price as I have declared, yet if they had
not other adioined unto them which are immortal and perpetual, and should
then be inioied, when these temporary prerogatives shall be at an end; our
lives 1. Cor. 15.19.
If in this life only we have hope of Christ, we are of all men the most
miserable; and yet both together, unmatchable.

CHAP. 14. Of the tenth and last privilege, inioied perfectly in the life to
come, but begun here.
SO that when we have had our part in all these, then comes the greatest, and
that which makes all these great: and that is, the pleasures at Gods right
hand for evermore, What this privilege is. Ps. 16.11. Math. 25.
and the glory, It cannot be conceived how great.
whereof I have some experience: I confess (I say) that I cannot express to
my contentation, my mind about the same; and do fear that in speaking of it,
I shall rather make it seem less, then if I said nothing: yet somewhat,
seeing this place does so require.

This estate therefore of the faithful after this life, the scripture sets
out by earthly comparisons and similitudes, to our capacity, for that we are
not It is shadowed out by earthly comparisons.
if in it own nature, it were described unto us: and especially, by the
resemblances of those things which we do most affect and delight in, as
honor, treasure, riches, bewty, friends, pleasure, joy, inheritance and
possession of our own. Hebr. 13.14. 1. Pet. 1.18.
Behold therefore here prepared for thee (o happy Christian) an habitation,
not made with hands, but everlasting in heaven: an inheritance immortal,
undefiled, etc. not purchased with gold and silver, but with a far more
excellent price; for what is more desired then to live with our friends? But
lift up thine eyes, and see how God has prepared for thee the company of the
celestial spirits, With whom their fellowship shall be.
namely, his holy angels, and elect people, to eat and drink with at his table
for evermore: I mean What joy they shall have in heaven.
Pleasure and joy how is it sought after? yea, what is welcome without them?
And that thou may know, that the Lord has liberally provided for thee this
way: know and understand, that the joy which there is possessed, is such, as it
causes a continual singing and thanksgiving.

Their honor.
And what honor can be greater, then to be the kings sons and daughters; yea
to reign triumphantly after we have overcome death, sin, hell and the
devil, the greatest enemies that ever were conquered? The like I might An
amplifying of these prerogatives.

A further commending of the^. 1. Cor. 2.9. Far greater then princes.


And all these privileges are so much the greater, because as their habitation
it self is permanent and everlasting: so are all the treasures which are
inioied therein, everlasting also. And therefore the precious things of the
kingdom of heaven are said to be such, as no eye has seen, no ear has
heard, neither is the heart of man able to conceive. The happiness of princes
has been inioied, and therefore is known what and how great it is;

The pure estate and vncorrupt of things in Adams innocence, but a shadow of
heaven.
if we might have seen all these in their perfection with him which was made
Lord of them, even man when he was yet without sin in the world, what a
glorious habitation should it have been? And yet, but as a courtyard or
entry into a kings palace should it have been, in respect of the heavenly
mansion, which is the celestial Jerusalem: for this is called but his
footstool,

And therefore if the Lord did so adorn this earth, as that it is yet full of
admiration to see but the prints of his glory, his power and wisdom therein;
and yet it is but for a season, even a while to be a place of refreshing for
us: who can think how magnificent the kingdom of heaven is, which with all
the infinite commodities he has made to be a perpetual habitation and
dwelling place for all his beloved ones? And so likewise it is an high degree a
day there, Ps. 84.10. and 87.3.
is better then a thousand elsewhere: and the prerogatives of a Christian are
admirable. Paul was wrapped into the third heaven, and had heard things that
were not to be uttered; it is said, that he was lift up with the abundance of
revelation: 2. Cor. 12.5. Mat. 17.2.
and, When Christ was but transformed, that his garments did shine as the
sun, Peter was astonished: how much more then with this glory? which in the
former are but dimly represented?

As for the further describing of it by the particular kinds of pleasures Of
things uncertain we may not speak boldly.
I will not (I say) wade further then I may wade safely; what the The joys of
heaven cannot be conceived.
I know not: It is enough, that I am sure they are so great and many, that they
cannot be once thought of according to their worthiness, no not of the
wisest, who can see furthest and enter most deeply into matters.

Only this I will say, and with this I will end: That the Lord shall there
wipe away every tear from the eyes of his children; and they which sowed in
tears before here on earth, shall there reap in joy; death shall no more
reign, neither shall there be any more lamentation, nor crying, nor sorrow:
Reu. 21.11. etc.
clear as crystal, etc. And after the soul in paradise shall in her kind
have inioied the pleasures there, then shall the body (for inioying the
fullness thereof) be adioined to it, Phil. 3.20. 1. Cor. 15.43. 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.
2 Thessalonians. 3.5.
and made like to the glorious body of Jesus Christ: and be glorious it self
also. The use is comfort, and such a waiting for the coming of the son of
God for our last and full deliverance, that we may well testify, that in these
our houses of clay we are but strangers. So that if we lay this privilege with
the rest which I have mentioned in this treatise, (all which are, and properly
belong to the true believers) Sheba said to Solomon when she had heard his
wisdom: It may be said of the privileges, as the Queen of Sheba said of
Solomon.
It was a true word that I heard in mine own land of thine estate and wisdom;
howbeit I believed not this report, till I came and had seen it with mine
eyes: but lo, the one half was not told me; for thou have more wisdom and
and prosperity, then I have heard by report: So it may be said by Gods people
(who have already in heaven a taste of the glory of the kingdom:) It was a
true report which we heard by the mouth of his preachers, concerning the Numb.
23.5.
even as Balaam by the spirit of God, prophesied of his people the Israelites,
when he looked upon them dwelling according to their tribes: How goodly are thy
tents, o Jacob; and thy habitations, o Israel? as the valleies are they
stretched forth, and as gardens by the rivers side, etc.

And as all these privileges are great, and we have good proof that God has
given his dear children liberty to enjoy them: so this further commends Ioh.
14.17.
(which the world cannot have) and most heavenly comfort and peace thereby; and
having learned experience

And concerning the effectual knowing of the will of God out of his word, to
believe all the forementioned privileges, that it is a peculiar gift of God to
his elect, and that no other (no, not the greatest and most judicial clerks
and divines) have it; that saying of our Savior, is a plain and clear proof
to his disciples: To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom,
Mat. 13.11. and 11 25. 1. Cor 1.26. Esai. 6.9.
but unto others not; that the prophecy of Esaias may be fulfilled, In hearing
they shall Whereby we may understand, that it is a singular prerogative to Gods
children to have the effectual knowledge of the word of God, whereby they may
see their liberties: which others cannot have.

And therefore the Lord says in Ezekiell, that he will take away from his
children their old hearts and give them new; and write his law in them, that
they may see the excellent things and wonderful which are contained therein:
which others do not. So that, although the unbelievers and unregenerate may
have knowledge in the letter; Romans 2.28.
yet are they not led after it by the spirit which is Ps. 50.16. 2. Tim. 3.5.
though they have a show of it, their hearts tell them, that they are not the
matters which take them up in the delight of them, for they hate to be reformed
by them; neither are they so precious in their eyes, as that which they have
gotten by

Whereas the word of God that reuealeth his will about all these, Ps. 19.10.
Ps. 119.35.
is more Ps. 119. part 2.
but that which is said of the man of God, That he had more pleasure in the
word of god then in all manner of riches, and that they were the joy of his heart,
his matter of song and his companions to talk and solace himself with; it is
far from them. Ps. 1.2. Romans 7.22. Job. 21.14.
Therefore when the blessed of the Lord are set forth in the scriptures, to
delight in the law of God: the wicked on the contrary, are described to speak
thus: Depart from us (o Lord); we desire not, nor are delighted in the
knowledge

And is not this a royal gift then, that whereas men's hearts naturally can
take no pleasure in the heavenly Manna of Gods word, but soon loath and wax
weary of it; that Gods people who know the price of it, Ps. 119 54. Ps. 119.77.
and Ps. 16.3.
may make the same their song, their joy and their delight: that so they may
draw out of it all good things as they have opportunity? Which seeing others
cannot do, therefore they seek vain delights to pleasure in, and that which
ministers found delight indeed, they can in their greatest need and heaviness
have no

And through this knowledge and delight that they have in the scriptures, which
certify them of all these heavenly prerogatives, they get experience in
themselves of the things which they leame therein, what is the happiest estate
of life that here can be inioied, 1. Tim. 6.8.
even that, which has the promises of this life and of that which is to come.
Mat. 5.18.
They grow wise in observing, that God verifieth indeed all that he has spoken
in his word, and not a iotte thereof does fail; and therefore they become more
resolute every day against all evil and sin, Ps. 119.101.
because they see that God will be revenged upon every evil Ps. 89.31.
that he keeps promise toward his, who rest on him, even in He that loves
me, John. 14.21.
shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and will show my self unto
him: Verse. 23.
He that keeps my word, as he shall be loved of my father, so we will come to
him, and abide with him: whereby he means, that he will make known his mind
and will to them as familiarly, as they which use to converse one with another,
and eat and drink together: for the which cause also Ps. 87.2.
and not to servants. For he loves Zion (his militant church which he has
chosen, and will dwell there and delight in her) more then all the habitations
of Jacob, that is, then all other beside it.

And what fruit this near communion with God does bring, which his faithful
servants have offered them, it may easily be coniectured; because, as Solomon
says: Prou. 18.24.
The heart of a friend rests in his friend; and a friend is nearer than a
brother: and if the perfection of love be joy, there must needs be great joy to
Gods faithful people, when they are so dear to the Lord and he Luc. 10.20.
John. 16.24. 2. Cor. 1.12.
and in many respects, through the hope of eternal life, through true prayer,
and by a good conscience (as has been said:) so, in that they know his will
and have proof of his familiarity with them, (as it pleases him to call it)
their joy is yet more increased, especially after a longer continued
acquaintance with the Lord in his word. And what is happiness (such I mean as
in this present life may be inioied) if this be not; namely, to partake all
these with him? thus to go in and out before the Lord, and to have him thus
the staff of our comfort in all estates? Which makes ready to die and fit to
live, and gives greater gain in both, then in any

This in few words is that which I wish the true Christian reader to meditate
on and consider, which all Gods people have so great need to enjoy and partake
Sion, and are holden down with sundry and sore afflictions till they faint
again, (as though there were no comfort to be found for them, to the easing of
their heavy hearts) that they may consider what the Lord has provided for the
easing of them, even this: to believe, that all the forementioned privileges
belong unto them: that though their sorrows be many and great, yet

And this will recompense, abundantly all the labor that has been taken,
and need no more be lost when it is once inioied. And therefore if the
believers may know by Gods word, that they have a part in all the forementioned
prerogatives, and therefore delight in his word which brings such tidings

And that I say no more of this, it is no hard matter to conceive, what sweet
consolation a believing heart inioyeth which has experience of this: for he
believing the promises of these things, from day to day, and having most sweet
peace of conscience with confidence, as a fruit of believing them already,

Oh that all who fear God did believe this, as they may boldly and ought
confidently to do, that they might enrich themselves by having their part in
it from time to time. All these excellent privileges as they may, so they
should be known by experience.
So that nothing is more to be lamented in the world then this: that God having
called men to be partakers of so excellent privileges, and appointed for them
such variety of blessings, (whereof I have mentioned but some part) that they
should be so ignorant, as not to desire to know them; so careless as to reject
them; so obstinate as to tread them under foot: and so to lead a life (I may
truly say) full of misery for want of them.

Objection.
How can we be persuaded that God has provided this liberty for his in this
world, Ps. 126.5.
when both Scripture calls our life here (when we be in greatest prosperity)
a wandering up and down heavily, as in a pilgrimage or wilderness? and a
sowing in tears, that is to say, full of grief? and Christ tells his, that
in the world they shall find tribulation, and that by many afflictions and
persecutions we must enter into his kingdom? And experience also teaches, that
these things are even so? Answer.
To the which I answer, affirming all that is said to be most Ps. 34.19. Ps.
130.7. Afflictions unto the children of God, prove the truth of his promises
when they are made to go under them.
and namely in this, wherein he feels his need greatest. And therefore these
afflictions which our gracious God has appointed and promised to bring us
through, are a most sure proof of this which I say: namely, that he has given
most precious promises and prerogatives to us, by the which only

Therefore seeing God of his unspeakable love has bequeathed to his children
so large a portion, even a taste of the heavenly ioies in this life, which
makes his chastisements sweet, and the yoke of his commandments easy unto
them, and all difficulties to be overcome of them, and pours such

Afflictions accompany the dear children of God, not that they can or do
extinguish this joy, but to keep them from all vain and deceitful reioicing.
And as for such as think, that it is weak reioicing, that is and may be
accompanied with so many afflictions, as our life is subject to: they must
know, that such corrections are seen by our heavenly father to be meet for
us, and to keep us from vain and deceitful reioicings; and that these
fatherly chastisements

Others object thus: Are there so many commodities in the christian life? How
comes it to pass then, Objection.
that they show it not forth, and that the godly of all sorts, poor and rich,
one and other, do not let their light so shine among men, that they may cause
them by seeing such admirable things in them as are not to be found commonly in
the world beside, to ask and haste after them? For where are they (say these
Obiecters) which have so much grace appearing in them above other men? In their
dealings we find it not: in their Answer.
To whom I answer, that al these things are true, which have been said of the
great privileges and prerogatives of the people of God, Ps. 87.3.
and much more according to that which is written in the Psalm: Wonderful
things are spoken of thee, o thou city of God: but yet not so easily descried
nor perceived in the persons who enjoy them; and that for these causes:

Spiritual things are not easily discerned. Ps. 45.14.
seeing their most precious gifts are spiritual and inward (according to that
which is written; The kings daughter is all glorious within) and therefore not
easily seen and beheld of such as have but outward and bodily eyes: their
comeliness and beauty is like the curtains of the tabernacle, the outward and
upper couerings whereof were of goats hair, rams skins, The beauty and
happiness of Gods children is specially inward.
and badgers; but the inward were of fine twined linen, blew silk, purple and
scarlet, with the most exquisite imbroidering of the Cherubins upon them: So is
the outward estate of Gods servants in this world, ill favored and deformed in
the eyes of men; but inwardly, beautiful as the lilie, Note.
and sweet and What the inward beauty of a Christian is.
as faith, hope, confidence, a pure heart, a good conscience, a well governing
of themselves; and with these, meekness, patience, mercifulness, love, etc.
being not perceived of them who neither know them, nor have them, nor love
them: what marvel is it, though they ask for that in them, which yet is
before their eyes, Ioh. 18.5.
(as the soldiers that sought Christ even when they spoke to him) and though
they say, They behold no such grace in them; which they can not discern? The
same may be said of the inward comfort and joy in the holy Ghost, which is more
worth than the world.

The second cause why these Obiecters see nothing worthy the following in The
children of light contrary to the children of darkness, can not seem lovely
in their eyes.
because the gifts of God which appear outwardly in their lives, do the more
provoke them to wrath and rage, because they see their course is not like their
own, but contrary unto it: for they think themselves disgraced by them,
seeing they walk not after the same excess of riot that they themselves do;
and therefore speak they evil of them. 1. Pet. 4.4.
Their innocence and harmless living in the world, and that they will have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rebuke them rather, and
their Christian carrying of themselves in their ways with moderation, wisdom
and constancy; is charged to be hypocrisy, preciseness, and newfangled
singularity.

A third cause why the happiness of Christians is not known. Pro. 14.9.
being rather felt in their own hearts than seen of strangers, and their
reproach in the world great, and their condition counted unfortunate: how can
the happiness of them be known, as I have said, although it be no less, yea
rather far greater, than I have set it down to be? No, no, they must have
eyes as clear as crystal, who can see and behold this.

And that I may leave no doubt in any man's mind about this matter, A fourth
cause why the godly seem not beautiful in the eyes of the wicked, is because
of some infirmities which they epsy in them.
I must desire them to think, that my meaning is not, that Gods children, for
all the privileges wherewith God honors them, both here, and especially
will do in the life to come, are therefore without their several infirmities
more than other, and do not believe nor regard the doctrine of the Scripture,
1. Pet. 1.6.
even then is their estate more to be desired, than the other in their greatest
flourishing. For they are beloved of the Lord Read I say 63.9. Cant. 1.4. Why
the Lord suffers the godly to fall.
yet still for all that, and most dear unto him, as it is written: I am
black, ye daughters of Jerusalem, yet comely, etc. And of their falls and
infirmities, I say, that therefore they departed from the good and perfect way
for a moment, that they might thereby see and bewail their vileness, The
fruit of the infirmities of professors, what it is.
and other heat and intemperancy of heart, etc.) to the offense of many, that
they do exceedingly abate the beauty and glory of their profession. And it
must needs be confessed and granted, that few Christians are as they might and
ought to be: but goodness is too sparing, and grace is too sore dimmed and
darkened in most, even of the best and forwardest: and few carry themselves as
they might and ought to do in their course, by giving good example. The fruit
of the godly conversation of professors, what it is.
whereas if it were a more common thing, that the well-willers of the Gospel
were more faithful, wise, watchful, loving, harmless, fruitful, etc. it
would cut and wound the hearts and consciences of the bad, and also encourage
many of the weaker sort unto their duties. But yet shall the lives of them be
glorious before God, and shining lights to such as can see and discern; whiles
they that carpe at them, and seek to disgrace them, shall be as the mists and
clouds, that shine not but hinder the light rather. And whereas it may be said,
that some of them have excellent gifts of God in them: yet the truth is, where
sanctification, even the salt of grace, is not Solomon says) like a ring in a
swines snout. And thus much of the privileges of the true believers.

The end of the sixth Treatise.
THE SEVENTH TREATISE: OF THE OBJECTIONS
CHAP. 1. Of the sum and order of this Treatise.
the weak believers about it to trouble them: I will therefore (as I said) in

The order of this Treatise.
And I will do it in this manner: First, to answer them who object, that there is
no need of any daily directing of us, as long as we have the Scriptures; and
therefore, neither this which is before set down by me, nor any other, is of
any use, or to any purpose: this I will answer in the next chapter. Then I will

CHAP. 2. Of the first objection: That their needs no direction daily besides
Gods word; and therefore this is needless.
ANd first, if any do marvel why I write any direction at all as though God
had not set down in the scripture a way for us all to walk in: to this I
answer, That if that were a good reason why no help for men's weakness
should be set forth in writing, because it is the same which is in the
scripture; then it The cause why this work was taken in hand.
being conversant among the people, of whom, many have received the gospel
gladly, what great wants and infirmities are among them: and as diverse of them
conceive and understand that which is taught them with much ado; so they as
hardly keep it in memory, and therefore make the less use of it. So that,
although all things necessary to salvation and godliness, be taught one time
or other, where an ordinary ministry is; yet, as I

And besides, I have known many of great forwardness and ready to receive any
profitable lessons, 2. These. 3.4.
(even as the Thessolonians were) who having Many for want of direction, walk
vnsetletly.
that they might have found some direction to lead them into their way, and to
hold them constantly in the same. And this they have done, for that they were
so soon unsettled and waxed loose hearted in a small time and short space,
although a little before they felt themselves in some good case, even ready and
willing to serve God: which men being directed how to keep constant, shall not
a little be eased. And if you will say, They may hear their preachers and so
learn to stay themselves: who does not know, that they must proceed in their
teaching as occasion is offered by their text; which does not fall out commonly
such or in

Now if you ask, Men loath to open their griefs.
why they do not open their case and make their grief known to their
teachers: I say, some of them are ashamed, some are afraid to show their
estate to others, the devil holding them in ignorance and distrust. Solomon
speaks of (calling them fools for meddling with the scriptures: and this is
the comfort which they find at their hands. These things when I have weighed
and thought upon, what light, ease of heart, Cant. 5.7. and. 3.3.
and consolation many of Gods dear servants have been deprived off for want
of direction, and how many of them have walked heavily and with hanging down
of the head; and all because they have seen their frailty great, felt their
wants many and grievous, teaching which is among them, (that I say nothing what
good it may do others)

This direction may help others.
Besides this, such as find no want of it, because they know not whether there
be any easier way to guide them, then they already understand, there is no
doubt but many of them, if there were any extant, would keep a more sound
course in their lives then now they do, having (I speak of many of them) none
other help then their public teaching, which in many places is both seldom
and slight.

And to speak plainly, (if it be expedient to speak thus: for the love of
Gods people constrains me) I have my self languished long, The Authors own
experience*
(though not Great gain of the direction.
who blesses the means, which are used in simplicity) that his labor in the
practice of it, shall be plentifully recompensed, yea his gain by many degrees
shall be greater then his travel. This I say now, seeing by the importunity of
many I have made it common to Hurt and loss for want of it.
it both causes great distraction and unsettledness in them, though otherwise
good men, and brings much barrennes of heart, gives more strength to their
corruption and more advantage to the adversary, and therewithal depriueth them

I have spoken much of the privileges of a godly life, though no tongue of
Angels can sufficiently set out the same: yet many (no doubt) of good hope have
not found it so, Privileges not inioied without such direction.
for that they have had but weak helps to set them forward, in having their
part in them, but are ignorant rather of the variety of

For from whence are there so many heauinesses, complaints of vnsetlednes,

I know that it is not the virtue, nor the power of outward means using, nor
of any direction that can bring our lives in frame: but yet for all that, Not
the bare means have such virtue.
when they are reverently and confidently used, God has promised that it shall
not be in vain, but they shall avail much to our benefit. What meant the Lord
Jesus else, to charge us to watch and pray, to hear and read? and the Apostle
also, in the name of God to exhort us, whiles we are in this warfare of the
world to Foiled by satan without this armor.
as many eue^ of the better sort are, though some of them through spiritual
slumber feel it not, neither perceive it in a long time, till it please God to
awake them.

But to return to persuade, Order is in all other things, and should be in
christian life most of all.
that it is necessary that Gods people should be too far gone out of the way
in some gross dishonouring of God:

If any should think me unadvised to call in this earnest manner, for daily
directing of men privately, Though public means be of an excellent use, yet
private necessary.
as though I set little by, or made small account of the helps which they have
in public assemblies; I have said before, that I prefer these before the
other: yet it may please them to understand, that besides the benefit of them,
which is very great and singular, every man shall find it more then
necessary, that they be not idle nor unprofitable at home We are not left as
strangers to hear seldom from God, but to walk with him.
but should have daily recourse to him, and throughout the day be with him, and
not as the wandering man, who

If this state be thought too precise by some; let them consider the examples
of those who are commended in the Scriptures for their constant walking with
God: This is not too precise. 2 Thessalonians. 1.3. 2 Thessalonians. 3.4.
how they were taken up with the love of him, and possessed of faith, etc. for
so the Apostle speaks of the Thessalonians; that they abounded in these, and
were ready to do whatsoever he commanded them: David prayed that he might not
wander from Gods commandments. Ps. 119.10.
What is here commended in them, but that which these mislike and speak
against at this day in us, who labor for some measure of it? Is that il in us,
which was good in them? There want no proofs nor examples to teach what we
should do in this behalf; but the flesh rocketh asleep even many good
Christians. But whatsoever these Obiecters allege, who have not tasted of
these dainties, let us be most glad to hear, and more glad to learn; that the
beloved of the Lord may dwell in safety under his protection all the day long.
Deuteronomy. 33.12.
And if we have not known so much, as that God has left us such direction to
enjoy his presence in some continual manner amongst us: then let us now


But I having thus showed the cause why I took this in hand, and answered
them, who may think that no direction for a Christian through the day is of
necessity to be imposed upon him: now I will proceed to satisfy the
reasonable about this particular direction, or the like in effect, by answering
such objections as may be brought against the same. Some perhaps Second
objection: This direction can not be daily kept.
neither have they heard, that good men in other ages have been given to any
such speculatiue life, except the monks and friars, and other of that rabble:
they will not deny but it is good, sometime to give our selves to prayer and
other good exercises; but every day to do it, Unjust cauils against this
direction.
and to be tied unto them and to other duties before mentioned, were a toil
intolerable which no man can like of, and a taking away of all delight from our
lives. Again, they say: What should become of men's labor and business in the
world? how should it go forward? Also they say: It were a strange world to see
men live now after such a sort, and a bringing in of Monkery again.

The true lets which hinder many from this course.
partly their own ignorance, vnacquaintednesse with this course, and
unableness: and partly the taunts, mocks and other discouragements, which
profane and ungodly men would pursue them with, who should walk so unlike
other men of Answer.
If it were impossible to bring our selves to such a course, (for here is no
perfection to be dreamed of by me, That it is possible to be thus guided. Ps.
1.2.
but an holy directing of our selves daily toward the kingdom of heaven) why
would the prophet David have said: Blessed is the man that exercises himself
and meditateth in Gods law day and night? Also why would he have said it of
himself, Ps. 119.97.
That all the day long he was considering it in his mind, that

And such examples this present age of ours (God be praised) does afford, (he
vouchsafe to multiply the number of them, for one an hundred) who do so pass
through the affairs of this world, that the Christian life is unto the^ not in
word (as it is with many which deceive themselves) but indeed and sensible 1.
Tim. 1.5.
yet that they bridle and bring under their corruptions, to the maintaining of
a pure heart, a good conscience and unfeigned faith which works by love, to
the praise of God, and their own comfort. The which will not be brought to
pass through security and negligence, but whiles they give al possible
diligence hereunto, Forwardest must be paternes to others.
and set themselves in some good order and daily direction for the preserving
of the same. So that if there be any before others in this practice, who by
experience have found how mightily God has blessed

There is no reason in it, that such as serve God in the day (as it falls out
The idle may not look for such gain, as the painful professor. What
experience we should have in our lives. Note.
or using the means for the quickening of their faith, should either find the
godly life so easy, or be able to judge of the best way to it, as they who
have painfully traveled in it, and spent much time about it. For they must be
able to report what repulses they have had, and how they have recovered their
strength again: what temptations, and how they have resisted them: what
hindrances and discouragements whereby they have been long held back, and
how they have overcome them. They must be able to say what hardness is in the
godly life, and how it is made easy: how flitting and soon vanishing our
faith is, and how it is strengthened and confirmed: what comfort and
unspeakable peace God Mat. 2.28. Ps. 19.11.
And when God has thus trained and made them fit for his service, then shall
they find great ease and reward in serving God, and find by proof the
exceeding benefit of a daily direction for the well ordering of their lives;
yea they shall count themselves much unsettled, when any day shall pass them,
which is not consecrated to God in that sort. Of such I wish them to learn the
way, Weak should learn of others.
who would gladly please God (they say) as well as others, but yet all means
are tedious to them to use, besides

And as we are wont in our matters of law to resort to them for counsel, which
are best acquainted with the laws, and best experienced in them; and in
dangerous sicknesses to resort to those Physicians, who besides their knowledge
have been a long time practisers, and have done many great cures: Best
practisers be fittest teachers.
so in the practice of the rules for a godly life (all which be grounded upon
the word of God) none can so well teach how, as they who have taken greatest
pains in the practicing of them by long experience, besides their knowledge

CHAP. 4. Of answer to this reason against the practice of daily direction:
That it is toilesome and inconvenient, taking away all pleasure from men, and
hinders their labors.
But now I have showed that it is not impossible, Is not irksome to be thus
guided, but greatest pleasure.
I will further answer their reasons, whereby they are led to think it a toil
intolerable, and that which would bring exceeding inconvenience. Gal. 6.16.
Iam. 4.17.
that there is no pleasure nor comfort in the world like it; no, nor (to them
who know it should be so) without it, howsoever men think otherwise. Which if
I can prove, I hope they will be far from this mind, to account it toil or
wearisomnesse. And for proof hereof, they Ps. 119.99.100. Prou. 8.11.
experienced, or our teachers; yet of the same wisdom Solomon says: All
pleasures are not to be compared unto her: therefore if thou desire pleasure,
be wise, and provide that thy soul be safely kept from evil in the day, and
throughout. For if it must needs be granted, that it is good at some time;
then it follows, that the oftener and more usually it is kept so, it is so
much the better. And if it be the greatest pleasure of all other, Deuteronomy. 12.18.
and 19.
or throughout the day. Agreeably to the which, that man of God, who was so
well experienced in these matters, testifies, Ps. 119.14.
not of some one time of his life, but of some whole part thereof: I have had
as much delight and pleasure in thy testimonies, as in all manner of riches. But
you will say: What is this to prove, that he was thus minded through the day? He
speaks (I say) of his daily course in such places; as it is easy enough to
see, Ps. 119.97. ver. 23. and 10.
according to that which I alleged before: All the day long is my meditation
in thy law, that is, (as he expounds himself elsewhere) casting and

For wherefore does the godly Christian take order to have his recourse to God
by prayer, meditation, reading, when he can have opportunity? wherefore is he
fearful of ill company, and desirous of good? why dares he not fashion
himself after the world in their common profane delights? why is the holy
assembly of Saints most desired of him; but because it is the pleasure, which
he seeks above other? when no man doubts, but that he has both Psalm. 88.
Heb. 10.33. and 11.24.
and so the more Christian-like, the more pleasure. Why would the best
Christians in all ages, suffer mocks, reproaches, displeasure of their friends
and betters, loss of their goods and other liberties: and in such times and
places as their profession has been pursued with imprisonment, Heb. 11.24.
banishment, yea, and death it self; go under all with free choice, rather
then to enjoy all other pleasures of sin, as other have done?

This is not pleasure to all:
Indeed I grant, that this is not pleasure unto all: neither is that to be
proved But only to the upright in heart.
that they may not offend him: This unto the upright in heart is such a
pleasure, as without it there is none to yet the issues thereof are the ways
of death: Prou. 14.12. and 9.17.
Insomuch that not only stolen waters, which are commonly most sweet, that is,
unlawful liberties, are mixed with poison; but even the pleasures of wealth
and marriage, Math. 19.23. Luc. 14.20.


Thus it may appear, that it is no wearisome thing to be settled in such a
course (wherein we may please God) as frailty will permit: but the sound and
chiefest pleasure rather, yea and besides, it is that only, Godliness
seasoneth all earthly liberties.
which so seasoneth our earthly and temporal liberties, that so they become
lawful and pleasant to us also; and the duties and works of our callings, that
they be not (as to others) burdensome and tedious. If all find it not so, yet
let the truth remain, and let such learn otherwise. And if by the
untowardness and rebellion of the heart, there be sometime found
unpleasantness and wearisomnesse in good things, even amongst the best, so
that they be overcome thereof:

But another reason why this course is alleged to be absurd, Godliness no
hinderance to our callings:
and inconvenient, is this: that men's labors should hereby be hindered, and
their callings neglected; and so poverty grow upon the land, and many evils
thereby: which where absurd, and not to be suffered. To the which it may be
answered, that godly thrift, and Christian gaining, and lawful prospering in
the world, But the best way to thrive.
do arise from hence: when a man does so go to work in the world, and follow
his dealings, that he be sure, that he goes about them with a mind Note.
and when he does faithfully and devoutly commend himself and his affairs
every day to Gods providence, and rest therein quietly; and when he does as it
were arm himself with circumspect heed-taking and wise regard, that he behave
not himself profanely in the world, nor after the manner of men, but according
to that which is written: Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, 1.
Cor. 10.31.
do all to the glory of God. And when for these purposes he shall resolve with
himself, in the most convenient sort that he can, to begin the day in some
Christian and godly manner, as I have set down in the daily direction, that all
the rest of the day following, he may savor of the same; he shall in his
duties Math. 6.33.
First seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and other things shall
be cast upon you. And this is the labor, which should go with religion. This
ought Christians to endeavor to come unto: wherein although all which fear
God, have not a like measure of wisdom and grace, yet let them all, wherein
they want and be behind in any part of duty, therein be willing to see their
failings and slacknesse; and so shall it go well with them, and they shall
daily come forward, Why many find not Gods blessings on their labors.
and are most like to get the same) yet not attempting these things through
Gods help, not usually and often craving his grace and direction, not having
their minds seasoned with piety and the fear of God, not being patient,
sober-minded, and watchful against the evils which will meet with them, Iam.
4.1
they are needy (that is, unsatisfied) for all their shifts, and therefore
never the richer: and many of them poor indeed, putting their money into a
bottomless purse, and that although they toil for much, yet enjoy nothing.
Which kind of men provide ill for themselves many other ways, in omitting the
chief duties which appertain to them; for they fill their lives with much

And whereas they apply another proverb in reproach to them which will first
see God served thus throughout their course, namely this: That the furthest way
about, is the nearest way home, with the^; they need not be ashamed of it. For
as the nearest way does not always bring a man soonest to his iournies Labor
without seeking first to God, is loss.
as soon as they are up, and (as they say) from their bed to their business,
refusing or omitting the daily duty of renewing their prayers, their purposes
and care to live godly; they may (I deny not) go a nearer way then the other,
but they do nothing less then attain that which they seek. For as all to
whom I direct my speech, are such as would feign please God, as well as be
maintained in the world; so they must look for their success and blessing
from him, and not from their own labor, industry and wisdom: and therefore
they must daily seek it at his hands by hearty prayer; and as they must not

The danger of such a course.
For while they do so, they are snared by the diuill: who sets, not hedges
and ditches in their way, (for by them yet they might have passage, though more
slow) but he pitcheth nets to entangle them, and lime twigs to hold Their case
is worst that see no danger.
So that often times it falls out thereby, that they are constrained by the
check of their conscience to cease from their labors for a time, or lose some
piece of their bodily rest, to recover their inward peace again with the Lord
and the good mind which was in them before, (if they be such as had any better
at any time, for of such I speak:) whiles the other who go to work
religiously, and take direction from God, break not off their labors at all,
but go forward, and that in quietness also.

A simile.
For as he riddeth not most work, who goes to it most early, when his
instruments which he should use in the performance of the same, be blunt and
dull; seeing, besides that he wearieth himself, the work is slacked and
marred: so he that will not frame himself, so to perform the duties of his
outward calling, that his mind may still attend upon God by faith, goes about
it preposterously, and shall find his success answerable. And if it be thus
with the better sort, judge in what case they be, who, so that the penny may
come in, care not though they be as like the ox and the ass in sense of good
things and understanding, as they

CHAP. 5.
ANother reason why men cannot follow any direction daily, as is required, is
this: They say, that it would be no world, if all men should be brought to such
a mopish life: they mean, there should be no familiarity nor good fellowship
amongst men; one should have no dealings with another; and so in time, This
course would not break off any lawful societies.
traffic and merchandise would fail: and by means hereof, leaving of count
it a strange thing (as the Apostle says) that other men run not after the
same excess of riot that they do: 1. Pet. 4.4.
and therefore speak they evil of them. But though it would seem strange,
yet would it not bring an overthrow nor confusion in states, in order, in
laws, neither break off societies and fellowships amongst men: but every man
should much better carry himself in all these, and the things themselves be
stablished more purely, and the evil that cleaves to them, be the more
easily and sooner purged. And as for the taking away and the breaking of ill
customs, Good to break off all ill fellowships.
and the corrupt and evil fashions and talk which do drive God from men's
tables and companies, it were to be wished, although it should be with the
murmuring and complaining of many, yet that we might once see it amongst us:
yea I say, it were to be wished heartily, that the notable ill practices,
customs and fashions in towns and companies of men, which uphold and
maintain the old world and cursed fellowships in it, were overthrown, and
with the tables of the money changers cast down: as houses of play and baudry,
where they are known to be; stage-plaies, May-games, Lord of misrule,
Morice-dancings, flockings and meetings together at victualling houses, David
said of his servants and subjects: A froward heart shall not dwell in my house,
Ps. 101.
him that privily slandereth his neighbor will I destroy, him that has a
proud look and an high heart, Ps. 101.5.
I cannot suffer; and such like: so we might once see and have them, and all of
like sort, odious amongst us. Godliness, no monkerie.
And whereas they say that it is to set up and bring in monkerie again, to
betake men's selves to any better course of living, than is commonly practiced,
I answer: That I can not easily say, whether the monks

CHAP. 6. Of the doubts and objections which weak Christians ought to
propound, until they be satisfied; namely, how they may atteine to such
direction daily: and
But as I have said before, (to let these cauils go, as not fit to trouble
them who would do well) I think these and the like, Obiectio^s of honestly
minded.
the meetest objections for such as are willing to learn: first, How they may
attain and keep this course.
that they see not how they might be able to attain to the practice of any
good and Christian direction, and constantly keep the same: and secondly, how
they may, because they are unacquainted with it, be armed with patience against
the mocks and discouragements First, there must be a desire.
which they may easily see cause of, if they consider what unsettledness is in
their lives, and what unfitness of mind to serve God, when they have not by
some good order taking for the same, resolved and accustomed themselves
thereunto, that is, to walk with God every day; and how much they are the
worse, when they have not done so, but neglected the same. Also it helps much
hereto, that they make this account with themselves, that they deal about
nothing of such value or importance in the world, as ought by right to hinder
or draw them from it.

Secondly, strife against sloth.
they must strive much against untowardness and sloth, which hangs in their
members (as if a lion were in the way:) and withal, they must call back and
hold in, Moderate earthly affections.
their earthly affections and carnal desires from nestling themselves any way
here below, so that they be not clogged thereby and made unfit for this work:
and then a full persuasion they must have, that their fruit shall be far above
their labor. Belief of profit hereby.
And to one thus prepared, I doubt not (God working by means) nay, I warrant
it from God, that the rules which I have set down, or the like, for safe
conducting

Impart his doubts to others.
And before he be thoroughly acquainted with the practice of this, let him impart
his doubts to such as may most conveniently satisfy him in the same, and so
commend himself to the grace of God in this new enterprise, betaking himself
utterly from his former wandering and uncertain serving of God: Take view of
his gain.
and let him after a week, and so after a month, take view of his doings, to
see what is amiss, and what is wanting, that it may be helped: if any Ismaels
progeny (I mean the generation of scorners and mockers) may raise unto him.
For as infinite swarms of vain and hurtful thoughts do occupy and fill the
minds of such as have not earnestly set themselves against them: so through
Gods grace, after they have accustomed themselves to better cogitations, and
weaned themselves of purpose from their old conversation, they shall find
occasions enough to honor God,

But I will proceed with other objections which are yet behind: among which,
this troubles many of Gods poor children, that they fear they shall never
bring their hearts to a daily course of Christian walking, seeing they are so
weak and have so much to do in subduing some one unruly affection. The
perverse sort object the same, who say they could like well, that men should be
To keep this course daily, not tedious.
to whom this I say: As God in the Scripture requires perseverance in a good
course to the end; even so, they which will faithfully submit themselves unto
that doctrine, cannot but like also to be daily settled in such an estate as
leads thereto: (for otherwise, how shall they be sure that their master when
he Luc. 19.13?) and if they do so, the hardness of it will soon be alaied,
and they shall in short time find it a sweet and pleasant way (as Christ calls
it, Luc. 12.37.
Mat. 11.30.) to his kingdom: so that the tediousness (as they count it)
being taken away in great part, there is no cause why they should fear that,
as too hard, which shall not hurt them; or seek to shun that as too
unpleasant, the benefit whereof they have not proved.

Notwithstanding all lets, this course may be followed.
that the chiefest lets of all from a godly life (which be, the intemperancie
of the mind, and unbridled lusts thereof) are by this direction best remedied
and stayed: the most of other which are outward in the world (as prouocations,
temptations, and other like occasions) are hereby also, and by the well
ordering of the affections prevented and avoided, or the easilier borne.
Lawful callings, no let.
And as Proverbs: Keep thine heart with all diligence, Prou. 4.23.
for from thence comes life? So that ye see the chief hindrances are
unfaithfulness, hardness

But perhaps they will reply thus: We would sometime pray or read by our
selves, or look to some other duties which God requires, for the well guiding
of our lives, when we must needs go about our own work, or the princes
business, or such like lets of one sort or other call us away, so that we
cannot perform them: whereas they which are free from these outward businesses
and services, may take their liberty in these spiritual duties. But I ask
this Many be let by lawful impediments:
And why are they not but even half so fervent in going about reading, praying
and other heavenly serving of God, when they have time and leisure? Which if
they be, it is well: let them rest with peace therein, so shall they be the
fitter to outward duties; and so doing, they must not count themselves let,
when they do that which is their calling: If they do not, let them wisely mark
how they When two duties meet.
that when two duties meet together at one time, both being of great weight,
that they pray God to give them discretion to consider, which is most
necessary (always following

An other sort there is, who are not troubled about this, yet have another
doubt which discourageth them very much from practicing such a Christian
course. For when they hear that there must not only be appointed set times to
pray and meditate, but also that in our going through the whole day, we must
watch against evil, and even in particular actions be circumspect that we
sin not against our knowledge, they ask whether they may not have their
minds on their work, while they are at it? If it be granted them, they Holy
exercises and lawful business may stand together.
I say, no scruple is to be made of this, but that there should be a minding,
and that carefully, of those things which we do, though they be not
spiritual: neither needed there be any question made of this, but that they
have after the manner of carnal and worldly men, so fraught and stuffed their
heads with earthly thoughts and worldly desires, that they cannot unburden
themselves of them, when they pray unto God. And therefore when he does
afterward give them conscience thereof and of other sins, they are so grieved
to remember their long continued offense that way, in that they were wont to
fill their hearts with all sensuality and worldliness, that now they think
they dispease God, when they have them set How the godly mind is occupied in
earthly dealings.
For a godly minded man, who has tasted how precious and sweet a thing it is,
to keep peace with God in all his ways, and has experience how soon his
heart is drawn into the world by the deceitfulness of sin, will This wise
ioining of both, is great grace.
and that we so behave our selves, that we may with fitness of mind be ready
(as it becomes us) to worship God, and also with sobriety to use our lawful
liberties in the things of this life: and especially so, as that we fail not
in the manner of doing it, that is, by doing the same either negligently, or
unwisely. But these things being regarded, a man may be conversant in both
duties, as I have said, in such sort as God may be pleased, with attendance
given to the^, (as, labor, bargain, talk of such that so whether we eat or
drink, or whatsoever we do else, 1. Cor. 10.31.
we may do all to the honor and praise of God.

CHAP. 7. Of other objections of the weak: as, That they cannot see how they
should walk thus, while they live in such an evil world: and of
But some cannot be satisfied in one thing which I said before: namely, that
the chief let, that holds us from the faithful and holy keeping of our
lives in good order from time to time, is our distempered heart: for they are
persuaded, how well soever they look to their hearts, yet as long as they live
in such an evil world as this is, they must needs be cast back and hindered.
For they say, that few give themselves to any such devotion, as through the day
to make most account of the life to come, and to have their hearts occupied
Many discouragements by bad examples.
though we be well taught by the word in the assembly; yet abroad, the doctrine
which we hear is as much discredited again by strength and boldness in sin
among many, and so it is caused to be forgotten and of no force: which are
great causes why Christians are so cooled, as they be at this day, and in no
commendable sort, suffer their light to shine: especially, we will yield to
them, they say, if we will weigh, how unfit we are for such heavenly
conversation, through our long custom in darkness and sin. To the which it
must needs be answered: that much is They should set us forward. Deutro. 8.23.
John. 16.33.
to make no other profit of the troubles, which they should meet with in the
world? did he foretell them, that they should find, tribulation in the world,
to the end they should be discouraged? Nay, to be of good comfort, because he
had overcome the world. When he told them, that few should so like of the Ioh.
6.67.
that they would walk in it, did he give them leave to stay their course also?
Math. 7.13.
yea rather he stirred them up to be the more earnest themselves to enter in at
the straight gate. So when any of their own weakness did appear, as pride
of heart, dreaming of worldly prosperity, great want of faith, and such like;
did he wink at them, because they had long been accustomed to them? Luc.
22.25.26.
did he not rather the more take occasion to pull them out of them, saying
sometime, O ye of little faith: at other times, The Lords of nations seek
after these things: but it shall not be so with you, but he that is greatest
among you, shall be least? Even so let us do: the more iniquity we behold among
men, the Genesis 3.15.
and the seed of the serpent: and the dragon shall make war with them that
keep the commandments of God and the testimony of Jesus, Reu. 12.17: and
their dwelling is, as was the dwelling of the church of Pergamus, where Satan's
throne is, Reu. 2.13. But let us take occasion therefore to settle our hearts
more firmly by our living among such, in the love of goodness, and set more
store by them whom God has raised up to be as Ps. 16.3.
let us love the saints with a more perfect love, even such as excel in virtue,
and break not of our fellowship with them when occasions are offered, lest we
have our acquaintance with devils.

If any object and say: Though all be not so zealous as you, nor show it not
after the same manner, They that dislike this, let the^ amend it.
neither follow any such direction; yet they may be as well occupied, and serve
God as well as you, or any such: I answer, if they have peace to Godward, and
can approve their state to be good by his word, I am glad: I envy them not: I
would the gifts of God were multiplied in them ten fold: I desire the same my
self: mine eye is not evil, to see them receive good. And therefore let us
both join together, and not be divided, This direction condemns not any
other good course, but agrees.
Neither is it my meaning to call in question by this direction, men's serving
of God, as though either none practiced a better,

There are yet others, who think the labor to be but vain which is taken in
persuading men heereunto: because the most receive not our counsel; Though
most receive it not, yet is it not in vain.
who only can use it, though others may repent and be ashamed by it: so I
doubt nothing, but that they which do, shall be much helped forward by it to
practice the godly life with more ease and readiness, unless they be such as
use it for fashion and ceremoniously; as some which take themselves to be the
Lords, may do. I grant it may be more profitable to one then to another, Some
use it for fashion.
according to the diverse measure of grace which every one has received of
God: but he which is a faithful vser of it, having least measure, shall not
go All not vain, though some slips.

If they offend that look to their ways, much more they that do not.


that al which they do, is vain, and that they had been as good never to
have entered at all into the profession and couenanting of such a course. But
thus they ought to think, that if they be turned out of the way, and mastered
of their affections,

Besides this, we have yet another benefit by bringing our selves daily to
consider our ways: Gain by infirmities.
that the infirmities and wants which we have seen in our lives, do both show
us, that we have still matter sufficient in our selves to humble us, and to
cause us to be charitable rather then severe judges of our Not rashly reject it.
yet let us not do as many will, who if it like them not at the first hearing,
they do not wisely

CHAP. 8. Of the objection of weak Christians who cannot read: and another, of
them that are troubled through some scriptures: and answer to both.
Such as cannot read.
IF ye will ask, what they shall do, which cannot read, and therefore can
neither enjoy the benefit of this nor such other helps, in any such ample manner
as others may: I answer, that they must needs fare the worse for want of that
gift, (although I could wish that many which can read, used it more often, and in
purer and more reverent manner then they do. Must be more diligent in hearing.
etc.
) But if they be such as are to be Otherwise they must look to come behind.
as it were meet for them in such a troublesome world and many ways dangerous,
as they live in.

Some (to draw toward an end) say: nothing troubles them so much How shall we
serve God all day long? Heb. 3.12.
All the day long we must meditate on the law: and pass the whole time of our
dwelling here in fear: Also, Whatsoever we do, eat or drink, etc. And, Take
heed, lest at any time there be in any of you an evil heart, and unfaithful,
to depart away from the living God. These and such like places they confess,
(in their judgment) are urged too sore, and they could else be content with
all their hearts to glorify God sometime, and in some parts of their lives as
they are able: but what comfort shall it be (say they) when we have done what
we can, to think yet, that God is never the more pleased with us; because we
know we have omitted This doctrine is hard only to the flesh. No time to sin.
whereto we are not debtors, are we commanded to bid battle, and that so
far as of us frail men (but yet endued with Gods spirit) may be performed.
Yet Note.
for after such times commonly do men most give themselves the bridle:) this
cannot be done without manifest contempt of these scriptures, and consequently
of the majesty of God, who knowing what is best for us, has thought good thus
to direct us. And yet (alas) how common this is in many which go for good
Christians, we may see with grief: who as though God had given them some times
to offend in, and some liberties which in his word are condemned, (which were
to make him say and vnsaie: and to deny dead flies do cause to stink and
putrify the ointment of the Apothecarie: Eccles. 10.1.
so some ill parts of life and dead fruits mixed with commendable virtues, do
spoil them of their virtue and beauty, that they have no favor in the sight
of God, neither give they any sweet smell or savor unto men: and as the leaven
though it be but a little, does sower and leaven the whole lump of dough; so
some strong corruptions being suffered to bear sway in the life, do corrupt
even that which otherwise would be good. For as it is a bleamish

They think it hard to be bound, (they say) to bring particularities of
their lives under examination, and themselves to be held within the compass of
any such rules, as should debar them of any liberty which they shall
think good for them: and that it were too foolish for them to think
necessary, and too servile to obey and follow them. But let them remember what
they Liberty to sin, dangerous.
what servitude it is, I lately set down; that is, only a stopping of the
course of flesh and our own corrupt will and affections: the which yet if we
live after, Romans 8.13.
we shall die, and be cut off from our inheritance with God and with Christ.
Indeed by these means, we should bridle many passions of pride, loftiness,
swelling; and break off many boisterous outrages which rise up in us, as
wrath, frowardness, heart-burning; and quench many fiery darts of
concupiscence, unclean lusts, and wantonness; with other such fond and
dangerous delights, which lead men to destruction; and clear our lives, We may
use all good liberties.
which our most merciful God has betrusted us with, which are both many and
comfortable in themselves, we may use them all in the Lord, so that God have
his honor thereby: but whiles we take our part in them, the Lord may not lose
his part due to him; in a word, whiles we use them soberly, and with care not
to offend, and that nothing be done against Falls of good Christians by
boldness.
given them up into their own hands, in haste and rashness to run with
greediness to the fulfilling of their hearts desire which they have sought?
and in that one hour to lay a foundation of sorrow for many years after? But
have they afterward in like haste and with ease returned again? Nay, then
they must have showed themselves wiser than some, who were wise: and more
strong than Sampson the strongest in his time; who after he had prostituted and
made himself a sot and slave to a base mistress, recovered not himself
again, until he had ground in the prison like an horse, both his eyes being
put out, and serving to make the uncircumcised pastime, who had been the joy
and glory of the people of God. But to return from Sampson: True liberty.
that all sound comfort and liberty to be desired and rested in, is in this:
that every one seek to be contented with the liberty which God gives him,
Prou. 15.15.
remembering that which is written: A good conscience is a We know, that through
frailty, forgetfulness and the remainder of our corruption, the best shall
too often go out of the way: therefore they need not seek occasions to do so,
but to avoid them rather, and so obey the commandment of God: Put ye on the
Lord Jesus, Romans 13.14.
and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. This I
trust may suffice for the unfolding of the forenamed Scriptures, and to answer
any reasonable man to his full contentation. And let such (in the fear of God)
cease maruelling, why we should be so careful to please God, even through the
day, and one day as well as another; because besides other reasons, which in
their proper place I have set Christianity must be followed, else no good will
come.
wherein no good will be done, nor profit arise, except it be thoroughly followed
and with great diligence, and especially this point regarded: that one thing be
not lost or neglected, whiles another is followed, nor one duty slacked
whiles another is performed. Note.
And thus I shut up my answer to this last objection, saying: That the
forementioned Scriptures and other like them, are not fearful to Gods
children, neither shall need to trouble any, who will take heed that they
trouble not themselves by wilfulness and gross negligence; but do in the
simplicity of their heart show themselves teachable to that which they know of
the will of God, although they find many wants in themselves, Luc. 17.10.
they are unprofitable servants.

CHAP. 9. Of the objection: That Ministers may follow daily direction, but yet
not therefore 2.
THe other objections which remain, are few, and shall in few words be
answered. Of the which this is one: Though you that have nothing to trouble
you, but sit quiet at your studies and lead a scholars life, may be fit to
guide your selves in such a manner as here has been set down (as indeed it
becomes you well, and all do look for it at your hands, who should be
lights unto others:) Not only for ministers.
Yea these Obiecters do further allege: If it be hard, even for you scolars
and ministers, to observe it, who have so many helps to set you forward over we
have; there is small equity in it, that we should be inioined the same
performance of duty which is required of you: our hindrances and lets in the
world being more and far greater than yours, and our helps and furtherances
fewer and weaker, as ye know. But to these I answer: As there are more helps to
the learned and ministry, and fewer lets (who for the most part have their
living provided them, and Ministers and such like should most tend this.
which is common to every private believer: but according to their special
calling, as they are ministers, they ought to perform the several duties
thereof publicly and privately, both by attendance to reading themselves, and
also as watchmen to look unto others diligently, in exhorting, Ezekiel. 34.3.
admonishing, rebuking, comforting and instructing them, as occasion

They should keep a register of Gods mercies, etc.
Further, it were meet for them to take a view of their weeks work at the end
of it, to keep a register of Gods special mercies and deliverances, and
another of his chastisements and afflictions; and how they go under them, and
profit by them: that by their experience they might the better bring on others.
This (I say) and some other such duties ought to be looked to of such: so that
private persons need not think themselves so sore pressed in respect of them;
who if they look well to their charge, have a double duty to discharge in
respect of others. Although I could wish, that they did in practice and in the
course of their lives faithfully and carefully perform that, Not to stumble at
bad ministers.
but too truly, that many of them live as they list, very offensiuely; and
both in performing the duties of their calling, and example, come much behind
many of those, who by good right ought to be guided by them: but none are to
stumble at the bad lives of such, forasmuch as there will always be in the
ministry, Ioh. 10.4.
offensive persons, who though they should go before the flock, 1. Sam. 2.17.
yet come far behind them, to their just reproach; and (as Elies sons) cause
their holy calling to be had in contempt, and to be evil spoken of: from whom
the people are not to fetch their light nor to take example. For though the
calling it self be most glorious and fit to make and keep them heavenly 1.
These. 2.19.20.
So that it is clear, Good ministers many troubles. Luc. 22.31. 2. Cor. 6.9.
for they are more shot at by Satan and his instruments, they have many
discouragements, vnkindenesses offered them, and hatred for their good will and
for the doing of their duty, as unknown though known, besides their
continual care over the flock of Christ. So that their crosses are many and
great, and they have need of great grace to walk faithfully and fruitfully in
their course. Therefore let none object, that the ministers (except some few
whom God does more specially privilege, for causes best known to him) because
of their calling may easily keep a constant course 1. Pet. 1.13.
and clogging them so, that they cannot go forward, but are ready to stumble
one at the welfare and good report of another; as Peter did at the liberty of
John, Ioh. 21. 21.
which he thinking to be greater then his own, said. What shall this man do?

Now as for them which will not mislike the counsel that is given them in
Practice of this.
but they think the writer hereof to have wished better to other, then he can
follow himself: let them yet weigh and take in good part his love to them
herein, whatsoever it have profited himself: and yet though he will say
nothing of himself, lest any should think of him otherwise then he sees or
knows to be in him, yet he can put them out of doubt, that this doctrine has
been received, and conscionably practiced of some, even private Christians to
their good contentation, This has been proved profitable.
and (as they are persuaded) to the plentiful recompense of their labor
therein bestowed, even already: who yet have good hope, that the first
attempting of it was, as the hardest to them, so the least gainful, in
comparison of that which is to be

And yet this is no small benefit, Singular commodities of this course.
(whatsoever others have done) that a man which desires to please God, may
know how to behave himself in this pilgrimage And this for the satisfying of
thy demand concerning the practice of this David made in faith to him, Ps. 71.9.
and obtained the fruit of it: O Lord thou have been my hope ever since my
youth: Cast me not away in the time of mine old age: when my strength shall
fail, leave me not. And as this holy man of God (we see) distrusted his own
weakness, yet through his long experience of Gods favor and kindness,
conceived assured hope thereof unto his end: so the best of us might justly
Faith ouercomes all doubts and lets.
and other men's. But above all these, either temptations and afflictions, or
the doubts and fears which come thereby, our faith carries us to see into
Gods mind and purpose, and to wait through patience for the acomplishing of
his promises, 1. Pet. 1.5. 1. Ioh. 5.4. 1. Ioh. 4.4.
accordingly as it is written: We are kept by the power of God through faith
unto salvation: And again: This is the victory that overcomes the world, even
your faith: And, Greater his he that is in us, then he that is in the world.

But yet one thing (seeing I speaking of it before, did shut it up too
briefly) remains necessary to be answered more fully. For when they hear
the name of direction (though they who read the whole, may easily see what I
mean thereby) they demand thus: What? is there any other direction, then the
word of God? And is that now at the first made our direction? But what
Christian has not labored to follow that in all ages, when no such invention
as this, nor no such new found out direction, as ye mention, was known?
unless perhaps ye have found out any new thing beside the scripture; or, you
see that in the Scripture, which none before you saw. I answer, that neither
do I urge any other then the word commands, No other direction then Gods word.
nor arrogate no

Chiefescope: How to live holily always.
to help such as are well disposed; some directing particularly how to pray;
some how to receive the holy communion; some how to fast, etc. so I have
labored in this treatise to direct men how to live in this present world, so
as they may walk with God: even by bringing them from a general and confused
thought of Christianity to a daily and particular care of godliness
throughout their whole course. And seeing (as our Savior says) The light of
the body is the eye; so the light of the whole life, is the effectual and
powerful knowledge of Gods will, and a well ordered heart, and governing of
the unruly affections: therefore I have herein declared how such knowledge
must be sought, and

The objections which remain, are in regard of the persons and states of men:
as, the mighty and the mean, the ruler or magistrate, the poor servant,
labourer and workman, the traveler, or whosoever he be, or in what state
soever, having his hands full of business, Lawful calling and business
hinders not this direction.
(so as his calling be allowed of Be persuaded that thou please God in that
which thou do.
that they labor and take pain therein, because it pleases God they should do
so: and withal, that they be watchful to practice in their labors, all
virtues, and bring forth the fruits of the spirit, Be watchful to practice
the virtues of patience, etc. as occasion shall be offered.
as occasion shall be offered; that is to say, patience,

To be short, every true Christian may as he ought, keep a daily course of
living holily, righteously and soberly, though not all in a like measure and
degree, yet so, as God may be pleased, his own heart quieted, and others by
his example not justly offended, but edified: which is the thing that we ought
all to propound to our selves, and aim at. And last of all, whereas it may be
Direction for sick persons.
That if the diseases and kinds of pain be such, (as there are many such)
then know we that the direction fit for such, is to keep faith, hope, peace
with God, and patience, with meekness and thankfulness: to watch for this,
1. Cor. 10.13
and lift up the heart as often (though briefly) as they can, by prayer for this
grace, and to hold out contrary rebellion (even as the martyrs did in their
Iam. 1.5.
God, who gives plentifully and casts none in the teeth, vouchsafe to grant
to all that desire it, for his sake in whom he is well pleased, Jesus Christ
the righteous.

CHAP. 10. The conclusion of the whole Book: containing an exhortation to good
and bad.
ANd thus much I have thought good to say of the doubts, objections and cauils
which may be raised from or by occasion of the former doctrine, as also of the
answers thereto. And now Exhortation to the godly.
Seeing you have some experience already, that it is no lost labor to live
under gods protection and government, but that in serving him devoutly there is
great reward, beware ye wax not slack and cold in the course wherein ye
have begun. And such of you, as have known this point of truth, and made
conscience of the same to practice it, I mean every day, and throughout the
same, to set your selves to walk with God, (which many and those also well
minded have not done,) hold on your course and be not weary of well doing;
for ye shall Gal. 6.
ye have borne the greatest brunt already, while living among many Atheists,
papists and carnal Gospellers, ye have received their liuerie and censure,
and with all disgrace that might be, (under the Gospel) have reprochfully had
the odious names of Precisians and Puritanes, Hypocrites and sedicious persons,
given unto you: but if taunts, mocks, reproaches and discouragements have not
turned you out of the way, nor caused you to wax faint in your Christian
course, neither let any other thing hereafter unsettle you, but hold out the
confidence of your faith, and reioicing of your hope unto the end: and so
doing, I pray God, Heb. 3.6. 3. ep. Ioh. 2.
that ye may prosper and fare well, as your souls shall prosper.

Ps. 119.10.11.
to the end ye might not so much as wander from Gods commandments, praising
him for the same; yet pray still to God, as the blessed of the Lord have done,
2. Pet. 3.18.
o teach us still thy statutes: and grow in grace and in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ. The blind world sees not the happy end of that to you,
which seems to them to be the greatest misery, whiles ye arm and settle
your selves to walk on constantly in the course ye have begun. And God knows
whether he has given that grace unto you, to a further end then they once
think of: that is to say, that when they shall see God to bless you therein,
Reu. 3.9.
which call themselves Jews, and are not, but do lie, may come and worship
before your feet, and know that he has loved you: yea, it may come to pass,
that when they shall after better and more mature deliberation, see and be
constreined to say, God is with you of a truth, that ten of them may take
one of you by the skirt and say: We will go with you, for we have heard that
God is with you: Zach. 8.23.
Nay it is certain, that your light so shining as has been said, Math. 5.16.
many shall see your good works and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
More I will not

^uch as look ^ot to their ^aies daily,
But to proceed: such of you as have not extended your care of living godly to
every day nor throughout the same; but have taken more liberty to your selves
then God allows, this I say to all such: If you have done so through
ignorance, Either through ^gnorance,
and that God has revealed no further light unto you, who yet were ready to do
whatsoever you should hear to be commanded you of him; be not discouraged,
your sin has been the lesser, and God will not impute it to you, nor lay it
to your charge. Only show that ye did it ignorantly, hereby, that now ye
know God requires it of you, that your care should Or an ill conscience, when
they do or might know their duty;
take it as spoken unto you. But to others of you, who fear God and know it to
be your duty to make conscience of your ways one day as well as another, and
yet did it not; or if you were ignorant of it, yet ye made no have to know
more then ye did, lest ye should answer for more then ye were willing to
do: Their sin is great.
the sin of both sorts of you is great, and does cry to God for punishing
it, and he has hard the cry of it against you, and Ephesus, Reu. 2.4.
(though yet God was worshipped truly of it, but not indeed with zeal, and
fervently) I have somewhat against thee. And that which Saint John said to
them, Therefore repent.
I say unto you: Remember from whence ye are fallen, and repent, and do your
former works, or else God will come against you shortly.

For indeed it is not meet, that such as at the first inlightning of them by
faith through the preaching of the gospel, To forsake our first love, what.
could not satisfy themselves in being thankful to God for their deliverance
which they saw: should after, make a common matter of Gods love, and leave
their feruency in honoring him, and their first love to him, which they
thought sometime could never be They smart who do so.
And therefore it is not to be doubted, but that such have many complainings
of their looseness and security, and many accusings of themselves, when they
smart for such negligence and boldness in sinning against God, by such
corrections as he does inflict upon them. And to omit all other (for there is
now no time to mention many) even this is one: that whereas many of them, who
while they walked uprightly, walked safely, yet since they waxed more weary of
Gods service, they were driven many times to contrary streights, complaining
that they could not find the comforts in Gods word and promises, which they
were wont to enjoy. And who doubts, but that it must needs be so? For
although some take discomfort without any just

Amend, and that speedily.
It is their wisdom for both to amend, and that speedily: the one, his error,
that he knew not; but both of them, their careless halfe-seruing of God which
reioicings be in trembling. This is that, which they must endeavor after. And
to conclude my speech to them, More cause to look to our selves then
heretofore.
let this that I say be regarded the more, by how much they are in greater
danger of the diuils deceiuable allurements, which now in this our renewed peace
and longer hope of the continuance of it, they lie open unto. Seeing it will be
plausible, not only to the bad, but also to the better sort, that now we have
escaped the peril which we feared Duble our care and thankfulness:
and also if with more enlarged hearts we set not our selves daily (as we have
good cause) to testify our thanksgiving, by all possible fruits thereof, with
honest and blameless conversation: I do them to understand, Or else the end
shall be worse then the beginning. Amos. 3.2.
that the last end of these blessed Amos to the children of Israel: You only
have I known of all the families of the earth, and therefore I will visit you
for all your iniquities.

Now I have spoken to the Godly, I turn to the other, who either have only a
false persuasion of their salvation; or else, confess that they have no
knowledge what shall become of them after this life. Both sorts are earnestly
to be desired, to consider in what fearful estate they be, who having not made
so much as a beginning in the practice of a godly life (for so it may truly be
Except ye repent, ye shall all perish: And that of Saint Peter: If the
righteous be scarcely saved, where shall the wicked and ungodly appear? For
besides that their estate shall be in the world to come, easelesse and
remediless, what is it that they desire here, for the which they can be
content to debar themselves of the blessed immortality of the soul, and the
glorious resurrection of the body, and to go to the place of torment? do they
not see the slippery and uncertain condition of all things here below? and
that they cannot promise without God in the world, the vilest of all creatures,
the most cursed, except the diuils, and yet devils incarnate themselves? And if
they think they may repent when they will, (beside that late repentance is
dangerous, if they might attain to it) do they not see, that they shut up the
way thereto from themselves, whiles they may hear the lord speaking thus to
them: Because when I called upon you, ye would not hear, you shall cry your
selves, and I will not hear says the Lord? And if they should persuade Prou.
1.28.
O ye fools, how long will ye love foolishness, and ye scorners delight in
scorning, and ye unwise hate wisdom?

And as great folly it is, to hope that punishments and fearful and
troublesome times here, shall pass as they have done, even like unto a shower
of rain. But as Noah told the people of the old world, that when God meant to
Destruction comes speedily.
but it did come to pass: even so, when God will bring their destruction, it
shall come swiftly as a whirlewinde, and consume them utterly, as the fire does
the stuble, before it make an end. And as Nabuchadnezzar had twelve months
granted him to repent in, but at the end of them, when he went forward in his
sin, even while he was priding himself in his great Babel, the same hour he
heard Gods sentence on him, and had it executed; that he was driven from men,
and did eat grass as the oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven,
till his hairs were grown as eagles feathers, and his

Why God deals so.
And why will God deal thus with them? Verily because they by continuing in
their sin, put him in mind of the judgment threatened against them, to execute
it: whereas a man would think, that so many examples both in scripture and in
their own experience, wherein they have seen the fearful execution of his
threatenings after men's sin has grown to ripeness, should Gods warnings soon
forgotten.
and never forget them: but like a wonder that lasts but nine days, so is
there repentance, which vanishes away as the dew of the morning by the heat
of the day. I would have thought my self, that many monstrous persons whom I
have visited, when Gods wrath upon them caused them to cry out, and promise
amendment, would have proved rare examples to others, of true conversion to
God; but to my great grief, and to teach me experience what becomes of such
untimely fruits as the dog to his own vomit: which causes me to write that,
which I have often uttered with an heavy heart, That we had need to have the
doctrine of repentance ofter then any thing else, for that sin being rooted
sticks so fast. If we be warned of any thing but sin, one warning will
serve: but many hundred sermons cannot purge that out. For when they hear that
which sometime casts

But now I have showed them their estate, even their shame, and the woe which
they are in, and what variety of spiritual and heavenly delights they have
forgone by refusing to walk within the compass of Christian duty from Lay it
to heart.
that they say with the apostles every one severally, when Christ their
master told them that one among the rest should betraie him: Is it I master?
and with Paul, Math. 26.22.
when he was smitten down at the gates of Damascus: Lord, what will thou have
me to do? yea and let them do as the servants of Benhadad: Act. 9.5.
when they were in great fear of their lives by the king of Israel, They put
halters about their necks, and came and humbled themselves before him, 1. King.
20.32.
and said they were Spare thy people, o Lord, and be no longer angry with the
sheep of thy pasture. But let them do it in truth, till the promises of God
be believed of them, and applied to them, piercing to the heart, and taking
hold of the affections, so that they may see themselves to be of the number of
Gods people, and to go beyond all reprobates; and till the same word of God
which they have heard preached, having been the seed of salvation to them, may
be the mould of their conversation also, which they being cast into, may be
fashioned after the doctrine of it: And the rather, for the renewed peace and
defense of the gospel, by the happy living safely under our vine and
figgetree: Deutr. 28.46.
lest if they serve not the Lord with joy and a good heart for all such good
things, they do procure such plagues, as shall manifestly show that he is
angry with them. Now to shut up all: if it be said to me, that I have showed,
how men may live happily, but nothing has been said about happy dying; Ps.
37.37.
be this for answer: An happy life brings an answerable death, and the
learning and accustoming of our selves to die and contemn the world while we
live, shall lead us the way to eternal and blessed life when we must die. For
that knowledge, faith, hope and other grace is

A SWEET MEDITATION OF THE AVTHORS, (LONG AGO) of the benefit of reading,
conference, musing on holy things, and prayer: containing a complaint, that
these holy exercises are neglected for that which is worse than nothing, even
men's sinful will.
1
OH, what a blessed thing it is
with godly learned to talk,
By reading and by conference,
both as we sit and walk!
2
And often to think upon the joy
by God for his prepared,
And eke to pray with groans to him!
the like has not been hard.
3
It does revive our hearts most dull,
and bring our minds in frame:
It does indue our souls with light,
made fit to praise Gods name.
4
It causes us our time to spend
in fruit, and heavenly sort:
It keeps from every evil way,
and so from ill report.
5
It holds our minds from earthly thoghts
and vanities most vain:
It does become pleasant and sweet,
instead of irksome pain.
6
By this, ill tidings are not feared,
afflictions are not heard:
But from impatience and ire,
hereby we are preserved.
7
By meditation and reading,
with prayer annexed thereto,
We make our gain of that which we
are loath once to forgo.
8
It makes us a savor sweet
in places where we come;
That some are gained to God thereby,
and folly has no room.
9
Blessed is he whose portion this,
in stead of toil is given
Whereby some cannot read a line
from morning unto even.
10
And as his lot in fairer ground
is cast whom this behighteth,
In reading and in study sweet
that joyfully delights:
11
So he that sees not this grace
and privilege most great,
Sorrow and shame shall him pursue,
and folly be his meat.
12
I speak of those whose calling is
by learning for to live:
Whom God would have be free from world,
and good example give.
13
And so of every one, as he
has liberty and leave,
That he do not for fond delight^
himself hereof bereave.
14
But Lord, what grief it is to think
that this so happy a lot
Should be trod down, as pearls of swine,
of many a drunken sot!
15
That this deceitful merchandise
of profit and of gain,
Should darken so and blind men's eyes,
that they should loath this pain:
16
That some should dream of honor high,
and of promotion, so
That this sweet state with all her fruits,
they should gladly forgo:
17
That neither Scripture given by God,
nor books by learned made,
Can cause them be in love with them,
and so forsake their trade.
18
Indeed it does require the heart
from evil to be brought,
That lovers of pleasures more than God,
may come to better thought:
19
I mean, that they may sin abhor
of every loathsome kind:
And that their chiefest joy may be,
from thence to weane their mind:
19
And with no less delight of heart
they wisdom may embrace,
Till godliness has got in them
a room and settled place.
20
Such shall it find a pleasure sweet,
their years and time to spend
In authors holy and divine,
until their life do end.
21
And such therefore may be full sure
the forenam'd fruits to reap:
And to enjoy all good delights,
in measure and in heap.
22
If any think this too great toil,
and state of life to hard:
Let him again think, that full great
and sweet is the reward.
23
(...) for my self, with Solomon
this one thing I may say:
Tha^ (...) have had experience
of (...) a happy day:
24
Such as deceitful world does yield
to such as it embrace;
Yet never saw I pleasure like
unto this heavenly grace.
25
What did I say, Not like to it?
no, nor to be compared:
For one it yields twenty fold
in pleasure and reward.
26
And lest I should be thought to say
(like to the Poets vain)
More then the truth in praise thereof,
and so should seem to feign:
27
Full many a thousand, even of them
who have their time ill spent,
And unto vain delights their years
and all their strength have lent:
28
And have not chose the better part
in wisdom for to grow;
Have cried out fearfully at length,
and said: It has been so.
29
All pleasure, Folly they did call,
which heretofore they found:
And sorrow'd, that they had no part
in that which was most sound.
30
They have cried out of idle life
and of their youth misspent:
That to the reading of good books
their hearts they have not bent.
31
For what though men should set themselves
to seek a pleasant life:
In all things, ease and peace to find,
and to be void of strife?
32.
Full true it is, that without this
their pleasure is but pain:
Right soon it shall depart from them
and sorrow come again.
33
Where are the mighty and the proud
and flanting ones become?
Some 100 years agone they died,
and such as had their room.
34
The rolls of kings and princes great
and chronicles of late,
Record to us full many a one
who lived in pomp and state.
35
A time they had, their time is gone,
their glory is decayed:
And sin to such as died not well,
a woeful hire is paid.
36
And as for men of lower place,
whom better we did know,
Whose crown was beauty, ease and wealth
and did in dainties flow:
37
Behold it is with them, as if
they never here had been,
As if no pleasure or no pomp
of theirs had once been seen.
38
And such as do remain as yet,
and live as they have done,
Shall find the same which they have found
when once their race is run.
39
So that small cause there is, we see,
this kind of life to choose,
And for the same the savor sweet
of heavenly life to loose.
40
But such as do in wisdom joy
and take delight therein,
Shall have with peace a place on earth
and greater gain shall win.
41
Therefore mine own desire shall be,
to take this for my part,
The water streams and pastures sweet
of Gods word, with my heart.
42
And such as these few reasons may
persuade unto the same,
I wish them that which to my self:
at this that they may aim.
43
Then happy we throughout our life
what ever us befall:
Thrice happy eke, when we go hence
and God us home shall call.
44
Let the words of my mouth please thee
and thoughts of heart, o God:
And in the same continually
let me make mine abode.
45
As have the days of sorrow been,
so may our comfort be:
That as we did not praise thee then,
so may we now praise thee.
A TABLE CONTAINING the sum and substance of the whole boooke in the
principal points of it.
The first Treatise.
CHAP. 1.
ASsurance of Salvation, the ground of all. Most men are deceived about it.
Papists think it impossible. Carnal Protestants think it easy. Weak
Christians full of doubting. Three general heads or parts of this Treatise.
Three branches of the first head.
CHAP. 2.
MAn created happy, fell into misery. Two parts of man's misery. The first:
His sin. Man's sin what. Every part corrupted. Understanding, conscience,
will. Affections. Conversation. Thoughts, desires, outward behavior. Man's best
actions abominable. Few think it thus. The second part of man's misery: The
curse. Which brings all plagues. After this life. In this life. The creatures
cursed for man's cause: Much more himself. In all he takes in hand. In his
body, diseases, etc. In his senses, deafness. In his friends and kindred, etc.
He has no right to any thing that he inioieth, and shall be called to
judgment for it. Men shift off this. This curse is to all. To harden the heart
against it, dangerous. The curse upon the soul. To be given up to vile lusts.
To be darkened in his understanding. Hastening to endless woe, and not see it.
Hardness of heart. Desperation, madness, etc. Remediless fears, etc. Hell
pains, extreme, easelesse and endless. The necessity of this knowledge of
man's misery. If this doctrine displease men, they may thank themselves. The
doctrine of the Gospel must go with this.
CHAP. 3.
OF the knowledge of redemption and deliverance. It must be known as well as
our misery. Four things to be considered in it. 1. What it is, and wherein it
consists. Merit overthrown. 2. By whom it is wrought. 3. How it is reueiled.
4. How it is received and embraced. Faith what. How it is wrought.
CHAP. 4.
KNowledge of our misery and redemption, necessary to salvation. They are
most light, who have most cause to mourn. The person that shall be saved,
believes and applies general things particularly to himself. Hereby the
heart is troubled. Few, hearing the doctrine of misery, think it to be their
own case. They are hardened, and make it common. Their woe at the time of
death. Answer to such as would not have the law preached. The law is to be
preached. But not without the Gospel. Effects and fruits of the law preached,
in the faithful. The ignorance of the law, how dangerous. Great fault in the
minister that teaches not the law. Consultation: the second work.
Consultation necessary. Proved. Without it, sorrow for sin profits
little. They that cannot counsel themselves, must ask. The complaint of the
penitent sinner. What his thoughts are. 1. About his own estate. 2. Concerning
the mind of God toward him. He is secretly vpholden by the promise.
Humiliation: the third work. How necessary it is. What great fruit it brings.
A secret desire of forgiveness: the fourth work. From what ground this
arises: Or, what breeds this desire. Many are long ere they come to this
point: and the cause why. How fervent this desire ought to be. To the humbled
soul the tidings of salvation most welcome, and til then little set by. This
desire continues till the thing be obtained. What staieth and vpholdeth him in
this case. He resolves never to walk in his former estate, and why. How
Satan labors that men should not come to this point, and by what means.
What he is the better for this resolving. Confession and craving of pardon:
the fifth work. How this is done. How great a matter this is. To forsake all
for it, and highly to price it: the sixth work. Object. 1. Can these or any
thing that man does, be accepted without faith? Answ. Although none of these
things be faith, yet they are not without it. We cannot discern the very
moment when faith is wrought. Object. 2. Must we thus prepare our selves to
receive faith? Answ. It is not in our power. It is gods only work to do it.
To apply Christ and his promise: the seventh work. God seals up his promises
to the believer. How the believer reasons with himself He weighs all
things heereto belonging. He seeks help of others. How he grows settled in
believing. What will follow of applying Christ. Faith though weak, yet sound,
after experience in a godly life shall be confirmed, and bring rest to the
soul. Faith is rather discerned by the graces that go with it, then by it
self. A description of the smallest measure of faith. Some attain assurance
in one day, others labor long for it. Faith unites to Christ. Common
professors have not this faith. By what means it is wrought. Why many want it.
The conclusion of this third part. Marks of faith.
CHAP. 5.
THe second head general of the treatise. Lets of faith. Many deceived in
faith. A general let of faith, the devils bewitching. The minister is the
watchman to give warning. Fault of not believing, in the minister and people.
In the minister. 1. Not teaching. 2. Seldom teaching. Necessity of often
teaching. 3. Not plain teaching. 4. Want of catechizing. The people should be
examined how they profit. The Minister should have authority to do it. What
good would come of it. Commendati^n and necessity of catechizing. Good life of
ministers. Private conference.
CHAP. 6.
LEts of faith in the people. Light esteeming the Gospel. Few that receive
the doctrine, have faith. Practice of true Christians. None beguiled by Satan
but wilful and foolish. Particular lets of faith. 1. Some think it
impossible. 2. Not necessary. 3. Too hard. 4. Others are careless. 5. Fear
loss. 6. Presume. 7. Never broken hearted. 8. Fear continuance. 9. Too
slightly seek it. 10 Sudden flashes soon out. An exhortation to the
ministers. The titles of ministers. Their charge. What their practice should
be. Encouragements to the minister to do their duties. 1. From their honor.
2. From their comfort. 3. The peoples benefit. 4. From their own reward. How
to answer the objections which might discourage us. An exhortation to the
people to embrace the ministry. The 1. reason: they are messengers of
reconciliation. The 2. reason: from the benefit reaped thereby. The peoples
sin. How the people hinder themselves. There are fit remedies to these lets.
Every desire of salvation, is not faith.
CHAP. 7.
TRue desire gives not over. It must be fervent and constant. It is
strengthened by an high account of the the thing desired. No pains and labor
in seeking it, thought needless. Difference betwixt sound and vain desire.
The heart is set upon Gods promises, if the desire be sound. Gods will we
should believe. Advise for the weak Christian. If any doubting arise. Not to
harken to any contrary voice. The danger of it. Remedy against fear of
continuance. Conclusion of the former.
CHAP. 8.
HOw the weak in faith should be established. Two sorts of weak ones. The
first sort described. The first persuasion to uphold a weak faith. The second.
The third. He that is newborn, can never die. The fourth. The second sort
more weak in faith then the former. They are described. How melancholy
works in such. Persuasions to uphold such weak ones. Satan works upon us
by suggestions, and by outward occasions. He conceiueth our intents and
purposes: and how. His properties. He persuades and tempts to sin, which
we delight not in. He labors to dim our knowledge, and and the sight of
Gods grace in us. He troubles much by outward objects. The objections of the
weak, in temptation. The Lords eye watches over these weak ones. Remedies
against Satan's temptations. Further remedies. What we should do, when we
feel not the sweet taste of Gods mercies. A fifth persuasion to uphold weak
faith. A sixth persuasion. A seventh persuasion.
CHAP. 9.
HOw far an unbeliever may go in the profession of Christianity. What use is
to be made of this doctrine. Forwardness in religion was sometime in many.
Apostataes. The falls of many professors have made them vile. Some have fallen
away before trouble come. Let such repent. What is required in effectual
calling: and how men are deceived about it. The law is not to be preached
without the Gospel. Why the law is preached. How men abuse their afflictions
through satan's wiles. Men content themselves with a shadow of of religion.
Look to that which is principal. Troubles inward or outward, commend not a
man to God. When a man is none of the woorst, he may be far from being good.
How men should try themselves. Unstaid ones must use all means to be
converted. Men are careless in the weightiest matter. How they deceive
themselves: or, what weak foundations they build upon. Some hear willingly,
but will not be warned by it. Why men are so loath to come to trial. 1. Because
they have no good evidence to show. 2. Their hearts are not upright: they keep
some sin. The maine cause why men love not to examine. Other causes. Gods
children do not so. The sin of such as mock at them that are forwardest.
Exhortation to every one to try his state.
CHAP. 10.
THe third general head of this treatise. Eight companions of faith. 1. Joy.
This does not always appear outwardly. How this joy is felt in afflictions.
The want of it argues weak faith. Object. You zealous folk, some of you are
ever sad. Answer. Some are weak in faith: they must mourn till they be
^^mforted. What mourning is good. Answer to such as take offense at the
heaviness of Gods children. Object. The sadness of some professors, makes
many shun religion. Answer. All mirth is madness, that proceeds not from faith.
2. Holy admiration. This is not in a Christian at his first calling only, but
is after continued and increased. Answer to such as think we must not wonder
always. What lets this grace.
3. Love. None have this but they that are loved first. The true believers
feel sensibly the love of God to shadow the love of other things.
4. Thankfulness. It must be daily. Even in afflictions. Praise God alone,
as well as in the assembly.
5. A desire of an holy communion with God. Gods presence in heaven to be
preferred before it on earth. The estate of them that cannot abide to hear of
death.
6. To forsake the world. A great grace, not to be tied to the world. Great
folly to set our hearts on things below. Make much of them, til God show us
better. A great liberty to be willing to die: such only are fit to live. The
forsaking of the world is not, to leave necessary duties. For what respects we
may desire to live. Cloistering and such like, no point of godliness.
7. Shame for our former unkindness unto God. The believers revenge themselves
for their former sins.
8. To convert and bring on others. Edifying talk, good for our selves and
others. Use it a^ it may be, though we see not present fruit of it.

CHAP. 11.
HOw weak faith is confirmed. The first mean: To account it chief. The best
things must best be regarded. Evil must be avoided, and lawful liberties
soberly used. The second: Earnest prayer, with meditation, etc. True believers
soon faint and are fearful. They must much help their weakness, and often.
Observe how God keeps promise in smaller things, that they may believe him in
greater. The third mean: The word and sacraments. The fourth: A daily
humiliation for sin. The fifth: Their former experience. The faithful have
near acquaintance with God. They are called his friends. Let no place be given
to doubting. How faith is weakened. Think of this as the weightiest matter, in
the morning, if it may be. The sixth: The example of others, who of weak
become strong.
CHAP. 12.
THe sweet fruit and benefit of preserving and confirming our faith. No outward
means confirm faith, if we price it not the best of all things. A pithy
speech of a worthy person. The chiefest thing every morning, is to remember
Gods love. Gods children not so wise for their good, as the bad for theirs.
Many good Christians have not half the comfort they might have. Their example
hurts others. Vnsetling of our selves from nourishing faith, is full of
dangers. The longer we live, the better we should be. Many have found small
comfort through their life. Three degrees of faith.
The second Treatise.
CHAP. 1.
OF the life of a believer. The sum and order of this treatise. Why godliness
should be joined with faith. Diverse opinions about godliness. It is necessary
to understand wherein a godly life consists. The necessary connection of this
treatise with the former. Faith and godly life are as twins, and go together.
The heads of this treatise are four.
CHAP. 2.
THe first point of the first head of this treatise. Where true faith is not,
there is no good life. No good thing in the unbeliever that pleases God. Men
are dangerously deceived about this point. This is no new doctrine. It is hard
only to the obstinate. None that have faith, can live wickedly. Proofs of it.
Faith is not content with a wandering desire of godliness. The Gospel despised,
because it is not known. Many would be thought believers, who live not a godly
life. Too hasty repentance, seldom sound. Change of life without faith, vain.
A simile. It is vain to think we have faith, without a new life.
CHAP. 3.
THe second point of the first head of this treatise. The believer must believe
other promises beside that of salvation. Also the commandments and threats.
The believers do not thus. The cause why. Another cause. Want of this faith
works much inconvenience. The believer must believe that he shall be
sanctified. And particular promises of benefits and deliverance. And precepts
and threats, even the word it self. Examples of such as did so. This doctrine
little seen into and practiced. This kind of faith not often beat upon by
teachers. The less conceived and in use with the better kind of hearers. What
causes tedious troubles to many Christians. The testimony of good Christians
touching this matter. An exhortation to the ministers. A minister must have
experience in himself of that which he teaches others. Answer to such as
think otherwise. Let faith and godliness be often taught. The same things
without vain repetition and barbarousnesse. The peoples wants require it. Want
of this kind of faith makes the godly life difficult. A simile. Where it is
inioied, the practice of godliness becoms easy. The want of a good foundation
is the ruin of many.
CHAP. 4.
THe second general head of this treatise. Of the heart. The heart the
fountain of godly life, must first be purged. Like heart, like life. The heart
is a dungeon of iniquity. A simile. A view of the filthiness of the heart. Men
see it not, and therefore suspect no danger. What the purging of the heart is.
He that dies in a weak estate shall be saved. Holy desires be often times
quenched in the believer. How to revive them. How the heart is purged. By the
power of the holy ghost. This is at the first turning of a sinner to God. Even
this is a gracious work. We must not stand at a stay in this. The heart is
purged by faith. Worldly delights so sought for because the heavenly are not
felt. So soon as any are assured of Gods favor, so soon are their hearts
changed. Faith purges only as the instrument. True repentance what. Without
the change of the heart there is no amendment of life. The simplest Christian
finds some measure of these. Proofs that this change is wrought by faith. By
this change the believer sensibly descerneth his present estate from his
former. The weak troubled, that this change is so small. Yet this is a note
that their state is good. This change of the heart is the foundation of a godly
life. If men at the first gave God their hearts, then should their whole life
be better. Not a piece of the heart. Many hardly brought to give their whole
heart, therefore give over.
CHAP. 5.
OF the renouncing of all sin: which is the first effect of a renewed heart in
the true believer. We must be changed before our lives can be amended. What the
life of the believer is. All ungodliness, not some only, is to be renounced.
The believer loatheth his former filthy life. The power of faith, and gain
thereby. The vanity of worldly ioies. The believer renounceth sin in good
aduisednesse, and not in some good mood only. For want of this settled denying
of our selves diverse never attain to true godliness. Worst sort of
protestants, who hate this doctrine. Gods servants are at utter defiance with
the world. They leave not sin for a time, nor by constraint, or for company,
fear. etc. They vow and perform. Not by their own strength. Their help is
from God, attained by faith, waited for by hope. It is got with much striving.
Which ought to be no discouragement. The faithful always prevail not. Yet
find comfort. No hurt by abasing. Gain of our falls, to purge us. This gain
is only to the believer. Believers can renounce all. Unbelievers cannot. No
dram of goodness in a natural man.
CHAP. 6.
Diverse kinds of evil to be renounced. First, inward lusts. All do not hold
them under in like measure. The effects of our natural corruption be here
meant. The root of them all, is unbelief. Three sorts of inward lusts. 1.
against God, and his honor and worship: in the first table. Ignorance of God,
and no mind to come out of it. Distrust. In adversity, impatient, obstinate.
etc. In prosperity, no thankfulness, carnal reioicing, drunk with
pleasures. No pleasure in Gods true worship. Superstition and blind devotion.
Profaneness, dissoluteness. etc. Abuse of peace. Loathing the Lords Sabbath.
2. Wicked lusts toward man: in the second table. Com. 5. contempt of betters,
unthankfulness, sauciness in youth. Com. 6. reioicing in evil, wrath, no
bearing revenge, no fellow feeling. etc. Com. 7. unclean lusts, E. Feeding of
them, 106. F. Eyes full of adultery: the mind made a nursery of filthiness.
Not only the worst sort deceived this way. Com. 8. coueteousnesse. etc. Com.
9. lust against our neighbors name. Surmises, devising of libels. etc. Things
not always, yet these be common. Com. 10. the heart is taken up with dreams
and hurtful thoughts. These lusts be causes of all woe.
CHAP. 7.
3. Evil lusts concerning our selves. Fretting when we be crossed of our will.
Excessive delight in abundance. Pride of life. Frowardness. Self-love. etc.
The word of God makes his Children wary against these. A special part of a
godly life, to renounce these. It is not done without daily striving. Lusts
mar all. Weak service accepted, if it be sound. He that observes these lusts
and resists them, is occupied in a godly life. All overcome not these alike.
The better sort how far they come, and how. Examples of such. The weaker are
not to distrust for not matching the best. These lusts are resisted of all
believers in their measure. They who be ruled by their lusts, can claim no
part in a godly life. The weak may stay their comfort in these three special
graces. 1. That they have a clear knowledge of their salvation. 2. That they
account it as their chief treasure. 3. That they be set forward in some good
course, whereby they may grow in faith and obedience. These three must be
earnestly labored for. The chief end of this book, is to set forward a weak
Christian. How to make godliness, a pleasure. The gain of such a course. Why
God witholds some grace from his. Causes in our selves of not growing.
Ignorance. Sloth. Favoring sin. Timorousness and unbelief. Remedy of our
unbelief.
CHAP. 8.
HOw the minds of the godly are occupied. Three ages of Gods children. 1.
Childhood. 2. Middle age. 3. Old age. The highest degree of Christians. How the
minds of such are usually taken up. The best are molested sometimes with
lusts. They are not comparable to the Apostles. Paul had special privileges.
These are called fathers. The second sort of the godly, in battle. The
practice of such. Sin is odious to them, though not ever overcome of them.
These are sometime discouraged. Glad to use all helps. Set against smaller
sins. They are held under their infirmities for their good. The third sort of
the godly. About what their thoughts are chiefly occupied. The dangers that
these are subject unto. 1. Danger in comfort. 2. Danger when they feel want of
comfort. Many defects are in these. Young Christians compared to children.
These must grow. Their duty. Gods children are in danger sometimes to be
dazeled and without feeling. Yet even in this estate they differ from
hypocrites and unregenerate. How they differ. These degrees may in some respect
fall one into another. Examples of these three sorts of Gods people.
CHAP. 9.
OVtward wickedness must be renounced. Proved, 1. by doctrine of the
scriptures. 2. by examples.
The sins that he loved best, are renounced of the believer.
CHAP. 10.
Four sorts of men which hope for salvation, and yet renounce not open sins.
1. Gross offenders. The ungodly will scorn professors, if their lives be
faulty. Such are seldom reclaimed.
2. Sort of bad professors, ignorant and careless. The woeful estate of such.
Yet there want not such as flatter them in it. Many laugh at the rude for their
homely speeches, who yet are like them in qualities.
3. sort: Civil professors. Some of all these three sorts are sometimes pricked
in conscience. Notes of their hypocrisy. Sudden flashes of grace.
4. sort: Schismatickes. They are taunters, railers, and slanderers of their
brethren. Censurers of others. Soon ripe in their own conceit. Inordinate
livers. Worse in dealing then men who profess no religion.
These with the former are far from a godly life. Other disorders of such
professors. Earthlinesse. Unquietness. Unprofitableness. Pride of life. Ill
educating their children. Uncharitable surmises.

CHAP. 11.
Object. Are all such damned? Answer. No, if they repent. God shoales out some
from others. h. Infirmities in all. The godly somewhat infected with common
corruptions. Difference between the falls of the godly and the wicked. The
godly fall not, but when they are secure and take liberty. How we may be
fenced. No warrant of not falling dangerously. We may be preserved from soul
falls. The ends, why God suffers some to fall so. 1. To humble men. 2. To
magnify his mercy in forgiving great sins. 3. In regard of others.
Otherwise, no fear of falling. Gods tenderness over his. Sweet comfort to the
weak. What infirmities the godly be subject to. The state of weaker
Christians. These differ much from all wicked. What the sin of infirmity is.
The wicked sin boldly. Their sorrow is carnal.
CHAP. 12.
THe heart purged, must so be kept. How the heart is kept. What danger grows
when the heart is not kept. Great labor, thus to keep the heart. With this
heart it is easy to renounce evil. An ill governed heart, the cause of all
disorder. Little acquaintance with our hearts, brings great bondage. An high
grace, to live well without the whip. The faithful in part, thus kept down.
Sin is not shaken off as a burre. Grace to vanquish sin, may be attained:
and more and more from day to day. The good treasury of the heart, being kept,
brings forth good things. A piece of heaven, to live with such as keep their
hearts well. Without it, nothing sauoury. The fruit of a well ordered heart.
The looking to the heart in a good mood only, dangerous. The heart may
always be looked to. An other cause why the heart should be looked to:
otherwise, it will not be ready to any duty. How we may be fit to pray and
meditate. The only way to curb up our lusts, is to look to our hearts.
Without this, small fruit or comfort. This clensing of the heart is not
perfect. This clensing, though weak, is a great privilege.
CHAP. 13.
THe second general branch of the life of a believer. More hard and excellent
to do good, then to eschew evil. Not to rest in eschewing evil. Three
branches of this second part of this treatise. 1. Sets down rules to direct
to the practice of duties. 2. Shows wherein this part of godliness
consists. 3. Answers objections.
Necessity of rules to live well by. The first rule to live well, is Knowledge.
Knowledge what. To grow in this knowledge. With this knowledge must go Delight
in it. Without this delight no fruit of knowledge. Knowledge an excellent
gift: But without the salt of grace, unsavory. The second rule, Practice.
Practice is first in an hearty desire. Our affections must be stronger, as the
good is greater. As we desire, so must we endeavor to do good. All parts of
our bodies must be given to serve God. Make a trade of godliness. Virtues that
further us to the former rules. 1. Uprightness, 2. Diligence. 3. Constancy or
perseverance.
Uprightness, what. Pretenses in good actions. Necessity of these rules and
virtues. Unarmed venturing abroad, is cause of sore wounds.
CHAP. 14.
Object. We cannot do as we desire. Ans. 1. Gods grace shall be sufficient. 2.
The best desire without looking for Gods help, is vain.
Why Paul overcame not all rebellion. Paul was not carried into gross
iniquity. We may look for the like grace that Paul had, in our measure. Many
weak, discouraged for want of this victory. Many know not their liberty. The
two next virtues, Diligence and Constancy. Diligence and Constancy bring
great matters to pass. What diligence is required. What constancy. The gain
of these. Many pay dear for their liberties. Want of these virtues, dangerous.
Other two virtues, Humility and Meekness. These always necessary. The
Christian life, no idle nor unsettled life. The end of one work, the beginning
of another: yet without toil. Keep always an appetite to some new duty.
CHAP. 15.
COm. 1. Duties to Gods person. Knowledge of God. Trust, hope, patience. Joy,
thankfulness. Request, love. Desire of God presence, reverence, fear. Com.
2. Gods worship, ministry, sacraments. Public prayers, Censures. Public
fasts. Extraordinary thanks. Private worship. Manner of Gods worship,
spiritual. How Gods worship is to be used. The word. 1. Preparation. 2. In
hearing. 3. Having heard.
How conference and reading should be used. How the Lords supper should be
received. How prayer should be made. Com. 3. In all things to glorify God. In
an oath. 1. Truth. 2. Righteousness. 3. Judgment.
In beholding Gods works. Com. 4. Keeping holy of the seventh day. Variety of
holy exercises. Public duties. Private: 1. By our selves. 2. With others.

CAAP. 16.
SEcond Table. Duties to God and man, are not to be separated. Bear love to
all. Brotherly kindness to Christians. Many duties to our neighbor. Com. 5.
Duties of inferiors. Common to all inferiors. Subjection. Reverence. Superiors
duty. Diverse kinds of superiors. Duties of subjects and servants. Duties of all
in authority: as, Princes. Masters. Childrens duty. Parents. Ministers.
Hearers. Strong Christians: Weaker. Others excelling in gifts. Ancient in
years. Duties toward our equals. By examining, see our wants and need of
Christ. Maintain our own reverence. Com. 6. Duties toward the life of our
nighbour. Bodily life and health. To hurt none. By mildness of spirit to bear
much. Cut off all occasions of discord. To do good to their lives. In their
miseries. To pity them. To show mercy. To servants distressed. To the sick in
visiting them. Helpfulnesse and harmlesnesse, virtues of singular price. What
virtues accompany them. Pity to the soul of our neighbor. Good example. To
win and confirm others. Help the poor.

