Richard Roll hermyte of Hampull in his contemplacyons of the dread and love
of god with other diverse tytles as it shows in his table.





Opus Ricardi Roll heremyte de Hampull qi obiit Anno christi. M.CCC.xlix.
THis short epistle that follows is dyuyded in sundry matters / and each matter
by himself in sundry tytles as this calendar shows. And yt thou may sone
find what matter the pleases / these tytles ben here in the Epistle marked
with diverse lettres in manner of a table

A How each man should desire to love god. B How men sometime loved god / and
how holy men sometime were vysyted with swetnesse in the love of almighty god. C
What is dread and how a man should dread god D What is charity and how and why
you shall love thy go Of four degrees of love / and in the first ben five
points.
Ordained love. E The first is that thou shall love thy flesh only that it
be sustained. F The.ii. is you shall love ye world to no superfluyte. G
The.iii. is you shall love thy neighbor for god. H The fourth is thou shall
love thy friend for his good living. I The fyfth is thou shall love thyn
enemy for ye more dread.
In the second degree of love ben three points. Clean love K The first point is
thou shall love no vice with virtue. L The second is you shall hate all evil
customs. M The third is thou shall not set light by sin be it never so
little.
In the third degree of love be five points Steadfast love. N The first is
thou shall love god with all thy desire. O The second is thou shall in the
beginning of thy works think on ye worship and dread of god. P The third is
thou shall do no syn^e upon trust of other good deeds. Q The fourth is thou
shall rule the discretly that thou fail not for none fervent will. R The fyfth
is thou shall not leave thy good lyuy^ge for feynte heart ne for temptacyon.
In the fourth degree of love ben.viii. points. Parfyte love. S How by encreace
of virtues thou may come to perfeccyon. T How good will is and may be in
diverse manners U What parfyte is in prayer and in what manner thou shall pray.
X How thou may beware and know of temptacyons waking or slepynge / and how
thou shall with stand them. Y How thou shall be pacyent and what time
pacyence is most needful. Z How perseueraunce is needful and how you may be
perseueraunt. AB By what prayer or thought thou may be styred to devotion.


Explicit tabula.
IN the beginning and ending of all good works worship and thanking be to
almighty god / maker and byer of all mankind / begynner and ender of all
goodness / without whose gift and help no manner virtue is ne may be / whether
it be in thought / will / or deed / than what ever we sinful creatures think
or do speak or write / that may turn in to proufyte of man's soul / to god
only be the worship that sent al grace / to us no praysynge / for of us
without him comes no thing but fylthe and sin. Now than good god of his
endeles might and plenteuous goodness grant me grace to think somewhat of his
dear love and how he should be loved / of that same love some words to write
which may to him be worship / to the writer mede / and proufytable to the
reder. Amen.

A How each man should desire to love god.
Among all creatures that ever god of his endeles might made / was there none
yt he so loved as he did mankind / whom he made everlasting bliss instead
of angels / which did fall from bliss down in to hell. But that good god
loved so man / that for as much as man had forfeyted that bliss thorugh sin
of Adam / he of his plenteuous charity became man / to bye body and soul that
was lost. In what manner he bought us / every christian man knows or should
know / that no less price / but suffered his own precious body to be all to
rent with bitter pains of scorgy^ge. He suffered also a garlonde of sharp
thorns pressyd to his heed / whiched percyd so the veins that the blood ran
down in to his eyes / nose mouth and eeres. Afterward upon the cross his
bones were draw out of Ioynte / the veins and the senewes were borsten for
strayte drawing / to ye cross he was nailed hand and foot / and so failed
the blood of kind with bitter pains of death. He betoke his spyryte to the
fader of heaven / and than suffered at the last his glorious heart to be thorugh
percyd with a shapre spear for to give his heart blood to bye man body and
soul into Joy without end. If god of his great goodness loved thus man
gyuynge him over this wit and reason and all other thing that him needs /
kyndely a man should night and day with all his wits love him and feruentely
desire to conne love such a good god that all thing made all thing gives
and susteyneth. Of this desire there ben many men and women which have full
great liking to speak of the love of god / and all day asking how they
should love god and in what manner they should love to his pleasaunce for his
endeles goodness. To such men and women of that good will and that holy desire
I will show first of holy men before this time how fervent some were in the
love of god. Also in how high a degree of love some were vysyted in ye
swetenes of christ But it may be so that it is full hard for the more party of
men and women to come to so high a degree of love / therefore after the
showing of such high degrees of love somewhat I will write to other of simple
knowing how they should love god / as that gracyous god will give me grace.

B How men sometime loved god / and how holy men sometime were vysyted with
swetenes in the love of almighty god.
I Find and read of our holy faders in old time that for the love of god
they forsook the world and all worldely things and lived in wyldernes by
grass and by rotes / such men were fervent in the love of god. But I trow
there ben but few or else none that folowen them now / for we find not by
gods law or heste that we should love so. For all be it they were kept and
sustained so it was most by the might and grace of god / as no goodness may be
without hy^ yet I trow they lived so much by ye strength of kind that was in
man tho days. I will not counsel the to live as they did / for thou may
by other manner living come to the love of god / as thou shall se afterward. I
find also furthermore of other full holy men of right late time which lyueden
a full holy life and took their lyuelode as feblenesse of man asks now in our
days. Some of these men as I have herd and read were vysyted by the grace of
god with a passing swetenes of the love of christ / which swetenes for an
example they showed afterward by their writing to other men following / if
any would travail to have that high desire or degree of love. This love
which they have written to other is departed in three degrees of love / which
three degrees they hadden one after an other standing stablysshed in their
desire / and suffrynge pacyently for the love of god many trybulacyons and
temptacyons till they come by holy contemplacyon to ye highest degree of love of
tho three. By this I suppose he that has grace to come to the first may by
gods help come to the second / and so with a fervent desire and good
perseueraunce he may come to the third. Shortly I will show here these
degrees of love / for by cause all men and women that should read this have not
knowing of them / ne never herd speak of such degrees of love before time.
Degrees of high love..i. The first love is so fervent that no thing which
is contrary to gods will may overcome that love / wealth ne woe health ne
sykenes. Also he yt has this love will not make god ones angry for all the
world without end / but rather suffer all the pain that might come to any
creature than ones wylfully dysplease his god in thought or deed..ii. The
second love is more fervent for y^ is so strong / that what man loves in
that degree all his thought heart and might is so entyerly so besely and so
perfyghtly stablysshed in Ihesu christ that his thought comes never from him
but when he slepeth..iii. The third degree of love is highest and most
wonderful / for what man comes to that love / all comfort and all solace is
closed out of his heart / but only the Joy of Ihesu christ / Other Joy may
his heart not receive for swetnesse that he has of the Joy evermore lasting.
This love is so brennynge and so gladynge that who so has that love may as
well feel the fire of bre^nynge love in his soul / as an other man may feel
his finger brenne in erthely fire. This love may well be called a brennynge
love. And if men had such swetnesse in the love of god of so late time I
suppose well yt ye same we may have now by the gift of god if we were as
fervent in love as they were. But these degrees of love ben set upon so high
love to god / that what man should have the first of these three / behooved that
he were a sad contemplatyf man or woman. And by cause mankind is now and
evermore the longer the febler or peraue^ture more unstable / therefore uneaths
should we find now a sad contemplatyfe man or woman. Men of relygyon have
taken diverse habytes of contemplatyf life. Men and women also that been
enclosed as it seems lyuen a co^templatyfe life / and so with gods grace they
do so for the more party. But for to speak of high contemplatyfe life as holy
men lived before this time it seems there ben right few. Therefore I trow
that I may sykerly say that few there ben now that will or may travail now to
have such high degrees of love as I have reherced before. Nevertheless what so
ever thou be that redest or herest this / be never to slower to trauayll. For
if thy desire be set fervently and louyngly holding the unworthy to have so
high a ghoostly gift before an other man / and put thy desire to gods
dysposycyon trustyngly he will dyspose that is best for the / whether thou
haste thy desire or have it not. But it is first needful to ye that thou have
other three degrees of love that the same holy men wrote in their treatise /
which be not of so high a degree as tho that be reherced before..i. The first
degree of these is / wha^ a man or a woman holds the commandments of god
and keeps him self out of dedely sin / and is stable in the faith of holy
church. Also when a man would not for none erthely thing dysplease god / but
truly stands in his degree whether he be religyous or seculer. In this manner
every man behooves to love his god that will be saved / therefore I counseyll
the to have and keep this love or thou clymbe to any hyer degree..ii. The
second degree is when a man forsakes all the world for the love of god /
that is for to say his fader his mother and all his kynred and follows christ
impouerte. Also stands night and day / how clean he may be in heart how
chaste in body / how meke and buxom / how clean in all virtues / and hate all
vices / so o that all his life be ghoostly and none thing flesshely. iii. The
third degree is highest / for that is a full contemplatyfe life as when a man
or a woman loves for to be alone from all manner noise. And when that he is
saddely set in this life and in this love with his ghoostly eyes than may he
se in to the bliss of heaven. And than his eyes be so enlumyned and so clear
lyghted with grace of ghoostly love and also through kyndeled with the gracyous
fire of crystes love that he shall have a manner of brennynge love in his heart
evermore lasting and his thought evermore upward to god. Thus as I have
reherced god has vysyted his servants gyuynge them a special savor lo
toue him by their holy living. Many other men and women there be which please
god full well standing truly in their degree as men and women of the world /
both lords and ladies and other husbonde men women and wives. For all be it
they may not come to such hye conte^platyfe life it suffyseth them to have the
first degree of these three which I reherced last / for that every man is
bound to keep. If thou desire to have an higher degree of love in to the
worship of god / travail as other men did and ask help and grace with good
perseuerau^ce if it please god to perform thy will and bring the to thy
purpose. But for as much as there be many that have not a sad ground ne but
little feeling how they should love and dread god / which is spedefull and
needful for all men to know. Therefore to such as be not knowing I will
show first in what manner they should love and dread god / that they may be ye
more stable in the love of god. After that I shall show by the grace of god
four degrees of love / which every christian man relygyous and seculer should
hold and keep and may perform for the more party if his will be fervently
set to the love of god. Now than as I said I shall in the beginning with the
help of god write and show somewhat of the dread of god / that shall be to his
worship and proufyte to the reder.

C What is dread / and how a man should dread god.
I Read that ye dread of god is beginning of wysedom. Dread as clerks have
written before this time is in many manners. But I suppose three ky^des of dread
be^ most needful for to know. The first is dread of man or dread of the
world. The second is called dread of seruage. The third is called a chasted
dread or a frendely dread..i. The first which is dread of man or of the world
is / when a man or woman dredeth more the punysshynge of the world as betynge
the body or prysonynge than the punysshynge of the soul. Also when a man
dredeth more to lose his temporal goods in this passing world than to lose
the bliss without end / this dread is counted for naught / for god almighty
forbad this dread when he said thus. Dredeth him not that may slay ye body /
but rather dread him that may send the body and soul in to everlasting
fire..ii. And the second dread which is the dread of seruage / is wha^ a man
withdraws him or absteyneth hy^ fro sin / more for dread of the pain of
hell tha^ for love that he should have to god. Every such man what goodness he
does it is not for dread to lose euerlasty^ge bliss which he desired not /
but for dread only of suffrynge of great pains which he dreded sore this
dread suffyseth not as thou shall see afterward / but yet it may be good and
proufytable..iii. The third dread which is called a chaste or a frendely
dread is / when a man dredeth the long abiding here for great desire that he
has to be with god. Also when he dredeth that god will go fro him / as
peradventure he withdraws his grace fro him. Also when he dredeth to
dysplease god for the great love and desire yt he has for to please god /
such dread comes of love and that pleases much god. Take than head how here
be reherced three manner degrees of dread / fle the first for it is not
proufytable. The second may be proufytable / for some men there be which
dread god by cause they should not be sent into hell to brenne there with the
deuyls in everlasting fire. This dread may be good for by this way they may
come in to the love of our lord god as by this way that I shall show. All be
it that thou dread our lord god only for pain yet love thou not god whom
you dredest / thou desyrest not yet goodness of virtues / but thou withstandest
yt wyckednes of vices / wha^ thou withstandest the wyckednes thou begynnest to
desire goodness. Wha^ thou desyrest goodenes and virtues / than comes in to the
the third manner of dread / which is called as I said a chaste or a frendely
dread. For than thou dredest to lose the goodness and grace that god has put in
ye / thou dredest tha^ also to lose the bliss that is ordained for the / and
so by this thou shall dread god that he forsake not the / when thou dredest god
in this manner then have thou him sykerly with the / and so for his love thou
shall desire to be with him. Thus may thou well know how dread of god may
bring the in to the love of god / if thou love god than thou have wysedom / so
thus the dread of god is the beginning of wysedom. Take heed than and dread
god in the manner as I have reherced / for if thou dread well god thou shall not
be slow in his service. He that dredeth well god leueth no goodness undo which
he may do to the pleasure of god. If thou dread god thou will keep his
commandments / and the dread that thou have to god shall bring the in to
everlasting sykernes where you shall never dread. Of the dread of god wexeth a
great devotion and a manner sorrow with full contryco^n for sins / through that
deuoco^n and contrycon thou forsakest thy sins / and perauenture somewhat of
thy worldely goods. By that forsakynge thou lowest the to thy god and come
in to mekenes / thorugh mekenes thy flesshely lusts ben destroyed / by ye
destrucco^n all vices be put out and vanysshed away / by putting out of vices
than virtues begin to wexe and spring. Of the shynynge of virtues the clennes
of the heart is purchased. By clennesse of thy heart thou shalt come to full
possessyon of the holy love of Christ. By these words thou may know how you
shalt dread for love / and how thou may come to love through dread of god.
But the more love encreaceth in the / the more dread gooth from the / so that
if thou have grace to come to a fervent love thou shall but little think on
dread for the swetnesse that thou shall have in the love of god. but yet be
thou never so parfyte it is needful that thou dread discretely as long as
thou art in this world / for as much as I said thou may come to love if
thou dread god / see now furthermore what is charity and love to god. How and
in what manner thou shall love him / why thou shall love him. How you shall know
when god of his mercy grau^teth the that grace to conne love him.

D What is charity and how and why thou shall love thy god. Of four degrees of
love / and in the first ben five points. Ordained love.
Charity as I read is a love that we should have to god / for as much as he is
almighty god. also charity is a love whereby we should love our neighbor as
ourselfe for god. And these be two pry^cypall commandments of god. The first
longs to ye love of god / which is ye gretest commandment of ye law of
god. The second longs to ye love of thy neighbor and this is like to the
first / and thus thou have what is charity and love. See now how thou shall
love god / thou shall love god with all thy heart / all thy soul / and with
all virtue as thus. When you put away from the or withstandest with all thy
power all thing that is pleasynge or liking to thy flesh for the love of ye
blessed flesh of christ / than thou love him with all thy heart and al thy
soul. Of this matter thou shall her more afterward / but se now ferthermore
how thou shall love hy^. The causes why thou shall love god ben without nombre
hauy^ge reward to his benefaytes / but two causes we have pryncypally above
other One is for he loves us first with all his heart and al his soul swetely
and strongely. Swetely when he took flesh and blood and became man for our
love. Strongly when he suffered death for love of man. The second cause is / for
there is no thing that may be loved more ryghtfully ne more proufytable. More
ryghtfull is there none than the love of him that made man and deyed for man.
More proufytable thing is there none that may be loved than almighty god / for
if we love him as we be bound / he will give us Joy and bliss without end /
where no thing lacks but all thing is plenteuous and euerlasty^ge. Se now
how thou shall know wha^ god puts grace in the for to know love. When the
travail which thou have for the love of god is light and liking to the /
than thou begynnest to have savor in the love of god. For there is no manner
travail grievous ne trauaylous to him ye loves god fervently and trauayleth
wylfully for the love of god. Also steadfast love feleth no bytternesse / but
all sweetness / for right as bytternesse is sister to the vice of hatred /
right so swetnesse is sister to ye virtue of love so that in love is all
swetnesse. Also the travail of lovers may be in no manner trauaylous negreuous.
For right as hawkers and hunters whateuer travail they have it greueth them
not for the love and liking that they have in their game / ryghth so what
thing it be that a man loves and takes upon him a travail for that thing
that he loves or else it is no travail / and if it be trauaylous it lyketh
him to have travail for yt thing which he loves. Take than good head of
these words / for if thou love god thou wylt gladly travail and suffer for ye
love of god / if thy travail seems than light to the / or else if thou
love or desyrest gladly to have travail for the love of god thou may well
know that god of his grace has put in the a beginning to come to love. When
thou have such a gracyous beginning withdraw not ye love from him for no
manner disease that may fall to the. For many men and women there be that while
they be in prosperyte / that is to say / while they be in wealth and in rest
gladly they will show love to god such as they can. But if god sends him
any disease or any manner of chastysynge anon her love swageth and that is no
sad love. For who so loves trustyngly and sadly he loves as well in his
aduersyte as in prosperyte / for what god sends to us it is for our proufyte
/ therefore be it health be it woe yt he sends we should hertely thank him and
not withdraw our love from him for no need that he has to our love / but for
great profit that we should have to love him / and for his great goodness that
he will chastyse us here all for our better. Thus than have I showed in few
words what is charity and love to thy god / how thou shall love him / why
thou shall love him / and how thou shall know when thou have grace to conne
love him. Learn than thus to love and se now ferther more what proufyte and
grace comes of love. In the love of god ben five gracyous things Fire / light
/ honey / wine / and son.

1. The first is fire clensynge the soul of all manner vices through holy
medytacyons..ii. The second is light shynynge in the soul with clerenes of
virtues thorugh holy prayers..iii. The third is honey making sweet the soul
when he has in mind the benefaytes and ye great gifts of god almighty / and
yeldynge to him thankynges..iiii. The fourth is wine fulfyllynge ye soul with
a great gladness thorough a sweet contemplacyon..v. The fyfth is a son making
the soul clear with a shynynge light in myrthe withouten end and gladynge the
soul with an easy heart in Joy and bliss evermore lasty^ge. Thus thou may
see what proufyte he shall have that can well love. God than of his great grace
grant us hy^ so to love as it is most to him pleasynge. Amen. Now
ferthermore I will show to the as I said before / four degrees of love which
thou may keep and easily come to one after an other if thou have good will.

Hour degrees of love there be / the first is called an ordained love or else
ordynat love / that is to say a love ordained to be known and kept of all
manner men and women of every degree in the world. To this degree of love
longen.v. points to be kept. The first is thou shall love thy flesh only
that it be sustained. The.ii. is that thou love the world to no superfluyte.
The.iii. is that thou love thy neighbor for god. The.iiii. is that thou love
thy friend for his good living. The.v. is to love thyn enemy for the more
mede of god.

E The first is that thou shall love thy flesh only that it be sustained.
THe first point is as I said thou shall love thy flesh only that it be
sustained as thus. Thou shall take mete and drink clothy^ge and al other
thing that is needful to thy body / in reasonable manner to keep thy body in
his estate in comfort of thy soul to travail and continue in the service of
god / and not for to nourysshe thy flesh in lust and liking with diverse
delycate metes and drynkes / for there of comes foul stynkynge sin and many
bodyly sykenes / namely when there is to much excess. This witnesses an holy
clerk and says / they that delyted them in lusts of the flesh they have
full often many dyseases in their flesh. Also as I read a soul that is wont
to delytes of the flesh gadreth together many fylthes and wyckednes. Thou
may also do no exces / for if thou use the to excess / thou fallest in to
the vice of glotonye / which thou know well is dedely sin. Of ye sin I
read thus / where ye vice of glotony reygneth in any man he leseth ye ghoostly
strength if he had any before. And but if the womb of glotonye be swaged all
his vtues ben cast down / therefore love thy flesh to sustentacyon and not to
delytes and to excess / for here thou may well know and se that it is good
and needful to flee delycacyes. But thou shall understand here yt I
counseylle the not to forbere any mete or drink in special / for the vice of
delycacye is not in the mete / but in ye lust that thou have in mete / therefore
says an holy clerk. Often we take deynte metes without blame / and sometime
other metes and common to every man not without gylte of conscience. So thus it
seems well when we take any mete for delight more than for sustenau^ce we
offend god / therefore flee delytes and lusts of mete and drink and love thy
flesh only that it be sustained / and than thou have the first point of
this degree of love.

F The second is thou shall love the world to no superfluyte.
THe second point is thou shall love the world to no superfluyte. As thus if
thou love god thou shall not desire ne love vanytees of the world / ne
worldely goods more than ye needs. If god has ordained the to an high
degree in the world / as for to be a lord or a lady / or for to have any
soueraynte ghoostly or worldely / by reason reverence must be done to the more
than to an other man or woman. For after that the first man Ada^ was inobedyent
to gods commandment it was ordained by almighty god that man should be
subgect to man. Also for as much as ye people must have governance / therefore
it is reason to do reverence to them that have power and governance above
other. But all be it yt you be great and worldely worship must be do to the /
love it not ne desire it not but mekely yield all yt worship to god which
might have made the a subget there he has ordained the a lord or a sovereign
/ and through that lownes thou shall have some grace to withstand ye desire of
worldely vanytees. I say ferthermore / if thou love the world to none
superfluyte / you shall not desire ne love worldely good more than the needs.
As thus thou know well enough in thy begy^nynge whether thou art lord or
subgect / poor or rich / hold the apayde with thy degree so that thou have
thy sustenaunce / and desire to be no greter / but only as gods will is and
as he will dyspose for the. If thou hold the not paid with that that god has
sent to the and to thyn a reasonable lyuelode / but ever desyrest for to be
greter and greter in the world than thou love the world to superfluyte for
thou desyrest more than thou nedest and so by that foul desire thou fallest
in to the vice of couetyse which is repreued by gods law as a foul dedely
sin. This sin is full peryllous / for I read where that the sin of
couetyse is in a man yt man is made subgect to all other vices. I find also
that couetyse and pride be as it were one vice or one wyckednes / in so much
that yet where pride reygneth there is couetyse / and where couetyse reygneth
there is pride / this vice is so wicked and so grievous and as long as it
reygneth in any man he shall have no grace for to draw to god ward. This
witnesses well a full holy clerk saint Gregorye and says thus in an Omelye.
That in none other wise we may ne can never come ne draw to ye begynner and
maker of all goodness / but that we cast away from us the sin of couetyse
which is rote of all euylles. Than it seems well if thou wylt come to the
love of god thou must flee the sin fo couetyse Three things there be in the
world as I read which men desire above all other worldely things The first
is richesse. The second is lusts. And ye third is worship. Of richesse
comes wicked deeds. Of lusts comes foul deeds. And of worship comes
vanytees. Riches enge^dreth couetyse. lusts noryssheth glotonye and lecherye /
and worship noryssheth boost and pride. Thus thou may know what peril it is
to love the world more than need is / and than thou shall keep the second
point of this degree.

G The third is thou shall love thy neighbor for god.
THe third point is how thou shall love thy neighbor for god / to this
thou art bound by the commandment of god where he commands and says /
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self / if thou shall love him as thy
self needs thou must love him / thou shall love him also for god. Of this love
speaks saint Austyn and says / thou shall love god for himself with all thy
heart / and thy neighbor for god as thy self / that is to say / look where
to and for what thou love thy self so thou shall love thy neighbor. Thou
shall love thy self in all goodness and for god / right so thou shat love thy
neighbor for god and in all goodness but in none evil / therefore says the
same clerk. He that loves men yt is to say his neighbors he loves or
should love them for they ben good and ryghtfull or else that they may be good
and ryghtfull / and that is to say thou shall love them in god or else for god
/ and in this manner every man should love himself Also of the love of thy
neighbor I read when thou forsakest a synguler prouffyte for ye love of thy
neighbor tha^ you love thy neighbor. Also thou love thy neighbor as thy
self wha^ thou do him no harm but desyrest the same goodness and prouffyte
ghoostly and bodily to him that you desyrest to thy self. Love thus thy
neighbor or else you love not god. To this accords an holy clerk and says.
By the love of god the love of thy neighbor is purchased / and by ye love of
thy neighbor the love of god is nourysshed / for he yt takes no head to love
his neighbor he can not love his god. But when thou have first savor in love
of thy neighbor / than thou begynnest to enter in to ye love of god. Love thus
thy neighbor for god and tha^ thou kepest the third point of this degree of
love.

H The fourth is thou shall love thy friend for his good living.
THe fourth point is / thou shall love thy friend for his good living. If
thou have a friend that is of good living / thou shall love hy^ in double
manner / for he is thy friend and for the goodness that is in him / if he be not
good of life but vycyous thou may love hy^ but not his vices. For as I read
parfyte frendshyp is when thou love not in thy friend yt should not be loved
/ and when thou love in him or desyrest to hy^ goodness which is to be loved.
As thus though it be so yt thy friend lives so folysshly thou shall not love
him folly living but that he may by gods grace amend him and be parfyte in
living For what man it be yt loves himself in folly he shall not prouffyte in
wysedom. Also the same clerk says in an other place loves not the vices of
your fre^des if ye love your friends. Love than thy friend for his good living
/ and than thou shall keep the fourth point of this degree of love.

I The fyfthe is thou shall love thyn enemy for the more mede. In the second
degree of love ben three points Clean love.
THe fyfth point is thou shall love thyn enemy for the more mede. A great
deed of charity it is and medeful to forgive them yt have trespaced against us
with all our heart. It is but little goodness and full less mede to be well
willing to him that does the no harm / but it is a great goodness and a greter
mede that thou be well loving to thyn enemy. And yt thou do good and will
good with all thy power to him that does evil or is in will to do evil to the
with all his power. Of this matter speaks an holy clerk and says. It is
holden a great virtue among worldely men to suffer pacyently their enemies /
but it is a greter virtue a man to love his enemy / for that virtue is
presented as for sacrefyce before the sight of almighty god. Also to this
purpose accorde^ the words of christ where he said to his dyscyples. Love your
enemies / do good to them that hate you / and pray for them yt pursye we you
to disease / and for them ye despise you that we may be the children of the
fader in heaven. Love than thyn enemy for ye more mede if you wylt keep ye fyfth
point of this first degree of love. Shortly thus ben declared to the the five
points of ye first degree of love. In the first if thou take good head thou
art warned and counseyled for the love of god / and as thou art bound by all
christian laws to withstand the sin of glotonye and al other flesshely lusts
In the second point to withstand ye foul vice of couetyse pride and all
other vanytees of the world. In the three last points to love thy neighbor
thy friend and all other men for the love of god and for the more mede. Love
than god in this first manner of love / and thou shall through his great grace if
thou wylt come to the second degree of love.

THe second degree of love is called a clean love if thou wylt come to this
second degree of love thou must keep three points. The first is / yt thou love
no vice with virtue. The second is yt thou despise all evil custom. The
third is that thou set not little by sin whether it be little or great.

K The first point is thou shall love no vice with virtue.
THe first point is / thou shall love no vice with virtue. As thus what ever
thou be in man's sight / beware that thou be not vycyous Inward in thy soul
under color of virtues which yt she west openly. Our ghoostly enemy yt
fend has many subtyltees to dysceyue mankind. But among all this it is a
great dysceyte / wha^ that he makes a vice like to virtue and virtue like to
vice. This thou may see by ensample. For all be it that mercy is a great
virtue where yt it is kept and in ye worship and in ye name of god yet it is
vycyous where it is do in worship of man and not of god. Also where virtue of
right wysnes is turned in to vices / when it is do for worldely couetyse or
else for anger or inpacyence. The vice also of pride is hyd sometime under
meekness. As when a man loweth and meketh himself in speech and in berynge to
be hold meke and lowely. Pacyence also seems in many a man when there is
none. As when a man would take vengeance if he might for the wrong that is do
to him / but for he may not / or else he has no time to wreke him on his enemy
/ for that cause he suffers and not for the love of god By these ensamples and
many other thou may well know that vices sometime be like to virtues. To this
accords saint Iherom and says thus. A great and an high conning it is to
know vices and virtues for all be it that vices and virtues be co^traryous /
yet they be so like that uneath the virtue may be know from the vice / ne ye
vice fro the virtue Beware therefore and love so sadly virtues without any
faynynge that you hate all manner vices / and so you may keep the first point
of this degree of love.

L The second is you shall hate all evil customs.
THe second point is thou shall despise all evil customs. A great peril it
is to have an evil deed in custom. For as I read / sins be they never so
great ne so horrible / when they be draw in to custom they seem but little to
them that use such sin in custom / in so much that it is to them a great
lyky^ge to tell and show their wyckednes to al other men without any shame. Of
this and such usage speaks an other holy clerk and says. When sin comes
so in use that the heart has a lust and a liking there in / that sin shall
full fayntly be withstand. For when a sin is brought in to custom it byndeth
sore the heart and makes the soul bow to him that it may not rise again and
come in to the right way of clean life. For when he is in will to rise / anon
he slydeth and falls again. For this says the same clerk in an other
place. Many there be ye desyren to come out of sin / but for as much as they
ben closed in the prison of evil custom they may not come out from their
wicked living Also to this purpose I read that he yt uses hy^ not to virtue
in his young age he shall not conne with stand vices in his old age. Thus you
may well se yt if thou be used in any sin it will be full hard to with
stand it. And but thou leave all manner sin to thy power you have none clean
love to thy god / therefore with stand all manner sin and take none in custom
/ tha^ you shall keep the second point of this degree of love.

M The third is thou shall not set light by sin be it never so little. In
the third degree of love be five points. Steadfast love.
THe third point is / thou shall not set light by sin / as thus. What
ever sin it be little or great / dread it right dyscretly in thy conscience
and set not little there by. For as I read what man yt passes mesure in
taking of his lyuelode as often more than him needs that man offends god /
this seems to many men full little trespass. But this holy man saint Austyn
says. It is no little sin for as much as we trespass every day there in for
the more party In as much as we sin therein every day we sin therein often
/ and by that we multeplye our sins and that is full peryllous / therefore it
is full nedeful to dread al such venyall sins and set not little by them.
Also venyall sins be they never so little / they be much to be dradde. As
the same clerk shows by ensample of little bestes where they be many to
gyder / be they never so little yet they slay and do much harm. Also ye
granes of sand be full little / but yet where a ship is over charged with
sand it must needs synke or drenche. Right so it fares by the sins be they
never so little they be full peryllous. For but if a man be rather ware and put
them away they shall make him for to sin deedly. Therefore if thou wylt have
a clean love to god / charge in thy conscience every sin little and great and
withstand in the beginning and put it out as soon as god will give to the
grace with contrycyon confession and some almesdedes. And than thou shall keep
the third point of this degree of love. Here is reherced the matter of these
points. Thus ben declared the three points of the second degree of love. In
the first thou art counseyled to love all virtues and hate all vices. In the
second point that thou have no sin in usage but that thou void it soon
and that thou hate all other evil custom. In ye third point that thou art
not to light of conscye^ce / but that thou beware and dread every sin little
and great by counseyl of thy confessor. If thou keep thus these points for
the love of god than thou love god in the second degree of love / that is to
say in a clean love. Love than saddely in this degree / and by gods grace
thou shall the sooner come to the third degree of love.

THe third degree of love is called a steadfast love. If thou wylt come to this
degree of love you must keep five points. The first is thou shall love god with
all thy desire. The second is what ever thou do think upon the worship and
dread of god The third is thou shall do no sin upon trust of other good
deeds. The fourth is thou shall rule the so dyscretly yt thou fail not for no
fervent will. The fyfth is that thou fall not from thy good living for feynte
heart or by temptacyon.

N The first is thou shall love god with all thy desire.
THe first point is thou shall love god with all thy desire / thou may not
love steadfastly but thou love with all thy desire. An holy desire it is to
desire the presence of almighty god for the great love that thou haste to god.
Such an holy desire is so acceptable to god as I read / that what man has a
great desire all be it he speak not with the tongue / he cries full loud with
the tongue of his heart. And that not desires how ever he loves to our sight
outward / or speaks to our herynge he loves not in his heart and as a dombe
man he is to fore god which may not be herd. Of such holy desire I read also
the longer that love lacks which is so sore desired ye more fervent is his
desire which abides and that desire begy^neth to brenne thorugh strength of
yt desiring love / in so much that though the body or the flesh fail yt
desire is nourysshed and encreaced. To this accords saint Gregorye and says
/ holy desires wexen and encreasen in taryenge and abydy^ge / for where desires
fail in abiding there is no sad desire. Thus than love god steadfastly with
all thy desire / and so thou shall keep the first point of this degree of
love.

O The second is thou shall in the beginning of thy works think on the
worship and dread of god
THe second point is what ever thou do think upon the worship and dread of
god. If thou keep this thou shall the more sykerly live to gods pleasure. For
what deed thou art in will to perform in worship of god thou may be syker
of great mede. Also if thou dread god thou art aferde for to do any thing that
should be dyspleasynge to him / and for as much as you dredest thou do it
not. So by that dread thou leuest that thing undo which should turn the in
to great peril of thy soul if it had been performed in deed. By this thou
may well know that it is full spedfull to think in ye beginning of all thy
works upon the worship and dread of god. To this accords the techynge of
saint Poule where he says thus. What ever ye do in word or in deed / do it in
the name of our lord Ihesu christ. For he that begins all thing in ye name
of almighty god he begins in the worship of god. Love tha^ so steadfastly
almighty god / that what ever thou shall do think first in ye worship and
dread of god / and thus thou shall keep the second point of this degree of
love.

P The third is thou shall do no syn^e upon trust of other good deeds.
THe third point is thou shall do no sin upon trust of other good deeds.
What man that synneth wylfully he neither loves ne dredeth god. If thou sin
upon trust of any goodness wylfully thou synnest so in yt you love not
steadfastly. To this purpose I read also that he is full unkind that is full of
virtues and dredeth not god. Also a great folly and a great pride it is for to
sin upon trust of any good deeds. For be thou never so full of virtues or
goodness / unkindness to thy god may destroy all tho virtues More unkindness
may thou not show tha^ dysplease god wylfully / which is begynner and gyuer
of all goodness / beware therefore and flee such unkindness / and do no sin
upon trust of other good deeds. Of such unkindness also it is needful for
to beware / for the more acceptable thou art to god thorugh thy good living /
ye more culpable shall thou be if that thou fall again in to sin and in to
evil living. And of this thou have ensample of Adam. For as much as he was
fulfilled first with goodness / therefore his trespass was much the more when
that he fell in to sin. Also I read yt it is but a sclyder hope where a man
synneth upon trust for to be saved / for he that so does he neither loves ne
dredeth god. And but if that we love and dread god to our conning or knowing
we may not be saved / therefore it is more spedefull for to dread well than to
trust amys. Also it is more prouffy table a man to hold himself low and
feeble than to desire to be holden strong / and for feebleness to fall and be
lost. Take heed than what goodness that god puts in the and thank him mekely
and pray him of contynuaunce / and do no sin up trust of other good deeds.
And thus thou shall keep the third point of this degree of love.

Q The fourth is thou shall rule the dyscretly that thou fail not for none
fervent will.
THe fourth point is thou shall rule the so dyscretly that thou fail not to
fervent will. To keep this it is needful to the to have the virtue of
discrecyon as thus. If thou take for ye love of god so much abstynence waking
or other bodily penance yt thou may not for feebleness continue to travail in
ye service of god / than is thy will to fervent. For be thy love never so great
god is not pleased when you rulest yt in such manner that thou may not abide
in his service through thy mysrule. Therefore beware and rule the up reason /
take no more upon the than thou may bear / besy not the to follow other
strong men or women of old time in doing of penance otherwise tha^ thy
strength will ask. And govern thy living by good counseyll that thou fail
not through thyn own folly For almighty god of his endeles mercy has ordained
heuens bliss to the sinful men through deeds of charity and of mekenes where
they be done in mesure and with dyscrecyon. The devil is so enuyous to
mankind that sometime he styreth an vnpartyte man or woman to fast more than he
may begin things of high parfeccyons having no regard to his feblenesse /
in so much that when his bodily strength begins to fail either he must
co^tynue that he has begone so folysly for shame of men / or else utterly
leave all for feblenesse. To this accords saint Austyn and says. Our wicked
enemy the devil has not a more spedefull engyn to draw the love of god
from man's heart / than to take us by his false suggestyon to love unwisely and
without reason / that is to say as I said before. To styre us for to take
fastings wakynges and other bodily penau^ces over our might. Take therefore to
the dyscrecyon and rule the so dyscretly that thou fail not for to fervent
will / and than thou may keep the fourth point of this degree of love.

R The fyfthe is thou shall not leave thy good lyuy^ge for feynte ne for
temptacyon.
THe fyfthe point is / thou shall not fall fro thy good living for feynte
heart ne for temptacyon. To keep well this point it is needful to have a
perseueraunt will and a stable heart against all temptacyons. Some men there be
when any heaviness bodily or ghoostly or when that any grutchynge of the flessh
comes to them / anon they ben so heavy and so full of unlust that they leave
their ghoostly travail and fall fro their good lyuyge / such men have no
stable ne steadfast heart. Therefore if thou wylt love god steadfastly suffer no
heaviness ne disease ne change thy travail ne thy heart fro thy service and
love of god / but take heed of the words of almighty god where he says. He is
blessed that is perseuerau^t unto his lives end Here of thou have ensamples of
holy martyrs and co^fessours which never would be departed fro the love of god
for all the persecucyon that might be do to them Also to such men of feeble
heart and unlust speaks saint Bernarde and says thus. When thou art unlusty
or dyseased with heaviness / have none untrust therefore ne leave not thy
travail / but suffer mekely and ask conforte of him that is begynner and
ender of all goodness And all be it that thou have not such devotion than as in
other times / think well how he that gafe ye such devotion has withdrawn it
for thy defautes as for a time / and happily to the more mede / therefore
wtstande all such heaviness and stand strongely / suffer lowely / and take
gladly the chastysynge of god / and evermore ask help and grace. Ferthermore
some for defaute of knowing and for unstableness have fall thorough travail of
temptacyons / therefore when thou art so trauayled with any temptacyons that
should be lettynge / or else is dredefull to the / change not therefore thy will
/ but stand steadfastly and show thy disease to thy ghoostly fader asking of
him to give the such counsel that may be most helping to thy soul. If
thou do thus mekely with a full good will to please thy god and to withstand
the temptacyons of thyn enemy the grace of the holy ghoost will fully fulfill
both him and the / him for to teache / the for to learn / and take of him such
counseyll that shall be most strength and conforte to the and confusyon to the
devil. And so by the help of god thou shall be conforted in such manner that
you shall not fall thorough travail of temptacyons / but ever the longer the
more stable and the more strong in the love of god to thy lives end. Thus
than take heed that thou fall not from thy good lyuy^ge for feynte heart ne by
temptacyons / and than thou may keep the fyfth point of this degree of love.
Here is shortly declared the matter of these five points. Thus be declared the
five points of the third degree of love. In the first thou art taught to
love god with full desire. In the second for to do all thing in ye worship of
almighty god / and ever for to dread god in the beginning of all thy works.
In the third fully to withstand all manner sin / and no sin for to do upon
trust of other good deeds. In the fourth that thou fall not for defaute of
dyscrecyon. In the fyfth thou art taught and counseylled for to have a stable
heart and for to withstand all temptacyons that thou fall not from thy good
living. If you keep thus these five points than thou have the third degree of
love / which is called a steadfast love to god. And if thou love god steadfastly
thou may soon come to perfeccyon / and so by the grace of god thorugh
encreace of virtues thou shall lightly come to the fourth degree of love.

In the fourth degree of love ben.viii. points. Parfyte love.
S How by encreace of virtues thou may come to parfeccyon.
THe fourth degree of love is called a parfyte love. An other love there is all
be it I make no mencyon but of four / which is called most parfyte love. Of
that love speaks saint Austyn and says. Charity is parfyte in some men and
inparfyte in some men. But ye charity that is most parfyte may not be had here
while we live in this world. Of the same most parfyte love speaks the same
clerk thus. In the fulfyllynge of the country of charity / that is to say /
in fulfyllynge of heaven where that all is love and charity. This commandment
of god shall be fulfilled where he says / you shall love thy lord god with all
thy heart / with all thy mind / and with all thy soul. For while any
flesshely desire is in man god may not be loved with all the heart and fnll
mind. And by this thou may know that there is a passing love which may
not be fulfilled in this world / and that may well be called most parfyte
love. But here perauenture some man will ask / why it is commands / but it
might be performed in this world. To that the same clerk answers and says
/ that it is skylfull that such a perfeccyon should be commanded / and this
he shows by ensample in this wise. Right as no man may run even and sykerly
but he know whether he shall run. In the same manner no man should know his
most parfyte love / but it had be showed in the commandments of god. If
no man had known it no man would have labored him to come thereto. Now
sythen it is so we know it well that it is most parfyte love we must nedeful
love it and set us in a ready way while we be here that will bring us even
to that most parfyte love. A more syker way is there none in this world than
the way of parfyte love. Wherefore I counsel the to have this fourth degree of
love which is called a parfyte love that we may come the more sykerly to
parfyte love. Of parfyte love speaks Saint Austyn and says. He that is ready
to deye gladly for his brother in him is parfyte love. To this acordeth the
words of Christ where he says. No man has more charity in this world than
he that puts his soul for his friends / that is to say than he that gives
gladly his life for the love of god to win his friends soul. This love is
the gretest love in this world / and many there be I trow through the gift of
god that have this parfyte love / but if it think the hard to come to such
an high love / be therefore not aghast. For other parfyte love there is wherein
thou may love parfytly thy god as I find by the techynge of an holy clerk
where he cou^seylleth in this wise. Yield we us to god of whom we be made /
and suffer we not them to have the maystrye over us which ben not of so great
value as we be / but rather have we ye maystrye over them. As thus / let
reason have the maystrye over vices / let the body be subgect to the soul and
let the soul be subgect to god / and than is all ye parfeccyon of man
fulfilled. Thus we should live by reason as ye same clerk shows by ensample
/ For as we put lively things before them ye be not lively. Also as we put
wytty things before them that have no wyttene reason. Also right as we put
tho that been not dedely before them that been deedly / right so if we will live
parfytly we must put proufytable things before them that been lusty and
liking. Also put them that been honest before them that been proufytable. Also
put them that been holy before them that been honest. And put all things that been parfyte before them that been holy. Take heed tha^ of this / for if thou
wylt live after this techynge tha^ thou may live parfytely / if thou live
parfytely you shat love parfytely live than thus and thou shall come to parfyte
love. But for as much as it is full hard to come so suddenly to such a
parfyte love / therefore take heed to tho three degrees of love which ben
reherced before / and begin to live sadly in the first / and than from ye
first clymbe up to the second / and fro the second to the third / and if
thou be sadly stabled upon the third thou shall lyghtely come to ye fourth
where is all perfeccyon / if thou have perfeccyon thou shall live perfytely.
Begin tha^ at the first degree of love / and so increase in love and virtues if
thou wylt come to this degree of parfyte love I read that some men begy^ne to
be virtuous / some encreace in virtues / and some be parfyte in virtues. Right
so it fares by the love of god as soon as thou art in will and begy^nest to
love god / that love is not yet parfyte but thou must stand fast and nourysshe
yt will / and if it be well nourysshed it will wexe strong / and if it has
full strength than it is parfyte. To this purpose I read also that no man may
be suddenly in so high a degree / but every man that lives in good
co^uersacion / which may not be without love they must begy^ne at the lowest
degree if they will come to an high parfeccyon. Thus tha^ good brother or
sister whether thou be withsta^de all vices / and gadre to the virtues for the
love of god and encreace in them till they ben parfytely stabled in the. And
among all virtues look that thou have a fervent will to be besye and devout in
prayers / stand strongely against temptacyons / be pacyent in trybulacyons /
and stable in perseuerau^t that thou live parfytely and so come to parfyte
love. Take none head of them that set little by parfeccyon / as of them that
say yt they keep not to be parfyte / it suffyseth to them to be lest in heaven
/ or come within the yates of heaven / these be many men's words and they be
peryllous words. For I warn ye forsothe what man has not parfyte love here
he shall be purged with pains of purgatory / or else with deeds of mercy
performed for him in this world / and so be made parfyte or he come to heaven
bliss for thither may noman come but he be perfyte. Beware therefore of such
light and folly words and trust more to thyn own good deeds while you art in
this world than to thy friends when thou art deed / think also this life is
but short ye pain of purgatory pass all the pains of the world the pains of
hell is everlasting / and the Joy and bliss of saints is evermore during.
Think also right as god is full of mercy and pity / right so he is ryghtfull
in his domes. If thou wylt think on these words often I trust to the mercy of
god thou shall wax strong in virtues and withstand so vices y^ within a
short time thou shall come to a parfyte love wha^ god has so vysyted the that
thou can love hy^ parfytely than shall all thy will and all thy desire be for to
come to ye love which is most parfyte / that is to say evermore to se
almighty god in his glorious godhede evermore with him to dwell. But for as
much as we may not come to our desire / but we begin somewhat to love him
here in this life. Therefore almighty god merciful thorugh the besechynge of
his blessed mother Marye grant us grace so to love him here / yt we may come
to the Joyful and everlasting life / where is most parfyte love and bliss
without end. Ame^. Here is reherced shortly how by encreace of virtues thou
may come to parfeccyon and what virtues thou shall love.

IN this fourth degree of love / which is called a parfyte love thou art
taught and cou^seylled to begin at a low degree if you desire to have an high
degree as thus. If thou wylt have this fourth degree of love thou must begin
at the first and so encreace in virtues till thou come to parfeccyon. But
among all virtues and al other points which ben reherced before / five
points there be as me thinks spedefull and needful every man to have and
keep yt any good deed shall begin and bring to good end. The first is yt
thou have a fervent will. The second is that thou be besy in devout prayers.
The third is / yt thou fight strongely against all temptacyons. The fourth is
that thou be pacyent in trybulacyons. The fyfth is that you thou be perseuerau^t
in good deeds. Of these points I spoke before in the fourth degree of love /
but for as much as they be not there fully declared / my will is by ye help
of god to write more openly of each of them one after another / and first to
write of good will for yt must be beginning and ending of all good deeds.

T How good will is and may be in diverse manners.
Will may be in diverse manners / and is good and evil / besy and fervent /
great and strong / but for as much as reason which god has give only to
mankind techeth and shows in every man's conscience full knowy^ge of evil
will / and by cause yt good will may be in diverse kinds / therefore I leave at
this time to speak of evil will / and purpose me fully through ye techy^ge of
almighty god to declare somewhat openly ye virtue of good will. I trow well yt
every man would be good or would do some good deed be he never so sy^ful and
peraue^ture not charge greatly to be good ne besyeth him to do good deed. But
for as much as he would good I may not say but he has a good will. So every
man that will well be it strongly or feyntly / little or great / and in as
much as he would good he has a good will. Nevertheless though this be a good
will it is worthy little or no mede / for it is no fervent ne besy will. for he
desires to be good without any travail / and so he suffers that good will
pass and charge not greatly to be good ne to do good deed. But what time he
besyeth him to perform that good will in deed / in that he desires to be good
and besyeth hy^ to do good though he have not fully his purpose ne may not
perform his will in deed / yet there is a fervent will and a besy will and I
hope a medeful will. So that what man desires to be good and to do good deed
and thereto besyeth him to perform that will in deed of him it may well be said
that he has a fervent will / yet is yt will but little acounted and feeble
having reward to a great and strong will. But what time thou have performed
in deed that thou have so fervently wylleth tha^ thou have a great and a
strong will / so that of every man that is in will to be good or to do good
deeds when he performs that will in deed it may be said sothly of him yt he
is a man of a great and a strong will. To this acordeth saint Austyn and says
hus. He that will do the commandments of god and says he may not but he has
a good will / but that will is but little and feeble / for he may do and keep
the commandments when he has a great and astronge will. As who says what
man has a great and a strong will may keep the commandments of god / and
but he keep them he has no great ne strong will. If thou wylt thou may keep
the commandments of god / if thou keep them thou shall be good and do good /
so if thou wylt you may do good and be good. But yet sometime and often it
talleth that by the grace of the holy ghoost we will do somewhat with al our heart
to the worship of god that is not in our might ne power to perform in deed /
when our will is set in this manner the goodness of god is so much that he
receives that will as for deed. Of this saint Austyn bears wytnes and says.
What thou wylt and may not do god acou^teth for deed. Thus may thou know
with in thy self when thou have a little or a feeble will / a great or a strong
will / and how acceptable a good will is to almighty god / where thou do thy
besynes to perform it in deed. But se now more openly and in specyal points
how thou shall know wha^ thou have a good will. Saint Gregory says. We have a
good will wha^ we dread the harm of our neighbor as our own disease / and
wha^ we be Joyful of the prosperyte of our neighbor as of our own proufyte.
Also when we trow other men's harms as by way of co^passyon / and when we
acounten other men's wynnynges our wynnynges as by way of charity. Also wha^
we love our friend not for the world but for god / and wha^ we love and suffer
our enemy for the love of god. Also when we do to no man that we would that no
man did to us. Also when we help our neighbor to our power and in will
somewhat over our power. These points stand much by the will without deed /
but who so wylleth these fully in his heart to be do has a good will. And as I
said before his good will shall be acounted before god as for deed. Thus than
have I showed which is good and fervent will though it be not performed in
deed which is a great and a strong will / and how good will in some points
is acou^ted for deed before god all be it that it be not performed / so that
the wyller do his besynes to his power. Take heed now ferthermore and beware
for though thou have all these manners of good will to thy feeling / it may be
so that yet thy will is not rygtfull / se how. Be thou never so full of wertues
but thou conform thy will to gods will in all manner things bodily and
ghoostly thy will is not ryghtfull. To this purpose saint Austyn says thus.
The ryghtwysnes of god is that thou be sometime hole of body and sometime syke /
and perauenture when thou art hole and in prosperyte / than the will of god
pleases the much and thou say that he is a good god and a curteys / if thou
say so or think so only / for thou have health or wealth of body thou have no
ryghtful will for as much as thou conformest not thy will to gods will / but
only in health and wealth. For if he sent the sykenesse or other disease
perauenture thou would be sorry and grutch against the will and the sendynge of
god / and so in thy will thou would make the will of god / the which may
not be but evermore right and even bow down to thy will / which boweth and
is full crocked and in this thou have never ryghtfull heart ne ryghtfull will.
But what time thou dressest thy will that is so crooked and make it stand
right with ye will of god which may not be crooked / but ever stands even /
that is to say no thing wylleth health ne sykenesse / wealth ne woe / but ever
hold the pleased with the will of god than thou have a ryghtfull will. Also
it is needful to a good will that it encreace in virtues and come to the love
of god that it be stable and reasonable What time thou art trauayled sore with
temptaco^ns and grutchest not against gods will but with a glad heart thou
thankest god and suffrest him lowely and thynkest well it is chastysynge to the
for thy sins tha^ is thy will stable. And when thou desyrest not high reward
in bliss for thy good living or ghoostly travail which thou have here in
earth but only at gods will what he will dyspose for the and no thing at
thy will than thou have a reasonable will. Thus I have showed the diverse kinds
of good will which be full spedefull and needful the for to know if thou be
in good will to love god / and if thou have a stable and a reasonable will you
shall soon come to parfyte love. Now perauenture thou ye trauaylest in
ghoostly works wylt think or say thus / sometime it happed that thou would
do some ghoostly travail and thou may not perform it in deed / and all be it
so thou do it in deed it is full often with so great heaviness yt thou grutche
somewhat for defaute of ghoostly comfort To this I may answer as I said before
/ if you grutche you have no stable will and if thy will be stable you shall not
dread in this case and se why. Thou shall understand yt the flesh is ever
co^traryous to ye spyryte and ye spyryte contrary to ye flesh hereof you have
ensample where saint poule said of hy^self in this wise. ye goodness which I
would do I do not as if he had said thus / some good deeds I will and desire in
my soul / but I may not fulfill them for feebleness of my flesh / and all be it
sometime I perform them in deed it is without any gladness but what for this
trowest you yt thapostle should therefore lose his mede / for he would and might
not or else he did good sometime without gladness Nay but much the more his mede
was encreaced for two causes. First for the trauaylous werkynge of his body
that he suffered when the flesh stryued so sore against the goodness of the
spyryte. The second cause is for the heaviness and travail which ye spyryte
suffered when he had no ghoostly comfort. In the same manner what ever
grutchynge thou have of thy flesh against good deeds or what heaviness thou
suffrest for defaute of ghoostly conforte / be not therefore abashed so thy
will be stable but suffer and abide lowely the grace of god for thy more mede.
Be than stable in will and the devil ne thy flesh shall never have maystrye
of the for all the deuyls in hell may not make the to sin but you put thereto
thy will. Ne all the angels of heaven may not make the to do good deeds but you
put to thy will. Take heed than that thy will be well dysposed to god and that
it be set stably and resonably / and than thou have a spedefull begy^nynge to
come to the love of god. but for as much as man's will is ordained first and
dysposed with the grace of god that he shall will good to have that grace in
will and in all other deed / Prayer me thinks is needful and therefore
somewhat I will write of prayer as god will give me grace.

U What parfyte is in prayer and in what manner thou shall pray.
PRayer in ensample of good living and is most spedefull to get grace and to
draw men to love god. A devout prayer and often used purchases grace of
almighty god and puts away the false suggesty / +ons of the fend and
stablysshed a man in all goodness. Therefore god says to his dyscyples thus.
Waketh and prays that ye fall not in temptacyons. Right as it is needful for
a knight that shall go in to battle have with him armoure and wepen / right so
it is nedeful and spedefull to every christian man to have with him co^tynuell
prayer / for what of our own freelte / what by malice and envy that the fend
has to us / we be ever in this world in ghoostly battle more or less by the
suffrau^ce of our lord god. Therefore says saint Gregory the more we be
trauayled with thoughts or flesshely desires / the more need we have to stand
besely in prayers. So thus you may se that prayer is spedefull and needful.
Also prayer as I read is a sovereign help to thy soule-confort and solace to
thy good angel / torment and pain to ye devil / acceptable service to god
parfyte Joy / sad hope / and ghoostly health without corrupcyon. Prayer is
also a needful messager from every man's soul to almighty god in heaven / and
namely from that man's soul which is much troubled and has no rest. Some
conscyences there be which be good / that is to say be well ruled and be in
rest / to such prayer is also a needful messager to hold ye soul in
ghoostly confort and to encreace it and stable it in goodness. But there be many
other men and wymen of diverse conscience. Some there be that have a bad
conscience which be in rest and not troubled / and that been they that been
set fully to evil and not to good. Some have a bad conscience and somewhat be
troubled in their conscience / and tho be such yt be somewhat evil or begin
to be evil. Some have good conscye^ce and also ben grieved in their conscience
/ and be such as live evil and begin to be good. While the conscience is
thus troubled the soul has no rest / therefore to pursyewe for help and
grace / prayer that needful messager must do well his office / that is to say
besely without any taryenge / and strongely without any feynynge / and rather
come to the presence of almighty god hy^ needs to have two special friends /
yt is to say steadfast faith and trusty hope with these two friends prayer
takes his way and renneth fast to ye yates of heaven and enters with out any
lettynge / for he goth to the presence of yt good lord truly to do his message
with full faith and sad hope / full pyteously he shows his needs and the
perils of his soul. Than anon the good lord so full of pity and mercy
sends his blessed love in to yt soul thorugh the pursuit of that good
prayer. When this love enters in to that soul anon he makes all glad yt was
full elenge and sorry / he makes in peace and rest that was sore troubled. Hope
comes again that was out / and ghoostly strength yt was away is fully
restored when the enemies of the soul / that is to say the fendes se this
help and confort to the soul / with sorrowful chere they torn away and thus
they begin to cry. Alas alas sorrow and woe is come to us / flewe fast away
for god fyghteth for this soul. Thus man's soul is delivered fro the fend
by prayer / and so it may sothly be said that prayer is a spedefull and a
needful messager fro man's soul to almighty god in heaven. Thus you have herd
what is prayer / se now ferthermore how you shall pray. As often as thou
prayest / or what ever thou prayest put all thy will in gods will / in the
end of thy prayer / desiring evermore in every asking his will to be
fulfilled and no thing thy will. For thou may pray and ask some thing
that he will not here ne grant / as if you pray for souls that be dampened thy
prayer is not accepted. Also it may so be that thou desyrest not that is most
helping to thy soul ne to other perauenture for whom you prayest. Also many
men prayed sometime for no good intent / and for that they be not herd.
Therefore to be always syker wha^ ever thou prayest put thy desire and thy
intent in asking in gods will for he knows all things and whateuer thou
prayest he will not grant it the but that is most proufytable for the. To
this accords an holy clerk and says. Oftentyme god grants not many men
at their will / for he will grant them other grace tha^ they ask to more
health of their souls. So that it is nedeful that we put all our asky^ge in to
his ordinance. To this acordeth saint Bernarde and says. No man should set
light by his prayer / for he to whom we pray after time the prayer is passed
from our month or from our heart / he writes it in his book / and trustyngly
we may hope that he will grant that we ask or else that is more proufytable
to us. Thus than what ever thou prayest put all thy will in to gods will.
Also when that thou prayest thou shall pray generally / that is to say / as
thou prayest for thy self so thou shall pray for other Thus thou must do for
three causes. First for love and charity will that thou do so. And therefore
says the apostle. Prays each of you for other that ye may be saved. The
second cause is / for the law of god will that every man help other in need.
This thou have by the techyn^ge of saint poule where as he says thus. Each of
you bear others burden / that is for to say / that each of you pray for other
or help other in need and so ye shall fulfill the law of christ. The third
cause is / for whosoever prays for all other as for him self / ye goodness of god
will that he shall be partyner of all other men's prayers. To this acordeth
saint Ambrose and says thus. If thou pray only for thy self and for none
other than shall none other pray for the but thy self / and if thou pray for
all other tha^ all other shall pray for the. Thus than when you prayest pray
for all other. Also when thou shall pray thou must pray with full heart and
put away fro the all vanytees of the world all ymagynacyons and all ydel
thoughts To this acordeth an holy clerk and says. When we stand to pray we
must with all our heart give our intent to that we pray / that is to say we
must void all flesshely and all worldely thoughts and suffer not our heart
otherwise to be occupied than about our prayer. But to this perauenture thou
say that though you be never in so good will to pray / thyn heart is away
from thy prayer and encombred with diverse thoughts that thou may have no
while thyn heart sadly upon thy prayer. To this I grant yt what the fend
which ever is besy to let all goodness and what through the vnstablynes of man
thyn heart shall not be stable upon thy prayer I trow scarsely the time of a
Pat noster. But wha^ thou go to thy prayer / take good head what need thou have
to pray what thou wylt pray / and how great how mighty and how ryghtfull and
merciful he is to whom you wylt pray. If thou set thyn heart thus in the
beginning of thy prayer / thou shall not I trow greatly be let / and though
it be so that sometime thou be let with other thoughts / fight against them
with all thy besynes / and anon turn to thy prayer. If thou wylt fight
wylfully in this manner god of his great grace and endeles pity will allow thy
good will / and much the rather for thy travail grant that you ask. Thus
than when thou wylt pray you must pray with full heart. Also an other manner
prayer there is / that who so has grace to come thereto his prayer shall soon
be herd if he pray resonably. This manner of prayer is when thou art vysyted
by the grace of god with great conpunccyon of heart and swetnes of devotion.
Conpunccyonis a great love of thy soul spryngynge out of thy heart with teeres
of thyn eyes. When you bethynkest the upon thy sins and upon the dredefull
dome of god. When you have this conpunccyon and these teeres than you have full
devotion / with such devotion besely pray for all tho that have need / for
what thing you prayest in yt time so it be worship to god you art anon herd
without any taryenge. For as I read prayer peaseth almighty god and makes him
torn to mercy. but when devout teeres come with prayer than of his great pity
he may no longer suffer / but anon as he were constrained he grau^teth what we
ask. Ferthermore if you be used to such deuoco^n you shall fervently desire to
conne love god / and so by gods grace you shall soon come to love / thus tha^
love prayer if thou wylt come to ye love of god. And for as much as many men
and women be much trauayled by diverse temptacyons or they come to love /
therefore beware of them and sooner to wtstande them / some what I will show of
temptacyons as me thinks is needful.

X How you may beware and know of temptacyons waking or slepynge / and how
you shall wtsta^de them.
BY the ordinance of almighty god there be ordained good angels to defend us
fro evil and to styre us to virtues and to keep us in goodness. Also other
badde angels and evil spyrytes there be which trouble mankind with diverse
temptaco^ns to preue man's stablenes and that to great mede to man's soul.
The power of this wicked spyryte / that is to say the fend is so great yt the
more a man besyeth him to please god ye rather he is about to grieve him / For
as I read oftymes it happeth yt many men when thy give them hole to
contemplacyon or to other deuocyons than they be trauayled with strong
temptacyons by suffrau^ce of god that they may know their own feebleness and to
keep them meke and low for they should not lose ye great mede of god for any
manner spyce of pride / which mede is ordained for their ghoostly travail.
Also in what ever manner of lower degree man or woman be that will withstand
sin to his power and live after the techynge of gods law / to al such the
wicked spyryte has envy / and evermore gives them some manner of battle
great or little slepynge or waking. Other men and women there be that he
suffers to be in rest and peace / and tho ben such as dread not god / but
night and day give them to all manner lustynges and lykynges of their flesh /
for they ben so ready to sin and to do his will that him needs not to styre
them to evil / and therefore he suffers them in peace and without any travail
of temptacyons. Of such men speaks saint Austyn and says thus. Some men and
women profer theymselfe to sin wylfully and abide not the temptacyons of the
fend / but they go before the temptacyons and be redyer to sin than the
fend is to tempte them. And sythen it is so that every man which is besy to
please god shall be trauayled and pryued with diverse temptacyons. I will show
the to my feeling and as I read of other auctours ye manner of beginning of
every temptacyou that thou may beware of them and rather withstand the
beginning and so overcome the hole temptacyon. I read that our enemy the
fend when he will make us to follow his will or else for envy will travail
and grieve us he begins with falls suggestyons / that is to say he puts in
our minds diverse ymagynacyons / as worldely and flesshely thoughts and
sometime other thoughts which be full grievous and peryllous / either to make
us have a great lust and liking in the^ that be worldely or flesshely / or
else to bring us in great heaviness or dread through tho thoughts which be
grievous and peryllous. As to the worldely or flesshely thoughts if we suttre
them to abide in our heart so long wylfully till we have liking in them /
than has the devil won a great strong ward of us and purfyeweth
ferthermore with all his besynes to make us assente to him as in will to
perform it in deed. By that deed thou may understand every dedely sin
after ye suggestyon is in ye beginning To some he begins with a falls
suggestyon of pride / or else of couetyse / to some with a suggestyon of
glotonye or lecherye / and so of all other sins wherein he supposes soonest
to have maystrye over man / for every man is enclyned more to one manner sin
than to an other. And where he has maystrye / that is to say where that sin
is performed in deed / he besyeth hy^ sore to bring it in to custom / and so
thorugh the custom to have us hole under his power. Go fle and withsta^de all
these perils the prophet Dauyd says in the sawter. Go away ward or bow
away from evil and do good / that is to say after the exposycyon of
doctors. Go from the evil of suggestyon / from the suggestyon of entysynge /
from ye evil of delytynge / from the evil of assenting / from the evil of
deed / and from the evil of custom. Withstand than all such worldely or
flesshely thoughts as much as god will give the grace yt thou fall in none of
these euylles which as I have said be full peryllous. Ferthermore as to ye
grievous thoughts and peryllous perauenture you wylt ask which be tho
thoughts yt be so grievous and peryllous. All tho thoughts that thou have
against thy will which make the heavy or sorry be grievous. And for to show the
more openly what man that ymagyeth upon high matters yt be ghoostly which
pass all erthely men's wit. As upon ye faith of holy church or such other
that neden not to be specyfed at this time for that man has grievous thoughts
and peryllous. if we suffer such ymagynacyous abide and take none head in the
begynny^ge to the false suggestyon of ye fend wtin short time or ever we be
ware either he will make us lose our kyndely wit and reason / or else he will
bring us to unreasonable dread. Of such temptacyons it is needful to be ware
and put them away if you may with dououte prayers and other occupacyons / and
if thou may not void them suffer them than esely. For you shall understand yt
they be right nedeful and medefull for thy soul / for but it were so yt such
thoughts come sometime in to thy mind you sholdest seem in thy self that you
were an angel and no man / therefore it is needful that thou be tempted
otherwyle with evil thoughts that thou may se and know thyn own feebleness
and unstableness which comes of thy self / and that you may feel the
strength which you have only of god. Also thou shall suffer such thoughts
esely / but thou may void them / for all such thoughts so yt thou delight
the not in them they ben a great purgy^ge for thy soul / and a great strength
to keep within the virtues / and all be it yt they be sharp and bitter for the
time think well yt they shall make thy soul clean that was right foul / and
make it hole that was right syke and bring it in to everlasting life and
health without end to the which life and health may no man come without great
sharpenes and bytternes. Also when you art trauayled with thoughts which you
may not put away think well that it is a great right wysnes of god that thou
have such thoughts. For right as you have had full often thy will and liking
in worldely and flesshely thoughts against the will of god / right so it is ye
will of god that thou have other thoughts against thy will But yet it is good
that thou beware of them and that you dread them dyscretly and trust steadfastly
in god. For when the soul has no delight in such thoughts but hates and
lotheth them / thaa^ they be a clensynge and a great mede to ye soul / but if
it so be that there come sometime onyly king of sin or of any vanyte thorugh
such thoughts / than withstand and think that it is a falls suggestyon of
the devil / and therewith be dredful and sorry that you have offended god in
liking of such falls ymagynacyons. I read that for such thoughts only you
shall not be dampened though they be come in to thy mind / for it is not in thy
power to let them to come. But if it be so that you assente or delight in them
than beware for there thou dyspleasest god. Also it is good that you dread god
though you assente not to evil thoughts that you fall not for pride. For each
man that stands in virtues stands only by ye virtue and grace of almighty
god. Thus than beware of thoughts for here you may se that all temptacyons
begin with falls suggestyons of the wicked spyryte. And if you have grace to
withstand such thoughts you shall overcome all such temptaco^ns. And for ye
most souerayn remedy against all manner temptaco^ns it is good that you show thy
disease to thy ghoostly fader as often as it needs else to some other good man of
ghoostly living as I said before in the fyfth point of ye third degree of
love. Ferthermore to speak of temptacyons. I read that when the wicked fend
may not overcome a man waking / than is his besynes to travail and to
taryenge him slepynge. And that is to dysceyue him if he may in three manners.
One is to begyle him through glad and confortable dremes. The second is to
grieve and to let hy^ through sorrowful and dredefull dremes. And the third is
to make him the rather assente to sin waking through foul syghtes or other
diverse vanytees which he suffers slepynge / therefore it is good to beware of
dremes / for in some thou may well believe and some it is good to set at
naught. for sometime god shows comfort to wicked men slepynge yt they should
the rather leave their sin. and sometime he comforted good men slepy^ge to make
them more fervent in his love. but for as much as you myghtest lightly be
disceyued through such illusyons. I counsel the to put them all out from thy
heart or else to show the^ to thy ghostly friends. For oftymes he yt has much
liking in dremes is most tarried and out of rest. Also you shall not dread
such dremes what soever they be / For as I read if thou be stable in the faith
of holy church / if you love god with all thy heart / if you be obedyent to god
and to thy souerayns what ever you be as well in aduersyte as in prosperyte. And
if you put all thy will at gods dysposycyon than shall you dread no manner of
dremes for though they be dredefull and sorrowful to thy sight be therefore not
aghast ne heavy / but trustyngly put al together in to gods hand he to ordeyne
for the as he will. Also though they be to thy sight glad and confortable
desire them not ne believe not in them but if it be that they torn to the
worship of god / if you do thus by the grace of god you shall overcome all
temptacous slepynge. Thus than slepynge and waking if thou withstand in the
beginning ye falls suggestyons of that wicked angel yt is to say wicked
thoughts and peryllous ymagynacyons as I said before / than you shall overcome
all temptaco^ns. To this acordeth saint Austyn and says. If we withstand the
lust and liking of unclean thoughts there should no sin reygne in our
dedely bodies. Withstand than thoughts and be strong against temptaco^ns /
and so through that ghoostly strength you shall lightly come to the love of god.
And for as much as such temptacyons and other worldely trybulacyons fall
oftentimes to gods seruauutes in to great mede of their souls so that they
can suffer them mekely and thank god therefore. I will show a few confortable
words of ye virtue of pacyence by the which you may be styred for to suffer
bodily and ghoostly dyseases gladly for the love of god.

Y How thou shall be pacyent and what time pacyence is most needful.
Charity which is mother and keeper of virtues is lost full often by Inpacyence.
To this acordeth saint Gregorye and says thus. Men that be Inpacyent when they
will not suffer gladly trybulacyous / destroy the good deeds which they did
while ye soul was in peace and rest / and suddenly they destroy that ghoostly
work that they have begone by good auysement and great travail. By these
words it seems yt it is needful to keep with us the virtue of pacye^ce if we
should come to the love of god / for without encreace of virtues we may not
come to y^ love. To speak than of pacyence I read yt in prosperyte it is no
virtue to be pacyent / but what man is troubled with many aduersytees and
stands stably hoping in the mercy of god / he has the virtue of pacye^ce.
In three manner of ways gods servants have need to be pacyent in
trybulaco^ns. The first is when god chastyseth them with his rod / as with
loss of worldely gods or else with bodily sykenes / The second is wha^ our
enemy the fend trauayleth us with diverse temptacyons by the suffrau^ce of
god. The third is wha^ our neighbors do to us wrong or despytes. In each of
these three our enemy besyeth him to bring us out of pacyence / and in each
of these we should overcome hy^ if we be pacyent. As thus if we suffer easily
and gladly the chastysynge of god without any grutchynge Also if we delight us
not in the false suggestyons of the fend and assente in no manner to his wicked
temptacyons. Also if we keep us sadly in charity wha^ we suffer any wrongs or
despytes of any of our neighbors / thus we should overcome that wicked fend
with the virtue of pacyence. I said as for the first we should overcome the
fend if we suffer easily and gladly the chastysynge of god without any
grutchynge / this is good yt we suffer for it is for great love which he has
to us and so great mede that he will ordeyne for us. To this purpose saint
Austyn speaks and says thus to each man's soul calling the soul daughter
and says thus Daughter if thou weep under thy fader weep not with Indygnaco^n ne
for pride / for that thou suffrest is for medycyne to the and for no pain / it
is a chastysynge and no dampnacyon if thou wylt not lose thyn heritage. Put not
from the that rod / take no head to the sharpenes of that rod / but take
good head how well thou shall be rewarded in thy faders testament. These words
may be remeued to every christian man and woman as thus. If our fader in heaven
should chastyse us with loss of goods or with sykenes of body we should not
grutche / but we should be sorry yt we trespaced ayenste our fader / and take
mekely his chastysynge and ever ask mercy. His chastysynge is help to our
souls and rules of great penance / his chastysynge is but a warning for love
and not during for wrath we should not be put out from the heritage of heaven
it is needful we be boxum to our fader in heaven and suffer lowely and gladly
his ryghtfull chastysynge for our grievous trespasynge that through the virtue of
pacyence we may come to that great heritage / that is to say to the bliss of
heaven to ye which he ordained us in his last testament that was when he gafe
for us his heart blood upon ye cross. Thus we must suffer gladly the
chastysynge of god without grutchynge. This chastysynge as I said is sometime in
sykenes of body / and sometime in loss of worldely goods. If thou be chastysed
with sykenesse of body / have in thy mind the words of the apostle when he
said thus. All be it that our body outward be corrupted with sykenes our soul
within is made new and more clean from day to day. Also if we be chastysed
with loss of goods / take heed to ye pouerte of Job where you may have a great
example of pacye^ce for with great thankynges to god he took full mekely and
gladly great pouerte sykenes and many dyseases and said Our lord gafe / our
lord has take away / as it pleases hy^ so it is do / blessed be the name of
yt lord Jesus Thus you have example to suffer gladly the chastysynge of god. I
said also as for the second we should overcome ye fend if we delight us not in
his false suggestyons / and if we assente in no manner to his wicked temptacyons.
In the last chapter before thou have how thou shall be strong and stable
against all temptacyons Se now more openly why thou shall gladly suffer
te^ptacyons without any grutchynge. One skylle is for if thou suffer them not
gladly but grutchest against them than you let them that should help the /
the which be good angels and other saints / and helpest thyn enemies which
be wicked fendes / for a greter confort is none to them but when they find a
man heavy and grutchynge / therefore suffer them gladly and ask help and mercy
of him in whom all grace is and confort. Also if thou suffer such temptaco^ns
gladly and assentest not to them in liking ne in will / than thou stoppest the
fend that he dar not assail the with other temptaco^ns for he dredth to be
put out from the and be overcome when he feleth the so stable and so pacyent
that is a great dread to him. For when he trauayleth a man with temptacyons and
he be withstand / than be his pains much the more increased in hell /
withstand than his temptacyons with the virtue of pacyence and so thou shall
overcome him. As for the third way of pacye^ce I said yt we should keep us
sadly in charity wha^ we suffer wrongs or despytes of other neighbors / such
wrongs it is needful to suffer for the love of god. For as saint Austyn says
/ he that is so pacyent that gladly will suffer wrongs shall be ordained great
and mighty in heaven. If than thy goods be taken from the wrongfully / suffer
esely and think in thy heart that thou came naked in to this world and no
better than naked shall thou go away out of the world. Also think upon ye
words of the apostle where he says. Naught we brought in to this world and
no thing we may bear with us / think upon these words and I trow they shall
styre the much to pacyence. If thou be dyspleased or defamed wrongfully think
upon the words of christ when he said thus to his dyscyples. Ye be blessed when
wicked men curse you or despise you wrongfully wha^ they pursyewe you or say
any evil making lesynges against you wrongfully / Ioyeth than and be glad for
your mede is plenteuous in heaven. These words me thinks should make the to
suffer gladly despytes and evil words It falls sometime that some men's
hertes be full great and stout by pride and Inpacyence. But gods servants
when they se such men so dyseased and trauayled in their souls have great
conpassyon of them knowing well that it comes of unstableness of heart and of
wicked sterynge of the flesh / and therefore they suffer wicked and angry
words for ye time hoping yt after so great noise shall come some manner ease
and lownes of heart they suffer also for ye time for they know well it is full
hard a man to euercome himself / for these causes every good man should
gladly suffer angry words. Also some men and women there be that will not
suffer / but for one wicked word they say an other and take no head to the
reward that they should have of god if they would suffer / such men al day
fall in temptacyons for anger of heart and for inpacyence / therefore what ever
thou be that art despised of thy neighbor suffer gladly and feyne the as thou
herdest him not unto the time that his heart be eased and than if it be such
matter that charge you may speak to him in easy manner / and if it is no
chargynge than it is no force though thou hold thy peace and answer right
naught. Thus I have showed the examples for to styre the to pacyence. First how
thou shall gladly suffer the chastysynge of almighty god as sykenes of body or
else loss of goods. The second how thou shall gladly suffer the temptacyons
of the fend. And the third how thou shall gladly suffer wrongs and
despysynges of thy neighbor. But now over all the ensamples I counseyll the
for to have one thing special in thy heart / the which shall be a general
ensample of pacyence to suffer gladly all manner trybulacyons for the love of
god. This ensample is for to have evermore in thy mind in each disease the
great pouerte trybulacyon and the bitter passion of Ihesu christ gods sone
which he suffered gladly and wylfully for the love of all mankind. Of this
good lord speaks saint Bernarde and says thus? Christ gods sone of heaven
from the time yt he came out of the glorious maidens womb Marye / had never
but pouerte and trybulacyon till he went to suffer death which manner of death it
needs not at this time for to show it to the. For you have it openly by ye
techynge of all holy church. Have than sadly in thy mind as much as god will
give the grace / how gladly how lowely and what he suffered for the / and yt
thought I trow shall make the to win the virtue of pacyence / and to
encreace in other virtues / and so forth within a while to come to the love of
god. And now ferthermore for as much as all ye virtues be most pleasynge and
acceptable to god which be co^tynued and brought to good end therefore to
strength ye in these virtues I will show ye now some words of ye virtue of
perseuerau^ce.

Z How perseuerau^ce is needful and how thou may be perseueraunt.
PErseueraunce is fulfyllynge and end of all virtues / keeper of all goodness /
without which perseuerau^ce no man may se god. But thou be perseueraunt / you
may have no mede thank ne worship for thy service. If thou be perseueraunt
thou shall have mede for thy true service / and a great reward for thy
ghoostly travail and a worshypful crown of vyctorye for thy strong battle.
Of this matter you have before in ye fyfth point of the third degree of love /
therefore at this time it needs not to speak but little more as of this
purpose. But I counsel the in few words if thou wylt be perseueraunt in
goodness that you trauaylest to win the virtue of pacyence whereof I have
touched somewhat in the last chapter before. For many men begin full well and
end their life full peryllously / and the cause is for the more party
Inpacyence for they will not suffer gladly temptacyons and other trybulacyons.
For when they feel never so little disease ghoostly or bodily anon they fall
away from virtues and torn again to sin. And often it falls that some
men fall so sore that they deye by that fall / that is to say that they fall
in to great sykenes and peril of soul / that to our sight they deye in great
sin and errors without any amendment. Of such men speaks god almighty and
says. No man yt puts his hand to the plowe and looks behind him is
dysposed to come to the kingdom of heaven. Here perauenture thou would ask
what is he that holds the plowe and looks behind him. He puts his hand
to ye plowe that amendeth his sins with contrycyon and confession to bring
forth fruit of penance and to encreace in virtues. He looks behind him that
torneth again to sin which were forsaken after time he had begone good
works. Therefore what ever thou be that have begone to leave vices / torn not
again to them for a little disease if thou wylt have the great mede that
longs to perseuerau^ce. Also if thou wylt be perseueraunt thou must be stable
in heart / if you wylt be stable in heart you must beware of the liking and
pleasynge of the world / and flee from wicked company / thou must take no head
to praysynges ne to blamy^ges / for of all these comes unstableness. And if
thou have any liking in ghoostly works that unstableness will put it away /
therefore be ware and flee such manner of occasyons if thou wylt be stable. I
say not that you shall flee bodily from ye world or fro worldely goods for
they be pryncypall occasyons / but I counseyll the in heart and in will that
thou flee all such vanytees For though you be lord or lady / husbonde man or
wife thou may have as stable an heart and will as some relygyous that sytte
in the cloystres But so the it is that the most sykerest way is to fle as
relygyous do / but for all may not be men or women of relygyon / therefore of
every degree in ye world god has chosen his servants. What ever than thou be
yt wit come to ye love of god begin first to do good deeds with a good will
and a contynuell desire. After that desire fulfill thy will in deed with
dyscrecyon that thou may continue to thy lives end. Wha^ thou have begone
think in thyn heart that god has give the such grace to begin that thing
to his worship / thou may well do it if thou wylt perform it in deed with
the help of god. After this point stand stably in will / ask grace of
perseueraunce / and perform it in deed with a fervent spyryte. And when thou
have begone dyscretly / though it be trauaylous in the beginning / all that
travail be it in fastings / wakynges / prayers or any other ghoostly travail
all shall be light to the and shall torn the in so great myrthe and ghoostly
conforte that thou shall set little by the passing Joy and the vanytees of
the world. Stand than stably in will and in deed / and god almighty that has
begone good works in the / will norysshe the forth in all virtues / defend
the from thyn enemies teache the to love him / and keep the in to his love to
thy lives end. after this death thou shall not dread for thou shall ever abide
in his kingdom where that is no care ne dread / but all Joy and conforte for
evermore lasting. Now I have showed to the four degrees of love / and
declared here five special virtues which as me thinks be most nedeful
every man for to have that will travail in ghoostly works / and to al other
manner men and women they be full spedefull to know whether they be relygyous
or seculer. And for as much as many in the beginning have full little savor
in devout prayers or in holy medytaco^ns some perauenture for tender age / and
some for uncunning / therefore to such simple folk I will show a manner form
how by medytacyon they may be styred to devotion / and what manner prayer shall
be to them need full.

AB By what prayer or thought thou may be styred to devotion.
THan thou ordeynest ye to pray or have any devotion found to have a preuy
place from all manner noise and time of rest without any lettynge. Sit there or
knele there as is most to thyn ease. Than be thou lord or lady think well
thou have a god yt made the of naught which has give to the thy right wits
/ right ly^mes and other worldely ease more than to some other as you may se
aldaye yt live in great disease and much bodily myschyef. Think also how
synful thou art and were not the keeping of yt good god thou sholdest fall in
to all manner of sin by thy^ own wretchedness and than you may think sothly
as of thy self yt there is none so synful as thou art. Also if you have any
virtue or grace of good living think it comes of gods sendynge and
nothing of thy self. Think also how long and how often god has suffered the
in sin / he would not take the in to dampnacyon when you had deserved it /
but goodly has abyden the till you would leave sin and torn to goodness for
loath hy^ were to forsake yt he bought so dear with bitter pains. Also you may
think for he would not lose the he became man and was borne of a maid / in
pouerte and trybulacyons all his life he lived. and after for thy love death he
would suffer to save the by his mercy. In such manner thou may think of his
great benefytes / and for the more grace to get to the compu^ccyon behold
with thy ghoostly eye his pyteous passion.

A short medytaco^n of the passion of our lord Ihesu christ.
THou may here ymagyne in thy heart as if you saw thy lord take of his
enemies with many repreues and despytes brought before a Judge / falsely there
accused of many wicked men / and he answered right naught but mekely suffered
their words They would needs have hy^ deed / but first to suffer pains
Behold tha^ that good lord cheuerynge and quakynge all his body naked bound
to a pyler about him standing wicked men without any reason sore scorgynge yt
blessed body without any pity. Se how they cesse not from their angry strokes
till they se him stand in his blood up to his ancles / from the top of his
heed to the sole of his foot / hole skin they left none / his flesh they
rased to the bones / and for werynes of them self they left him almoost deed.
Look than aside up on his blessed mother / se what sorrow she made for her dear
sone / and have compassyon of her pain that lay there aswowne. Torn again
to thy lord and se how they unbind him / how hastly they draw him forth to
do hy^ more disease. A garlonde of thorns they put upon his heed till the
blood ran down in to his eyes nose mouth and eeres. Than they kneled down with
scorns and arose up with repreue and spette in his face. See than how ye
blessed lady beteth her breast / draws her clothes / and wryngeth her hondes
/ and I trow thou wylt weep for that pyteful sight. Look yet again to thy
lord and se how they hurl him forth to an high hylle there to nail him
hand and foot upon the rode tree. Se than first how fyersly they draw of his
clothes and how mekely that he than went to the cross / he spredeth his arms
abroad / but strayter with cords they drew forth his arms till the synewes
and the Joints be all to broke / and than with full great nails they nailed
his precious hondes to the cross. In the same manner thou may se how
grievously they draw his dear worthy legs and nailed his feet down to the
tree. Se than how they proffered him for to drink bitter galle and eysyll / and
kneled again before him with many despytes. Than harken to that good lord how
mekely he takes leave of his gracyous mother and of his dear apostles and
betaketh them either to other as dear mother and sone. Than with a great voice
he commended his spyryte to his father in heaven / and hanged down that blessed
heed right forth upon his breast. Se also how soon after they perced his heart
through with a spear with full great anger and ran down by his body meddled
blood and water. Than may thou have full great pity beholdynge that good lady
how for sorrow she synketh down in her systers arms. Take heed to the chere
of his apostle saint Johan to the teres of Marye magdalene and of his other
friends / and I trow among all these thou shall have co^puncco^n and plente
of teres. When there comes such devotion than is time that thou speak for
thyn own need and for all other quycke or deed that trusten to thy prayer.
Cast down thy body to the ground and lift up thy heart on hye with
dreedfull there / than make thy moan and if thou wylt thou may think thus
and say. A lord god almighty blessed mote thou be / you made me / thou
boughtest me / thy suffrau^ce is full great in me / you would not take me in
to dampnacyon that often I have deserved / but thou have kept and saved me
till I would forsake sin and torn hole to the. Now lord with sorrowful
heart I knowleche to thy godhede that falsely I have spended and without
proufyte all my wits and virtues which thou have given me in helping of my
soul all the time of my life in diverse vanytees / all the ly^mes of my body
in sin and superfluytees / the grace of my crystendom in pride and other
wretchydnesse. And sothly good lord I have loved other things much more than
the / and not withstanding my great unkindness ever thou have nourysshed me
and tenderly kept me. Of thy great suffrau^ce I had full little knowing / of
thy great right wysnes I had but little dread. I took no head to thank yt for
thy great goodness / but al my life from day to day great matter of wrath I
have showed to ye through my^ own wyckednes / herfore lord I wot not what I
shall say to the but only this word in which I trust God of thy great mercy
have mercy on me / I wot well lord all yt I have comes only of ye / I wot
well without the no thing may be / but my sin and wretchydnes comes all of
me / wherefore lord with meke heart I beseech thy grace do not to me as I have
deserved but after thy great mercy / and send me grace of thyn holy ghoost to
lyghten mine heart / to comfort my spyryte / to stable me in the right way /
to perform thy commandments that I may have perseuerau^ce in that I have
begone and that I be no more departed from the by my unstableness or by
temptacyons of mine enemy. It is lord yet full worthy that I be chastysed for
my wicked lyuy^ge with what rod thy will is / welcome be thy sendynge.
Pacye^tly good lord send me grace gladly to suffer thy chastysynge / comfort
me among for thy great grace / and when thy will is withdraw thy rod and
take me to thy mercy. Full bitter be these temptacyons and full grievous to
suffer / and though they be dredefull I wot well here after they shall be
medefull to my soul / but good lord you know well mine heart is right feeble
/ much is my^ unstableness / my conning is but little / therefore good lord
strength me / stable me and teache me as you made me and bought me so keep and
defend me body and soul I take to the no thing after my will but as you wylt
lord so mote it be And now good Ihesu gods sone knower of all thing help
me in wicked thoughts that I dysplease the not in living ne in assenting /
full often I have dyspleased the in diverse thoughts all against thy will and
much to my liking therefore it is thy ryghtwysnes that I be trauayled with other
thoughts at thyn ordinance and grievous to me / but curteys Ihesu when thy will
is put them away and take me in to thy grace. Jesus christ gods sone which
stood still before ye Judge no thing to hy^ answering / withdraw my tongue
till I think what and how I shall speak yt may be to thy worship Ihesu gods
sone whose hondes were bound full sore for my love / govern and wysshe my^
hondes and al mine other ly^mes that all my works may begin and gracyously
end to thy most pleasure. Also lord you see well that many there be that
trust to my prayer for grace that ye show to me more tha^ I am worthy / ye
wot well lord I am not such as they wene but though me prayer be unworthy /
take heed to their lownes and to their deuoco^n and what they desire to your
worship grant it them for your goodness. Grant them and me and to all other
for whom we be bound to pray grace to love all that is to your liking / and
you to love to your most pleasynge no thing to desire that should dysplease
you. All manner temptacyons myghtely to withstand / all other vanytees for your
love to despise / you good lord ever to have in mind / and in your service
for to abide to our lives end. And if ye grant us any thing to do that
shall be to us medefull / grant prate to the souls which be departed from
the body in the pains of purgatory abiding your mercy Amen.

In such manner thou may pray in the begy^nynge / and when thou art well
entered in to devotion thou shall perauenture have better feeling in prayers and
in holy medytacyons otherwise than I can say or show. Good brother or sister
pray tha^ for me which by the techynge of almighty god have written to the
these few words in helping of thy soul.

A Good curteys angel ordained to my gouernale I know well my feebleness and
my uncunning / also well I wot yt strength have I none to do gods service
but only of his gift and of your besy keeping. The conning yt I have comes
no thing of me but what god will send me by your good entysynge. Now good
gracyous au^gel I ask you lowely mercy / for little head I have taken of your
good besynes but now I thank you as I can with full heart besechynge you yt ye
keep me truly this day and evermore slepynge and waking with syker
defending and your holy techy^ge. Defend me and keep me from bodily harms
defend me and keep me from ghoostly peryles to gods worship and sauy^ge of
my soul Teache me and wysshe me my wits for to dyspende most to gods
worship and pleasynge. Feed me with devotion and savor of ghoostly swetnes /
conforte me wha^ need is against my ghoostly enemies and suffer me not to lose
y^ grace that is granted me / but of your worthy office keep me in gods
service to my lives end. And after ye passing of the body present my soul
unto the merciful god. For though I fall aldaye by my^ own freelte you I take
in wytnes yt ever I hope in mercy. Gladly would I worship the and I might to
your liking therefore god to worship for you / you also in him after his holy
techynge. I thank him with this holy prayer. Pater noster. Et ne nos. Sed libera
nos a malo. Amen.

Deo gratias.
Enprynted at London in Fletestrete in ye sign of the son By Wynkyn de
Word. Anno dn^i MCCCCC.vi.






