A SERMON OF LOVE.

Instructing all men to unite and join themselves in hearty Love, and
Christian Charity one with another.

Preached at Folkestone, a Mayor Town in Kent.

BY FRANCIS ROGERS, Bachelor in Divinity; and sometimes fellow of Trinity
College in CAMBRIDGE.

JOHN 13.35. By this shall all men know if ye be my Disciples, if ye Love one
another. ROMANS 16.17. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently which
cause division and offenses, and avoid them. LONDON: Printed by T.S. for George
Norton, dwelling near Temple-barre. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, his very loving Mother, ANNE ROGERS Widow, within
the precinct of Christ's Church CANTERBVRY.
THE Husbandman does not plant his Tree, Water it, Dongue it, Lop it, Prune it,
to the end that when the time of bearing Fruit is come, it should be like the
Fig Tree, to bring forth Leaves and no Fruit; but rather that it should be
like unto the Vine-tree which does bring forth fruit in clusters, and in great
abundance: even so man, which is planta inuersa, a Tree, with his root upward,
is not nourished in the womb of his Mother for the space of forty weeks
together, and after he is borne into the world, he is not suckled, fed,
swadled, and tended by Mothers natural care, and tender affection, to that
end, that when he is ripe in years he should prove like Absalon, a stubborn
and disobedient child, but rather to be like our Savior CHRIST, who was
obedient to his Father and Mother in all things, that so he may be a joy unto
his Father, and make glad the heart of his Mother.

And howsoever Alexander the great propounds it as a great question, whether
a man be more beholding to his Father which begets him, or to his Master
which teaches him, because the one is occasion of his being, the other of his
well-being: yet the Laws of God and Nature tell us that all reverent respect,
and dutiful obedience is to be carried to our Father which begat us, and to our
Mother which bare us: almighty God having promised in the fifth Commandment a
special blessing of long life upon earth to the obedient child. Wherefore as
when the Grecians in a great solemnity did present to Philip king of Macedon
many goodly gifts; a poor Painter stepped in among the rest, and offered up the
counterfeit of himself in a Table, besides which, were purtrayed out many
Jewels, and Pearls, and Rings, over each whereof was inscribed, Vellem and
hoc: I would I were able to give such gifts as these. Even so my self, having
at this time occasion, by importunity of friends, to expose these my simple
labors of that poor Talent wherewith God has endued me, to the worlds view
( vtinam foeliciter, God give it good success) have thought it my duty to
present unto your self (most dear Mother) these my first, though unworthy
endeauours, unfeignedly protesting, that if there be any thing wherein I may
show my obedience, and bring comfort to your old age, Vellem and hoc, I desire
of God that I may perform it. In the mean time let me entreat this favor at
your hands, that as Lewis the eleventh King of France, presented with a great
root by one of his poor subjects, perceiving that it came from an hearty
affection, took it in good part, and locked it up in his Treasury among his
richest Jewels: so let me beseech you to accept this simple present, as an
outward testimony of my true hearty love, and Filial reverence to you, my
most loving and natural Mother, and so I humbly take my leave; earnestly
entreating Almighty God to give you in this life peace of conscience, which is
a continual feast; and at the hour of your death to bring your gray hairs
with joy unto the grave; and after this miserable life is ended, to give you
peace of soul and body for evermore, in his blessed Kingdom of Heaven: which
God the Father grant for his Son Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Your dutiful and obedient Son unto his power, FRANCIS ROGERS.

TO THE READER.
SAint Hierom says very well, Habet nescio quid latentis energiae viua vox,
and in aures discipuli de authoris ore transfusa fortius sonat: the lively
voice of man, speaking has some especial secret operation in the mind, and
does send a more strong sound into the ears of the hearer In which respect, I
persuade my self this Sermon will prove like unto Tapestry wo^^^ which
seems fair far off, but when yo^ (...) near unto it, you may discern the
coursenesse of the thread; for as Philosophy tells us, the ear is a far
more dull judge then the eye; and reason teaches us, that we cannot so truly
discern of things which suddenly pass away, as of objects which are still
permanent.

Therefore as always, so now especially, I did desire to imitate Plato the
Divine Philosopher, of whom it is said, Maluit aliena verecunde discere, quam
sua impudenter ingerere: He had rather learn of others with modesty, then
impudently make show of his own knowledge. Yet the importunity of my
fellow-brethren and Ministers, then present, was such, as my case did resemble
the servants of King Eglon, Judge. 3.25.
they tarried at the door till they were ashamed: so I denied them so long as
I was ashamed to deny them any more. Wherefore now I present this Sermon unto
thee (gentle Reader) accept it kindly, read it patiently, censure it
charitably, and practice it diligently. If thou reapest any good thereby, give
the glory to him who is the Author and giver of every good gift: only thus
much I advertise thee: Aristotle the great Philosopher in his books does often
refell the opinions of his Master Plato, and he never does excuse his so doing,
but only in his Ethickes; the reason whereof is given, that he being in those
books to give precepts of good manners unto others, would not himself seem
so much to transgress the bounds of modesty and good manners, as once
publicly to write against his Master which taught him, and his Tutor which
instructed him, without good reason and lawful excuse. Even so remember (good
Reader) that when thou do read this Sermon, thou do read a Treatise of
LOVE, then do not while thou art reading of love, so far degenerate from the
nature of love, and bond of Christian Charity, as once to give it an harsh
censure, and uncharitable construction: humanum est errare, to err, and be
deceived, is proper to humane frailty: ergo pietatis est ignoscere,
humanitatis non agnoscere; therefore piety teaches thee to forgive the
faults, and humanity bids thee not to acknowledge the faults: And thus I
commit thee to the protection of the most high God. From Alkham in the County
of Kent, this 10. of February. 1613.

Thine in Christ Jesus, FRANCIS ROGERS.

A SERMON OF LOVE: Instructing all men to unite and join themselves in hearty
Love and Christian Charity, one with another.
MATTHEW 22.39. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
WHat S. Hierome says of the whole Book of Job, may most truly be verified
of this saying of our Savior: namely, Singula in eo verba plena sunt sensibus;
Hiero. Paul.
that is, Every word is a full sentence, affording large scope, and ample
matter for to entreat of: but that I may the better confine my self unto the
time allotted for this business, observe three things: first, a commandment,
Thou shall love: secondly, the object whom we must love, thy neighbor:
thirdly, the mean how far this love must be extended, as thy self. Of the
precept.

Thou shall love.] The Moral Law of God, contained in the ten Commandments,
is divided into two Tables: the first sets forth our duty unto God, wherein
nothing else is required at our hands but Love; so says our Savior, Mat.
22.38.
The first and greatest Commandment is this, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind: where we learn
our love to God must be like unto death; for there is no earthly living
creature, so strong, so weak, so rich, so poor, so old, so young, so noble,
so ignoble, of what condition soever, but Death does overcome all: even so,
though we may love Wife, Children, Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Kinsfolk,
Friends, Honors, goods, and our own lives, yet the love of GOD must surpass
them all, or else we are not worthy of God says our Savior. The second Table
contains our duty toward our Neighbor, and therein likewise is nothing
else required at our hands but Love; Mat. 10.37.
so says my Text, The second is like unto this, thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self. So that as Saint Augustine, Epist. 56.
speaking of Humility, says; the first virtue in a Christian, is Humility;
the second, Humility; the third, Humility; and so often as you will ask
me, I will answer nothing but Humility: not because there are no other
precepts in the Bible, but because unless Humility go before all other
virtues, accompany all other virtues, and follow after every virtue, Pride will
deflowre our holiest actions. In like manner S. Paul, 1 Cor. 13. seems to
speak of Love, saying, that the first virtue in a Christian, is Love; the
second, is Love; the third, yea, all required in a Christian is nothing else
but Love: therefore he says, 1 Cor. 13.1.
Though I speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and have not Love, I am as
sounding brass, and a tinckling Cymball. And again, Though I had the gift of
Prophecy, Verse 2.
and knew all secrets, and all knowledge; yea, if I had all Faith, so that I
could remove mountains, and had not Love, I were nothing. And again, Though I
feed the poor with all my goods, Verse 3.
and though I give my body to be burned, and have not Love, it profits me
nothing. Hence arises so many commendations of Love in the Scripture; as, Love
enuyeth not, Colos. 3.14.
it suffers all things, it believes all things, it hops all things, it
endures all things. James 2.8.
It is the bond of perfection: the Royal Law: the great commandment: It is
Christ's own precept: yea, John 15.12.
God himself is termed by the name of Love, 1 John 4.8. Hence the ancient
Writers made so many exhortations to love, and wrote so many commendations of
Love. Love (says Philo Iudaeus) is (...), that is, a short word, but yet it
contains much matter to be spoken of: Mat. 13.31.
like the grain of Mustard-seede, the least of all other, yet grows so big
as the Fowls of the air build their nests in the branches of it: Romans 13.9.
so is Love the abridgement of the whole Law: 1 Timothy 1.4.
the end of the Commandments: the fulfilling of the whole Law: Romans 13.10.
Insomuch as Clement Alexandrinus calls a loving man, a God: Gregory
Nazianzene being asked what was the best thing in the world, answered, Unity,
Peace and Concord: and being asked the worst thing, answered, Hatred, Discord
and Contention: this is illustrated by a Similitude.

As maine Ocean Seas, and deep Rivers in themselves are fit for ships to sail
in, and to hinder the passage of enemies into the Country which they enuiron;
but let them be cut into narrow channels and small gutters, then they are unfit
for either. Even so where there is love and amity, there all things prosper:
by concord small things become great, but where is discord and strife, there
nothing flourishes, for by dissension great things become small; Luke 11.2.
yea, nothing at all. For Kingdoms (says our Savior) divided among
themselves cannot endure. Though God had often foretold of the miserable
destruction of Jerusalem, Josephus de bell. Iudae.
which was performed by the Romans, yet nothing did work their so speedy and
lamentable ruin as their own dissentions and civil wars within themselves:
see this likewise verified in the aeconomicall government.

Therefore it is worthy noting that Silurus having fourscore sons, seeing
them at discord among themselves, tied up a great Faggot of sticks together,
and gave to each son a piece of the cord which tied them, and bad them all
assaye to break the Faggot, which when they had long endeavored they could
not effect; vvhereupon the old man loosed the Faggot and gave to every son
one single stick, which every one could easily break in sunder: even so,
while Christians and brethren unite themselves in Love and Charity, so long it
is hard for them to be overthrown; but when once they are at hatred within
themselves, then the devil easily overcomes them, for he goes up and down
like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour: where the Greek is (...),
quem, who in the singular number catching them one by one, not quos in the
plural number, when they go in couples. Observe likewise how discord in the
members overthrow the private body of every particular man; therefore it is a
pretty fable in Aesope that at a certain time the members in the body fell at
dissension with the belly; the hand would reach it no meat, the foot would
go for no meat, in the end all the whole body waxed so feeble as it was ready
to perish; then the hand would reach meat, the foot fetch meat, the mouth chawe
meat; but alas, it was too late to shut the door after the Steed was stolen,
for the belly was so faint and weak as it was able to receive no meat, and so
the whole body was consumed, and as dissension overthrows kingdoms, private
families, the souls and bodies of men; even so it does wholly consume the
wealth and estates of men, as is seen in the lame man and the blind man, of
which, one for want of lims was not able to go, the other for want of eyes
could not see to go, until at last they agreed together that the blind man
should carry the lame man, and the lame man should guide the blind man: thus
they went on well and quietly, until the lame man had espied an Oyster, then
they fell at dissension to whom it did belong; the lame man challenged it,
because he espied it out, the blind man said it was his, because his legs did
fetch it; to be short, in the end they determined to be judged by the next man
they met: this man being a Lawyer, made an equal distribution, he gave each
of them a shell, and kept the meat to himself: and even so go on in suites
and iarres at last ye will find the Lawyer to be like the Butlers box at
Christmas, whosoever is a looser that is a gainer.

We which live in this latter age of the world have been long time the
scholars of Saint Paul and Saint Peter, but we could never yet take forth
our lesson so far forth as Saint James, or Saint John, we have learned of
Saint Paul to believe well, but not of Saint of James to bring forth good
works which are the fruits of faith: we have learned of Saint Peter to feed
Christ's flock, and the people to be fed of the shepherd, but neither
shepherd nor sheep, Minister nor people, have learned of Saint John to love
one another, who as himself was the beloved of Christ, so are his Epistles
filled with words of love, and drops of fatherly affection, as Babes, little
Babes, Children, little children, Beloved, dearly beloved. We read of
countries and Islands which do not nourish any vile or poison some creatures,
but never can we read of a commonwealth wherein lived men whose hearts were
void of envy, hatred and malice. Acts 2.3.
In the Acts of the Apostles there is mention made of cloven tongues, but
never can we find any cloven hearts, hearts divided in sunder; wherefore as
ever, so especially now in these last days had we need to exhort to love; for
as the world waxes old, so men in the world wax old; and as the bodies of
old men go stooping downward, so the souls of men in this age go groueling
to earthly possessions, not minding heavenly inheritances, and as the bodies in
old age wax cold and want the heat of nature, so the souls of men in this
age wax cold and want the heat of charity: therefore if ever then now had
this lesson of Love need to be enforced, not particularly to Ministers only,
least then Laymen say, quod supra nos nihil ad nos (that is) what is above us
pertains not to us: nor to the Laymen only, least the Clergy say, id
populus curet, that is, let Laymen Love, let us disagree: but it is generally
to be enforced unto all, of what sort or condition soever he be.

Read the Scripture, you shall find how often love is commanded; now no man will
often demand that thing which is not pleasing unto him, therefore we must love
one another because love is so pleasing unto GOD, as appears by Gods often
requiring love of us: the Wife which loves her husband will fit her self to
his humor, she will do that which he delights in: We, the Church, are the
spouse of Christ, he is our husband, therefore if we truly love him, we must
entertain hearty love one with another which is most pleasing unto God; Psalm.
133.
for love is likened unto precious ointment, which powered forth, makes a
svveet savor over all the room: so is love a sweet smelling sacrifice in the
nostrils of God; 1 Cor. 14.33.
he calling himself the God of Love, saying also, that he hates him which
rayseth up contentions among brethren; but in Ecclesiasticus Chap. 25. Three
things rejoice me, Prou. 6.19.
and by them am I beautified before God and men, the unity of brethren, the
love of neighbors, a man and wife that agree together. This is seen in that
David, a man after Gods own heart, must not build an house to God: and why?
because his hands had been embrued with blood: 3 Reg. 5.
but Solomon his son a king which reigned in peace, was commanded to build
a Temple to God. And JESUS CHRIST which was borne into the world to make peace
between God and man, was borne under Augustus Caesar, at that time, when the
whole world was at peace; therefore seek peace and ensue it, follow after
love, pray with Saint Bernard on the Canticles, Domine pacem volo, pacem cupio
and nihil amplius: O Lord I desire peace, I seek peace and nothing else.
Wherefore, does thy brother offend thee put it up? refer him to God, who will
revenge thee. Veterem iniuriam ferendo vitabis nouam: By suffering an old
injury, thou shall eschew a new wrong, as we see in a brawling Curre, if he
bark at thee, and thou ride on, and not regard it, the dog will be quiet;
but if thou offer to chide him, to strike at him, or to hurt him, then he
flies at thee more furiously then at the beginning.

A coal of fire let alone will out and dye of it self, but blow it, and it
will burn afresh and as hot as before: so wrongs and injuries let alone, will
in time dye and be forgotten, but if they be repeated, and often rehearsed,
they will increase.

I, but thou will say, for my own part, I can be contented to live in peace,
but my neighbor is always beginning with me, and offering me wrong first;
what should I do in such a case? Tread on a worm, and it will trune again.
To this I answer: Know what the Heathen Orator says; Nulla laus est ibi esse
integrum vbi nemo est qui aut velit, aut conetur corrumpere: It is no
commendations to be an honest man when thou can not tell how to be dishonest:
for example, What credit is it for a man to say he never did commit adultery,
when as he never came into company where Women were? What glory is it for a
man to be never drunken, and never be in place where he can drink wine or
strong Beer, but only water? So what commendation is it to live in love and
peace, when as no neighbor thou have does offer thee any wrong or injury.
Wherefore he which offers thee wrong, gives thee occasion of patience, not
of anger and revenge; so that every one should say of him which offers wrong,
as David said of the cursing of Shimei; Suffer him to curse, 2 Samuel 16.
for the Lord has bidden him; it may be the Lord will look on mine
affliction, and do me good for his cursing this day: so put up wrong, refer
all to God. Saint Cyprian says well, Quid gloriae est illis facere quod fecit
Judas? quid ignominiae est nobis pati quod passus est Christus? What glory is
it for a man to offer wrong? Judas did the like to Christ: and what shame is it
for us to suffer wrong for Christ's sake, who before has endured much more for
our sakes?

Socrates the wise Philosopher walking in the streets, pulled off his hat to
one whom he met, which man vnciuilely passed by, and left Socrates unsaluted:
whereupon one said unto Socrates, Why are you not angry with that unmannerly
companion? To whom Socrates replied, If I had met one with a crooked back, and
which had a body more deformed then my self, should I be angry with him? To
whom the other answered, No truly: and then much less have I cause to be
displeased with one that has a worse mind then I, said the the Philosopher.
Even so, to make some application to us Christians: Has thy neighbor done
thee injury? Surely this proceeds out of his Souls infirmity, and
therefore be not offended because he has a worse Soul then thy self: for
indeed in stead of hurting him again, thou have more need to pity him, and
to pray for him.

I, but thou will peradventure say, The offenses are not small and ordinary,
but great and heinous, such as flesh and blood cannot endure. 1 Cor. 15.50.
Alas beloved, Flesh and blood shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
but he which is borne of water and the Spirit: and know thus much that the
greatest injuries offered unto thee are not comparable to the least sin thou
committest against GOD: for the greater the object offended, the greater is the
sin committed. Offer to kill an ordinary man, and not effect it, thou have
but a small punishment; but offer to kill the King, and thou art punished in
the highest degree: thus you see how one and the selfsame sin is greater
and lesser in regard of the object offended; now then almighty God being
infinite and eternal, the least sin against him, deserves infinite and
eternal punishment. How then can thou hope for pardon from God for thy great
sins against him, when thou will not forgive thy neighbor his small sins
against thee, in comparison? Mat. 18.25.
as our Savior sets forth at large in the Parable of the unthankful
Servant, who having to himself forgiven ten thousand Talents, would not
forgive his fellow-seruant one hundred pence: this Master is God, this Servant
to whom ten thousand Talents are remitted, is every Christian which has his
sins washed away in the blood of Christ: these hundred pence of the
fellow-seruant, are those small sins which one brother offers to another. A
Talent was then two hundred pounds, then what difference is betwixt twenty
hundred thousand pounds, and one hundred pence, so much difference and more is
there between our sins to GOD, and our Brothers to us.

O then for shame good Christian speak not of the greatness of thy wrongs,
but rather pray so much more earnestly to God, and say with our Savior, Luke
22.34.
Father forgive them, they know not what they do: And with the blessed Martyr
Saint Steven, cry, Acts 7.60.
O Lord lay not their sins unto their charge. Imitate Almighty God, who is
quick to show mercy, as we see in the Prodigal Son, Luke 15.20.
to whom he ran forth speedily, and with all haste embraced him: but God is
slow to anger and revenge; for when he came to punish Adam in Paradise, he
came not running, Genes. 3.8.
but walking; and that not in the heat of the day, but in the cool of the
evening: even so, be thou swift to forgive thine enemy. Let not the Sun go
down upon thy wrath, Ephesians. 4.26.
but be slow to anger and revenge: for, he which is angry with his Brother
unadvisedly, Mat. 5.22.
shall be culpable of Judgment.

I, but thou will yet say, I can be contented to live in peace, to forgive
great wrongs, but I am often wronged, and still injured, I can never live in
quiet. Know thus much my beloved, James 3.2. Psalm. 19.12.
that not in one or two things, but in many things we all sin against God:
and who is he which knows all his iniquities? Ibid.
Had not every one need to pray with David, Lord cleanse me from my secret
sins? Luke 11.4.
Does not our Savior teach us daily to pray, Forgive us our trespasses? And
also daily to practice forgiveness to our brother sin he not seven times,
Mat. 18.22.
but seauenty times seven times in one day. Consult not therefore with flesh
and blood, but submit thy self to Gods Law, which tells thee, that the
greatest Commandment is to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all
thy soul, and with all thy mind, and that the second is like unto this, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Wherefore be not a Christian in show, but in deeds, imitate thy Savior
Jesus, who does not only not hate his enemies, but bestows many benefits
upon them, as, his Sun shines upon the just and unjust, his rain falls
upon the good and bad: so do not only not revenge thee on thy enemy, but love
him, do him good, and pray for him: and reason good; for if GOD the Creator
spares his Creature, much more must thou spare thy Fellow Creature: if GOD,
the Lord of all, do forgive his Servants, then must thou forgive thy
Fellow-seruants, Wherefore embrace love with all men, If thine enemy be hungry,
feed him; Romans 12.22.
if he be thirsty, give him drink; if he be naked, clothe him: for in so
doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head: that is, says Saint
Augustine, De doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16.
thou shall stir up in thine enemy the burning zeal and sorrow of
Repentance, causing him to grieve, that he has offended that man, who is so
ready to succor and to relieve his wants and miseries.

To conclude this first point, Psalm. 34.14. Romans 12.18.
Seek peace and ensue it, if it be possible: as much as in you is, have peace
with all men: For (as Saint John says) he which hates his Brother is a
murderer; 1 Epist. 3.15.
and we know no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. But (as the same
Apostle says) let us love one another, 1 Epist. 4.7.
for love comes of God, and every one which loves, is borne of God, and
knows God. And so I pass unto the object whom we must love, namely, our
Neighbor.

Thou shall love thy Neighbor.] Difficile est humanam animam nihil amare:
(says Saint Hierome) It is hard that the Soul of man should love nothing:
for, Nihili est qui nihil amat: (says Plautus) He is to be esteemed as
nothing which loves nothing, especially seeing there are so many objects for
to love. In which respect it is observed, that there is no one word in the
Greek tongue, which receives so many Compositions, as the word (...), Love.
There is, (...), (...), (...), (...),
that is, The drunkards love. The Leachers love. Ambitious love. Pleasures
love, etc.


But of all other objects of love, Saint Augustine does reckon up four, as
most principal, De doct. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 23.
saying; Quatuor sunt, etc. There are four things especially to be beloved:
one which is above us, (that is, God:) another, what we are, (that is, our
selves:) the third, which is near unto us, (that is, our neighbor:) the
fourth, which is beneath us, (that is, our bodies.) This present occasion
offers to speak only of the third: and here one may ask with the Expounder
of the Law, Luke 18.29.
Who is my neighbor? Indeed the Jews in Christ's time esteemed none their
neighbors but their friends: the simple sort think them only their
neighbors who dwell near unto them: In 22. Mat.
Saint Chrysostom he says, By neighbor is understood Jesus Christ, because
he is the true Samaritane, which pours Oil and Wine into our soars. But
Saint Augustine most truly tells us, Proximus hoc loco, Epist. 52.
non sanguinis propinquitate, sed rationis societate pensandus est, in qua
socij sunt omnes homines: Our Neighbor is not to be esteemed him which is
nearest to us in blood, or in place, but he which is our companion in reason:
now every man being a reasonable Creature, every man is therefore our neighbor.

Again, Ser. 59. de temp.
the same Father shows three things, in which we are all neighbors: first,
in that we are all borne alike: secondly, in that we all dye alike: thirdly,
in that we all hope alike for the heavenly inheritance: And Saint Hierome
gives a most vvitty and pithy reason why every man is our neighbor, In 4. ad
Ephesians.
be he friend or foe, Christian or Infidel, and that because it is
commanded, Thou shall not lie with thy neighbors Wife: now if Neighbor be
only Christians and friends, then it were lawful to lie, and commit adultery
with Turks, Jews, Infidels, and with our enemies; but this is most wicked:
and therefore by consequent, every man is our neighbor. And thus having showed
you by Neighbor is understood every particular man of what Country or
condition soever, let me now urge among many, three special arguments to move
us, and to stir us up to love our Neighbor.

The first reason enforcing love (besides the infinite places in Scripture
commanding us) is taken from necessity: 1 John 4.8.
He that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love: so then as the body
severed from the soul, is nothing else but a dead carcass and a senseless
truncke; so the soul united to the body, and yet void of love, is dead, and
senseless in spiritual things: for, as the Apostle says, He which hates
his brother is a manslayer, 1 John 3.15.
and we know no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. And indeed how
can we love Christ which is our head, and hate our neighbors which are his
members.

If a man should stroke one on the head with his hand, speak him fair with
his tongue, and yet in the mean time, did beat and cut his body with a sword,
no man would think he loved that man: Even so, how can we love Christ, which
is our Head, and yet hate one another which are his Members? Wherefore let this
teach us, 1 John 4.11.
that if GOD so loved us, then ought we to love one another; now God so loved
us, as to dye for us when we were his enemies, then must we love one another,
though we are enemies one to the other: for to requite good for good is the
part of humanity; to requite evil for evil, is the trick of a beast; to
repay evil for good, is the property of a Devil; but to repay good for evil,
to bless him which curses thee, is the duty of every true Christian
whatsoever he be: For, John 13.35.
by this shall all men know if ye be my Disciples, if ye love one another.

The second reason moving us to love, is taken from our Creation: We find not
in the Bible, that GOD made all the Angels of one Angel; or all the Fishes, of
the great Whale; or all the Birds, of the surmounting Eagle; or all the Beasts,
of the huge Elephant; or all the Plants, of the tall Cedar: but we read in
the Scripture, that GOD made all mankind of one and the same Adam, which
teaches us thus much, says S. Augustine, De bono coniug. contra Ioum.
that we should all live like brethren, and love as one, because we proceed
from one. And Lactantius says very well, Lib. 6. cap. 10.
if we all proceed from one man, whom God did make, then are we all of
consanguinitie, and therefore it is a great sin to hate even a wicked man.
Look also a little unto our procreation and bringing forth into the world: the
Trees have height to resist the violence of Beasts, strong Arms to wrestle
with the force of winds, Leaves to keep from them the heat in Summer, and
Barks to defend the cold Frosts in Winter: among the Birds, the Eagle has
her claw, the Porcupine her quils, the Crane her bill, the Hawke his tallent:
among the Beasts of the Forest, the Lion has his tail, the Bear his paw,
the Bull his horn, the Boar his tuske: among the Fishes of the Sea, the Sepia
has a mist of Incke, the Crabbe his shell, the Polypus his change of colors:
thus every creature comes forth with some defense for it self, with offense
for it foe; only man, poor miserable man, comes naked into the world:
whereby Nature her self the common parent of all, does teach us, that man of
al creatures, should be most loving and peaceable one to another, as having
speech given unto him, which is denied to other Creatures, to make him more
sociable. Wherefore let there be that love between man and man, as is between
beast and beast. If one Sheep be faint, the whole flock will stand between
it and the Sun until it be comforted. Among the Bees, aegrotante vna
lamentantur omnes: If one Be do wax faint, all the whole Hiue does mourn.
If a man will not be as kind to man as Beasts are among themselves, yet let
men be as kind to men, as the beasts are to men. We read of thankful Lions,
kind Eagles, loving Dogs, Wolves have nourished some men, Bears have suckled
others: in the Scripture we read how Elias was fed by Ravens: 2 Kings 17.6.
Dan. 6.22. Luke 16.21. Acts 28.5.
Daniel was safe in the midst of Lions: Dogs did lick the soars of poor
Lazarus: the Viper did not hurt S. Paul. O cum detestandam humanae malitiae
crudelitatem! Aues pascunt, Ferae parcunt, homines saeuiunt, says Saint
Cyprian, O the most detestable cruelty of man's malice! the Birds feed us, the
Beasts do spare us, and yet one man is a Wolf, yea, a Devil to another: well
yet let one man be as loving to another, as the Devils are among themselves,
for they will join together to the destruction of man, as we see by him
who said his name was Legion, because we are many; Mark 9.
and so let us love together to destroy the Devil.

All men of one trade will always join together for the maintenance of their
trade, The Kings Apology for the oath.
so we being all Christians, having one Father, one Redeemer, one Sanctifier,
one Mother the Church, partakers of one Baptism, one Faith, and hoping for one
kingdom in Heaven, must needs unite our selves in hearty Love and Christian
charity thereby the better to overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

The third reason to stir us up to love our neighbor, is taken from nature;
which teaches the perfection of all things to consist in unity. Look upon
the heavens, there is one motion of the Sun, another of the Moon, another of
the Stars, yet they are all carried about motu primi mobilis, by the motion
of the first moveable: descend lower to the four Elements, Fire, Water, Air,
Earth, what more differing then their qualities hot and cold, moist and dry?
yet all these agree together to the making of one mixed body and solled
substance: come to those creatures which have life and motion, as Plants,
Herbs, Trees. In the Tree there is the body, the Bark, the Bows, the Leaves;
all those parts differ one from another, yet all have their perfection from one
and the selfsame root which is grounded in the earth.

Look upon the Beasts and Fowls, no one Beast or Bird of the same kind will
hurt another: as the Hawke flies after the Partrich, not another Hawke; the
bloud-Hound pulls down the Dear, not another Hound, and so man should not
have war with man, but with the Devil. Come unto man the most excellent
creature in nature, and see how every thing in him tends unto unity: for his
outward parts; the eye cannot say to the foot, I have no need of thee, but
the eye guides the foot, the foot bears the eye, one member receives into
the body what is necessary, another euacuateth and casts out of the body
what is superfluous, yet all serving for the good of the whole body. View the
inward parts of man, how many several Nerves and sinews are there in the
body? yet all from one head the brain: how much blood dispersed through
several veins, yet all from one fountain the liver; how many spirits and
motions, yet all from the heart: from these three principal parts the Head,
the Liver, the Heart, are diffused into the whole man, Life, Sense, and
Motion; yet these three have but one head, which is the soul of man: and as
Philosophy tells us, Anima est tota in toto and tota in qualibet part: The
soul is alike whole in the whole body as in the little finger, and alike
whole in the little finger as in the whole body: wherefore embrace love, seek
peace, Heb. 12.14.
without which no man shall see GOD.

Is then thy enemy greater then thou art? be quiet, and tibi parce, spare thy
self, meddle not with one that is mightier then thy self. The Toade may swel
till he burst, before he be so big as the Ox. Is thy enemy less then thy
self? (impar congressus Achilli) parce sibi, spare him, it is no glory for a
man to beat a Boy; no credit for a great rich man to oppress a poor mean
man: the Lion will seldom meddle with a woman, but never with a little
child. Is thy enemy thine equal? Solomon tells thee, that the discretion of
a man deferreth his anger, Prou. 19.11.
and his glory is to pass by an offense. Thou will spend five pounds to make
him spend ten, this is but to be the envious man. It was once granted that the
envious man, and the covetous man should both have their wishes, and he which
wished last should have the first man's vvish doubled; so they did much strive
who should vvish last, in the end it was granted to the covetous man:
hereupon the envious man wished one of his eyes to be put out; which done,
the covetous man has both his put out, so then to spend twenty pounds to make
thy neighbor spend forty, is to be but envious, make the best of it. It is
but like too boys at boxes, the one gets a blew face, the other a bloody
nose, but both of them are well beaten. Aesope tells us a fable how the Mouse
and the Frog would needs fight together, and in the midst of the battle
came the Kite and devoured them both: even so take heed, while neighbors are at
variance among themselves, seeking to do mischief one to other, suddenly
comes death and takes them all away, and when they are thus dead in their
hatred and malice, let the devil alone to torment them all.

Sermon. cap. 168. de tempore.
To shut up this point with S. Augustine his counsel, saying, Seeing every man
as he is a man, is thy neighbor, but as he is an evil man and offers
vvrong, he is not only thy enemy but his own foe, therefore love in him his
soul and his body, that is, love thy neighbor whom God has made, but hate
and detest his malice, and other sins which the Devil has by temptations
worked into his soul, so shall thou be like a wise Physician who loves his
patient, and hates his disease. Thus much for the object, whom we must love,
our neighbor: let me now speak of the last thing considered, namely, how
far our love must be extended.

As thy self. Hom. 21. in Genesi.
] As Saint Chrysostom says very well, Neque vel sillaba vel apiculus est in
sacris Scripturis in cuius profundo non sit grandis quispiam thesaurus. There
is not one syllable or tittle in the holy Scripture, but searching thereof some
great and hidden treasure may be found; for if it be a true axiom in
Philosophy, Natura nihil facit frustra, that nature does nothing in vain,
then it must be much more true of the God of nature, that he will speak
nothing in vain, and that in his holy writ.

This is partly seen in this word As, the which has four several
significations in the Bible.

First, it signifies the likeness of a thing but not the truth of a thing, as
in Saint Matthew. Matthew. 26.55.
Ye came out as against a thief with bills and with staves.

Secondly, this word As signifies the truth of a thing, but not the likeness
of a thing, in Saint John, John 1.14.
We saw the glory of him as the glory of the only begotten Son of the
Father.

Thirdly, it signifies both the likeness and the truth of a thing, as to the
Hebrews, God offers himself unto you, Heb. 12.7.
as unto children.

Lastly, it signifies rei qualitatem sed non aequalitatem, the quality, but
not the equality of a thing, Luke 6.36.
as in S. Luke, Be ye merciful, as your Father is merciful. Where the meaning
is, we should be as well merciful as God, not as much, for that is
impossible; and in this last signification is this word [As] taken in this
place, Love thy neighbor as thy self, that is, pari affectu, sed non pari
effectu, as the School speaks; 3. Sent. did. 29.
so the meaning is, that we must love our neighbor as well as our selves, but
not as much as our selves; for there are degrees in love, the Apostle says, Do
good unto all men, Gal. 6.10.
but especially to the household of faith: and among Christians, as Saint
Hierom observes, In Ezech. 44.
after God we must love our Father, and our Mother, our Children, our Brothers
and Sisters, our Kinsefolkes, our own household, for he is worse then an
infidel which will not provide for his family: 1 Timothy 5.8.
and therefore S. Augustine says very well, Omnes homines aeque diligendi
sunt, Lib. 1. de doct. Christ. 28.
All men are alike well to be beloved, but when a man cannot do good to all,
then he must especially help those, which are nearest unto him in place, in
time, or by some other occasions, etc.

Having now set down the sense and meaning of the words, that we must love our
neighbor as well as our selves; let us now show how well we must love all
men; and this first in general, then in particular. For the general, what
the Law of nature speaks in the negative, Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne
feceris: What ye will not have done to you, do not unto others, that same the
Law of the Gospel speaks affirmatively, as ye would others should do unto
you, so do ye unto them; for this is the Law and the Prophets. Now then
examine thy self by this rule: Suppose thou were poor and needy, and driven
to beg thy bread from house to house, when thou did ask an alms,
would not thou be glad to receive it? would it not grieve thee to be sent
away empty without meat for thy belly, or clothes for thy back, or harbor for
the vveather? surely thy conscience will tell thee yes, why then, as you would
another should do to thee, so do thou unto him; relieve the poor, visit the
sick, comfort the fatherless, etc. Again, if thy enemy had thee at
advantage, would thou be contented that he should take away thy goods, thy
good name, that he should beat thee, hurt thee, kill thee, or the like, examine
thy conscience, it will tell thee no: why then, as thou would another should
do unto thee, so do thou unto him. Forgive thine enemy, make him not consume
his goods, rob him not of his good name, do not strike him, hurt him, kill
him, or the like. And as in these, so in all other things examine thy self,
and when thou go about any thing concerning any man, remember this short
lesson, Do as thou would be done unto, and it will keep thee from many
sins: for assure thy self, as Saint Augustine says, thou do not love thy
neighbor as thy self, De monit. Eccle. Catho.
if thou do not strive to bring him to that good, which thou desire to
enjoy thy self. And this for the general.

Give me now leave more particularly to show how we should love our neighbor,
by a few similitudes drawn from the natural body of man, and the members
thereof. First, one member in the natural body does not envy another: even so,
we must not envy at our neighbors prosperity. This sin of Envy is of all
other most foolish; for the covetous man has a little wealth for his soul,
the voluptuous man has a little pleasure for his soul, the ambitious man has
a little honor for his soul, but the envious man gives away his soul to the
Devil for nothing, having only hearts grief and misery: yet many men in
these days are like Caesar and Pompey, of which one could not abide his
superior, the other could not endure his equal: but this should not be among
Christians. For why should my eye be evil because Gods eye is good? Wherefore
as in the body, if one member suffer, 1 Cor. 12.26.
all the members will suffer with it; as if the foot be hurt, the eye will
look to it, the hand will reach for it, the tongue will speak for it, etc.
Even so must we take compassion of one another miseries, like Scipio
Africanus Minor, who (as Appian reports) did weep when he saw Carthage
burn, saying that Rome, his mother City, might one day burn so: Even so, we
either are in misery like our Brethren, or we have been in such misery, or
before we dye, we may be as wretched as our neighbor; therefore let us have
a Sympathy and fellow-feeling of each others calamity. Again, if one member
rejoice, all the other members rejoice with it: so must we be glad at others
good; for this is to be Angelical, Luke 15.10.
the Angels in heaven rejoice at the conversion of a sinner upon earth. What
Seneca says to his friend, that every Christian must from his heart speak
unto his Neighbor, Mihi id expedit quod tibi, aut non sum amicus, nisi
quicquid agitur ad te pertinens meum est: Look what is good for thee, that I
esteem good for me, and so on the contrary, otherwise I am not thy true
Christian neighbor and friend.

Secondly, one member in the body does not appropriate its good unto it self,
but to the whole body: as the eye sees not for it self, but for the whole
body, and so of the rest: Even so, we being all members of one mystical Body,
whose Head is Christ, must communicate to the good and necessities one of
another. Wherefore Love must be to our actions, as our hand is to our body; the
hand it clotheth the back, it feeds the belly, and does all other necessary
offices to the body: Even so love must practice all good actions to the members
of Christ's Mystical Body, in feeding the hungry, in clothing the naked, and
the like. And as the hand covers the soars in the body by laying on of
plasters, so Love must cover the multitude of offenses, which our
fellow members commit, by forgetting and forgiving them. For as the hand is not
all one lump of flesh, but divided into several joints and fingers, whereby
it is more fit to perform its duty: even so are we by Gods special
providence, divided into several members, that we may the better perform the
works of love, not like a Boar in a stye, to live unto our selves: nor like a
Dog in a kennell to bark at all that go by, but to let all our actions be
done in love, doing to all others, as we would all others should do unto us.

Thirdly, one member in the body hurt by another, does not revenge it self, as
if the hand let fall a stone or weight upon the foot, the foot does not kick
and spurn at the hand again, but bears it patiently: Even so must we bear
and put up wrongs one of another, referring all to GOD, who in his due time
will revenge; De vero cultu. cap. 18.
Non minus mali est refer, quam infer iniuriam: (says Lactantius) It is no
less evil to requite a wrong, then to offer a wrong: for he which reuengeth
wrong, does imitate him of whom he received injury; now in that he imitateth
another in that which is bad, he can by no means himself prove good. Sermon.
de Ira.
Saint Basil goes further, affirming that he which reuengeth wrong, is worse
then he which begins wrong: for that which another man offers unto thee
is good or bad; if good, why then art thou angry with him? I, but it was bad:
is it so? why then do thou seek to offer and requite that to thy neighbor,
which thine own conscience tells thee is bad, and which thou thy self
condemnest for sin in thy brother? If a man see his enemy sick of the Plague
soars, will he to revenge himself of his enemy, strive to have the plague in
his body also? every one will esteem such a man a mad man, or a fool. Are we
then wise for our bodies, and foolish for our souls? He beloved which offers
thee injury, has filled his soul with sin, insomuch as without Gods grace,
and his repentance, he cannot be saved: now then for thee to seek to repay
this wrong, is to fill thy soul likewise with sin, and to make it
abominable in the sight of God.

This then condemns most specially our private duels upon every small
punctilio of Honor to challenge the field: consider with thy self in reason
(setting Gods Word aside) are we not all, in the Kingdom, members of the body
politic, the King being the Head? now he which dares fight with the Kings
friend, dares fight with the Kings enemy: then what vvrong is here to the
whole Kingdom, for a private wrong offered unto me, I shall bereave my country
of him which in the front of an Army may kill a General, and so by that means
may save the life and liberty of the King and Kingdom? Exodus 23.5.
In Gods Law it is written, if thy enemies beast do fall into a ditch, thou
shall help him out. Is so great love to be showed to my enemies Beast? O how
much then ought I to love the person of mine enemy, who is created after Gods
own Image, and for whom CHRIST JESUS dyed and shed his precious blood?

Fourthly, the honorable members in the body do not despise the meaner, nor
can they; for the head cannot say to the foot, I have no need of thee: Even
so, great men must not despise mean men, neither can we live without one
another. See how God does not give to every nation every commodity, because
men should traffic one to another, and distance of place and language should
not separate our love. See likewise in every nation how every man has not
every Art, some are Tailors, some Masons, some Husbandmen, some Merchants, and
this to teach us love, because we all stand in need one of another. It is
noted as a great plague in Israel, 1 Samuel 13.19.
that there was not one Smith left among them; this seems but a base Trade,
yet so necessary a member to the body politic, as the Commonwealth cannot
stand without it. The Lion entangeld in nets had need of the little Mouse to
gnaw the threads in sunder before he could get loose: therefore let not the
greatest and richest men despise the poor and mean men, for they stand in
need of the meanest, if for nothing else, yet to pray for them.

It is well noted by Primasius, that the rich man is like the Elme-tree, the
poor man is like the Vine-tree: the Elm vnder-proppeth the Vine, and so
causes it to stand and bear fruit, which otherwise would fall and wither; the
Vine again ouer-shadoweth the Elm, and causes it to be green and
flourishing, which otherwise would perish and decay: Even so, the rich men by
their alms uphold the poor, who otherwise would starve, and the poor men
again ouer-shadow the rich men with their prayers to God, whereby they do the
better flourish in this world, and live for ever in the world to come. See this
to be verified in rich Onesephorus, 2 Timothy 1.16.
who relieved poor Paul in prison; and Saint Paul again desired God to be
merciful to Onesephorus; there is a blessing in this life: and further he
prayed, God grant he may find favor in that day; there is a prayer for the
life to come.

Fifthly, one member in the body does endanger it self for another; as let one
strike at the head with a naked sword, and the hand will adventure cutting off
to defend the head: Even so must we run into danger for the good one of
another, and most especially we must die for our head, if occasion serve,
because before our head has dyed for us. To give of our abundance to the poor
is pleasing unto Almighty God, but to spare out of our own necessities is
far more acceptable unto God, as we see the poor Widows mite was of
greater value in the sight of GOD, Luke 11.3.4.
then the greater gifts of richer persons: so at all times to help one another
is charitable, but to help others with hazard of our selves, and with
prejudice of our own estates, is far more acceptable to GOD, and pleasing
unto man.

Sixthly, one member in the body receives not another food, but sends it to
the other parts of the body: so the rich man must not eat up the poor man,
but rather he must communicate to his necessities, neither must the poor man
steal from the rich, but follow rather his labor, and depend upon Gods
providence: for necessary it is for a good stomach to have hunger and appetite
unto meat, which arises of watery humors which do gnaw upon the spleen:
secondly, the stomach must have judgment and discretion to choose such meat,
which does best agree with the stomach, and refuse the contrary, which
judgment arises of four muscles coming from the Head: thirdly, there must
be strength and vigor to be able to digest the meat which it receives, least
otherwise it turn into raw crudities, and so breed diseases in the body;
which heat and vigor arises of motions and spirits which are sent from the
heart: all these are necessary, yet none sufficient, unless there be communion
and dispersion of the food, to send the nourishment to the other parts of the
body, which is done by the blood through the veins. In like manner necessary it
is, for a Christian man to have faith, Heb. 11.6.
for without faith it is impossible to please God. In like manner necessary it
is for a christian man to give alms, and to pray to God, to be patient in
adversity, etc. but our faith profits nothing unless it works by Love;
neither is any other virtue acceptable in the sight of GOD unless it be
begun, continued, and ended in Love, therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.
If I have all things and yet want love, it profits me nothing: the hand can
reach and receive a gift of it self, but the hand cannot cut any thing of it
self without a knife, or some such like instrument; even so, Faith, as the
hand of the soul, is able to ascend up to Christ's cross, and to apply his
merits unto the soul, but faith cannot of it self bring forth the works of
the first and second Table, yet, as if you put a knife into the hand, the hand
will cut, so join Love to Faith, and then faith working by Love, does
perform all those Christian duties which GOD requires of us in his Law.

Hence a Christian man is not unfitly compared to a Conduit: to which there is
a Spring, whence the Water flows: a Leaden Pipe, through which the Water is
conveyed: a Cysterne, to receive the Water: and a Cock, to open and let forth
Water to all which stand in need. So every Christian is as a Conduit; the
Springhead from whence the Waters of Life do flow, is JESUS CHRIST; the Leaden
Pipe whereby these living Waters are conuayed, is a true and a lively Faith:
the Cysterne which does receive these Waters, is the Soul of man: now Love
must be as the Cock, to open, and bring forth all deeds of mercy to all those
which stand in need.

Lastly, one member in the body does tremble to be cut and severed from
another, so should we fear and tremble to be separated one from another by
hatred and dissension. The soul gives life unto the body, and to every member
of the body, yet not unless they be united and joined to the body: for cut off
the hand or the foot, and then the Soul cease to give life to them, but
presently they dye. So Almighty GOD gives life unto the Soul of every man,
but not unless we be united and joined one to another in love and charity:
For he which loves not, 1 John 4.8.
knows not God, for God is Love; but if we love one another, God dwells in
us, Verse 12.
and his love is perfect in us: So that he which lives in hatred and
dissension, seeking revenge, is a mere Atheist, no true Christian: for, as
Saint John says, If any man say, Verse 20.
I love God, and hate his Brother, he is a liar. And S. Gregory, If they shall
be the Children of God which are peacemakers, then surely they are the
Children of the Devil, which are peace-breakers. Therefore every Christian man
must be like unto a Mason, which has two hands, with the one he holds
fast on the Ladder, to keep himself from falling, with the other he
reaches out Tyle and Mortar to his fellow laborers: Even so, in building Gods
Church and house, every one must have two hands; the one the hand of Faith,
whereby he himself may climb up to the Cross of CHRIST, and so be saved
from falling into the pit of Hell; the other must be the hand of Love, to reach
forth deeds of mercy and of Christian affection to our Fellovv-labourers and
Builders of Gods house.

To draw to a conclusion: the love of men, in this age, is like unto a Tree,
but it is the Fig Tree CHRIST cursed in the Gospel, which brought forth
Leaves and no fruit: so we are loving in show, not in deed, whereas our
love should be like unto a Tree which is rooted deep in the earth, and
bears branches upward, and fruit which hangs downward, so our Love must
be rooted in Humility: he which will run up a high steepy mountain, must
go stooping, not bolt upright. Heaven is a high hill, he which will run
thither must have no high aspiring thoughts but be humble.

Observe among all the beatitudes which our Savior reckons up, he says,
Matthew. 5.
Blessed are the hungry, for they shall be satisfied: blessed are the meek,
for they shall inherit the earth: but blessed are the poor in spirit, that is,
the humble minded man, (...), for theirs, already, is the kingdom of Heaven.
Again, our Love must bear branches upward, to love God above all, that though
the Sorcerers of Egypt made many Serpents before Pharaoh, Exodus 7.12.
yet the Serpent of Moses did devour them all: so though man's love have many
objects, yet the love of GOD must overcome them all. Lastly, our Love must
bring forth fruit hanging downward to our neighbor as our selves, Vt quem
potuerit hominem (says Saint Augustine) vel beneficentiae consolatione, Epist.
52.
vel doctrinae informatione, vel disciplinae coer^ione adducat ad colendum
Deum: That in as much as we can, we should bring every man to worship GOD,
either by comforting him with deeds of mercy in his distress, or by
instructing him in knowledge if he be ignorant, or by curbing him with the rod
of correction when he is faulty.

The love of men in this age is like unto fire, whose nature is to consume all
that it lays hold on: so we strive to eat up one another, by cosening, by
Usury, by Symony, and Briberie, whereas indeed our love should be like unto
fire. First, the nature of fire is to ascend; so our love must ascend upward to
love GOD above all, our Love must ( de Deo, Lib. de sub. stat. amoris.
cum Deo, ad Deum currere, says Saint Augustine) run from God, as being
grounded in him; with God, as being obedient unto his Laws; unto God, as
resting in him alone. Secondly, the nature of fire is to shine, and to give
light; so the light of our love must so shine before others, Matthew. 5.16.
that they seeing our good works, may learn to glorify our Father which is
in Heaven. We must every one be like John Baptist, who was (Lucerna ardens
and lucens) a burning and a shining Lamp in Gods Church. Thirdly, the nature
of fire is not to give heat to one or two, but to all that come near unto it:
so our love must not extend it self only to our selves, and to our Children,
but to all the members of Christ Jesus; yea, to all mankind; be he a good
man, nay be he a bad man he must be relieved. Charitas non iudicat de meritis,
sed de miserijs: Charity does not judge of our brothers merits, but of his
miseries. And then remember when thou deniest love to one which is wicked, that
if God were extreme to mark what is done amiss O Lord who might abide it?
Fourthly, the nature of fire is never to go out, if there be Coal or Wood, or
matter to burn: even so, our Love should never be weary of well doing, never
weary of forgiving. Musculus says very well, Vt nequit miserecordiae
praescribi modus, ita nec operum certus numerus: As none can prescribe a mean
how far mercy should be extended, so no man can set down a finite number how
many works of mercy are to be performed: for, as the miseries of man are
infinite, so the works of love must be infinite. Now, a man is sick, and so
needs relief: anon, he breaks his leg, then he is in want again:
now, his House is burnt; and so in infinitum; our life being a Sea of Glass,
as tumultuous as the sea, as brittle as glass.

The love of men in these days is like to the Sun, whose nature is to
dispell darkness, and lay all things open to every man's view; so our love is
like the Sun in disclosing and talking of our neighbors faults and
infirmities, like unto Flies in the Summer time, which if there be but one
galled piece on the horse back, they will be licking there, and let the sound
flesh alone; so the conditions of us in this age is to be talking and taxing
our brothers faults, never commending his virtues: but hearken what our Savior
says; Hipocrite, Mat. 7.5.
first pluck the beam out of thine own eye, and then look into the moate
which is in thy brother eye: he which is without sin himself, let him be
censuring his brothers sin: he is a fool which has his own house on fire,
and lets it burn and so run to look upon the fire on his neighbors
house: even so, he is unwise which does not cleanse his own soul from sin,
but is espying faults in his Brothers life. Others there are, which will not
openly disclose their neighbors infirmities, but as the Sun shines through
a little creuisse and small grate, so they will secretly carry news and tales
of all they see and hear, and these are the firebrarnds of much dissension:
Prou. 26.20.
for Solomon says, Take away wood, the fire goes out, so take away a
talebearer, and contention cease: and indeed it is as great a sin to
hear, as to tell tales: and there would never be one tongue in the head to
tell tales, if there were not two ears on the outside of the head to hear
tales.

But indeed our love should be like unto the Sun in his Circle, sursum,
deo^sum, dextrorsum, sinistrorsum: the Sun in the morning arises, so our
love must go upwards, we must love our Superiors, and not envy them: the
Sun at evening goes downwards, so our love must descend, we must love our
inferiors, and not despise them: the Sun shines on the right hand, so we
must love our friends, and not offend them: the Sun shines on the left hand,
so we must love our enemies, and pray to God for them.

Briefly to shut up all, seeing (my beloved) that the ways of God are the
ways of peace: Prou. 3.
seeing it is a good and pleasant thing for brethren to live together in
unity: Psalm. 133.1.
seeing Love is the Christian man's bagde, whereby he must be known; John
13.35.
By this shall all men know if ye be my Disciples, if ye love one another:
seeing Blessed are the peacemakers, Matthew. 5.9.
for they shall be called the Children of God: seeing the Apostles in their
Epistles, wish to them to whom they write, Grace and Peace from God the Father,
and our Lord Jesus Christ: seeing the Angels at the birth of Christ did sing
this Song, Glory be to God on high, Luke 2.14.
peace on earth, good will toward men: seeing our Savior willed his
Disciples, into what house they entered, to say; Peace be unto this house: Luke
10.5.
seeing Christ Jesus dyed to make peace between God and man: seeing at his
death the last Legacy he bequeathed unto his Disciples was Peace, My peace I
give unto you, John 14.27.
my peace I leave among you: the first blessing after his Resurrection, he
desired God to bestow upon them, was Peace, John 2.19.
Peace be unto you: seeing the God whom we serve is the God of peace; 1 Cor.
14.33.
let us therefore labor and endeavor to be in love and charity with all men,
to seek peace and follow after it, and as freely to forgive others their
trespasses against us, as we desire God to forgive us our trespasses against
him. And as the Toade before he drinks, does cast up all his poison, so let
us, before we presume to taste of the heavenly food of Gods Word, disgorge
all rancour and malice, least otherwise God espying us without our
Wedding Garment of Charity, Mat. 22.11.
bid that we be taken and bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness,
where is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Philip. 2.1.
Wherefore with S. Paul, I beseech you brethren, if there be any consolation in
Christ; in you, any comfort of love, any fellowship of the spirit, any
compassion or mercy; be ye like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, and of one judgment, that nothing be done through contention and vain
glory: but as in the Trinity three persons make but one God; as in Christ
Jesus two natures, his Godhead and his manhood, make but one person; as in
the Sun are many beams, yet but one light; as many grains of corn make but
one loaf of bread; as many grapes make but one cup of wine: so we, though we
are many and diverse, yet being joined together in hearty love, we may make but
one Church, and one body, whose head is Christ Jesus in heaven, and thus being
lincked together in Christian Charity, we may all of us, from the highest to
the lowest, from the richest to the poorest, from the eldest to the youngest,
with one voice, with one heart, and with one consent, sing forth and set forth
the praises of God the Father, of our Lord Jesus Christ: To God the Father to
God the Son, to God the holy Ghost, three Persons in Trinity, but one true
and everliving God in essence and in unity, be ascribed and given, as is due,
all honor, and glory, and power, from this time forth, for evermore. Amen.

2 CORINTHIANS. 13.11. Finally, brethren fare ye well, be perfect, be of good
comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be
with you.
FINIS.

