A TREATISE OF LOVE.

Written by JOHN ROGERS, Minister of Gods Word in Dedham in Essex.

God is Love, and he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and God in him,

1 John 4. 16. This is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that ye
love one another,

1 John 3. 11. And this Commandment have we of him, that he that loves God,
should love his Brother also,

1 John 4 21. LONDON, Printed by H. Lownes and R. Young, for N. Newbery, at the
sign of the Star in Popes head Alley. 1629.

TO MY LOVING Neighbors of Dedham.
Loving and good Neighbors, the doctrine of Faith being gone forth into the
World, I thought it not amiss that the Daughter should attend upon her Mother:
and therefore to put forth a Treatise of Love, to follow after Faith, as they
were both handled in your hearing not very many years since. Now I desire that
these things may live and speak unto you, when I shall be taken from you: In
which two if you shall profit, you cannot but do well, God shall be much
honored, and I shall have my great desire. Now this of Love, I dedicate unto
you, that as you have learned in some measure to love one another. so that you
do it still, and increase more and more. I found you, by the care and
diligence of my worthy Predecessor, in a peaceable state. Thus, through Gods
mercy, have you continued without rents or divisions, sidings or part taking,
in peace and unity these three and twenty years of my abode with you: wherein
both the head and body of the Congregation looking one way, much ill has bin
hindered, and much good done and mainetained. And I hope so to leave you: yea,
my hearts desire is, that you may live in peace, and godly love when I am gone,
that as you have done, so you may draw altogether as one man. So shall nothing
be too hard for you, nor no force of wickedness be able to prevail against
you; As a bound Faggot cannot be broken, though the band loosed and sticks
shattred asunder, becomes weak. As few or no suits of Law have bin found
amongst you, but differences either between your selves agreed, or by
indifferent Neighbors compounded; so do still in the name of God. And as I
have ever found you forward in good sort to any deed of Charity, wherein you
have bin moved, besides the good provision made for your own poor: so I beseech
you to continue, that you may show forth the fruit of the Ministry of the Word
so long, so long continued among you; and other towns seeing your well-doing
and good order, may be provoked by your example* and so God may have much
honor by you, and he take pleasure to dwell among you, and be the God of your
Posterity after you, from one generation to another. Which I beseech him to
grant for his mercies and his Christ his sake.

And you that be young now (which God be thanked give good hope) if God let you
live to stand up in your Predecessors rooms, see that you labor to quit your
selves as well as they have done; and better will be required, as having more
light every day, and their example to make use of. In which hope I take my
leave, and commend you all heartily to the grace of God, remaining till death

Yours in what service of Love I can, JOHN ROGERS.

A TREATISE OF LOVE.
CHAP. I.
Having finished the Doctrine of Faith, let me add a few things concerning
Love, which were delivered from the same Text, 1 John 3. 23. in my ordinary
course one after another. This is the commandment of God, that we believe in
the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another. Which, seeing the
holy Ghost has joined together, as two necessary and inseparable companions;
and that the duty of Love is of so necessary use in the course of our lives, I
thought good to add some things hereof to the former Treatise. The holy Ghost
having had occasion in Verse 22. of that Chapter, to speak of the keepers of
Gods commandments, who are the parties whose prayers God will hear; now in
this Verse, lest any should doubt and ask the question, But what be those
commandments? he therefore names them, and orings them all to these two heads;
Faith in Jesus Christ, and Love to our brethren: and these he exhorts unto, to
believe in Christ Jesus, and to love one another.

Now, in that the Apostle has reduced to two heads all the commandments of
God and our duties, he has mercifully provided for our weakness, and
prevented those carnal excuses whereby most men cloak their ignorance and
careless neglect of heavenly things: Oh, they be so dull to conceive, and the
Scriptures so dark, and they have such ill memories, and the Scripture so
large, as they can make no work of them; which is Adam-like, to turn the
fault from themselves upon God. As if they should say, If God had given us
shorter and plainer Scripture, and better wits and memories, we would have
done great matters. But this is but the wickedness and falsehood of their
hearts: for they can find wit and memory enough for the world, their profits,
pleasures, or lusts, and what they have a mind to; and why should they not
serve them for better things, if they would bend themselves thereto?

And God has mercifully left us so much of his Word, as is necessary to
salvation, clear and plain to every humble and teachable heart, that seeks
help of God by prayer, and is willing to be ruled thereby. Yea, he has
gathered the whole into short sums; As the whole Law and will of God, so
large and scattered in the Scriptures, is referred to ten words, Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
which are the ten commandments, delivered by God, Exodus 20. and these ten
referred to two, Matthew. 22. 40. and these two to one, Galat. 5. 14.

So our whole direction concerning Prayer, is in that short plat-forme called
the Lords-prayer. So has the Church of God since, out of the Apostles
writings, gathered all the things we are to believe unto eternal life, into
twelve Articles. So has God provided in this lightsome, (and in that respect)
blessed age of ours, abundance of good Books of the points and principles of
our Religion, some more large, some more brief; Catechismes for every bodies
turn, that even the dullest, and of worst memory, may come to the knowledge of
God, themselves, and their duties, and the things of salvation, if they be
not shamefully careless. So that the ignorance of the people of this Land
(which yet is fearfully gross, and more than any think for, but they that try
it) is affected and wilful; and therefore their condemnation will be (as more
fearful than of other Nations, so) most just and inexcusable. It Is lamentable
to see how the precious time is spent with many, in sinful courses and
exercises; with most, in eager pursuit of the world, the profits, honors, and
pleasures thereof, as if they were the necessary things, and end of our being
here; when the means of the knowledge of God, and the things that concern our
own happiness lie woefully neglected. Has God after the long night of
superstition, ignorance, and idolatry, that our Forefathers lay under, caused
the day to arise, and the sun of Righteousness to shine so long upon us, and
shall we yet love darkness and not light, be ignorant, and grope at noone
day? Has God set us up with those precious means of grace and life, and given
us our full scope in them, when he has denied them to Nations twenty times as
great as our selves, and shall we make sleight of them? Oh how many under the
tyranny of Antichrist, that would skip at the crummes that fall from our
tables, would adventure their lives for the scraps and leauings of such things
as we cast under our feet? They would and cannot; we may and will not: may we
not justly fear, lest God ere long snatch his Word from us, and bestow it upon
them, that will make better use of it?

The Lord awaken the people of this Land, to know the day of their Visitation,
and to understand the things that belong to their peace, before the decree come
forth, and it be too late.

Get knowledge and understanding, search the Scriptures, make use of such good
helps as the time affords plentifully. Take our time: Say not, I am dull, I
have a bad memory. God has taken away these pretenses: therefore they will not
go for payment at that day.

Next, observe, that Faith and Love are joined together as two inseparable
companions: wheresoever one is, there is the other also, and miss one miss
both. He that has Faith, must needs have Love; for Faith works by Love, Gal.
5. Faith assuring us of Gods love, to us, makes us love God again, and our
neighbor for his sake, at his commandment, and for his Image that is in him.

And wheresoever true Love is, there certainly Faith has gone before; these
can be no more severed than sun and light, good tree and fruit. As for that,
1 Cor. 13. If I had all Faith, and have no Love, I am a sounding brass, and
tinkling cymball: it is to be understood of the greatest measure of the Faith of
miracles, which indeed might be severed from that of Love, as in Judas; not
meant of justifying Faith, of which before in the Treatise of Faith.

This may be comfortable to Use.
many humble souls, that unfeignedly love God (as appears by good signs) that
love his Word, Ordinances, and their Neighbors; but Saints especially, and yet
doubt whether they have any Faith or no: they may as well doubt whether the
sun be risen, when they see the beams thereof shine in at their window. It Is
impossible to have Love, till we have Faith wrought in us, which is the
mother-grace; as impossible, as to have good fruit without a tree for it to
grow upon.

2. This on the contrary, witnesses fearfully against the people of England,
and the most part every where, that there is no Faith among them, seeing Love
is so scarce and hard to be found. The manifold idle and malicious wilful
suites in Law, the many contentions, brawlings, raylings, and fallings out for
trifles, do show there is but a little love. So much oppression, cruelty,
extortion, bribery, symonie, such racking and rending, every man for himself,
not caring who sink, so he swim; so much deceit in bargainings and
dealings, in buyings and sellings, as one knows scarce whom to believe, every
one spreads a net for his neighbor, to catch him if he can: such covetous
pinching, neglect of giving where cause is, of free lending, by reason of
usurious lending, and innumerable such courses as these, do cry out with a
loud voice, that Love is but rare. Such neglect of duty to others souls, so
few regarding to admonish, reprove, exhort, comfort, when, and where there is
need, few able, fewer willing: Besides, so little love to the Saints and true
servants of God. All these bear witness strongly, that Love is wanting; and
therefore, certainly, that there is no Faith: which where it is, cannot but
show it self by true Love in the fruits thereof. Let men therefore, whosoever
they be, keep silence concerning Faith, except they can prove it by their
Love; which while they live in the quite contraries thereto, they can never do.

Next, whereas Faith and Love being joined together, yet Faith is set in the
first place, note, that though in regard of time, they be wrought together in
the soul, yet in order of nature, Faith goes first, uniting us to Christ, from
whom are derived into us, Love, and all other graces.

First, this confutes that Popish Use.
assertion, That Love informs Faith, or gives a being unto it; which cannot
be, since Faith is before it. It declares and makes Faith manifest where it is,
and proves the soundness and truth of it, but gives no form or being thereto.

2* This shows, that where Faith is not, there it is impossible Love should
be; therefore an unbelieving man or woman, neither does, nor can love God or
their Neighbor: which is a fearful thing to be spoken, and yet most true:
Therefore, Lord, how should it awaken such (which are the greatest part) to
labor earnestly after this grace of Faith! get this and get all; and so on the
contrary.

3 Lastly, let none of those that are about the work of Faith, hold off, and
say, If I could love God as I would, and my Neighbor as I should, then I could
believe: Nay, rather know, that you must first believe, and then you shall be
able to love God and your Neighbor.

Object. But here some may object, that whereas the Apostle has brought all
our duties to these two, Faith in Christ, and Love to our Neighbor; that this
is defective, for as much as the Love of God, which is the chief of all, is
left out.

Answ. We are to know, that it is not left out, but necessarily included in the
love of our neighbor, from whence that does proceed: for as he that loves
God, cannot but love his neighbor, so no man can love his neighbor truly, in
whom the love of God is not wrought, for whose Image, and at whose commandment
he loves him, 1* Ioh. 5. 2.

CHAP. 2. Of the Love of God.
OF which love of God, seeing both it is the principal, and that whereby we may
know whether the love of our neighbor be in us, yea or no, which is the point
we mainly intend in this Treatise; I will therefore speak a little of the
same. The love of God is a most precious and honorable esteeming and affecting
of him, with a chief delight in him above all things. God is worthy to be
loved vnmeasurably, because he is infinitely and vnmeasurably holy, pure,
perfect, and good in himself. Also because he has been vnmeasurably good to
us, especially in giving his Son to the death for us. John 3. 16. So God loved,
i. e. so vnmeasurably and vnutterably, etc. 1 John 4. 9, 10. and Ephesians. 3. To
know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge: But that we cannot;
therefore we must love him, as Deuteronomy. 6. 5. with all our heart, soul and
might. But this we cannot neither, since the fall of Adam; therefore we must
love him with an upright heart, and this God will accept in Christ. We must
love him simply and absolutely for himself, and all other things for him, in,
and under him. We must not love him as we love other things, but above all
other things in the world. Mat. 10. 37. He that loves father or mother more,
etc. Nay, Luke 14. 26. He that hates not father, etc. that is, when they would
withdraw us from God and his Obedience: therefore Deuteronomy. 13. 6. are we bidden,
if any, never so near and dear, should entise us to Idolatry, we should
reveal him, that he may be put to death. If we love him not above all things,
he is not our God.

And this we ought to do, first, because he is goodness it self, which is
most worthy of all love, and wheresoever we see any part of this Image, it
ought to draw our hearts unto it. Secondly, he has created us after his own
Image, redeemed us by his dear Son, preserved us always, and multiplied
upon us, and daily renews innumerable mercies both for soul and body; and
do not these (besides what he has promised us hereafter) challenge all our
best affections?

Thus have the worthy servants of God done in their several generations. The
holy Martyrs, who have forsaken all for his love, and counted meanly of their
lives for his Names sake: yea, chose rather to endure the uttermost torturings,
that cruel persecutors could inflict upon them, rather than do any thing to
his dishonor.

This condemns all such as Use. 1.
are so far from this love of God, as they are no better than haters of God:
Oh, there be none so vile. Yes, we are all such by nature, till God work a
change, Romans 1. 30. and 8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is
not subject to the will of God, nor indeed can be. Saint Paul, Romans 5. Colos.
1. says, we were enemies to God. 2 Chro. 19. 2. Would thou love them that
hate God: 1. Ahab a wicked Idolater, and such as he? so also in the end of the
Second Commandment, see if God call not Idolaters, and such as pretend great
love to him, and are at great cost and pains with him, haters of him.

Such be all Atheists, Heretics, etc. Papists be Idolaters, and great haters
of God, persecuting also his Truth and Saints with fire and sword. Among our
selves be many abominable blasphemers, contemners of God and all goodness: The
better any person, thing, speech, action, or duty is, the more they hate it;
and the worse any thing, or any company is, the better it pleases them.

These be Satan's eldest sons, marching in the Fore-ranke of the Devils Band,
to whom (without rare Repentance) belongs nothing but a fearful expectation of
vengeance, and violent fire to devour such adversaries, Heb. 10. 27.

It condemns all such as love 2.
not God, which indeed are to be ranked with the former haters of God, save
that they do it not in so high a degree. But most will say, they love God, or
else it were pity of their lives, and they defy him, that shall say, they love
not God: What, am I a dog? Thus, if great words would carry it, every body
would be lovers of God: but it is deeds must prove it, not words. And the Holy
Ghost has left us certain and infallible marks, to know the love of God by,
by which if you will be tried, let us briefly hear some of them, and judge
your selves accordingly. They that love God, hate evil, Psalm 97. 10. They
will keep Gods commandments, Ioh. 14. 21. 1 John 5. 3.

They that love God, would that all others did so, and draw as many to God as
they can; as Philip did Nathanael, John 1. 41. Matthew the Publicans, Mat. 9.
to our Savior Christ. Isay 2. 1. and rejoice to see any come home to God by
Repentance, as the Angels of Heaven do.

They will grieve, when they see him wronged or dishonored; as Moses, when he
threw down the Tables; and Phinees, when he ran thorough Zimri and Cozbi. Lots
righteous soul was vexed at the unclean conversation of the Sodomites.

They that love God, will love his Word, being holy and pure as himself, and
containing his good will.

They love his faithful Ministers: he that receives you, receives me, Luke
10.

They will love Gods Children and his Image, wheresoever they see it, 1 John 5.
1. Psalm 16. 3.

They will take pains in his service, as Jacob did night and day in Labans,
for the love he bare to Rachel: and be at cost, as David toward the building
of the Temple; and Mary, with her box of precious ointment poured on our
Savior Christ. Yea, and speedily he will go about what God calls him to; as
Abraham that rose early to offer Isaac, and Hamor, who made speed to get the
Shechemites to yield to the demands of Dinahs brethren, because he so dearly
loved her.

They that love God, are willing and glad to meet him, or hear from him in the
Ordinances of his Word, Prayer, Sacraments, as the wife desires, and is glad
to hear from her absent husband, and to send or receive tokens to him and from
him.

They that love God greatly, are content to suffer for his Names sake; as Paul,
that said, I am not ready to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the Name of
Christ. And that worthy Martyr, that said, Shall I dye but once for my Savior?
I could find in my heart to dye a hundred times for him.

Also they long for his last coming, for their full Redemption, and that they
might be ever with the Lord, as 1 These. 4. 17. As the Church, Reu. 22. Come,
Lord Jesus, come quickly. Or else they long to be with him, in the mean time,
as Paul, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

Now, if these be the true and certain marks of the Love of God, and where
these be wanting, or much more, where the contraries to these be found, there
is no love of God; then must we necessarily conclude against the most part of
people in all places, that there is little love of God abiding in them, as will
appear, if we look over the particulars: which might strike terror into their
hearts, if it were well considered.

For those whose hearts by these marks can bear witness on their sides, let
them labor to increase more and more in this love of God, and see what
privileges God has promised and bequeathed unto them. Psalm. 91. the three
last Verses, Because he has loved me, therefore will I deleuer him, etc. He
shall call upon me, and I will hear him, I will be with him in trouble, I
will be with him, and glorify him: With long life will I satisfy him, and
show him my salvation. And John 14. 21. He that loves me, shall be loved of
my Father, and I will love him, and show mine own self unto him. verse. 23. Yea,
these are they, to whom God has promised his heavenly Kingdom. James 1. 12.
to them that love him.

Thirdly, it condemns those, that love any thing more than they love God; as
father, mother, wife, child, profit, pleasure, friend, yea, or life it self:
which is no other than Idolatry, and to make that our God, which we love above
God, and spiritual Adultery, as St. James calls it, James 4. 4. as a man that
loves a harlot more than his own wife: yet what is more common than this? yea,
the trade of it with the common sort, who for the sake of the things above
named, care not what duties they omit, or what sins they commit against God:
who yet ought to be loved above all, and all things to be loved, in, and for
him, and under him, and as may stand with our love to him, and not otherwise.

Yea, the servants of God, because their love is not perfect, suffer many
things to come in between God and us, and steal our heart and affection in
part from him, and that obedience that we owe unto him: which we ought to
bewail deeply, and labor every day more and more, that his love may be
greater in us, than to any thing; nay, all things else that are in the world
besides. And so much of the Love of God briefly, having taken it but by the way.

CHAP. 3. Of Love to our Neighbor: and first, what it is.
NOw I come to handle the duty of Love to our Neighbor, as that which
necessarily flows from the Love of God. And of this, first, What it is:
secondly, of the Notes it is known by: thirdly, of the Properties of true Love:
and fourthly, of the persons that we ought to love.

1 Love is a sanctified affection of the heart, whereby whosoever is endued
withal, endeavors to do all the good he can to all; but especially, to them
that be nearest unto him.

1. Its an affection seated (as we say) in the heart, as all the other of hate,
hope, fear, joy, grief, etc. as the understanding is in the head. These are
in themselves good, and not evil, being given to Adam in his creation, in whom
they were all pure, well ordered, and in good tune, loving the good, and hating
the contrary, and so in the rest. But ever since the Fall, they are utterly
corrupted: the will and affections have not only lost all their purity, but
the will is become most rebellious, and all the affections disordered, and
turned the contrary way: As this of Love, is turned to the love of evil, to
malice, revenge, and self-love.

2. I say its a sanctified affection: for ere a man can love, he must be
regenerate, and sanctiffed throughout; as in his understanding and will, so in
his affections: which is, when a man is united to Christ by Faith, he is
sanctified by the Spirit; that is, the old and cursed disposition that is in us
by nature, is put away, and a new and contrary frame and disposition of soul,
wherein we were at first created, is brought into us, the understanding
enlightened, the will made plyant and frameable to the will of God, and so the
affections purged and restored to their former integrity in some measure; as to
hate the evil, so to love the good, to love God and our brethren for Gods
cause.

So that no unregenerate or unsanctified man, can love either God, himself, or
any body else. True Love proceeds from a pure heart, good conscience, and faith
unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. from a soul purified by the spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 22. And
Gal. 5. its reckoned among the fruits of the spirit. And 2 Pet. 1. 7. its
reckoned among other graces, Faith, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, etc. so
that one is no more in us naturally, than the rest.

There be many things that the blind world call Love, which are not this grace
that we speak of, nor come in any such account with God. That between the
fornicator and his harlot, is no love but lust; as in Amnon, which turned as
soon into hatred. Between drunkards and thieves, is no love, but conspiracy:
for Love rejoices not in iniquity, but in the truth: that is, in that that is
good.

Nor that natural love of parents to their children. This is in bruit
creatures: the Cow loves, nourishes, and defends her Calfe; the Goose and
Gander tend and brood their young.

Nor that civil love that is between ordinary people in the world, that stands
only in eating and drinking, prating and playing together, which they count
such love and good fellowship, as who so speaks against, and calls for better
spending of the time, is cried out upon, as an enemy to all love, and not to be
suffered. But our Savior Christ, nor the Gospel, comes not to bring such
friendship, but rather debate. Such as that, was among the Heathen, and is only
carnal, whereas true love respects the soul, and that most of all; which is
no whit seen, nor thought of among carnal men.

Unregenerate men cannot love their neighbors; for while they be kind to
their bodies, and have no care of their souls, is this worthy to be called
Love? Its as ones friend or child should have a hurt in the brain, and another
in the heel, and he should carefully look to the heel, and let the brain
putrify.

Carnal Parents, that pamper their childrens bodies, and prank them up brave,
and lay for great portions for them, and suffer their souls to welter in
sin, and dye and perish for want of instruction, admonition, prayer, and holy
example, is this to be called Love? what do they more than Turkish Parents?

The wicked Magistrate, that is very friendly to all the Country, and keeps a
good house all the year, and yet suffers sin to reign, and houses of
disorder to abound in his circuit, the Sabbaths to be profaned, and, like
Gallio, cares for none of those things, call you this Love?

The negligent Minister, that sets on the great Pot, and keeps good Hospitality
among his neighbors, and yet suffers their souls to famish for want of
breaking to them the Bread of life. The carnal neighbor, that to the body of
his neighbor is very kind, but suffers sin to rest upon his soul, and
rather nourishes him therein, than rebukes him thereof; this in the language
of the holy Ghost, is hatred and no love, Leuit. 19. 17.

And what hold is there of unsanctified men's love one to another? They may be
very inward, and great friends now, and on the sudden, upon a small occasion,
fall out, and become deadly enemies. They often go arm in arm to the Alehouse
or Tauern, embracing each other, and stabbe one another ere they come forth.

See a lively picture of this, Judges 9. in that sworn friendship that was
between Abimelech, and the House of Shechem, who yet came shortly to hate each
other so, as they never lin, till they had wrought* each others, destruction.
And no marvel; for even the Heathen could say, That true friendship was
grounded only upon virtue.

Neither can unregenerate men (much less) love the children of God: For there
is a natural enmity between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent, which all are, till they be regenerate; nor can any man love grace in
another, till he be sanctified, and gracious himself.

They may be convinced in conscience, that they be the good servants of God,
and better than themselves, as Saul was of David, Herod of John Baptist, Pilate
of our Savior Christ, pronouncing him Just.

They may be restrained from hurting them, as Laban and Esau from hurting
Jacob, one in his hot pursuit of him, the other in his meeting him with four
hundred men. If a man's ways please God, he will make his enemies at peace
with him, Proverbs 16.

As Daniel was preserved safe among the Lions, and the three Children took no
hurt in the fire.

Nay, they may do them good, as Cyrus did the Jews, restoring them to their
land and liberty, and furnishing them with all necessaries to the building the
City and Temple of Jerusalem.

Ahashuerosh also and Artashashte to Ezra and Nehemiah, and by them to the
people of God. But they do it, as Caiaphas, that uttered that prophecy, not
of himself, but as he was high Priest that year. So these are used of God to
such purposes: As the Ravens that brought Elias bread and pottage in the
morning, and again at even.

But love them they cannot, at least, not for their godliness sake. They may
do a man outwardly some good, and it is not amiss to take it, yet its not good
to be too much beholding to them.

And what hold is there of their good will? If they cry Hosanna now, they may
cry Crucify him by and by. If as Acts 14. 18* 19. they so highly esteem us,
as to be ready to deifie us, yet by and by, upon a lying report, they will be
ready to stone us. As Herod reverenced John Baptist, and yet at the persuasion
of Herodias, cut off his head.

David says, it was his familiar, that ate bread with him, and took counsel
with him, that yet lift up his heel against him, Psalm. ^. 1. 9. They are gone,
and hide their heads. If the multitude go the other way, or the times begin to
turn any thing dangerous* when they have most need of them they are gone.
Nay, no bond of benefits bestowed, no nor of nature it self, is strong enough
to bind such a man sure to the child of God. Our Savior Christ made Judas
his Disciple, an Apostle, of his own Family, Table, and Mess, made him his
Purse-bearer, and yet how* villanously did he betray him into the hands of his
vtterest enemies? Iehoiada preserved the life* of Ioash* when all his brethren
were slain, h^lp him to the Kingdom, and was a* guide to him as long as he
lived with him; yet how ungratefully and wrongfully did he cause his good son
Zechariah, a Prophet, to be put to death?

And for the bonds of nature never so near, our Savior Christ foretold that
which experience has proved often true, Matthew. 10. 21. That the brother shall
betray the brother, father the son, and children shall rise up against their
parents, to get them put to death. There is no hold of any unregenerate man,
but* he may prove a persecutor; therefore what (...) to be given to his love?

Use. This shows the miserable state of unregenerate men, that they can
neither love God, themselves, nor any body else, while they are in this case:
what should such a man do in the world? One would think it should make him
weary of himself. If he would consider, and believe it, so it would. Oh beg of
God, by his blessed Word and holy Spirit, to work a mighty work of change in
your hearts, and to sanctify you throughout, that from hence you may be able
to love God, your own selves, and others in a right manner; till which time,
you cannot so much as love your own wife and children, as you ought to do.

2. It teaches also Gods people, not to trust too much to such men and their
love: live peaceably with them, use them kindly, accept kindness from them,
but open not our selves too far to them, lean not too much on them, lest
they prove like Egypt, a broken reed, that will run into our hand, and they
prove like a sliding foot and a broken tooth. For if they be pent, they will
burst: They are like a Jade, that will draw while its going, but is not sure.
If the time alter, there is no hold, but he may betray thee: As Pilate, who
knew our Savior Christ to be innocent, and that all was wrongfully and of
malice that was done against him, and he sought many ways to rid his hands
of him, and to save his life, yet when they urged him, that he was not Caesar's
friend, if he let him go, then he passed sentence of death against him.

Object. But some will say, I am not of your mind, I will trust my honest
neighbor before these runners to Sermons, none will sooner deceive one than
they. I know one that came from a Sermon, and went and hired his neighbors
house over his head.

Answ. I deny not but as ever there have been, so now be some, that make a show
of godliness, and deny the power of it: and then the world is no wiser, than
to judge and say so of all professors; which is a most foul wrong, and a false
thing. For there are to be found, that dare not deal unfaithfully, but say as
Joseph, How should I do this wickedness, and sin against God? they have the
Spirit of God within them, and the fear of God in their hearts to bridle them,
which the carnal person has not, nor any thing that one may warrant will tie
and hold him. And this even the men of the world know: for they will put the
matters of greatest trust into their hands. I have known a very carnal
Master, that having diverse ruffianly servants that he delighted in, and a
couple of sober Christian men; and to these he committed his keys, and
matters wherein greatest faithfulness was required, which* yet he heartily
affected not, but they were fit to serve his turn. So in matters of
Arbitrament, they will put their case to such as be of best report for
godliness in the Country, persuading themselves, that they will deal
uprightly and with a good conscience. And the truth is, he is not worthy the
name of a Christian, and its pity of his life, that will not do better than
any carnal man in the world.

It follows in the description of love, whereby whosoever is endued
therewith: for its not to be found in every bush, but its rare; and he that
has it, has received it from the Father of lights, and its a gift of Gods
Spirit. Look for it therefore from above.

Endeavors to do, etc. So that howsoever love is in the heart, yet it lies
not still, nor sits idle, but is working* like the good huswife, Prou. 3. 1.
both by words and deeds, to soul and body: therefore that love* that is all
within in the heart, and none in the hand and life, is a dead love, a carcass,
like the dead Faith that St. James speaks of, that is without works, and like
bad men's love to God, which is without obedience to his commandments.

Endeavors to do, etc. Puts Wishing well is the pulse of love, and heates
wheresoever love is alive.
forth it self, and does what it can, though not what it would, creeps where
it cannot go* wishes it could, grieves that it cannot, gives two mites, a cup
of water, etc.

And indeed, what we do here is rather endeavor, than any* great matter that
wre attain to, especially at the first. And a true endeavor with increase,
God accepts, Hos. 6. 3. 1 Cor. 28. 7.

It commands all the powers and abilities of the soul, to further the good of
the Beloved, to whom it wishes all good: therefore the eye sees, the tongue
speaks, the foot walks for the good and benefit of the party beloved: Why
Love will have it so. The memory is a faithful remembrancer, the mind plods
and counsels, the affections pursue all purposes and occasions for his help,
all other things neglected, Why Love will have it so. Nay, patience is enjoined
to bear all the wrong that such one does, compassion must pity all the wants
that such one has, humility and modesty give way to any thing that he
requires. Why Love will have it so. Love is like the great wheel of the
clock, all are turned about when that stirs: it sets on work all the other
graces in the soul to their several works.

[To do good.] So that love does no hurt, its contrary to its nature;
whatsoever hurt is done to souls, bodies, goods, names, Love may wash her
hands of it, as none of her doing; but whatsoever good is done, that is of her.

[To do good.] Love contents not it self to do no evil, but labors to do
good: the harmless, yet unfruitful fig tree was accursed. Such only as have
done good, will stand on the right hand at the last day.

[To all.] For though brotherly kindness be to the Saints, yet Love, 2 Pet.
1. 7. reaches to all, near and far off, strangers, enemies, within, and
without the Pale of the Church, Turks and Pagans, we must pray for them, and
do them any good if they come in our way, as the Samaritan did to the Jew
fallen among thieves, Luke 10.

[But especially to them that be nearest.] So God gives leave, nay
commandment, that love begin at our selves and ours, and so proceed. First,
seek our own salvation, then others; our own bodily preservation from
danger, then others. First, begin with our own family, 1 Timothy 5. 8. then to
our kindred, 1 Timothy 5. 4. then to our own Town, then to strangers, as far as
we can, and God requires no more.

If any therefore, having good gifts, resort to other folks houses to repeat
Sermons, and never do any such duty among their own company (which I have
heard of some) these are justly to be suspected of pride and hypocrisy.

They also, that in outward things prefer strangers before their own kindred,
and kinsmen before children, do not well. To bestow upon Copes-mates that
please them, or spend on lewd companions, or be surety for them or any other,
to the hinderance or undoing of wife and family, is not Love, but folly and
cruelty.

[Nearest also in the spiritual bond.] For we must especially love the
household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10.

Quest. Whether should we love our natural or spiritual kindred best?

Answ. No doubt, the Saints before our natural kindred, that be but carnal, as
our Savior Christ did, Who is my brother? He that does the will of God, he is
my brother, sister, and mother: yet we must help our kindred, whom Gods Word
binds us to provide for, as children and parents in their necessity, though
not godly, before the Saints, if both be in equal need together, because
these be most specially committed to our care. As a rich bad man, and a godly
poor man be at our house together, I must love the godly best, and he must
have the highest room in my heart, but yet I may and must set the ungodly rich
man highest at my table, because God is the author of degrees among men, and so
the author of order, not of confusion. So is it in the other case of my
natural and spiritual kindred.

This is the virtue so often commanded, and so highly commended in the holy
Scriptures; commanded, Romans 12. 10. and 13. 8. commended, Col. 3. 14. called
the bond of perfectness. It binds up all the duties that we owe to our
neighbor, which are many; holds them together, as the band does the
Fagot-stickes. It makes every duty easy; as where this is not, every duty is
irksome, nothing comes well off hand. It ties societies together and families.
Its the strength of Kingdoms, Cities, Corporations, and Villages: Oh how it
keeps out evil, and sets up good; by it small things have proved great, and
for want of it, great things have come to nothing.

In a Town, when chief men hold together, what evil can stand against them?
what good may they not effect? As on the contrary, when some would pull down
houses of mis-rule, and others, to cross them, and out of spleen to them,
shall strive to uphold them: when some would bring in the Ministry of the
Word, and others oppose it, how must not the Devil needs have his throne in
such a place?

In a Family, when husband and wife both draw the right way, Gods worship goes
up in that house, children and servants be well governed, the outward state
prospers. But when they be divided and disagree, prayers be interrupted, no
good can get forward: when one would go to the Sermon, the other is against
it; one would govern the children, the other cockers them, nothing can do
well: for the band is broken that should hold all together, and make all
strong. Even servants that agree not, nay, horses if they draw not together,
the work cannot get forward.

2 Its the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 8. Gal. 5. 13, 14.

3 Its a very comely thing in the eyes of God and men, only hateful to the
Devil, to whose Kingdom this is a great enemy. Its very precious, and of most
fragrant smell: Also is very fruitful in all good wheresoever it is, as
appears, Psalm. 133. the whole Psalm.

4 Love is the beneficial virtue; other virtues benefit our selves, but this
does good to others. Faith draws all from Christ to us. Love lays out all it
has for others good: as the Sun that shines forth his light to others,
having it for that end, and not for it self. Faith is like the bung of the
barrel, that takes in the beer or wine; Love is like the tap, that lets it
forth, to the benefit of them that need. If a man be never so full of
knowledge and other good gifts, and have not this tap, others may starve for
all that; and he himself is but a sounding brass, and a tinkling cymball.
We are not borne for our selves, nor our Talents given us to hide: but the
perfection of all our gifts, spiritual and temporal, is the well employment
of them for the good of others. The useful man, is the happy man, that keeps
the best house, and most drink of his cup, especially in spiritual things.

5 This is the virtue that makes us most like to God; for he is love, and
continually exercised in doing good to all, even to the ends of the world: yea,
to his enemies, though specially to his children, to souls, to bodies, and
every way, and he is not weary to do good, even to such unworthy ones as we
are. So that when we be full of love; giving here, lending there, forgiving
this wrong, and passing by that injury, requiting good for ill has been done
to us, when we be instructing, counselling, admonishing, comforting, praying
for any that need, we are like unto God in our measure, and like to our Lord
Jesus Christ, who went about doing good, Acts 10. 38. So must we walk in love,
Ephesians. 5. 2. Love must be our continual walk, and we must never be out of
it: for then we are out of our way. All our ways and works toward our
brethren, must be in love, and savor of love. All our life must breathe love:
as when we come in heaven, it shall be the common air we shall breathe and
draw in. So that what is love, but the life and soul of the world, and that,
without which all things else are nothing? 1 Cor. 13.

Oh that I could so paint out the face of this lovely Virtue, and set it before
you, that every soul that sees it, may fall into a deep love and liking
therewithal*

But alas, how lamentable a thing is it, that so excellent and necessary a
virtue, should be so scarce and rare to be found among men as it is, and that
in these days of the Gospel, and when the God of peace and love dwells amongst
us, whose people we profess our selves to be! Alas, its as it were banished out
of the earth, and departed from the sons of men, and found but at a few hands,
and there but scantly. But pride and contention, oppression, deceit, malice and
revenge, and all contraries to love, have taken possession of all places, of
most hearts: yea, even among true Christians what cold affection, what
hollownesse, strangeness, hard surmises, readiness to fall out for trifles?
little power to forgive and to pass by wrongs, to overcome evil with good,
which yet God does to us every day. Its easy to hear, read, and pray; let us
show the fruit of them in love.

Oh let us every one suffer our selves to be provoked, yea, and overcome in
this, that we labor to be possessed of this grace of Love, in whom it has not
hitherto taken place: and they, in whom its begun, that they would increase in
it more, as 1* These* 4. 10. Hereby it shall appear, that we regard Gods
commandment, we shall do much good, and strengthen the places where we live*

We shall know we are not of the Devil, but of God, 1 John 3. 10. and shall be
like unto him; and what should we desire so much, as to represent our Maker,
and to have his Image shining forth in us?

And the more love God has showed to us, the more let us show to others; the
more he has given us of temporal or spiritual gifts, give the more to our
brethren, Freely ye have received, freely give. The more God has forgiven us,
the more let us forgive others, the more patient and slow to wrath he has
been with us, the more patience see we show toward our brethren. And here
with let us stay our selves, when we find readiness to be provoked, or to
renenge; and think it a most unreasonable thing, that God forgiving us a
thousand talents, we should catch and hold our neighbor by the throat for an
hundred pence. If this grace of Love be in us and abound, we shall honor God
much, and our holy profession, get a good report, and much love in the Church
of God, and further our own account against that day, and provide for the
increase of our glory in the Kingdom of Heaven.

CHAP. 4. Of the Notes, whereby love to our Neighbor may be known.
NOw to this end, that none may deceive themselves, but may try whether they
have in them this grace of Love or no, or in what measure, I will set down some
of the chief acts, effects, or fruits of it, as notes whereby it may well be
known, as a tree by the fruits.

1. Love is not left handed, but interprets, and takes things at the best. As
it commends what is plainly good, so it interprets favorably what is
doubtful, until it know the contrary; speeches, or actions of men, toward
our selves or others, if they may be well taken, it will not take them ill. As
the mother, when the child cries, says a pin pricks it, it has the fret, or
breeds teeth, she is loath to say, its nothing but frowardness, and so to chide
or fight. When Joseph's brethren, out of malice, had fold him into Egypt, and
afterward were afraid he would remember it, what construction makes he of it?
God sent me hither aforehand to provide for you. As our Savior Christ did,
when his Disciples were so sleepy in the garden: though he mildly rebukes them
for it, yet he favorably helps it, saying, The spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak.

Yea, if a thing be plainly evil yet Love will make it no worse than it is. It
will not say, it was done deliberately, and of set purpose, when it was done
rashly; maliciously, when it was done weakly only, and in temptation. For one
may do injury to a bad action, and its better to think and speak a little
better of it, than worse than it is. Always provided, this be understood, not
of palpable, notorious foul evils, nor of continued courses in sinning; for
what good or charitable construction can be made of these? When such therefore
be plainly reproved, and told their danger, and they cry out, Oh you may not
judge: Why, what can Charity it self judge, but that you are of the Devil,
and in the state of damnation for the present, and without sound Repentance for
ever? Its therefore no property of Love, but a foul fault, and a sign of a
corrupt conscience to extenuate and blanch foul sins in bad persons.

2. It will depart from his own right, rather than break peace; as our Savior
Christ, Matthew 17. 27. Abraham to Lot* Genesis 13. 9. If thou will take the left
hand, I will take, etc. As it will give way in conference to one that is
stiff, though one know he has the truth, so it be in small matters: After
offenses, it will soon yield and seek reconciliation, though it were meet the
other should seek to him. It stands not upon terms: it will lay down the
bucklers, go on the lower ground, yield the way or the wall to those, that it
were meet should yield it to him. For why? it more prizeth and esteems Love,
than small matters.

3 It does no hurt, its against the nature of it so to do, neither in life,
chastity of our neighbor, goods, or good name. See this in the two chief
patterns of Love: in God toward his, and parents toward their children, who
do nor can do them no hurt, at least, parents, in their conceit.

4 It seeks not her own things, but others as well, as is commanded, 1 Cor.
10. 24.

5 It provoke nor exasperateth not, but strives rather to please, as far as
it may with good conscience: As we see in a loving mother toward her child, so
also in whomsoever it is truly found.

6 Its not easily provoked, 1 Cor. 13. 5. but forbeares, forgiues, puts up,
etc. which is well seen in God, and a natural mother with her unquiet child.

It will cover natural infirmities, such things as be little weaknesses in our
brethren, yet not done of set purpose, nor growing into extremities, but only
natural defects. As some be a little too quick, some a little too slow, some
see a fault, and be a little too ready to speak, others somewhat too slow to
speak, or reprove a fault. Some be a little too fine, some a little too homely
and plain; if they were not all so much on either hand, it were better. Some
be somewhat too earnest in their business, if it were not altogether so much,
it were better; yet not much amiss, and its their nature, who be yet very
gracious: Some be a little too negligent, some be a little too merry, some a
little too solemn: these and such like Love will cover, or else nothing. Love
will not standvpon them, rebuke or reproach them, or deal hardly with them for
these, but wisely bear with them, and in love cure them, if it can.

As for example: a wife, a godly woman, good houswife, loving and duetifull in
good measure, but somewhat cursed, and quick of speech, or not so cleanly as
were to be desired; a good husband in love will bear with these, and be
thankful for the maine that he finds in her.

So a woman has a husband, good in all the substantial points of the husbands
duty, but he is somewhat too glum, not so affable and ch^arly as might be, or
whose nature will not suffer him to use such complement^ to his wife, as some
can do with facility; Love will reach her to bear with this. A servant is
very trusty, religious, and careful to please, only somewhat slow; the Master
or Mistress must not rebuke him too often, too openly, too sharply for it, as a
thing they can hardly remedy: no perfection to be expected in any. If you can
cure it by a loving and private admonishion sometimes, do.

So a Neighbor conferres with his Neighbor, and he is a little too quick
and harsh: but love will not see it, but considers it as a natural infirmity;
therefore will not exasperate him, or be put out of patience by him, answering
him tartly again, but passes it by, and goes on in kind and friendly manner.

Love will also cover and put up wrongs done unto it, not seeing small ones,
passing by somewhat greater; as considering he himself is a man, and so
subject to offend his Neighbor, and so may stand in need of his pardon. As
also that he offends God daily, and would be glad to obtain pardon;
therefore he must pardon his Neighbor, or else can have small hope or
boldness to come before him for mercy; and this often, yea unto seventy
times seven times.

If they be greater matters, yet Love will easily accept of indifferent
conditions of agreement. If they be so great as they so endanger our name and
estate as they are not to be passed by, then its lawful to flee to the
Magistrate, and take the benefit of Law; yet so, as Love will teach the party
to lay away malice, and to forgive the revenge. And in going to Law, these two
Caueats must be observed: First, that it be not for trifles. These should
rather be forgiven, 1 Cor. 6. 7. Why rather suffer ye not wrong? Secondly,
that it be the last Remedy, when all other ways of more peaceable agreement
have been tried. It must be as the cutting off a member, when it cannot be
healed otherwise.

Hitherto belongs also that Love will teach us to hide and cover folks faults
from the world, except we have a cause and calling to speak thereof, but
rather of their virtues.

7. Lastly, Love is bountiful, beneficial, and helpefull, not keeping what it
has to it self, but ready to distribute and communicate to the good of
others, whether spiritual or temporal gifts. Spiritual; for love begins at
the soul, and does good to that first, of children, servants, neighbors. It
will communicate any gift it has to them that need it, taking to heart their
spiritual wants, instructing the ignorant, counselling the doubtful,
comforting the afflicted, admonishing them that be out of the way, exhorting
the^ that begin to faint or stagger in the way, and praying for all.

So for outward things, it will cause men to give to the poorest that are to be
help by Alms, as they be able: and lend freely to them that be a degree
above the poorest, which having a Trade, and skill and will to follow it, yet
want stock to employ themselves and their company. These a man is as much bound
in conscience to lend unto, according to their ability and honesty to pay
again, as to give a piece of bread or a penny to a poor miserable Creature,
Mat. 5. 42. Deuteronomy. 15. 8. By this shore, many a reeling house has been kept
from falling flat to the ground. By this help, many have lived handsomely, and
brought up their families, that else must have come to uttermost misery.

To the wealthy that have no need of us, yet to be neighbourly and friendly,
in lending or exchanging Courtesies with them! To inuit them sometimes to us,
and to go to them being invited: And in their sickness or heaviness to
visit them* and comfort them in the best manner we can.

Use. Now seeing Love is such a thing, and that these be the fruits of it, If
we look abroad among men, we shall be forced to say there is but little love
in the world: for, where be these Properties spoken of, to be found? as may
appear in going over them.

1. Who takes not things in the worst part, hardly construing men's words and
actions; doubtful ones, it may be not bad, taking them to be evil; those
that be bad, making them worse? Thus the Jews mis-interpreted our Savior
Christ, John 2. Destroy this Temple, etc. which afterward cost him his life. 1.
Chro. 19. 3. How was David's good and loving Action toward Hanun wickedly
mis-construed? which cost the lives of many thousands. Old Eli offended in
this, 1 Samuel 1. 14. judging Hannah drunk, because she prayed, and her voice
not heard. What more common than to say, Men do that they do to be seen, and
to win credit, when yet they do it syncerely, and to please God? Or, having
invited one to our house, and he comes not, to think or say he does it out of
some spleen, or want of good will. Many a time in a year are we forced to
recant, and with shame say, I thought it had been worse meant than now I see it
was. This is the cause of innumerable contentions and breaches among men.

2. For departing from men's right, who does it, but stand out stiffely to the
utmost? This is an usual speech, It is my right, and I will have it. I ask no
more but my right, and that I will not lose. This is thought but reasonable,
and he is thought an honest man that will have but his right. But its an ill
speech and resolution, whether it be in conference: If a man know he has the
truth, though it be but in small matters, yet he will hold it out, though the
other be never so peremptory, till they fall flat out, whereas in small truths
its better to give in; Or in dealings, covenants, bargains, bonds, men will
have their right: and yet herein extreme right may be extreme wrong.

Always provided, that we give not away other folks right, especially Gods.
Moses would not yeed a hoof, Exodus 10. 9, yet most men, stiff in their own,
will yield enough of Gods right, can cut large thongs out of that. They will
not let their servants play one hour on the six days, yet can let them play
on the seventh what they will. So are sins against the first Table made small
account of, in comparison of the breaches of the second.

3 Whereas Love hurts no way, whence comes all the hurt and mischief that is
done among men; stabbing, killing, fighting, quarrelling, ^rayling, reuiling,
scolding, etc. all the defilings of men's wives, children, and servants? So for
bribery, theeuery, cousenage, false weights, false wares, etc* slandering,
defaming, backbiting, mocking, and such like: All these abound every where. I
am sure Love does none of them. Love was not at the doing of these*

And for seeking others good as well as our own, O Lord, where is this? But in
all men's courses* the greatest part, yea, and among Christians, they seek
themselves too much, and others too little.

4 Also that men will so readily provoke one another by words and deeds, they
care not how.

5 For being provoked. Lord be merciful to us, who can bear any thing? but
taunt for taunt, quip for quip; he shall have as good as he brings. If there
be a little trespass done them, Oh how men stand upon it, and study revenge?
Hence the innumerable suits in this land, many thousands in a year for mere
trifles, that ten times as much is spent in them as is sued for.

A shame for England to be so contentious, having the Gospel of peace amongst
us. Oh, men's stomachs be up straight, all their blood is in their face, or else
look as pale as ashes, or secretly practicing to revenge. Hand on the dagger
straight; on the top of the house by and by, and fly in one another faces for
trifles: so far off are we from forgiving till seventy times, as our Master
Christ has commanded. So short spirited, as we can bear nothing; and that
which is worse, if we have taken up a displeasure once, its not easily laid
down, but Sun after Sun* Moon after Moon, yea some, year after year
can carry it about with them: quickly provoked, but hardly pacified, especially
truly. It may be, some will not be seen to live in open onmity, yet have
hearts unsound, and full of secret grudgings, that cause open breakings out
upon every occasion. Men can bear nothing, but are straight carried after
revenge.

6 And for speaking of our neighbors virtues, and hiding their faults, without
just cause, and calling to the contrary, where is that to be found? Nay, the
contrary is most woefully common; little of men's virtues spoken, except a word
or two, to make way for a But, and to speak of their faults: and these we
delight to be much in, as the Crow that seeks out the carrion, and the Hog
that delights to lie in the mire, rather than upon the green grass: like the
Fly, that if there be but one galled platt on the horses back, delights
rather to sit on that, than on all the whole body besides.

7 And for the last, where is communicating of spiritual good things? Parents
bring up their children brave, but how few catechize, instruct, admonish them,
pray with them, and for them?

So for servants, their governors give them meat, drink, and wages, and hold
them to work on the six days, but little care how they spend the Sabbath, or
for instructing and examining them, calling them to reading and prayer: and
what love call you this, but such as you show to your beasts?

So for neighbors, what Christian conference is there, what admonishing them
that be out of the way, but rather let them run on, and talk of them behind
their backs, and that often times with rejoicing, which is fearful?

What consolation is given to the heavy? who lays their case to heart? how
few are able to speak a word in season, and to comfort fitly? but utter vain
and frothy speeches to them, fitter to do hurt than good. And for such as be
troubled in conscience for their sins, alas how few have any skill of such
things? nay, many will rather deride, and make a scoff at them, saying, they
have run to Sermons so long, till they will go out of their wits. Who
prouokes one another to that that is good? but every man says, Who made me my
brothers keeper? Nay, men are so far from these, as they seek all they can
to drive others from God and goodness, by their cursed counsel and wicked
example, and by all the discouragements they can devise, of threats, mockes,
and taunts. And is not this fearful? where is true Love in the mean time?
that is a great way off.

And for outward things, how backward are most in giving to the poor any more
than needs must? what contentions at making of rates, though God has freed us
from the chargeablenesse of the Legal service, and has freed us from that
intolerable burden of the Rogues, that swarmed like Locusts all over the Land;
whose burden lay on us very heavy; as they that be of years can remember,
which yet yielded small comfort, the greatest part of them being a cursed
generation of idle and sinful Varlets: which seeing God has maruellously
and mercifully rid us of, what encouragement should it be to us, to relieve our
own true poor?

And for lending, where is this in use? but rather, as if God had never given
precept of it, or as it were a Statute repealed; and that is out of date, so is
this duty of lending. That cursed and cruel trade of Usury, has eaten up,
and banished out of the Country this Christian duty of free-lending.

Some rich men are so grim and so austere, as a poor man dares not speak to
them for such a thing. And indeed, how few be there, that have any thing to
lend at any time?

Some lend out all so near to Usury, as they have not to lend, but borrow
rather: Or if a poor man do any work for them, they cannot pay them of a
good while, they be so bare. For as soon as any money comes in, it must out
again straight, as if it would burn a hole in the Cupbord, or would be half
an undoing to them, if it lay there but a week or two.

Others are ever purchasing, and so keep themselves bare, and in debt, and then
they whine at every charge, and wrangle at rates, and are never fit or ready to
lend, or to any good use. Such bring a curse upon themselves, making themselves
borrowers, when they might be lenders, Deuteronomy. 28. 44.

Others be so miserable, as though they have it, yet they will not lend. So for
the last duty of neighbourly dealing, inuiting, visiting, these are decayed;
so that we may believe in all these respects, these be the times foretold,
Matthew. 24. 12. wherein Love should wax cold.

Yet indeed there is a great deal of counterfeit love, of fauning, crouching,
and congeying, of pot-companionship, and joining together in evil.

A great deal of self-love also, making others faults great, and our own
small, or none; nay, sometimes making them virtues: extenuating and making
light of the virtues of others, highly esteeming our own; seeking our selves
in all our dealings and courses, with little regard of our neighbors: which
self-love the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 2. foretells shall be in the last times, and
sets it in the forefront, as the cause of many other evils that follow.

Now let every man examine himself in particular touching these things, and so
make use to his own soul for comfort, or the contrary.

But who shall not find himself failing in every one of them? whereby we have
much cause to be humbled; and the courses of the common sort are wholly
contrary to all these properties of true Love, whereby they may conclude
fearfully against themselves.

CHAP. 5. Causes of the want of Love to our Neighbor.
NOw to this end, that every man may the better see how to mend that that is
amiss, let us a little look into the causes of this want of Love, and what are
the hindrances of the fruits thereof. The maine and general cause is an evil
heart, pestered with self-love, and many lusts that be contraries to Love.

1 More particularly. Want or weakness of Faith is one great cause. When our
Savior Christ told his Apostles, they must for give till seventy times seven
times, what said they? Luke 17. 4, 5. Increase our Faith. Assurance of Gods
love to us, in pardoning our many sins, and giving his Son Jesus Christ, and
assurance of eternal Life, makes us love again, and both to give and forgive;
which are two principal dueries, and fruits of Love. Pride, and the following
Vices are hinderers of the exercise of Love.

2 Pride, whereby men think highly of themselves, and meanly of others; think
they may speak or do any thing, but others may do nothing to them. Only by
pride do men make contentien, Prou. 13. 10. Humbleness causes love, Ephesians.
4. 2. Pride makes men think themselves so wise and good, as every body should
say as they say, do as they do, and after a sort do homage to them; if they
do not, then the peace is broken straight.

Pride will not endure a reproof: therefore being told of a fault, they fall
out deeply; as Ioash with Zechariah, Ahab and Iezabel with Eliah, Herod with
John.

3 Covetousness is another: this makes men contend for trifles, the least
damage done him is thought so great (looking on it in a false glass) as its
sufficient to break Love, and cause a suite.

It causes men to oppress, to use false weights and sleights, etc. It hinders
both mercy to the poor, and all other neighbourly offices of inuiting, and the
like.

4 Envy hinders Love exceedingly. When one enuies at the prosperity of another
in whatsoever kind, of temporal or spiritual good things; As Labans sons did
at Jacob, which changed their countenances toward him, and made him weary of
his place. Cain, that envied that Abels sacrifice was better accepted than his,
and Esau that Jacob was blessed, Ismael, that Isaac was the son of the Promise:
what breach of Love, and woeful fruits followed of all these?

5 Frowardness and shortness of spirit breaks Love very often: for angry words
stir up strife, Prou. 15. 1.

6 These days of peace are an occasion, through men's corruption, that men grow
hollow and strange, and to set light by one another. Troubles cause men to make
much of each other, and cling together: as the sheep, that out of danger, and
in a fair day, scatter themselves over a field, in a storm, or when they see
a dog come, run all together.

These and such like, be woeful Effects.
causes of the want of Love, which also bring forth as lamentable effects every
where, both in Church and Commonwealth. What woeful breaches, hideous
contentions, what hard measure and wrongs are offered, what enmities and
oppositions, to the hazard of the Church, danger of the Commonwealth, and
overthrow of the prosperity of many Parishes?

What ruin brings this want of Love upon many Families?

And among particular persons, what breakings out both in word and deed, to the
dishonor of God and Religion, and the undoing each other many times, both in
soul and state? to the disgrace of the Gospel, and ill example of the
beholders, and hurt to their own souls, by keeping them from, and disabling
them for the right performance of holy duties, which cause cold prayers, and
those not heard; and hereby either kept from the Sacrament, as many times it is
(Oh fearful thing to be spoken) or else slubber it over, and come with
festered hearts, and so lose the benefit: nay, by such unworthy coming, they
provoke the wrath of God, and eat their condemnation as much as in them lies;
but often times they eat and drink their judgment, a sore sickness, and may
be, their own death, or the death of wife, or some child that is dear to
them, to teach them and others by their example the price of such boldness.

Now seeing these things be so, the Lord give us every one hearts, where we
find our selves faulty, to humble our selves, and crave mercy, and to labor
to be reformed in this point. Therefore, first, let us labor to pluck up these
noisome weeds out of our hearts, that this precious plant of Love may grow
therein.

1 Strive against Infidelity, and labor to get Faith, and the increases
thereof, if by Gods grace we have it already.

2 In humbleness of mind, labor to esteem others better than our selves.

3 Labor for a moderate affection toward these outward and base things in
comparison, setting more by Love, and the sweet fruits of it, than by them all;
and therefore much more, than by small trifles.

4 Avoid envy. Is our eye evil, because our Masters eye is good? we have
more than we might look for.

5 Strive against techinesse and shortness of spirit. Think what a base lust,
and sinful distemper it is, how it exalts folly, and how ill it becomes us,
and what an enemy it is to true Love.

And labor we, that this love to our brethren may show forth it self in all
good fruits, in judging the best, departing from our right, not provoking, nor
being easily provoked, but forbearing and forgiving offenses and wrongs, and
communicating of what God has imparted to us of any kind. and that for these
Reasons; weigh them well.

1 First, God requires it of Reasons.
us, who is Love, 1 John 4. 8. and if we perform it, we do not so much serve
our neighbor, as please God, who takes it to himself; and in neglecting this,
we neglect not our neighbor only, but God, who takes himself wronged in
this behalf.

2 Our neighbor is our own flesh, and every one has some part of the Image
of God in him, or upon him.

3 The Word abundantly calls for it, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper puts us
strongly in mind of it.

4 No better argument, that we are in the light, love God, and are Christ's
Disciples, be translated from death to life, be endued with that excellent
grace of true Faith, than this, that we truly love one another, John 13. 34,
35. 1 John, 3. 14. As a King is not known by his apparel, great company with
him, etc. which may be some meaner man, but by his Crown; so is not a
Christian known by his hearing Sermons, or good words, but by his Love.

5 The beauty of a Christian is Love: he is the best Christian, that loves
most, whose lips feed most, whose branches spread widest.

6 And for forgiving wrongs, what should we do else? God forgiues us many and
great debts, and ill dealings with him, and shall we be ready to revenge every
petty trespass? See Matthew. 18. 34. what became of him that did so. God bids us
ask forgiveness on no other condition, than that we forgive our neighbor,
Mark 11. 25, 26. And no better sign, that a man is forgiven of God, than to
forgive our neighbor; and no man can be assured of that, but he will forgive.
Let us therefore of the sea of compassion that God has shed out upon us, let
fall some drops of it upon our neighbor.

Also we may stand in need of our neighbors forgiveness: for who lives, and
is not subject to offend his neighbor one way or other? No cause therefore we
should seek revenge, which every Turk, yea, every beast can do; but pass by
offenses, which is the glory of a man, Prou. 19. 11. Keep out anger therefore
in such cases if we can, or if we be not so strong, yet let it not rest in
us, sowring in our hearts: Let not the sun go down upon it. The world
counts this base, but indeed its truly honorable. Its the honor of God,
Micah 7. 18. and so it makes us like him. Let us therefore labor to do thus;
and not a little or some few times, but get a long skirted Love, which will
cover a multitude of offenses, as St. Peter says, 1 Pet. 4. 8. or, as Prou.
10. 12. All trespasses.

7 And for distributing things temporal or spiritual as we have, great
reasons there be. God gives to all, both good and bad: he has given us what
we have; (for what have thou, that thou have not received?) and given us them
to be good stewards, and dispensers thereof, to the good of others, 1. Pet. 4.
10.

And the more we give, the more we have, and not the less; it increases in
the giving, as the loaves in our Savior* Christ's hands, especially in
spiritual things; yea, in temporal: therefore giving is compared to sowing,
which in good ground is usually with increase. Therefore a worthy Minister upon
occasion asking his wife, whether there were any money in the house, she
answered, that she knew but of one three pence; Well, says he, we must go
sow: that is, give something to the poor, knowing that to be the way of
bringing in, Prou. 11. 24, 25. Deuteronomy. 15. 10. The best thrift is to be
merciful, and the way to beggary in a a man's self, or his posterity, is to be
pinching.

And to conclude all, Love in the exercise of it, will bring much peace to our
consciences, and comfort us not a little on our deathbed, that we have not
lived to our selves, but to be useful to many, especially to souls. It
procures us love in the places we live in, and in the Church of God a good
report.

No man is well beloved, though he have good things in him, if he be not
loving. Oh, say they, he is a good honest man, I think, but he is a harsh
censurer, contentious, so hasty that no man can tell how to speak to him, he
is a strait man, lives all to himself, few the better for him by counsel,
admonition, encouragement, and the like: and so for outward things, very
close-handed and near.

But if a man be full of love, it will procure him love again, he shall be
well spoken of while he lives, and mourned for when he dies, which is a good
mercy of God, and the temporal reward of righteousness and love. Pro. 10. 7.
The memorial of the Just shall be blessed. Thus they wept for Dorcas, and
showed the coats she had made, Acts 9. 39. But a proud, churlish, close man,
shall live without being desired, and dye without being mourned for.

These would have love, good will, and credit in the Country and Town they
live in, but they will not seek by this way to procure it, will not be at the
cost, be not useful, liberal, etc. let them never look for it: Let them
win it, if they will wear it. Others care not, so they may scrape all to
themselves, what the world say of them; let the good name go which way it
will. But these are base minded persons, and they carry little better than a
curse about them, while they live.

CHAP. 6. Properties of true Love.
NOw yet for our further direction in this point of Love, I will set down some
such Properties, as the Scripture requires in it; as that it must be mutual,
common, sincere without feigning, fervent, pure, constant; all gathered out of
1 Pet. 1. 22.

First, it must be mutual, it must 1.
come from one to another mutually, and be at every hand: as God commands
others to love us, so us to love others. so that none is free from this duty.

Many will look for a great deal of Love from others, that care not how
little they show themselves; would be visited, but care not to visit others:
would have their own virtues commended, will not do so by others; have their
infirmities covered, but will not do so: would not be provoked, yet will
provoke: would not that others should be quickly angry with them, yet they will
with others.

Alas, this is great weakness: for its a more blessed thing to give, than to
receive, Acts 20. 35. And we should rather strive to go before, and set
others in our debt by love, and be on the forehand.

A good mind rather remembers the debt that is going from him, than that which
is coming to him. This often comes of pride in some men, to look for much of
others, and perform little themselves.

The husband often looks his wife should walk at an inch with him, though he
will break else out of square. So sometimes it falls out* with the wife toward
her husband, look for much, and perform little. This is no equity: we must
do, as we would be done to.

Its more dangerous for us to neglect our duty to others, than that they
neglect to us; for this is but a small want, but the other makes us liable to
Gods judgment. Let us therefore strive who shall do most duty each to other;
husband to wife, neighbor to neighbor: and not the contrary.

2. It must be common: One another. Its in the plural number, and shows a
community; that we must not love one, or two, or a few, but all, and
especially all that fear God. Love communicates it self, and is not engrossed
to a few. Many can be content to love one, or two, or a few as they list, but
they set light by the rest, yea oppose and iustle with some, and live unkindly
with them. This is no true love, neither ought it so to be. Yea, we must love
the meanest that fear God, and not neglect them. The meanest member of the
body is regarded by the greatest. Though they be of low degree in the world,
yet seeing they be members of that glorious body of Jesus Christ, we must not
have the faith of him in respect of persons, James 2. 1. Seeing God has
vouchsafed to give his Son for them to redeem them, his Spirit to sanctify
them, and has prepared a place in heaven for them, we must not despise them.
Nay, these we ought the rather to encourage, and to hearten on in well-doing,
seeing so few of that sort have any good in them, and they have many
discouragements. They will bear their poverty the better. Its a great cheering
to them, when they see themselves regarded. And nothing is more comely, than to
see wealthy ones to be affable, and to speak kindly, and to the hearts of the
poor that be godly; as Boaz did to Ruth. For, being fellow-brethren and
fellow members as dear to God as they, should a little wealth lift up the
mind? The Lord is the Maker of them both, Prou. 22. 2. James 2* 5. Has not
God chosen the poor of this world, that they should be rich in Faith, and
heirs of the Kingdom? etc.

3 It must be without seigning, Romans 12. 9. 1 John 3. 18. Not in word, or in
tongue, but in deed, and in truth. God hates dissembling in every thing:
whether in love pretended to himself, when is no such thing, or toward our
neighbor, in any of our dealings with him. God loves simplicity and plain
dealing; as in Jacob and Nathaneel.

If Love, which is the maine virtue, be counterfeit, what shall become of all
the duties that proceed from thence? Gods love to us was not feigned and in
show, but sincere and real, when he gave us his beloved Son to the death for
our sins.

Here two sorts of persons are justly to be taxed: 1. Such as pretend to love,
when yet they hate. 2. Such as make show to love, and do not. For the first,
Psalm. 28. 3. Psalm. 12. 2. and 55. 21. and 62. 4. Pro. 26. 24. read these
places. Thus did Ioab to Amasa, 2 Samuel 20. Judas to our Savior Christ, Saul to
David, 1 Samuel 18. 17. 25. giving him his Daughter to be a snare to him,
requiring no ioynture, but an hundred fore-skins of the Philistims, hoping
thereby he might fall into their hands. which persons carry a mark of
Reprobation about them. Psalm 28. 3. Workers of iniquity, to whom belongs
some notable judgment of God. They be like the Devil, who pretended love to
Eve, when he sought her ruin, and of all her posterity. So to our Savior
Christ, Mat. 4. All these will I give thee etc.

As these be more dangerous to those they hate, than if they did openly show
it (for then they could better beware of them: One Enemy within the Walls is
worse than ten without) so are they worse for themselves: For, any vice masked
and cloked under a show of virtue, is double iniquity. And as our Savior
Christ said to the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23. 14. Ye shall receive greater
damnation; so shall these.

Yet how common is this? many will speak fair as may be to their Neighbor,
when yet they intend mischief against them, or as soon as their back is
turned, mock or jest at them, speak evil, or raise up some slander against
them, or do them what hurt they can. If we know any have dealt so with us, let
us take heed that we never do so by them or any other, but loathe it, as
hateful and devilish.

For the second sort: There be that pretend they love, but alas! try, and you
shall find no such thing. A deal of Court-holy* water, congeyes, and
crouchings, an handful of true hearty love, is worth ten armefuls of their
congeyes down to the ancles: they will salute Good morrow, and Good night,
when yet they mind, nor heartily wish no good. These are clouds without rain,
plashes that deceive when most need is; vessels with false bottomes, that have
a little water on the top, but empty below: Snch as will earnestly inuit, when
they know one cannot or will not stay, proffer kindness, when they think it
will not be needed; but if it happen to be accepted, and made use of at any
time, then they either have some shifts to avoid it, or else do it with much
unwillingness, and grumbling behind the parties back.

So those that pretend they love the poor, yet come to them in their behalf,
and nothing shall you get, but what they are forced unto, and hardly that.

So many good Ministers and Christians have found small kindness in their
need, at the hands of such, as yet in their prosperity have professed good will,
and made great shows of love to them; they might have done full ill for all
these: what love call you this? Its like Faith without works, which God will
condemn. So to speak well of such and such men, to pity them, and say they
are worthy men, and pity they should want, yet never do any thing for them. If
God should feed them thus, they would soon complain.

4 The fourth thing required in Love, is, that it must be pure. It must come
from a pure heart* as St. Peter speaks, and be agreeable to the rule of the
pure Word of God.

Pure Love is seen in diverse things: First, it loves for some virtuous and
good actions: therefore the love of the Adulterer and his Mate, of Drunkards
and Thieves, that be sworn brothers, is no love.

To love a man, because he can dice well, or swear deeply, drink others under
board, or mock and deride wittily, or rail bitterly against the servants of
God; this is cursed love: for true Love rejoices not in iniquity; as we have
heard. A worse note cannot be, than when one sees one fight cunningly or
desperately against God, to love him the better. These be no better than
Rebels, and Conspirators against the Majesty of God.

2 Pure Love is that, which is grounded on Grace and Religion, and on no
transitory thing; or in those that have no grace, we love them for conscience
of Gods commandment, and because of that part of the Image of God that is in
them: which condemns the carnal love of the most, which love only for
worldly respects; for strength, beauty, or any inward gift of the mind not
sanctified: as wit, skill in Arts, music, play. These are worthy love, but to
love only for these, is not true and pure Love; for thus loved the Heathen:
worldly men's love is for such respects, and no other. Yea, even Gods servants
fail this way sometimes, as old Isaac, that loved Esau for his skill in
hunting, David loved Absolon for his beauty; and so does many a man his wife,
which do ill to build love on so false grounds: for when these fail, often the
love goes after.

3 Pure Love is in respect of the party himself, whom we love, and for no
respect to our selves, or any commodity of ours. And such was Gods love, in
giving his Son to us miserable sinners; which condemns the world, who only
love for selferespects: As he is my Uncle, Friend, loves me, or has done
this or that for me, or may do me a pleasure; therefore I will make much of
him, or for fear he may do me a shrewd turn: This, if it be shaken out of
the clouts, will be found but selfeloue; we have a respect and aim only to,
and at our selves, Mat. 5. 46. Many a man shows kindness, or does good to
some only, to purchase credit.

The husband loves his wife, because she pleases him well, is fair, a good
housewife, and for nothing else: this is self-love. All the Papists charitable
deeds were all self-love; for they were done with opinion of merit, and so
they loved themselves rather than the parties they gave unto. So is all the
love of worldlings; examine it, and you shall mostwhat find it to be
self-love; they have some reach at themselves.

4 Pure Love is, when we so love a man, as we love his soul; and therefore
will suffer no evil to rest upon him, but hate the sin in him whom he loves
most dearly, and will counsel him to all good, and from all evil. Therefore so
to love our neighbor, as not to tell him of his fault for angring or
disquieting of him (if he be such as we may speak to) is hatred rather than
love, as God says, Leuiticus 19. 17.

So Parents, that love their children so well, as they will not nurture,
rebuke, correct them; they hate them* they slay them in following their ways:
He that spares the rod, hates his child, Prou. 13. 24. Its as one should be
so tender over a child, as not to suffer the wind to blow upon it; and
therefore hold the hand before the mouth of it, but hold so hard, as he
strangles the child: As the Ape that hugs her young so hard, as she kills it.

Again, friends persuade a man to do this or that for preferment, that he
cannot do with good conscience: Oh they love him, they would feign see him
preferred. Woeful love to the body, to destroy the soul.

A neighbor has a child, or cattle strangely handled; one comes in of love,
and persuades him to send to such a cunning man, or good Witch (the worst
instrument of the Devil of all) for help. Is he a friend, that will do that
that shall vantage one a penny, and ere the year come about, hinder him a
hundred pound?

So when a good Christian is ready to suffer for a good conference, and a
friend comes and says, Oh I pray cast not away yourselfe, I wish you well; be
not too nice, do as others do. Cruel love is this, to persuade them to save
their bodies, by doing that, whereby they should cast away soul and body for
ever: As Peter advises our Savior Christ not to go up to Jerusalem to
suffer, but to favor himself, Matthew. 16. 22. which was to dissuade him from
doing his Fathers will, and from that, whereby Peter himself and all mankind
should be saved, and without which they had all been lost for ever: what love
therefore was this? you may see by the thanks our Savior Christ gave him, who
bade him get him behind him Satan; for he sauoured not of the things of God,
but of the world.

5 Next, our Love must be fervent. We must love earnestly, and hotly as we
can; and secondly, constantly: for in these two things stands feruency. First,
for the earnestness of our Love; as we must stretch it to as many persons,
and in as many duties as we can, to soul, to body, in giving, forgiving,
etc. as we have heard before; so in these we must not be sparing, but in
giving, liberal; for he that sowes sparingly, shall reap sparingly, 2 Cor. 9.
6. So in forgiving plenteous, to seventy times, etc. For thus is God to us, in
giving for soul, body, goods, name, to our selves and ours, day and night,
never weary in doing us good, never vpbraiding. In forgiving, how merciful, in
passing by our manifold offenses, and that daily? And the rather, because a
little love is soon quenched; therefore we must so love, as though we meet
with many temptations from the parties themselves, or from others, that yet we
suffer it not to be extinguished. And we must love fervently; not doing these
duties when we can well, and have nothing to let us, but forget our pleasure,
profit, ease, etc. to do our neighbor good. Love seeks not her own things.
It is laborsous, 1 Cor. 13. as in the Samariran, who set up the wounded man
upon his horse, and went on foot himself, and left all the money in his purse
for his charges, and promised to send more. And as he that rose out of his
warm bed, to lend his neighbor loaves. As they that gave out of their maine
stock, or sold their lands to relieve the necessities of the Church, Acts 2.
44. Above and beyond all comparison ten thousand times, was the feruency of the
love of God the Father, when he parted with his own and only Son out of
his bosom, for our Redemption, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, who forsook the
glory of Heaven, and laid down his life here upon earth, to save us miserable
siuners, and his utter enemies.

Oh how does this condemn the cold, yea, frozen love of the world? And where
there is a spark, yet it is so weak, as the least drop of water will quench
it. We will not speak a word in defense of never so good a man or cause, if it
will hinder our selves never so little, or procure us but a frown.

How worthily on the contrary did Jonathan, who spoke for David to Saul his
father, to the danger of his own life, 1 Samuel 20. 33. So Ester endangered her
life to speak for the Church; I will go to the King, If I perish, I perish,
Hest. 4. 16.

6 Lastly, our Love must be constant; not easily broken off, but continuing to
the end, Heb. 13. 1. Ephesians. 4. 3.

Thus is Gods love to his, John 13. 1. which we must imitate. The Devil will
seek to break it off, and our selves (being men) are frail, and many
occasions will be ready to be offered; therefore we had need with all
diligence, to strive to hold and maintain it alive in our hearts.

How does this rebuke the inconstancy of many men, that are won (as we say)
with an apple, and lost with a nut; that will upon every slight occasion
break friendship? If God should so deal with us, what should become of us?
But his love is constant to his, notwithstanding their daily prouocations.

Yea, he loves them in adversity, and their low estate; yea, best then, and is
nearest them with his comforts. So it ought to be with us; for then our
neighbor has most need of us, and then our love will show it self to be
most free, and not mercenary. But how contrary is this every where? While they
be in prosperity, they have many friends, which in their affliction go aloof
off; as David often complains, and Job, to whose very wife his breath was
strange in the day of his affliction. Ruth did quite contrary, and very
commendably, who vowed to her mother-in-law Naomi, that nothing but death
should separate between them.

CHAP. 7. Whom we must love.
NOw follows, to speak of the persons whom we ought to love: and they are
all men upon the face of the earth, good and bad, without or within the Pale of
the Church; our love must stretch it self to any of them: they are our
neighbor, whom we are bidden to love as our selves; as we may see in the
Parable of the Samaritan: these we ought to do good to, if they need, and we
be able; and for these we must pray.

Yea, we ought to pray for every particular person, that we know or can see,
because we know not (whatsoever he be now) but he may belong to God.

We must therefore love all; our enemies, and all men whatsoever they be, but
especially the Saints and People of God. And of these I will speak severally,
and in order.

And first of the love of our enemies. Love of our enemies.
That we must love our enemies, is required inclusiuely in these words of 1.
Ioh. 3. 23. that ye love one another; and in those words, that be the sum of
the two Tables, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: as may appear by
comparing Exodus 23. 4, 5. with Deuteronomy. 22. 1, 2. He that is called in one place
thine enemy, is called in the other thy brother or neighbor. More plainly its
required, Pro. 25. 21. Matthew. 5. 44. But ere we proceed to the proof of this
point, let us see who are the enemies we must love, by showing the kinds of
enemies that there be, and withal clear some Scriptures that seem to
countenance hatred of our enemies. Enemies be public or private, Gods
enemies or ours. Public, be such as oppose and hate the Religion and truth of
God, and persecute it in the professors thereof, or are enemies to any good
courses and godly proceedings, and so to us for the same. These again be
either curable or incurable: for the curable, such as Saul was, who afterward
became a Paul; we must hate their sins, pray against their devices, but love
their persons. The incurable we must hate their sins directly, and their
persons indirectly.

Thus we hate the person of the Devil; though he be Gods creature, yet because
he has sinned against the holy Ghost, and is Gods desperate, final and
incurable adversary, therefore we are bound to hate him: So might, nay ought
we to do, if we knew any man or men to be such: as S. Paul did, who 2. Tim.
4. prayed against Alexander, that God would reward him according etc. and the
Primitive Church against Julian the Apostate.

Of these David meant, Psalm. 139. 22. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate
thee? yea I hate etc. and Psalm. 109. and 69 22. to the 29. and in many Psalms
he prays for the final and utter destruction of his enemies, which is a
sign of utter hatred. But this was not because they were his enemies, but Gods
as well; and not that only, but desperate and irrecouerable ones, which he saw
by the spirit of God, being extraordinarily and infallibly* informed: thereof:
whose prayers were but prophecies of the final destruction of these men, as
Psalm. 63. 9. and 54. 5. But for us, because we have not the like measure or
gift of the spirit, we have no such warrant to hate or pray directly against
any man's person.

Of these also are meant such places, where we are bidden to rejoice at wicked
men's destruction, Psalm. 52. also Psalm. 58. 10. We also, though we know not men's
final estate, yet if we see any notorious enemies of the Church, and
Gospel, and good men, taken away, may give God thanks, and in some sense
rejoice, namely, that God has showed himself careful of his Church, and has
provided for his glory, the comfort of his people and passage of goodness, and
for the terror of other bad ones; but not to rejoice as its their destruction:
but as we should pray for them while they live, so pity them being cut off,
that they have brought misery upon themselves.

Object. But an objection or two may be made. Our Savior Christ tells us, we
must hate father and mother, wife and child etc. for his Names sake.

Answ. True, when they stand in opposition against Christ, and would pull us
from him, we must then say, Get thee behind me Satan, and tread upon them if
they stand in our way to hinder us from following Christ. We must hate their
counsel, but yet love their persons, and pray God to open their eyes and turn
their hearts.

Object. 2. God bade the Israelites kill the Cananites, man, woman and child,
and spare none.

Answ. If God bade them hate them, they had a warrant so to do; for we must
love our enemies in God and for God, and not against God, and we must obey his
commandment. But God bade them not hate them, but kill them, and so they might
do, and yet wish well to them, and pity them. The same may be said of all just
wars: we may hate the bad cause of our enemies, overthrow their enterprises,
and slay their persons, and yet pity them, and pray for their salvation. As the
Magistrate also, that puts a malefactor to death for his offense, and to
terrify others by his example, yet hates him not, but desires that his bodily
punishment may be an occasion to bring him to Repentance, to the saving of his
soul; and therefore gives him godly counsel, grants him respit and time,
sends Preachers to him to labor with him. So in the other.

And thus much of Gods enemies. Besides these, we may have private enemies,
that be upon occasion fallen out with us, that hate and hurt us, and have done
us wrong, and seek our mischief. These our enemies we must love: and of
these principally, as also of Gods curable enemies, is our speech to be
understood in all that follows.

We must love our enemies: that is, we must carry a tender affection toward
them, as desiring their good, wishing salvation to their souls, and outward
prosperity, so far as may stand with Gods glory, and their good, rejoicing at
their welfare, and grieuing at the contrary: and this we must show forth by
all signs and fruits of good usage every way. which are referred, Mat. 5. 44.
to these three heads: first, Bless them: that is, speak kindly to them and of
them: secondly, Do good: that is, be ready to help and relieve them: and
lastly, Pray for them that hate and persecute you; even pray to God to pardon
them, and to turn their hearts. And thus are we to do to those, that be never
so deadly set against us; yea, and never so wrongfully. And mark, that in this
last cited place, we are first bidden to oue them: the beginning must be in
the affection of the heart, that so the other duties required may be
performed, and that in a right manner, without which, the one or the other, or
both will fail: and then that we must not say we love them only, but show
it by the fruits. Romans 12. 20. If thine enemy hunger, feed him, etc. overcome
evil with goodness. Prou. 24. 17. we are forbidden to rejoice at our enemies
fall, either into sin or punishment.

Thus David put on sackcloth, fasted, and prayed, when his enemies were in
affliction. Elisha bade the King set bread and water before his enemies, and
them that came to take the Prophet, 2 Kings 6. So did our Savior Christ to his
Precept ( Matthew. 5.) join his Pattern, not only not revenging, as St. Peter
says, being reviled, he reviled not again, being persecuted, he threatened
not: but on the contrary, prayed for them that put him to death; Father,
forgive them, they know not what they do. Thus he spoke kindly to Judas, when
he betrayed him with a kiss, and called him Friend, Matthew. 26. 50. Thus Steven
prayed for his persecutors, even in the act of their stoning of him; Lord, lay
not this sin to their charge, Acts 7. at the end.

Now listen to some Reasons, to move us to this difficult duty, and the Lord
make them powerful to persuade us thereto.

First, They be our own flesh, Isa. 58. 7. therefore we are not to hurt them,
nor turn away our face from them to do them good.

Secondly, they have some part, at least of Gods Image in them, in their soul,
being an immortal spirit, in the Majesty of their face above all creatures, in
their authority they bear, or age, or gifts, or the like.

Thirdly, our Savior Christ commands it: But I say unto you, Mat. 5. 44. The
Scribes and Pharisees had taught, they should love their friends, and hate
their enemies: But our Savior Christ, the Lawmakers, and so the truest
Interpreter thereof, the Doctor of his Church, he of whom the Father bade from
heaven hear him, Matthew. 17. 5. who is also our Lord and King; bids us love our
enemies.

So that if he may be heard, who is only to be heard, and if his authority
and commandment may bear sway with us, that only ought to command our
consciences; then must we do so. So that though Scribes and Pharisees say,
Love friends, and hate enemies; though the Devil say so, flesh and blood say
so, and do so, yet there is another to be heard against all these; But I say
unto you, etc. Let us therefore listen to his voice.

Fourthly, so shall we be the children of God, and be like him, who makes his
sun to shine, and rain to fall on the just and unjust: and besides many
outward mercies, gives them the Gospel, to call them to repentance; And even
loved us when we were his utter enemies, and when as he might have glorified
himself in our condemnation; yet he so loved us, as he gave his own dear
Son to redeem us; and has effectually called diverse of us to the Faith of
his Son Jesus Christ, and the hope of eternal life. Oh Love unspeakable, to
be showed to enemies! Now what should we desire, and is our happiness, but to
be like him? Now when we can love our enemies indeed, it will be a certain
evidence we are the children of God: a sign we love God dearly, when we can
do this difficult thing for his sake: And a sign of much grace to mortify
the rebellion of our nature, that lusts to the quite contrary. And we can
have no mark we are the Lords, except we can do this in some measure, and
strive after it more and more.

Fifthly, Gods people must do singular things, such as the world cannot
attain to. Now every Publican, civil person, hypocrite, can love his friends,
and hate his enemies, but we must do more: God has showed us singular mercy;
therefore we must yield him singular obedience, and show forth the power of his
grace that is in us. We must not be singular in conceits, opinions, and courses
of our own devising; but we must be singular, in obeying such commandments
of God, as the world will not be brought unto: and to reproach us for such
singularity, shows them to be of this world that do it.

Sixthly, this has reward from God, so has not loving them only that love
us, which is selfeloue; we shall have their love still its like, and there is
the reward we are like to have: but in loving our enemies, we shall have a
reward, Prou. 25. 22. not of merit, but of promise for our encouragement.

Seventhly, we are commanded, Matthew. 5. 48. (whence all these reasons are
collected) that we should be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect. This
is a degree of grace, and profiting in Christ's School, to be able to love our
enemies; which we must strive unto, in this and the like duties; not
contenting our selves to hear, read, come to the Sacrament, which not only
weaklings in grace, but hypocrites can do, and do continually, nor yet
holding our selves satisfied with some small measure of Love, or other graces,
as Faith, Patience, etc. but to strive forward to some good degrees of them,
and of the fruits of the same in our course, as occasion serves: of which this
loving and doing good to our enemies, are principal ones.

Eighthly, hereby we shall, it may be, convert and overcome our enemies to love
the truth; As the patience of the Martyrs, was a mean of the conversion of
some, who suffered soon after them. Or at least, it will be a conuincing
them, and leaving them without excuse; as Saul, by David's innocence, who twice
might have killed him, and did not, was convinced, and cried out, Thou art more
righteous than I, 1 Samuel 24. 19.

Ninthly, we shall provide herein well for our own comfort, both in life and
in death; when in all adversities and wrongs by wicked men, our enemies, our
hearts can testify with us, that we seek no revenge, that we can pray for our
persecutors. For this argues much love to be in us, and that it is fervent, as
God commands. As that is a great fire, that warmes not only them that be
near, but gives heat to them that be far off: So is this Love.

This then, first confuteth the Doctrine of the Scribes and Use 1.
Pharisees, of which we have heard: which is Doctrine and Divinity for our
turn, and well suiting to our nature; but its too pleasing to nature to be
good: nay, its to be abhorred.

2 The Papists also, who, little better, teach, that in two cases only we are
bound to help our enemies, in the case of extremity, or of scandal. For other
things, to love them, or pray for them, or do them good in other cases, its
but a counsel our Savior Christ gives, and no commandment. If men can do it,
its well; but if they cannot, its not required. But this is false; our Savior
Christ speaks in the Imperative and commanding Mood, and urges it hard, with
diverse reasons: therefore its not left to our discretion, but flatly required,
as in other Scriptures.

3 It rebukes the contrary nature that is in us, and the practice of the
world, which quite against this Precept of loving, praying for, and doing good
to our enemies, do hate them, rejoice at their fall, envy at any good that
comes to them, speak all ill to them, and of them, interrupt all ill against
them, requite one evil with another, taunt with taunt, suit with suit, blow
with blow, and seek to do them all evil. Yea, and men think they should be
borne with, and not blamed for this: Why, say they, he is mine enemy, and that
wrongfully, I never did him hurt, yet he has raised lies and slanders of me,
or thus and thus abused me: What then? what mastery else were it for you to
love him? Oh but this cannot be heard of; whereby it appears, that most men
are carnal, and of the Devil.

They say, they owe them no love; Well, yet you owe God all love, you cannot
deny, and he has turned over some of the love you owe to him, to be paid to
your enemy, and he will take it as paid to him; and this is but just in common
dealing among men.

Nay, its a fault too much among many Christians, that show great weakness
this way. If they be wronged, Oh how they swell, and how far they will go in
revenge, both by words and deeds, and how long they dare lie herein? whereby
they be wray they be more flesh than spirit, as Paul said to the Corinthians.
While these things are thus, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? 1 Cor. 3. 3.

My Brethren, these things ought not so to be. This is not the persuasion of
Gods Spirit. Indeed, the spirit that is in us lusts after envy; but the
Scripture teaches better things: The wisdom that is from above, is, first,
pure, then peaceable, full of mercy, and good fruits. Therefore this revenging
course, which is counted wisdom, if it be any, its earthly: that is, of the
men of this world; sensual, of our own corrupt lust and desire, and
Devilish, he is the author and teacher of it.

Oh that we could be brought to see our sin every of us in this point, and
be humbled, that there is such a nature in us, so contrary to the will of God,
and for our practice, that has been so bad, and lets every one of us bewail
heartily, and repent of that that is past: and for time to come, lets labor
for greater grace, that when any such occasions be offered us hereafter, we may
show better fruits.

And though we talk with our enemy, or debate the matter, keep passion away,
and do it patiently; yea, or if we reprove him, if he be worthy, or take the
benefit of Law or Magistrate, yet let it be without revenge. We are not bound
hereby to love their sins, nor their needless society, nor to furnish them
with kindness, that might make them fitter to do hurt, nor to relinquish our
right, or our good cause; but that we be free from hatred and revenge, yea, and
further, to overcome their evil with goodness, as God does, and commands.

And first, that we beware of revenge, which is a wicked thing, and that for
these Reasons:

First, Vengeance is the Lords, and he will repay. Its his office and
privilege: to revenge therefore, is to take the Royalty out of his hand; as
one should put the Lord chief Justice out of his seat, and judge his cause
himself. He must revenge to whom it belongs, as Psalm. 94. 1, 2. therefore the
Egyptian said to Moses, when he would have parted him and the Israelite, Exodus
2. 14. Who made thee a Judge over us? Noting, that men must not avenge without
authority: therefore our Savior Christ bade Peter put up his sword, when he
cut off Malchas ear: with a reason, Because who so auengeth without a calling,
shall perish by the sword.

We must therefore commit our case to God, as our Savior Christ did; for he
can also do it most wisely, and most righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 23. we will do
it foolishly and partially, as we see in daily experience. Leave it to him, he
will not fail to do it, and well too.

2 When we revenge our own wrongs, we leave the Lord nothing to do, except it
be to turn his wrath from our enemy, on whom we have been revenged already,
to our selves, for our sin of revenging, as Pro. 24. 17, 18.

3 When we revenge, we do we know not what: we consider not who smote us. Its
the Lord, as Job said, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, when the
Caldeans had robbed him. No evil in the City: that is, of punishment, but the
Lord has done it, Amos 3. 6. which made David so quietly bear Shimei his
railing, because the Lord set him on work so to do for his humbling.

Our enemy is but as Ashur, Esaias 10.
the Lords rod, to beat us with; therefore to revenge, is to wring the rod out
of Gods hand, and break it, or cast it into the fire, which is but an
ungracious childs part. When God bids us love our enemies, he bids us but
kiss the rod, to pull down our stomachs* which many wise mothers will make
their young ones do betimes.

So also its the Devil in thine enemy, that does thee wrong in goods, life, or
name, who hereby seeks to drive thee to revenge, or some other sin; as he
did to move Job to curse God, by all the troubles he brought upon him;
therefore resist the Devil, and not the man: for the Devil aims not at thy
goods, or name, to hurt thee in them, but to draw thee to sin, to the hurt of
thy soul. If thou can therefore, resist Satan herein, and avoid the sin
he seeks hereby to bring thee to commit, thou shall play a wise man's part, and
so in stead of revenging thy self on thy enemy, be revenged upon Satan, thy
chiefest enemy.

4 When we revenge, we do our selves ten times more hurt, than we do our
enemy: we hurt him a little, it may be, in his body, goods, or good name, and
wound ourselves deeply in our own souls; hit him in the skin, and pierce the
kall of our own hearts: As the Be, that to sting another, loses shortly her
own life. Its the foolishest thing in the world to revenge; but a wise part,
to commit it to God, best for us, and worst for our enemy. Oh its no dealing
with a man that commits his cause to God, no standing before him: for though
God would part from his own, yet he will not give away his servants right. It
were better for an enemy, that the party that he hates, should devise all
ways of revenge in the world, by himself, and by his friends against him,
than that he should put it up quietly, and leave it to God.

And let us not stay our selves here, in avoiding revenge, but go forward to
love our enemies, and labor to do good against evil, as we are commanded,
Romans 12. vlt.

Object. I cannot do it: for he has deserved all ill of me; and can I then
do him good?

Answ. And have not you done so against Almighty God, and yet he does you good
daily?

Object. Its a base part for me, being wronged, disgraced, and abused, not to
challenge him, and be avenged of him, if I can, else I shall be counted a
cowardly fool, much more if I should do him good.

Answ. This is but carnal Divinity, which counts it great courage to turn
again and revenge, which Heathens and Turks can do, and every Bull and Bore
can do, and that its baseness to put up wrongs. But its quite contrary: for
its true valor to overcome our selves, and conquer our unruly lusts and
sinful passions, and to obey the commandment of God, Prou. 16. 32. he is
more mighty that can rule himself, than he that conquers many others: And
that is true baseness, for a man to be so led by his passions, as he can be
are nothing, no, though God command, and the contrary turn to his own
destruction.

Object. When you have said all you can, it is impossible.

Answ. No, its not impossible, though a hard thing it is, I grant: and
therefore by the way, for such as profess they can bear all indignities done
them, and can do them that do them, all good, as if there were no such matter,
and find no difficulty in it, (and yet but ordinary persons neither) for my
part, I do not believe them, and I doubt, they do but deceive themselves. If
it were not hard to be done, it were not so worthy of a Christian. Its
therefore a yoke, but easy; a burden, but light to the spiritual man, that
is well assured of the love of God to him, and of the forgiveness of many
sins. But to the carnal man, I grant, its wholly impossible.

Lets labor therefore for this Faith and Assurance of forgiveness, whereby we
may be enabled to do this difficult work.

Now to draw to an end of this point of Love to our enemies, let us, I beseech
you, be persuaded seriously to weigh the reasons that have been used to move
to this duty, and let us suffer our selves to be overcome of them.

Its the most noble and heroical duty, and truly worthy of a Christian man:
hereby we shall prove our selves to be the children of God, and do like to
him; which ought to be our greatest ambition.

Hereby we shall show our selves to have profited well in the School of
Christ, and that we have not learned to do that every body can do, but to do
some singular thing; for so may God expect of us, after all this cost of his
Word bestowed upon us, and that we are grown past children and weaklings, on
toward perfection, even to do difficult duties, and such as are most
contrary to our rebellious nature. The Lord persuade our hearts to conceive
well of, to believe, and obey this point.

Me thinks, whiles I am speaking. of these reasons, the heart somewhat yields
to this duty, and there seems as if one should have some power to do it: and
I am persuaded, that there be diverse, that at the hearing and reading of these
things, if they were tried now they be hot, could be able to do something
this way.

But let them sink down so deep into our hearts, as they may abide with us,
that if hereafter occasion shall be offered, we may be able to show forth the
force and fruit thereof. We must look to meet with wrongs and enemies;
therefore lets learn to take out this lesson beforehand.

Oh that we could but learn this one point at this time! how happily should
we have spent our time? Hereby we shall honor our profession, convert or
convince our adversaries, and provide much comfort to our own souls: As that
worthy Master Greenham, a man subject to many slanderous reports, that yet
would say, these two things comforted him: First, that he found his heart not
ill, but well affected to his brethren: Secondly, that when he was alone, he
could humble himself to God, and pray him to forgive him, that raised them up.

Lets labor hereunto: what else do we hearing so many Sermons continually, if
we mean not to show forth the power thereof?

CHAP. 8. Of Love to all men.
NExt unto our Enemies, whom must we love more? We must love all other men. Not
only our kindred, friends, acquaintance, our neighbors of the same town,
country, or nation, but even all that dwell upon the face of the earth, high,
low, rich, poor, men, women, yongue, old, bond, free, without or within the
Church, that either are or ever may be the people of God. True, our love must
begin at those that be nearest us, and must be most to those within the Church,
especially to the household of Faith; but it must stretch it self far, and
wide, and over all, and we must do all duties of Love to them, as occasion
shall be offered and we be able. For whosoever has or shall have need of our
help, he is our neighbor, whom we are bound to love, because God has
commanded it, and he is our own flesh. Our prayers, as a maine duty of love,
must reach at one time or other to all, and do them what other good we can.
We must pray for the poor Pagans, that God would send his light and truth
amongst them, that they in time may be brought into the bosom of the Church,
and the sheepfold of Christ Jesus.

For the Lords ancient people the Jews, that he would be pleased to make those
dry bones to live, and to take the veil of unbelief from off their hearts,
that they may at last come to embrace and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, to
their eternal salvation. And that God would in mercy bring in the fullness of
the Gentiles, and to that end that he would hasten the ruin of Anchrists
Kingdom, that those nations that have long lain under the bondage of that man
of sin, and in the darkness of superstition and Idolatry, may be set at
liberty, and have the light of the glorious Gospel to shine among them, to
teach them to know and worship the true God aright, and to believe in Jesus
Christ, which is life eternal.

And for those within the Church, we ought to pray to God to continue his
mercy toward them, and to give them grace to walk worthy thereof. And for
those that be fallen into their enemies hands, and be in great distress every
way, we ought to send up continual fervent prayers and strong cries, out of
the bowels of compassion toward their miseries, unto Almighty God the father
and protector of his Church, that though he has punished them for their
sins as pleased him, yet that he would in judgment remember mercy, and
humble their hearts under his heavy hand, pardon their sins, and restore
their former liberties to them again. Yea and as their bodily necessities
shall be truly made known to us, we should be ready to reach out our hand
to the relief thereof.

Ob. If any will say, They be strangers to me, what have I do with them?

Ans. Let such a one know, that yet Gods Image, nor his express commandment
ought not to be strange unto us, but ought to provoke us to this duty. Yea
they that be never so ignorant, profane, ungodly, whether rich or poor, we
must wish well unto them, and seek their good: for as we must not hate the
vices for the persons sake, so neither the person for the vices sake. Our love
toward them, may be a mean to win them to God.

Use. But alas, how few be there that think any such thing required of them?
and therefore no marvel though no conscience be made of the performance
thereof: for even in those things that they know to be the will of God and
their duties, yet few will be brought to the obedience of them. Who so pities
the miserable state of those that know not God, nor have any means of
salvation, but be out of the pale of the Church; as to pray earnestly to God,
that he would in mercy visit them in his due time? Alas, multitudes pray not
for their own selves and families, their neighbors and nation; and therefore
no marvel they look not so far.

But, me thinks, that fearful Prayer the Church makes against such, Psalm
79. 6. should strike fear into them, to move them to seek to avoid the dint
and danger of it.

How sew lay to heart the long and sore afflictions, nay, the woeful
desolations of our brethren in the Palatinate, Bohemia, and places adjoining;
and therefore power out compassionate repenting and fervent prayers to God for
them? We hear of their unspeakable miseries, but are not affected with them,
either to profit by their harms unto sound repentance our selves, or to put to
our helping hand, by our instant prayers to seek their deliverance. We talk
much of them, and would feign see an end of their troubles, and a return of
things, but few be those that do pray for them, and that so seldom, and so
coldly, as we can have as little comfort, as they have hitherto found benefit:
for what fruit can be expected from prayers, not joined with true repentance?
for God hears no sinners; and let him that calls upon the Name of the Lord (and
looks to be heard) depart from iniquity.

I doubt not but some there are, that do compassionately and feelingly wrestle
with God for them, from time to time, yea, do afflict their souls to obtain
mercy for them, whose prayers are assuredly not shut out, or forgorten before
God, but shall in due time have blessed effect; but these, I doubt, are but a
very few.

And for other duties of Love, no marvel, if (as occasion serves) they be
coldly performed to those that be further off, when we are found so faulty
toward those we daily converse with. What extreme failing in the duties of
forgiving wrongs, and doing good to souls and bodies of those we have to do
with? Of which we have spoken already upon one or two several occasions;
therefore I now speak no more thereof: only I pray God to give us this true
Love, that may reach out it self to all men, as occasion is, or shall be
offered.

CHAP. 9. Of Love to the Saints.
NOw I come to the love we owe to the Saints and true people of God; and these
are to be loved in the greatest degree of all other men, and to be had in high
price and account, Gal. 6. 10. Psalm 15. 4.

Thus did David, Psalm 16. 3. All his delight was in the Saints. Psalm. 119.
63. He was their companion. Psalm. 101. He would have such to attend upon him,
and such only as near as he could. So Cornelius, Acts 10. 7. had a soldier
that feared God, that was at his hand.

Reasons of this are: First, the 1.
Image of God is most clearly seen in them: we are to reverence and love the
least part of it, wheresoever we see it, even in wicked men; how much more
then, the brightness of it, which stands in the graces of the Spirit,
wisdom, holiness, and righteousness, wherein they most lively resemble
their Maker? And the more of this we see, the more we ought to love, in
children, friends, neighbors, or whomsoever. This is to be esteemed far above
wit, beauty, strength, wealth, actiuity, or any gift of Nature or Art; these be
toys to grace: Favor is deceitful, and beauty vanity, but one that fears
God, he or she, shall be praised. Therefore herein Rebecca was wiser than
Isaac, who loved Jacob for his grace, more than Esau for his skill in hunting.

Secondly, God loves them best; therefore so should we. As whom the King
favors, all do honor. These be his secret ones, precious in his account, as
the apple of his eye; he has rebuked Kings for their sakes.

When he drowned all the world, he preserved his little number: As Lot in
Sodoms destruction. Yea, if there had but ten righteous persons been found in
five Cities, they had all been saved from the burning. These be marked in
Jerusalem from the common destruction, Ezekiel. 9. These he sealed, Revel. 7. to
be preserved from the plagues bodily and spiritual, that should come upon the
world. He makes more account of one righteous one, than of a thousand other,
Isa. 43. 3, 4. As he did, when to make way for his people, the Jews, into
Canaan, he gave seven mighty Nations to the sword.

Thirdly, they be more excellent than any other, Prou. 12. 26. The righteous is
more excellent than his neighbor: meaning, that is not righteous, but wicked.
More excellent in this life, at his death, and in the day of judgment. These
are written in the Book of Life, be washed white in the blood of the Lamb,
clothed with his Righteousness, aricher robe than ever Solomon wore on his
back: adorned with the precious Jewels of Gods sanctifying graces, attended by
the Angels, borne from above, the children of God, members of Christ, temples
of the Holy Ghost, heirs of all things here, and shall at death, and after the
day of Judgment, be inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, prepared for them
before the beginning of the world. And for the wicked, we may say, as Psalm. 1.
4. It is not so with them. And therefore good reason these should be best
beloved.

4 Lastly, they be most useful, and can do us most good, by their counsel,
example, prayers, when we be present with them, yea, absent from them: He that
walks Pro. 13. 20
with the wise, shall be the wiser; much good may we learn, and comfort may
we get, by conuersing with them, that be truly godly.

For their sake the world continues; if the number of the Elect were fulfilled,
the wicked should no longer rout here, but come to judgment, and be sent to
their own place.

For their sake, and at their prayers, many plagues are kept from the Land; as
at Moses prayers they were from the Israelites: Many judgments entered, have
been removed, as Plague and Pestilence, and unseasonable times; yea, final
desolation prevented: and had it not been for a few, we might have looked to
have been as Sodom, and as Gomorrha. All fare the better for the Righteous
sake; as all that were in the ship* with Paul, had their lives given them, and
were preserved from drowning for his sake, Acts 27.

Use. 1. This then serves to reprove the folly of carnal people, that so dote
upon wealth and honor, and things of this world, as if they that had them were
the happy men; Oh they be made, they cannot do amiss. And these, in their
language, are usually called the best men in the Town, and these they crouch
to and ad mire, when grace and the fear of God in any is little regarded;
esteeming the servants of God without wealth (how gracious soever) but poor
snakes.

But, Oh folly and madness to worship the Golden Calfe! so highly to esteem
men for red and white earth, gifts of Gods left hand, given even to his
enemies, things transitory and soon fading away, and that cannot keep their
owners from the damnation of hell; and not to esteem of the precious graces of
Gods Spirit, given from above only to his Elect, and which do abide unto
everlasting life.

Elisha, that worthy Prophet of the Lord, was of another mind, who, but for
the goodness that was in King Iehoshaphat, would not have once looked toward
Iehoram, that wicked King of Israel, 2 Kin. 3. 14. which folly, of preferring
wealth above grace, the Apostle St. James rebukes, Cap. 2. 1, 2. etc.

Secondly, this rebukes such, as make account of all alike, especially, if
they be any thing civil; one as welcome to them as another, as much commended
in life and at death: like as well of the civil, as of them that be truly
religious, show as much countenance, yield as much help to one as to the
other. If they have any thing to give, they put no difference between the
poor, good, or bad.

These are justly to be suspected, and to be thought to be neither Fish nor
Flesh; for where true grace is, their eyes be anointed, that they can see a
difference between men, and grace will draw to grace, and as discern it, so
embrace it: for though we challenge no such gift, as some that say, If they
talk but half* an hour with a man, they will know whether he be the child
of God or not; yet, I say, God gives grace to discern grace where it is, from
bare ciuillity, at least by conuersing with them, and to prefer one
infinitely before the other.

Many will commend a mere civil man, in whom its easy to discern, that
there is not one dram of piety or true grace, to be as honest a man as need
to be, and think and speak as well of him, as of a true good Christian; but
this is a very dangerous sign, that there is no more but civil honesty in
themselves.

Thirdly, this reproves a more fearful sin yet, and yet the common practice
of some, that in stead of loving the godly best of all persons, they can worst
away with them. They could love such a kinsman, tenant, servant, etc. but that
he is (as they call them) a Puritan, and they cannot abide these precise
fellows. Nay, they have loved such and such a one, till it pleased God to
convert him, and ever since they could never abide him: As the chief Priests
dealt by Saul, after he was converted, and became a Paul. Why? he was the same
man that he was, only he was better now: So its with the other that I spoke
of; which is a plain argument, that they hate them for their goodness, as
David complains, Psalm 38. 20. My meaning is only to reprove those, who,
upon sincere and devout Chrians, such as make most conscience of their ways,
and are truly zealous in Gods service; fasten the odious name of Puritan, and
cannot abide them.
Though they pretend they hate them for this or that fault, yet* that is not
so; for they love those that live in greater faults, and themselves live in
far greater, than they can possibly charge them withal: The truth is, its
because they are better than themselves, and dare not be companions with them
in evil, 1 Pet. 4. 4. therefore the openly profane hate them: They hate them,
because they fly a higher pitch, than they are willing to put themselves to
the pains to attain to, and so they count they discredit them, who, but for
these precise ones, should be counted the best, and as good, as one would
desire.

Besides, these tell them, that their fruitless profession of Religion will
not serve to bring them to Heaven; and therefore urge them to look further,
which they are not willing to do; and this makes them wish, they were all out
of the way: for they only trouble the world, they should be quiet but for
them. And thus our Savior Christ and the Gospel bring variance, not into the
same Town where before all went hand in hand to sin, but into the same
Family; because some will receive the Gospel and the power of it, some others
will not: therefore they are now at odds, that were all one before in evil.

This sin has most fearfully ouer-spread this Nation, so that its more safe
from the hatred and ill tongues of most, to be any thing, rather than to be
zealous and godly. A fearful thing. Every man loves a courageous soldier, a
diligent and resolute servant for his Master, a man forward in his business;
only forwardness and zeal for God and in Religion, that cannot be endured.
These be they that be the troublers, and a burden to the places where they be,
and so to the Land, and be railed on as the vilest persons, when as yet these
are perhaps upon their knees, pleading with God for the Nation, when multitudes
are swilling, and swearing, and provoking Gods wrath against it; therefore we
have small cause to be weary of them: the Land, no doubt, fares the better for
them every day.

Is this the fruit of above threescore years peace and plenty of the Gospel;
wherein it had been meet we had all been such as I mean: that is, zealous and
true hearted Christians, that now those few that labor to show forth the power
of true godliness, in an universal obedience to the Word they profess, that
these should be had in derision, and be a wonder in Israel? As sure as we live,
if all in this Land served God, as it is to be feared, some do, in an idle and
mere ceremonious coming to Church, hearing of Sermons, and receiving the
Sacrament, and yet live as they list, and keep their lusts still, and the
sins they have a mind to; God would soon ease himself of us, and vomit up
such a lukewarm Nation: for how odious is this to God, to have people draw
near to him with their lips, when their hearts are divided from him, and run
after their sins: to hear his Word, and hate to be reformed, or to mend a
little in what they list, and no further than they please; to call upon God,
and yet depart not from evil; in receiving the Lords Supper, to profess Faith
in Christ, and obedience to all Gods commandments, and in their lives to show
the clean contrary every day? what is this but to provoke God against us, and
to deceive our own souls?

And as for those particular persons that are haters of Gods true servants,
they are no such themselves, and their state is fearful. For they are not led
by the spirit that David and Cornelius was, and which I pray God I may ever be.
They be no true Members of the Church here, nor shall be heirs of Gods
Kingdom hereafter, as Psalm. 15. 4. None of Christ's Disciples, who are known by
loving their Brethren, John 13. 35. nor are translated from death to life, 1
John 3. 14. but remain under death to this hour: Nor have any love to God in
them, 1 John 5. 1. for if they loved him that begets, they would love those
that are begotten of him.

But they are of the seed of the Serpent, bearing enmity against the seed of
the Woman, against Christ in his members; of Cains lineage, of the brood of
Ismael, worse than Balaam; Numb. 23. that said, How shall I curse, where God
has not cursed? or detest, where God has not detested? are led by Satan, who
is an accuser of the Brethren, Revel. 12, 10. who provide woefully for
themselves: for God said to Abraham, and so to all that be of the seed of
Abraham by true faith, I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that
curse thee.

Their ill will is indeed against Christ, and reaches to him; as he said from
heaven to Saul, Why persecutest thou me? and, Its hard kicking against the
pricks. Look throughout all the Scriptures, and you shall see, that fearful
judgments have overtaken the haters, and pursuers, or opposers of the true
servants of God. Later Histories of the Church, and our own daily experience
affords abundance of very true, sensible, and fearful examples in this kind.
And if at the day of judgment, they that have done them no good shall be set
on the left hand, and hear this doleful sentence, Go ye cursed etc. then
what shall become of them that have hated them, and done them hurt? Let every
one therefore that has been guilty in this thing, repent deeply of it, as
there is cause, and so shake off this black and fearful Mark, else the time
will come, when they shall wish, and would think themselves happy, to be
shadowed under their wing whom now they hate; when they shall see them
received, and themselves refused.

Yet here again let me put in this by the way, that I count not those for Gods
true servants who are such only in Profession, and not in their Practice.

Some zealous Professors there are, which yet are not so diligent in their
callings as they ought to be. Some not so careful to keep out of debt, or not
to pay their debts, but hang on every bush, and break promises shamefully, to
the just opening the mouths of their Neighbors. Some be rash and
indiscreete, given to censure too deeply. Some spend all their zeal in crying
out against Ceremonies, and neglect matters more belonging to edifying
themselves and others. Some forsake their own Ministers when they preach, very
uncharitably and indiscreetly. Some separate themselves from the Church, and
our Ministry and Society altogether. Now if a Minister, or any Christian
shall show his dislike of such courses in general, or rebuke any particular
person for any of them, he is not to be ill thought of for so doing, nor to
be reputed an hater of Gods servants.

Fourthly, there are diverse sorts of them that be no open enemies to Gods
children, that yet will be found no other, when God shall come to judgment;
and therefore here to be discovered and reproved. They be not with them;
therefore they be against them. They can sit and hear them unjustly evil
spoken of, and yet be never grieved, nor once open their mouths in their
behalf. That pry into their lives, and if they can spy a hole in their coat,
they reproach them by it, and tell it from one to another, and that with no
grief. Can cast out a scoff against them: That care not for their company.
Delight rather in those that spend the time in telling News or Tales, of this
or that body: with these they can sit long; but for other that will hold to any
godly speech, they take no pleasure in them: They make matches with such rather
than with those; inuit them, and love their company to choose. These be
lukewarm Christians, Neuters, neither the one, nor the other, of both sides,
of every side: but God can see them to be Enemies, and will set them on his
left hand; when it will not serve them to plead that they never hated them, or
opposed them. Let men look well to this Point: for there be many that think
well of themselves, for good Christians, that yet will be found of this number:
But as they can have no sound peace to their Consciences, so shall they never
have good name in the Church of God, till it be otherwise.

Fifthly and lastly, let this be a Consolation to all those whose hearts do
bear witness, and their practice bewray that they truly love the Saints; they
can have no better sign of the grace of God, or that they be true Members of
the Church here, and shall be inheriters of glory hereafter; that they love
God, be Christ's Disciples, and be translated from death to life. Always
provided, that you deceive not your selves in this point, as no doubt diverse
do, To think, that because you love some one or two choice ones, that you are
a lover of Gods people, though you neglect all the rest: which is not so; for
whosoever loves any in truth, loves the grace of God in whomsoever he sees it,
rich or poor, high or low. Or because you love some that be of your Kin, or
for some outward good qualification they have, or some common gift of learning,
eloquence, or because they be rich, or be such as have done you some
pleasure, or may do: for if your love be set upon Gods servants for such by
respects, this is not the true Love of the Saints: But if you love them simply
for the work of Gods sanctifying grace that yousee or hear to be in them,
though you never saw them, nor never shall, yet for the grace of God your heart
is knit to them, as Ionathans to David: or if you know and live near them
though they never did you any special good turn, or be nothing to you
outwardly and in the flesh, nay, though any such have reproved you of some
fault they have seen in you, yet you love them for the Image of God that
shines in them: yea, though you see, hear, or know some imperfections in them,
and things worthy blame, yet seeing signs of synceritie you love them
notwithstanding, are glad when they do well, and grieve at the contrary: this
is good.

Examine your selves by these things; if you be taken tardy, then deceive your
selves no longer: If your heart witness on your side by these trials, then be
comforted, and labor to increase in this grace, that so your evidence may be
strong: And the rather, because this has kept many from sinking in time of
Temptation, when all other evidences have been to seek. Thus much of the love
that all ought to bear to the People of God.

CHAP. 10. How true Christians should love each other.
NOw I will add yet one thing more, and that is, How true Christians should
love and carry themselves toward each other. They ought to love one another
most entirely, and more than they do, or can love the common sort. They must
love them as fellow members of the same mystical body whereof Christ is the
head. Now how do the members of the natural body love, stick together, and
seek the good of each other, defend and tender one another, rejoice in each
others welfare, and grieve at the contrary? so ought the Members of the
spiritual body much more, if it were possible. We cannot love all thus; for
all are not fellow members in this body of Christ.

Secondly, they must love as brethren: therefore the love that is to be
between them is called Brotherly kindness, 2 Pet. 1. 7. Therefore though
some scoffing Ismaels deride this name, and say, Oh you be of the Brethren:
yet we are not to be ashamed of this name, seeing GOD so speaks.

Gods children be brothers and sisters; they have the same Father, which is
God, the same Mother, the Church, begotten by the same immortal seed, the Word
of God, nourisht with the same milk, and meat of the same Word and holy
Sacraments, heirs of the same Inheritance in Heaven by Christ Jesus. A better
Brotherhood than that of nature, as much as the spirit is better than the
flesh: Yea, and a more lasting Brotherhood; that will last when this is
vanished away, which lasts only for this frail life of ours, but the other
abides for ever. Therefore our Savior Christ said, Who is my Mother, and who
are my Brethren? Natural Brethren ought to love dearly, how much more we that
are of a better kindred?

Its very pleasing to God our Father; and to the Church our Mother, that all
their children should live in love, as Psalm. 133. 1. and a joy to all the
brothers and sisters; As it is a joy to any earthly Parents to have their
children love well together: and the contrary is very grievous, and they will
mourn to each other, There be two Boys can never agree, two Girls that love
not one another; what will they do when we are gone?

Now to love as Brethren, is this; To have Brotherly* affections each to other
inwardly, and to declare the same outwardly by brotherly actions. For the
first, we are bidden, Romans 12. Be affectioned to love one another; as to weep
with them that weep, to have compassion of their miseries, as Heb. 13. 9. As
the Samaritan had compassion on the man that fell among Thieves. And our
Savior Christ had compassion on the spiritual misery of the People, Mat. 9.
36. St. Paul was affected with the miseries of the Jews, and took them
deeply to heart, Romans 9. 1, 2, 3. So Nehemiah, hearing of the distress of the
Church of the Jews at Jerusalem, though he were well himself, yet he so
mourned for them as it was seen in his face. The contrary is blamed, Amos 6.
No man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph.

So to rejoice with them that rejoice, as Luke 1. 58. yea, though it were ill
with ourselves. As Paul in prison, yet rejoiced to hear of the welfare of the
Churches. These brotherly affections be so necessary, as all brotherly actions
not proceeding from these, are in no account with God; As a man may give all
his goods to the poor, and have no love, and so be but a tinckling Cimball, 1
Cor. 13. As if a man should give, that he might merit thereby, or to purchase
credit, or for companies sake, or with vpbraiding; and from no compassion of
the poor man's misery, it would neither please God, nor profit him that does it.

So to admonish one (which is a special duty of Love) but if done with
twitting and reproaching, as glad they have some matter against him, it has
lost his grace and reward with God.

And herein, the poor may show as much love to their fellow-brethren as the
rich; which may comfort them which are ready to be discouraged, and think they
are unhappy, and have nothing to show any love in; Yes, you may be as
plentiful in brotherly affections, as any other.

Now for brotherly actions, they must be adjoined to show the truth of the
affections; they be counterfeit, if not thus approved, as 1 John 3. 17. like
those speeches, James 2. 15, 16.

Brotherly actions be to the soul and body, as need is. To the bodily
necessities of our fellowbrethren in ordinary wants, we must give of our
superfluity; in extraordinary calamities, of our maine substance: And to think
it honor enough, that God makes us giuers to them, that be as dear to him as
our selves, and shall be inheritors of the same glory with us, though we abound
now, and they be suffered to want.

So to the soul in admonition, exhortation, consolation, and prayer, which are
the principal and most profitable fruits of our love one to another. And all
these ought to be performed purely, fervently, and constantly, as we heard in
handling the properties of Love.

But, Beloved, if we come to look for these things among Christians, they
will all be found very much wanting, both brotherly affections, and brotherly
actions, and those that be, often not pure, but with looking at our selves, not
fervent, but faint and few, nor constant, but short and brittle, broken off by
affliction, especially, if it continue, when yet there is most need: for a
brother is borne for adversity.

Many Christians will be kind to another in the beginning of their affliction,
and for a little while; but if it hold long, then most fail him, and their
love is spent as it were. Or otherwise, their love is broken off by some
unkindness, and not readily sodered again so strong as it was before.

There is much strangeness between Christians; they care not one for another
almost: they see each other at Church, but not all the week after. Peace has
made Christians proud and careless; every man can subsist by himself, and
has no need of his brother: We may justly fear, God will send us troubles,
to make us glad one of another.

But there is use enough one of another even now, if we had eyes to see it, to
help, encourage, comfort, and confirm each other in our holy profession and
Christian course, against the manifold discouragements and temptations we are
subject to meet with; and to whet on, and set an edge one upon another, that
grow so dull; to lay our brands together, that we may catch some heat from
one another; to mind one another of such changes as may come, and so of our
last end, to prepare for them in time.

Stronger Christians, and of better gifts, look so houerly on the weak; so
the rich upon the poor: Fie upon it, are they not your brethren? do you not
know them, because of their russet or leather coat? he has as much grace, may
be, more than you, and shall have (it may be) a better place in Heaven than
you; and do you esteem so meanly of him? Its counted pride, when any will not
know their poor kindred; know Jesus Christ and the grace of God in them, and
disdain not their company, though your inferiors; seeing, as you may comfort
and refresh them by your love, so you may receive much benefit from them again.

Christians should meet together, not to feasting only, but sometimes to build
up one another by holy conference. and this will increase love greatly: for
when we see the grace of God one in another, and get good one by another, our
love is hereby greatly furthered.

Another fault too much among many Christians, is, as want of bowels of tender
compassion toward our brethren in distress, so there is not that forwardness
and freeness to relieve their necessities.

First, for their bodily wants, there is too much straitness ofttimes; whereas
if we did consider, that they are not only our own flesh (as the common sort
are) but our fellow members, fellow-brethren, and such as whom God might have
made us takers from them, and them giuers to us, it would enlarge our heart and
our hand toward them. Well, what we do for them, is not to fellow members and
fellow-brethren only, but to Christ Jesus himself; and it shall be so counted
for at the last and great day. Its not so much theirs to whom we give it, as
its our own, and furthers our reckoning: As the seed is not the grounds so
much, as the owners that sowes it, and for his benefit. It will be all reckoned
ours at the great payment day, even to a cup of cold water: and we shall see
he has not forgotten any work of our love, but has kept just books and true
accounts, and will then say to us, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit, etc.
For I was often, in my members, in a poor condition, and ye ministered unto me;
now receive a thousand fold, even that Kingdom that was prepared for you from
the beginning of the world.

And for relieuing their spiritual wants, there is often too much want of
compassion and care. How far may a Christian go out of his way, ere another,
with the spirit of meekness, will step in by a wholesome admonition, to stop
him in his course? The heavy not comforted with a word in season, nor the
fainting encouraged, but every man minding his own matters, as though we were
strangers, and God had given us no charge one of another.

Nay, there is yet a greater fault to be found among many Christians, than
these two that I have spoken of, and that is this, That sundry of them can take
leave to fall out, and contend with each other, and that very deeply: sometimes
for words, sometimes for small matters of the world; yea, and some when they be
out, cannot find the way in again, nor are they ashamed of that they have
done, but can lie and continue in it month after month. Is this the behavior
of fellow members? think we our Head Christ will endure or bear it, to have
his body thus rent one member from another? nay, one would think, is this
possible: What do you think of your self, that you are a true member of
Christ by Faith? Well, and what do you think of him, that you are thus rent
and divided from? I dare not but think (you will say) but he belongs to God.
And do you think then, that the member of Christ should either thus deal, or
thus be dealt withal, and that by his fellow member? He that should see one
member in a man's natural body, offering hurt and violence to another, would
he not think the man were mad? What shall we say then, when Christians can
so eagerly pursue each other in words and deeds (as too often is seen) shall we
say they be in their right mind? but rather, that the spirit of pride, or
couetoushesse, or some such humor, has intoxicated their brains. This will
cost them dear, or ever they can make their peace with God and their
Conscience; and they must fall out as deeply with themselves for their folly,
and with indignation take a holy revenge of themselves, that they may fear
ever to do the like again.

Is this the behavior of brothers and sisters, to fly in one another face,
to live at such odds, as that all the Parish takes notice of it? If natural
brethren should do so, all men would cry shame of it. Does our father like
this, think you? our mother, and fellow-brethren round about, that see or
hear of it, do you think this goes not to their hearts? And think you, you
do not open the mouths of Canaanites and Perizzites that are every where, and
hear of it? Think we good, to give them such just matter to speak evil of
us, and of our holy profession for it? Our father Abraham could say to his
inferior Lot, Let there be no strife between me and thee: for we are brethen.
A body would think that the name Brother, should either prevent all strife, or
at least quickly break the neck of it.

Though good Christians, may out of brittlenesse of nature, fall out on the
sudden, yet, me thinks, grace should enforce them to recall themselves, and
yield to each other, and come in, though they were of never such a proud and
stout stomach naturally. Else may they not suspect themselves to be bastards,
rather than right bred brothers? to be wooden legs, and no living members?
at least they have got the numb palsy, for which they had need to seek speedy
remedy.

Let us, I beseech you, so many of us as have been faulty in any of these three
things, see how ill they have becommed us, be ashamed and humbled for them, and
amend, that we may have sound arguments, that we are true members of Christ's
body, and lively and feeling ones.

Think like brethren, speak as brethren, both to face and behind their
backs, and do like brethren, so shall we glorify God our Father, credit and
comfort the Church our Mother, and our fellow-brethren, and stop the mouths of
Papists, Atheists, profane ones, mere civil ones and worldlings, that would
not a little rejoice at our divisions.

Put on brotherly affections, show them by brotherly actions, let not small
matters make unkindness, depart from much for peace and love, let our
differences be speedily compounded by others, if we cannot agree them within
our selves; fear rather to do the least wrong, than to suffer a greater: so
shall we be fit to do good one to another upon all occasions; for goodness
goes forward where love is, but contention or unkindness stops the course of
all that is good. So shall we also be stronger against our common adversaries,
the World, and Devil, which do so hate us, as a body would think it were
meet for us to stick fast and close together, and make much one of another,
seeing this wicked world is bent against us.

Let me conclude this my speech to you Christians, with that blessed
exhortation of Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 13, 11. Finally, my Brethren, fare ye well,
be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of
love and peace shall be with you.

CHAP. 11. Of releeuing the poor.
I Will add but one thing more, and so make an end of what I purpose to say of
this duty of Love, in which I have been longer than I thought of at first: And
that is touching one branch, and duty of love, which is the relieuing the
necessities of the poor; of which, because I have spoken some thing in one of
the Notes of Love, namely, that its Bountiful, I will be so much the shorter;
handling some things here, that were not there so convenient to be spoken of.

The Scriptures, both of Old and New Testament, are plentiful about this
Point, either Commandments touching it, and Promises of blessing thereto, or
Threatenings against the neglect of it.

In the Old Law God commanded to leave their Grounds vnsowen, and Trees
ungathered the seventh year, for the poor, Exodus 23. 10, 11. Leu. 25. 3. And
the years that they sowed and gathered in, they were bidden to leave gleanings,
Deuteronomy. 24. 19. to the end.

How often in the Prophets does the Lord call for Mercy? yea, tryes the truth of
their Religion, and performance of holy Duties by this, as St. James does,
chap. I. and the last verse, giving such charge of the poor in general,
particularly, of the widow, stranger and fatherless.

It is commanded, Esaias 58. 7. a very excellent place, plain and plentiful;
and in most of the Prophets its called for, as a thing that the Jews much
failed in, and were covetous and cruel. Heb. 13, To do good, and to
distribute, forget not, etc. Ephesians. 4. 28. Mat. 5. 45. He commands it, whose
we are, and all we have at his appointment. I will add a few Reasons to move
to this Duty:

1 To let pass to speak of the Reas.
example of God, who fills the whole world with his goodness, and feeds both
man and beast; who has also been bountiful to every of us that are unworthy
(as Jacob said) of the least of his mercies; Let the examples of Gods servants,
who herein obeyed and imitated the Lord in all ages; let them move us. Elisha
took order for the poor widow, for the payment of her debts, and for her own
maintenance, 2 Kings 4. Job was notable in this duty, as appears Chap. 31.
from verse 16. to 21. Our Savior Christ of that little that he received for
his maintenance, yet gave something to the poor: therefore (Judas carrying the
bag) when our Savior Christ bade him, that he did do quickly, the Disciples
thought he had meant he should give somewhat to the poor. Zacheus, being
converted, gave half his goods etc. Luke 19. So Acts 2. and 4. the rich sold,
and relieved the poor. Dorcas a good Woman this way, Acts 9. toward the end.
Cornelius also a notable example, Acts 10. 1. There was also a contribution
made by the Christians for the poor Brethren in Judea, because of a famine was
among them, Acts 11. 29. Onesiphorus is commended, and Gaius for an host to the
poor Saints of God.

2 Its a sacrifice very acceptable to God, Heb. 13. 16. Phil. 4. 18. as
Cornelius his Alms came up into remembrance before God, Acts 10. 4. Yea, so
pleasing, as when his service and that cannot stand together, he preferres
mercy before sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6. And so pleasing, as no duty of Religion,
ordinary or extraordinary, is welcome to God, if this duty be wanting, as Esaias
1. and 58. from verse 5. to 13. What stronger motive can there be than this,
seeing its our happiness that we can do any thing that GOD will be well
pleased with?

3 We are but Stewards in respect of God (though owners among men) who has so
delivered these things out of his hand to us, as yet he has reserved a
Royalty in them, and the appointing how they shall be disposed, and will call
us to account of our stewardship, who has appointed the poor a part:
therefore without this, we can bring in no good bills of account.

We must not be like the Giants den, that have all the footings coming to us,
and none from us. As that rich churl that coming over among his Tenants at
the half year, a poor body asked him a penny, No he told them, he came to
receive money, and not to give: the contrary had been better sense and reason
a great deal. Else how can we show our selves thankful to God, that has made
us able to give, that might have made us receivers, the tail as well as the
head, it being in his hand to make poor or rich, and there being nothing in us
to move him to give us the better part?

Its a great honor to be the Almners of the King of Heaven and Earth, and
that to those that be not our own flesh only, but may be, such as belong to
the Kingdom of God, as well as our selves. If we should see an Ox or Ass in
misery, ready to famish, or lying under the burden, we ought to pity and
help them: how much more our Christian Brother? Its honor enough that we may
be giuers and lenders, though we keep not all to our selves. Its good
manners for them that sit at the upper end of the Table, when they have cut
well, to set down some to them that sit below, that all may go away
satisfied, and praise the Master of the Feast.

4 By our liberality and merciful dealing we shall bring much glory to God:
for we shall cause many thanks to be given him from the poor, 2 Cor. 8. and
make them more to depend upon God, and to speak good of his dispensing of
things; that though he has appointed some to be poor, yet has also
commanded the rich to have respect unto them.

5 We shall do them a great deal of good whom we relieve: First to their
bodies, feeding their hungry bellies, clothing their naked loins, refreshing
their bowels: Or by lending we set them to their work, whereby they may get to
live of. Next to their souls, keeping them from murmuring, impatience, theft,
discontent: if they have no goodness in them its the way to break their
hearts, and to bring them to good, or else to convince them at least: if they
have any good, we shall comfort their hearts, strengthen their faith, and make
them serve God much the more cheerfully.

But especially we shall do our selves a great deal of good: First, we shall
procure many prayers* of the children of God for us. which is no small benefit,
2 Timothy 7. and the three last verses, the third Epistle of St. John the first
and second verses: St. Paul prays earnestly in the one place for Onesiphorus,
and St. John in the other for Gaius his host; and such prayers be not in vain.

Besides, we bring upon our selves a great many blessings, God having made
such promises of blessing to this Duty rightly performed.

We provide well for our outward estate: for he that sows liberally, shall
reap liberally, and with increase. God has given his Word for requital, Pro.
19 17. So that we have God in our Cupboard for it (as we may say with holy
reverence) he is the Poores Surety, whose word is better than any man's bond:
Heaven and Earth must be empty ere he will fail to pay. He that finds seed
to the sower will supply to such, 2 Cor. 8. His righteousness shall endure for
over, Psalm. 112. God will not put him out of his Farm that pays his Rent so
well, but bless his stock and store, his crop and increase, Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
Eccles. 7. 1.

Yea, he will bless them, not in their goods only, but in their names, they
shall have love and a good report, which is better than a good ointment, and
than much silver and gold, Prou. 22. 1. How fresh and sweet is Mary's name
still, for her ointment poured out; and Gaius, whose name is used, when we
speak of a bountiful man to the people of God; he is a Gaius we say? Yea, God
will bless such in their souls, Prou. 11. 17. Isa. 58. from verse 8. on
forward. Matthew. 5. the merciful shall obtain mercy. As on the contrary, God
will not hear the prayer of the unmerciful man, Isa. 1. 15. Prou. 21. 13. He
that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, etc. Nay, God will not bless the
merciful man in this world only, but at the resurrection of the Just, Luke
14. when they shall hear this comfortable and most sweet word, Come ye
blessed, etc. because he counts it as done to himself; and will we not give to
God that gives all, nor to Jesus Christ, that spared not his life for us? If we
say, Yes to God or Christ, we will give any thing, else God forbid; God takes
it done to himself, that is done to any of his. Whereas the Lord will plague
both here and hereafter the unmerciful man: here, as Nabal, whom he struck
that he dyed; and the Fool, Luke 12. that had all for himself, never mentions
any body else, was struck with sudden death; and hereafter, as the rich
glutton, Luke 16. for no covetous or unmerciful man shall ever come in the
Kingdom of heaven: but there shall be judgment without mercy, to them that
show no mercy: they that will not give crumbs of bread on earth, shall be
denied drops of water in hell.

Nay, God will not only bless the liberal and merciful man himself, but his
posterity after him, Psalm 37. 26. The son of a Tennant, that paid his rent
duly, shall not be put out his of Farm. Whereas God will curse the posterity
of unmerciful men, and pluck from them the poores portion, which their wicked
fathers unconscionably hoarded up among their own; God will let the
extortioner catch him, or give him up to a riotous wastefull course, that shall
consume all: one way or other God will draw it out of his belly; and he often
dies in misery, whose father had no mercy.

Therefore, howsoever they have a Proverb, Happy is that son, whose father
goes to the Devil, yet its most wicked and false: for even for outward
happiness they miss of it, except it be some odd one, that by Repentance
breaks off, and heales his fathers sin by mercifulness to the poor.

So that every way a merciful man prouides well for himself, furthers his
reckoning, and brings a great heap of blessings upon himself and his. But an
unmerciful cruel man is well called a miserable man; for of all men, a
covetous man is most miserable, in goods, name, soul and posterity, here and
hereafter.

Use 1. This rebukes a number of cruel, and unmerciful, and hard hearted
men, of whom there are every where some seen. True, the Gospel (God be
thanked) has prevailed with many, and they show forth some good fruits of
their Faith and Love: But a number be usurers, oppressors, grinders, rakers,
all for themselves, and so covetous, as they will part from nothing by their
good will: if any thing come from them, its so hardly, as one should wring
water out of a stone, or pull away a piece of their flesh; as Nabal, that sent
away David's servants empty, and with a churlish answer.

Some others so prodigal and riotous, and given to their pleasures, and to all
excess, as they waste their state so fast, as they disable themselves to do
that good they might; its not to be had: Luxury keeps them so bare, which if
they had grace to measure their matters with judgment, might live a great
deal better themselves, and do much good where need is.

Or if some be so rich, as they hold their state, yet they lay it on so upon
themselves and theirs, as no cost is spared upon brave apparel, new fashions,
costly and curious diet, hawks, hounds, dice, cards, gamings, that yet when it
comes to a matter of giving, are as pinching, as they that have not the tithe
of their estate, can beteeme nothing, to the poor or good uses, very frank in
idle expenses to serve their own lust, very sparing to those that have need;
like the Glutton, Luke 16. who spared nothing from himself, nor nothing for
poor Lazarus. And those, Amos 6. that fed to the full of the fattest, and
drunk of the sweetest, till they were fitter to stretch themselves, and tumble
upon their costly beds, than to do any good, yet they had not so much as a
thought of the poor that were in want. And as the Fool, Luke 12. that made
account he had much, and all for himself; Soul, eat, drink, and take thine
ease, thou have goods laid up for (thee) for many years.

Notwithstanding the commandment of God, which they cannot be ignorant of, and
the Law of Nature, which would be helped, if they were poor, Gods and good
men's example, and the many promises of blessing made to this duty, yet are no
whit moved by all these, but fast glued to the world, and can hear nothing
that should pull any thing from them. This was one of Sodoms sins, Contempt
of the poor.

Let these sorts of men know, they are not so ill for others, as they be for
themselves: As they show well, there is no love of God or men in them, as 1
John 3. Who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion against him, how dwells the love of God in him? So
they will pull some judgment of God upon their own heads, as their
Predecessors, whom I have named, have done. And this is one reason, no doubt,
that men's goods shift masters so often; besides the ill account they will make of
their stewardship, when they shall be called thereto, for which they must make
their reckoning, to hear no better sentence than, O evil and unfaithful
servant, take him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness.

Let these better bethink themselves in time, and break off their sins by
repentance, and their unrighteousness by mercy to the poor, that there may be
a healing of their error, and a preventing the judgments of God: Oh that my
counsel from God may be acceptable to them.

2 But for those, that out of conscience of Gods commandment, and faith in
Gods promises made to this duty, out of a zeal to bring glory to God, do
good to others, and to further their own reckoning; make conscience to be
doing good with a merciful heart, carry a liberal hand, as God gives ability
in themselves, and occasion from others: let them take it to themselves, as a
good mark of the truth of their Religion, and know they can no way provide
better for their comfort, or the continuance of Gods blessing upon them and
their estate, than by continuance in this duty.

3 And thirdly, let this provoke all sorts of men, to take knowledge of this
duty of mercifulness to the poor, as one part of Gods will; and well
weighing the reasons used to provoke thereto, set themselves to make conscience
of the performance thereof: which that they may do indeed, they must be
persuaded to remove out of the may certain vices, that be deadly enemies
thereto, and labor for the contrary virtues.

1. The first is Unbelief, which, as it breeds many other vices, so that of
Unmercifulness; for that casts so many doubts and fears of what they may want
themselves, and that it will hinder them in their estate, to give here and
there, as they withdraw: therefore labor for Faith to believe, that as God
will perform all his promises, so those made to this duty; and therefore that
its the high way to thriuing. and this will set us to it, and that with
cheerfulness.

2. Pride, which is seen in excess of costly attire for our selves and ours,
aiming at high pitches and great portions for our children, and such and such
estates must be obtained; this must needs hinder liberality: therefore the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. forbids women to be decked with costly apparel, but
commands to array themselves with good works: Noting, they cannot do both; for
the back is a thief: the meaning is, when its superfluous, and beyond their
ability, all duties discharged: Oh what an infinite deal of good might be
done, if but the superfluities of folks apparel were taken away, which might
very well be spared!

3 The like may be said of intemperance excess of cheer, variety and
costliness of dishes at men's tables: God allows to men according to their
degrees, to some usually, to others at festival times and days of greater
rejoicing; yet to none excess: or so as they thereby be disabled for such good
works as their place calls for at their hands. The excess of this Land in
these two forenamed things, would abundantly not only relieve the wants of our
poor at home, but would make a blessed supply of the most woeful and crying
necessities of our distressed brethren abroad.

And is it meet that some should be hungry, and others drunken? as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 11. 21. Were it not much meeter, that they had our superfluities
(which do us but hurt) to supply their necessities, and so both should be
better? The Lord give us at last to make conscience of this Duty; its more
than high time so to do.

4 Idleness and unthriftiness, which usually go together, are great lets of
liberality. For, if one go ever to the heap, and by labor add nothing
thereto, in time it will consume, and so he shall have nothing for himself
nor the poor: therefore the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 28. commands to work with the
hands, that so there may be wherewith to give to them that want.

But usually idleness is joined with spending, gaming, drinking, and such
unthrifty courses, and this hastens beggary the faster, and so preuents
liberality in a high degree. The provident and thrifty are fittest to do
good: as the good Hous-wife in the last of the Proverbs.

5 Covetousness is especially to be cast out, as the direct opposite to
mercifulness to the poor, as contrary as fire and water: which is an
insatiable desire of getting more, setting men's hearts on the world so eagerly,
as it were heaven or happiness, and making it their God, so as they cannot
endure to part from it; not knowing that they are base and transitory things,
and that the perfection of them is in their well employment.

Lets therefore be entreated to remove these lets out of the way, that this
duty may be carefully performed.

But yet let us not content our selves to do this Duty of Mercifulness to
the poor, but labor like Christians to do it in a right manner: for that is
all in all, that makes or marres. For we may give much, and yet not please
God, nor profit our selves. Therefore diverse Rules to this purpose must be
observed:

1. We must give or lend righteously, Rules f^^ right relieuing.
that is, of our own lawfully come by; not what we have gotten by oppression
or wrong, which is to rob one, to give to another. We must not keep the poor
as the Lion or Fox keep their Whelps or Cubs, with that we have got by
rapine, but with our own: therefore giving is called Righteousness, Psalm.
112, not only to show that its a duty that must be done, but it must be done
in Righteousness. Therefore Micah 6. these two are joined together, to do
justly, to love mercy. Zacheus first restored what he had got wrongfully, and
then gives of his own just gotten goods to the poor.

Contrary to this, is the practice of some usurious, covetous, or sacrilegious
persons, who when they have got much by Church robbery, and selling Church
livings, or by oppressing and undoing many families; to still the gnawing of
their Consciences, give somewhat to the poor at last. But its abomination to
God, and their sins cry louder for judgment, than their liberality for any
blessing.

Quest. But here it may be demanded, whether servants may give of their Masters
goods?

Answ. No doubt, without Masters or Dames consent in one kind or other, they
may not, it shall be theft to them, rather than any thing pleasing to God.

Quest. May children give of their Parents goods?

Ans. No: not except they have some consent.

Quest. May such as are behind hand, and owe more than they be worth, or able
to pay; may these give?

Answ. No: by no means. They boast of false liberality.

2 We must give freely, without expecting a recompense. Not therefore with
opinion of merit to earne heaven, as Papists mercenarily do: Or to help
themselves out of Purgatory; that is base: Nor do it Pharisaically, with
ostentation, and desire to be seen.

We may look upon the Promises made by God to this Duty, to encourage us the
more; yet to do it freely, because its commanded us of God.

Not expecting any thing from man. What is freer than gift, as we say? So when
we lend to our poor Neighbor, it must be free, not looking he should earne
it out, as it were, or do as much for us some other way; fie upon it. Nay, we
ought not so to look for our own again, as that be the chief thing we aim
at, but to do him a pleasure.

3 Cheerfully, as a free will offering. God loves a cheerful giver: as
Zacheus stood forth and gave etc. The Macedonians 2 Cor. 8. counted and called
it a grace and favor, that they might have their hand in so good, acceptable
and gainful a work. Men sow cheerfully in good ground.

Therefore its not to be done by force of Law, as some: Nor yet by such
importunity of Neighbors, feign to use so many Arguments, and such a deal of
do to persuade and get them to it. Not grudgingly or of necessity.

4 Seasonably; not tomorrow, if they now need, and we have it, Pro 3. 28. we
know not what may fall out by then, what temptation they may meet with. Also
we may be dead, or they: He gives twice, that gives quickly.

Also help them ere it be too late: shore them up when they begin to reele,
so they may stand a good while; not let them alone till they fall flat down. A
little in time may do more good, than much more after. We must not tarry till
they have sold their cupbord, bed, their best coat; fie upon it. If one be
lent to in time, he may be vpheld, that else must soon come to receive Alms.
So to give to the poor in their sickness, before they be too farspent.

5 Wisely: not lashing it on too fast, but measuring it out as it may continue.
Psalm. 112. Measure our affairs by judgment. Few err on this hand; yet some
have been so lavish in housekeeping, entertainment and giving, as they have
over gone themselves. This is to pull out the tap: We must draw as need is. A
good housekeeper will not set the barrel on the green, for every one to
drink that will, and more than need; so he should soon make an end, and
have no comfort when he has done.

Also we must give wisely, as we may do most good with that we give.
Therefore we must take care, that they have it that have most need: Not the
lusty to have it, and the old, lame, blind, impotent, and yongue children to
want. Its a great disorder in some great men's keeping open house at Christmas,
that the rude, idle and profane round about, they come thither to meat, but
the very poor indeed, which cannot travel in the dirt, and cold, and crowd,
they sit at home and want.

No doubt, if it pleased them to send to their Neighbor-towns in money what
they think good to bestow, to be distributed by the Officers and chief of
the Town that know how to give it indifferently, and where most need is, it
would be much greater relief to the poor, and so a more charitable work,
and save themselves a very great deal of trouble, and prevent a great deal of
sin committed by that rude company, in their unseasonable returnings home,
besides their rudeness there.

6 We must give to the good especially, Gal 6. True, we must give to all; I
mean, to such as follow their calling: but for those that can work, and will
not, let them starve. Give even the bad in their want, if they be diligent to
do what they can; yet give them with instructions, admonitions to keep their
Church, have a care of their souls, and to bring up their children to work,
not to pilfering, idleness, or begging, rebuking them for these or any such
faults; as they that be most poor are very graceless, and godless almost.

So may we do good both ways But to the household of Faith, give them with
more cheerfulness, and good encouragement of them in their good course, and
behold Jesus Christ in them: when all be alike to us, its no good sign, but
when these be worst regarded, there can be no worser sign.

7 Orderly. To our own kindred first* 1 Timothy 5. and so on to our own Town,
and so further, as God gives occasion and ability.

8 According to every man's ability. To whom much is given, of them is much
required. The Master called his servant that had five Talents to account for
five. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Rich men are charged to be rich in good works: he that
has but little, little is of him expected; if it be but a cup of cold water, a
widows mite, where is no more, it shall be as well accepted, as great things
of the rich. For God requires not of 2. Cor. 8. 12.
a man according to that he has not, but according to that he has: and that
he will require.

Its therefore a great fault in most Parishes, that the meaner sort bear the
chiefest burden, and not the richest: but a man, not a quarter sometime, not
half a quarter of their substance, shall be half as much in charge as they.
Fie upon such inequality: amongst men of good conscience, it ought not so to be.

Though it were but a foolish thing for one of us to say, If I were such a rich
man, I would do thus and thus much good more than such a man does; because we
were never in that state: and therefore know not the temptations belonging to
that state: yet this we may truly say, that such and such a rich man has
means in his hand to do very much good: Oh what elbow room he has? he might
reach out his hand two ways, ten ways, and be never the worse. Toward the
Ministry of the Word, to help a poor body out of great trouble, etc. What is
it for a richman to give here twenty shillings, there forty shillings, five
pound to this good use or that? And when some charge is to be borne by a
company of mean men, to exempt them, and bear it all himself; what good by
lending poor young beginners, and such as want stock?

But alas, how far off is it from the most such? Some do no good: others
nothing answerable to their ability. They lose their honor that God has put
upon them.

Truly let them look to it: for they have great accounts to make: And if
their receipts be found great, and their layings out small, God will cast such
bills in their faces, and themselves into hell.

9 We must give according to every ones need: for their need should be the
whetstone to our liberality: As in dear times, or in time of sickness and
distress, to reach out our hand more than ordinarily; not to give hand over
head, as much to those that have less need, as to those that have more. The
wicked will be most clamorous, and if we go by that, often times the better
minded poor, which be more bashful and slow to speak for themselves, shall
have wrong; therefore we ought to inform our selves, as well as we can, of
every ones wants, especially, in our own Parish, and to carry our hand
accordingly: we must not be bountiful to our wealthier neighbors, and
pinching to the poor. If we cannot do both, let our feasting the wealthier
alone, and do good to the poor; for that will be the truer and more certain
testimony of our love, because they cannot requite us again. But you shall
have some, that will spare no cost, to make a feast to them that have no need,
(which, with the other too, has his place) that yet are very miserable to the
poor, and will the same day of such feast, shake up a poor body like a
dish-clout, that comes but for some of the scraps. Let not these boast of their
Love.

And then to show our selves most kind and helpful, when their need is
greatest: for a brother or Pro. 17. 17.
neighbor is borne for adversity, and that is the trial of love. God is never
so near his servants with his comforts, as in their greatest afflictions: And
therefore, while a man is in prosperity and good case, to salute him, use him
kindly, be glad of his company; and when the world frowns on him, and God casts
him behind, then not to know him, to shake him off, go on the other side of
the way, or if we must needs take notice of them, then to speak slightly to
them, houerly, and be strange and far off, this is no true love: and yet this
is that that many a one finds in the world, as Pro. 14. 20. and 19. 4. 7.
These be like winter-plashes, that be very broad when there is no need of
them; but in summer are dry, when they should do most good.

Thus many a worthy Minister, while they have enjoyed their health and
Ministry, have had countenance of all sorts, both Gentlemen and Yeomen, that
after, by some occasion, having had the case altered with them, have gone up
and down moping, and no body, especially of the wealthier sort, take notice of
them, but shun them, as if they had the Plague about them. So the wives of many
painful Ministers, while their husbands lived, were made account of, and
invited, that when God has taken their husbands from them (when they had most
need of comfort) have found cold friendship, not of strangers only, but even
of those that professed greater love to the parties deceased. This is but
carnal, or at least but cold love, that is then farthest off when there is
most need of it; whereas true Love rejoices to be showing it self, where is
most good to be done.

10 We must give with compassion, and out of a pitiful heart and feeling of
others miseries; as we are bidden, Col. 3. 23. to put on tender mercies, and
bowels of compassion, etc. and 1 Pet. 3. 8. Be pitiful, etc. and Isa. 58. 10.
Pour out our soul to the hungry: that is, have compassion of their miseries.
Thus did the Lord to us, when we had plunged our selves into irrecouerable
misery, he took pity on us, and gave us his blessed Son, etc.

So had he compassion on the gronings of Israel under Pharaohs bondage. So in
the book of Judges diverse times, Judge. 10. 16. so also, Neh. 9. 17. This will
prove us to be living members, not dead stocks. A little given with
compassion, is more acceptable to God, than never so much without, 1 Cor. 13.
yea, compassion alone is much accepted with God and men, where there is nothing
else to be had.

Which condemns the great Almsdeeds of Papists, that proceed from no
compassion toward the poor, but out of love to themselves, to save their own
skins. That give to be seen of men, that give by constraint of authority, or
for shame, and to avoid reproach, or to satisfy the requests of friends: Or
those that give with twits and taunts, and proud insultings, checkes and
vpbraidings, especially toward those that be any thing well minded: all these
have their reward they are like to have, except their work had come from a
better root: Whereas many a poor body coming to their poor sick neighbor,
with pitiful moanings, out of a grieved heart, and water in their eyes, beat up
their pillow, watch with them all night, or tend them a day or two (which can
very hardly spare the time from their own bellies) or of their little give
them a little, this is a very rich gift, and pleasing to God, and shall not go
unrewarded. Let not the poor therefore be discouraged, and say, I live like an
unprofitable person, and can do no body any good; but consider what our Savior
Christ said of the Widows two mites cast into the treasury, and be of good
comfort.

Now seeing compassion is so necessary, and gives such commendation to our
liberality, it shall be good for us to use the best means we can, to stir it
up, or procure it in us.

1 It shall be therefore good, to take a true report from such, as can relate
the miseries of any that we are to give unto, and so well weigh and mark it,
as it may move us. Thus did Nehemia, Cap. 1. so weigh the misery of Gods people
that was told him, as he was very deeply affected therewith.

2 To put our selves into their person, and think (as it might have bin our
case, as well as theirs, so) what we would be glad to find from others, if it
were. Consider, they be not bruit beasts, but even our own flesh; and
therefore to pity them.

3 So by our own afflictions that God sends us at any time, to be moved to
pity others; and from the comforts that we find in them, from God or Men, be
provoked to the like compassion toward others, 2. Cor. 1. 4.

4 Especially, its of very great force to this purpose, to go and see the
miseries of our poor brethren, their ruinous and cold houses, poor fire to
make amends with, empty cupbords, thin clothing, and so near the wind, cold
lodging, slender covering; and to see what exceeding pains some take early and
late, to see others in how great pain and affliction they lie, and how little
to comfort them, etc.

5. If our heart be not made of an Adamant, this will move us, and a great
deal more than all that we can hear. The sight of the eye moves much, either
to good or evil; which the Devil well knew, when he tempted Eve to look upon
the Apple, and when he set Bathsheba naked and bathing before David's eye,
which did more hurt than if he had heard of such a thing: So is it powerful to
move to good. Therefore Saint James bids us, visit the fatherless and widows
in their adversity, etc. Our Savior Christ seeing the people scattered, etc.
Mat. 9. had compassion on them: So the Samarit an saw the wounded man, and had
compassion of him.

It were therefore a comely thing sometimes for wealthy women to look into the
poores houses, and see a sight that might move them, and that they might report
of to their husbands. Their coat would sit never the worse on their backs, if
they did so: neither need they think scorn, seeing the glorious Angels attend
about them, if they be good, and God himself is with them.

This also is comely for Ministers and their Wives.

Especially it is requisite for them to do so, that are in office, and have
taken for the time the special charge of the poor. ^o shall they answer their
name of Overseers, which few do, but go by hearsay, which is often
uncertain, or that which is worse, by the words of the poor themselves; the
worst most-what being most bold and importunate, when others* that have more
need, and are better to be regarded, cannot so well speak for themselves.

These Rules being carefully observed in our Relieuing the poor, it will not
only be profitable to them, but it shall be wellpleasing to God, and bring
much comfort and blessing to our own selves here and hereafter: Without which,
howsoever others may have benefit, yet our selves shall certainly lose our
labor.

But now I draw to an end of this duty of mercy to the poor, Do you think
that the carnal and unbelieving heart of man will willingly yield hereto,
without any further questioning or opposing against it? Oh no: for though those
that are of God will hear Gods Word, and his Commandment, and Reasons that he
uses to move to the obedience thereof, will overcome and prevail with them,
yet to the unregenerate, nothing can be so spoken, but they have many carnal
reasonings and objections to make against the same. Some whereof I will here
make known, and briefly answer them, and so wind up with a word or two of the
duties of the poor.

Object. 1. My goods are mine own, I Will do with them what I list, and nobody
shall make me give, but where and when I see good my self.

Answ. Though thy goods be thine own among men, yet God has but committed
them to thee of trust, and reserved a right in them, commanding thee to dispose
of part of them to the poor, to whom he has given none, and will accordingly
call thee to account for the same: therefore thou art not such an absolute
owner of them as thou imaginest, but an accountant and steward.

Object. 3. If I give to every one that will ask, and say they have need, I
may give away all, and make my self a beggar.

Answ. That's not required of thee, but to give with discretion. As for the
yongue man that was bidden by our Savior Christ to sell*all, and give to the
poor, and follow Christ; it was a commandment of trial peculiar to him, not
binding all: and yet we see it not plainly required of him, that he should
give away all.

Again, they fear a false fear: for when some of them hinder themselves much
by running into usury, of a covetous mind to purchase withal, some others by
riotous expenses in apparel, by suretiship, or other blind courses that they
take; then every little thing that they give to the poor, or any good use; oh
this will beggar them. No, no, look well about thee, and thou shall find its
not thy liberality beggars thee, but somewhat else; leave that, and thou may
do well to thy self, and much good to others.

Object. 3. Though I have enough now, yet I cannot tell what I may want
hereafter; I Will be sure to provide for my self, and if I leave any thing when
I dye, I will give them somewhat then: As one that lying upon his death bed,
put a piece of Gold in his mouth, and kept it there, and being asked his reason,
he answered, Some wiser than some, I mean to keep this till I am dead.

Answ. A right objection of a covetous distrustful man, that will trust God no
further than he sees him; no, though he has promised to reward liberality
with plenty. What a wretched mind is this, to think that God will fail men
ever the more that obey him? And whereas they think to make sure of enough for
themselves, its not all, nor ten times so much that could keep them from
beggary and misery, if God should set himself against them. And to give when
they dye, its little thanks; for they cannot carry it with them.

Object. 4. All is little enough for my self and my children: for I mean to
leave my eldest son a good estate, and I have diverse daughters that I purpose
to match well; and therefore must get them good portions, as its expected in
these days, and then they must have education accordingly.

Answ. But who bids you fly such high pitches, and set down such portions,
and in the mean time neglect Gods commandment, and your duty to the poor?
This is the high way to pull down your children. Do as you may, all duties
discharged, and there an end: for if you hoard up the poores part in your
childrens great portions, God will draw it out of your, or your childrens
bellies.

Object. 5. They be never the better for all that is given them, they draw all
through their throat.

Answ. If some be not, yet some be thrifty, and its well seen and well
bestowed of them: If any abuse your liberality, you may cut them the shorter,
but let not others fare the worse for them.

Ob. 6. They be ill tongued, one may give them never so much, and they will not
give one a good word.

Answ. It may be we spoil our gift in the manner of bestowing it, and so it
loses its grace and credit. 2. Though some be unthankful and ill tongued,
yet all are not so: they that be, yet give them, and overcome them.

Ob. 7. They be so bad and so wicked, as its pity to give them.

Answ. We give it not to their badnesse, but to their poverty: and may be our
goodness to them with good counsel, may make them better. But some blame not
their badnesse for hatred of their sin, but as an excuse to save their purses:
but that is not a sufficient plea.

Ob. 8. They be so theeuish one can keep nothing for them almost, abroad
especially: They break my hedges, carry away my bars, pluck up my styles; I Will
give them nothing, not I.

Answ. This is most what rich men's faults: for if they would take order that
every family should do what work they are able (according to the Law of God,
and the good Statutes of the Land) and then what they cannot reach to by their
labor, to supply to them for necessaries, every one being held to work, most
part of this would be prevented. And then if any were taken in such offense,
and were well punished, either by the whip, or else their collection that week
kept back, you should hear few such complaints. But if they be not as well
looked to, to follow their work, as to give them a little collection, a great
many will beg or steal, rather than get it by working.

Ob. 9. Some of them that make a great show of Religion, yet if they get money
into their fingers that one has lent them, one cannot tell how to get it again,
for all their great preciseness, and running to sermons.

Ans. True; some such offenses there be, more is the pity: but this must not
wholly take our mind from the duty of lending, nor let all fare the worse for
the fault of some few: Or if we should do well for any that we thought well of
for soundness, and after they proved but Hypocrites; yet if our minds were
upright in that we did, we shall not lose our reward

Ob. 10. There be such a number of charges every way, to the King, and for
Soldiers, to the Ministers, to the repairing the Church, to Bread and Wine for
the Communion, and Briefes, and one Collection or other, that I can never a
Sunday be quiet: and now you come for the poor; I think you will have all; I
see no reason to be at all these charges.

Answ. For those that be to the King, its our bounden duty, and they be
abundantly recompensed in the peace and quietness that we enjoy under his
Government. And for the Church, small cause to grudge at that, seeing it is a
trifle toward his service that gives all. And that we give for the good of our
souls, is the best bestowed money that can be, if the fault be not in our
selves. For any thing we do in compassion to them that be in want, God has
given his word himself to see that requited. So that if it be well considered,
there is no such cause of this grumbling at any one, or all of these charges.

Ob. 11. If you will not be quiet, but follow me thus with Give, give, and
Pay, pay, I will make a shortcut of it, I Will break up house and go live in a
great Town, and eat and drink, and be merry with my friends, and put out my
money to usury.

Answ. If you do, you shall carry many curses with you, and a guilty
conscience, and the hand of God will follow you, and it may be you may have as
small joy of it, as your Predecessor in the twelfth of Luke, when he had thought
to have nestled himself in his wealth for many years, and lived at ease, he
was suddenly arrested, with O fool, this night they shall fetch away thy
soul, and then whose shall these things be? There is no flying from the duties
that God requires: therefore listen and learn, obey and be blessed.

CHAP. 12. Of the Poores duties.
NOw for the Poores duties, a word or two. I speak to you from the Lord, how
you should behave your selves in this your condition (and its very needful)
know them, and God give you a heart to do them.

You must labor to be contented with your estate, and give glory to God, and
know it to be the state that he sees fittest for you, if you were borne to it;
or he has brought you into it, especially, if you have by any wicked courses
brought it upon your selves, you can have the less comfort in it. But if you
can be so wise as make it unto you a spur to true repentance, you shall be
happy.

Keep your Church diligently, though your clothing be mean: Keep holy the
Sabbath day, and know nothing is lost by that: Pray daily, and labor to live
in the fear of God, that though you be poor to the world-ward, yet you may be
as St. James says, Cap. 2. Rich in Faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which
he has promised to them that love him.

Follow your calling diligently, that as much as may be you may eat your own
bread, and that God may move men's hearts to supply willingly that that is
wanting. Be not over clamorous: Keep a good tongue, though men deal not very
well with you.

Carry your selves dutifully and humbly toward the rich, and all your
superiors; not saucy, surly, ill-tongued: patient and meek, when you receive
a reproof, and not swell or give ill words.

Be thankful for any kindness you receive; First and chiefly to God, who
gives the ability, the commandment and the heart to do you good; and upon
former experience, depend upon him in after needs: and resolve, that
whatsoever want you suffer, you will use no unlawful means to help your
selves, but rather make known your burdens, and God will make a way.
Secondly, be thankful to those, whom he has made his instruments to do you
good, so God gives good leave; and see it practiced by godly Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles.
31. 8. In token of your thankfulness, pray to God for them, that God would
bless their basket and store, themselves and theirs, especially, that he
would give them much joy and comfort to their souls, and to have long life and
happy days.

For you that are borrowers, borrow no more than you have possibility of paying
again. Appoint such a day, as in all likelihood you may repay it: work night
and day to keep touch, borrow it of another to pay, rather than break day; for
if you keep your day, you keep your friend. Or if you be much disappointed
that you cannot, then come before the day, tell your case, and crave favor,
and a new day, and show your selves as careful to pay, as ever you were to
borrow; so shall you have a good conscience, and provide well for your selves:
for if you deal honestly, you shall not need to fear but you shall find
friends.

Many there be, that care not what they borrow, and never care for paying; they
cared to borrow it, they say, let the Owner care to come by it again: they do
not mean to take two cares. which bear the mark of wicked men, Psalm. 37. 21.
for the godly make great conscience of it, as the son of the Prophets, that was
so sorry for the loss of the axe; Alas, Master, it was but borrowed, 2 Kin. 6.
5. And the Prophet Elisha wrought a miracle to this purpose, increasing the
oil in the Widows cruse, and bade her sell it, and, first pay her debts, and
then live of the rest: For we must owe nothing to any, but to love one another;
that is, not wilfully, or through carelessness, but what we can, and mean to
pay. They will appoint, it may be, a near day, though they know no means to
compass it, only to obtain their purpose: But when they have it, they care
to keep no day, nor yet come at the Creditour, nor in his sight, as near as
they can. These play the fools as well as the wicked men, and undo themselves
utterly, which otherwise might have been vpheld, and lived comfortably of
their credit, though they had no ability of their own. But when they have no
ability nor credit neither, they must needs hasten apace to misery, and thank
themselves.

Let all, that have any wit or conscience, take heed of this: But especially,
let all those, that make greater profession of Religion than others, beware of
this, that they give no just occasion to carnal men, to speak ill of them, and
their holy profession for their sakes; nor to the godly to be griened by their
unfaithfulness.

FINIS.

