AN HISTORICAL DIALOGVE Touching Antichrist and Popery, DRAWN AND PVBlished
for the common benefit and comfort of our Church in these dangerous days, and
against the desperate attemptes of the vowed adversaries of Jesus Christ, his
Gospel, and this flourishing State.

by Thomas Rogers.

Allowed by authority.

Revel. 18. 6 Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and give her double
according to her works: and in the cup that she has filled to you, fill her
the double. AT LONDON, Printed by John Windet for Andrewe Maunsell, and are to
be sold at the sign of the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1589.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR CHRIstopher Hatton, Knight, Lord high Chancelar of
England, Knight of the most Honorable order of the Garter, and worthy
Chancelar of the most famous University of Oxenford, his singular good Lord
and Patron.
THAT Whore of Babylon in the holy book of Revelations decyphered by Saint
John, Revel. 17.
has bin long since, and through the goodness of The Almighty, is many ways,
and by sundry means in this last age of the world most notably proved to
be the church of Rome.

Notwithstanding as common strompets oftentimes put upon them both the faces
and the persons of most honest women: so this whore, filthy though she be and
unclean, yet would she appear in the eyes of man to be pure and chaste, as the
spouse of Christ. And as harlots have brazen faces, and dare compare, yea and
for pure behavior some-while praefer themselves to unspotted virgins, and
right sober matrons: so this filth albeit she know her self guilty of all
manner pollutions, yet, such is her impudency, she blusheth not both to
compare he self for honesty with the best, and make the world believe that it
is not she, but even the lambs wife Revel. 19. v. 7. 21. v. 9.
, that is naught and unclean. Demonstr. 2.


But, praised be God for the same, vaunt she never so much of her holiness,
Test. Rhem. annot. John. 16. v. 13. 17. verse. 17. Ephesians. 5. v. 24. 29.
and speak she never so blasphemouslie against the spouse of Christ, her
loose and lecherous life is well known, and her abominations blazoned to
th'uniuersall world: 1. Tim. 3. v. 13.
so that she which gives out that she is clean, is known to be naught else
but mere pollution; that says she never went astraye N. Sa^d. de vi^ib.
Monar. lib. 8.
, neither can err Catech Triden* in exposit. Symb.
, is well known to be even the very scu^me of ancient and new errors Whitak.
against W. Reinoldes. c. 5.
, the sink or draughte of heathenish idolatry Theol. Wirtemb. contra Bellar.
p 254.
, to have erred in an hundred Fla. Illyricus contra mend. Papist.
, yea, in six hundred points of religion Heshusius de 600. erroribus pontif.
, to have adulterated every principal head of Christian doctrine Theod. Beza
epist. 1.
, and to have quite revolted from our Savior Christ Caluinus epist. S regi
Poloniae. f. 169.
.

This being so, great should the detestation of her be in all our minds; and if
any natural affection we carry toward our dear mother, the Church of Christ,
we gladly will employ all our gifts both of body, and of soul, and what else
soever graces we have for the defense of our mothers good behavior, and for
the bringing of this bold huswife and most impudent harlot, so much as in us
lies, into a common hatred of all sorts, that if possible it were even the
very boys and moathers in the street may never hear Popery named but they
may hiss at it, as they do at the sight of known bawdes and naughtie-packes.

For my part Right Honorable, somewhat in this book, as heretofore in other
treatises I have done, and by Gods assistance and the lawful favor of my
Superiors, will proceed to the displaying of her filthiness more and more to
the world. For well I see, which that most Reverend Father and blessed martyr,
Master Latimer did long since observe, that th'impudencie of this whore is
excceding great and intolerable, and therefore, where occasion shall be given
she is to be gauled and spurgauled too M Latimer his last words in his confer.
with B. Ridley bout the Lords Supper.
, seeing no better she will prove. That which I look for at her hands, is
but mortal hatred, for my labor. For so do harlots requite such as of
good-wil, lay open unto them their ungodliness, that they may amend.

And surely as in some things above mentioned, so otherwise me-thinkes she
does notably resemble the brothels and harlots of the world, and therefore
diuinelie by Gods spirit is entitled the whore of Babylon. For harlots, if
they love you, and you will not with like love answer them again, they will
hate you as Putiphars wife did Joseph Genesis 39. v. 7. 8. etc.
, and those wicked Judges Susanna Hist. of Susanna.
; Love them and they will abuse you, as Delilah did Samson Iud. 16. v. 6. 17.
etc.
, and that filth Apame ^ Esd. 4. v. 29. 30.
, which proudly sitting on the right hand of the king, with her right hand
took the crown of the kings head and put it on her own, and struck the King
with her left hand; Leave them once, and give your self to lead an honest
life, either solelie or in holy wedlock, and they will pursue you with malice
even unto the death, as the late murder of Abel Bourne is memorable View of
expmples.
, to this purpose.

So this whore of Babylon, if you love her not again, she loving you, she will
hate you even unto the death; If you love her, she will abuse you, and that too
shamefully; If you praeferring a Godly life agreeable to Gods holy word before
her wicked company, and cast her of, nothing will pacify her till she see
your blood.

Of England this whore would be loved, but England will be chaste still with
Joseph, and Susanna: and therefore England is extremely hated. Spain loves
this whore, and Spain is abused, she sits on the Kings right hand, she
takes his Crown with her right hand, and puts it on her own head, and with
her left hand she strikes him on the face; he gapeth and gazeth on her, poor
soul; if she laugh at him, he laugheth, and if she be angry with him, he
flattereth till she be reconciled: yea he will not spare his own blood to
enjoy her love Apology of the Pr. of Orange.
. France leaft her company, what say I, leaft? he only cast a friendly
countenance toward the lambs wife, and her faithful servants, and she was
inflamed with jealousy forthwith, she could not be pleased, she feared he
would cast her of, or not feed her malicious humor, and therefore a brother of
that brothel house graciously admitted unto familiar speech in his own
chamber Letter of H^rie 4. K. Fr. and Navarre.
under color of confession De caede. etc. Gal. Regis He^rici 3. epigra^mata.
must be his priest, and cut his throat.

Honorable, there is no joy, but in a godly conversation; there is no settled
comfort but with the spouse of Christ. The End of harlots and following the^,
besides discredit in this world, and consumption both of body and goods Prou.
6. v. 26.
, it is utter condemnation both of soul and body in the world to come Gal. 5.
v. 19. 21. Revel. 22. v. 15.
. The end of this whore is everlasting condemnation in hell fire Revel. 18. v.
8.
, and besides their excessive charges and expenses Taxa. paenite. Duarenus de
S. eccles. minist. ac beneficus li. 1. c. 4.
, their end is th'utter wrath of God which have to do with her. To such I say
from the Lord, go out of her good people, that ye be not partakers in her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues Revel. 18. v. 4.
. To your honor I wish perseverance even until the end in that good religion
which you do profess, to the end you may at length overcome, and so eat of
that tree of life, which is in the mids of the paradise of God Revel. 2. v.
7. 17.
and receive the white stone, and be clothed in white araie Revel. 3. v. 5. 21.
, and sit with Christ in his throne, even as Christ sits with his father in
his throane.

And thus presuming of your wonted favor (whereof to my great comfort and
encouragement I have tasted) and nothing doubting of your gracious accepting of
this treatise, small and simple though it be, I humbly take my leave of your
Honor at this time; commending your Lordship with all your good endeavors for the
welfare of the church, our Prince, and Commonweal to the blessing of
The Almighty. From Horninger, near S. Ed. Bury in Suff. the 19. of September.
Anno 1589.

Your Honors at commandment, Tho. Rogers.

AN HISTORICAL DIALOGVE OF ANTICHRIST AND POPERY.
Chap. 1.
1 Of the office of our Savior Christ ascribed unto others besides him; 2 and
first of S. Francis Deified, and by sundry Types and Shadows proper only to
the Majesty of God and his son Jesus Christ praefigured.
The speakers.
Timothy, Zelotes. Two professors of the Gospel.

TIMOTHY. I now see, is you have This has relation to an other dialogue of
the authors, entitled, A Catechism for Catholics.
said, the word of GOD confirminge your words, that our Adversaries the
Papists do but story out Christ, in Christ they do not believe.


ZELOTES. Though you see much already, yet you have not all.


T. What remains.


Z. It is bruted of Pope Paul the third, (in whose time as in some of his
predecessors Leo. 10. Adrian. 6. Clemens 7.
also that excellent Organ of God, Beza. epist 81.
, Martin Luther, opposed himself against the most detestable enormities of the
Romish Church Sleidanus de Statu Relig. and Reip. lib. 1.
that he should say; being somewhat moved against Cardinal Be^bie for alleging
a place against him out of the Gospel concerning Christ what tellest thou me
that same fable of Christ?


T. Counted he the Story of Christ but a fable? And all which is said and
written of our Savior for a mere fable? yet what is the blasphemy of that
wretched Pope to the common faith of all Papists? take they the Gospel of
Christ for a fable?


Z The fool has said in his heart there is no God, says the Prophet David
Psalm. 13. 1. Psalm. 53. 1.
; he said it, but not in plain terms with mouth, that were too horrible, yet
said the fool in his heart there is no God. So the Papists do say in their
hearts, Christ is not the Christ, and that which is written in the Gospel
concerning Jesus Christ, it is but a fable; they say it, but not in those
terms with mouth, as did that cursed Pope, that they know were too too
blasphemous, yet say they in heart, and by their deeds and words of like
signification, they say as did Pope Leo of our S. Christ.


T. May this be credited?


Z. Hear and then believe, as God shall move your heart. I grant they
confess a son of God, which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of the
virgin Marie etc. yet when they believe not that which the Scripture does
deliver concerning him, or ascribe that unto others which is due always, and
properly unto him, and unto none besides in respect of his office, do they not
take, which the Scripture ascribes unto him for a toy or fable?


T. Ascribe they his office unto any others besides him?


Z. That do they unto diverse and sundry persons that I say not things besides.


T. Can you name any?


Z. That can I a great sort.


T. Who is one?


Z. S. Francis: which is like unto Christ Confor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 10.
, Yea whom Christ has made like unto himself Ibid fol. 4.
, and that in all respects Ibid. f. 18. 5.
. Hence is it that they ascribe unto the said Francis the same titles, the same
natures, the same properties, the same power, and the very same office due
unto our S. Christ.


T Prove that which you have said, that I may credit you.


Z. Concerning the titles, called is our Savior, as you know, the Son of God
Matthew. 16. 16.
, so is Saint Francis Math. 3. 17. Confor. Fr. L. 1 Fol. 14.
; the good Shepherd John. 10. 11.
, so is S. Francis Confor. Fr. L. 1. fol. 157.
, the Rock, 1 Cor. 10 4.
so is Saint Francis Confor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 11.
, the light of the world John 8. 12.
, so is Saint Francis Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 17.
, the grace of God Titus. 2. 11.
, S. Francis is so too Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 5. lib. 2. fol. 14.
Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews John. 19. 19.
, they say of Saint Francis also, that he is Jesus of Nazareth the king of the
Jews Cofor. Fr. lib. 1. 229.
.


T. Who that has any benefit, and looks for more, and more excellent from
Jesus Christ; would ever think that any receiving his name from him, would
attribute these titles unto any but unto Christ?


Z. True, but these are but names and titles.


T. Yet names oftentimes express the nature of things.


Z. And so do these titles given unto S. Francis.


T. But these names point both unto a divine, and also unto an humane Nature in
our Savior Christ?


Z. So was S. Francis very God, and very man.


T. Say they S. Francis was very God as well as Christ?


Z. In such terms they say it not, yet as Christ said, I and my father are
one John 10. 30.
, so they say, that S. Francis is made one Spirit with God. Confor. Fr. lib.
1. fol. 3.
. And as the Scripture every where makes it a thing peculiar always, and
only unto God, to behold the heart: so they write of Saint Francis, that he
only of all Saints, and none else, but by his illumination, beholds the
consciences of mankind Confor. Fr. lib. 1. fol, 162.
. And he saw the very secrets of hearts Ibid. lib. 1. fol 201. and lib. 2.
Fol. 27.
which is to say, that S. Francis was very God. And when they say, that God
has put all things under S. Francis his feet Hebr. 2. 7. 8.
, and set him above the works of his hands; and he deservedly may say Matthew.
11. 27.
, All things are given unto me of my father; and which more is, when they say
(as they do all these things in one and the same place Confor. Fr. lib. 1.
fol. 149.
) that it has pleased the Lord God, that all things should be obedient and
pliant unto S. Francis will, make they not S. Francis a very God?


T. O Sun, and can thou comfort these! O earth, and can thou endure
these! O God and will thou not be revenged on these Catholics so irreligious!


Z. You will be moved I perceive when you hear all.


T. End they not here?


Z. Nay it were an infinite thing to rehearse the most horrible blasphemies
which these pour out against God, to bring glory unto their S. Francis,
another Christ. But for brevity sake this know for all that before he was
borne they fetch types of S. Francis out of the holy Scriptures from sundry
dark sayings and persons, as well as of Christ; being come into the world,
they make him every way to answer unto our Savior Christ, and som-waie his
superior; and when he was dead, they gave as much glory unto him even as unto
Christ: as if either that Christ were not the true Christ, as the Jews do yet
think, or besides him there should be another Christ and savior of the world,
which is their S. Francis.


T. Is this true that you say, or do you so imagine?


Z. I deliver nothing but what themselves have writ. For concerning the first
point, they say, that S. Francis as well as Christ, was declared by dark
sayings, and speeches of the prophets Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 5.
.


T What may those Types of S. Francis be?


Z. They tell of many, I only will recite a very few, omitting to mention
the rest, both for brevity sake, and t'auoide offense. You know, at the
commandment of the Lord, Moses made a fiery Serpent, and set it up as a
sign, that so many as were bitten might look upon that Serpent of brass and
live. Numb. 21. 8. 9.
.


T. I know the place very well, what of that?


Z. That Serpent was a figure of this S. Francis. Confor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 9.
.


T. Of this S. Francis! Not of S. Francis but of Christ, I trow, for so Christ
him self did say John. 3. 14.
.


Z. But they say it was a figure of Saint Francis. It must therefore
necessarily ensue, either that Christ was not the Messiah, or that S. Francis
was the Messiah and Savior of mankind, so well as Christ.


T. Who ever so wickedly has abused the holy Scriptures of God?


Z You shall hear another Tipe of this new Christ Saint Francis. When
Nebuchad-nezzer had cast the three Noblemen into the burning oven, at length
he spied in the midst of the fire a fourth, whose form was like the Son of
God Dan. 3. 25.
. Know you whom that fourth did signify?


T. Who^ he did signify? I wot what I think, But I pray you tell whom he did
signify?


Z. I will tell you: he was a figure of S. Francis, if you will credit the
Franciscanes Confor Fr. lib. 2. fol. 10.
.


T. No more of this, I pray you hartelie. I can no longer endure to hear
such blaspheming of God, and horrible abusing of his holy word.


Z. How then would you abide to hear them say, that the word of the
Seraphins, Holy, Holy, Holy, in the 6. of Esaie Esa. 6. 2. 3.
, were spoken figuratiuelie, and are to be understood of S. Francis Confor. Fr.
lib. 1. fol. 9.
? How would you abide that the noise of the great rushing behind the Prophet
Ezechiel uttering these words Ezech. 3. 12.
, Blessed be the glory of the Lord, should point unto Saint Francis Confor.
Fr. lib. 1. fol. 9.
? what would you think if you heard them say, which they write Ibid. lib. 1.
fol. 10
, that the Angel having the seal of the living God, mentioned in the 7. of the
Revelation Apoc. 7. 2.
, was very Saint Francis?


T. That is as much, as if they said, that Christ is not Christ, but S.
Francis is Christ.


Z. And that is to make the Gospel of Christ even a very fable.


Chap* 2.
Of S. Francis again, who is in many equal, in some respects made Superior to
Jesus Christ.
TYMOTHIE. But to leave these shadows and come unto the substance, dare they
compare S. Francis with Christ, as you said they do?


ZELOTES. They do both compare, and in many respects prefer him before
Christ.


T. That would better be known.


Z. You have already heard how they are made like for names, like for nature,
a like prefigured, yea sometimes by one and the same Types and Shadows. But
more-ouer they are made equal in many other things, in so much as they have
written a book on purpose to show the conformity between Saint Francis and
Christ.


T. What resemblance is there between Christ and S. Francis?


Z. As much in truth as between God and Belial: Yet that the world may see how
far they have waded in impiety, you ca^ name almost nothing of Christ,
wherein they make not S. Francis to resemble him.


T. When Christ was borne, a multitude of heavenly soldiors with Th'angel
praised God and said, Glory be to God etc. Luke 2. 13. 14.
. What such thing at the birth of S. Francis?


Z. Yes, it must religiously be believed, say they Confor. Fr. li. 3. fol. 24.
, that the like was done at the nativity of S. Francis. And which more is,
Hell was so moved at this man's birth, as the infernal feendes did think
either that the day of Judgment was then come, or one was borne that should
shake, yea overthrow the force of hell Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 14.
, was ever the like read? or could any thing be said more in disgrace and
dishonor of our Savior Christ?


T. Christ being a child of eight days old, and presented in the temple,
Simeon that just man fearing God, and waiting for the consolation of Israel,
took him in his arms, and praised God etc. Luke. 21. 25. 28. etc.
.


Z. That is very true, so did Simeon a just man, yet a man; but saint Francis
being a child, an Angel in shape of a pilgryme, took him in his arms, as
Simeon did Christ, and blessed him Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 28.
.


T. Christ was so holy, as albeit he was tempted, yet was he without sin Hebr
4. 15.
, and never did sin 1. Pet. 2. 22.
, nor knew any sin 2. Cor. 5. 21.
, nor had in him any sin at all 1. John. 3. 5.
.


Z. In integrity of life also saint Francis does resemble Christ Confor. Fr.
li. 1. fol. 4.
. For he performed even according to the letter, not omitting so much as one
jot or title, eue^ all the holy Gospel Ibid. fol. 2. 39.
, and kept every commandment of God Ibid. fol. 149.
, in so much as he is an example of all perfection Ibid. fol. 5.
.


T. If he were such a one, marvel it is he had no Ionn Baptist to prepare
away for him, as Christ had Math. 3. 1. etc.
!


Z. You marvel that he had none such, but he had such a forerunner, as Christ
had, and that is merueilous Confor. Fr. li. ^. fol. 110.
.


T Christ had his twelve Disciples, and the names of them all are known Math.
10. 1. 2. etc.
.


Z Saint Francis had so many for number, and as well known by their names
Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 46. lib. 2. fol. 46.
. And as one of Christ his Apostles called Judas Math. 10. 4.
, was wicked, and hung him self Math. 27. 5.
; so had saint Francis a disciple called Johannes de Capella Confor. Fr. li. 1.
fol. 46.
, which for lewdnes hung him self. And as the Apostles of the Lord were
wonderful for their holiness and miracles; so the companies of saint Francis
were glorious for conversation and miracles, in life and in death: And as the
holy Apostles followed with all endeavor the life and doctrine of Christ; so
these companies with saint Francis observed the holy Gospel: And as the Lord
Jesus had other Disciples besides the 12 Apostles; so also saint Francis
besides the forenamed companions and disciples had many mo that were singular
for life, holiness, and perfection: And as by Christ and his Apostles the whole
world was changed; so by saint Francis and his brethren the world is altered
to the following of Christ his life, and exercising of penance Confor. Fr. li.
2. fol. 46.
.


T. Christ was tempted of the devil Math. 4. 1.
, was saint Francis so too?


Z. Yea, he was tempted likewise of satan, that therein he might be found
like unto Christ Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 41.
.


T. Christ was so virtuous, as some being sick, thought that if they might but
touch his garment only, they should be whole Math. 9. 21.
.


Z. Saint Francis was therein not inferior unto Christ: for he thought him self
happy that might touch the hem of saint Francis garment Confor. Fr. li. 1.
fol. 52.
.


T. Christ was of that power, that he healed every sickness, and every disease
among the people Math 4. 23. Matthew. 9. 35.
?


Z. So did saint Francis Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 29.
.


T. Christ raised the dead unto life John 11. 43. 44.
.


Z. Saint Francis did the same Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 29.
.


T. Christ at a Marriage made Wine of water John 2. 6. 7. etc.
.


Z. S. Francis also turned not only water, yea a fountain of water Confor.
Fr. li. 1. fol. 147.
, but also vinegar into wine Ibidem.
.


T. With seven loaves and two little fishes Christ he fed 4000. men Mar. 8. 9.
, besides women and children Math. 15. 34. 38.
.


Z. In the miracle of feeding of so many thousands of persons, S. Francis was
made like, and did resemble Christ Confor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 106.
.


T. We read of Christ that he was transfigured, and his face did shine as the
Sun, and his clothes were as bright as the light Math. 17. 2.
.


Z. So we read indeed, yet but once, and saint Francis was transfigured as
well as he Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 110.
, and that often times.


T. Christ he was wounded for our transgressions, as Esaias Esa. 53. 5.
, and as David prophesied Psalm. 22. 16.
: his hands and feet were pearsed* Luke. 24. 39. John. 20. 25.
.


Z. In Francis, man's nature was dignified, and adorned with the marks of
Christ his passion Confor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 5.
, his side was opened, as was the side of Christ Ibid. fol. 232.
; and in him the passion of Christ was again renewed Ibid. fol. 194.
: yea he was so wonderfully conjoined to the Crucified, and transformed into
Christ, that God is minded through him to save mankind Ibid. fol. 159.
.


T. And is not this to make S. Francis another Christ? and either to make a
fable, as I. have said, of the Gospel, or none account of Christ his passion?
But I see enough, and but too much in deed of this comparison. No more
therefore of the same, it is too odious.


Z. I could and would too, but I see you offended, and that justly, proceed,
and show unto you saint Francis, death approaching upon him, would needs strip
him self naked, and so lie upon the bare ground, because he would be like
Christ, which hung naked on the cross Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 240.
; how being dead he went downeinto purgatory Ibid. fol. 241.
, as Christ descended into hell; how after his death he appeared unto diverse
and sundry Ibid. fol. 244.
, as Christ did after his resurrection 1. Cor. 15. 5. 6. etc.
, how compassed about with many souls whom he had brought with him out of
Purgatory, he ascended into heaven Confor. Fr. li. 1. 241.
in imitation of th'ascension of Christ Mar. 16. 19. Act. 11. 9.
; and how S. Francis, as Christ Phil. 2. 9.
, is highly exalted unto the glory of God the Father Confor. Fr* li. 1. fol. 5.
, and has a garla^d as a conqueror; a crown as a saint, and a mark as one
above all beloved Ibid. fol. 246.
; But this may suffice, which does show that saint Francis is like, and every
way likened unto Jesus Christ, and made another savior.


Chap. 3.
Again of S. Francis and of the confidence reposed in him as in Jesus Christ.
TIMOTHY. You have declared now the conformity between S. Francis and
Christ.


ZELOT. So have I, yet nothing of mine own fiction, but all is of their own
publishing.


T. Find you also that any do repose the like confidence in Francis, as
Christians do in Christ?


Z. I will prove that some, and they a great some do: and first by the
Doctrine, then by examples of the Franciscanes.


T. What is their doctrine?


Z. You know that the scripture says John. 3. 16. 18*
: God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Again, He that
believes in him shall not be condemned; but he that believes not is condemned
already. And again Mar. 16. 16.
, He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not
believe, shall be damned.


T. That is the sum of the Gospel: teach they not the same?


Z. They do not. For this is their doctrine Confor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 105.
. They which observe not the rule of saint Francis, shall be damned; and they
which keep the same, shall be saved. Again Confor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 103.
, He that purposelie does persecute the order shall not live long, But he he
that loves the order of saint Francis, be he never so notorious a malefactor
shall obtain mercy In breuiario Francisci. and Confor. Fr. li. 2 fol. 203.
.


T. Is that the Gospel of saint Francis? And is any so destitute of
understanding as to believe the same?


Z. I will tell you; it is too horrible which is delivered touching them that
to-fore have bin, are at this present, and hereafter shall be of this order of
saint Francis: as if they only were the church, they only the elect people of
God, and they only should be saved. For in respect of the time passed, they
say that in Christendom there is almost not a noble house, but of the same
some one or other has bine a Friar minor, or of the order of saint Francis
Confor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 73.
. And as of the most noble; so infinite of the most holy callinges of
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Bishops, Confessors etc. By the
merits of S. Francis, and through the preaching, life, and example of his
brethren have come unto salvation Confor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 86.
.


T. And is not this to give S. Peter the lie, which said Act. 4. 12.
, Neither is there salvation in any other (but only in the name of Christ).
But it is well, the more they say men are saved by the merits of saint Francis,
the more they testify unto the world in what estimation they have the merits
of Christ; and confirm me in this, that they take not Christ to be the Savior
of mankind.


Z. Howsoever you are confirmed in your opinion, sure I am that this Doctrine
of theirs has bin so confirmed eue^ by the Popes of Rome, Platina.
that of them some have lived and died of this order, and afterward bin buried
in a saint Francis coule and habit Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 82.
; some have given countenance and allowance to the same by their Bulls from Rome
Ibid. fol. 234. Bathol. Carranza summa omniu^ Council. p. 331. b.
; some have granted a day or solemn feast for the worship of the marks and
Printes in S. Francis body Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 3.
; and some have canonized for a saint this Antichriste saint Francis Barthol.
Carranza. summa omnium Council. p. 331. b.
.


T. Then this is so true, that it cannot be denied, though peradventure it be
so horrible as many, I doubt not, even of the very papists them selves are
ashamed of the same.


Z. Then may they be ashamed also for condemning them for heretics which will
not acknowledge for the very truth these blasphemies of saint Francis.


T. Count they such for heretics?


Z. That do they. For Pope Gregory the 9. enjoined the faithful to hold, and
firmly to believe the same, and that he should be punished as an heretic
that would think the contrary Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 3.
.


T. Is that a law of the Church of Rome?


Z. It is the Popes decree (which the Church of Rome that never (as they vaunt)
swarued from the steps of the Apostles Did. 24. q. 1.
; whereunto in doubtful and hard matters men are to make recourse Did. 11, c.
pala^. Did. 22. praeceptis. 2^. q. 1. c. quori^s.
, which must judge all men, but may be judged of none Did. 11. q. 3.
) does ratify as an article of the Creed.


T. Who ever would have thought, that this church so damnably had erred!


Z. They which seek shall find; and they that read shall perceive, not only
this that I have said, but also a great deal more, and all confirmed by
th'autoritie both of the church of Rome, and as well by the Pope which now is
called Sixtus Quintus, Sixtus quintus
as by diverse Popes his predecessors.


T Favors this Pope also these Franciscane impieties?


Z. He so favors them, as at this present himself is a Franciscane, and for
a long while before he was Pope, was president likewise of this order of saint
Francis Brutum fulmen. p. 27.
.


T. Then no doubt this Friar reigning and raging over the church of God, men
are to address themselves either to undergo the punishments appointed for
heretics which is burning fire in this world, or to embrace, as Heavenly
Oracles, these franciscane fables.


Z. It is wonderful as a thing may be, which they publish of the success
they shall have, and of the swarms of Franciscanes that are to be in the world.


T. What success shall they have?


Z. Such as passes, For already (and this was written of them no few years
ago) the very places of the Friars minors dispersed through the world, do
mount unto the number of a thousand and six hundred, besides them which day by
day are newly erected Confor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 85.
. For as it is in the Psalm Psalm. 80. 11.
. She stretched out her branches unto the sea, not only Mediterrane and
Ocean, but even unto the Indian also, and from the river unto th'endes of the
world. For even in India this order now has, and a long while has had many
places of abode Confor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 85
.


T. If the places be so many, what and how many may the persons be which
supply those roumes!


Z. For Nations the French come, the Spanish hasten, the Dutch and English run,
and the greatest multitude of diverse other languages do speed them selves to
be of this order Confor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 83.
. And for numder John Th'eua^gelist having in the 7. chap. of the Reuelat.
described both the time when, which was at the opening of the 6. seal; and the
manner how saint Francis should be sent, to wit as that Angel having the seal
of the living God, he adioyneth next of the multitude that by the preaching,
life and example of saint Francis and his companions shall be converted unto
Christ Ibidem.
.


T. What are the words of Saint John?


Z. His words be these Apoc. 7. 4.
. And I heard the number of them which were sealed, and there were sealed an
hundred and four and forty thousand, of all the tribes of the children of
Israel.


T. Expound they those words of the Franciscanes?


Z. Yea verily, or, this may be expounded, say they Confor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 83.
on this wise, that there shall be so many friars, or men to be converted in
this order, the people being brought unto the Lord, either in process of time,
or in the very days of Antichrist, when as this order, all other orders being
destroyed, shall preach against Antichrist.


T. Of the Franciscanes one hundred forty and four thousand!


Z. Yea, or which more is, say they Ibidem.
, it may be said, that according to the phrase of scripture, by a certain he
means an uncertain number, as if there should be sealed, and in the habit of
Francis, and that of the crucified, not only an hundred forty and four
thousand, but infinite besides. And this John seems to mean, they say, when
he adds, that he beheld a great multitude which no man could number of all
nations, kinreds, people and tongues, etc.


T. Then I see full plainly that they make not only saint Francis another
Christ, but also them of his order to be the only people of God, and that
none either have bin, or shall be saved but only they of saint Francis order.


Z. You have gone to the very point, for hence they both term their company
the family of God Ibidem.
, and they say Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 101.
, If thou will be saved, be a Fra^ciscane; For not only they which live, but
they also that submit them selves unto the rule of this Francis, though at the
very point of death, even all of them are saved Ibid. fol. 78.
. No marvel therefore though he be adored the world throughout Ibidem. fo.
30.
, even as very God; and made an advocate with the Father Ibidem. fol. 7.
like another Christ 1 John. 2, 1.
.


Chap. 4.
Of the Virgin Mary, whom the Papists make another Christ by ascribing unto
her the offices and honor due always, and only unto the Savior of mankind.
TIMOTHY. Now do I see, which before I knew not, the most sacrilegious
impiety, and popish blasphemies about saint Francis.


ZELOTES. Hear again what their faith is concerning the blessed Virgin, as
they say, our Lady.


T. Take they her also for the Savior of mankind, as they do saint Francis,
and as we do Christ?


Z. That do they.


T. If one should say so unto them, would they not deny it, and say we slander
them?


Z. Say they what them list, their own books penned advisedly, and published
by them selves shall bear continual testimony to that which I have said.


T. What write they of her?


Z. They describe her nature by her name.


T. As how?


Z. Marie in Latin is Maria.


T. And what then?


Z. Maria consists of five letters.


T. Then what?


Z. Those five letters do import the five offices to be exercised by her to
usward Viguerius institut. ad cath. theol* c. 20. sec. 9. fol. 21. 4 b.
.


T. What are those her five offices?


Z. The first is Maternitatis, of Motherhood, signified by the letter M. M.
Matter.
For she is a merciful Mother, even the mother of mercy, being the Mother of
God, through whom (she making intercession and oblation) we attain mercy.
Therefore the church calls her, the mother of grace and mercy.


T. What is her second office?


Z. That is Conseruationis, of conseruing the treasure of God, signified by the
letter A. A. Arc^*
which represents, Arcam the sauri, the Christ of treasury. And therefore
called is she the treasurer. This is taken from poor men, whose manner is to
run unto the treasurers. Therefore we which are poor in this vale of
misery, etc. (must repair unto her) because in her, say they, we shall find
an infinite treasure of the wisdom and grace of God.


T. Her third, what?


Z. That is Directionis and Gubernationis, of direction and governing by
examples of her life. This imported is by the letter R: R. Regina.
and therefore is she named Regina, the Queen.


T. And what is her fourth office?


Z. That is Iaculationis and repulsionis inimicorum, of flinging and repelling
back of enemies, I. Iaculum.
signified by the letter I; for which cause she is termed Iaculum inimicorum
infernalium, the dart of infernal enemies, which at the inuocating of this name
yield and flee away. For she is as terrible unto them as an army of men set in
battle raie. Ideo Ecclesia frequenter orat, etc. This causes the church often
to pray, saying. Tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe, protect thou
from the enemy, and receive us at the hour of death.


T. Her last office what is that?


Z. That is Aduocationis of Aduocation, imported by the letter A. A. Aduocata.
whence the Church Eya aduocata nostra, Eih our advocate, turn those thy
merciful eyes unto us.


T. What moves you now to use those Latin words?


Z. That do I in two respects, first for that I would have their more then
childish toies observed, who at their pleasure can make letters to signify, as
some have made Bells to sound, even what pleases their fantastical brain,
and as best may feed their superstitious humors. Hence is it that M. is to
signify Matter, and nothing else; and A. in the first place must needs be
Arca, and in the second Aduocata, etc. and other tongues must yield and give
place, as not to be regarded, for the better setting out of this Latin Maria:
the Greek word consisting of six, the English of four (...)* ^.
, and neither the Greek, Maria. 5.
nor the English, Mary. 4.
nor yet indeed the Latin letters (but that they so imagine) importing any
such matter as here they set down concerning the offices of saint Mary: But
this do I cheeflie, that it may appear what their own words be, and that I
forge nothing of mine own brain. For what I have delivered they are the very
words of Friar John Viguerius (one for his knowledge (as they count him, Friar
John Viguerius.
most learned; a doctor, yea, and a public professor of Divinity among them)
in his Institutions unto the Catholic Theology Cap. 20. sec. 9. fol. 214. b.
.


T. Then whatsoever the letters may import, the matter ascribed to those
letters is Catholic, agreeing to th'analogie of the faith professed in the
church of Rome; which is, that through th'intercession of saint Marie, by
Christ we obtain mercy at th'andes of God; in her is an infinite treasure of
wisdom and grace for them that will seek and sue for the same unto her; She
is of sovereign glory and majesty with God; she the conqueror and
ouer-commer of the infernal enemies; and she our Advocate, to make request,
and to plead for mercy on the behalf of mankind. And what is this else, than
to say that she is our Savior? for these offices, and every of them are due
only and always to the Savior of man.


Z. If this be not evident enough, you shall by other Testimonies taken from
their own works, perceive, that their drift is to make the Virgin Mary, I say
not equal with Christ, but many ways above, yea utterly to exclude him from
the office of man's salvation.


T. That is to deny him to be Christ, and to make but a very fable of the
holy Gospel.


Z. To prove that only thing I allege this example.


T. Confirm that now which you have said.


Z. If to say that saint Marie is the original of our salvation Ludolphus
Carthus. vit^ Jesus Christi par. 2. ora. 80.
, the recouerer of grace and forgiveness Flores Grana. par. 4. p. 156 a.
; our hope Dionys. Carthus. de vita christiana, li. 1 ar. 8. reg. 2.
, our salvation, our resurrection Confor. Fr. i^ Conclus li. 1.
, be to make her, and not Christ the savior of mankind: the Papists make
her, and not Christ, our Savior. For those be their words of the Virgin Mary.


T. O Antichristian impiety!


Z. If to say, that to her it is given to bruise the serpents head Viguerius
in^stit. ad Catho^theol c. 20. sec* 9. fol. 214. b.
, and she shall bruise the serpents head Catech. T^^den. in Symb^verba and.
in^le sum Christum*
, and she has bruised the serpents head Confor. B. Fr. in conclus. lib. 1.
, and procured that peace between God and man, which no man could procure
Viguerius instit. ad cathol. Theol. c. 20 sec 9. fol. 215. a.
, be (as it is) to compare her, yea to praefer her above Christ, yea to make
her, and not Christ the Savior of mankind; the Papists compare her with him,
praefer her above him, yea make her, and not Christ our Savior, for that is
their doctrine of the Virgin Mary.


T. O most damnable sacrilege!


Z. If to say, O blessed Virgin what shall become of me, if that be not restored
by thy clemency which I have lost by my sins Flores Grana. par. 4. de ora.
p. 154. b.
, Show thy merry o Virgin in saving me: If thou forsake me, who shall uphold
me? If thou forget me, who will remember me? If thou Lady, do not inlighten,
whither shall I go? O Lady turn not thine eyes from me a sinner, but cleanse
me that am unclean; make me of a sinner, righteous; of slothful, diligent;
of lukewarm and dry, zealous and devout Ibid. p. 157. b.
, Heal me and I shall be whole; salve me, and I shall be saved Ibidem.
. O Lady protect thou from the enemy, and receive us at the hour of death
Officiu^ beatae Mariae a Pio 5. Papa reformatum.
: I say, if to use these words unto the Virgin Marie, be (as it is) to make
her and not Christ our Savior: the Papists make not Christ but her the
savior of mankind. For thus do they pray unto the Virgin Mary.


T. O blasphemy most horrible!


Z. If to change the whole Psalter of David, and to attribute all praises, all
prayers, all supplications, all intercessions therein contained from God and
his son Jesus Christ unto the Virgin Mary, be to make her (not as some write,
of that excellency, as nothing is above her save God Anselmus de concep.
virginis.
, and the three persons in the Godhead Didacus Stella in cap. 1. Lucae fol. 51.
a.
, but) of that divine majesty, as that she is worthy to have all thanks for
all benefits, as well spiritual as corporal; temporal as eternal; and all
prayers made unto her for whatsoever thing we stand in need of: and if to give
this unto her, be (as it is) to rob God, and his son Jesus Christ of their
glory, and that in the most sacrilegious manner that can be; then are the
Papists guilty of this so horrible sacrilege. For they have turned the whole
Psalter, and all either praises ascribed unto God, or prayers made unto his
majesty, they apply even all of them unto the Virgin Mary Ioannes de Ales,
Psalteriu^ Mariae and Venetus and Parisiis excusum.



T. Is this to be a Papist? To deprive Christ of his office, and God of his
glory: is this to be a Papist?


Z. To make even a toie of the Gospel, and a jest of the holy word of God, and
of all Christianity, even that is to be a Papist, and nothing else.


Chap. 5.
Of the Pope of Rome placed in the room of Christ.
TIMOTHY. There is a saying, as I have heard, that a Christian if he once
fall into wickedness, proves for impetie worser then if he were an heathen.


ZELOTES. They are saint Chrisostomes words In Math. homil 30.
and they are true, understand them how you will, whether he prove wicked for
life, or an heretic for Religion. There is no man so ungodly, as he which of
a professor becomes a wicked Christian.


T. I see the truth hereof, and I see it verified abundantly in those of whom
all our speech is. No such ouerthrowers of Christianity, as they which will be
counted Catholics and Christians.


Z. That which is already sufficiently does, but that remaining to be spoken,
will more fully confirm this point.


T. Speak not yet what may be said, but that only which serves to show,
that they have in contempt, or in small account our Savior Christ.


Z. That shall be the mark whereat I will aim, and therefore listen. It is
written of saint Francis, that on a time rising from prayer he should, being
much troubled, unto his fellow-friers, say, would to God I had never bin the
fou^der of this same habit Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 103.



T. What moved the Friar to burst into those terms?


Z. Because it was revealed unto him, said he, that out of his order Antichrist
and his sect should arise. Whatsoever the meaning of this Friar might be, he
prophesied the truth, as Caiphas did before him John 11. 51.
. For the Pope now living is of his habit and order Brutum Fulmen p 27.
, and is very Antichrist.


T. Why so?


Z. Because he is not only placed in the room, but also does usurp the very
office of Christ.


T. Show that the Pope is placed in the room, and that he does usurp the
office of Christ, that I may the more be settled in this persuasion, that the
Pope is Antichrist?


Z. They which say, that the Pope is the sun, the Church, the moon Confor.
Fr. lib. 2. fol. 10.
; the Pope the bridegroom, the church the bride Johannes de turre cremata
; the Pope the head Council. Flore^.
; the church the body: they place the Pope in the room of Christ. For Christ
is the sun Revel. 8. 12. 10. 1.
, Christ the Bridegroom Math. 9. 15. 25 1. etc. John. 3. 29. Revel. 21. 2. 9.
, Christ the head Ephesians. 4. 15. 5. 23. Col. 1. 18. 2. 10. etc.
of the catholic Church. To say therefore that the Pope is the Sun, the
bridegroom the head of the church, is even to say that the Pope is Christ.
This Heaven cannot endure two suns, nor this wife two husbands; nor this
body two heads. If the Pope be, Christ is not; and if Christ be all this, the
Pope is not.


T. Conceive they so highly of the Pope?


Z. Yea, and to this day whenever they enstall their newly created Pope, they
salute him with these words. Thou art the high priest, thou art the Archbishop,
thou art the heir of the Apostles; in praedecession, Abel; in governing the
Arc, Noe; in Patriarkship, Abraham; in order, Melchisedec; in dignity Aaron;
in authority Moses; in judgment Solomon Samuel.
; in zeal Helias; in humility, David; in power, Peter; and in respect of
thine unction, thou art Christ.


T. So say some of our side Rainoldes Confer. chapter 6. sec. 4. p. 276.
, as I do remember.


Z. That which we say, they confirm, and like well of Maioranus Clyp. milit.
eccl. c. 35. p. 137. Hardings confut. f. 240. a.
.


T. But how in respect of his unction can he be called Christ, seeing Christ
was not anointed by the hands of any mortal man, but by the Power of the
celestial father, nor with earthly ointment, but with spiritual oil Catech
Trid. in Symb. verba and in Iesum Christum etc.
; and the Pope is anointed not immediately from God, but by the hands of man,
not with spiritual oil, but with greasy ointment?


Z. In deed it is too horrible that in that respect they should entitle him
with the name of Christ B. Jewel in his defense of the apology etc. f. 494.
and f. (...).
: yet far worser is it that they dare acknowledge him, as they do, for the very
Messiah, and renounce our Savior.


T. As how?


Z. In that they take not Christ for the only King, the only Priest, and the
only Prophet; but make the Pope, the King, the Priest, and the Prophet of the
church of God as well as Christ.


Chap. 6.
1 Of the Pope of Rome invested in the royal throne of Jesus Christ, and made
the sovereign King of the Catholic Church. 2. and of the Papal government,
and bloody proceedinges of the same all Antichristian.
TIMOTHY. Declare now more fully that which you have said; and first how the
Pope usurps the place of Christ in the execution of his kingly office?


ZELOTES. You know what is written by saint John in his Revelation touching
our Savior Christ, that he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings Revel. 17.
14.
, yea the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Revel. 19. 16.
.


T. The Places are well known.


Z. They now which say that the Pope is the Prince of Princes, and the King of
Kings, do they not enstall the Pope in the throne of Christ?


T. That is very true, but do they so?


Z. Yea, for those be their very words and judgment of the Pope In pro.
Decretorium.
. And which is equivalent with the same, they say, that of necessity if men
will be saved, they must come under the subjection of the Pope, D. Tho^. in
opus primo cha. 66. Maioranus clyp. milit eccl. l. 3. c. 35.
, yea, we declare, say, define, and pronounce that it is altogether necessary,
if they will be saved, that all creatures yield obedience to the Pope of Rome,
says Gregory the eight Extrauag. de Ma. and. obed.
.


T. That is the voice, not of God, but of Antichrist himself.


Z. So be those words; whereby it is delivered, that the Pope not only has the
power of a priest, but also whatsoever power the Kings and Emperors in any
part of the uniuersall world have, it is the Popes, and they receive it from
him August. de Ancon. in summa de Eccl. potest. q. 1. ar. 7.
, and for his part himself is exempted from all obedience to any earthly
Prince Matoranus clyp. milit. eccl l. 3. c. 35.
; and is in such a state that he neither need, nor will do any reverence at
all to any mortal man Cerem. curiae Romans l. 3.
.


T. Christ was of an other Spirit, for he acknowledged the authority of the
Magistrate over him and his, when he paid the polle money both for him self and
Peter, and that to avoid offense Math. 17. 27
, and that unto such as were no favorers of the true Religion, but enemies.
Again of that humility was Christ, that he is an example to all posterity of
meeknes and lowlines in heart Math. 11. 29.
.


Z. And the Pope is a Patron on the other side of most detestable pride: For
he gives out his feet to be kissed of men, even of Kings and Emperors.


T. Christ did never so lay forth his feet, but that he washed and wiped his
poor disciples feet, we do read John 13. 5. 15.
: And that because they should do even as he had done to them.


Z. Truth it is Christ gave no such example, and the Kings of Persia and
Turkey, yea the most proud Calaphaes of Arabia have always abhorred such kind
of adoration Bodinus meth. hist. c. b.
.


T. Read you ever that any Emperor was of that base mind that he would submit
him self so seruilie to the kissing of the Pope his feet; or that any Pope
would suffer such a majesty so to debase himself?


Z. We find, not only that the Emperor Frederick did so unto pope Alexander
the third Acts and monumentes. Naucl. Vol. 3. Genesis 40.
, and Iustinia^ unto Syluester Ang. Steuchus l. 2. c. 66. p. 134.
, but also that it is the office of the Emperor sometime to pour the water
into the basen when the pope is to wash; to carry the first dish to the table
where the pope does sit; See Fields caucat for. Parsons Howlet. Let. E. 5. etc.
and abroad not only to hold the stirrup while the pope mounteth up, but to
lead forth his horse also for some pretty space Cerem. curiae Romans lib. 1.
: yea the pride of the pope of Rome is such, as some well acquainted with the
fashion of countries are driven to say W. Thomas in his descrip. of Italy. p.
37. b
, what is a King, what is an Emperor in his Majesty, any thing to the Bishop
of Rome? No surely, nor I would not wish them to be.


T. That must needs be excessive pomp which the greatest in the world may be
ashamed to show forth.


Z. And so it must.


T. What places of Scripture have you to condemn this ambitious arrogancy of
the Pope of Rome?


Z. To condemn his pride the places are manifold and pregnant, as where
ambition, arrogancy, and pride is condemned in general: so where Christ says
unto his disciples that, albeit the Kings of the Gentiles do reign, bear
rule, and are called bountiful, yet they should not be so Luke 22. 25. 26.
, where again he says John 18. 36.
, My kingdom is not of this world: where again it is written that Christ
departed into a mountain him self alone, when he perceived that the people
would come and take him to make him king. John 6. 15.
. And where the Elders of the Church are willed not to be as Lords over Gods
heritage, but to be ensamples to the flock 1. Pet. 5. 3.
.


T. Seeing the word of God is so flat against his pride, and arrogancy: how
comes it about that he is of that state and Sovereignty?


Z. That is by the papal constitutions, and by nothing else. For so the popes
Boniface the eight Extrauag. vnam sanctam de Ma. and obed.
, and Clement the 5 Clem. pastoralis in re ^udic.
. would have it be.


T. Then are they of that authority by no right and warrant from God his word.


Z. By none at all, neither yet by any law besides: the consideration whereof
has moved some, as Cyno-pistoriensis, and Duarenus, excellent Ciuilians, by
public writings to inueigh against that usurped power, and the most part of
Lawiers, says Duarenus Duarenus and sanc. Eccle minist. ac beneficiis l. 1. c.
4.
, that are of any account, are of the same judgment: yea, says the same
Duarenus, I am persuaded, there is none of the sounder and learneder sort that
can like of this enterprise of Boniface.


T. Then not only Gods word, but also the best Ciuilians in the universal
world do utterly condemn this sovereignty in the Pope of Rome, as having no
strength of reason to uphold itself withal, which may not a little strengthen
us that abhor this Antichristian pride, power, and supremacy of the Pope.


Z. Besides, they may work in our minds a great and utter detestation of
those horrible effects proceeding from the infinite power of this papal
primacie.


T* Name some of them?


Z. As if Kings and Emperors be of a contrary mind unto the pope in matters
of Religion that he may deprive them of their Roialties, and quite discharge
their subjects from obeying the^ any more.


T. Publish they such things of the Pope?


Z. That is their doctrine. For, says Maioranus Clyp. milit. eccle. l. 3. c.
35. ex Driadone de lib* Christ. l. 1. c. 14.
, The pope of Rome by that fulness of power which he has over all Christian
Princes, he may for the crime of haeresie deprive haereticall Kings and
Emperors of their Empires, yea and in temporal things quite set free the
christian people from obedience and subjection: with whom agree of our country
(but of a contrary religion unto us) Sanders de vi^ib. eccl. mon. l. 3. c. 7.
, Bristow Motive 8. and 40.
, with him that wrote that infamous Libel against the Christian justice
executed at this praesent in this realm of England.


T. This doctrine is like the doctrine neither of saint Paul, who was so far
from putting such ungodly thoughts into the peoples mind that from God, he
commanded that supplications should be made for all men, even for Kings 1 Timothy 2. 1.
, which then were idolaters: nor of saint Peter who also said, Submit your
selves unto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto
the King as unto the superior, or unto governors, as unto them that are sent
of him etc 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. 15
: And Kings in those days were as heavy adversaries to the Church, as any
now living. And this do, says the same Apostle, for so it is the will of God.
Obedience therefore and subjection unto our governors are the true effects of
a true and good Religion, as it was well delivered by a worthy Counselor Mr.
Daulton in his speech. to the citizens of London the 22. of Aug. 1586.
unto good and most loving subjects Her Majesty's own testimony of the
Londiners in her letter to the L. Mayor etc. the 18. of Aug. 1586.
.


Z. If the doctrine be so horrible, what is the practice of the same?


T. That must needs be al hellish.


Z. Then from the infernal feendes do those Bulls and excommunications
proceed, thundered both against the two noble Henry's, the one whereof now is,
and long may he be, King of Navarre, the other the Prince of Condie (most
unnaturally of late through poison, sent out of this world) by which Bulls those
Princes for their own parts, yea and their heirs too are disabled to govern;
and made incapable not only presently, but for ever hereafter of any
praeeminence, dominion, honor, and roialty in any land, but specially in
France; and their feudatories besides, vassals, liege people and subjects are
asoiled and set free from al oaths of faithfulness and subjection how soever
made unto them, yea forbidden for their lives to obey them any more De
postremis Galliae motibus p. 245. Declaratio sixti papae 5. co^tra Hen. Borbo^.
assertum Regem Nauar. and Hen. ite^ Borbo^ praetensum principe^ Co^densem. etc.
: and also against the mighty Empress of Great Britain, our most renowned
Queen Elizabeth, the Lords anointed, whereby both her sacred Majesty is
denounced an haeretick, and her people, her well affected people (and still may
they be) to her Majesty Her Majesty both in her let. to the L. Mayor of Lo^.
and in her speech to the states of Par. An. 1586. Sir Chr. Hattons speech at
Apeltrees acquital.
, charged, and upon pain of the great curse commanded not to obey her any
more, but as discharged from their natural allegiance due unto her by many
straight bonds, to take up arms against her and rebel Bulla Pii pa. 5. B.
Jewel in his view of a seditious Bull. Nichols reca^t. ^et. H. 8. Bulla papae
Sixti. 5. Tyrtels reca^t. p. 29. Papa confut. act. 1. p. 3. b. D. Humfr. de R.
curiae praer. p. 49.
.


T. Though the Pope like (Antichrist) himself dare embolden, yet God forbid
that any should be so bad as to decline from their vowed loyalty, by any Bulls
from an Italian priest.


Z. I shall tell you, which yet I can neither think but with grief, nor
speak without horror, the Seditions, rebellions, treasons not intended, but
entered-into upon this warrant from the Pope have been monstrous and
abominable. And one thing besides more horrible then the rest, I will not let
to unfold.


T. What is that?


Z. Though I can utter it neither but with grief of heart: yet that you may se
another proper note of right Antichrist indeed, this is it, There is a
doctrine resolued-vpon Ans. to the execut. of Justice.
, commended, allowed, and warranted in conscience, Divinity and policy In
the declar. of Parries treasons. p. 19.
, that for the furtherance of the Romish superstition, it is lawful, yea
meritorious Ibidem. p. 18.
, to God and the world, for a natural home borne subject by any indirect
means to take away the life of his liege Prince the Lords anointed.


T. Now blessed be the Lord that thus lays open the more the^ devilish
cogitations of that Romish Synagogue; and thrice blessed be his aeternall
majesty for alienating our minds from such ungodly thoughts!


Z. David did but privily cut-of the lap which was on Saul's garment, and he was
touched in heart for the same 1. Sam. 24. 5. 6. 7. 8.
, yea, said this child of God being cou^sailed to kill his King Saul, The Lord
keep me from doing that thing unto my Master, the Lords anointed, to lay
my hand upon him, for he is the anointed of the Lord, yea David was so far
from killing Saul himself, or suffering them that would, to murder him, that
he put that man to a shameful death, who both by the consent, and by the
commandment too even of Saul himself had killed him 2. Sam. 1. 9. etc.
. So little desire had David by any sinister 15.
and treasonable course to maintain his cause, and to advance himself.


T. A worthy example doubtless and proper only and always unto them who are
of that Religion which is of God. Complaint of Eng. Let. D.
But is that doctrine warranted by the Pope himself which you have spoken of?


Z. Himself has so allowed the same as by letters written with his consent a
Cardinal from Rome Card. de Comos letter to Patry. It is in the declaration of
Parries treasons.
has not only commended the fact, as that which shall merit heaven, but
animated the villain also which was to perpetrate the treason to persevere in
those (black accursed which he called) holy and honorable thoughts, saying
(by the spirit of Antichrist) that he was endued with a good Spirit, and
promising him from (the father of all treasons) the Pope, not only great
things in this world, but also plenary indulgence and remission of all his
sins in the world to come.


T. Was any so bewitched as to adventure the committing of so horrible treason
upon such a warrant?


Z. You are very ignorant if you know D. Parrie.
not; or very forgetful, that I say not unthankful, if you do not remember,
which all posterity shall cry out upon, that parricide intended, promised,
vowed, but through the almighty power of the watchman of England not brought,
to pass by Parrie In the declar. of Parries treasons p. 14. 16. Babington, etc.
. From this warrant after that Babingto^, and other like himself traitors
co^bined and confederated themselves by vow and oath likewise The copy of a
letter to the etc. Earl of Lecester etc. prin. by Chr. Barker 1586. p. 5.
even to murder and shed the precious blood of their sovereign Queen the
Lords anointed. From this warrant another sort of alienated and Italienated
Englishmen, which thing her Majesty's own eyes saw written, and her Blessed
mouth did utter Ibidem. p. 17.
, had by oath also vowed within one month either to bereave her sacred body
of natural life, or to be hanged themselves. Upon the like ground before all
this that vile youth of Warwickshire Someruile, Someruile.
in a detestable mind, and with a resolute purpose came trudging apace toward
London to have shortened the days of his dear prince and most gracious
sovereign In the execut. of Justice. D. Story.
.


T. I have read that the guise of D. Story, that Arch-papist and traitor,
after meals, was to pray, that if our Queen, even this our Queen Elizabeth
would not speedily turn to Queen Mary's religion, that she might be overcome
with fire and sword, and all that would take her part In the let. sent by a
gent. Stud. in the Laws etc. concerning D. Story.
: and I thought him of all the worst man, that so wickedlye would wish unto his
Prince, even the holy one of God. But who ever would have thought that any
durst have dared with stained hands to touch, much less to kill so honorable
and divine a state as her Majesty is!


Z. Assure your self there is nothing so damnable, but if such a Doctor dare
say it, there be scholars enough, and too many of his school that will do it;
and if the Catholic Tyran, the Pope, will allow it, there be few of his
vassals, as they call themselves Catholics, I am persuaded, but easily will
subscribe unto the same as lawful Read the warni^g against the dangerous
practices of Papists etc. by Mr. Norton. Fields caveat for Parsons Howlet.
Let. F.
, if not put it in execution as honorable.


T. Many treasons have bin contrived even against most godly Princes as we may
read in holy writ, and much oppression even of good men by cruel tyrants:
but that any subject professing the Religion did ever so much as in heart
consent unto, much less traiterouslie by word or deed conspire the deadly
ruin of their sovereign Princes whether good or bad, we shall never read; but
that they have discovered treasons, as did Mordecaie Ester 2. 21. 22. 6. 2.
, we may read, and even in the midst of their miseries prayed for their
oppressors, we may also read Bar. 1. 11. 12. See B. Jewels defense of the
Apology of the church of England. f. 18.
.


Z. These treasons therefore, seditious rebellions, and horrible pursuing of
Christian Princes by all treacherous devises even unto the death, do evidently
demo^strate unto the world of what spirit and Religion men are of.


Chap. 7.
1 Of Gods justice executed severally upon popish rebels, and other traitors
from time to time; 2. and of the use which good subjects and others should
make of the same.
TIMOTHY. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, neither curse the rich in
thy bedcha^ber: for the foul of the heaven shall carry the voice, and that which
has wings shall declare the matter, said Solomon, or God rather by Salomons
mouth Eccles. 10. 20.
.


ZELOT. Oh, though even legions of examples of good men conceauing honorably of
their governors in respect of their places, and living in good order even under
most cruel tyrants cannot allure men to the imitating of their obedience, yet
that the fear of those heavy punishments threatened in that sentence last by
you mentioned, could terrify the wicked from tracing the steps of rebels and
traitors Read M. Reaniger against treasons, rebellions etc. The complaint of
England. let. D. 8. etc.
, which by the righteous judgment of the almighty are accursed!


T. I verily do believe no traitors can prosper, but that they, yea and all
which they in disloial hearts shall enterprise, are accursed of the Lord.


Z. You will be strengthened much in this persuasion if you call into mind the
examples of God his justice, I say not time out of mind, but within the
memory of us both, nor in foreign lands, but within her Majesty's dominions
severely executed upon these furtherers of the Popes antichristian authority,
arrant traitors both to God and this realm.


T. My memory is not so good that I can remember, and God forgive me that I
have no better observed such things; recite therefore I pray you, those
examples, or some of them, for my further confirmation.


Z. You have heard I am sure of seditio^s moved of late years both in Ireland
and in England. But did you ever hear of any prosperous success that traitors
hitherto have attained?


T. This I know for certain that the rebels in England were no sooner up,
Rebellion. in the North. In Ireland.
but they were as easily to the everlasting shame and confusion both of
themselves and their houses put-downe again; and they of Ireland, though
troublesome for a season, yet by the suppressing power of the almighty are so
rooted-out in the' nd, as, which is merueilous, yet well known In the execut* of
justice.
, there is not in all that wild and wast Country a know en traitor remaining at
this day, nor has bin for a great time.


Z. As the judgment of God upon those rebels in general: so the same
judgments of the same Lord of hosts upon the ringleaders and heads of those
rebels in particular would from hand to hand, from father to son, and from man
to man everlastingly to all posterities be delivered.


T. The particulars I have not so well marked, make me acquainted with them:
for it shall be as joyful for me to hear, as for you to tell of the
destruction of disloiall subjects and traitors.


Z. The principal stirrers-vp of rebellion from time to time in Ireland have
bin, of English Stukeley, and D. Sanders; of Irishmen; James the Earl of
Desmond, and John his brother, and Fitz-morrice; Now behold the judgments of
God either by the hands of man, or without means by himself; or by himself
and man too upon the^ al. By the hands of man, God in his Justice both caused
that forenamed Fitz-morrice at one James Fitzmorrice.
blow by a lusty young gentleman to be slain Execut. of justice. Tho.
Stukley. El. Exhort. concerning the state of Christendom. p. 39
, and made Stukley so infamous, and so intollerablie odious among the foreign
papists, that even the King of Spain himself, otherwise a great harborer and
praeferrer of such fire-brandes of sedition ( El), banished him not only out of
his Court, but quite out of his Country of Spain In the let. to Bernar.
Mendoza. p. 32. N. Sanders.
. Without the means of man in his justice God not only caused that D. Sanders
to wander like himself, a ravening wolf among the wolves on the mountains of
Ireland, but also kept from him all sustenance of life (who had detained the
food of the soul from others), and bereft him of his wits (which had so abused
his knowledge to the disquieting of Gods people) whereby rauing and in a
frenzy he ended his days Execut. of justice.
, that would have brought to destruction many one both in body and soul.


By himself and man too the two Desmondes came to fearful ends; John of
Desmond.
by man both of the^ after the Irish fashion made shorter by the head; by God
both of them also, like Caine forced to range about they wist not whither,
James Earl of Desmond.
but James especially, a man of power was forsaken of all men, and of a mighty
Earl became a miserable beggar Execut. of justice.
.

T. Blind is he that cannot see, and far given over of God that will not
confess that God stands for his Lieutenantes, the Kings, Queens and
governors of the world, against all popish rebels whatsoever.


Z. That to his glory must be acknowledged, mark now again the conductors of
rebels in this land, which were the two Earls of Northumberland, and of
Westmerland, and upon them also, behold the judgments of God either
immediately by himself, or by himself and man too showen upon them both. Tho.
Percie Earl of Northumberland.
By himself and man he of Northumberland came into their hands whose ouethrow
he sought, and as his demerits did require, at York had his head cut from his
shoulders, Charles Neuil Earl of westmerland.
that would have disme^bred this so flourishing a Common weal. By God without
man the other of Westmerland that thought to have made many a man and woman
childlesse, was bereft of his children, or they of their wits; Lady Margaret
a frantike roge.
and he that viperlike upon no just cause would have distroyed his dear mother
his native Country by his rising-vp is eaten-vp of ulcers rising of lewd
causes out of his own body Execut. of Justice.
.


Chap. 8.
Again of the Justice of God himself executed upon other principal
promooters of Antichrists Kingdom, arrant traitors to the Realm and Crown
of England.
TIMOTHY. Happy are they whom these examples can teach to beware.


ZELOTES. We may otherwise also behold an heavy countenance of the Lord upon
other rebels and traitors. For as he has in the sight of man with the iron
rod of his fierce displeasure eue^ crushed the frantike brains of open rebels
into pieces: so has he as well by himself as by man, so discovered, defeated,
confounded privy traitors, as both the Godly rejoice, the wicked fret, and all
men exceedingly do wonder at the same.


T. I have heard indeed from year to year not only of the Detection, but
also of the miraculous apprehending, and just execution of most barbarous
traitors in sundry and diverse places of this land.


Z. Ascribe that unto the provident care which God has of his handmaid, and of
his Church the spouse of Christ. Consider yet, and especially that which the
godly wise have besides observed.


T. What is that?


Z. It is not so much the necessary execution of that punishment which wholesome
laws have laid upon the bodies, as the importable judgments of the Lord
himself upon the souls and minds of traitors.


T. Make me acquainted therewith that I may grow more and more into a
detestation of them whom God himself in such sort abhors.


Z. Is it not strange, think you, that me^ guilty of hie treason against the
state, being by friends (no friends of their Prince and country) advised to
shift for themselves, and having either fit opportunity to fly, or place
convenient to escape the hands of them whose laws they had violated, should
yet have no power to embrace that counsel, tending so greatly to the
preservation of their lives.


T. Whom mean you?


Z. I mean Felton (that Felton in this place I mean not who lately together
with James Clackson was executed forhie treason These were hanged between
Brainford and Hunsloe near London the 28. of Aug. 1588.
, but his father John Felton) a man for the space of eleauen years together
before his apprehension privy to every treason and conspiracy against her
Majesty, and a special instrument for all foreign enemies to work withal
Fidelis serui subdito infideli resp.
; and Story, eue^ that Story which wished the persecutors had left the
branches and laid the axe to the root of the tree Acts and Monumentes in Q.
Marie. De Romanarch. contra N. Sanderum. l. 1. 2.
, who though they were advised the one of them to fly, when easily he might
after he had set-vp the popes Bull at the Bishop of Londons gate; the other to
refrain to go whither he was allured: yet could neither Felton run his way
Fidelis serui sub infideli resp.
, nor Doctor Story for his life avoid the trappe whereof he was warned In the
declar. of the life and death of l. Story.
.


T. No doubt this was the justice of God before upon the minds, that afterward
the justice of man might be executed upon their bodies, as it came to pass
Felton was hanged in Lo^d. at the Bishop of Land. gate. Story was hanged on a
new triangle gallows called the Tyborne, the 1. of June 1571.
.


Z. Will you see this thing yet more evidently by other examples?


T. That is my desire.


Z. Then call into mind the cursed end both of Someruile before mentioned p. 38.
Someruile. Sir Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland.
, and of that other earl of Northumberland, the one whereof, being condemned
for hie treason praeuented the Queens mercy by hanging himself in Newgate;
the other to be condemned, durst he abide the trial, forewent the Queens
Justice by discharging upon his own carcass a dag charged with three bullets
The true report of the Earl of North. treasons etc. p. 15. 19.
: both of them dying not like Christian men, but like him that having betrayed
our savior Christ unto the hie priests Luke 22, 47. 48. John. 18. 2. 3.
Parrie.
, went and hung himself Math. 27. 3. 4. 5.
, Now whereunto may this be ascribed?


T. Surely unto nothing but unto the same justice of God which lay like an
heavy burden Act. 1. 16. 17. 18.
upon their Souls: an evident demonstration that God is no abettor of
Traitors, and popish conspiracies.


Z. And whereunto may we also refer the trouble, even the great trouble that
Parry was in at the consideration of the manifold excellencies in her Majesty's
person The true and plain declar. of Par. treasons. p. 16.
; and the tears which the very fight of her Highness, in whom to his thinking
he saw the lively and express image of king Henry the seventh Ibidem. p. 35.
, did draw from his eyes: whereunto I say may we refer things but unto the
very justice of God upon his soul, stricken with the horror of a guilty
conscience, and daring him for his life not so much as to touch, much less to
dispatch so heroical a prince, endued with so rare parts as her majesty is?


T. So by miserable experience he saw that it was not of all the easiest thing,
as himself sometime phantastically did imagine Ibidem. p. 9.
, to take away the life of our gracious Queen.


Z. It is written of Iezabell that she thought at her pleasure she could put
the holy Prophet Eliiah, to death, and therefore vowed by a certain time to
cut of the days of that man of God 1. Kings. 19. 2.
. But though her malice was great: yet her power was nothing, for both he lived
and was carried into heaven 2. Kings. 2. 11.
, and she through the justice of God for her sins was eaten up of dogs 2.
Kings. 9. 35. 36.
. So this Parry vowed indeed the destruction of her roial person Parries
treasons. p. 14. 16. 33. 35.
, and thought he could at his pleasure either with dag or dagger spoil her of
al life Ibid. p. 9.
; but we know that both her majesty lives (and long may she live to the
further advancement of Gods glory); and he not only by the justice of man
upon his body Parrie was drawn from the tower of Land. to the palace of
westminster and there hanged the 2. of March. 1584.
, but also by the severe justice of God upon his soul, was banished out of
this world. For he died in final impenitency, for ought that man could
perceive, asking no man, no not God forgiveness for his sins Par. trea. p. 39.
.


T. O most horrible spectacle! yet often seen, that as me^ live so they die, he
lived profanely, and died like an Atheist.


Z. I could tell you of the impatiencie of some; of the desperate ends of other
even at the place of execution; Story. Tichborne. Babington. etc.
of the filthilie polluted bodies through French diseases of other traitors;
all which do cleerelie show into what vile minds God does deliver them up in
his justice that will seek to pluck them down whom he does aduau^ce, or to
aduau^ce that he would have destroyed: But I only do wish were observed, the
utter detestation generally in all sorts of subjects (raised by the very
finger of Gods holy spirit (against all Popish traitors from time to time.


T. Show that one thing.


Z. It is easily done. The outward signs and shows of exceeding joy at the
very discovery of treasons, and apprehension of traitors See the letter of
her Majesty to the L. Mayor of Land. of the 18. of Aug. 1586. it is printed by
Chapter Bar.
; the outcries which they have made Par. treas. p. 38.
, and the speeches of the vulgar people unto the traitors in the open streets
after their arraignme^t In the life and death of D. Story.
, declare the peoples mind; that so famous Act of association in loialtie and
faithfulness toward their prince and Country, by so many thousands
entered-into most willingly See the treat. intitu. The copy of a letter to
the Earl of Leicester. etc. p. 10.
yet altogether unwittingly to her majesty til a great number of hands with
many obligations were showen unto her Ibidem p. 18.
, declare the minds of the greatest; the diverse and sundry Statutes enacted,
but specially that Parliament in the 28. year of her Highness reign, and the
importunate suite of both houses by the mouths of most principal persons for
the putting of them to death whom this Realm neither could nor might any
longer endure Ibidem. p. 22.
, declare both a secret joy and delight they have in her majesty (as in a
jewel of inestimable valor Ibidem. p. 25.
, even as in the Diamond of all Christendom B. Jewel in his view of a sedit.
Bull. p. 73.
, and a common hatred in all men's hearts against them whomsoever that shall rise
up to the overthrow either of her person, or of this government.


T. And this also is a very subscription eue^ of God himself unto that
Religion for the propagation whereof her Majesty with a most resolute mind
has opposed her person to all manner of perilles and dangers what-soeuer.


Z. She knows and has confessed also In the copy of a letter etc. (...)
the Earl of ^cicester p. 30.
, that he for whose sake only she does all that she does, for power can, and
of his endless mercy will defend her still. And all good subjects say thereto,
Amen.


Chap. 9.
1 Of Gods wonderful protecting her Majesty from foreign enemies; 2. And of
the vain inuading of Ireland in the year 1580 and intended invasion of this
land from time to time.
TIMOTHY. If ever Prince had any sensible experience of Gods protection, it is
her Majesty; and if ever people by outward signs were certified that the Pope
is very antichrist, even we of this age now in England may palpablie perceive
the same.


ZELOTES. And yet are there mo things of great moment to confirm us in this
truth then hitherto we have mentioned.


T. I doubt not of that, but what is the special thing that you have observed?


Z. It is the miraculous praeseruation of her sacred person and government from
the dangerous attemptes of foreign papists, promooters of Antichrists
kingdom.


T. I have heard indeed that among our English papists of note and place it
has bin agreed-vpon, that the state of all Christendom has stood upon the
stout assailing of England. Northumb. treas. p. 3.
.


Z. Upon such a conclusion it is well known that long agone the Duke of Alua
in Flanders by Doctor Story The let. sent by a gent. stud. etc. concer. D.
Story.
; of late years the duke of Guise (the French Haman) in France by TT. Morgan,
and Throckmorton Northumb. treas. p. 3. Throck. treas.
; King Philip in Spain by Sir Francis Englesield Ibidem.
; the pope of Rome by doctor Sanders Execut. of justice.
, and Allen Northumb. treas. p. 3.
(the new Cardinal of England) and others daily were solicited, and
importunatelie urged to make an invasion upon her Majesty's Dominions.


T. But what of that?


Z. Hereof two things have insued, one whereof was an invasion made, the other
an invasion intended.


T. What invasion hitherto at any time was yet made?


Z. The invasion was upon Ireland in the year of our Lord 1580. by a company
of soldiers sent into those parts by the commandment of the Pope Genebrard
Cronograph. l. 4. and in append.
and K. of Spain Declar. causarum quibus adducta Ang. Reg. Belgis afflictis
etc. p. 13.
; and there most proudly vaunting themselves under the Pope his banner
displaide.


T. Alas they were but an hand-ful in comparison, and though their malice was
never so deadly; yet could they do no great hurt, their power was so small.


Z. That they did none hurt impute it unto the mercy of our God to his
Church-ward. But much hurt they might have done had either they not forsaken
them who came forth as assisstantes with them; or they come unto them, which
were very many, even the Irish rebels, or they not deceived them that
promised them aid, namely the Pope with a new supply of Soldiers, out of
Italy, and the earl of Desmo^d with his route of rebels; or they any way bin
blessed of God, being for number almost as many as their opponentes, and much
stronger in regard of the vantage of place, they being entrenched strongly in
a fort, and their enemies abroad in the open field. Besides the name of a band
of men arrived, and armed on all sides, especially with authority from the
Pope, and King of Spain, is a great imboldning of the wicked, that are
wavering to revolt.


T. But they were no sooner come almost on land and had fortified themselves but
they were even all of them either hanged, killed, or taken prisoners.


Z. So let them perish, o most righteous God which band themselves against thy
Christ and his Church.


T. Thus God shows himself still to be for her Majesty, and takes her
enemies for his own.


Z. You will say so when we have thoroughly displaied the invasion intended.


T. What have you to say thereof?


Z. Many things; but for brevity and method sake I will reduce them all
unto that which concerns the enemies and their overthrow, and our selves, and
our prosperous success.


T. What is to be noted touching our enemies?


Z. First their long and careful praeparation many years, and their
wonderful armies as well for la^d as sea in the last, and famous, and much
expected year, 88; the^ the excessive pride of the adversaries, and the just
account they made to conquer and subdue us all; and last of al, the miraculous
defeating of al their wicked purposes, and the most famous victory given of
God unto us his weak servants over his and our enemies.


Chap. 10.
1 Of the long praeparation to invade this land; 2. of the hideous Armies and
Armado for the same purpose; 3. and of the causes and ends of the same.
TIMOTHY. Speak now more fully that which in a word you have uttered.


ZELOTES. Touching the praeparation to invade this land mark first of all the
diverse things that from time to time, for the harting, or hardening rather of
rebellious people have bin bruted of the same: as that the realm for
certeintie should be invaded sometime by 20000. Northumb. t^eas. p. 3.
, sometime by 40000 men The Let. of agent. stud. etc. concer. D. Story.
, sometime under the conduct of one Prestal an Englishma^ Ibidem.
; sometime of strangers, as by the duke of Alua; M. Fleetwoods the recor. of
Lon. orat. to the Lon. An. 1571,
, otherwhiles by Don John of Austrich Exhort. concer. the state of
Christendom. p. 39.
, now by the Duke of Guize Throck. treas.
then by the King of Spain Ibidem.
; and the invasion to be sometime upon Ireland Ibidem.
, sometime upon England, and there somewhile in Sussex Northumb. treas. p. 6.
Throck. treas.
, at an other time in the North parts Northumb. treas. p. 7. 9.
.


T. This declares an horrible conspiracy and proanes in Princes and Papists
to annoy her Majesty, and this land. But why according to their desire do they
not effect their wicked and mischievous purposes?


Z. It was some twenty year ago by F. Pais (a public reader of divinity
at Rome in the praesence of 300. scholars and not so few) said that the Popes
goodwil (to this invasion) is tried and known, and his purse ready, but
either fear withdraws, or power forbids (K. Philip) that he dare not
venture to bring his army of Soldiers into England Nich Recant.
. That which father Pais said of the Pope and King of Spain do I say of them
and the rest of our adversaries also, their malice is well known, and their
money ready for this enterprice, but they did not hitherto invade us, not
because they would not, but for that they durst not, their cause being naught
their courages did fail them.


T. So God takes away their stomachs many times which band themselves to the
overthrow of his truth.


Z. Many-times indeed he does so, though not always, for sometimes he gives
the^ the raines to proceed at their pleasure, as he did Pharao, and the King of
Spain, to their greater overthrow in the end.


T. What was now his preparation at the last?


Z. Most wonderful whether you respect his nauies upon the sea, or his armies
for land, his power was so exceeding great, as a mightier praeparation was
never known in former times to be made against any Turks, or Sarasins than
he made against Christians Let. to Me^d. p. 6.
. The number of his ships was great, the variety strange; the persons not only
very many for multitude, but also for state of great reputation True descrip.
of the Ar. p. 36. 46.
: so puissant a power, and such if either the number of natural Spaniards, or
the qualitye of the viagers be considered, as the like came never out of Spain
with any King or without Piement. deposit. p. 13.
; so mighty a power, and so provided with all Martial furniture for six
months True descr. of the Ar. p. 58. Piement depo. p. 7.
, as might have amazed the greatest Monarch in the world to have incountred
with the same.


T. What might be the cause of this so rare an enterprise?


Z. The cause praetended was religion, or to return unto the pope his church a
great number of contrite souls D. Medinas orders for the Spanish Fleet.
Northum. trea. p. 4.
; as Piementellie said, it was in the King of Spain a desire of revenge for
the supposed injuries received at the hands of the most valiant and thrice
renowned Knight, Sir Francis Drake Piement depo. p. 16.
, (forgetting utterly the infinite and grievous injuries that himself from
time to time has offered to her Majesty, by abusing her subjects, and
Ambassadors, and by inuading her realm of Ireland, and harboring of arrant
traitors both to God and her crown Exhor. concer. the state christ. p. 39.
: But the true cause indeed we shall find to be an Ambitious desire in K.
Philip of Spain to tyrannize in her Highness dominions as he does over the
Indies, Portugals, and them of Netherland See the exhor. concer. the state of
christendom.
.


T. If the ground was so ill, the end could never be good.


Z. Surely the end was none other but to conquer the whole Realm, to remove
our most gracious Sovereign from the Crown and regal dignity Throck. treas.
; to set up some English (or other) Catholic for King Northumb. treas. p. 3.
; to bring both our bodies into the Spanish thraldom Let. to Mend. p. 4.
, worser then death it self See the Spa. colonie. the suppl. unto the K. of
Spain made by the P. of Ora^ge etc. The Pr. of Ora^ges apology. The Pol.
discourse of the, leage between Fr. and Eng. The complaint of England.
, and our souls into the hellish bondage of the Roman Antichrist Med. orders
for the Spa. Fleet. Crusado from Rome, p. 10. Northumb. treas. p. 3.
.


Chap. 11.
Of the detestable pride in the Spaniards, and just account they made to subdue
us all.
TIMOTHY. No doubt their praeparation being so great (unless, which is
incredible, they have left that vice for which they are notoriously infamous
Guicciardine in his 16. book hist. Italicae. M. Norton in his warni^g etc. The
pol. disc of the league between Fr. and Eng.
, the pride of the Spaniards could not be little.


ZELOTES. Their pride was so excessive as they termed their army, The
invincible army Crusado from Rome.
; and our navy in disdain, Fisherboates Elz. triumph. p. 29.
; They judged their Fleet so mighty, as had there not bin so many ships by
twenty as they had, they could easily have praeuailed over us Pieme^. depo.
. They thought either that we durst not encounter with them, or if we did we
should presently be overcome Let. to Mend. p. 16.
.


T. I have read, I well remember, four years before the appearing of this
Fleet, that Bar. Mendoza, the Spanish Embassader, did say unto Throckmorton
the traitor, that we should as easily be overthrown by the spanish power as
assailed Throck. treas.
.


Z. And about 13. years before that also it was delivered by Doctor Story, if
the King of Spain would but go about England with his Navy, as Joshua with
his army went about Ierico Joshua 1. 6.
, that he should be sure to find as good success here as Joshua did there
The Let. of a Gent. Stud. co^cer. D. Story.
.


T. Some said that a maid (called the holy maid of Lisborne) the year last
immediately past before the coming of the Fleet, did prophecy that the
Spaniardes should no sooner approach the coast of England, but the hearts of
Englishmen should fail them, and the Spaniardes obtain the victory D.
Banerof^^ ser. at Paul's cross p. 6.
.


Z. Some say likewise they played at dice for our noblemen and knights Spa.
masque.
; and had after a sort quartered the whole Realm as a pray among themselves
Let. to Mend. p. 36.
.


T. Others besides deliver that in one of Don Pedro de Valdez ensigns there
was figured a Sun and a Moon with a Motto in Spanish to this effect,
Yesterdaie the full, but to day the wane Spa. Masque.
; not obscurelie thereby insinuating the good success which they promised unto
themselves by our utter ouerouerthrow.


Z. The embroidered garments also with strange emblems, and the lofty verses
diuulged by their favorites at Colein Tu qui Romanas voluish spernere leges,
etc.
manifested unto the open and wide world, the just account that both themselves
and their adherentes did make to prevail, to ouer-run the whole realm, and to
supplant the religion and the present state.


Chap. 12.
1 The dreadful doun-fall of the ambitious and proud Spaniardes; 2. Gods
heavy curse upon the whole army and Armado of the Catholics, 3. with the
sundry effects ensuing thereupon in the minds of many men.
TIMOTHY. But pride goes before destruction, and an hie mind, before the fall,
said Solomon Prou. 16. 18.
the wisest among princes.


ZELOTES. That which that worthy Prince delivered, by our experience we know
to have betide that proud Antichristian army of papists; For he that rules
in the heavens did laugh them to scorn, the God of Gods had them in derision,
and brought even in the public view of the uniuersall world most horrible
confusion upon them all.


T. How, declare?


Z. The whole power of Spain co^sisted of three parts; of the prince of
Parmaes forces of one hundred sail of ships, and forty within two thousand men
Piemen. depo. p. 13.
; of a new supply of fourscore ships Disc. of the Ar. in the end.
; and of the grand Armado of eight score ships Let. to Me^d. p. 17. Disc. of
the Ar. p. 36.
; and thirty and two thousand fighting men Piemen depo. p. 6.
: In all of ships three hundred and forty, of men not so few as an hundred
thousand.


T. What of that?


Z. Consider now the judgments of the Lord our God upon all, and every of
these armies.


T. What upon the Prince of Parma, and his forces?


Z. The P. of Parma, though his strength as well for sea as land, was exceeding
great; yet the Lord of hosts (in whose hands are the hearts of al men) so
weakened his courage, as he had none heart either to assail us, or to assist
his companions of the conspiracy beaten even like dogs, if not in his sight,
yet within his hearing. Whereby the glory of that Prince, before so valorous,
is not a little diminished, and his credit impeached among the manly
soldiers, as well on his side Piemen. depo. p. 15.
, as adversaries to his cause The discourse upon the declar. pub. by the L de
la Noue. p. 9.
.


T. What upon the new supply?


Z. The supply of fourscore well appointed ships had this judgment laid upon
them also, that for their lives they durst neither rescue their pursued Fleet,
nor ve^ter upon our navy; nor enter into the land, but got them home again,
as they came forth, save that they returned with some touch of dishonor in
regard of their great timiditie.


T. What upon the huge Armado?


Z. The judgments of God upon that were most wonderful, whether you consider
them from their coming first from home til their meeting with our Navy; or as
they are met together; or being departed from us and fled away, they never
prospered neither first nor last.


T Before their meeting with our Fleet what ill success had they?


Z. Let this generally be observed that from their first setting forth til the
return of the remainder of ships into Spain, they had not so much as one good
day to their comfort and consolation Let. to Mend. p. 17.
. Next they were no sooner departed from the Groyne, but forthwith their Ships
wherein all their medicamentes were, perished Piemen. depo. p. 7.
. So that God at the beginning of their voyage did discomfort, and bereft them
of all means to heal their sick, wounded, and diseased persons withal.
After that their four Galleys even all of them suffered wrack I. An. de Mon.
confess.
, in a tempest from heaven before they came upon the coasts of England Piemen.
depo. p. 5.
, And having entered into the chanel of our la^d themselves set fire upon the
Admiral of Oquendo and burned him Ibidem p. 13.
.


T. Apparent arguments, that God abhorred that enterprise of theirs; and most
gracious warninges unto them of greater evils to themward, did they not desist,
had they had grace so to have taken them.


Z. But they went on to their greater shame and ruin. For no sooner saw they
our Fleet and felt our bullets, but God stroke a cowardice into the hearts of
the Lords of Spain, as into the Aramites 2. Kings. 7. 6. 7.
bending their force against Israel, as these did against England: so that they
whose hearts before the fight were as hard as steel, being come now unto the
battle, became so soft as wax. Hence was it that they stood in fear of our
English Fleet (which before they despised) and doubted much of boording Em.
Frem. exam.
, Yea had we offered to have boorded their ships, it is thought they would all
have yielded to our mercy Em. Frem. confess.
, so fearful were they. Hence was it that the Captain general of the whole
army, the Duke of Medine, tooke-vp his lodging in the bottom of his ship Let.
to Mend. p. 18.
, as in a place of most security, and Ian Martines de Ricalde, chief Admiral
of the Navy, betook him to his bed (like a knight of the pillow) and there
lay from the fight before Calice seven weeks together and upward Exa^. of
Pier. Carre.
: neither of them daring to buckle with their enemies, or to succor their
distressed friends, which has turned much to their discredit Let. to Mend. p.
18.
Hence was it that the famous soldier, Don Pedro de Valdez, in a ship of 1550.
tonne, furnished with 304. men of war 118. Mariners, and 50. Canons for the
war Disc. of the Ar. p. 34.
, was taken prisoner withal his, Let. to Mend. p. 18.
making little, if any resistance, through fear. Hence was it that they flew
desperately one upon an other, and slew themselves M. Pigs medita. p. 33.
, eue^ as the Moabites, Ammonits, and they of Mount Seir did in the days of
Iehoshaphat 2. Chro. 20. verse 22. 23.
. And hence finally it was that these brave assailers hoisedvp their sails,
and sailed away so fast as they could drive Condem. of the Spa. lies
.

Look upon the person, and you shall find that none among them of any account,
but they were either killed by us, as Hugo de Moncado Ibidem.
, and the masters of the camps of horsemen and of footme^ I. An. of Genuas
; or taken prisoners as Do^ Pedro de Valdez of who^ I now spoke, and Diego
Piementellie, one of the five masters of the ca^pe Pieme^. depo. p. 6. 12.
, and of great blood Ibid. p. 3. 4.
; or drowned, or put to shameful flight: Consider their ships, and you shall
find the best of them and strongest to be either sonke, or taken, or
dangerously pearsed and bruised with our shot: Look upon their treasure and
you shall find that either it came into our hands by the taking of Don Pedro
Em. Frem.
, or it perished being thrown into the sea by a Friar in the Galliasse where
Hugo de Monacado was slain.

In one day there were slain and drowned of these our enemies five thousand
men l. An. of Genuas.
; in a short time drowned and taken 15. Spanish ships, and a thousand men and
not so few taken prisoners, which remain to this day in bondage partly in
England, and in Zeala^d partly Aduertis. out of Ireland.
; in nine days all the Spanish hope vanished to nothing, and the glory of this
Antichristian voyage, so earnestly solicited, so much exspected, so many
years in preparing, the hope of all Papists, and as it were their last refuge
and castle of comfort, became utterly defaced and overthrown Let. to Mend. p.
3.
.


T. Now blessed be the Almighty for thus justifying his poor servants, even
in the open sight, and stage as it were of the universal world.


Z. Yet our God whose cause we maintain, stayed not here but took the defense
of the same into his own hands, sent his angel among the^ as into the army of
Rabsakeh Isa. 37.
, loosed his winds, powered raging streams of vengeance from above, threw his
storms into the sea, Droaue his and our enemies by violent tempests into
vnquoth and cold Northren quarters (little grateful to those brave Sothre^
soldiers); severed, sonk, and drowned many of their ships, and brought most
horrible confusion upon them all Aduertis. our of Ireland.
. Whereby it fell out that the Prince of Ascule, base son to the King of
Spain, and Don Michaell de Oquendo, general of the Fleet of Guipusque, with
almost 500. men in one ship were drowned I. An. de Mo^. exam.
; others landed in Ireland and were put to the sword, yea one man with an axe
slew fourscore of these spanish Philistines Aduertis. out of Irel.
; others abode in their ships, and suffered perforce extreme misery Em. Frem.
exam.
. Which made them both to cast their horses and mules over board into the sea
to save their fresh water Condem. of the Spa. lies p. 12. John de la Conidos
confess.
, and also to die of famine most miserably, in so much as out of that ship which
best was furnished with victuals there died in less the^ six months of
hunger and thirst four or five in a day Em. Frem. exam.
. In which flight of theirs 17. ships and 53. hundred men and upward are well
known to be either sunk, drowned, killed, or taken upon the coasts of Ireland
Aduertis. out of Irel.
.


T. Thus to our comfort and confirmation of our faith, we do see that where
Gods providence is the watch and defense, no floods of foreign forces can
ouerwhelme.


Z. And praised be God, as they which be strong in faith hereby are more
strengthened, so some which before have staggered in Religion are now made
wholly on our side, and such as were stiff on the adverse part, begin now to
stagger Let. to Men. p. 3.
; and they which came out enemies are become our friends, in so much as many
of them do not only crie-out upon the English traitors in their Country, as
betraiers of the king of Spain Ibidem. p. 30
, but also vow no more to meddle with us Em. Frem. Exam.
, and will rather be buried in the ground alive, then come in such an other
voyage against England Ibidem.
, acknowledging both our Country to be invincible, otherwise than by treason
of some great part within the Realm Let. to Men. p. 31.
, and Christ also in all these fightes to have showen him self even a very
Lutheran, Ibid p. 17.
, that is an utter enemy to the Pope and Popery.


Chap. 13.
The prosperous success of the Gospel, and the most gracious countenance of
God cast, and continued to his seruantes-ward of the Religion of Christ.
TIMOTHY. And these effects are wrought in the minds of many, not so much
by God his overthrowing his enemies, as by blessing every way with happy
success his dear children standing for the Gospel of Christ against
Antichrist, and his partakers.


ZELOTES. Doubtless as the ground of our quarrel was good: so the proceeding was
most godly, and the means and end blessed, and all prosperous.


T. I ensure you I am not a little refreshed, and even full as it were fraughted
with unspeakable comfort when either mine heart does think, or my tongue speak,
or mine ears hear, or mine hands write of those happy days.


Z. So is every sound Christian and subject.


T. And truly he that shall call into mind the courage of the people, the
magnanimity of the Prince, the obedience of subjects, the direction of the
Governors, the diligence of the Captains, the forwardnes of all sorts to
spend their lives and goods in defense of their native Country, and
maintenance of the long established, and much blessed religion among us, will
frankly acknowledge all this to come of God, if any sparkle of Gods holy
spirit be within him.


Z. Every thing was notable which you have mentioned, but that the very
Papists were so far from reuolting from their due obedience to their
sovereign Prince, that they were pressed and ready both with body and goods to
proceed in hostile manner with us of the Religion Let to Mend. p 8.
against all enemies whatsoever, that is of all most merueilous in mine eyes.


T. It was the work of God, who showed his Almighty power not only in
weakening the courage of the foreign enemies, but also in changing their hearts
who are among ourselves most dangerous, and (had he not made them of wolves,
for the time lambs) might more have perplexed us in a day, than could the
out-enimies in a month.


Z. Therefore the glory thereof is to be ascribed unto him alone to whom
justly it does appertain, which is the immortal and invisible God.


T. And they for all their proffered service then Let. to Mend. p. 9.
are no whit the more to be favored and trusted now; Papists being the
soliciters Northumb. and Throck trea.
, Papists the prosecutors of this war Therefore. politic p. 64.
, Papists the soldiers The descr, of the Ar. Crusado from Rome.
, and al attempted on the behalf of the Pope and Papists Medinas orders for
the Spa. Fleet. Northu^b. trea. p. 3. 4.
.


Z. God give us grace to beware of the^, whom not only by public writings
blazoned M. Nortons war. against the dang. practices of Papists. Execut, of
Justice. M. Drants sermon at the court at windsor the 8. of Ia^. 1569. Fields
caveat for Parsons Howlet. Let. F. D. Fulkes confut. p 5 Complaint of England.
, but by other mischievous practices as well against the person of the greatest
in England, as the present government, we know to be of all most dangerous: we
are well warned of them if we can beware.


T. But notwithstanding the general concurrence of al sorts to withstand the
inuaders, yet, had not the almighty God bin our keeper, we had for all that
watched in vain. For the enemies if they had not to their desire prevailed,
yet had they surprised our Navy on the sudden, and landed to our great hurt.


Z. But, blessed be the Lord which in good time discovered them to one Eliz.
triump. p. 28.
, who co^cealed it not from them which were in best place for the Sea affairs.


T. This ought to be added next in the Catalogue of God his favors to his poor
church of England ward.


Z. An other argument of the same favor is, his enduing our sea me^ as well
marines as soldiers not only with an invincible courage (whereof our enemies,
as before was noted, were quite deprived) but with all other virtues, and
qualities besides, necessary for Christian warriers. Hereof it was that upon
the tydinges of the approaching enemies they dreaded not upon the sudden only
with fifty ships, such as they were, which the Spaniardes counted little
Fisherboats Ibidem.
, to set upon that dreadful sea monster The refor. politic p. 42.
, and reputed inuicible Armado of Spain consisting for number of eight-score
ships Let. to Mend. p. 17.
, so ventrous were they, and so circumspect, that they always gained the wind
at their pleasure Ibidem.
to their great advantage; and so valiant as some one of our ships fought at
one time with three of their Galiasses Condem. of the Spa. lies. p. 3.
, as if David had incountred with three Goliahs; and two of our Eng. gentlemen
assaulted only with their naked rapiers, and seized upon the chiefest Galiasse
in all the Spanish Fleet Let. to Mend. p. 28.
, a thing so wonderful as if two naked men should set upon, and enter a mighty
castle replenished with strong men and al martial furniture.


T. But how fortunate were they?


Z. That has already bin showen.


T. But strange things do they publish, clean contrary to that by you
mentioned.


Z. I wot well, neither is it a new thing among Papists to broach abroad lies,
and loud untruths; we spoke not long since of the invasion of Ireland.


T. We did so, what of that?


Z. What a good hand we had over our enemies at that time, it is universally
well known. Yet were not the Papists ashamed to blazon through-out Spain,
that an Angel from Heaven with a Chalice in his hand had discomforted many
thousands of Englishmen In the addideclar. to the Bulls. etc.
. Whereupon the belles were ro^g, the people met together, and all sorts from
the highest to the lowest of men, al Biskaie M. Hanmers answer to a Ies.
challenge. p. 26.
, yea al Spain In the addit. declar. to the, Bulls. etc.
over reioiced, triumphed, and by all outward arguments declared the inward
comfort they received by that tidinges.


T. O merciful God that ever such untruths should be forged! thousands of our
men discomforted; and discomforted by an Angel from heaven! when God was so on
our side that we either killed, hanged, or took at our pleasure even all that
Antichristian rableme^t, and but one of our men in all those fightes was slain,
nor above two hurt, and not so much as one man taken prisoner This is testified
by so many as have written of this inuading of Ireland.
.


Z. So have they published that the Admiral of England in the last fight upon
the seas was sunk Let. to Mend. p. 14.
.


T. And yet he is alive, and, praised be God, fares well.


Z. That Sir Francis Drake was either taken or slain Pack of Spa. lies. p. 7.
.


T. Yet he was neither taken or slain, but took and slew a great number; and
since by the power and goodness of the Almighty has slain and taken, and still
does both take and slaie them.


Z. That we fled from coming to the battle Ibid. p. 10.
.


T. And yet we chased the Spaniardes as a brace of Greyhoundes would an heard
of Dear Condem. of the Spa. lies. p. 3.
, and whipped them as a man will whip bond-slaues The discr. upon the declar.
pub. by the L. de la Noue. p. 9
, and as vagabondes are whipped about a town, so whipped we them about England
and Scotland Aduertis. out of Irel. Conde^. of the Spa. lies. p. 3.
.


Z. That of our ships 20. yea 22. were sunk, and 15. yea 26. yea 40. taken
Pack of Spa. lies. p. 3. 5. 12.
.


T. And yet so far were we from loosing forty, that we lost not one, yea
so far from loosinge a Ship that we lost not so much as a boat Let. to
Mend. p. 17. Condem. of the Spa. lies. p. 10.
nor a Ship-mast. Aduertis. out of Irel. Let. to Me^d. p. 17.
.


Z. That many of our men were slain, and drowned Pack of Spa. lies. p. 3. 5.
12.
, and a number taken prisoners. Ibid. p. 1. 3. 5. 7. 12.
.


T. Yet can they name, neither do we know any man of mark and reputation that
was slain Condem. of the Spa. lies. p. 12. Aduertis. out of Irel.
, nor any man what soever that came as prisoner into their hands Let. to Mend.
p. 17.
. For all are living and praest by Gods favor to adventure their lives as
cheerfully as ever they did for her Majesty when she shall command them
Condem. of the Spa. lies. p. 12.
.


Z. This of all is most wonderful that they no way, and we every way were
fortunate; that their hearts should be taken from them, and new courage be put
into us; that so many of their Ships should be lost, and not so much as one
boat, nor mast of ours from the first to the last to perish; that in one day
five thousand of them, and not in nine days so much as one man to count-of on
our side should be slain; that in a few days a thousand of theirs should be
taken prisoners, and not one man of ours come into their hands; that their so
famous an army and Armado should by Heaven, by Earth, by water, by fire,
perish for a great part, and ours be preserved and remain whole and sound
either to go against them to their greater ruin, or to encounter with any
foreign forces that shall assail us!


T. He that sees not a special regard of God toward us, as to the dear
spouse of Christ ward, and an angry countenance on the other side against the
Church of Rome, as upon the whore of Babylon described by S. John Revel. 17. 3.
4. etc.
, is very blind.


Z. So is he.


Chap. 14.
Of a great desolation at hand of the Papal kingdom gathered from the
consideration of things, past and present.
TIMOTHY. And I trust the observation of these things will draw them on, who
are not so well affected to that religion which is from above.


ZELOTES. I hope so too, I wish it, and many arguments I have inducing me to
think that some more notable overthrow the Pope shall again sustain ere long
it be.


T. May I not be privy unto some of them?


Z. It is written that Jupiters priests in Meroe had with superstition so
bewitched the peoples minds, that when soever they gave commandment, men
would lay violent hands upon the kings and governors of Aethiopia, and put them
to the sword. Du arenus de sac. eccl. minis. ac benefic. l. 1. c. 4.



T. Who but hears this, and does not abhor the same, be he endued but with
common humanity?


Z. Then no doubt popery, which both teaches, defends and practices even
the murdering of Gods anointed, the Kings, Princes and governors of
Christendom, must needs universally become odious.


T. Hasten the same for thy names sake, O most righteous God.


Z. At length those Jupiters Priests by a Prince of an heroical courage were
themselves even all of them put to the sword, and their authority, government,
and priesthood, quite rooted out, and overthrown Duarenus, ibidem.
.


T. Even so declare thy justice and iudgme^tes, mighty God we beseech thee,
upon Baals Priests of Rome, and upon the whole papacy, no whit inferior in
impiety to The ethiopian priests.


Z. That Prince that so rooted them out was hight Erganes Duarenus ibidem.
. The name of him that already has given the deadly blow unto the state of
Popery in England, was one entitled even by the pope himself, The defender
of the Faith, Sleid. comen, de statu. ^el. and resp. l. 3.
since for his magnanimity and power in suppressing Gods enemies justly termed
The hammer of Papists even K. Henry the eight of most famous memory.


T. O that other Countries and territories yet under the Papal jurisdiction had
either such Erganes as Aethiopia, or such Henry's as England had!


Z. It is delivered that Italy is fatal to the Polonians Theod. Beza in vita
Caluini.
.


T. What then?


Z. And it is credibly thought also that the name of Henry seems fatal to
the Papacy The refor. politic. p. 87
.


T. What the Henry's shall be God only knows, and man cannot define: but what
adversaries the Henry's have bin, and still are at this hour to the Papacy all the world does know, and the present state of France does afford memorable
examples in their excommunicate Henry's.


Z. But whosoever the persons shall be for state, or name, and how unlikely in
the judgment of many to distroy the Popedom, sure I am the miserable
condition of our even Christians does require, and the instant supplications of
all Gods people every where do also crave and call for a speedy reformation;
and they cannot be in vain.


T. There is nothing impossible to God.


Z. Saint Paul some-time was an enemy of the Church, and with commission was
sent and went also to murder and persecute the saints of God Acts 9, 1. 2.
etc. Phil. 3. 6.
; and yet he proved a most zealous and constant preacher of the word afterward
himself Act. 9. 20.
, suffered much for the cause of Christ 2. Cor. 11. 23. etc. Act. 9. 24.
, and of an hipocriticall Pharisie became a true professor Phil. 3. 2.
.


T. The example is notable.


Z. We have mo Paul's than one, we praise God: For Petrus Paulus Vergerius also
in his last age, a Cardinal of Rome, Sleid. come^. de statu rel. and reip. l.
21.
an Ambassador of the Popes, sent and sent again, for his rare wisdom and
faithfulness in all the Popes affairs into Germany Ibidem. l. 9.
and Naples unto the Emperor, and that for the rooting-out of Gods people under
the name of Lutherans Sleid. lib. 10.
; an heavy accuser of declining papists Ibid. l. 16.
, and an earnest writer against such as revolted from the Romish faith Ibid. l.
21.
: himself in the end all this notwithstanding forsook his profession, left his
dignities, renounced al his spiritual promotions, the Pope, and Italy
Biblioth. Simleri. fol. 563.
, and became a zealous preacher, and professor of the Gospel of our Savior
Christ Sled. Comen, de statu rel. and reip. l. 21.
.


T. And such, thanks be to God; we hear of now and then M. Latimers 1. ser.
upon the L. prayer in p. 125. b. M. Charkes answer to a Jesuits Let. fo. 6.
.


Z. Little did Martin Luther think when first he opposed him self against the
Popes pardons to have bin the subuertor of the whole Religion of Popery Sleid
comen. de statu rel. and reip. l. 1.
; as little also did King Henry the eight, when first he dealt in that case of
diuorcement think to have bin the banisher of the popes authority out of
England Acts and Monumentes. in K. Hen. 8.
.


T. So many there be now, as man thinks, the Popes sure friends, which may
prove his enemies, and they which are his vpholders and protectors now, may
throw him down hereafter.


Z. King Henry of whom our speech has bin, had a very honorable title
ascribed unto him by the Pope; other Potentates had the like Sleid. comen. de
statu rel. and reip. l. 3.
, that which they are in name they may be in truth. Great injuries are offered
by the Pope unto his stro^gest pillars not only in France The discourse of the
pres. state of France
, but also in Spain The refor. politic p. 42. 47.
, and Princes irritated may and will do much.


T. Those princes are in best estate even in the eyes of man which have least
dealinges with the Pope, and as the Princes are such be the people.


Z. Were that well marked, Popery could not stand, the Antichristian kingdom
must needs even presently fall to the ground.


Chap. 15.
Of the Priestlie office of our Savior attributed to the Pope of Rome.
TIMOTHY. The time is now that you tell how the Pope is placed in the Priestlie
office of our Savior Christ, and in that respect made another Savior.


ZELOTES. That by two things is evident, first in that he is a Priest, then
because he is a Pope.


T. As a Priest how is he Christ?


Z. For that as a priest he has authority to offer sacrifice unto God for the
quick and the dead Catech. Trid. de ordinis Sa^
, which sacrifice also, as they teach, is a propitiatory sacrifice, Council.
Trid. sess. 22. can. 3. Catech. Trid. de Eucha. sacra.
, and the same sacrifice propitiatory too that was offered by Christ himself
upon the cross Council. Tride^. sess. 22. cap. 2. Catech. Tride^. de Eucha.
sacra
, None of which things belong unto any creature, but solie unto Jesus Christ
the only savior of mankind.


T. It is very true. For as Christ himself is the propitiation for our sins
Romans 3. 25. Hebr. 9. 12. etc. 1 John. 2. 2. 28. 4. 10.
. so that sacrifice propitiatory was once offered Hebr. 9. 12. 27.
; and that upon the cross Galat. 3. 13.
, and that by Jesus Christ himself Hebr. 9. 12.
, both the sacrificer, and the sacrifice.


Z. Therefore to whom-soeuer power is given to offer a propitiatory sacrifice
for the quick and dead, which power they give to every priest who is in the
highest degree of holy orders Catech. Triden. de ordinis sacra.
; and so belongs unto the Pope as he is a priest; and they who say that the
sacrament of the Altar is the same propitiatory sacrifice that was offered by
Christ himself upon the cross, they give both unto the Pope a priest, and to
the Mass, the sacrifice that which of right belongs solie unto Jesus Christ.


T. But our savior as a priest has not only satisfied the wrath of God by
sacrificing himself upon the cross, but still does as a priest also
continually use intercession unto his father for his redeemed people Romans 8.
34. Hebr. 8. 6. 1. John. 2. 1.
.


Z. That is manifest in the holy Scriptures, notwithstanding though clear it
be that Christ is our mediator, and by intercession makes request for us unto
God: Yet they make every popish priest beside a mediator so well as Christ
Catech. Triden. de ordinis sacra.
.


T. Saint Paul says there is but one God, and but one mediator between God
and man, even the Man Christ Jesus 1. Tim. 2. 5.
.


Z. And they say (contrarying thereby The Apostle Paul) there be many
mediators, even so many as there be priests and popes. For every pope,
because every priest, is a mediator; And so every pope, even this Franciscane
Sixtus usurps this part of Christ his office.


T. Show now again how every Pope, as Pope intrudeth himself into the
priestlie office of Jesus Christ.


Z. Their common judgment of the pope is, that he as pope is the high priest
Durand. cat. diuini offic. l. 2. c. 1.
, the general pastor Ans. to the execut. of lustice. c. 6. p. 131
, the common father of all Christians Ibid. c. 6. p. 121.
, and the hie Ibid. c. 3. p. 52.
pastor, and moderator Catech. Triden de ordin. Sacra.
of Gods universal Church, in order Melchisidech, and in dignity Aaron
Maioranus clip. milit. eccl. l. 3. c. 35.
.


T. It is well known that such titles are proper only unto Christ Hebr. 3. 1.
Hebr. 13. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 25.
, and those persons Melchisidec and Aaron, were types and figures of our
savior Christ Psalm. 110. 4. Hebr. 5. 4. 5.
.


Z. Therefore to inuest the pope with such glorious titles, and to make him the
person prefigured by such tipes is eue^ to make the pope, if not the same, yet
another Christ, as they made S. Francis.


T. Saint Gregory did write unto the Emperor Maurice, that whosoever calls
himself the universal priest in his elation he is the forerunner of
Antichrist, because through pride he places himself before other men Greg.
Magnus epist. 30. ad Mauriciu^ Imper. li. 16 and in epistolis passim.
. And I may boldie in likewise affirm that whosoever does either call, or
suffer himself to be called by such titles as you have recited, he is very
Antichrist.


Z. But so does the pope.


T. The Pope therefore is Antichrist.


Z. Then the arrogating of that power, whereby our Savior most soueraignly
excels, must more fully decipher, and notify him to be Antichrist in very
deed.


T. Can you show that?


Z. What is more sovereign than for our Savior to be the head of his church,
upon whom al other parts do depend Ephesians. 4. 15. 23.
even as members are linked to the head? Col. 1. 18. 2. 10. etc.



T. Nothing.


Z. Of this mystical body the pope is made the head, and so him that gives
life and direction to all other members whatsoever Durand. cat. diuin^ offic.
l. 2. c. 1.
; and they say of him as John said of our savior Christ John. 1. 16.
. Of his fulness we do all receive Durand. ibid.
.


T. Is this Catholic divinity? to make the Pope of aequal excellency with
our Savior Christ, is this the divinity of Papists?


Z. You shall hear more yet, For as they call him the head of the universal
church, and say that of his fulness we do all receive: so as it is recorded,
with patience has he endured to hear himself called, even The lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world. For eue^ prostrate upon the ground
certain Ambassadors of Sicilia said unto him on this wise Paulus Aemylius lib.
7.
, Thou which take away the sins of the world have mercy upon us; thou which
take away the sins of the world, grant us peace.


T. O gracious God, open once the eyes of thine elect among them at length that
they may see the most horrible condition they are in, and repent.


Z. If here they staid with making the Pope in office equal with our Savior,
it were the less offensive, but when they do not only compare, but for pity
also and power by blasphemous lies, and untruths prefer the pope before Christ
in the redemption of mankind, the sin is extended even unto the uttermost.


T. Do they so?


Z. Do they not so when they teach and deliver that the pope dailye of pity
freeth some one or other from the pains of Purgatory Eras, Roter in epist. ad
Tim. c. 1.
? when our Savior did free none at al from those hellish pains?


T. This shall suffice for this point, Philip Mor^aeus tract. de eccles. p. 193.
I se their blasphemies but too too well, and I abhor them from mine heart.


Z. We will therefore speak of that which remains.


Chap. 16.
How the Pope of Rome is set in the prophetical office of Jesus Christ.
TIMOTHY. And is the Pope seated in the prophetical, as he is in the roial and
priestlie office of Jesus Christ?


ZELOTES. Hear and then determine.


T. First tell me where is our Savior entitled with the name of Prophet?


Z. That he should be so, it was by Moses long-ago foretold Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
, and that he was so S. S. Peter Acts. 7. 37.
, and Stephan Acts. 7. 37.
, do testify.


T. Why is he so termed?


Z. He is so called partly because he prophesied much of things to come
Wigandus corp. doct. noui Test par. 1.
; but especially for that sovereign authority he had both to teach and
reveal the will of God concerning the redemption of man.


T. What was his authority?


Z. Such as we are both enioined, and that by a voice from the excellent glory
2. Pet. 1. 1^.
to hear him Math. 17. 5.
, and threatened to answer for the same, if we despice his doctrine Deuteronomy. 18.
1^.
.


T. What were his gifts?


Z. Most divine. For he was the brightness of the glory, and th'ingraued form
of God Hebr. 1. 3.
, full of grace and truth John. 1. 14.
; yea so full that all the fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily in him Col.
2. 9.
.


T. What was his doctrine?


Z. As were his qualities, such was his doctrine, even most heavenly. For all
things which he has heard from his Father has he made known unto us John.
15. 15.
, and they are committed unto writing that we might believe John. 20. 31.
, and that through believing we might have life through his name.


T. Now tell me how Christ is diuested of this office; and the Pope of Rome
made the great Prophet of the Church of God?


Z. I have mentioned nothing from the holy Scriptures touching either
th'auctoritie, or the gifts, or the doctrine of Christ, but the Pope is made
to match, that I say not, to surpass our Savior Christ in all and every of
these respects, and therefore as great for power, as Sovereign for gifts, as
divine for doctrine as Christ himself.


T. I would see that confirmed.


Z. Who knows not that God is more pleased in his son Christ, than they are
delighted in their Father the Pope? This is my beloved son, hear him, says
God Math. 17. 5.
: And of the Pope, this is our well-beloved Father Catech. Trid. de or. Sacra.
in whom we are delighted, hear him say the papists. For whatsoever he
determines is a known truth, and that which he condemns is a known error
Heart in his confer. c. 2. sec. 2* p. 79.
. His laws even all of them are to be taken as confirmed by the mouth even of
God himself Papa Agatho apud Gratian. distinct. 19. c. Sic.
. And whatsoever he says it is truth, and he cannot err Pighius in Hier.
Eccles. Maioranus clyp milit. Eccles. l. 3. c. 35.
. Is not this to make the Pope of equal authority with Jesus Christ?


T. To deny that, is even to gainsay an open truth.


Z. Moreover that which lately I alleged though to an other purpose does
fitly prove also that he is taken for gifts and divine parts to be as
singular as our Savior Christ, when they say of him an saint John said of
Christ John. 1. 16.
, that of his fulness we do all receive Durand. rat. divine. offic. l. 2. c. 1.
, And that his doctrine is made equivalent with the Gospel of Jesus Christ it
appears many ways.


T. Show that thing.


Z. He that will read the books of Sentences, especially the works of
Gabriel Biel In 3. did. 37* q. 1. art. 1.
shall find that they make four sorts, or degrees of the law of God.


T. What are they?


Z. The first degree be the laws revealed immediately from God himself and
be written in the holy Bible, especially in the Gospels penned through the
will of Christ for our better attainment of everlasting happiness.


T. What hear I Zelotes? Is the word of God the first degree of Gods law? and
be there more laws, which are to be nombred among the laws of God, besides the
holy Scriptures? And among those books of the sacred Scriptures are the works
of the Evangelists to be reputed but for laws?


Z. That is their judgment.


T. Proceed then, and tell me what be the other laws of God besides the holy
Scriptures?


Z. The next are the Phansies and dreams either taken by tradition from man to
man, or derived from the Scriptures by their false, corrupt, erroneous, and
pharisaical interpreting of them, such are most of the Articles of the popish
Creed, sometimes drawn from the written word I grant, but rarely agreeing
with the sense of the holy ghost, and to th'analogie of the catholic faith.


T. And be the Articles of their faith, laws? and their expositions to be
accounted for the very laws of God?


Z. It is their opinion.


T. What be their other laws which they say are the very laws even of God
himself?


Z. They are of two sorts: of one are the Canon laws, the Decretals, Sixtes,
Clementines, Extrauagantes, and the like; of the other sort be the Revelations,
false Religions, and Rules, as of S. Bridget, S. Francis, S. Dominick, and that
lame Spaniard Layola, the founder of the Iesuitical viperous generation, either
penned, or auctorized and made current by the Popes of Rome.


T. And are men bound to take these, and every of them even as the very laws
of Jesus Christ himself?


Z. Even as the laws of Christ. And how in comparison of the Pope his laws
traditions, ordinances, and expositions they think of the holy Scripture it
would carefully be observed.


T. What think they of the holy Scriptures?


Z. He was a Popish Bishop, that sometime demanded of a reverend Father, and
afterward a blessed Martyr of Jesus Christ M. Latimer in his 2. ser. before K.
Ed.
, whether the people might not be ordered without the holy Scriptures? And he
was a Cardinal of Rome that writ how there might be a Church without the
Scriptures Cusanus epist. 2. ad Bohemos.
. And another of that stamp, whose name I now remember not, said plainly it
had gone better with the Church, had there bin no Scripture at all.


T. These are particular men, you show not the common judgment of the Romish
church?


Z. It is written of the Circumcellian heretics that they not only exercised
most violent persecutions upon the bodies of Saints, but also burned to ashes
in the fire even the most holy books of God D. August. l. 2. contra lit.
petil. c. 27.
, which we call the Scriptures.


T. So did Herod before them Ambrose in Lucam. l. 3. c. 3.
and the wicked Israelites before them also Ier. 36, 1.
, but what of that?


Z. Their burning of those books notified unto the world in what price and
estimacion, they had the most precious word of God.


T. Yet this is nothing to the Papists of whom our speech is.


Z. Yes very much. For they doing the same thing that is burning those books,
do show thereby in what reverend account they have the holy word God.


T. Have they burned the Scriptures of God as did the Circumcellian heretics,
and other impes of Satan?


Z. Not only the Scriptures they have burned, but also in as barberous manner
as ever was heard have they burned into ashes the bodies of men only for
having, I say not the whole Bible, but even a little fragment of the same, even
the Lords prayer in the English tongue, and not allowing the same idolatrouslie
to be said unto dead Saints Bale in his preface to I. La^berts treat. of the
L. Supper.
. And how that good Deane of Paul's in London, D. Colet, should have bin
condemned for an heritike and burned it is notoriously well known.


T. But wherefore?


Z. For translating the Pater Noster forsooth into English Acts and Monu. vol.
2. in K. Hen. 8.
. And again how they have cited, tossed, threatened, and troubled of good
people some for having the New Testament, some the Gospel after S. Matthew,
some Th'actes of the Apostles, some Th'epistles of S. Paul, some the Revelation
of Saint John, yea some for learning or teaching even the very grounds of
all true Religion, as namely the ten Commandments, the Creed, and the Lords
prayer, and some but for saying in English, Blessed be they that hear the
word of God and keep it, it is worthily recorded Acts and Monu. 16.
, and to th'euerlasting shame and reproach of Popery to be remembered.


T. But the days are now changed. For by their diuulgating the whole new
Testament into a vulgar tongue, they declare themselves to have a religious care
of Gods word.


Z. Cardinal Cusanus was of that mind that he thought how as the Church by
time does alter, so the interpretacion of the Scripture also may vary, whereby
that in The apostles time was a truth in these days shall be an error and
contrariwise Cusanus epist. 2. ad Bohemos.
our papists in deed, though not in word, seem to be of his mind; else would
they never allow that in these days for good which their fathers condemned as
wicked and damnable, I mean the having the Scriptures in a vulgar tongue, yet
this proves no whit that they have in estimation the Scriptures of God.


T. Why not?


Z. Mark I beseech you, Albeit they have translated the New Testament into
English (which for all that most impiouslie they have done, and sacrilegiouslie
See D. Whitak. against W. Reinolds. c. 15. 17. D. Buckleis ans. to the Pref. of
the Rhem. Test. from page 51. But for all. D. Fulk his co^fut. of the Rhemish
edition.
: yet when they hold either as Hosius D. Fulke in his defense of The eng.
translat. p. 4.
, that there is none other express word of God, but only this word Ama, or
Dilige Love thou; or as another Johannes Maria Verrastus.
, that the gospel is nothing else but the determination of the Church; or as the
same Hosius Contra Bre^tium l. 4.
, that whatsoever the church of Rome teaches that is the express word of God,
but whatsoever is taught contrary to the sense, and consent of the Romish
church is the express word of the devil; or as Harding does Confut. of the
Apol.
that to the interpretation which the Church of Rome gives of the Scriptures
whatsoever it be is the od and only true sense of Gods word, it is apparent
that hold what they list for the letre they make their own imaginations,
determinations, senses, consent, and expositions even the very word of God,
rejecting thereby in comparison thereof the most holy writings of the blessed
Prophets, and Apostles, who we know wrote not by the will of man but through the
instinct of the holy ghost 2. Pet. 1. 21.
, And this being established by the authority of the Pope, does not it seat
the Pope in the prophetical Chair not of Moses, but even of Christ himself.


T. Undoubtedly.


Z. And yet end they not here, but give unto the same Pope that authority
which neither Christ would take unto himself, nor yet could give unto any
creature beside.


T. What may that be?


Z. Even an absolute authority to dispense against the law of God 16. q. 1,
Quaeeunq. in Glossa.
, against the law of nature 15. q. 6. Authoritate in Glossa.
; against the epistles of S. Paul Did. 34. Lector. and distinct. 82. presbyter.
; against the whole new Testament Abbas panor. Extra. de diuortiis. c. fin.
, and against all the commandments of God Summa Angel. in dictione Papae.
. For with these and against all these, they say, the Pope at his pleasure can
dispense. B. Jewel in the defense of the Apol. f. 57. Feilds caveat. etc. let.
E. 7.



T. But so cannot Christ himself do. For what soever his written word any
where does condemn as il, and ungodly, by no dispensation can he make it
good, godly, and allowable at any time?


Z. It were an endless thing to mention the most horrible dispensations
proceeding from time to time from the infinite power of this arrogant
adversary of Christ, I will therefore mention one of them for the horriblenes
thereof, which plainly shows what spirit it is that possesses the Pope.


T. Show that I pray you?


Z. The time was some thirty years ago when the popish preachers in their
open sermons published that to kill a Lutheran, it was a work grateful to God
and meritorious Commen. de statu Relig. and Reipub. in regno Gal. par. 1. li. 1.
: But of late not yet five years ago, for a natural and often sworn Subject
and servant to murder his liege sovereign it was not only permitted as
pardonal by a dispensation from the pope, but also judged meritorious, by a
cardinals letre Cardinal de Comos letter to Party. See before in his book. c. 6.
, as whereby he should merit much in heaven.


T. An Indian great man, as I have heard Spa. Coloni. Co^pl. of Eng.
, being tormented most cruelly by the barbarous Spaniardes grew into such a
detestacion of that merciless Nation that he chose rather to go presently
into Hell, then with the Spaniardes to enjoy bliss in Heaven. For my part
Zelotes rather would I choose to be for ever debarred from that joyful paradise
of everlasting happiness, than to be admitted into heaven by such a meritorious
work.


Z. The time was and still is Test, Rhem. annot. Math. 20. v. 23.
, that they hold how by doing good, man may merit heaven, which yet is
erroneous doctrinez and much derogatorie to the merits of Christ; what titles
then may we give to them which maintain that murder, yea and the murder of
Gods anointed, is meritorious, and deserves a reward from God.


T. I am of your mind, and I think even Satan himself can hardly perpetrate
a more execrable sin. But here stay we, Zelotes, I see now full clearly,
blessed be God therefore, that al popery is most loathsome and horrible; and
there is none end of citing the most cursed opinions which Papists do
maintain, they are so many. You have sufficiently proved the pope to usurp
even all the office of our S. Christ, and so indeed to be reputed of our
adversaries for very Christ, but thereby known of us to be very Antichrist.
And because others also (as Saint Francis and the Virgin Marie of whom you
have spoken) have the same roialties, dignities and offices given unto them by
the Papists which appertain unto Christ, and unto none besides, the
conclusion is that the Gospel of Christ in truth is but a very toie or fable
counted among the Papists.


Z. Be it therefore known unto al men by these presents that whosoever is a
subject to the Pope is a traitor to God, that I say not to his Country, and a
contemner of Christ and of all Christianity so-wel as the Pope with whom he may
assuredly exspect for ever to be damned unless in time through the grace of
God he leave his wicked opinions, and embrace the sincere gospel of Jesus
Christ at this hour in England professed, embraced of all States, ratified by
most wholesome laws, prospered miraculously by all happy success, and most
constantly against all manner Adversaries and deuilish attemptes defended by
by the most gracious, glorious, and victorious Prince Elizabeth, whom the
almighty so preserve that she may live and still see the prosperous success
of this truth and the overthrow of all enemies of the same, to the great glory
of God, and her own everlasting comfort.


Amen.

