SERMONS PREACHED BEFORE HIS MAJESTY.

1. The Bridegromes Banquet. 2. The Triumph of Constancy. 3. The Banishment of
Dogs.
By FRANCIS ROLLENSON, Batcheler of Divinity.

Omnia pro veritate nihil pro tempore. AT LONDON Printed by T. Snodham for
Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleet-streete, over against
the Conduit. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS, LORD ELLESMERE, LORD CHAVNCELOVR OF ENGLAND.
RIght Honorable, Preaching, and Printing of Sermons, if both be done for the
glory of God, and the good of his Church, are like the Two silver Trumpets of
the Tabernacle, excellent instruments to call men to Christ, but if in Printing
and Preaching, Divines seek their own glory, and thirst after popular
applause, then they be but Trumpets of Rams-hornes, whose sound leuels not the
walls of Jericho, but Jerusalem with the ground: I dare not auowe that these
my labors, Preached and Printed, be Trumpets of Silver, for then should I
paralele the proud Pharasie in justifying my self; neither will I acknowledge
them to be of horn, for so should I wilfully brand mine own actions with
shame, and carry Caines mark ever upon me; let the censure be referred to him,
who is the searcher of the reins, and whose all-seeing eye has ouer-lookt the
aim and intention of my heart, upon which this Nil vltra is graven; Deo and
Ecclesiae; For God and his Church; This God by One star conducted the wise
men from the East, when they came to worship the star of Jacob, and offer
their Gold, Incense, and Myrrh to our King, Priest, and Prophet Christ: but he
has directed me to your Lordships presence by Two stars fixed by his gracious
goodness in the firmament of your noble heart, Virtue and Honor; there to
make an oblation, not of Myrrh, Incense, and Gold, but of one slender talent,
and Two poor Mites, Three worthless Sermons, preached as once our Savior did
in a Ship royal, but written out for the press, as Jonah prayed in the Whales
belly; I know that the Magi of our Church do daily cast out of their
abundance, Rich offerings into your Treasury, to whose writings I may justly
apply that of the Poet, and call them (...). The Garden and Table of Alcinous,
so well fraught and furnished they be with Knowledge, Judgment, Wit, and
Elegancie; but the poor Widow must do as she may, not as she would: They that
cannot bring Gold and Pearls to the building of the Tabernacle, must present a
Rams-skin and Goates-haire; All the Patriarchs wore not Party-colored Coats;
and all the Servants had not five Talents; They then that have but one Talent
in their Purse, and one Coat to their back, must measure their actions by
their ability, even as God himself by balance does distribute his Graces; Yet
many things in themselves of no moment, are highly priced, because of their
dedication to the Temples (says Pliny.) The two Tables being but of stone,
were reverently regarded, because in them the finger of God writ the Law; nay,
the very Besomes and Ash-pannes of the Temple were much esteemed, because they
were instruments in the Lords house; so I hope these my Endeavors shall
purchase the better Respect in the opinion of the Readers, for that they were,
and are dedicated to the devout ear of his Sacred Majesty, the invincible
defender of the faith, and to the Judicious eye of your honorable self, being
a bountiful Nurcing-father of our Church; which if it shall please you out of
your True worth favorably to Accept, Patronise and Protect, I will boldly
promise to second them with a better Present. And thus as most bounden in duty,
ready in service, and daily in Prayer, unto Almighty God, to be your Honors
guide and fortress both in this life and the life to come, I rest most humble
at your Honors command,

FRANCIS ROLLENSON.

THE BRIDEGROMES BANQVET.
CANT. CANT. 5. CAP. 1. VER. I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I
gathered my myrrh with my spice: I ate mine honie-combe with mine honey, I
drank my wine with my milk: eat, O my friends, drink, and make you merry, O
well-beloved.


Solomon, the Author of this Text, was a King, a Philosopher, a Preacher, and a
Prophet, and therefore he may fitly be compared to the Cherubim, which Ezech.
10.14.
Ezechiel saw in his vision, for as they had the face of a Lion, a Man, an Ox,
and an Eagle, even so Solomon, first, he was a royal Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, sitting upon an 1. Reg. 10.18.19.
Iuorie throne, supported by twelve artificial Lions, emblems of Royalty and
Courage, which two like Ex. 28.30.
Vrim and Thummim in Aarons breast plate, ought to be engraven in every Princes
heart. Secondly, he had the face of a Man, witness his Aphorisms of moral
Philosophy, the Proverbs; Hieron. in Proverb.
by which he instructs men of green and unripe years in virtue and
godliness: Thirdly, he was an vn^^usled Ox, laboring in Gods harvest,
treading out the Corn; and trampling the Chafe under his feet, for being
Ecclesiastes, in his Sermons, he does unmask that Babilonish strumpet,
Vanity, raising the whole architecture of his speech upon this foundation.
Eccles. 1.1.
Vanity of Van ties, all is Vanity. Lastly, he had the face and the wings of
an Eagle. For what Prophet ever mounted to so high a pitch, as this sweet
Singer of Israel, in his Song of Songs, that volume of mysteries; called by
Saint Orig. Proam. in Cant.
Origin, Epithalamion, because it contains the wooing and the wedding of the
Son of God and his Spouse the Church, whose Love was from the beginning, but
their Marriage in the fullness of time: Every line in this song is the language
of love, and every word rellisheth heavenly passion; but this Verse which I
have chosen for my Text, does especially describe. First, the Consummation of
their Marriage; secondly, the Wedding feast; thirdly, the entertainment of the
guests: which three are the maine branches, growing out of this stem.

I am come, etc.] In these words is the Consummation of Christ's marriage, by
which is understood the Union of the two Natures, Divine and Humane, the
Contract whereof was Gods Promise of Christ's coming, and the Consummation his
Nativity.

In an Espousall or Contract, Cod. lib. 5. tit. 4. leg. 7. Gordian. Cod. lib.
5. tit. 4. leg. 12. Dioclesian.
the Consent both of Parents and Parties is necessarily required: So here:
first God the Father is content, that his Son shall come into the world, and
be made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted; it was his own
decree: for all mankind in Romans 5.12.
Adam being corrupt, Con. Mogunt. cap. 5.
Quia primorum hominum peccatum in omnes homines transiuit and secum suam
poenam traxit; because the sin of the first Man was derived by propagation
unto all men, and drew the punishment with it. God looked upon the posterity
of Adam with two eyes, the first being like a Doves eye washed with milk, the
second like a flame of fire, Mercy, and Justice, according to whose several
viewes he made two Decrees, the one of Election, the other of Reprobation;
which two resemble the two streams that issue from the throne of God, Dan.
7.10.
the one being all fire, the other Revel. 22.1.
Water of life. Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 9.16.
Election is the decree of God, whereby on his own free will, he has ordained
certain men to salvation, without any foresight of their good works, to the
praise and glory of his grace.

Romans 9.21.
Reprobation is Gods decree, whereby according to the most free, and just
purpose of his will, he has determined to reject certain men, unto eternal
destruction, to the praise of his justice. These decrees are built upon two
several foundations, Romans 11.32.
Adams sin is the ground of Reprobation: of Election Heb. 5.5.
Christ Jesus is the foundation, called of his Father from all eternity, to
perform the office of a Mediator, that in him all those which should be saved
might be chosen; as then he was predestinate to be the Reconciliation betwixt
God and mankind, so likewise there was preordained a Marriage, or uniting of
the two Natures, Divine and Humane.

Secondly, the Bridegroom he is willing, for he confesses as much by the mouth
of the Psalmist, saying: Psalm. 40.
In the volume of the book it is written, that I should fulfill thy will, O my
God, I am content to do it, thy law is within my heart. Ever since the making
of this decree, God the Son and his spouse the Church, like a pair of Turtle
Doves, have loved and wooed each other, as appears by those sweet passions,
with which this Song is full fraught, and yet from the time that he was first
promised, till the fullness of time when he was conceived, Cant. 2.9.
He ever stood behind the wall, looking through the windows, and appearing
through the grates: These windows were the Sacraments, Circumcision, and the
Paschal Lamb; these Grates the Tabernacle of Moses, and the Priesthood of
Aaron, all of them principal Types and figures of the Messiah. Cant. 2.3.
Thus for a long time the Church, under his shadow only had delight, and his
fruit was sweet unto her mouth. But at length she grows loue-sicke, and
cries, Cant. 2.5.
Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with Apples: for I am sick of Love.
Cant. 1.1.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his love is better then
wine. As if she should have said, how long will he appear unto me only in
types and figures? when shall mine eyes see the Salvation of God, which he has
prepared to be a light to the Gentiles, and the glory of the people Israel.
Cant. 4.16.
Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruit.

Let the word be made flesh and dwell amongst us. Our Savior therefore Cant.
4.9.
whose heart from the beginning she had wounded with one of her eyes, and a
chain of her neck. Because he would not suffer her to pine away, and languish
with expectation, answers her saying, I am come into my garden my sister, my
spouse. As if he should have said: the Contract of Marriage, which by my
Fathers decree was from eternity, is now consummate by my Nativity: In which
Consummation three Circumstances may be considered.

First, the publishing of the Banes by the Angel Gabriel, thus speaking to the
Virgin Mary: Luc. 1.28.
Hail thou that art freely beloved, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou
among women; and having thus saluted her, he tells her, that she shall conceive
and bear in her womb a Son, and call his name Jesus: But how shall this be,
says Mary, seeing I know no man? this she speaks, says Theophilact, not
doubting of the event, but enquiring the manner: The Angel answers her: Luc.
1.35.
The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the virtue of the most high shall
ouershadow thee. Vide hic (says Cyprian) cooperantem simplicem trinitatem,
Quae est virtus altissimi? nisi Christus, virtus and sapientia patris, etc. See
here the whole Trinity are at work together; what is this virtue? but Christ
the virtue and wisdom of his Father; of whom is this Virtue? but of the most
high: Although then the Son alone was conceived and incarnate, yet both the
Father and the Holy Ghost were present to sanctify his conception, which is
the second circumstance and the manner of the Marriage. He was not conceived of
the seed of Joseph and Mary, as Ebion dreamed, but by the holy Spirit, of the
seed of Mary alone, as may appear by these testimonies. Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head. Fear not Joseph Mat.
1.20.
to take Mary for thy wife, for that which is conceived in her, is of the holy
Ghost. A strange conception: here is Aarons rod cut from the stem blossoming,
and a Virgin without a man conceiving. Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost,
there is an argument of his Divinity; and borne of a virgin, there is a proof
of his humanity; so he is neither God only, having an aierie body, as Apelles
the heretic thought, nor mere man as the Epipha. lib. 2. tom. 2. haeres. 69.
Arrians surmised, but God and Man united, one Christ, conceived by the holy
Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary, which nativity of Christ is the third
circumstance, and the very form of the Marriage, betwixt him and his Spouse
the Church.

Our Savior out of the Virgins womb came like a Bridegroom out of his chamber
full of glory, and yet in all humility; Philip. 2.6.7.
For being in the form of God, and thinking it no roberie to be equal with
God, he made himself of no reputation, took on him the form of a servant,
and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man. This his
lowliness appears further in the very choice of his Mother, who was a poor
Virgin, betrothed unto a Carpenter. He was conceived when she was a Virgin
betrothed, but he was borne when she was a Virgin married, because he would
honor both Single life, and the marriage bed. A Virgin she was to fulfill the
Prophecy of Isaiah, saying: Isai. 7.14.
A virgin shall conceive and bear a Son. Ante partum, in partu, post partum
Virgo, says S. Jerome: Before, at the very instant and after her delivery a
Virgin, not past fourteen years of age (as Augustine and Chrysostom writ)
Flos ipse, in the flower of her youth she bore him, who is the Cant. 2.1.
Rose of the field, and the Lilly of the valleys. A Virgin, but yet very poor:
God ever looks on the inside, but the world on the outside of a man. Let one
be as foolish as Nabal, and have ears as long as Midas, yet if he have mount
Carmel for his Lordship, and as it is in the Proverb (...), swim up to the
ears in rivers of gold, the world will honor him, and bow the knee unto him,
as the idolatrous Jews did to the golden Calfe of Horeb: but Gods eye
searches the heart and the reins; he regards the poor and the needy, for
ever they be most religious, most virtuous: he chose David from the
sheepe-folde, following the Ewes great with young to reign over Israel; and
he makes choice of one of the daughters of David, to be the Mother of his
Son, though she was so poor, that the place of her Delivery was a Stable,
and her first begotten sons Cradle a Cratch. Why should any man be proud of
his wealth then, seeing both she whom all generations call blessed, and he
that is Lord of heaven and earth, were both very poor? why should any man like
Ephraim, be fed with wind, and puffed up with his descent, his alliance, his
worme-eaten antiquity, seeing Christ was the Son of a poor Virgin,
betrothed and married to a Carpenter; and yet both he and she were of the
royal line of David? Psalm. 132.
To whom the Lord had sworn in truth, and he did not shrink from it, saying,
of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throane. Thus was the marriage
consummate betwixt Christ and his Church in the Virgins womb: this womb was
the milkie way, by which he came into his garden, Oh blessed was that womb of
her that bore him, and those paps that gave him suck!

The second general branch, is the Marriage feast of Christ, in which, first
let us see the Banqueting place: secondly suruay his Banquet.

Christ makes his Banquet in a Garden, but which of his Gardens is it? for
Christ has three. The first is Hortus potentiae, the second Hortus gratiae,
the third Hortus gloriae. His first Garden is the kingdom of Power, and this
is very large and spacious, stretching it self from the highest heavens, to
the nethermost parts of the earth: for his power is infinite; (...), says
Damascen, He can do all things that he will. His second Garden, is the
kingdom of Grace in this world, whereby he reigns in the faithful by the
holy Ghost, of this Daniel speaks, saying; Dan. 7.13.14.
As I beheld in visions by night, behold one like the Son of man came in the
clouds of heaven, and approached unto the ancient of days, and they brought
him before him, and he gave him dominion, and honor, and a kingdom, that all
people, nations, and languages should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall never be taken away, and his Kingdom shall never be
destroyed. His third garden is the kingdom of Glory, which is already in part
begun, because he is ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of his
Father, but shall be complete at the general resurrection, when the Elect
being gathered together, shall reign continually with Christ. Neither the
first nor this last Garden, is the place where the Banquet is kept, but only
the second: in this the Bridegroom gathers his Mirrhe with his spice, in this
he eats his hony-combe with this honey, in this he drinks his wine and milk.

The kingdom of Grace is here called a Garden, and this Garden is either shut
up or not shut up. The Garden not shut up is the Church visible, in which
grows as well the fruitless Cedar, as the fat Olive; the bitter
Colloquintida, as the sweet fig tree; the prickie Bramble as the cheerful
Vine, for the Church visible, is like unto Genesis 7.8.
Noah's Arc, in which were stabled, beasts, both polluted and impolluted, it is
like Genesis 37.3.
Joseph's Coat, made of diverse colors; for in it are men of diverse
dispositions; a Simon Peter, and a Simon Magus; a Judas the brother of James,
and a Judas Ishcariot; a Priscilla and a Saphira; good and evil; Elect and
Reprobates: here only is the difference, the Wicked are weeds, and grow
without privilege, they live in the outward assembly of Christians, yet are
they not the true members of Christ's body. 1. Ioh. 2.19.
They went out of us, but they were not of us, says John. Dec. P. 2. cause. 24.
q. 3. cap. 8.
Ad ecclesiam Dei non pertinent illi, qui in eius vnitate corporaliter mixti,
per pessimam vitam seperantur: They belong not to the Church, which being
corporally mixed in the society thereof, are separated by an evil life. In
this Garden be diverse beds of Spices; so says the Spouse, Cant. 6.1.
My well-beloved is gone down into his Garden, to the beds of spices, to feed
in the Gardens, and to gather Lillies: These Beds of spices be particular
Churches; as for instance ours in England, it is a Bed of Spices, a Society of
the Elect: for here we have, Cant. 4.14.
Spikenard, Saffron, Calamus, and Cinnamon, with all the trees of Incense,
Mirrhe and Aloes, with all the chief spices. We have true Preachers, whose
tongues never cleave to the roof of their mouth. Silver trumpets, and golden
bells, that ring out peales of Gods praises in Sion, and sound out his wonders
in Jerusalem. We have zealous professors, in color like white Lillies for
their pure faith, and as sweet as Incense for their charity, which that they
may still more and more increase; Cant. 4.16.
Arise O North, and come O South, and blow on our bed, that the spices thereof
may flow out: But alas, how can they? for the Enemy has sown three
poisonous weeds in our Bed, Atheism, Papisme, and Simonisme, which like Tares
choke the wheat, and hinder the growth of our better plants. The first and the
worst is Atheism; for are there not amongst us whole kennels of Apo. 22.15.
Dogs, whose foreheads are brass and iron; impudent, audacious, blasphemous,
and conscience-cauterized fools, Psalm. 104.
which in their hearts say there is no God? holding 1. Cor. 2.14.
the Gospel of his kingdom to be mere foolishness; and Scriptures fables,
coined and stamped for current, only to awe the world; were there not such
monsters, why is the profession of Religion grown policy? and Christians in
name become Macheuillians in practice; as mutable as Proteus, as changeable as
the Camelion, temporizing their Consciences, to day a Papist, to morrow a
Protestant, the next day any thing for advantage, a Turk, a Jew, an Infidel.
Psalm. 10.11.
Tush, if there be a God, he has forgotten, he hides away his face and will
never see. Thus spoke their Tutor Auerrhoes, denying Gods presence and
providence hereupon earth; Against the Jews the Queen of Saba, and against
these Atheists the very Gentiles shall rise in judgment: for they having
nothing to direct them but the glimmering light of Nature, would acknowledge
both a God, and his divine providence. Arist. 1. de any.
Aristotle commends Anaxagoras, because he taught that there was an immixt and
most simple understanding, which knew all things, and this is God. The
Platonists called him (...), because he is the Beholder of all things whatsouer,
and Orpheus confessed that there was (...), One begotten of himself, by whom
all things were made, and this is God: and yet we have fools amongst us. which
in their hearts say there is no God. The second weed is Papisme, a weed that
ouerspreads our Bed, for evil weeds ever grow apace: it is like Lotos which
Homer speaks of, he that tastes it is bewitched with the sweetness thereof,
like the companions of Ulysses: for does not Papistrie dispense with all
licentiousness? and has not the whore of Babylon Revel. 17.4.
a golden Cup in her hand, with which she makes drunken the inhabitants of the
earth? and yet this weed must grow still; who plucks it up? it is cropped
sometimes I confess, and the leaves are cut off, but as long as the root is
quick, both leaves and branches will increase and multiply like the Heads of
Hydra. Upon this weed breeds, the Grasshopper, the Canker-worme, the
Caterpillar, and the Palmer-worme, which make our Vines wast and pill the bark
off our figge-trees; I mean those Revel. 9 7.8.
Locustes (spoken of by John the Divine) coming out of the smoke of the
bottomless pit, whose form is like unto horses prepared for battle; and on
their heads as it were ermines of gold, their faces like unto the faces of men,
their hair like the hair of women, and their teeth like Lions. In a word, the
whole Swarm of Jesuits and Seminaries, Romish Alastores, Evil spirits, which
must not be driven away with David's Harp, but Elijahs sword: These make
profession of Religion, yet are their actions died in blood; they vow
voluntary poverty, yet aim at crowns, and are ever meddling in matters of
State; they seem humane, and as tenderhearted as women, (Oh, there is their
aequiuocation) but their Teeth are Lyon-like; their disseignes violent; their
stratagems cruel. These Iebusites live amongst us, and are pricks in our
sides; they have ever yet been forgers of I reason, and even now no doubt they
are hammering some mischief; and yet must they still gall us; I, what remedy
can be found? Pluck down the Cages of these unclean birds, and give the law
liberty to punish their harbourers without any respect of persons, then see if
these Locustes do not quickly vanish away like smoke, and fly to their
smokie dungeon. The third weed is Simonisme, the root whereof was first set
by Simon Magus, Act. 18.18.
who offered Peter money for the gift of the holy Ghost: and at this day it is
watered by Bells Priests, and Baals Prophets, such as make their profession a
mere Mechanicke Trade, or Occupation; and their Ministry a Ladder only, to
climb to preferments. Mercenaries no true Pastors; Creepers in through the
window, no true Preachers: you shall know them by their works, for they seek
their own, and not Christ's; they feed upon the fat of the flock, and cloth
themselves with the wool, but suffer the sheep to starve for want of food:
They be like unto the Strab. Geog. lib. 15.
Astomi, of whom Strabo writes, which people have no mouths, but only a
certain hole in steed thereof, whereby they receive the sweet sent of
flowers, which is their sustenance: So these Simonistes have no mouths to show
forth the praise of God, but only a tongue-lesse hole, by which they suck up
the sweetness of Church-liuings, purchased by briberie at Steeple-faire. Well,
it was not so from the beginning; for Aarons Exodus 28.34.
robe round about the skirtes was hung with golden bells and Pomgranates, the
first betokening Doctrine, Mal. 2.7.
the second Hospitality, to signify, that the Priests lips should preserve
Knowledge, and his mouth should be a silver bell, to call the people to Gods
tabernacle: likewise his door must be ever open to the harbourlesse, and his
bread continually cast upon the waters. Sed motos praestat componere fluctus. I
must speak as Pli. lib. 35.8.
Timantes painted Polyphemus, only showing you the thumb of these Monsters,
thereby you may proportionate their whole bodies: and as Aug. Ep. 48.
S. Augustine said of the Tares, Totus mundus in maligno positus est propter
Zizania quae sunt per totum mundum: So may I say of these three weeds,
Atheism, Papisme, and Simonisme, by them our bed of Spices is almost spoiled.

Secondly, the Garden shut up, is the Church Invisible, of this Solomon thus
speaks, Cant. 4.12.
My sister, my spouse is as a Garden enclosed, as a Spring shut up, and a
Fountain sealed up. Which invisible Church, is the Catholic Society of the
faithful, elected and chosen to eternal life, and it is said to be invisible,
because it is only of the Elect, who are not Visible to men, but only to God:
2. Tim. 2.19.
for he alone knows who are his. The Papists utterly distaste this
distinction of visible and invisible, and yet they themselves confirm it,
saying: Inter relig. Caes. cap. 9.
Ecclesia quatenus constat membris talibus, quae secundum charitatem viuunt,
Sanctorum est tantum, and eatenus spiritualis and inuisibilis. The Church as it
consists of such members which live after the rule of Charity, is only of
the Saints, and is so far forth spiritual and invisible: To this also their
own decrees give consent: Dec. P. 3. did. 2. cap. 9.
Societas corporis and membrorum Christi est Ecclesia, in praedestinatis. The
society of the body and the members of Christ, is the Church, consisting of
the praedestinate. This Garden then is like the garden of Eden, which was kept
by a Cherub, Genesis 3.24.
shaking a fiery sword; This Cherub is Christ, who suffers no unclean thing
to enter into it, neither whatsoever works abomination or lies, but they
which are written in the book of life. In the old Paradise grew two principal
trees, Genesis 3.22.
the tree of Life, and Genesis 2 17.
the tree of Knowledge, the like are in this garden: For Ioh. 3.15.
whosoever believes in Christ, shall not perish, but have eternal life; here
is the tree of Life, Ioh. 17.3.
And this is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ; Here is the tree of Knowledge. And as Eden
was watered with Genesis 2.
four Rivers, Pishon, Gihon, Hiddekel, and Perath, so has this enclosed
Garden, the Church invisible, four waters of comfort, namely: Election,
Vocation, Justification, and Glorification: Romans 8.29.30.
for whom God has praedestinate to be made like the Image of his Son, them
also he calls, whom he calls, he iustifies, and whom he iustifies, them will he
also glorify. Of these Waters, whosoever drinks, shall never thirst again;
for they shall be in him a Well, springing up into everlasting life. This
Garden is the place whither Christ comes to prepare his Banquet; and a Banquet
he prouides very delicious, for it is Mirrhe and Spice, the hony-combe and the
honey, Wine and Milk.

I gathered my Mirrhe with my Spice, etc.] These words may bear a double
sense: First, Mirrhe is a gum very bitter, but Spice is sweet; by Mirrhe
therefore may be understood the Law, by Spice the Gospel: for the Law is
bitter, it shows us our sins, the Gospel is sweet, for it applies a
remedy: the Law is a Rod of iron, called by Zach. 11.7.
Zachary, Bands; the Gospel is like Aarons Rod, bearing fresh Almonds, named
by the same Prophet Beauty: the Law is a Numb. 17. Deuteronomy. 18.16.
flaming fire, that consumes; the Gospel, the Cooling water of the Rock which
comforts: the Law is the savor of death; the Gospel of life: Amb. in 11. ad
Romans
Nam data est Lex (says Ambrose) vt humanum genus terrore manifestatae legis
froenaretur. The Law was given that mankind might be terrified with the
manifestation thereof: But of the contrary part, Amb. in 3. ad Romans
Euangelium gaudium operatur: the Gospel works Joy. Our Savior therefore
making his marriage feast, gathers Mirrhe and Spice, the one Bitter, the other
Sweet, and mixeth them together: for if he had given his Guests Mirrhe only
to eat, they would have cried out like the children of the Prophets, 2. Reg.
4.40.
Mors in olla, Death is in the Pot: because the 2. Cor. 3.6.
Law is a killing letter, and causes death: and if he had set before them
Spice alone, then might they have thought, that the Law was wholly abrogate:
no, he came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law; therefore he gathers Mirrhe
and Spice together, qualifying the bitterness of the Law, with the sweetness
of the Gospel.

Secondly, by Mirrhe and Spice, I rather think that the Spirit of God means
the preaching of the Gospel. 2. Cor. 2.16.
Which is the savor of life unto life, and of death unto death, and therefore
it is both Bitter and Sweet; first, it is sweet, for it is the Luc. 24.46.
preaching of repentance, and forgiveness of sins in the name of Christ, and
therefore it is called (...) in Greek, which word amongst profane writers,
signifies joyful news; So Aristophanes uses it, saying, Aristoph. in equit.
(...), I have told them good tidings; and can any thing be sweeter to the
soul of man, then the Gladsome Report of eternal life revealed in the Gospel?
Secondly, it is Bitter, but yet this Bitterness is not properly in the Gospel,
but is caused by the wilful contempt and disobedience of the hearers, by whose
perverse nature the sweetness thereof is turned to bitterness; to the
faithful believers the Gospel brings comfort and peace, if it do not so to
others, the fault is in themselves. Again, the Gospel is both Sweet and
Bitter, Sweet in it self, but very Bitter in the Profession: this we may
gather by the Revel. 10.10.
little book that John ate, given him by the Angel, which, in his mouth was
sweet as honey, but in his belly as bitter as Wormwood; This Book is the
Gospel, which in the mouth of a good Minister, is wondrous sweet and
comfortable, but in his belly extreme bitter; because the true Preachers of
the word, 1. Tim. 3.12.
and all that live godly in Christ Jesus, do ever suffer persecution; they in
this world have the same entertainment that their Master Christ had amongst
the Jews, Gall, Vinegar, and a Whip: but of the contrary part, in the
Carnal-Gospellers mouth this Book is ever bitter, but yet sweet in his belly;
for it is death to him to preach the word in season, and out of season: Oh no,
he hates a Pulpit as much as the 1. Sam. 5.5.
Priests of Dagon do the Threshold upon which their God broke his neck: to
him it is pain to speak, for like Demosthenes when he was bribed to hold his
peace. (...), he is troubled with a Siluer-angina, which stops his mouth, and
makes him dumb; but in his belly it is sweet: for the profession of the
Gospel, enriches, promotes, and preferres him, and thereby he grows as fat as
a Bull of Basan; but mark his end, as Judas said unto the high Priests
servants concerning Christ, Whom I kiss, take him, that is he: So says the
world to the Devil: Whom I kiss, lay hands on him, he is thine own.

Secondly, says Christ, I ate my hony-combe with my honey.] Hereby is
understood that Peace which our Savior has made betwixt his Father and us.
The sin of Adam and Eve in Paradise, made the breach betwixt God and
mankind: the death of Christ made the atonement and reconciliation, so says
the Apostle, Romans 5.10.
When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. As
then Sampson in his Riddle said unto his Companions, Judge. 14.14.
Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong one came sweetness: Which
was meant of a dead Lion, in whose belly Bees had hiued and made honey; so I
may say of Christ: for he was a Reu. 5.5.
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and from him being crucified for our sins, and
slain for our redemption, we receive our honey and our hony-combe, that is to
say, Peace with God the Father. Christ therefore is called the Esaias. 9.6.
Prince of Peace, at whose birth a Quire of Angels sung this Dittie, Luc. 2.14.
Glory be to God in the high heavens, and peace in earth, and toward men good
will. Be the Sea never so rough and turbulent, yet when the Halcion hatcheth,
it is ever calm: whereupon arises this Proverb, Halcedonia sunt circa forum,
All is well, all things are quiet: So when they Virgin Mary brought forth the
Savior of the world; the forehead of God all rugged with anger, for the sin
of Adam, grew smooth and amiable: Coloss. 1.20.
For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, and by him
to reconcile all things to himself, and set at peace through the blood of his
cross, both the things in earth, and the things in heaven.

But here it is said, I ate my hony-combe with my honey; honey is sweet and
good, I confess, and the Spirit of God uses It and Oil, for the two emblems
of Peace and Plenty, as we may read in the song of Moses, saying, Deuteronomy. 32.13.
He carried him up to the high places of the earth, that he might eat the
fruits of the fields, and he caused him to suck honey out of the stone, and
Oil out of the hard rock: But for the honycombe, why should Christ eat it?
Zeph. 3.3.
Wolves are very hungry, that will not leave the bones till the morrow: And
so is Christ, though he be not a Wolf, yet he is a Lamb that is both hungry
and thirsty, till he have taken away the sins of the world: and therefore
he Eats his honie-combe with his honey: so greedy is he to cancel the
handwriting which was against us, so desirous of our peace and reconciliation.
S. Bernard writing upon this word Ioh. 19.28.
Sitio, I thirst, which our Savior spoke hanging upon the Cross, makes this
Dialogue betwixt Christ and himself. Sitio, says Christ, Quid sitis Domine?
says Bernard: Christ answers, Sitio salutem vestram, vestram fidem, vestrum
gaudium. To this Sitto, I will add Esurio, and then will the Dialogue be
complete I hunger, I thirst, says Christ, Lord why art thou hungry, why art
thou thirsty? say we: he replies, I hunger and thirst for your salvation, for
your faith, for your joy, for your peace and atonement with God; and this
peace has he made, this league has he ratified.

Thirdly, says Christ, I have drunk my wine with my Milk, etc.

There be three kinds of wine: the first is called, Vinum vanum and
detestabile, a vain and detestable kind of wine, so called in regard of the
effects that flow from the superfluous drinking of it: for too much Hose. 4.11.
takes away the heart of man, says Hoseah, and is the very bellows and
incentiue of Lust and wantonness; too much of it makes vials of vengeance be
powered upon our heads: so says Isaiah, Isai. 28.1.
Woe be to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, for his glorious
beauty shall be a fading flower. And for this cause, as Pli. lib. 14. cap. 13.
Pliny reports, the Ladies of Rome were forbidden Wine by the laws, Ne in
aliquod dedecus prolaberentur, for fear of dishonouring themselves. The second
is, Vinum durum and execrabile, a harsh execrable wine. Of this Moses speaks,
saying, Deuteronomy. 32.32.33.
Their Wine is of the Vine of Sodom, and of the Vines of Gomorrah, their
Grapes are Grapes of gall, their clusters be bitter: Their Wine is the poison
of Dragons, and the cruel gall of Aspes. This is the pure Wine of the wrath of
God, which Reprobates drink in hell. I keep the good Wine until now, and it
is dulce and delectabile, sweet and delightsome, a Wine that cheares the heart
of man, a wine that turns every thought into joy: and this is it that Christ
mixeth with milk, and drinks a health to his well-beloved; by which is
understood Grace and Mercy, as it is in the Prophecy of Isaiah, saying, Esa.
55.1.
Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no
silver, come, buy, and eat, come, I say, buy wine and milk without silver,
and without money: So likewise in Joel, Joel. 3.18.
In that day the mountains shall drop down new Wine, and the hills shall flow
with milk: this wine is Grace, this milk is Mercy, which Christ offers
unto all that will come unto him.

I drunk my Wine with my milk.] This mixture is remarkable, Wine and Milk
Blent: show that the work of our Redemption, the Grace and Mercy of God in
Christ Jesus, meet together and kiss each other, whereby we may gather, that
Grace, whereby we are justified, and made acceptable before God, is no quality
inherent or dwelling in our selves, as the Bell. de great. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Jesuit avouches, but proceeds from the Mercy of God, imputing unto us the
righteousness of his Son: So says S. Paul, 2. Cor. 5.21.
He has made him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, that we should be
made the righteousness of God in him: So likewise Augustine, Aug. de verb.
Apost. Sermon. 15.
Iustitia sit, sed ex gratia sit, a Deo tibi sit, non tua sit: Sacerdotes tui
inquit induantur iustitia: vestis accipitur, non cum capillis nascitur, etc.
Let there be righteousness, but let it be of grace, let it be of God, let it
not be thine own; Let thy Priests, says the Psalmist, be clothed with
righteousness; clothing is received outwardly, it grows not in us as our
hair, nor as the sheep are clothed of their own: So then Justifying grace
is no more ours, nor inherent in us, then the vesture or garment, with which we
are clothed, which is not in us, but only adhereth, and is applied to us. And
is not this an excellent Banquet; Where Mirrhe and Spice is the Preaching of
the Gospel, the hony-combe, and the honey spiritual peace, and the wine and
milk Grace and Mercy?

The third and last general part, is the Entertainment of the guests, in these
words, Eat O my friends, drink and make you merry, O well-beloved. In which, I
will observe two things: first, Who be the guests, that Christ inuites?
Secondly, what is their entertainment.

The Guests are our Saviors well-beloved friends, a selected number, not the
whole fry of the world, for, as Ioh. 10.15.
he died only for his sheep, so was he borne only for the Elect, his
well-beloved friends. This Doctrine is gaine-said by Pellagius, who as S.
Augustine affirms, taught that the Grace of God, was not only in respect of
the outward means offered unto all, but even in his eternal Decree and
purpose ordained for all, if they would receive it; his reasons be, because S.
Paul says, 1. Tim. 2.4.
That God will that all men shall be saved, and S. Peter. 2. Pet. 3.9.
The Lord would have no man to perish, but would have all men come to
repentance. Likewise, 1. Tim. 2.5.
Christ gave himself a ransom for all: 2. Cor. 5.15.
Christ died for all; as then all the World lays claim to his Cross, so in
like manner to his Cratch; as he suffered death for all: so was he borne for
all, and therefore the Guests that Christ calls to his Banquet, that is, to the
Participation of his spiritual Graces, is no particular number, but the whole
world. In answering these arguments, we must first consider the Will of God,
and secondly, the Death of Christ. Gods will is twofold, Arcana and reualata,
his Secret will and his Revealed will. Now then those places of Scripture which
Pellagius alleges, are to be understood of Gods Revealed will, for by It he
would have all men to be saved, because he rejoices not at the destruction of
his creature: but if we consider his Secret Will; then must we needs confess,
that Mat. 20.16.
Many are called, but few are chosen: then must we needs acknowledge, Pro. 1.26.
That he rejoice that the destruction of the wicked: then must we of necessity
conclude, that from aeternitie his will is, that some shall not be saved,
because he respects a further end; namely, the setting forth of his own
glory, which consists as well in Justice as in Mercy. Secondly, touching the
death of Christ, that he dyed for all men, is most certain, the Apostle
affirms it; yet because else where the Spirit of God says, Ioh. 10.15.
That he dyed for his sheep, and for the Ephe. 5.25.
Church: least the Word should seem to thwart itself, we must not take the
letter, but follow the Scence, which is this. The death of our Savior in
respect of it is sufficiency, has satisfied for all men; but is Mag. sent. li.
3. did. 20.
efficacious only to those which were foreordained to life aeternall in
Christ Jesus: so says Augustine: Aug. tom. 7. ad artic. falls. imposit.
Quoad magnitudinem and potentiam precij, Sanguis Christi est redemptio totius
mundi, quonia^ tamen non omnes captiuitate eruti sunt, rede^ptionis proprietas
hand dubipenes illos est, qui me^bra sunt Christi: In respect of the greatness
of the price, the blood of Christ is the redemption of the whole world, but
because all are not redeemed from captivity, the proper effect of redemption
is only wrought in the members of Christ. So likewise for his Birth, I say
with Ambrose, Amb. lib. 3. de fide. cap. 4.
Ille quidem misericordia sua omnibus natus est, sed perfidia hocreticorum
fecit, vt non omnibus nasceretur qui omnibus natus est. He in mercy was borne
for all, but the unfaithfulness of haeretickes is the cause that he which is
borne to all, is not borne for all. Therefore the Elect only are the selected
Guests, whom Christ inuites to his banquet, saying; Eat O my friends, drink,
and make you merry, O Well-beloved.

Secondly, What is their entertainment? Marvelous kind and loving; as may
appear by the Bridegromes words, Eat, drink, and be merry.

But me thinks this is a strange speech: why does he that says Luc. 6.25.
Woe be to them that be full, here bid us eat and drink? Why does he that
says, Woe be to them that laugh, here bid us be merry? What are God and Mammon
confederate? is there friendship betwixt Christ and Belial? no, far be it from
us so to imagine, for these words are the language of the Spirit, howsoever the
flesh may mis-expound them: They be like Music, which according to the
hearers disposition, does ever alter it is operation; for play upon an
instrument before a Tiger, and he will grow more furious, and rent his own
flesh from his bones for anger: but let the Dolphin or the Heart hear any
melody, it so rauisheth and delights them, that thereby they may be trained to
their death: even so let one of those, whom Lucillius calls Venties,
Bellie-gods, or him that Athenaeus terms (...), a Wine-bottle and a
Mealebarrell, read these words and he will forthwith grow more luxurious, for
his apprehension will reach no further then the fleshpots of Egypt. Let any
of our Hermophrodites, effoeminate and wanton chamberers hear them, and they
will presently begin to be as mad-merrie as the Pom. Mel. lib. 1.
Tabareni, of whom Pomponius Mela writes, which do nothing all day long but
make merry, pipe and dance: but of the contrary part, the Regenerate whose
ears are circumcised; they hear Christ's voice, and they know his heart. They
hear him say, Eat O my friends, and they know that he means Myrrh and
Spice, the Gospel; the food of the hungry soul, which every one that hopes to
be saved must be willing to eat. They hear him say, Drink O my friends, and
they know it is Wine and Milk, Grace and Mercy; which whosoever refuses
being offered him, will Christ at the last day reject with an Ito maledictie,
depart thou cursed. They hear him say, Be merry O my well-beloved, and they
know it is because the Hony-combe with the honey is eaten by Christ, that is to
say, he has made our peace with God the Father. Eat O my friends, says
Christ; he inuites all to his Table, the word is preached to all, but all will
not hear it, all will not come to his Feast? for they have either married a
Wife, or hired a Farm, or bought a yoke of Oxen, and therefore they must be
excused. These are the children of Martha, they are ever combred about worldly
affairs, and wholly drawn from God, by the Devils three golden hooks; Honor,
Pleasure, and Wealth.

Others being bidden, in plain words refuse to come; for they had rather,
like the barbarous Pom. Mel. lib. 1.
Trogloditae, feed on Toades and Serpents, then Mirrhe and Spice: their
stomachs are only for traditions of men; their plats distaste the Word of
life: such be our English Recusants, to whom if I were Jacob Isachars blessing
should be theirs; which was this: Genesis 49.14.
Isachar is a strong Ass couching betwixt the burdens; why may not I term
them so, seeing that Gregory commenting upon these words in Job: the Job. 1.14.
Oxen were plowing, and the Asses feeding in their places by them; by Oxen
understand the Clergy, and by Asses the Laytie, which must feed by the Oxen,
and believe as the Church believes; being contented with an implicit faith;
for Ignorance is the mother of Devotion, and so do our Recusants, whose backs
are even broken with the burdens of Antichrist and his disciples. Some again
will come and sit down at the Table of Christ and eat, but they never digest
the Mirrhe and Spice: such are they, which either in heart being Romish, will
come to the Church to save their Lands, or else being Atheists, and of no
Religion, come for fear of being suspected to be Papists, you shall know them
by their attention; for like as Adders refusing the voice of the Charmer, do
ever stop one ear by laying it close to the ground, and the other with her
tail, so they bar the entrance of the Word; either by worldly Cogitations or
private Conferences, but of the contrary part, the Elect which are the true
friends of Christ, they come to the table willingly and eat cheerfully, for
they ever hunger and thrist after righteousness: what though the Word be
bitter in respect of the Profession? yet it is sweet in regard of
Contemplation, and therefore they eat it as the food of their Souls. Secondly
says Christ; Drink O my friends.] Here our Savior exhorts us, to embrace his
grace and mercy, being freely offered unto us. And who would not pledge this
health, considering that he which drinks shall never thirst again? Apulei.
lib. 3.
Apuleius reports an excellent speech of a certain wiseman at his table,
which was this; Prima eratera ad sitim pertinet, secunda ad hilaritate^, tertia
ad voluptatem, quarta ad insaniam. The first bowl of wine is drunk to quench
the thirst; the second, to provoke mirth; the third, for pleasure, the forth
makes a man mad: But it is far otherwise in drinking this Wine and Milk: for
the first draught, is (...), Esa. 53.11.
a fullness of knowledge by the illumination of Gods spirit: the second is,
Certitudo salutis, Gal. 4.6.
certainty of salvation, reueiled unto us by the same Spirit, which in our
hearts cries Abba Father: the third is, Confidentia, Heb. 4.6.
Confidencie: whereby we approach boldly to the Throne of Grace: the fourth is,
Ephe. 1.5.
Adoptio, Adoption; by which we receive power to be actually accounted the
Sons of God by Christ. O let us therefore drink this Wine and Milk, that we
never hereafter may thirst again.

Thirdly says Christ; Be merry, O my Well-beloved.] Nay further, Be drunke^;
for so is it word for word in the Hebrew; be drunken, but Ephe. 5.18.
not with Wine, for that is a voluntary madness and the Souls corruption: Be
drunken, but not with sin, Esaias. 29.9.
for then the Soul staggers, and falls into a spiritual slumber: but be
drunken with joy, because I have Eat my Honycombe with my Honey, and purchased
your Ephe. 2.15.
peace. Be merry, because I have bailed you out of Deaths dungeon, and
delivered you from the bondage of Satan. Be merry and rejoice always, because
your names are writ in Heaven. Lastly, be even drunken with mirth and joy
because being my friends upon earth, you shall be filled in heaven with the
pleasures of Gods house. To which holy tabernacle, he that was born for us
bring us: to whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory
now and euer-more.

FINIS.
The second Sermon. THE TRIVMPH OF CONSTANCY.
APOC. 3.11.12. VER. Behold, I come shortly hold that thou have: that no man
take thy Crown.

Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the
Name of the City of my God, which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down
out of Heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my new Name.


AT the two ends of the Exodus 25.13.19.20.
Mercieseat, were set two Cherubims of beaten Gold, whose wings were stretched
out on hie, and their faces one against an other, both toward the Mercie-seat.
This Seat of Mercy is Romans 3.24.
Christ: these Cherubims, the Prophets and the Apostles, both which in all
their Writings, look and level their pens at Christ, who is the true
propitiatory. The Prophets being the Apostles of the Law, were taught of God
in Number. 12.16.
Dreams and Visions, both that the Messiah should come into the world to
suffer, and also what should happen before his birth: The Apostles being the
Prophets of the Gospel, were after the same manner instructed in all
occurrences concerning the Church till the last day, and Christ's coming into
the world to judge. Of this rank was John, an Apostolical Prophet, and a
Prophetical Apostle, as appears by this Book of the Apocalypse, being a
Register of intricate Visions; wherein there be couched as many Hier. ad pauli.
Mysteryes as Words. The Author hereof was Christ, the Secretary John; the
place in which he penned it Pathmos, an Island in the Strab. lib. 13.
Aegaean Sea, whither he was banished by Eus. eccle. hist. lib. 3. cap. 18.
Domitian the Emperor; The time when these Visions were seen, was the Lords
day: and his first Vision was of one like unto the Son of Man, having in his
right hand seven stars, and standing in the midst of seven golden
Candle-sticks; the Mystery hereof is reueiled by Christ, saying: The seven
Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, and the seven Candlestickes,
are the seven Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thiatira, Sardi,
Philadelphia, and Laodicia: to the Angels or Bishops whereof our Savior writes
seven Epistles, commending some, reproving others, and exhorting all to
Perseverance, to Patience, to Repentance: but to omit the rest, at the seventh
verse of this Chapter begins the Epistle to the Angel of Philadelphia, a City
of Misia in Asia: Strab. lib. 12.
in the first part whereof he commends the Angels patience, threatens his
enemies, and assures him of aid and assistance. In the latter part, which is
my Text, he first exhorts him to Constancy, in these words; Behold, I come
shortly, hold that thou have, that no man take thy crown.] Secondly, recounts
the rewards of Conquerors, saying; Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in
the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write upon him
the Name of my God, and the Name of the city of my God, which is the new
Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God, and I will write
upon him my new Name.

The Exhortation lies in these words, which are the very Nauill of the Verse:
Hold that thou have, about which these two Motives twine, like the Serpents
about Mercuries rod. First; Behold, I come shortly: secondly, that No man take
thy Crown. Hold that thou have: Constancy and Perseverance are in the
scriptures set forth by four Metaphors, Ploughing, Running, Standing and
Holding. For the first, our Savior says, Luc. 9.62.
No man that puts his hand to the Plough, and looks back, is apt to the
Kingdom of heaven. This Plough is Gods service, and the Profession of Christ;
to which when a man has once settled himself, he must by remembering Lots
wife, take heed that he look not back. Religion is fitly resembled by the
Plough, for the life of a true Professor and a Plough-man are alike, both full
of labor and travail: the one eats his bread in the sweat of his face, the
other groneth continually under the Cross. To this Plough, all that hope for
heauenmust put their hands; for the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, (says
Christ) therefore we must take pains for it, and continue constantly at our
work, without looking back from Zoar to Sodom, and from the pains of the
Plough to the pleasures of the world.

For the second S. Paul says; 1. Cor. 9.
So run that you may obtain; In some sort all men run, but because all do
not obtain, it seems there is Error either in the choice of the way, or in
the manner of running. There is but one way to heaven Mat. 7.13.
and it is narrow and strait; and this is Christ, the Luc. 14.6.
Way, the Truth, and the Life, whosoever follows not this Path, wandereth
from the Truth, and therefore loses aeternall life: as the Way, so the manner
of running is but One, it must be without ceasing, stop, or stay, Mat. 10.22.
for only he which continues unto the end shall be saved.

For the third, the same Apostle says; Ephe. 6.14.
Stand therefore, and your loins girded about with Verity. Now what else is
it to stand, but to be Ephe. 6.10.
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might? to be constant Soldier, no
faint-hearted Coward? Such as be weak in faith cannot but fall, because like
the Dan. 7.
Bear in Daniels Vision, they stand only upon the one side, and but upon one
Leg: Cant. 5.15.
but such as be strong in faith, have legs like marble pillars set upon sockets
of gold, permanent, firm and solid, and using them both they must needs stand.

For the fourth, my Text says; Hold, that thou have. That is to say; persevere
in faith and righteousness, and Use thy function without fear. This is the
Pharaphrase of our Saviors speech, the Scope whereof is to make the Angel of
Philadelphia, like unto the Pro. 30.28.
Spider in the Proverbs: of which Solomon says: The Spider takes hold with
her hands, and is in Kings palaces: so must he with constant faith and
undaunted courage, the two hands of the soul, lay fast hold upon the Cross of
Christ, and never let his Hold go.

Hold that thou hast]: This Exhortation is an Antidote against the poison of
Haereticks, and a Shield to blunt the Sword of Tyrants: which two sorts of men
in the Primative Church (like brethren in evil) were leagued and linkt in
conspiracy against Christ, and his Ministers: the One sort being Satan's
Advocates, the other his Assascinates. Haeretickes Apoc. 9.3.
like the Locusts with Scorpion-like tails, did not only hurt Reprobates,
with the deadly sting of their contageous error, but also endeavored thereby
to kill them which had the Seal of God on their foreheads. Tyrants, like the
Apoc. 12.
great red Dragon with seven heads and ten horns, never ceased to persecute
the Spouse of Christ, and to make war with her seed; what by the Impostures
of Haereticks and the cruelty of Tyrants, many Christians were drawn to leave
their Hold, and fall back from the Truth. Against these enemies of the Gospel
of Christ, this good Angel of Philadelphia, had hitherto (according to his
little strength) opposed himself; Now because he should not faint in the
midst of his conflict, our Savior encourages him with this exhortation
saying: Hold that thou have, as if he should have said; Thou have begun in the
Spirit, end not thee in the flesh; as yet thou bear the Image of God, then
fashion not thy self according to the world, thine Alpha has been
Sincerity, then let not thy Omega be sensuality: without perseverance the
best Professor is a branch cut from the Vine, he can bring forth no fruit; a
painted Tomb full of rotten bones, and a fruitless fig tree with goodly
blossoms. Furthermore, Be of a stout and valiant courage in the managing of
thine office: subdue fear, let not the rough hand and rugged face of Tyranny
affright thee, or weaken thy resolution; the persecutour may destroy thy body,
but he cannot kill thy soul: therefore be not dismayed, for he that loses his
life for my sake, shall find it again.

As Christ writes to this worthy Angel, so in like manner he does to the Angels
of all Churches in the world; whether they be in the Eparchia, to wit,
Archangels, or Monarchs, or in the Mesarchia, namely, Cherubims and Seraphims,
or Bishops: or in the Hyparchia, ministering spirits or Preachers of the Word;
to every one of these particularly he says; Hold that thou have:] For never
was there more need of Holding, then in this age. Indeed, in the Primative
Church, Aug. in psalm. 58.
I confess with Augustine, that the Devil was both Leo aperte saeuiens, and
Draco occulte insidians; by open and out-ragious cruelty he showed himself a
Lion, and by his secret poisoning of Religion a Dragon; yet his malicious power
was curbed, and Apoc. 20.2.
he himself bound in chains for a thousand years, so that notwithstanding
all his subtlety and cruelty, Truth like a Palm Tree flourished, and
Christ's Cross like Aarons Rod did blossom, and bring forth much fruit: but
now the old Serpent is let loose, and of late years has acted both the Lion
and the Dragon without restraint, both by policy and puissance, studying to
extinguish the light of Truth: neither have his attempts been effectlesse, for
what by Magogs sword in the East, and Gogs usurped Keys in the West, he has
driven Truth like a Dove into the holes of the Rock, and banished Faith from
amongst men.

In the time of the Apostles, the 2. These. 2. Iren. lib. 2. cap. 20.
Mystery of iniquity began to work, by the Agencie of Haereticks, such as
Simon Magus, the father of Deceivers, Menander, Cerinthus, Ebion, the
Nicholaitans, and many other of the same counterfeit stamp; all which be
returned to the bottomless pit from whence they came, and in their place
succeed Apo. 16.13.
Frogs, unclean Spirits, whom the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet,
have sent out of their mouths unto the kings of the earth, to gather them to
the battle of that great day of God Almighty. These are the croaking fry of
Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, which are sent from Rome to the Courts of
Princes, to stir them up to make war against the true Professors of the
Gospel: these are the Leprosy of the Church, and the bane of Christian
Commonwealths; these are the true-borne sons of their father, the old
Serpent; for as he in the subversion of mankind began with the woman and
tempted her, so they insinuate themselves into our weaker vessels, and lead
them captive to Babylon. For reformation whereof, I wish that that Edict were
in force amongst us, which Hest. 1.22.
Assueroh upon the contempt of Queen Vasti, made and proclaimed amongst the
Meedes and Persians: Namely, that every one should bear rule in his own
house. In ancient time, Rome was honored for a Goddess, and she had her
Temple, and her sacrifice of Blood. So says Prudentius: Delubrum Romae
colitur, nam sanguine and ipsa Prud. lib. 1 Con. Sym.

More Deae, nomenque loci seu numen habetur.


And even so is she now Idolized by these Frogs, her Priests, whose oblations
are ever bloody; if her Deity be offended, nothing can appease her wrath but
death: How many of Gods anointed Princes have these Idolatrous shauelings
sacrificed upon her altar? and how many treasons did they broach to entrapt
that Mirror of her Sex, Englands Debora, our deceased Sovereign? From whence
came the Saltpeter which made the Gunpowder? was it not brought from him who
challenges Peter's Chair, and should therefore like his pretended
Praedecessour, be the Mat. 5.13.
Salt of the earth; but he has lost his savor, and therefore he is now good
for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under the foot of men. Well, I may
justly say of these Frogs, as the Greek Poet did of the people of Caria,
Egypt, and Lydia.

(...)
(...)
The Locustes which did pester the Primative Church, were venomous vermin, and
did much hurt with their Lion-like teeth, and Scorpion-like tails; but these
do quite outstrip and surpass them in mischief and cruelty.

When that glorious Woman clothed with the Sun, and crowned with twelve
Stars was in her travail, then the Beast with seven heads and ten horns
stood before her, to devour her Child, when it should be brought forth: that
is to say, the Romish Empire, did wholly oppose it self against the kingdom of
Christ when it was first preached: witness the cruel Persecutions under Nero,
Domitian, Traian, and the rest. Dan. 7.7. Apoc. 13.11.
This Beast I confess was fearful, terrible and very strong; but nothing in
comparison of the Beast with two horns like a Lamb, and whose speech is like
the Dragon that is now come out of the earth, for he plays both the Tyrant and
the Imposter: he does all that the first Beast could do, in shedding of blood;
and moreover by signs and false miracles he deceives them that dwell on the
earth.

This is Antichrist, that Man of sin, that child of perdition, that Belial
subject to no yoke, who according to the signification of his name, is both for
and against Christ: who he is, ^er. ep. 12.5.
and where he dwells S. Bernard tells us, saying; Bestia in Apocalypsi cui datu^
est os loquens blasphemias Petri cathedra^ occupat: the Beast in the
Apocalipse, to which was given a mouth speaking blasphemies, does occupy
Peter's chair. Iam-pridem Romae natus est Antichristus; Antichrist a good while
since was borne at Rome, says Ioachim the Abbot. This is he who calls
himself Christ's Vicar, and yet robs Christ of his honor; who is styled the
Servant of Servants, and yet exalts himself above all, that is called God:
this is that purple Whore which makes her Followers drunken with the Cup of
her abominable Idolatry, and is drunk her self with the blood of Saints
and Martyrs. In a word the Papacy, in which both the tyranny of the Roman
Emperors, and the leaven of ancient Haereticks concur and meet together:
seeing then that Satan is unchained, seeing that these Frogs crawle in every
corner of Christian Commonwealths, and seeing that this Beast does continually
bend his sharp horns against the true Professors of the Gospel, it does
nerely concern all good Angels, whether they be spiritual or temporal, To
hold that they have, by perseuering in true faith and righteousness, and by
exercising their Functions without fear. Of all other Angels, Antichrists
malice is most against Archangels, or Princes; his endeavor is to make them
his Vassals, by treading upon their necks, and depriving them of their crowns:
for who knows not how arrogantly he claims to be Lord of the whole earth,
Gel. did. 96.
and challenges both an Ecclesiastic and civil Supremacy: does it not then
behoue Princes to hold fast that they have? God grant then that true Faith may
be their Shield, the Word their Sword, and the salvation of God their Helmet,
that being thus armed they may be enabled to resist all the assaults of that
blasphemous Antichristian horn. Let their Diadems, (O Lord) be like unto
Aarons Miter, upon which these words were engraven; Holiness to the Lord: for
Sincerity in Religion is the most steadfast proppe of royal authority, and
the most firm supporter of a throne, it is like the brazen Bulls, that held
up the sacred Lauer, or the yuorie Lions of Salomons kingly Seat.

[Behold, I come shortly: hold that thou have, that no man take thy crown.]

The Exhortation being finished, the Motives follow, which be these: First,
Behold I come shortly; Secondly, that no man take thy crown.

These two are of a contrary nature: the first is sweet, and flows with honey,
the second is bitter, and full of gall; in the first the voice of Christ is
like a sweet Cymball; in the second like the sound of many waters; the first is
a Motive of Comfort, promising aid and assistance, the second of Terror,
threatening a degradation for want of perseverance: (...): as it is in the
Proverb, out of the mouth of Christ comes both hot and cold; a hot Cordial
and a cold Corasiue, such is his Rhetorike, if by fair promises he cannot
persuade, his custom is by threatenings to Compel.

Ecce venio cito. Behold I come shortly.] This Motive is a proclamation very
short, but wondrous pithie and pondrous, wherein every word is remarkable.

First Ecce, Behold. When the Prophet Isaiah speaks of the first coming of
Christ; he begins his Prophecy with an Ecce, saying, Esaias. 7.14.
Ecce Virgo, etc: Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and she
shall call his Name, Emmanuel. So in this Book, where there is any mention
made of Christ's second coming, there is ever prefixed an Ecce: Apoc. 22.12.
Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me. Whereby we may conjecture
that the holy Ghost would have us attentive, for he is about to proclaim some
wonder. In his first coming there is, Ecce humilitatem; Behold his wonderful
humility: but here in his second coming, there is Ecce gloriam, behold his
admirable glory. Betwixt this and that Ecce, there is as great difference, as
betwixt Tabor and Caluerie: the first of which saw his beautiful
Transfiguration, the second his uncouth Deformation.

Ecce, behold his humility: in his first coming, he was the Cant. 2.1.
Lilly of the Valleys, for his mother was a poor Virgin, his cradle a cratch,
his followers fishers, his apparel a cote without seame, and his steed, an
ass: but Ecce, behold his glory. In his second coming, he shall be the Cant.
2.1.
Rose of the field, full of majesty, attired in glorious apparel, and girded
about with strength; his attendants shall be Legions of Angels, his Court in
the clouds, and his steed Apoc. 19.11.
a white horse. Ecce: behold his humility, when he came first, Ioh. 12.47.
it was to suffer for our sins, Esa. 53.4.5.
to bear our infirmities, to carry our sorrows, to be wounded for our
transgressions, to be broken for our iniquities, to make our peace with his own
chastisements, and to heal us with his stripes: then was his head crowned with
thorns, his ears filled with Crucifige and blasphemies; his eyes closed up
with dim death, his face made blew with blows, his mouth made bitter with
gall and vinegar, his hands and feet nailed to the Cross, and his whole body
racked and tentar'd ad modum timpanicae pellis, like the head of a Tymbrell or
a Tabret. But ecce, behold his glory in his second coming, he shall Esaias 1.24.
ease himself of his adversaries, and avenge himself of his enemies, Cant. 5.
his head shall be like fine gold, Apoc. 19.12.
and upon it many crowns, his eyes like a flame of fire, his cheeks like beds
of spices and sweet flowers, his lips like Lillies dropping down pure
mirrhe, his hands like rings of gold set with the Chrisolite, his belly like
white yuorie covered with Saphires, his legs like marble pillars set on
sockets of gold, and his countenance like Libanon, excellent as the Cedars. Oh,
who then would not for a little time in this world hold fast and be constant,
having such a Pattern and such a Patron.

Ecce venio, Behold I come.] These words have a relish both of life and death,
they be as sweet as honey, and as bitter as worme-wood; they be restoratiue to
the Elect, but poison to the reprobates: and therefore our Savior speaks them
to comfort the one, and terrify the other. To the wicked nothing is more
yrkesome then the day of death, and the day of Doom. O mors quam amara, etc? O
death how bitter is thy memory (says the Wiseman) to him that puts his
trust in his possessions? And the Evangelist tells us, that at the last day
Apoc. 6.15.
the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men shall hide themselves in dens, and among the
rocks of the Mountains, and shall say to the Mountains and fall on us, and
hide us from the presence of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb: but on the contrary part, Death to the righteous is ever welcome:
For blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them: and for the day of Doom, it is to them
Mell in ore, melos in aure, Iubilaeus in cord; the name of it is as honey, the
mention of it melody, and the very thought of it a year of Jubilee: wherefore
the Saints departed cry Quousque Domine? How long Lord? Veni domine Jesus, veni
cito, says John, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: to whom our Savior makes
this comfortable Reply; Ecce venio, behold I come. This Venio, I come: may well
be compared to 1. Sam. 16.
David's Harp, and Iosuah 6.
Ioshuas Trumpet; the sweet warble of David's harp refreshed king Saul in his
agony, and did drive away the evil spirit; the sound of Ioshuas Trumpet made
the walls of Jericho tremble, and leueld them with the ground: the like
operation proceeds either from the hearing or reading of these two words; Ecce
Venio, behold I come. Let one of the Elect hear them; imagine his shoulders be
over laden with the Cross, his head pricked with thorns, and his back
embrodered with stripes, (as indeed in this world the righteous ever suffer
affliction and persecution, which like evil spirits haunt and torment them)
yet I say, let them but hear this ecce venio, and their countenances will be
cheared, and their hearts comforted, so pleasant is the harmony of this
heavenly Harp, But let a Reprobate either hear or read them: suppose (...), as
it is in the Proverb, he swim up to the very ears in rivers of gold, be
crowned with Rose-buddes, and sleep upon a bed of yuorie (as indeed the wicked
in this life are ever most happy, free from Crosses, free from tribulations)
yet I say, let them in the very surfeit of their pleasures; but hear this ecce
venio, and like 1. Sam. 1.37
Nabal, their hearts will die within them: and like Dan. 5.6.
Balthazar at the sight of the handwriting on the wall, the joints of their
loins will be loosed, and their knees smite one against another, so fearful
is the sound of this heavenly Trumpet.

Ecce venio eito, Behold I come quickly. The coming of Christ is both
certain, sudden, and short: first, it is most certain, so we gather out of
the word, Venio, I come: for our Savior herein speaks of a future judgment,
as if it were present. Secondly, it shall be sudden; for behold, I come,
says Christ, like a theife in the night. Thirdly, it shall be short: Behold I
come shortly, though his coming be certain, yet the time when is uncertain:
for it shall be sudden and short. I cannot then but condemn the boldness of
them that dare assign the very year, month, and day of Christ's coming to
Judgment; considering that their assertion, is flat opposite and contrary to
the Scripture, which says; Marc. 13.33.
that the hour and day of Christ's coming, is not known to the Angels, nor to
the Son of Man, but to the Father only: and yet Cusanus like Genesis 11.4.
Nimrod, to get him a name, has built a Babel of mere conjectures: as first;
his opinion is, that the world shall end between the year 1700. and 1734.
because as Christ rose again in the four and thirtith year of his age, so
the Church of God shall rise at the latter day in the four and thirtith
Iubile, which make one thousand seven hundredth years. Secondly, as after the
first Adam, in the four and thirtith Iubile, there came a consumption of sin
by Water, for the Flood was one thousand six hundred fifty six years after
the Creation of the world: so in the four and thirtith Iubile, after the
second Adam, there shall be a final consumption of sin by fire. Other
conjectures he has, but being but conjectures, I let them pass, saying with
Augustine; De saluatoris reditu, qui expectatur in fine, tempora dinumerare non
audeo, Aug. in Epist. 28.
nec aliquem Prophetarum hac de re numerum annorum existimo praesciuisse, etc.
Of our Saviors return, which is expected in the end, I dare not number the
times, neither do I think that any of the Prophets knew the number of the
years: but rather that to stand which the Lord says: Act. 1.7.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the Father has kept in
his own power. The Lord to great purpose would have that day kept secret, that
our hearts should be in continual expectation of it. Aug. in psalm. 36. con. 1.
Ser. 6. and 17.
Quid ad te (says Augustine) quando venies? sic vine, quasi hodie venturus
sit, and non timebis cum venerit. What is it to thee when he comes? so live
as though he should come to day, and thou shall not be afraid when he
comes. Remember thine end, and thou shall never do amiss; the day of Death
and the day of Doom are two Pole-starres, upon which we that be Pilgrims and
trauailers upon earth, must ever fix our eyes; Joseph of Aramathia made his
Sepulcher in his Garden; and the Egyptians in their banqueting houses had
ever the picture of Death: so ought we in the midst of our worldly pleasures
and delights continually to cast up our accounts, and daily to number our
days. What know we when the Bridegroom will come? It behooves us therefore
like wise Virgins ever to have our Lamps full of Oil, and to be in
readiness, to give attendance: For behold Christ will come certainly,
suddenly, and shortly.

Hold that thou have, that no man take thy crown.] In speaking the first
Motive, the face of Christ was to look upon like the Apoc. 4.3.
Gasper-stone, which is green and beautiful: but in this he resembles the
Apoc. 4.3.
Sardine, which is red and bloody, for there is Comfort, here is terror;
there his Cant. 5.16.
mouth was as sweet things, and he wholly delectable; here out of his mouth
proceeds a Apoc. 1.16.
sharp two-edged sword, and his countenance is very fearful.

This word Corona, a Crown, has in the Scriptures diverse significations,
sometimes it signifies aeternall life: as in the second chapter of the
Apocalipse: Apo. 2.10.
Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life; and so
the Papists understand this place, whereupon they gather that the Decrees of
Election and Reprobation be changeable: for the Schoolmen teach, that the
Number of the Elect and of the Reprobate, is certainly and unchangeably
decreed and purposed of God in his aeternall counsel, so that it can neither
be increased nor diminished, for he has absolutely appointed how many shall be
saved, and how many rejected: but yet they say, that he has not certainly and
unchangeably decreed what particular men shall make up, or be of this
determined and purposed number; because that Men having as they say, Free Will,
do sometimes depart from God, and sometimes return unto him. The first of
these Numbers, they call the Formal number; which is certain; the latter they
call the Material number, which is uncertain and changeable: so by their
doctrine, he that is elect may finally be blotted out of the book of life, and
become a Reprobate; and he that is a Reprobate may be made an elect this their
Position they endeavor to prove, by this Text of Scripture amongst the rest: by
which words they affirm that it is evident, that he which is elect to wear a
Crown of life may loose it: and another which was not elect, may supply his
place. But this their Collection is contrary to the intention and meaning of
the Spirit of God that writ it, who is never in opposition to himself. Ioh.
10.29.
My Father is greater then all, and no man is able to take them out of his
hand, therefore our election is certain; For Iam. 1.17.
with God there is no variablenes, neither shadowing by turning. Horum qui
electi sunt, si quispiam perit, fallitur Deus, sed nemo eorum perit, quia non
fallitur Deus, Aug. de cor. and gra. cap. 7. Aqui. part. 7. quest. 24. art. 3.
says Augustine. Of the elect if any perish God is deceived; but none of them
can perish, because God cannot be deceived. Likewise Aquinas says, Simpliciter
in libro vitae, scripti nunquam deleri possunt; simply they that are written in
the book of life, can never be blotted out: of this Text of Scripture then we
must seek for some other Exposition, for by it cannot be understood the Crown
of aeternall life.

Secondly, this word Corona, a crown, sometimes signifies any faithful man,
which by the Ministry and preaching of the word is converted from Gentilisme
to Christianity. So S. Paul calls the Philippians, saying; Philip. 4.1.
Therefore my brethren, beloved and longed for, my joy and my crown, so
continue in the Lord ye beloved. Thirdly, it is the Badge or Cognizance of
Authority, both Temporal and Spiritual; and so is it to be understood in
this place: in which our Savior exhorts the Angel, or Bishop of Philadephia,
to constancy in his Function, for fear an other be placed in his Office, and
take the dignity of the Bishopric from him. By this threatened degradation may
all Archangels and Angels learn to know, that Crowns be no perpetuities. If
Solomon turn his heart from the Lord God of Israel, and build high places to
Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, and Molech, the abomination of the children
of Ammon; God will surely rent his kingdom from him and give it unto his 1.
Reg. 11.11
servant: if Eli the high Priest will not chasten the wickedness of his
sons, but suffer them to run into slander, and stay them not, 1. Sam.
4.11.18.
he and they both shall go with blood to their graves, and the Priesthood be
conferred upon an other.

Therefore hold that you have, that no man take your Crowns.

The second general part of my Text, is a Catalogue of the Rewards, that
Christ promises to bestow on Conquerours; saying, Him that overcomes, will I
make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I
will write upon him the Name of my GOD, and the name of the City of my God,
which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God, and
I will write upon him my new Name.

Him that overcomes, etc.] Reward makes men both valiant and ventrous: 1.
Sam. 18.27
for a wife, David will fetch two hundredth fore-skins of the Philistims; for
gold the 1. Reg. 9.28.
servants of Solomon, will tenni confidere ligno, hazard their lives in a ship,
and sail to Ophir. Our Savior therefore to stir up our courage, and put
spirit in our faint hearts, does as the Romans did: they had laws for the
Triumphs of Generals, and diversities of crowns appointed for well deserving
Martialists; and this was done in policy, to make their men of war stout and
valiant: so Christ to encourage those that march under his Standard, the
Cross, proclaims their Rewards: saying, Apoc. 2.7.
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life; which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God.

Apoc. 2.13.
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Manna that is hid, and will
give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man
knows saving he that receives it.

Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, etc.] Oh
then, who would not be a soldier in the Camp of Christ? preferring his
thornie crown before a diadem of gold; his Cross before a chair of estate;
his Whip before a Scepter; his Reed before all temporal Royalty; his White
coat before raiments of Needle-worke; his scoffs and taunts before worldly
applause; his gall and vinegar before the rich Gluttons delicious fare; and his
death before life; considering that Cum Domino iudices venient qui nunc pro
Domino iudicantur, (says Augustine) They shall come with the Lord as Judges,
who are now judged for for the Lords cause.

Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar.] A Pillar is the Emblem of three
things, Remembrance, Pre-eminence and Continuance.

First, it is the Register of Memory. God turned Genesis 19.26.
Lots wife into a pillar of Salt, because contrary to the commandment of the
Angel, she looked back toward Sodom and Gomorrah: and Christ says;
Remember Lots wife. The sight of this Salt pillar, was to make men remember the
judgments of God, and to terrify them from backesliding and reuolting. 2. Sa.
18.18.
Absalom the son of David, in his life time did rear a Pillar: for he said;
I have no son to keep my name in remembrance, and he called the Pillar after
his own name. 1. Macca. 13.27.28.
Simon made upon the Sepulcher of his father and his brethren a building, high
to look unto of hewn stone behind and before; and set up seven Pillars upon
it, one against another, for his father, his mother, and four brethren, and
set arms upon the Pillars for a perpetual memory. For this cause the
Egyptian kings made those stately Pyramids, and Obeliskes, to perpetuate their
memory. Hercules also erected two Pillars upon two Promontories, the one in
Europe, the other in Africa, as monuments and records of his victories. And
Gel. lib. 10.
Artemisia, the Queen of Caria, made a Tomb for her husband Mansolus,
reckoned amongst the wonders of the world; which was compassed about with
thirty six Pillars, all which were to preserve his Name.

Secondly, a Pillar sometimes signifies Pre-eminence; as it is in the Epistle
of S. Paul to the Galathians: Galat. 2.9.
And when James and Cephas, and John, knew of the grace that was given unto me,
which are counted to be Pillars; they gave to me, and to Barnabas the right
hands of fellowship: that we should preach unto the Gentiles, and they unto the
Circumcision. Dexteras Paulo and Barnaba societatis, sed Tito qui cum eis erat,
Ier. lib. 1. in Epist. ad Gala.
dexteras non dederunt; says Ierom. They gave the right hands of fellowship to
Paul and Barnabas, but not to Titus who was with them, because he had not
attained unto such measure of grace, as was requisite in the Governors of the
Church. Out of this may be confuted our English Arians, which hold that all
Ministers should be equal, and that a Bishop neither is nor ought to be
superior to a Priest, neither that there is any difference at all betwixt
them. Hier. ad Euang.
We know that Bishops and Priests in the Apostles time were all one; for those
whom the Apostle calls Act. 20.17.
Elders or Presbiters, he names Act. 20.28.
Bishops or Overseers. Likewise S. Peter exhorts the Presbiters or Priests to
feed the Flock, (...). That is, ouerseeing, from whence the name of Episcopus
or Bishop is derived: yet according to the names of honor, which the use or
custom of the Church has obtained: a Bishop is greater then a Priest, Ep. 19.
ad. Hier.
says S. Augustine, neither is it contrary to the Scripture, that there
should be a Prioritie amongst Ministers, for even the Apostles though in
respect of their Apostleship they were al one, yet there was a superiority and
precedencie amongst them: for the prioritie of speaking was given Act. 1.15.
to Peter in the election of Matthias: Act. 15.13.
the definitive sentence is pronounced by James: Paul is ordained the chief
Apostle of the Uncircumcision, and Peter of the Circumcision; and among the
Apostles themselves, Gal. 2.9.
James, Cephas, and John are counted pillars, which is a title of Pre-eminence.

Thirdly, a Pillar is the byeroglyphick of Continuance, God in sign of his
everlasting essence, Exodus 13.21.
went before the people of Israel by day in a Pillar of a cloud to lead them
the way, and by night in a Pillar of fire to give them light, that they might
go both by day and by night: Christ in token of his aeternal Deity, is said
in the Canticles of Solomon, to have Cant. 5.15.
legs like Marble pillars, set on sockets of Gold. The Church of God, which
by Solomon is called the Pro. 9.1.
House of Wisdom, is said to be built upon seven pillars, that is to say it
has a firm and solid foundation; for numerus septenarius perfectione^
significat, says S. Augustine; the seuen-fold number signifies perfection:
whereupon the Lamb of God, our Savior, is said to have Apoc. 4 ^.
seven horns and seven eyes; by which are intimated his absolute power, and
perfect knowledge. In that Christ then says; He will make him that
overcomes a Pillar, you must note, that his Meaning is this: his perseverance
in righteousness shall be had in everlasting remembrance: his glory shall be
greater then of the ordinary sort of the elect, and his happiness in heaven
shall abide and continue for ever: for he shall be made a Pillar in the Temple
of God, and he shall go no more out. In these words our Savior alludes unto the
two 1. Reg. 7.21.
Great brazen Pillars, which King Solomon made and set up in the Porch of the
Temple; calling the name of the one Iachin, and of the other Boaz: the first of
which is by interpretation; He will establish: and the second signifies
strength: as if he should have said, God will perform his promise toward this
house, and the power and glory of it shall continue for ever. And so will
Christ deal with them that overcome, He will make them both Iachin and Boaz:
that is to say, according to his stable and firm promise, he will deliver them
from the mouth of the Lions in this life, by breaking their iaw-bones; and in
the world to come they shall for ever reign with the Lamb, and Apoc. 14.4.
follow him whither soever he goes, and never any more go out of the Temple.
Hereby we may gather, that they which once have received a true lively faith,
and are thereby justified before God, can never finally fall away, neither can
that faith utterly perish or fail in them though it may for a time somewhat
decay, and be empaired, yet shall it revive, and they be raised up again. The
Papists impugn this doctrine, Bellar. lib. 3. de iusti. cap. 14.
teaching that a man may fall away from the faith which he once truly had, and
be deprived altogether of the state of grace; because God says: Ezech. 18.24
If the righteous man turn away from his righteousness, and commit iniquity,
and do according to all the abominations, that the wicked man does, shall be
live? all his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned; but in his
transgression that he has committed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in
them shall he die. Likewise S. Paul speaks of some Tim. 1.29.
That they had made ship-warck of their faith, upon which place the Rhemists
conclude, that a man may fall from the faith which he once truly had; many
other Texts of scripture they allege for the same purpose. As that out of S.
Luke, Luke 8.13.
They receive the word with joy, but they have no root, which for a while
believe, but in the time of tentation go away. Out of S. Matthew; Mat. 24.12.
the love of many shall wax cold. And out of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians; 1. Cor. 9.27.
I do chastise my body, lest when I have preached to others I should be a
Reprobate. In making answer to these objections, let us but observe the true
meaning of these words. Righteousness, Faith, Love, and Reprobate, and then
this Gordian knot; will with ease be loosed. First, whereas the Prophet Ezechiel
speaks of the fall of a righteous man: you must note that he means such
righteous persons, as to the worlds eye rather seem so to be, then be so
indeed, and thus S. Luke teaches us to expound it, who, where as other
Evangelists write thus, From him that has not shall be taken away, even that
which he has; he says, Luke 8.18.
that which he seemed to have: God takes away his grace from him that has it
not, but only seems to have it, and gives still to him that has: he then
that is hypocritically righteous, we grant may fall away finally, but he that
is truly righteous, and a Pillar in the Temple of God shall go no more out.

Secondly, Faith is either Viua or Mortua, A lively or a dead faith; of the
dead faith there may be made a shipwreck, it was Judas his case: such a faith
is a reed shaken with every blast of wind, it is a combustible substance like
Timber, hay and stubble, the least flame of any fire will burn it: but the
Lively faith which is ever accompained with a good Conscience, like the Ship in
which our Savior slept, may be tossed and shaken with wind and waves, but never
cast away, never swallowed up in any gulf, for it is a house built upon the
rock, no tempestuous gust can ouer-turne it. It is a well of living water
springing up to everlasting life, he that drinks of it shall never thirst
again: Ioh. 5.24.
For he that believes is already passed from death to life, he is made a
Pillar in the house of God, and shall no more go out.

Thirdly, as there is a dead faith, so there is a Counterfeit Love, the one
being the root, the other the branch: therefore where there is such a faith,
charity there must needs wax cold: Cant. 8.7.
but true Love, by much water cannot be quenched, neither can the floods drown
it. 1 Cor. 13.8.
It does never fall away: Cause. 33. did. 2. cap. 8.
In quocunque fuerit haec charitas, radix illi erit, arescere non potest, in
whom soever this charity is, it shall be a root unto him, he cannot wither,
but ever flourish like a green Olive tree in the court of Gods Temple, never
to be transplanted, never to go out any more.

Fourthly, this word Reprobate, usually in the Scriptures, signifies such a
one as is Iud. verse. 4.
(...), before of old ordained to comdemnation, and rejected or reproved of
God. But sometimes it is taken in another sense, and is all one with (...)
which is it reproved, 1. Cor. 9.27.
or reprobate to men, and so does S. Paul use it, when he says; I chastise my
body, lest when I have preached to others, I should be a Reprobate. In this
speech the Apostle does not fear lest God should cast him away, or finally
reject him* for he professes the contrary, saying: Romans 8.38.39.
for I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. But his meaning is this, lest if he preached one thing
and practiced an other, he might be reproved and reproached of men. No, Aug.
de cor. and great. cap. 7.
he that is Elect, and whose faith works by love, either never falls at
all, or if he do, he is revived and raised up again before this life be
ended: for he that is a Pillar in the Temple of God, shall go no more out.

Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar etc.] Upon this Pillar, Christ
promises to write three Names. The Name of God, the Name of new Jerusalem, and
his own new Name: And I will write upon him the Name of my God.

Pro. 22.1.
A good name says Solomon, is to be chosen above great riches, it is better
then a good ointment, it fatteth the bones: What honor was it for Moses to be
called Gods Servant? and for David to be adorned with this Title, a man after
Gods own heart? Publius Scipio did reckon his name Africanus amongst his
greatest glories. And Paulus Aemelius thought himself, well satisfied for his
pains and service in the wars, because the Romans gave him the name of
Macedonius. Catal. glor. m^nd. part. 11. consid. 23.
Honor and decus est habere pulchru^ nomen: says Cassanaeus, it an honor and
glory to have a fair name; and therefore Socrates wished that parents would
give their (...) significant and wel-sounding names. Such a name (...) our
Savior promise to write upon them that per^^^^e in goodness, saying, I will
write upon him the name of (...) God. God has diverse names in the Scripture,
some being derived from his substance, other from his properties: as he is a
Being of himself, and an aeternall Essence, he is called Iehoua, of Haia, to
Be: as he is mighty, El; as holy Cadoseh; as all-sufficient Schaddai: but his
principal name is Iehoua: a name of such holiness, that the Chaldaeans (as
Reuchlinus says) to avoid profanation, would not write it, but expressed it
in their Books by certain pricks; and the Jews blinded with a superstitious
conceit, in stead thereof used Tetragrammaton, Adonai, and Elohim; this name so
holy shall be graven upon them that be pillars in Gods Temple. Whereby Christ
signifies, that God will be their Iehoua, and they shall be his Israel: Apoc.
^1.7.
he will be their God, and they shall be his people. This name is Apoc. 7.2.
that Seal wherewith the servants of God are marked in their foreheads, which
who so has, no hellish Apoc. 9.4.
Locust can hurt him: this name is like the Exodus 12.13.
strokes of blood upon the posts of the Israelites houses, no plague nor
destruction shall light upon them that bear it: this name is like unto the
Joshua 2.18.
Cord of red thread in Rahabs window, it preserues them that have it from the
Sword in the day of Vengeance. The Letters of his name Iehoua, are by the
Jewish Rabbis called, Literae flatus and literae quietis. Breathing and
resting letters. Whereby thus much may be collected; First, as God is a spirit,
so he is the sole Father and giver of life: he will raise up the Elect at the
last day in incorruption, clothing them with immortality, and bestowing upon
them life aeternall.

Secondly, there is no way to find Rest but in God only, he is like Noah's
Arc to the tired and wearied Genesis 8.9.
Dove; he is that living stone upon which only Genesis 28.11.
every elect Jacob must lay his head and sleep: he is that Heb. 13.10.
Altar under which the Saints departed repose themselves, resting from their
labors, Heb. 4.9.
and finding rest for their souls. And thus by the writing of the Name of God,
three things by Christ are promised: a heavenly Inheritance, a life aeternall,
and a rest everlasting.

And the name of the City of my God which is the new Jerusalem, which comes
down out of Heaven, from my God, etc.

As it is an honor to have a good name, so it is a glory to be of a famous
Nation, or a Citizen of a famous City. The Ioh. 4.9.
woman of Samaria, wondered that Christ being a Jew by birth, would ask
drink of her being a Samaritan; for the Jews meddled not with the Samaritans,
holding them as ignoble, in comparison of themselves, and wicked people: as we
may gather by their blasphemous speech to Christ; Say we not well, thou art a
Samaritan and have the devil? There is a great difference in the Excellency
of Nations. Quaedam gentes (says Julius Maternus) ita a coelo formatae sunt vt
propria sint morum vnitate conspicuae. Some nations are so framed of heaven,
that they may be known by the propriety of manners what countrymen they be.
And this variety comes from the diversity of Climates, Ptolo. 2.
Quadripart: Liuius. Apulei. Iul. Maternus.
and the influence of the stars. The Jews be naturally superstitious, the
Egyptians learned, the Syrians covetous, the Sicilians acute, the Africans
crafty, the Scythians cruel, the Grecians unconstant, the Italians generous,
the Frenchmen rash, the Spaniards vainglorious, the Tit. 1.12.
Cretians liers, evil beasts, slow bellies, the Germans and Brittanes valiant.
These stampes of nature being considered we may conclude, that it is far more
honorable for a man to be of one Nation or one City then another. Our Savior
Christ, then because he would demonstrate the Glory of the Elect: says that he
will write upon them the Name of the City of Jerusalem: he will enfranchise
and make them free of a famous City: but we must not look for this Jerusalem
in Iudaea; no, for of that City, not one stone is left upon another, but we
must cast our eyes upwards, Apoc. 21.2.
For it comes down from God, out of heaven, prepared as a Bride trimmed for
her husband. The old Jerusalem was a type of the Church Millitant, this New
Jerusalem is a figure of the Church tryumphant: the Old was often besieged and
sacked; a shadow of the afflictions of the Elect here upon earth; the New is
said to be garnished with twelve several precious stones, Apoc. 21.19.20.
the Jasper, the Sapphire, the Chalcedonie, the Emerald, the Sardonyx, the
Sardius, the Chrysolite, the Beril, the Topaze, the Chrysoprasus, the Iacinth,
and the Amethyst: by which are signified the glorious endowments of the Elect
in heaven. In the number of twelve, there be four Triplicities, and this City
being fouresquare, the precious stones like those in Exodus 28.17.
Aarons Breastplate, are set three and three in a square: by which four
Triplicities, four things may be understood, which shall concur and meet
together to make the Elect most glorious.

The first, is the Glorification of the body; the qualify and state whereof
may fitly be resembled by the three stones of the first Triplicitie; namely the
Jasper, the Sapphire, and the Chalcedonie. First, the Jasper is green, and
being worn dispelleth all Phantasmes; and drives away evil spirits, (says
Isodore:) the healthful state of our bodies after the resurrection, shall
paralele this Jasper, they shall be like green Olive trees, never withering,
never fading; here while we live Diseases the Purseuants of death, are ever
like Saul's evil spirits, at our elbowes haunting us: David had the stone, for
his reins chastened him in the night season; Job his boiles and botches;
Miriam her leprosy, and even the most righteous have their infirmities: but at
the last day our bodies shall be so changed that sickness shall exercise no
tyranny over us. Secondly, the Sapphire, is hard and blew, of the color of
heaven, it killes the Spider, and drives away poisonous serpents: such like
shall our bodies be, heavenly and beautiful, no deformity shall come near to
blemish them; Phil. 3.21.
for Christ shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue al
things to himself. Thirdly, the Chalcedony is so hard that no tool of iron can
grave it: even so, though now Satan works us like wax, and makes us receive
his mark, by tempting and alluring us to give our members servants to
uncleanness, yet then our bodies shall be purified; we shall tread upon the
Lion and the Dragon: the devil shall have no more any power to make our bodies
his Synagogue: for they shall be the aeternall Temples of the holy Ghost. The
second thine is, the Sanctification of the Soul; the condition whereof we
shall see in the three stones of the second Triplicitie; to wit, the Emerauld,
the Sardonyx, and the Sardius. First, the Emerauld is in color Green,
delightsome to look on, and very sovereign against the falling Sickness:
like unto this precious stone shall the souls of the Elect be made, all
glorious within, and full of grace, being so confirmed in Righteousness, that
whereas now the most just man has the falling sickness seven times a day,
then Sin shall have no more dominion over us. Secondly, the Sardonyx is of
three colors, it is Niger in imo, candidus in medio, rubicundus in supremo;
the lower part of it is black, the middle white, the top of it red: so our
Souls shall be Nigrae in imo, black below, for they shall contemn the
malicious disseignes and stratagems of the devil, and smile in scorn at the
destruction of him and his angels. They shall be Candidae in medi^, white in
the midst, being clothed like the Lillies of the field, in long white robes of
righteousness; lastly, they shall be in Supremo rubicundae, Red above, that is
to say all glorious, in regard of the golden crown of immortality. Thirdly,
the Sardius is a red stone, and the virtue of it is, to drive away
timorousness and fear; this shows our future boldness and confidence: here
upon earth we work our salvation in fear and trembling; but hereafter we
shall approach boldly unto the throne of God, with Palms in our hands in sign
of victory, having washed our long white robes in the blood of the Lamb. The
third thing is the consummation of Charity, the attributes whereof be three:
for Charity must be pure, good and true: these three, are set forth, by three
stones in the third Triplicitie. First, the Chrysolite is of a golden color;
whereupon it has that name, it sparkleth, and being laid before the fire, will
quickly be inflamed and burn. This stone is an Emblem of our pure love
toward God the Father; whose presence, when we behold him face to face, shall
be so attractiue, that our hearts shall be set on fire with his love. Secondly,
the Berill is green, and has power to procure Love; this stone is the Emblem
of that good love, which shall be betwixt God the Son and us: who loved us
first, and was incarnate, and we then shall love him most dearly, being
incorporated and made fellow heirs with him. Thirdly, the Topaze is yellowish,
resembling the Sunbeams, and it is an Emblem of our true love toward God
the Holy Ghost, which like the beams of the Sun shall ever shine, and whose
hear shall never be quenched, never extinguished. The fourth thing is the
perfection of Justice, expressed by the three stones in the fourth Triplicitie.
Iustitia est virtus, (says Ambrose) suum cuique tribuens: Justice is a virtue
that gives every one his due: to every one of us that has it, it imparts
Continency; to our neighbor friendship; and to God honor. Which three are
discribed by the Chrysoprasus, the Iacinth, and the Amethyst. First, the
Chrysoprasus in the night shines like fire, in the day like gold. In it behold
our future perfection in Continency and Temperance, we are now frail and
unstable; our passions and affections are ever changing; in the daytime of
prosperity we shine like gold, we rejoice in the Lord, and magnify his holy
Name; but in the Night of adversity, we are of Job. 2.9.
Jobs Wives mind, who counseled her husband to curse God and die. But in the
world to come, we shall be Et ignei; and aurei, vel tanquam aurum probatum in
igne: Like gold tried in the fire, purged of all our drossie passions and
earthy affections. So absolutely Continent, that if we were liable to Crosses,
yet should no Cross cross us. Secondly, the Iacinth ever suites it self to
the temperature of the Air; if the air be clear, it is bright; if the air
be dim, it is dark. Such like hereafter shall our disposition be altogether
harmonicall: Might there be in Heaven Eccle. 3.4.
a time to weep, and a time to laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance,
we should mourn with them that weep, and laugh with them that dance, such
should be the Symphathie of the Elect. Here upon earth it is quite contrary,
We weep with them that laugh, and laugh with them that weep; one enuies at
another prosperity, and rejoices at another misery and affliction.

(...), etc.

Says the Poet; One Tyler enuies an other: One Carpenter another; one Musician
an other, one Beggar another: and one Courtyer an other: but mark our
alteration, the air at the last day shall be purged, and it will ever be fair
and clear weather: all grudging and envy shall be banished, and we shall for
ever be linked together in brotherly love and friendship. Thirdly, the Amethyst
is of a purple color, and sparkles like the fire: a fit figure of that due
honor which the zealous Elect in heaven shall give to God for ever: whilst we
are clothed with this flesh, even the most righteous man is lukewarm in Gods
service: but when this Corruption shall have put on incorruption, We shall
stand up like fire, and our words shall burn like a Lamp, Apoc. 19.1.
ever singing and saying; Hallelu-iah, Salvation, and glory, and honor, and
power be to the Lord our God. And thus by the four Triplicities of precious
stones, in the wall of the City of new Jerusalem, whose name Christ here
promises to write upon them that overcome; are signified the four heavenly
indowments of the Elect: namely, the Glorification of the body, the
Sanctification of the Soul, the Consummation of Charity, and the perfection
of Justice: all which proceed from Romans 9.16.
the free grace of God; no desert or merit in our selves. And thus much may be
proved, by the Coming down of this holy City out of heaven from God.

And I will write upon him my new Name.] In the Epistle of Christ, to the Angel
of the Church of Pergamus, He promises to give them that overcome a Apoc. 2.17.
white stone, and in that stone a new name written: and here he says, that he
will write upon him that overcomes his own new name. In the first place he
alludeth unto the custom of electing Magistrates, by white and black stones,
shaddowing in that figurative speech, the mystery of our Election, and the
Romans 8.18. Bern. ser. 2. in die Penticost.
Seal of Gods Spirit, whereby we both know and are assured of our Salvation.
In the second place, he has reference to an use which was amongst the
Gentiles, of erecting Statues, Pillars, and Arches, in honor of their Men of
valor and Conquerours; upon which were engraven their worthy Exploits. Hereby
declaring the great glory that shall be bestowed upon such as persevere in
righteousness, defend the truth, and subdue fear. Phil. 2.8.9.
Our Savior, (says Saint Paul) because he humbled himself and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross; is highly exalted by
GOD, and has a name given him above every name. Hereby is signified, that God
the Father has given unto him Dan. 7.14.
Dominion and Honor, and a Kingdom, that all people, Nations, and Languages
should serve him.

This Honorable and Glorious name will Christ write upon his servants, setting
them at his right hand in the heavenly places, far above all Principality,
and Power and might, and Domination, and every name that is named in this
World: Shall then such as be constant and courageous be made Pillars in Gods
house, having written upon them the Name of God, the Name of new Jerusalem and
Christ's new Name, titles aeternall and truly noble? O then who would not (by
their godly life) show themselves to be ambitious of this glory? What a huge
tower did Nimrod build to get him a name? Themistocles used to walk up and
down solitarily in the night, and one asking him the cause, he answered; The
Trophies and fame of Milciades awake me.

Let then the glorious memory of David, Io^sh, Ezechiah, and Josiah, stir up
all earthly Archangels to walk before God with vp-right hearts. Let the fame
of Augustine, Ambrose, Basile, Athanasius, and the rest of the ancient learned
Bishops, move all our Cherubims and Seraphims terrestrial, to be industrious
and painful in Gods harvest. And lastly, let the Example of S. Paul, who was
never idle in his Ministry: being as Ierom styles him; Hier ad Pammach.
Vas electionis, tuba Euangelij, rugitus Leonis nostri* and flumen eloquentia
Christianae: A chosen vessel, the trumpet of the Gospel, the roaring of our
Lion, and stream of Christian eloquence, be a motive to persuade all
Ministering Angels, in season and out of season, to preach the gladsome tidings
of aeternall life; that all of them at the last may be made Pillars in the
House of God the Father. To whom with the Son and the holy Spirit, be
ascribed all honor and glory both now and euer-more. Amen.

The third Sermon. THE BANISHMENT OF DOGS.
Apoc. cap. 22. Verse. 15. For without shall be Dogs.


THE four Ages of the World, and the four Monarchies of the Earth, are
resembled by Dan. 2.32.33.
four Metals; Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron: the first Age and Monarchy
were both Golden; the Second worse then the first, like Silver; the third
Brazen; and the fourth Iron. Eccles. 3.1.
Thus to all things, there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose
under Heaven; a time of Doue-like innocence, and a time of Serpent-like
subtlety; a time of secret cruelty, and a time of open Tyranny. Now as it
has been heretofore in the Ages, and Monarchies of the world, so likewise
have we seen a change and alteration in the state of Christianity, of it
there have been four several Ages: the first was the Lambe-age, in this
lived Ioh. 1.36.
Christ the Lamb of God, and the blessed Apoc. 14.4.
Virgins that followed him whither soever he went, the holy Apostles and
Disciples which were not defiled with women, but kept themselves chaste and
clean, both from carnal contagion, and spiritual whoredom.

The Second was the 2. These. 2.7.
Foxe-age: when the mystery of iniquity began to work by the means and
agencie of Haeriticks, who like little Cant. 2.15.
Foxes sought to destroy the Vine, which our Savior had planted with his own
right hand: Namely, Simon Magus, Cerinthus, Menander, the Nicolaitan^, and many
other of the same Leaven: who though they did disagree in opinion amongst
themselves, having like Samsons Judge. 15.4.
Foxes, their heads separated and disioyned, yet were they tied together by the
Tails: for every ones aim and invention was with the firebrand of Error, to
make havoc of Christ's harvest.

The Third, was the Wolfe-age; our Savior, did foresee this time, and
therefore he says to his Disciples, and in them to all true Believers. Mat.
10.16.
Behold, I send you forth like Sheep among Wolves; these Wolves were cruel
Tyrants, such as Nero, Caligula, Domitian and the rest of the Ethnic
Emperors: all which were Zeph. 3.3.
like Wolves in the Evening, that leave not the bones till the Morrow; being
extreme ravenous and greedy of Christian blood.

The Fourth is the Dog-age, and that is this wherein we live, and therefore my
Text is suitable to the Time. The Astronomers call only those forty days the
Dog-dayes, wherein that Constellation, called the Dog, meeting with the Sun
in our Meridian doubleth his heat; by whose influence, burning agues,
frenzies, and such like hot diseases are bred in man's body: but I am of a
contrary opinion, even every day is now a Dogge-day: for that spiritual Dog
the Devil, is continually in our Zenith, (being Ephesians. 2.2.
Prince of this world, that rules in the air and in the children of
disobedience) and by his powerful temptations makes us even run mad with
desire of Sinning; so that I may confidently say, that that curse is light upon
us, which Moses proclaimed against the obstinate Israelites, saying; Deu. 28.28.
The Lord shall smite thee with madness and with blindness, and with
astonying of heart. I might I confess have done better to have chosen a Text
more plausible, and of a sweeter relish in the ear; but in this service every
man must do as the Israelites did in their Contributions to the building of
the Tabernacle, Exodus 35.23.
They that were rich brought Gold, Pearls, and precious stones, but the poorer
sort a Ramskin or a little Goats hair; so I, (for amongst these in respect of
knowledge I will rank my self) for want of a better present will uncase a
Dog, and offer up his skin, take it in good part it is the widows mite; let
the greatness of my good will counteruaile the weakness of my performance;
yet will I not leave my Text without an Apology, whereunto shall I compare it?
It is like the Image of Selinus, which outwardly was only rough hewn, being
neither curiously carved, nor gorgeously ouer-guilt, but there was a window in
the breast thereof, which being opened, his golden heart might be discovered,
and his rich intrailes: so here: though the words be harsh and unsavory, yet
if you look into them with a spiritual eye you shall find Satan's subtilties
disclosed, Sin vnmask't, and Hell discribed.

For without shall be Dogs. These words are like the Angels great Apo. 20.1.
Chain, wherein both the Devil and his followers are fast bound and fettered,
the L^nkes whereof be three, arising naturally out of the words of the Text.

A Transformation, A Detestation, A Separation.
First, a Transformation: for the wicked are here called by the name of a Beast.

Secondly, a Detestation: for Reprobates are named Dogs.

Thirdly, a Separation: for the righteous shall be within the City of God, but
the Ungodly shall be without.

The Transformation.
We read in the Scriptures of two kinds of Transformations; the first
Corporal, the second Spiritual: The Corporal is when the body is changed
from his shape, putting on a new form: such was that of Lots wife, who
contrary to the commandment of the Angel, Looking back became a pillar of
Salt. Aben Ezra flying from the letter of the Text, denies this
Transformation, thinking that she was only consumed with a fiery shower
compounded of Salt and Sulphur; but not only the words avouch this
Metamorphosis, but also Thrag. in gen 19. Hierosol. in gen 19. Rab. in gen 19.
Kimbi. in gen 19.
Joseph. lib. 1. antiq. Vatablu^.
authority very authenticke affirms the like. Such likewise for the time was
that Transfiguration of Christ, Luke 9.25.
The fashion of whose countenance as be prayed was changed, and his garment was
white and glistered.

The Spiritual Transformation is, when the Will, the Mind, and the
Understanding, are changed and corrupted: The first creature that was thus
Transformed was the Devil, who was once Esai. 14.12.
Lucifer, the son of the Morning: and an Ezech. 28.14.
Anointed Cherub, walking in the midst of the stones of fire: that is, says
Gregory; In aliorum comparatione caeteris clarior fuit: In comparison he was
more excellent then the rest of the heavenly Spirits, till Schism or Faction,
including Pride, Malice, and Lying; cast him and his Adhaerents from heaven to
Hell, and transformed him into a Lion, a Serpent, and a Dragon; for so is he
styled in the Scriptures not that he bears the material form of any of these
three Beasts: for being a Spirit he has neither flesh nor bones, but because
he resembles them in quality and disposition; as the Genesis 3.1.
Serpent he is subtle in his temptations: as the 1. Pet. 5.8.
Lion he goes up and down roaring and compassing the earth, seeking whom he
may devour: and as the Apoc. 12.9. And Caesar in Apoc cap. 12.
Dragon he is quick in sight, and is altogether delighted in Blood and
slaughter: having thus by sin lost his first shape, his whole course was
afterward to procure some Associates in his Metamorphosis, therefore when God
had created Man, according to his own Image in Ephesians 4.24.
righteousness and true holiness, he assailed the first woman He^ah, and by her
as his instrument, the first Man Adam, tempting them both, and they both
consented to eat of the forbidden fruit, misled and blinded by this
bewitching bait of Ambition: Genesis 3.5.
Eritis sicut Dij, You shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. Through this
their disloialtie, and disobedience, that glorious Image wherewith God had
decked man, was canceled and defaced, not only in themselves but in all their
posterity; so says the Apostle: Romans 5.12.
As by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death, so death
entered upon all men, in that all men have sinned; by Original sin then,
which is Corruption engendered in our first Conception, whereby every faculty
both of body and soul is prone and disposed to iniquity, whole Mankind is
transformed and changed from good to evil; we have lost our knowledge, our
righteousness, and our immortality, and draw now nothing from the loins of
our parents, but 1. Cor. 2.14.
Ignorance, Impotencie of mind; Vanity, and an inbred and natural inclination
to conceive and devise such things as are evil: yet here is not the period and
stint of Satan's malice; he knows that Man is deformed by Original sin, but
Actual sin must absolutely transform him, therefore mark his Plot, and
observe his Practice.

As God observed a Method in Man's creation, so the Devil has his passages
and order in his transformation.

God first said, Genesis 1.26.
Let us make Man: the blessed Trinity went to council, and this Consultation
proves Man's excellency above all other creatures whatsoever, for in the rest
God only had his Fiat, Genesis 1.26.
Let there be light, and there was light; but in Man he had his Faciamus, Let
us make man: as if he should have said, Genesis 1.28.
The King of creatures, to rule over the fish of the sea, and over the fowls
of the heaven, and over every beast that moves upon the earth: even so Satan
on the contrary part consults, and takes council with himself and his Angels
of darkness in the unmasking and transforming of man: Let us change man (says
the Devil) and let us utterly deprive him of the remnant of Gods Image: for
hereby shall he be made like unto the beasts that perish. This is our
Adversaries plot, but the execution thereof is hindered, because he is not as
God only is, the Searcher of our reins, and the Knower of our thoughts;
wherefore he plays the Politician to discover our corrupt imagination and
siftes us by the Concupiscence of the Eye, the concupiscence of the heart; and
the pride of Life: 1 Ioh. 2.16.
for these three are the Roots from which all other sins are braunch't and
take their growth.

If therefore the Devil spy either Man or Woman walk like the Esaias. 3.16.
daughters of Zion, with a wandering eye, he presently makes this position;
Out of the abundance of the heart the eye looks and these glaunces are shafts
drawn out of the Quiver of wantonness, wherefore forthwith he accommodates
and applies himself herein to Man's corrupt appetite: Numb. 25.
if he be a Zimri he will provide him a Cosbi; if a Judge. 16.1.9.
Sampson a Dalilah; if a Herod an Herodias, who shall like Genesis 39.7.
Potiphars wife catch him by the garment; saying: Lie with me, sleep with me.

Again, as the Judge. 12.6.
Ephramits were known from the Giliadites by the pronouncing of Shibboleth;
and the Galilaeans from the Jews, by their phrase and Idiome of speech: even
so the devil by the tongue of Man discries the Concupiscence of the heart, and
the Sin to which he is most devoted; wish but for Nabaoths vineyard as 1
Reg. 21.2.
Ahab did; or but say with Math. 26.15.
Judas, What will you give? and he will say presently thou art covetous, thy
very speech bewraies thee: then will he set up his two golden Calves, the
worlds Idol, Gold and Silver, and make proclamation; saying, These are thy
gods in whom thou most trust, and Mammon is thy Mediator.

Lastly, if the devil see an Ear like Hosea. 12.1.
Ephraims, fed with wind, Soothing and flattery, or do but discover the very
feet to tread an elaborate and curious pace, as the women of Jerusalem did
Esaias. 3.16.
who minced as they went and made a tincking with their feet, he forthwith
apprehends an inclination to Pride (for these are but the instruments of a
vainglorious mind:) whereupon be suites such persons with the attendants of
flatterers; so he dealt with Ahab the king of Israel, preferring to his
service 1 Reg. 21.
Zedkiah the false prophet, whose words were ever plausible and pleasant; and
so he did with Herod, to whom he put a troop of Parasites to puff him up
with their acclamations, saying; Act. 12.22.
the Voice of God and not of man; Flattery is Satan's trappe for Potentates,
the Page of great personages, and a disease that haunts Princes, it procures
grace and countenance, but Truth is ever disgraced and frowned upon. Flattery
is always well-liking like the fat Bulls of Basan, but Truth may be
resembled by one of Pharaohs lean Kine, for it straues and pines away, and yet
the one is strong and reigns for evermore, the other is as Diogenianus says;
(...), of sweet but deadly wine: and a poison drunk in a Cup of Gold.

Having thus sifted our nature, he turns Practicioner, saying as God said;
Let us make man according to our own Image. Now when God made Man, he made
him of the Dust of the ground, and breathed in his face the breath of life, and
created him in his owns Image: so the devil when he transformes Man, uses our
Adamah or Dust; that is, our old Man, or Natural corruption, making it the
matteriall or ground of our Transformation. Secondly, he breaths into Man not
the breath of Life, but the breath of death, For the wages of sin is death:
his breathing is his tempting, for thereby he enters into a Man, as he entered
into Judas, and before he can finish his malicious disseigne, he breaths
four times.

By the first breath, he with-drawes the mind from Gods service, to which it
should be ever zelously devoted for so says our Savior; Luke 10.27.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and
with all thy thought.

By the second, he draws the evil thought of the heart to a Consent in sinning,
by sweet baits and allurements, whereby the Will and the Affections are
delighted, bewitched, and captiuated.

By the third Breathing, Sin is Conceived: so says the Psalmist, Psalm. 7.14.
He shall travail with wickedness, he has conceived mischief, and he shall
bring forth a lie.

And by the Fourth, Sin is borne; the birth of sin is, when by assistance
both of the faculties of the Soul, and the powers of the body sin is
committed: thus as by the breath of God, Man was made a living soul; so on the
contrary part by the Breath of Satan, he becomes liable to everlasting
perdition being separated from the presence of God, and the glory of his
power. Furthermore, as God did adorn man in his Creation, with his own image,
to wit, Divine wisdom, and perfect holiness: so the devil in Man's
transformation, frames him according to his own shape, which is directly
contrary to that of God, for it consists in folly and vanity; hence it is,
that all sinners are fools: Psalm. 14.1.
for they say in their heart there is no God, and in the whole course of their
life, they are altogeher lighter then vanity it self.

Lastly, though Man being Created was made a living Soul, and decked with Gods
own Image, yet was it not complete and perfect till the woman also was
created: So though by actual sin Satan has transformed us, and cast us in
his own mould, yet he is not satisfied, until he has provided a Heuah to
help us forward to destruction. When God made the first Woman, he took but
one Genesis 2.21.
Ribbe out of Adams side, but the devil takes six, and of them makes so many
Women, all Sorceresses, set on by their Founder to bewitch man, and turn away
his heart from God: these are Ephesians. 4.17.18.19.
Vanity of mind; Darkness of Cogitation: Ignorance of God; Hardness of heart;
Wantonness in uncleanness; and Greediness in sinning. Of these Six we may
say as Adam said of Heuah: They are bone of our bones, and flesh of our flesh,
for their Original is from our natural corruption: every one of these is like
the Apoc. 17.4.
Purple Whore, for with the cup of Sorcerie they take away the heart of Man,
and bereave it of understanding.

The first two, namely, Vanity of mind, and Darkness of Cogitation, lead a
sinner, Prou. 7.22.
tanquam bouem ad lanienam, like an Ox to the slaughter: this is a strange
Metamorphosis; that a Man should be turned into an Ox, yet so it is; for as
the Ox thinks he goes to the Pasture, when he is led to the slaughter: so a
sinner misled by the vanity of his mind, and having his Cogitation darkened,
thinks Satan to be an Angel of light, Sin most sweet and pleasant, and
himself in the practice of it to be even in Paradise, when as poor Soul he
is in the chambers of death.

The second two, to wit, Ignorance of God, and Hardness of heart, work more
powerfully, for when they have insinuated themselves and are grown familiar
with a Man, they change him into the shape of a Horse, which as the Psalmist
says, must be holden in with bit and bridle: See here the effect of Custom in
sinning (...), Custom is the food of Sin, says Chrysostom, and as S.
Bernard says; Ex ea fit quaedam peccandi necessitas, it produces a necessity
in sinning; for it cauterizeth and seares the Conscience, and takes away all
sense and feeling.

The two last are Sisters indeed in evil, out-stripping the former in hellish
charms and damnable witchcraft; Namely Wantonness in Uncleanness, and
Greediness in Sinning; for when these have taken possession of a man's heart,
then is his Transformation made absolute, even according to the devils own
desire, for thereupon he is turned into a Dog, being given over to a
reprobate sense, and therefore committing sin without all remorse.

The Dog is the Emblem of two things, Pyer. in Hyer.
Greedines, and Impudency, as appears in the Egyptian Hyeroglypheckes, and
therefore the Spirit of God calling all Reprobates by the name of Dogs,
intimates unto us, these two infallible marks of Reprobation, Impudency, and
Greediness in sinning.

Of all creatures two are most impudent, the Dog and the Fly, and thereupon
says Pollux, the Grecians used the word (...), to signify Impudency: also
amongst the Romans Cotytto the goddess of Impudency was painted with a
dogges-head and a woman's body, whose Priests, called Baptae, in their
sacrifices used most impudent gestures: like Goddess, like Priests, and like
unto them be all reprobates, Dogs in disposition, having the brazen forehead
of a harlot, which never blusheth at the foulest sin. 2 Samuel 16.22.
Absolon was such a dog, who went into his fathers Concubines in the sight of
all Israel. Pro. 7.18.
The harlot in the Proverbs was such a dog, who caught a young man in the
open streets and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, Come let
us take our fill of love, until the Morning, let us take our pleasure in
dalliance, for mine husband is not at home, etc. Of such like dogs as these
there is plenty, who are so far from confessing their sins with David, and
weeping for them bitterly with Peter, that they will grin and bark against him
that does but unwittingly touch their ulcer. Their sin is like the disease
called Noli me tangere, Touch me not; if it be handled though never so gently,
they presently either dart against the Minister, the Iauelin of their malice,
even bitter words; or else cry out in defense of their sins, as the Act.
19.28.
Ephesians did for their Diana: in this case experience guides my tongue; for I
have Preached to such dogs, as like the Priests of 1 Samuel 5.5.
Dagon, have forborne and forsworn the treshold of Gods Temple, because in
that place the idol of their heart has fallen before the Ark of God. Is not
this impudency in sinning? is not this the brand of Reprobation? are not these
dogs?

Secondly, the dog is the emblem of Greediness, and therefore the holy
Ghost calls all castawaies dogs, because they be usually greedy of sinning.
There is a disease (says Galen) in the orifice of the stomach, called Bulimia
or Bulimus, which procures in him that is diseased, an insatiable hunger, that
never has enough, and a greedy appetite, or desire of eating: such a greedy
worm as this have all Reprobates in their souls, which makes their appetite
quite contrary to that of the elect; for these hunger and thirst after
righteousness, but the wicked thirst and hunger after sin. Thus does Vanity
of mind, and darkness of Cogitation, lead the sinner like an Ox to the
slaughter: Ignorance of God, and Hardness of heart, make him obstinate; like
unto a horse that must be holden in with bit and bridle; and Wantonness, or
Impudency in Uncleanness, and Greedines in sinning, transform him into a
dog; and therefore Saint Paul writing to the Ephesians, gives an excellent
caveat against these six Sorceresses, saying: This I say therefore and
testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in
vanity of their mind,

Having their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their heart.

Which being past feeling, have given themselves unto wantonness, to work all
uncleanness, even with greediness.



For without shall be Dogs.
The second general part, is a Detestation: for the wicked are here called
dogs; which imports Hatred and Baseness, as may appear by the use of this
Title both in profane and divine writers. Odit cane peius, (says the Poet) she
hates him worse then a dog. Non eum salutat magis quam canem, (says the
servant in the Comedy) she gives him the entertainment of a dog. So likewise
in the Scriptures, Goliath when he saw young David come against him, armed
only with his staff, his sling, and five smooth stones in his bag or scrip,
he said unto him; Am I a dog, that thou come unto me with stones? When
Isbosheth reproved Abner for going to Rispah, the Concubine of Saul, he was
wroth, and said, 2 Samuel 3.8.
Am I a dogges-head? The paraphrase then both of Goliahs and Abners words, is
this: Am I so vile, so base, and so contemptible? So in these words Almighty
God, to show and manifest his detestation and hatred of sin, calls all
Reprobates dogs, saying; For without shall be dogs.

In the Scriptures we read, that when God is provoked to anger, he declares by
four several ways, how much he abhors and detests sin; namely, by strange
signs, Allegories, Ironies, and Characters.

First, by strange signs; to omit many other, there is one most remarkable in
the Prophecy of Hoseah; where we find that God being greatly offended at the
Israelites for their Idolatry, deciphers the foulness of their Sin by an
uncouth sign: Go (says he to the Prophet,) Hos. 1.2.
Take unto thee a wife of Fornications, and children of Fornications. So Hoseah
went and took Gomer the Daughter of Diblaim, and of her begot two Sons and a
Daughter, which were thus named by God himself, Izreel, Lo-ruhamah and Lo-ammi:
S. Hierome, the Chaldie Paraphrase, Rabbi Kimhi, and Aben Ezrah, say that this
was only a Vision, but the more ancient Hebrew Doctors affirm that it was a
thing done indeed by the appointment of God, and therefore no sin in Hoseah:
here then God by a very strange sign preaches against the Idolatry of
Israel, and proclaims vengeance against them for their sins, as may be
showed out of the names of Hoseahs wife and his Children of Fornication.

First, in that Hoseah marryes the Harlot Gomer, which is by interpretation
Corruption, the daughter of Diblaim, which signifies a cluster of Figs,
hereby is taxt the spiritual Whoredom of Israel, which being corrupted by the
Gentiles with a full consent had played the Harlot, for so says God himself,
Hosea. 1.2.
The Land has committed great whoredom departing from the Lord.

Again, the name of Hoseahs first child is Izreel, which is dispersed; the
second is Lo-ruhamah, which is, not obtaining mercy; and the third Lo-ammi,
that is, not my people. There three names are Signs of Gods wrath, and Sermons
of vengeance. The Israelites once Gods inheritance must be carried away
captives, and be dispersed over the face of the earth, because they were become
like a Cluster of rotten Figs, corrupted with spiritual Fornication: and
being dispersed, though they cry unto God for his aid, yet will he show them
no mercy, nor ever acknowledge them to be his people: thus by a most strange
Sign of Hoseahs marrying of a Harlot, and begetting children of Fornication,
God declares how much he detesteth Sin.

Secondly, by Allegories: an example hereof we have in the Prophecy of
Ezekiel, where the Lord thus says: Ezech. 23.2.3.4.
Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one Mother, and they
committed Fornication in Aegipt, they committed fornication in their youth,
there were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teates of their
Virginity, and the names of them were Aholah the Elder, and Aholibah her
Sister, and they were mine, and they bare Sons and Daughters; thus were their
names: Samaria is Aholah, and Jerusalem Aholibah, etc. In these words
Allegorically God inueyeth most bitterly against the Idolatry of Samaria and
Jerusalem, in that as a token of Detestation, he compares them to two Harlots
being he most odious and loathsome of all creatures.

Thirdly, by Ironies, or Jesting and Taunting: a Jest is Gods Hierapicra, his
bitter confection, his rod of Iron, his Sheepe-hooke called Bonds, his
two-edged Sword, be most peircing reproof, and the best remedy to cure a
desperate sore. Some Devils says Psellus, are driven away by Jesting, and
Saules evil Spirit lest him at the sweet sound of David's Harp, and a Taunt is
very forcible to make a man ashamed of his Sin. When Adam and Heuah were
fallen in Paradise, God said, Genesis 3.22.
Behold the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: here God
derideth Adams folly, because he was seduced by the woman. So likewise the
Prophet Eliah mocketh the Priests of Baall; saying: 1 Reg. 18.27
Cry loud, for he is a God, either he talks, or pursues his enemies, or is
in his journey, or it may be that he sleeps, and must be awaked: thus God to
show his hatred of Sin laugheth (as the Wiseman says) at the destruction of
the wicked, and mocketh when their fear comes.

Fourthly, by Figures and Characters: Sin is most lively expressed by a foul
Picture, and therefore God to set forth his own hatred, and to breed in us a
loathing of it, uses sometimes Characters, whereof there be diverse patterns
and instances: as for example; Prou. 30.14.
That generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaws as knives to eat
up the afflicted out of the earth, and the poor from among men: I mean
tyrannical oppressors, Procustes his progeny, Land-rackers, which measure
their Tenants upon a Bed of Iron: cutting them shorter if they be too long, or
have too much; and tentaring or stretching them out longer if they be too
short; these Caterpillars I say, are by the Prophet Amos called Kine: Amos. 4.1.
Hear this word (says he) ye Kine of Bashan, that are in the mountain of
Samaria, which oppress the poor and destroy the needy, and they say to their
masters, bring and let us drink.

Furthermore unjust Judges, such as Justify the wicked for reward, and
condemn the innocent; such as crucify Christ in his members, and let the
murderer and the robber Barabas loose, there are by the Prophet Zephaniah
called Zeph. 3.3.
Wolves, in regard of their cruel craftiness and crafty cruelty.

Again, the greedy Miser and the luxurious Epicure are named Prou. 30.15.
Horse-leaches daughters, whose insatietie causes their tongues to cry out
continually give, give, because like hell mouth, and the barren womb, they two
will never say, it is enough. I might insist in diverse other particular
Characters of this nature, but let this suffice, that the Spirit of God in
these words calls the whole frye of the wicked, dogs, to show how much they
are abhorred, and how hateful they be in the sight of God.

Though the Reprobates be generally termed Dogs, yet the Devil has a
selected number upon earth, which may well be called Satan's Kennell, and it
consists of five forts of men, who as an argument of their detestable life
are in the Scripture styled Dogs.

The first is the Infidel or the Gentile: he is by our Savior in his speech
to the woman of Syrophaenissa called a Whelp, or a Dog, Mark. 7.27.
It is not good (says he) to take the childrens bread and give it unto
Whelps: see here what base account Christ makes of Infidels and unbelievers:
he calls them Dogs, and well does this name befit them; for like beasts
they are without reason, else would they never forsake the Creator to worship
the Creature. Athan. in erat. de Idolis. Lactant. lib. 2.. diu^inflic.
Ignorance of the true God, and Blindness of heart were in the Gentiles, the
Nources of Infidelity, and the Broachers of Idolatry, says Athanasius and
Lactantius: had there been in them but any spark of reason, they would never
have committed so gross and palpable a sin, but they were without
Understanding, mere Dogs; and therefore being stricken with a spiritual
madness, they run headlong like the Swine of the Gergezens, into the maine
Ocean of all uncleanness, and filthiness of Fornication: some going a whoring
after Ezech. 8.5.
Baal, and Chemos, as the Moabites: some after 1 Reg. 11.7.
Milcom and Moloch, as the Ammonites: others after 1 Reg. 11.5.
Asteroth, Dagon, Meleketh or the Queen of heaven, Tamuz, Leu. 18.21.
Baal-zebub, and many others: nay further, what more pregnant demonstration can
be made of the brutish dotage of Infidels, then to take a suruay of the East
and West Indians, Munst. Cosm.
who at this day worship the Devil himself, represented by an Idol of a
horrible and ougly shape.

The second Dog, is the Contemner of the Gospel; Matthew. 7.6.
Give ye not (says Christ) that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast you
your pearls before swine, lest they tread them under their feet, and turning
again all to rent you. Here our Savior prohibiteth the preaching of the
Gospel, to such as wilfully resist the Truth, and bark at the Ministers of the
word: Such Dogs are Papists, who are not ashamed some of them blasphemously
to call the holy word of God, a Nose of wax, Sil. Prier. in epit. resp. ad
Luth. Tom. 1. cap. 7. Council. Trid. ses. 4. page 11. and 12.
a dead Letter, an Incken Gospel, and a fable. Were they not Contemners of the
Gospel of Christ, they would never vilify it so much, as to make it subject to
the Popes censure; who may, as they teach, choppe and change the Scriptures at
his pleasure, equalizing to them his own traditions and constitutions.

These dogs, especially the Jesuitical Bloodhounds, are as dangerous in the
Church, and the commonwealth; as Judge. 15.5.
Sampsons Foxes in the Corn fields of the Philistims; their barking bewraies
that they are like Act. 8.23.
Simon Magus, in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. But let
us hear their mouths; Lib. Jesuit. cui tit. Concertatio Eccl. catholica.
Joan. Mariana Jesus. Toleta. de rege. lib. 1. c. 7. page 65. 67.
The Pope, say they, is Lord of the whole earth, and therefore it is in his
power alone to advance or depose whom he will, be it Emperor, King, or other
Potentate: It is lawful (say they) to murder a Prince that is a Lutheran or a
Caluinist, either by sword or poison. Do not these Dogs make man admirable
cry? but they would be trust up, because they haunt counter, contrary to the
express commandment of God; who says, Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God: and in another place, Touch not mine Anointed; and yet there be some of
these Romish Dogs, that can temporize, and cry Hail Caesar: but it is as
Gregory Nazianzen says, As if a man with one hand should scratch a Kings
head, and with the other strike him upon the cheek. There is no trust to be
given unto them, because there never can be any perfect and true loyalty,
where there is a difference in Religion: Vnus Rex, vna lex; vna fides; One
King, one law, and me faith, is a Eccles. 4.12.
threefold cord, which will not easily be broken: they then that profess
another faith then we do, depending upon that man of sin, who challenges
power to absolve subjects from their allegiance to their Princes, though they
live amongst us, yet are they not of us; they be but (as Act. 26.28.
Paul was answered by King Agrippa) almost Christians: almost subjects: or like
unto the Cofti in Aethiopia, which are both Baptized and Circumcised, being
semi-Iewes, semi-Christians; so are they semi-English, and semi-Italians: from
the Nauill downward they are their Kings, but all upward is the Popes: to him
being their holy Father, They give their hearts: well, Clemency is a Royal
Virtue; but mark Plutarckes speech, It is not a fine shoe that will cure the
gout, nor a gold ring the crampe, nor a crown the headache; nor is the biting
of a mad dog staid by gentle usage: to cure the stinging of the fiery
Serpents, Moses by the appointment of God made a Serpent of brass, and set it
up for a Sign; Number. 21.9.
and when a Serpent had bitten a Man, then he looked to the Serpent of brass
and lived: but to heal the wounds which the venomous Teeth of these mad dogs
do make, no other remedy can be found, but to hang up the Dogs themselves.

The third Dog, is the Scismaticke; of him the Apostle gives us a Caveat,
saying, Phil. 3.2.
Beware of dogs: beware of evil workers: beware of Concision. This Dog,
though he be not altogether so dangerous as the Blood-hound of Babylon, yet is
he wondrous troublesome. To him I may apply that speech of Seneca the
Philosopher; Sen. de rem. fertu.
Quibusdam canibus hoc innatum est, vt non proferitate, sed pro consuetudine
latrent; Some dogs have it by nature, to bark more for custom then
cruelty: and so does the Schismaticke or Brownist, whose mouth filles the air
only, little or nothing troubling the ears of wise men. And yet it is well
that such Barkers as these, that open their mouths against thee grave Fathers
of the Church, despising authority, and condemning the present discipline,
should be musled; else would there be no peace in Zion, and the Church would be
even rent asunder by that many-headed Hydra, turbulent faction. 1. Reg. 6.7.
When the Temple was built, there was neither heard Axe nor Hammer, nor any
tool of iron in the house; so should Gods Church be free from tumultuous
Schism. When Christ came into the world, the Quire of Angels sung, Luke 2.14.
Pax hominibus, Peace to men: and when after his resurrection he appeared to
his Disciples, he said, Ioh. 20.19.
Pax vobis, Peace be unto you; as then he is a Solomon, so would he have his
subjects Shulamites; and as he is the King of Peace, so would he have us keep
the Kings Peace in the Church. Cant. 3.9.10.
King Solomon made himself a Palace of the Trees of Libanon, he made the
pillars thereof of silver, and the pauement of gold, the hangings thereof of
purple, whose midst was paued with the love of the daughters of Jerusalem: Like
unto this Palace should the Church be; the silver pillars signify
Ecclesiastical discipline; the golden pauement, pure doctrine; the purple
hangings, regal protection; and the love of the daughters of Jerusalem, peace
and unity amongst professors. Now how can this peace be preserved, if Schism
be not banished, and all gaine-saying Corahs put to silence. Of the
Schismatic Dogs, I will say nothing, but as the ancient Fathers in like
case spoke, and decreed in two several Councels, Conc. Gang. Cap. 6.
Si quis extra Ecclesiam priuatim populos congregat, anathema sit; If any out
of the Church do privately gather the people together, (as our Corner-preachers
do in their Conuenticles) let him be accursed. Conc. Laodicen. can. 35.
Nam non oportet Christianos Ecclesiam Dei relinquere and in angulis
Congregationes facere, For it is not meet that Christians should leave the
Church of God, and make their Congregations in corners. And yet there be even
in the most reformed Churches some dogs transported with Singularity, that
make Concision, and cut and divide themselves, both in hearing of the word, and
receiving of the Sacraments, from the rest of Christ's family; as though the
Church were Baals Temple, the Book of Common prayer a portesse, the manner of
ministering the Sacraments superstitious, and the Ecclesiastical government
Antichristian. Solin. cap. 40.
The Priests of Pergamus (says Solinus) to keep Spiders out of the Temple of
Apollo, hanged up in the same place the carcass of a Basiliske in a net of
gold: Severity is of the same virtue that a Basiliske is, being used by such
as are in Authority, it clears Gods Church of all Schismatic dogs, whose
chief delight is to trouble the peace of Zion.

The fourth Dog, is the Apostata, or Back-slider: of whom Saint Peter
speaks; 2. Pet. 2.22.
The dog is returned to his own vomit, and the Sow that was washed, so the
wallowing in the mire. But here we must note, that all Apostates be not
dogs, or Reprobates, but only such men as wilfully and willingly reject
Faith, and do altogether alienate themselves from Christ, and set themselves
against him: This is the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which God so punishes,
as it shall not be forgiven neither in this world, nor yet in the world to
come. So says the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 6.4.5, 6.
It is impossible that they which were once lightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of
the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come, if they fall away
should be renewed again by repentance, seeing they crucify again to
themselves the Son of God, and make a mock of him.

Such a dog was Julian, surnamed the Apostata, who being converted from
Gentilisme to Christianity, did afterward return to his Vomit, oppugning with
his Pen that Truth which he had professed, and calling Christ in scorn the
Galilaean. Peter denied Christ with his mouth, and many other in the time of
Persecution have fallen as Marcellinus, who fearing death offered sacrifice to
Idols; were these therefore dogs? No: for inwardly in their mind they
renounced not Faith: if they had utterly forsaken the Faith; they had never
repented; for Repentance is one of the fruits of Faith.

The fifth Dog is he whom the Prophet Isaiah calls the blind, dumb and
greedy Dog: saying; Isa. 56.10.11
Their watchmen are all blind, they have no knowledge: They are all dumb
Dogs: they cannot bark, they lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping, and
these greedy dogs can never have enough, and these Shepherds cannot
understand; for they all look to their own way, every one for his advantage,
and for his own purpose. These dogs even with their breath blast Gods
Harvest, and pollute the Sanctuary: they be enemies of Christ's kingdom, and
betrayers of men's souls. b It is written of Josiah, 2. Reg. 12.31
that he did not only destroy the Idols, and put down their Chemarims, but
also having found out the Book of the Law, he caused it to be read unto the
people by the Priests: out of whose example, all Princes are taught to take
into their hands the Scourge of Christ, and to whip buyers and sellers out of
the Temple: I mean such as having no worth to commend them, prefer
themselves by Simonicall compacting, and sufferance of their beards and coats,
like the 2. Sam. 10.4.
Messengers of David to be half shaven, and cut short, by these greedy
Ammonites, sacrilegious Patrons, who ever desire to retain and present to
Ecclesiastical Benefices the cheapest Minister, one of Judge. 17.10.
Micahs Levites, that will be content to serve the Cure for ten shekels of
silver by year, a suite of apparel, and his meat and his drinck: hence it
is, that so many dumb dogs are in the Church, men that were never brought up
at the feet of any learned Gamaliel, (...), as Pindarus calls such like,
Hogheards not Shepherds, Asini coronati, as one of the Emperors styles them
in his Letters to the King of France, Crowned Asses, unlearned and blind
Guides, whose Ignorance is the cause that Bethel is turned to be a Bethanen,
and the House of God, the house of iniquity: thus does Almighty God in sign
of detestation and hatred, call Infidels, Gospel-contemners, Schismatickes,
Apostates, and unworthy Ministers; Dogs.

For without shall be Dogs.
The third general part is a Separation: the visible Church here upon earth is
like unto Genesis 25.23.
Rebeccaes womb, in which at one time were enclosed both Jacob, whom God
loved, and Esau, whom he hated: it is like unto a Mat. 13.27.
Field, wherein grow both Wheat and Tares: it is like unto the Act. 10.12.
Sheet knit at the four corners, wherein were all manner of foure-footed
beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the
heaven: for in this life, the Elect and the Reprobates, are mixed together as
the Jews and Iebusites in old Jerusalem: but it shall not be so at the last
day, for when our Savior comes to Judgment, he shall like a Shepherd,
separate the Sheep from the Goats: his Reapers shall gather the Tares, and
bind them in sheaues to burn them, but gather the Wheat into his barn: and
the true Israelites that have done his Commandments shall have right in the
tree of life, and enter in through the gates into the City: but without shall
be Dogs, and Enchanters, and Whore-mongers, and murderers, and Idolaters,
and whosoever loves or makes lies. This Separation shall be as the Springes
of Lebanon to the righteous, but as the Waters of Marah to the ungodly; as
sweet as honey and the hony-combe to the true believer, but as bitter as Gall
and wormwood to the Infidel.

In this world the commixion of the Good and the Evil, is evil for the Good,
but good for the Evil: First, it is evil for the Good to live amongst, and
converse with the wicked: for which cause David complains, saying, Woe is me,
that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have my habitation amongst
the Tents of Kedar: but on the contrary part it is good for the Evil, because
the Evil by the Good are shielded from many plagues: if Genesis 18.32.
ten righteous men had been found in Sodom, God would not have destroyed it
for the tennes sake, and one Genesis 39.5.
Joseph was the cause that the blessing of the Lord was upon the whole house of
Potiphar.

This life is a time of weeping and mourning to Gods Children, but a time of
laughing and dancing to the Sons of Beliall; the Righteous mourn to see the
Ungodly dance, and the Reprobate laugh to see the Elect weep: Eccles. 3.1.
But as all things have their appointed time, and are subject to change and
alteration, even so the estate of Men: for when that General Separation shall
be made, then they that have sown it tears shall reap in joy; and to such
whose Seed-time has been Mirth, a harvest shall befall of weeping and
gnashing of teeth. As one heaven cannot hold Apo. 12.7.8.
Michael and the Dragon; nor one Temple 1. Sam. 5.
God's Ark and D^^gon; nor one ground bear both the Oak and the Olive: no more
shall the glorious City New Jerusalem contain both the Sheep and the
Goats, the pure in heart, and the polluted in soul; no, no, Within only the
Lamb shall be and the blessed Virgins his followers: but without shall be
dogs. These two words Within and Without, are like Hercules Pillars, upon
which was written Nil vltra, Nothing further: for in them we see the end of all
flesh: Within, shows the Map of heaven; Without declares the Topographie of
hell: Within, promises life everlasting; Without threatens death aeternall.
Exodus 28.30.
The two words Vrim and Thummim being by Gods appointment written upon the
breast of the High Priest were to put him in mind of Zeal and Knowledge, two
essential and necessary virtues in the Ministers of God; so these two Within
and Without being Characters of Separation, do intimate unto us the glorious
Estate of the Righteous and the miscrable Condition of the Wicked in the world
to come.

First, Within like a Remembrancer puts us in mind of that felicity which the
Apostle calls a Mystery, because 1. Cor. 2.7.6
The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither came
into man's heart, are, which God has prepared for them that love him: oh then
thrice happy are the Elect, which shall be free Denizons in Paradise and
coheyres with Christ in his Kingdom, enjoying John. 16.22.
a joy which none shall take from them; even the Mat. 25.21.
joy of their Lord, being with him to behold his glory: whose presence shall
be to them says Austin, tanquam Cythara, Speculum, Balsamum, Mel and Flos:
like a Harp for their hearing, like a Glass for their seeing, like Balm for
their smelling, like Honey for their tasting, and like a Flower for their
touching: the Meditation hereof works in the Regenerate strange effects.
First, as the sweet sound of 1. Sam. 16.13
David's Harp did drive away the Evil Spirit from King Saul, and as the Exodus
15.25.
Wood which Moses cast into Marah, changed the bitterness of the Water into
sweetness: so though the righteous be environed and encompast with a thousand
bitter afflictions in this life, and be even heavy laden with crosses, laid on
them by Satan and the world; yet when they cast up their eyes to heaven, the
bright and glorious country of the soul, as Zoroastres calls it, then is their
Wormwood turned into honey, and their grief of mind into gladness of heart,
because they know that a time shall come, when the Saints that are now eclipsed
by the shadow of adversity Dan, 12.3.
shall shine like the Sun and the Stars of the Firmament, and they that now
wear Sackcloth, with David; hairecloth with Eliah; and garments of Camels hair
with John Baptist, shall be clothed with long white robes, made white in the
blood of the Lamb. Secondly, as the sight of the blood of grapes, made the
Elephants of King Antiochus fight more furiously: so even the very thought of
heavenly joy stirs up the minds and the hearts of the Righteous, to fight a
good fight, to run a good race, and to offer violence to the Kingdom of
heaven, by taking pains to hear Gods word preached in season, and out of
season, by praying continually, by beating down the flesh and keeping it in
subjection by Fasting and Abstinence, by sweating blood and water, and watring
their Couches with tears; had it not been for the remembrance of Chanaan, a
land flowing with milk and honey; the barrenness of the Wilderness would
have broken the hearts of the people of Israel: our life is a pilgrimage, and
the World is a Wilderness, through it the way to the land of Promise is
strait and hard to find. Is not this enough to daunt and dismay a Passenger?
but hope of being at the last within the gates of the holy City, cheares up
the Christian pilgrim, and arms him with patience against all dangers; and
hope once to be separated from the society of dogs, causes him to think
Christ's yoke sweet, and his cross a tree of Life.

Secondly, this word Without, points us to Hell, the habitation of Devils, the
hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean, and hateful bird;
Esaias 30.33.
which of old is prepared for the wicked, and by Almighty God is made deep and
large, the burning whereof is fire and much wood. As was the banishment of Adam
and Heuah out of Paradise, such shall be the exile of Dogs: God to debar
their re-entrance into the Garden of Eden, set the Genesis 3.24.
Cherubims and the blade of a Sword shaken, to keep the way of the Tree of
Life: our Savior at the last day, shall be the anointed Cherub, to guard the
gates of new Jerusalem; his fiery sword, shall be this Sentence; Matthew. 25.41
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. These words are, Dan. 7.10.
that fiery stream issuing out of the throne of God, by the violent current
whereof, the Wicked like the Swine of the Gergesens, shall be carried headlong
into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

Dan. 5.
Three words, Mean, Tekel, and Vpharsin, written upon the plaster of the wall in
Belshazzers Palace, foretold the ruin of himself, and his whole Monarchy;
but here in this Scripture, one word, (...), Without, supplies the place of
these three: the interpretation of Mean, is, God has numbered thy Kingdom, and
finished it: of Tekel, Thou art waighed in the balance, and art found too
light: and of Vpharsin, Thy Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and
Persians. All these significations, are included in this one word, Without;
First, Without shall be dogs, that is, the Kingdom of the Wicked shall then be
at an end, for the years of their reign is expired when Christ comes to
judgment. Secondly, Without shall be dogs; that is, God will exercise upon
them judgment in measure, and justice in weight. Thirdly, Without shall be
dogs; that is, They shall not only be deprived of all earthly pleasures, but
also be divided and separated from the sight of Gods glorious Majesty, and
from the fellowship of Saints and Angels.

To be without Heaven, is to be within Hell. Hell then is the place appointed
for the imprisonment of Dogs: but is there such a real place? Many heads
have hammered many conceits: Psalm. 14.1.
The fool has said in his heart, there is no God: the Matthew. 22.23
Sadduces held there were no Angels, and denied the Resurrection of the dead,
and the Day of Doom: and there have bin some Opinionists, which have affirmed
Hell to be nothing else, but a bare Separation from Gods presence, and the Sting
or gnawing Worm of a Guilty Conscience. We must confess indeed, that these
are very dreadful torments, wherewith the Wicked, even in this life, are
grievously oppressed: as may appear in Caine and Judas, both which before their
death, were in this Hell; but yet all Hell is not contained herein: for these
two are but branches of the Tree of Death. That there is such a real place,
may be proved both by Scripture, Testimony of the Fathers, and pregnant
reason.

First, for Scripture: the Psalmist thus speaks of ignorant and foolish
worldlings, which think that their houses and habitations shall continue for
ever, and call their Lands by their own names: Psalm. 49.15.
Vt ones lischeol deponuntur, mors illos pascit, etc. Like sheep they lie in
hell, Death deuoureth them. Also it is written of Number. 16.33.
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, that they went down quick, Sche^lah ad infernum,
to Hell. These words prove that Hell is not only a certain place, but also
demonstrate where it is; namely below, in the Bowels of the earth. But to these
places it is answered, that Scheol signities the Grave: I know it does; for the
word bears three significations: sometimes by it is meant the Sepulcher: and
so is it used by the Patriarch Jacob, saying; Genesis 37.35.
Surely I will go down (Scheolah) into the grave unto my son, mourning:
sometimes metaphorically, it is put for the aduersitses and afflictions of this
life: so the Prophetical King David applies it saying; 2. Sam. 22.6.
Cheble scheol sebabuns, The Sorrows or Snares of hell compassed me about, and
ouertooke me. Sometimes it signifies Eternal destruction, and the real and
certain place of the Damned: and so it is to be understood in those Texts of
Scripture above named. For if by Scheol, wherein the ungodly like Sheep shall
be devoured by death the Grave should only be understood; then should there
be no difference betwixt the Righteous and the Wicked; for Death, and the Grave
are common to them both: neither should the Psalmist speak of any
extraordinary punishment, in saying, They shall lie in the grave. But if we
observe the Text seriously, we shall find that David does most directly point to
Hell; as may appear out of the words following: Psalm. 49.13.
But God shall deliver my soul from the power of Scheol, or hell, for he will
receive me. The same signification that Scheol has in these words, it has in
the words going before; but here of necessity is meant the Place appointed for
Cast-awaies, wherein both body and soul shall be tormented. Therefore in the
former speech (Vt oues lischeol deponuntur mors illos depascis) (Like sheep
they lie in hell, death deuoureth them.) The spirit of God does plainly
describe hell to be a real place, and the Receptacle of Reprobates. Also
whereas it is said, that they which perished in the gaine-saying of Corah, went
down quick into hell: Here-out we may gather, not only that there is such a
certain place; but also that it is below, even in the nethermost parts of the
earth. This is confirmed by the authority of Epiphanius, Hierom, and others;
all which, Epiphan. in Anchorato: Hiero. in 4. cap. ep. ad Ephesians. Pagninus in
genesis 37.
in that Text of Scripture, by Scheol, understand Hell. I might allege diverse
other testimonies out of the Scriptures; as that in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 32.22.
Fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn unto the bottom of hell. Also
the Wiseman says, Prou. 15.24.
The way of life is on high to the prudent, to avoid from hell beneath: and in
another place, Prou. 9.18.
but he knows not, that the dead are there, and that her guests are (baamake
scheol) in the depth of hell. All which places most evidently prove that there
is such a Lake, such a Dungeon, and such a bottomless Pit. But let us descend
to the Fathers, profane Writers, and Reason; though these to the Scriptures,
are but like Zilpha and Billa, to Rachel and Leah, hand-maides, or servants.
First, Cyprian says it is a hollow vault in the earth, full of smoke and
darkness: Tertullian calls hell a Treasury of hidden fire in the bowels of
the earth: to Theophilact, it is (...), a dark region under the earth: and of
the same mind is Saint Hierom, and Saint Augustine, Aug. ep. 57. ad Darda.
and with them the profane Writers consent, Hesiod, Homer, and diverse others;
amongst whom, this is an article of their belief.

(...).
As far as heaven is above the earth, so far is hell beneath.
But leaving them, let us come to Reason. Who will deny that a Body can be but
in a place? Seeing then that the Resurrection shall be both of Body and Soul,
as well for the Reprobate as the Elect; and that the one sort of them must
enter into a Matthew. 25.34
Kingdom prepared for them from the foundations of the world, and the other
Matthew. 25.41
into eternal fire which is prepared for the Devil and his angels: must not
both the Sheep and the Goats be in two distinct, several, and real places?
it cannot be gaine-said: but what places be these? Some think that the
Fruition, and the Want of Gods presence and Glory is that Kingdom, and this
Fire: if it were so, why should there be any general Judgment? for in this
Life the Elect enjoy Gods gracious aspect, which is Heaven upon Earth, and the
Reprobates are deprived of it, which is a kind of Hell. This I confess is a
heaven, and a hell for the Soul, but take away that Place which is called
Coelum Coelorum, the heauuen of heavens; and that Dungeon which is named
Tenebrae exteriores, utter Darkness, and how shall the bodies of the Righteous
Dan. 12.3.
shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and the bodies of the wicked rise
again to perpetual shame and contempt. My conclusion then is this: As God
has ordained some to be Vessels of honor, some of dishonor: so has he
prepared two several places for them, heaven and hell; the one above, the
other beneath: betwixt which there is a Luke. 16.26.
great gulf, so that they which would go from heaven to hell cannot, neither
can they come from hell to heaven. That there shall be a Corporal Ascension,
and Descension into two distinct places, Eliah and Corah, are two figures; 2
Reg. 2.11.
Eliah went up by a whirlwind into heaven, carried in a fiery Chariot, drawn
by horses of fire: and Number. 16.33.
Corah and his company went alive into hell: neither of these dyed, but were
changed 1 Cor. 15.52
, (as the living shall be at the last day) in a moment, and in the twinkling
of an eye: and their bodies being corruptible did put on Incorruption; sharing
betwixt them Life and Death eternal, both in body and Soul: and all this was
done to teach us what shall become of our souls and bodies, at the general
resurrection, and to inform us that as there is a Place above, Heaven for the
Elect; so there is a Place beneath, hell, for the Reprobates. Here shall Dogs
endure pains most bitter and eternal; namely, a fire unquenchable, and a
worm that shall never cease gnawing: of this Fire the Body shall be the
Fuel; and to this Worm, the Soul shall be food. Seeing then that there
shall be a Separation, a within and a without; and that there is a heaven and a
hell; Joy eternal, and Torment everlasting, O let us continually meditate upon
this Lake burning with fire and brimstone, the thought whereof, if all sparks
of grace be not quenched in our hearts, will be like a Bridle to curb us, and
keep us from sinning.

Our Savior to dissuade us from backsliding, bids us Remember Lots wife: the
Wiseman says, Remember thine end, and thou shall never do amiss: and so say
I, Remember Hell; this Memento is like a Jewel made of Iacinthes, to which the
Lapidaries attribute three excellent effects; namely to preserve a man from
lightning, from the Pestilence, and to procure sleep: such like is the
Remembrance of hell, in that it is an Antidote against the poison of sin, it
saues the soul from that furnace of fire, where there is nothing but weeping
and gnashing of teeth, and preserues it from those unspeakable plagues and
torments, which God has prepared for the Devil and his Angels: lastly,
because he that ever thinks of Hell, will be afraid to commit sin, this
Memento does disburden the Conscience of all internal horror and Anguish;
which like Saules evil Spirit do ever haunt the guilty mind, and
consequently procures spiritual peace and Rest to the Soul: This Peace he
give us, who is the Prince of Peace, Christ Jesus the righteous: to whom with
the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor, praise, power, glory and
dominion both now and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
For (...) read (...) For (...) read (...) For (...) read (...) For Arians.
read Acrians For M^ced^nius. read Macedenious For Seli^^^. read Silen^e.

