THE DISplaying of an horrible sect of gross and wicked Heretics, naming
themselves the Family of Love, with the lives of their Authors and what
doctrine they teach in corners.

Newly set forth by I. R. Whereunto is added certain letters sent from the
same Family mainteyning their opinions, which Letters are answered by the same
J. R.

IMPRINTED AT London for George Bishop. 1579.

The Preface of the Author to the Reader.
WHEN I began to write of this doctrine of the Family of Love, I minded in
deed, to have sent it to a friend of mine which is entered into that error,
and so to have made it as a private matter between us. But when I had showed
the same to certain of my friends, to have their judgment in certain
points, their importunate suite was, yt this small treatise might be published
in print: which request I was loath to grant, for diverse causes. The chief
whereof was, that Books which are set forth unto the eyes of all the world,
had need to be circumspectly and diligently examined, before they be made as a
glass for all men to look upon. For, when as there are many beholders, there
are also many fault finders. And in this simple work there are many faults,
through ignorance and want of skill committed: which I confess, not to be done
of malice or negligence, but in truth my simple and unlearned capacity could
do no better. The faults are these. The rough and harsh style, being rudely
and without any good method set down, because I want the help of those arts
which comely and aptly couch sentences together, whereby the Reader might take
the more delectatio^ in reading and perusing of books. The order shoud have
been amended if time would have suffered, but since it is otherwise, I beseech
thee accept my good will. If any of the family carpe at this book, because of
the rudeness thereof, let them answer it, and a reply will speedily be
performed, wherein their expectation shall be satisfied (I dout not) by men of
godly knowledge and learning. In the mean time, I will declare the cause that
made me more willing to satisfy my friends request. There are many diligent
and godly teachers, which in places convenient do inuey and impugn the
doctrine of y^ Family of Love, and yet are not thoroughly acquainted therewith:
whereby many in the same family, take occasion to exclame against them, as
slaunderers of their doctrine: and many also of Gods children, hearing the
Family of love spoken against, are desirous to know what opinions and doctrine
they hold and profess. Therefore I thought it my duty which I owe unto
Christ's Church (as a member thereof) to utter and make manifest unto all
persons what I know touching the Authors and doctrine of the same family. And
seeing that we live amongst so many enemies of Christ's Gospel, which object
against us variety in opinions, it is very requisite, that every member in
Christ's Church, put too his helping hand, to cleanse and purge the Church from
such errors and false doctrine, as through the malice of Satan daily creeps
in. For if we hearing Christ Jesus his death and passion (which is our only
comfort) blemished and darkened by the subtle fetches and persuasions of
erroneous and wicked men, possessed with fantastical spirits, and shall not
be moved with zeal: how appears any love of God or Christ Jesus in us? or
where is become the fruits that should show a justifying faith? Many that are
at case and live securely, think that this error will of it self vanish and
decay, without stir or gainsaying: which saying bewraieth too much their want
of y^ true fear and love of God. For, if we shall daily hear but our friend
evil spoken of, and be still and silent ^hereat, what love or friendship
appears in us? How much more ought we to be zealously affected, when the
glory of our GOD, and the office of Christ Jesus our Lord, shall be shadowed
and impaired, we sleeping securely without touch or motion of true zeal or
love? And if we look into the daily increase of this error, we shall then
behold our sloth and negligence. For in many shires of this our country,
there are meetings and conuenticles of this family of love, and into what
number they are grown, my heart reweth to speak that which one of the same
society did avouch to me for truth. Therefore it is time to withstand their
impious opinions, and every one according to his charge and office in the
Church of Christ to purge and cleanse the same, from the dregs and
blasphemies of H. N. and his family. And although many errors and much false
doctrine is taught in the family, more then is here expressed, (which to touch
al would require a longer discovery and a more learned author,) yet I have set
down (for a taste or show) some of their doctrine, that the children of God may
be armed before hand, and take heed of such impious blasphemies as. H. N.
teaches. Many Books are abroad, which I have not seen, and many I have seen,
which I could not have the use off to read. For except one will be pliant to
their doctrine and show good will thereto, he shall hardly get any of their
books, no, nor they will not confer, nor talk of any points of their
doctrine with any, except it be to such as they find inclined, and (as they
term it) willingly minded thereto.

And here I protest, that what my pen shall utter, either touching the person
of H. N. or his doctrine, I malice him not, nor his family, I rather pity
the^ and their case, yt so many simple people are by his doctrine seduced and
deceived: neither will I avouch any thing which I have not suffient warrant to
prove. As touching his person and behavior, I have the testimony of diverse
ancient persons, and of good credit of the Dutch church, who have been
acquainted with y^ same H. N. and have dwelt together in one city, and in one
street, being near neighbors and familiar friends, who have declared and
testified the certeintie of his behavior, and demeanor. And touching his
doctrine, I have used this order, to set down the authors own speech, not
adding or diminishing any thing, with the name of the Book, Chapter, or follio.
And whereas I have directed much speech unto the Family, the cause is this. I
have been familiar with some of them of long time, and have had large discourses
and conference with many of the^: therefore if my simple speech, vttred by pen,
may do any of them good, I have that I desire. And this has been an other
cause, why more willingly I condescended unto my friends request. And because
H. N. and his family have protested, that the truth has no where been taught
in the world since the Apostles time, but now by the family: how vain this
their assertion is, in it self appears. For if truth has been hid and buried
this 1500. years, where is become Christ's promise, that he would be ever with
his to the end * of y^ world* to what purpose Matthew. 28.
have so many notable men suffered Martyrdom, both in the primative Church
under heathen Emperors, and daily do suffer under the persecuting and cruel
Papists? If these have not suffered for the truth, where shall we seek for
truth? at the hands of H. N? whose doctrine so far disagreeth from truth,
as light from darkness? This is a true saying, Truth loves no corners, if the
doctrine of H. N. be a truth, why is it taught in corners? Why dare none s^ep
forth to maintain the doctrine of H. N. being every where spoken against? why
dare none of y^ Illu^in^t Elders (which can not err nor sin) come before
the simple ones in Christ's school, and prove their authors doctrine good by
the holy Scripture? Their answer is, that fear of death does cause them to
be silent. Did Christ or his Apostles so? If we perteine unto Christ Jesus,
we must Romans ^*
* be like unto him in suffering, that we may reign with him, (being called
to witness the truth.) And this is a thing also to be wondered at amongst the
Family, that if conference be urged at their hands, they deny it utterly: if
disputation be offered, they flee from it egerly: the reason is, their doctrine
dares not abide the light, nor the trial of the touchstone. If there were
nothing else to prove their doctrine false, this were sufficient. I could
declare of discentions that are amongst the^, and how many of their great
Rabbines, or Illuminate Elders, have been plain Arrians, and have recanted at
Paul's Cross: Also how often they have altered their opinions, as well
touching community of things, as diverse other points. But because they will
lay to my charge, that I seek only to make them odious to the world, I cease
to speak any further, because I rest, hoping in their conversion, which I
beseech the Lord our God to grant for his Christ's sake. There is one other
thing which (as they affirm) moves them to be silent* because there is no
public Magistrate that will maintain their doctrine: therefore they are
constrained to be still. If this be a cause sufficient, let the reader judge.
Shall a truth be hidden, because no Magistrate will give it maintenance?
Certainly if the Apostles had ceased to preach Christ, until they had
warrant from the Magistrate, I think many nations had been yet unconverted.
But I will not let to put them in memory where they had maintenance of a
Magistrate. Even in Munster a city of Westphalia where John Leyden, and
Knipper Dolling showed the fruits and effects of their doctrine. Nothing they
taught nor published, but that which they affirmed to receive from God by
revelation. What murders* what abominations they exercised during their reign
and government, John Sleydan, (a man living at that time, and of good credit)
has manifestly published and declared. And these men were Hollanders, and
scholars of David George, whose disciple your author H. N. was at that time,
although now he publish his doctrine in his own name, and says y^ he has
received the same not by man's ministry, but at y^ mouth of God, whose sound
and voice he says he has heard. The Scriptures do teach us to fly from such
men as boast of such vanities, that they are taught by revelation. For * Paul,
when he was converted, Acts. 9. Acts. 10.
was sent by Christ to An^ni^s to be instructed, * Cornelius was sent to Peter.
Almighty God to teach his children, uses always the office and ministry of
man. The Israelits had their Prophets, men instructed by God, I grant: but they
had their testimony of their calling joined with their office, as a sea^, and
badge, which was, a bold publicatio^ of their message without fear, because it
was a truth, and there was joined commonly therewith the working of miracles:
which seals your author wants. For neither H. N. nor any that follow that
doctrine, dare boldly speak what they believe, * nor render ^. Pee. 3.
a reason of their faith and hope, as the apostle Peter has written: although
H. N. calls himself a Prophet, and has entitled a book, called The
Prophefie of the spirit of love: in which book his manifest folly is openly
declared, as by reading this small treatise thou shall find. The Lord God for
his Christ's sake open their eyes, and mollify their hard and stony hearts,
that they may behold the suttleties contained in the doctrine of the family,
and embrace the joyful promises which Christ our Lord has set forth to us in
his Gospel, and that his Gospel, and y^ his Church may be free from such
deprauers of Christ Jesus his death and passion: so shall we his children
rejoice over their conversion, and magnify the name of the Lord our God, to
whom be praise and dominion now and ever.

Stephan Bateman to the gentle Reader.
CHristian Reader, consider I pray thee, how from the beginning, there has
ever been such discordaunce found, as has bred great dissension among the
creatures of the world: for by the wicked, the death of the godly has ever
been hastened. And I gather it to be for this cause only, that the absence of
such godly might seem to the froward a peaceable being, when (not rebuked
for their wicked and ungodly living) they might (as it seemed unto them) live
secure, to do what in their eyes and minds seemed best. This subtle engine
had Satan in the beginning, when he stirred Caine to s^ay his brother Abell.
And why? Gene. 4. 6. 7. 8. 9 19.
because his brothers sacrifice was good, and his evil. etc. Likewise, as from
a corrupt tree, there has sprung forth such sap, by Exodus 1. 2. 3. 4. 5 6.
7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14 1^. 20. 32.
the instigation of Satan, in the members of the ungodly: as ambition,
hypocrisy, false religion, and such like: that to have a place of government
according to their natures, they have driven the Church of Christ by Number. ^2.
Iosu. 1 ^. 6 7. 10.
many extremities, into out Isles of the world: and when by Gods mighty
assistaunce they have for a time inioyed quietness, yet such^ Judith. 1* 5 7.
1^. 1. Reg. 4. 5. 17. 31. 3. Reg. 18. 22. 4. Reg. 1. 2. 17. Psalm 1.
has been the malic^ of the ol^ ser^^^t and his members, to begin again
with ^ew devised torments, to disqviet the peaceable service of Christ's
Church, which notwithstanding, in spite of that fury, has ever h^d stay in
one place or other. And for the yet hoped time, after many attempts they mig^t
get the victory, the devil, to the intent that b^ domestical discord, the
church of Christ might be thoroughly shaken, as a l^ing spirit, begat error,
error begat heresy, and ho^ even under the visard of hypocrisy, to feign
the pure religion by outward resemblance, and so in time to bring in his ma^e
Idolatry: that then betwixt the^ both, they might in short space hatch
superstition, Romans 1. Ezech. 37. Dani. 5 3.
practicing the Church, insteade of the creator to worship not only the
creatures but also idol^ made by themselves, which as soon as ever the true
Church espied, began to separate themselves from that s^lthie brood: then
came discord, and with him division, which division increased a worse heresy
then before, so that the sons of the Devil gate D. Cooper Cron.
names* as Phariseis. Saduceis. Esseis, Basilides, Cerdonistes, Valentianistes,
Marcionistes, Appelles, Montanus, Sabellius, Manes, Arius, Donatus, Macedonius,
Eunomius, Pelagius, Eutiches, which inge^dered the Pope and Papists, when
jesus Christ his Church was banish^^, by the tyranny Image of both chur ches.
^usebius.
of the great murders, from Nero, to Domitianus and other, through persecution.
After which time yet to vex the Church a new, came in Menandrians, Cherinthus,
Ebionites, Nicholaites, Saturninus, Ta^^anus, Messaliani, N^sco^ians.
Anabaptists, Libertines: and diverse others, whose nature not unlike to Turdus
Syluestris, by whose ^yling Gesuerus. The dung of t^e^^d ing^d^e^h the mistle.
Mat^^^lus Ra^tholomens. Ortu^ ^anitatis.
on the Ok^ or fruit trees, the Mis^le grows: so of the doung of these
silthie s^^^es have proceeded a n^w^ Mergus, a cormorant foul, the family of
love, an heretical sect, that has to bring forth a new purity in religion,
supped up the most part of former errors, which except it pl^ase the
Almighty God in the mercies of his Christ our Lord and Savior, the
sufferance thereof will give occasion to a new persecution. It beh^ueth
therefore all reverend Elders, Bishops, and Preachers, to seek at the hands
of our sovereign, authority to redress the same, or else will assuredly
follow the like pl^gue on us, as was at Munster in Germany, by David George,
John a Leede, K^ipper Dolling, and others, the seed whereof is. H. N. Henry
Nicholas, now of Colone. His disciple here in England Christopher Vittel
lotner, and many more, whom God turn from this and al other errors if it be his
will, or else hasten their overthrow from poisoning the simple, as yet to be
accounted traitors to God, hipocrites to the Prince, and false Prophets in
seducing the people. Thus gentle Reader, I have presumed to enter into this
authors book these few words, to none other end, then to encourage thee to
accept his pains, that seeks by his study and laborious toil thine ease,
in bringing to light that which might else have longer been hid, to the great
hurt of this common wealth. And now being brought to light give God the praise:
to whom he honor and glory for ever. Amen.

Stephan Bateman, professor of divinity.

The life of David George testified by the Magistrates of Basil, which was the
founder of the heresy of H. N. and the Family of love.
DAVID GEORGE, borne in Delphe a town of Holland, taught his errors in the
low country, where he dwelled forty years: and fearing to be espied by
the Magistrates, departed out of his country Anno. 1544. and iournied toward
Basil in Zuitzerland, with his family and kinsfolk, and named himself John
of bridges. When he was come to Basil, he made his complaint to diverse of the
Magistrates, that he was banished out of his native country for the word of
God, and was feign to flee from place to place. They took compassion of him,
and made petition unto the Lords of the town for him, that it would please
them to take him and his, for poor subjects and inhabiters of their city.
They received this answer, that they would not deny their city to any honest
stranger, being of a good and true religion. His, grave years, sober speech,
and modest behavior, with his ancient and comely apparel, did not a little
prevail, that his petition took place: so that he and al his company were
made free men of Basil, and was in good reputation among the people. He was
liberal in giving of alms, and full of hospitality: he married his daughters
very worshipfully: he was served in plate, and spent liberally: for his
scholars in the low countries made collections for him, so that he wanted
nothing. Eleven years he dwelt in Basil, and it was not espied what doctrine he
taught.

Then he built two houses, the one for pleasure in a garden, the other in the
town: one of the houses was by lightening and thunder consumed with fire: also
in his own dwelling house one loft fell down, and did much harm: al these were
warnings of Gods displeasure. In process of time, one that married his
daughter began to mistrust his doctrine, and when David George understood
thereof, he sent for his son in law, and with many persuasions, endeavored
to confirm his son, to believe that he was that right David that was sent
from God, and should restore again the kingdom of Israel, and build the
tabernacle of Jacob in the latter days: whereunto his son answered, that the
restoring of the kingdom of Israel, and al other prophesies of David, was
fulfilled by Christ. With which answer David George was veri^ angry:
notwithstanding, with gentle words he began again to persuade him: y^ if
any thing were too high in his books that he could not understand, he should
commit it unto God, from whom such high wisdom did come.

He writ diverse books, especially ^^^ called The wonder book, wherein he
taught his damnable errors. He dyed the 16. of August 1556. and was buried in
the parish Church of S. Leonardes. Many of his disciples took great thought
after he was dead, for that he promised unto them that he should not die, but
if he did, he would rise again within three years, and fulfill all his former
promises.

Diverse of his disciples and scholars forsook his heresies after his death,
and confessed themselves deceived, and acknowledged David George to be a very
blasphemer of our savior Christ. But certain would not, but conveyed them
selves away, and infected others. The Magistrates of Basil, when they
understood of his doctrine and manners, they called before them, all such as
they suspected to hold of David George, and searched their houses, found the
books and letters which he had written: and when the Lords of Basil had all,
they caused them to recant solemnly in the chief Church, all such articles as
David George had taught them. They found also in David Georges house a picture
of David Georges person, veri^ curiously and cunningly cou^terfet, which
together with the carcass: of David George, and his books, letters, etc. were
burned in the Market place: his goods and lands seized to the use of the
town. All the rest that were known to hol^e that error did willingly abjure
the same, and so were received as members of Christ's Church. Yet did not his
heresies cease, for diverse were in Holland that stiffly did maintain David
Georges heresies, and perverted many, among which number was Henry Nicholas
thought to be chief: who after the death of David George took upon him to
maintain the same doctrine, not in the name of David, but in his own name, as
a Prophet, sent to rebuke the world of sin and iniquity, and has written many
books in the Dutch tongue in a rude style, which many of his scholars and
fellows have translated into diverse languages: his Euangelium R^gni is in
Latin, many also are in a Dutch letter in English, translated (as is supposed)
by Christopher Vittell a ioyner, dwelling sometime in Southwark, who has by his
trudging about the country, infected sundry simple men with this poisoned
doctrine, and snared their minds so corruptly therein, that it is hard to
pluck out of their heads those vain^ toys of H. N. which Vittel has so
deeply impressed in their minds, y^ although they deny publik^ly before the
world, yea and set their hands against the same doctrine, yet they return
again to their old opinions, as is well seen by many that I could name. For
it is a Maxima in the Family to deny before men all their doctrine, so that
they keep the same secret in their hearts: which is impious and ungodly.

There have been many of our English men in Flaunders, to confer with this.
H. N. their author, of whom in their return they speak great good of his
wisdom, of his mild nature, of his humility, and of his patience: yea, and
they vainly boast, that he knew of their secret messages, which they account
to be miraculous. And when he makes any mention of the works which he has
written, he calls them the works of God, and seldom or never his works.
Certain pamphlets are newly set forth as his works. The Lord bring such
devices of Satan to naught, and preserve his church evermore

The life and doings of H. N. testified by certain of the Dutch Church yet
living, who knew the man, and were acquainted with him.
H N. otherwise called Henry Nicholas, borne in Amsterdam, a town in Holland,
of many was called Henry of Amsterdam, who with his brother John, departed
from Amsterdam, about the year of our Lord, 1533. when a certain stir was
in the town tending to a tumult. And these two brethren had prepared money
with other furniture, to aid (as they pret^ded) their brethren in Munster, a
city of Westphalia, who were distressed by a siege of the noble men as you may
read in the x. book of Sleydanes Commentaries: and although he give them to
name Anabaptists, (for they were rife in those days) yet surely it is
probable that David Georges followers were there, unto whom these two brethren
did send aid: who being espied by the Magistrates, were imprisoned: at the
last they forsook the city, and came to Emden, a city of Westfrize, land.
John Nicholas was a brewer by occupation, but Henry was a Mercer, and called
commonly Henry of Amsterdam. He was a man of a reasonable tall stature,
somewhat gross of body. He had a son who kept his shop, called John
Nicholas. This Henry was very brave in his apparel, he would go in his
crimsen satin doublet every holyday. Henry gave himself to writing of
books, which he put in print, especially one amongst the rest, which was the
chief, called The glass of righteousness the less: for he compiled two books
of that title, wherein he certifieth his Family of love, that they must pass
four most terrible castles full of combersome enemies, before they come to the
house of love: the first is John Calvin, the second the Papists, the third
Martin Luther, ye fourth ye Anabaptists: and passing these dangers they may be
of the family, else not: this is testified by a man of credit, one Adrian
Gisling, who did read the same in a Dutch book, entitled as before said. There
was complaint made unto the Magistrates, when certain of his books came abroad,
that he despised al manner of religion, especially those of Calvin and Luther,
affirming that of all other they were the worst. He married his daughter Marie
to a yonker, and when they should come to church, Giles Faber minister of Emden
did deny her marriage, saying unto Henry Nicholas, that he was a derider of
their religion. Also Henry Nicholas had in his house three women, which went
all alike in their apparel: the one he affirmed to be his wife, the other his
sister, the third his cousin. It happened his cousin to be very sick and
doubtful of life: the neighbors in such a case resorted unto her, and there
before diverse of good report, the confessed that Henry Nicholas had abused her
body, and made her believe that she should never die. The neighbors hearing
this so odious a matter, made complaint unto master Brames, who was Drosserd
of Emden, or governor: he according to his office, came to the house to have
apprehended the party, but Henry was fled immediately before. The Magistrate
seized upon his goods, and carried it away unto the castle of Emden, and this
was in Anno. 1556. Henry fled to Peusam, to a yonker called Hycomanning, one
of his Family of Love, and there remained about a year. He was 57. years old
when these things happened. It is thought that he went with Granuella to
Naples the year following, and the most do verily think that he is dead, but
our Fami lie in England do believe y^ he is alive, and does still write: if it
be so, by this collection he can not be less then 78. years old. He does call
him self Restaurator omnium, in the thirteen Chapter of his Euangeli. So did
they at Munster entitle a book, and called it, The book of restoration. In
which book are contained diverse horrible heresies which they held, as may
appear by Sleidans Commentaries: which I have here placed, that the reader may
perceive how in many things their doctrine in Munster and the Family in
England do agree.

Articles taken out of the Book of restoration which they in Munster held, as
appeartth by John Sleydan.
1 THe time of Restoration is at hand. 2 The seat of David which is decayed,
shall be erected. 3 The writings of the Prophets shall be now fulfilled. 4 This
restoration goes before the world to come, to the intent that all the ungodly
being destroyed, the house and seat of Justice might be prepared and
beautified. 5 The marriage of such as are not lightened with true faith, is
polluted and filthy, and to be reputed for whoredom. 6 Martin Luther and the
Bishop of Rome be false prophets, but of both, Luther is the worse. 7 Since the
Apostles time the word of God was never preached truly, nor any justice upon
earth. 8 There are four prophets, whereof two are just, David, and John
Leyden, and two unjust, the bishop of Rome, and Luther.
Their teachers in Munster, were all or the most part Hollanders, and David
George did then teach his blasphemous doctrine at that time. Although John
Sleydan does generally call them Anabaptists, yet it is very probable, y^
these and other of their articles are all one with the family of Love, for the
Anabaptists do hold none of these.

Articles gathered out of the Books of H. N. and which are taught by the
Family of Love.
1 IN primis, that H. N. can no more err or miss the right, then Moses, the
prophets, or Christ, and his Apostles. 2 Item, the Elders are illuminate and
De^fied: and God in them hominified, or become man. 3 Item, their illuminate
Elders do not sin, neither actually, nor by cogitation. 4 Item, that they
may join with any congregation or Church, and live under the obedience of any
magistrate, be he never so wicked or ungodly: the Turk, the Pope, or
whosoever. 5 Item, that they allow a kind of shrifte worse then Popish, For
where the Pope requires but confession of the act committed: they will have
the thoughts manifested, and what our nature and inclination draws us unto.
6 Item, they hold, that the law of God is possible to be kept, of every man
that will endeavor himself thereto. 7 Item, that their author H. N. is the
true prophet of God sent to blow the last trumpe of doctrine which shall be
published upon earth, and he only knows the true sense of the holy
scripture. 8 Item, that his books are of equal authority with the holy
scripture, and are written with the same spirit. 9 Item, all is false and
lies, whatsoever is taught or preached by any other, then their Illuminate
Elders in the Family. 10 Item, they commend the Pope and Cardinals, and allow
the Mass, and other their ceremonies.
The Books of H. N. which I have seen.
1 IN primis, the first Epistle of H. N. 2 Item, the first and second
exhortation of H. N. 3 Item, a diologue between the father and the son. 4
Item, the prophecy ^^ the spirit of love. 5 Item, the published peace upon
earth. 6 Item, the declaration of the mass. 7 Item, their Euangelium Regni. 8
Item, the true and spiritual Tabernacle. 9 Item, the new and heavenly
Jerusalem. 10 Item, a confession of their faith newly made. 11 Item, sundry
Epistles of. H. N.
Books which I hear of, and have not seen.
1 ITem, two books entitled the glass of righteousness. 2 Item, a Book
called the holy Lamb.
The displaying of the Family of Love.
WHen I considered the duty of a Christian, to consist in the true profession
of Christ Jesus his name, and diligently to walk in the paths and ways
manifested in his word, and to seek to beautify and enrich that beloved
spouse, the Church of Christ, sanctified by his blood: I could not hold back
my pen, to publish such matter, as I see daily to blemishe that beloved
bride: (I mean the Church of Christ:) and to have crept in by the subtlety of
Satan, our professed enemy. Having therefore gathered diverse notes of that
cankered error of H. N. taken out of his books, which I have to show, I had
thought to have stayed my hand from further frauell: but being urged by diverse
of Gods children, to manifest this my labor, to the end, that some nouices of
that error might, (if it were possible) be stayed from further plunging
themselves into that gulf of impiety. How the wicked take occasion by these
and like errors, to speak evil of Christ's Church, the ears of many godly do
hear, Especially the Papists: who speak and write* and nothing is heard more
common in their mouths, then these terms. Ye are at variaunce amongst your
selves: no unity of doctrine is observed: ye are of diverse opinions and
sects. But how untruly they impute these matters unto the church of Christ, to
every member of the same Church it is evident.

For if we consider the wisdom of God in governing his, we shall perceive that
in all ages, when Christ's Church did most flourish in perfection, then was
error and heresies most rife, as may well appear even in the Apostles times,
by the Nicolaitans, Ebionites, Cerinthus and others. How busily did the fathers
in the primitive Church withstand such heresies, as crept in, even in that
happy time? Tertullianus, the Valentinians: Augustine, the Donatistes: and
Athanas^^us, the Arrians, with infinite m^, as by reading the Ecclesiastical
histories does well appear. Wherein, what travel has been taken, what
counsels called, what Books written, it were a wonder to behold. But when
corruption began by little and little to spread her self, and got the face of a
Church: O how were dissentions appeased, and no variety seemed to be? where as
in deed, nothing was taught nor published but dreams and devises of men: who
leaving the certain and known ways of y^ Lord revealed in his word, betoke
themselves to depend upon the doctrines of men. But if we descend into these
last times, wherein we live, and mark the wisdom of God in governing his
Church, how he has manifested his son Christ Jesus with an uncovered face,
to the great comfort of his children, how the doting dreams of men are
vanished, how nothing but Christ Jesus is lifted up with praises, as the
immediate and only cause of our salvation, how the true use of works is
placed, not as any cause, but as the fruits of our instification. And yet to
see how busily satan (envying the prosperity of Christ's spouse) endeavors
daily in his members, to trouble and disquiet this peaceable Sion, by raising
up diverse strange and monstrous heresies, as the Anabaptists, the Free will
men, the Arrians, the Pelagians, and the Family of Love, with many others,
which heresies the Devil more bufily sows now to disquiet the Church, then
heretofore in y^ time of ignorance, when he lulled the most part of y^ world in
errors and dreams of men. And seeing that every error does seek his
cloak and defense by the holy scripture, yet we have great cause to rejoice,
that only by the scripture they are all put to silence, and their heresies
made manifest to all men: as by the learned treatises of many grave men in this
our age does manifestly appear. Of this last error of. H. N. the chief
pillar and vpholder of these errors of the Family of Love, whereof (by the
Lords assistance, I mind to leave behind me such notes and breefes* as of
certeintie I have learned, both of the person, and also of his doctrine) no
man hitherto (that I can learn) has endeavored to confute them in writing.

Whose Books as they have come to my hand, I have with diligence perused, and
by much conference with diverse of that Family, learned the doctrine which they
follow. And whereas they have been charged with diverse articles before the
high commissioners, yet by no argument that I can learn, do I find that
they hold all the errors contained in the same.

Notwithstanding, so many as either by the doctrine of Henry Nicholas, or by
conference I have learned, I have set down, to the end that some good man
might be encouraged to confute so impious an author, and such horrible
errors, and perform in some learned work that which my want and capacity
is not able to supply: neither would I have ventured to commit to writing
such rude and ignorant labor, the matter being in deed ^etter then the
handling: but in my opinion, it is better to have course bread, then none at
all.

And because diverse with whom I am familiarly acquainted are fallen into this
error of Henry Nicholas, I have the rather for their sakes bent my study to
do them good, if it be possible. And if these simple notes may have that
success that I wish: I trust it will stay some of GODS children, from running
headlong into that bewitched snare. And also such matter, as by disputation,
and conference with some of the same family, I have boulted out, I will
declare. For in deed, the Author in his Books does not deal so plainly,
as one being led by the spirit of GOD, whereof he boasts: but very
subtilely, and darkely, and so as the judgment of many godly and learned men,
to whom I have delivered his Books, upon the reading of the same, have
testified, that there is no matter in the Author, that may be drawn into
argument, but that it seems to be as a riddle, or dark speech, and
therefore more intricate to be followed.

And as his terms and phrases are geyson and unwonted, so they do dasell
the simple, with an admiration of a prudent spirit to be in the Author, which
of mean wits can neither be comprehended nor understood.

And when the Kabbynes of that Family, whom they term Illuminate Elders,
have been pressed by me and others, to give a reason, why the Author has so
cunningly and subtilely dealt, not expressing his mind in plain terms and
speech: the best answer that has been made, is, that the Author has
written in the Dutch tongue, which wants his grace and eloquence, being
turned into our rude English. But if I might be bold to replye without
offense, his rude style being written in the Dutch tongue, is rather
beautified by translation, then impaired: for I have some copyes in Dutche,
some in Latin, and some in English: wherein the Authors barbarous style, and
his ignorance, is very much manifested, although some of his scholars have
put too their helping hands, to garnishe this their barbarous* Author:
especially the book entitled, Euangelium Regni, which is translated into
Latin exactly. I would to GOD the matter did answer the goodness of the
tongue.

And if I should diligently seek out of what forge the Author Henry Nicholas
has fyled his heresies, I am certainly persuaded, that one David George was
the founder, hatcher, and breeder of all this mischief, and Henry Nicholas,
but a disciple or scoller of the same David. What this David was, you may
perceive by that which is set down before: whose errors also for a taste I
will set down in part as they are collected by the governor of the
university of Basil, that all men may see, that an evil author has bred a
worse scholar: And thereby shall be perceived that David George his opinions
differ nothing from H. N. but are so like in wicked boasting that they have the
spirit of God, that a man may thereby say, an evil father has begotten a
worse son.

Articles taken out of David George.
AL doctrine taught by Moses, the Prophets, and Christ himself, are not
sufficient to salvation: but only to keep the people in good order, till the
coming of me David George: but my doctrine is able to save all those that put
their trust therein.

2 David George does further say, that he is the right Mes^ias, the beloved
son of the Father, not borne of the flesh, but of the holy Ghost: and when
Christ was dead, according to the flesh, the spirit of Christ was kept at the
fathers appointment, until the coming of David George, and given to him.

3 He says, that he will set up the true house of David, and the children of
Le^^^, and he will raise the tabernacle of God, through the spirit of Christ,
not by the cross and suffering, but* through me^knesse and love.

4 He says, that whosoever speaks against his doctrine, shall never be
forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

These I have set down as the doctrine of David George, found in his books.
And because their doctrine may be better viewed and seen, how they agree in
wicked and devilish fantasies of their own device, set on by the father of
lies, our ancient enemy, to be a stumbling block unto the simple, and to
darken and blemish the joyful proceeding of the glorious Gospel of Christ
Jesus, which almighty God has in mercy revealed to nations and kingdoms most
plentifully, mauger the malice of the devil and all his children: I have
therefore here placed certain sayings of H. N. which are word for word taken
out of his books, that the diligent reader may see how in wicked boasting they
agree, and what vile doctrine they publish.

The errors of H. N. taken out of his own books translated into English.
1 For, the being of God, or essence, gave forth his sound and voice, and
Proph. cap ^. diuis. 5.
spoke unto me H. N. through his spirit of love all these words, he said.

Speaking against the Church, he says:

2 For that cause if thou now account not thy self for an whore, but esteemest
thee for the faithful espoused wise of Christ, my jealous conceiving cannot
stand otherwise toward thee, but that thou art a presumptuous whore, which
dissemblest and playest the hypocrite with Christ, and covertly committest
whoredom, and nevertheless, wilt be judged as a faithful espoused wife of
Christ. So Shall thou presenly be constrained to drink the bitter cursed
water of my jealousy.

3 All that God has spoken through his holy Prophets, and what is written of
Christ, should also in us, and with us, become fulfilled, to the honor and
glory of God, and to our joy.

Out of a Dialogue between the father and the son. Chap. 17. the son
concludes with these words. SEeing now that I (my Father) have found out in
deed, that our Lord the most highest has revealed his mercy seat, the
possession of his most excellent Majesty, and heavenly riches in thee, and
with the same being of the perfect Godhead, made a godly dwelling with thee:
so were it meet that all the generations of the ^arth submit them selves under
the same mercy seat and Godly Majesty, and assemble them thereunto.

Here may thou see these two men boasting the^ selves in their presumption
and pride of mind, to have the spirit of God: the one saying, that the same
spirit which was in Christ Jesus when he lived on earth, is now in David
George, (which is horible blasphemie^) and abaseth Moses, the Prophets, and
Christ him self, in whose doctrine the certainty of our faith is firmly
fixed, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail: and promises to
bring the house of David and the children of Levy into great prosperity, and
to set* them up: not with painful suffering, as Christ our Lord in him self has
performed, and left to us his children example to follow his steps in
suffering misery, that we might reign with him in glory: but he promises to
bring his disciples into that glory through meekness and love, which in deed
is the pleasanter way to be followed, if we consider flesh and blood.

H. N. he following his father in like blasphemy, avouches, that he has
talked with God, not by inspiration or revelation, but by giving forth his
sound and voice. Then places himself in Christ's stead and office, in judging
the children of God, saying: My jealous conceiving can not stand otherwise
toward thee, but that thou art a presumptuous whore: and shall be constrained
to drink the bitter cursed water of my jealousy. If these be not Luciferian
voices, I am much deceived: then he says, that what the Prophets and Christ
have written, that must be fulfilled in him and with him: and that all the
generations of the earth must submit them selves unto the mercy seat, and godly
majesty, which is in him. Thus I suppose my conjecture stands firm, where I
said, that David George was the hatcher of this heresy, and laid the egg,
but H. N. brought forth the chickens. How well they agree in vaunting them
selves, does well appear: and that the son is far worse then the father.
Surely I could well have spared my pen in writing this and other their wicked
opinions, and with their patrones have buried it in silence, had it not the
zeal of the Lords house carried me so far, that I could not stay, until I
had published such matter as came to my hands, whereby I saw the glory of
Christ Jesus to be so defaced: and seeing these wicked impes to place them
selves so high in ye minds of many simple people here in England, it pitieth
me to see them so snared in this bewitched error. A man would think that
these things are so vain and absurd, that none y^ were in their right wits,
would once bend their minds to embrace the same. In deed, if I did not know
many of the^, and am truly certified by some of the same fellowship, that
there are in Engand, at the least 1000. in diverse parts of this realm, which
do hold this vain and monstrous opinion of H. N. I would not have traueled any
further. But eue^ for their sakes, who in deed are simply deceived, and not
maliciously hold any thing, do I write: and if this my labor may (by the
Lords will) convert any of that fellowship, and bring them into the plain and
manifest way, which Christ Jesus has left in his word, I have my expected
desire. There is no one thing in my opinion that has so much prevailed with
this simple sort, which are members and professors of y^ Family of Love, as
a certain show and outward face of a holy conversation, which some of their
illuminate Elders do seem to use. Wherein they follow the steps of the
Pelagians and Papists directly, whose doctrine of works, how by them we are in
the favor of God, and accepted, does in diverse treatises manifestly appear,
destroying the work wrought by Christ our Lord, * by whose blood we are
cleansed, and Esai. 53.
by whose stripes we are healed: and without this faith in Christ, all our
works, be they never so godly, are mere impiety. If he work in us the will
and the deed, what have we to boast of works? If we have nothing which we
have not received, what favor with Romans 4.
God does our works purchase? If everlasting life be the free gift of God, what
have our works to do in that matter of our salvation? It stands not upon so
^ickle a point as the uncertainty of our works: but in such errors they
wander, which leave the wholesome precepts of the holy Ghost revealed by the
scripture, and embrace the doctrins of men. It seems that the simple truth
which by the Scriptures we be taught, and the promises of Christ our Lord
made unto us, does not content their curious heads, but vainly they wander in
every uncertain way, esteeming H. N. and his sayings expressed in his book, to
be of no less value and credit, then the sacred Scripture written for our
comfort, not as the works of men, but by the finger of GOD, even the holy
Ghost. And whereas H. N. does boast him self y^ he can not err, he says
that with the same lying spirit that is in the Pope, affirming the self same
thing. As for the Pope, it is manifest enough without proof. But because some
may think that I avouch that of H. N. that is not to be proved, I will set
down his words as they are written in his book entitled, The prophecy of
the spirit of Love, the 13. chapter, where you shall perceive, y^ H. N. does
couple him self with Moses, with y^ Prophets, with Christ and his Apostles,
very presumptuously affirming, that he him self can no more err then they.
His words be these.

H. N. Chap. 13. verse. Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, and
his Minister H. N. they judge to err, or miss the right, rather then
acknowledge themselves in their imagination to be ignorant and lying.

In my opinion H. N. in these words does somewhat ouermatch the Pope, for the
Pope does acknowledge, that as he is a man he may err, but as he is Christ's
vicar or deputy upon earth, he can not err: but H. N. without any distinction
does affirm, that he can no more err then Christ or his Apostles. And in
deed his books are thought amongst his disciples to be of equal authority
with the scripture, and they do affirm that they are written with the same
spirit. But if their bare affirmation may stand for good proof, then indeed it
is somewhat they say: but ye holy ghost has taught us another lesson, saying,
believe not every spirit, but try the spirit whether he be of God. And that
we may rightly discern this H. N. other wise called Henry Nicholas, which
takes upon him to be that great prophet, sent to rebuke the world of sin,
and has written his books, intituling one, The prophecy of the spirit of
Love: wherein he prophesies of many things to happen to the Church of GOD
before this time, but God be thanked, his words are no warrants, and he is
proved a false prophet: and since our Savior Christ published unto the world
y^ glad tidings of his glorious gospel to our great comfort, the office of
prophesying or foretelling of things to come, has ceased in Christ's Church.
Many have risen and taken upon them to prophecy and foretell things to come*
but they have been counted false prophets, even as H. N. is. Christ our Lord did
forewarne us that in the latter times such false prophets should rise, and
false Christ's, and such dangerous days, that if it were possible, the very
Elect should be deceived. Blessed be the Lord our God, which by the light he
has given his children in ye holy scripture, has so instruct us, that the
very children and babes are able to confute these false techers and false
prophets.

And least the Papists should imagine that this H. N. should be a professor of
the Gospel, I will declare manifest causes, to prove that he is a right
chicke^ of the Church of Rome, and harbored many years by Granuella a
Cardinal. How he extolleth the Pope to be that great Priest of the West, how
he opens the mysteries of the Mass, in a book entitled, A declaration of
the mass: How he commends every trifling toye in the Mass, by the book
may at large appear. How he allowed confession worse then auricular, may
appear by diverse his own words, which, least any should carpe at me, I will set
down: How he agrees with the Papists, in extolling works as efficient
causes of our salvation, I have before touche^ Al which do prove, that he is no
professor, but an enemy to the Gospel of Christ our Lord.

H. N. in the first exhortation. Chapter. 13. Division. 12. IT is expedient
that they should make manifest their whole heart, with all their counsels,
minds, wills, and thoughts, together with all their doings, dealings, and
exercises, naked and bare before the eldest in the Family of Love, and not to
cover or hide any thing (be it what it is) before him, and what their
inclination and nature draws them unto.

By this it does appear, that nothing must be kept untold or unrevealed to
the eldest Elder in every their several conuenticles: for else it can not be
understood, that one man in one country should hear all the rest
particularly. And here they step one foot before the Papists in my opinion:
For where the Pope requires but a confession of the act committed, H. N.
requires a declaration of the thought, and what the inclination of our nature
draws us unto. And yet in more special points they agree with the Papists,
namely, in the possibility of the Law, to be kept of every one that will seek
to perform the same. And whereas I showed before, that. H. N. and the Pope do
both boaste that they can not err, I think it not amiss, to let H. N. tell
his own tale touching this matter, that his scholars may behold, that I
slander him not, neither do make his doctrine worse then it is.

In the first exhortation, Chapter. 13. Division. 11. Fol. 31. They ought to
beware that they distrust not the eldest in the family of Love, nor suspect
any manner of evil or vnwisdome by him, nor yet in any wise persuade them
selves, that the exercises; documents, and instructions which are taught or set
forth before them, by the father of the Family of Love, or oldest Elder, are
too slight, too childish, or too unwise for them to follow after, or to obey:
but with perfect hearts, humbly and singly minded, as good willing children,
to receive the same instructions, proceeding out of the wisdom and counsel of
the eldest, and to stand even so submitted, till they come unto the manly
oldnesse in the Love.

Here is showed, that none must suspect the oldest Elder touching any false
Doctrine that he might utter* nor to think any vnwisdome to be in him: in
which affirmation, how arrogantly does he challenge that unto him, which is
only due to Christ our Lord, and to ye holy scripture, written by the spirit
of God. And although he bost that he has the spirit of God, and that he is
Godded with God, and God in him Hominified or made man, yet are not we to
believe such lying spirits, which utter such absurd and blasphemous
doctrine, contrary to the Scriptures of GOD. And because I am entered into
that high point of Divinity, which amongst the Family is counted a mystery,
I think it not impertinent, to set before the eyes of all the professors of
H. N. and his doctrine, what the meaning of those terms are, to be Godded with
God: for as they be strange, unwonted, and unaccustomed speeches, so the
doctrine taught in the same, is more strange and absurd.

It were convenient that we that profess Christ, should be content with such
phrases as the holy Ghost does utter in the sacred Scriptures, and not to
seek curiously strange terms, which are not in the holy history, nor
consequently can not be gathered out of the same: of which number this is one,
to be Godded with God, and vngodded with man, the meaning of all such terms
is this, as it is taught by H. N. and embraced of the Family.

They hold as a principle in the school, that after regeneration we sin not,
fortifying this their assertion with this place of the Evangelist S. John: He
that is borne of God sins not, and he that commits sin is a servant
of sin. Again, God hears not sinners. All which places are very truly
said and alleged, but to a wrong purpose, for the places do not prove that
the regenerate man sins not, but shows y^ sins are not imputed to a
regenerate man, to condemnation and death. He that is borne of God or
regenerate, sins not: That is, to his destruction everlastingly. The
Scriptures do teach us to distinguish sins in this sort: to commit sin, is
one thing, but to abide in sin, or to dwell in sin, or sin to have
dominion in us, (as S. Paul says: Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies:
and in the epistle to the Romans. Commit not wickedness with greediness,) is
another thing. The last pertains not to the elect of God: For as the children
of God do daily fall thorough frailty and humane imperfections, so they are
daily renewed by the spirit of God, which drives them to repentance. But with
the wicked the case is otherwise: For they sit down in the seat of the
scornful, they commit wickedness with greedines, saying, tush, God sees
us not: such sinners God hears not, and such be servants unto sin. Now in
the Family it is otherwise taught, and otherwise believed: For they affirm
that after we be regenerated, which they term, The upright freedom, we
actually sin not, neither in thought nor deed. And y^ we may hear the Author
H. N. utter his own speech, I will set down what he writes touching this
matter.

In the Dialogue, division 26. follio. 40. The true freedom is this, that the
man in his heart, mind, and spirit, be wholly released, purged, and purified
from all wicked nature and sin, which has reigned over him, and that there
dwell, live; nor rule, any other thing in him, namely in all his spirits,
thoughts, mind and soul, but alone the true Godhead, with the lovely being of
the upright love, and wholly to be replenished with all the virtues of God, and
that there ^^owe nothing else in him but spiritual and heavenly waters.

Hereby it may appear what the Author H. N. thinks touching regeneration,
which they call The upright Freedom. And as I have conferred with diverse of
the same family, to understand these mysteries, which in the end with much a
do, I have found out to be, y^ after we be regenerat, we sin not. And when I
have required somewhat out of y^ holy scripture to prove this, in the end I
have received this for answer. God does promise to dwell with ye man that is of
a lowly mind and humble heart. Also, ye are the Temples of the holy Ghost. And
again, the father and I will make our habitation in man. Now where Christ
dwells, there also is the father and the holy Ghost: where or in what man
soever God thus dwells, it may be well verified, God dwells in him: if God
dwell in him, then the contrary can not remain in the same body. God is
pure, and will not dwell in a corrupt vessel. Two contraries can not be in one
place. Christ and Beliall can not dwell in one temple. Light and darkness can
not be together. That man y^ has God thus dwelling in him, may be called
Godded, or god dwelling in him: so y^ by this reason man is God ded with God,
and God Hominified in man. This their Rabbynes or Illuminat Elders do teach,
and whatsoever this Godded man does speak, think, or do, it cannot be evil,
neither may be so judged by any.

What vain doctrine this is, may well appear even in it self, and yet I was
long acquainted, and much traveled in y^ matter, before I could get this great
mystery opened unto me, which y^ young ones in the Family can not explicat,
except he come unto the state of an illuminate Elder. And as I have before
proceeded, so you shall see ye author H. N. utter his own words, whereby no
suspicion shall arise, that I have spoken that I can not prove.

H. N. in the dialogue, Chapter 16. division. 16. It becomes not that any
should take in hand to teach, but only the illuminat Elders in the Family of
Love, which have received the word of life from the living GOD, and are even
so through the same Godded with God, or incorporated to God, with whom also
God in one being and power of his spirit is hominified, or become man.
Therefore it is assuredly al false and lies, seducing and deceitful, what the
vngodded or vnilluminat men out of the imagination of their knowledge, and out
of their learnednesse of the scriptures bring forth, institute, preach, or
teach. They preach in deed the letter, but no^ the word of ye living God.
Let them esteem them selves as holy as they will, they are a false
Christianity, and diuelishe Synagogue, or schole*,

Now may thou perceive, how this H. N. esteems all preachers and teachers
that are not thus Godded, or thus illuminate. In deed I confess, that without
the spirit of GOD, which his children be partakers of, we can not see, nor
perceive the mysteries contained in his word, much less declare the same to
others. But that we must be Godded with God, because the scriptures use no such
phrases, neither has any writer before us in Gods church used any such proud
speeches, I think, with the Author they are to be rejected in that sense that
he means. For being thus Godded or illuminate, he stands upon his tiptoes
and says.

H. N. out of the prophecy, Chap. 3. Although ye dissemble with me, and how
craftily so ever ye cover you before me, yet are nevertheless all the counsels
and falsehoods of your hearts manifest before me, and so much the more naked
and bare before the eyes of my heart and spitite.

If these words do not prove H. N. to be a wicked deceiuer, let the indifferent
Reader judge. He affirms that the secrets of our hearts are known unto him,
which knowledge pertains only unto the Lord our God: For he is witnessed by
the holy scripture, to be ye searcher of the heart and reigns of man.

Thus how H. N. teaches his family, that he is Godded with God, I have
described: the rather because it is one of y^ cheef mysteries and secrets of
their school, which very few do understand, except the illuminate Elders,
who also are Deified or Godded, till they do grow unto the manly oldenesse in
the love, as they use to speak. These blasphemies, do require a longer
discourse then my simplicity is able to atteine unto, but I hope Almighty GOD
will raise up unto his Church some good man: who will take some pains
learnedly to confute this horrible doctrine. In the mean season, these briefes
I have set down, mindinge to let some of the Family see the vanity of their
Authourand his doctrine, how contrary to the Scriptures of God they be.

In the Book of. H. N. entitled Euange^lium Regni, The Gospel of the
kingdom, which is a title that none of Gods children durst ever give unto any
of their Books: and in deed it is another Gospel, then that which is
contained in the New Testament of our Savior Christ. How* H. N. aduaimceth
the Pope and his Cardinals does man^^estly appear in the 13. Chapter of the
same Book*

The Apostle Paul did arm Gods children a forehand, to beware of such as
should bring unto us another gospel, yea, although he were an Angel: and it is
also ^^^^ifled, that our adversary does transform himself into an Angel of
light to deceive Gods children, if it were possible* Even so H. N. in all his
writings, how does he transform himself to be deified with God, and God in
him to be Hominified. Which in plain (...) are, y^ he is made even as God, and
God in him is become man* which is horti^^e blasphemy. For we have the spirit
of God by participation, and not Deified: For that belonged to Christ our
Lord, who, as S. Paul witnesses, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God. No man would suppose that in this great light, where Christ Jesus and his
glorious Gospel does shine, that such dotinges and dreams of men possessed
with a fantastical spirit, could take any deep root in the hearts of men:
but alas, we see y^ there is no error be it never so absurd and senseless,
y^ has not many favorers: and this has the more, for that the Author H. N.
teaches, that an outward show of a holy life does cheefely please God: when
as without faith, our life and works are impiety and wickedness: and you shall
never in all the writings of H. N. (that I have read) hear him advance, or
once speak of our faith in Christ Jesus: but he does raunge from matter to
matter, in his writings so obscurely and darkly, that he thinks never to be
espied, what his scope of doctrine is: which in deed is not so plainly set
forth in his small treatises, as they are in a book entitled, Speculu^
iustitiae, The glass of righteousness: unto which book the author does
still refer his reader to be fully certified: of which book they make such
bragges, that all the world is not able to control the doctrine contained in
the same: and still their Elders do bear their pupils in hand, that the book
shall be published. From day to day great collections have been made and sent
into Flanders there about, but hitherto all in vain. Yet I have talked with
some of the Family that has read certain fragments of the same book, and
they say no man can resist the spirit which the author does show forth in
that book. They think it is long lacking, but I suppose it will never be
missing. How vainly they boast of such books, is well verified in one of the
Family, who speaking unto a man of good calling in London, which is ready to
testify the same, and both the parties are living, when the one did
expostulate very earnestly, why the other once professing the Gospel of Christ
Jesus, was now turned unto ye error of H. N. The other answered. It is a wise
Gospel which I professed then, I know an other manner of Gospel far better
then that: in such reputation have the Family the books and doctrine of. H.
N. But why H. N. intituleth his followers, A family of Love, I think it to be
a mystery not to be explicated Every error has supposed them selves to be
the true Church, but H. N. is contented that his be counted a Family. Why he
adds this word Love, I could never perfectly learn, but as some have
interpreted to me, this word Love, in many places of the author, does signify
the Majesty of God* as in these three phrases: The lovely being of the Love:
or, The manly oldnesse in the Love: Here Love is taken in both places for God,
according to this s^^ying, Deus ^st Charita^, God is Love: but why they use
this (...) the, so much, I cannot well understand. It is true, that God is
Love, or Charity, so is he Justice, so is he Mercy, and all other like
virtues: ^ but they are not in him as qualities, one extelling another, as they
reign in man: but he is Love* without measure, even Love it self, even so
Justice it self, even so Mercy it self: he is all Love, he is all Mercy, he
is all Justice. But when we speak of any of these which proceed from the
Majesty of God, we understand not by any one of these God him self. For as
his ^one is exceeding great, so his mercy also: therefore by as good right may
an other bring forth a doctrine or Family of Mercy, as H. N. a Family of
Love: For mercy is our great comfort, and mercy is the faires^ flower of our
garland. We read in the holy scriptures of diverse sorts of love, of which
three be principal. The first is, y^ love of God toward his children, set
forth in John. 3. 16.
these words. So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten son, that
none that believe in him should perish, but have life everlasting: which love
how perfect it is, and how excellent, it passes the capacity of man to
conceive, much less to utter or describe. It caused that beloved and elect
vessel Saint Paul, to exclame and cry out, Oh the exceeding greatness and
deapth of the love of God, which loved us first, 1. Ioh. 4. Chap. verse. 19:
this love is perfect in deed. The second love that is expressed, is the love
of us again toward God, appearing in these words: If ye love me, keep my
commandementes. And again, The love of God is shead abroad in our hearts. To.
5. Chap. verse. 5. which love in us, how imperfect it is, every one feels in
himself, and is a witness. The third is, the love that one of us should show
toward an other which properly is called Charity, appearing in these words.
By this shall al men know that you are my disciples, if ye love one an other.
And again, A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one an other.
Ioh. 13. Chap. 14. verse. Now, if I might be so bold as to demand this
question of H. N. or any of their Illuminate Elders, of which of these three
loves is their fellowship? If they say of the first, which is the love of God
toward man, they deceive the^ selves: for of that fellowship none is partaker
but Christ Jesus our Lord. If they be of the second, which is the love of
man toward our God, it is so imperfect and corrupt in us, that I think they
will not acknowledge them selves to be members of such imperfection. If they
will be of the third, which is of the love we owe one toward an other, I
think if they enter in, to see how weak and feeble it is in us, and in every
one of Gods children, they shall easily judge how far off they are from that
they should be: as if ye look into S. Paul's first Epistle 13. Chapter, verse 4.
there shall you see the properties of love rightly described: how love
boasts not, enuieth not, seeks not her own, rejoices not in iniquity,
suffers all things, believes all things, hops all things, indureth all
things. But how these shall be found in any, yea even in y^ best of gods
children, (if we rightly judge ourselves) I cannot discern. Of this last
love, if they will have their fellowship, then let the^ behold how imperfect
their Family is, and contrary to that they vainly brag. Where H. N. has
written these words. We the Elders of the holy understanding shall reign upon
the earth in righteousness, and under the obedience of love, judge ye world
with equity. When these things shall come to pass, this dreamer which would
be taken for a Prophet, does not tell us. Here you may see this Prophet
persuading his Family, y^ the Elders shall reign upon the earth in judgment
and equity. Who would not follow this author that so plentifully will reward
his scholars, to make them upon earth Kings and Judges? I doubt his words be no
warrants, nor his promise any payment: for it is 28. years ago since he made
this solemn protestation, and yet none of the Family do enjoy any part of the
promise: but contrary it does appear, y^ none of his Elders neither in
England, Flaunders, or else where, dare once be so bold as to defend their
dreaming prophet, but subtly in corners insinuate unto the simple sort, and
feed them with many outward promises: but to argue or dispute their cause with
any of Gods children, therein they keeye silence, and prefend ignorance,
affirming their elders to be able to defend their Author and his doctrine, but
they are but partakers of the holy understand ding. And when you happen to meet
any of their Elders, you shall find them as far without sense or feeling of
the spirit of God, as y^ younger sort: although they can set a show of greater
gravity* And because I have often made mention of their Illuminate Elders, I
think it not amiss to name one, and the same notoriously known. His name is
Christopher Vittell, a ioyner by occupation, a man that all the days of Queen
Marie was a teacher of those famous heretics the Arrians, and at Paul's
Cross did solemnly in the first year of our souerein Lady Queen Elizabeth,
recant the same errors, as by the register of y^ bishop of London does
manifestly apeare. And now, as the old proverb is, he is gone, A malo in
peius, from evil to worse* Such men as can not be content with the simple
truth taught in the holy scripture, but curiously seek for singularity, do
easily fall into such bypaths, as our enemy by his subtlety can lead them
unto. And to speak truly, this is the only man that has brought our simple
people out of the plame ways of the Lord our God, and has put so many toys
of this author H. N. into their heads, that I fear me they will not easily
be removed. What travel he has taken, how he has trudged from country to
country, and how he will not once move his speech, if any learned or godly
persons, that has any true knowledge of the word be present, is very well
known: but among the simple he is peerless, and in deed, the oldest Elder of
our English Family; amongst whom he has his maintenance. His wife is
resident in London, with whom (as is supposed) he has not been these
two-yeares. In corners does this man creep, and dare not show his head, nor
maintain that doctrine which he has taught: but certain of his pupils have
been imprisoned, who in the end have subscribed against the doctrine of H. N.
which Vittel does teach. Every doctrine which is true dare abide the light,
but the doctrine of H. N is kept in corners, and dare not abide the light: a
certain Argument that it is a counterfeit doctrine. For no one man dare once
open his mouth, or put pen to paper to defend their Author in England: but
amongst the simple, whose capacity is like unto wax, which will easily
receive every seal or print, among such will he sound his trumpe. He says
the last trumpe shall blow, by which he understands the last doctrine which
shall be published upon earth* which is (as he says) this doctrine of H. N. How
he miserably does expound the holy scripture unto the simple people in
corners, my heart does lament: how he drives the true sense of the holy Ghost
into allegories, it pitieth me to hear: and other wise to interpret the holy
scripture, is to stick in the letter, as he untruly affirms. But woe be unto
those simple people which do give ear unto such false teachers, they can not
with the Lord our God, plead simplicity, and ignorance by no means can
excuse them. If the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the ditche.
The greatest grief that I conceive against y^ Nouices of y^ Family, is, that
some of them have been prosessours of Christ Jesus Gospel according to the
brightness thereof, which by his good will and pleasure he has revealed in
this latter age most plentiously: and now by the doctrine of this Vittell are
declined so far, that the true sense of the Gospel they despise; and follow
the baine and fantastical humor of Vittels allegories, a man utterly
unlearned, more fit to be a scholar in Christ's school, then an Illuminat
Elder in the Family, and so a teacher. He that never learned Christ Jesus
truly* how ca^ he teach Christ Jesus to others? And in deed, if he taught
Christ Jesus he were to be borne withal, but that is not the mark they
shoot at: To set up H. N. as a Prophet, to advance his precepts, to credit
his speech, to believe that he is Godded with God and cannot err, is their
whole inde^our. But amongst the rest in deed they insinuate a good life, which
they pretend to follow: which is as the visard and cloak to hide all the rest
of their gross and absurd doctrine, and the hook and bait whereby the
simple are altogether deceived. And this is the subtlety of Satan, who
otherwise could not prevail with such bewitched doctrine, except it were
shadowed under the cloak of outward holiness. For there is no sound argument,
a good life is all that is required for us to do, and with this the Family do
seem to press Gods children often in conference. For if y^ will serve to
salvation, I see not how the Jew or Turk can be excluded, whose works
outwardly (if they be viewed) shall condemn us.

How close unto the letter of the law does the Jew stick? How willingly
do they abide as vagrant and banished men in every country? How pitifully
do they relieve their brethren which want? so that none is found to want
that, which another is not ready to supply: which are notes and marks of
charity, or love, and truly in my opinion we come not near the Jew in this
point.

But I pray you, what does all this avail without a true and a right faith
in Christ Jesus the son of God? The Turk likewise is a great and dilligent
obseruer of his Alcaron, a great faster or absteiner, a great giver of alms,
diligent in prayer, severe in keeping his word and promise, very charie in
keeping his Sabbathes, very obedient to Princes and Magistrates: and to speak
truth, in many outward virtues does far excel us Christians, (to our shame
it may be spoken,) but what does all this avail? For so much as they blaspheme
Christ the son of God, and deny his Godhed, and resurrection, they have no
part nor fellowship with us of the promise of God, touching Christ our Lord,
neither are partakers of his mercy, which through Christ we feel in our
hearts, to our great consolation and comfort. Without faith it is impossible
to please God.

Therefore, aright faith in Christ our Lord, is cheefely to be required and
sought after, and then our works will of necessity follow. For it is the
proper fruit of that excellent tree: a true faith can never be without his
works, which stick so close together, that they are inseparable. A faithful
man can never be without good-workes, no more then fire can be without heat:
and yet a faithful man is not without sin, as H. N. does auouche of his
regenerate man. We have many examples to prove, that a faithful man or a
regenerat man, does sin often, and to use the words of the Prophet David;
Septies in die cadit iustus, seven times a day does the righteous fall. This
cannot be understood, but of a faithful and regenerat man. David was
regenerate when he fell into whoredom and murder Peter was regenerat when he
denied with cursing Christ our Lord. Paul was regenerate when he solemnly
pronounced those words, Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of
the which number I am the greatest. And I am persuaded that we are never so
near unto God our Lord, as when we feel sin most heavy. God calls not
such as be empty, or feel not the load of sin: but Come unto me all ye
that are laden with sin, I will refresh you. I speak not of the reprobate,
who in deed feel in this life a hell in their conscience, and do despair:
but GODS children do feel themselves wounded with sin, even to death, but by
grace given from above, they do apply that sovereign salve, that wholesome
medicine, Christ Jesus, whose passion has purchased, whose blood has
cleansed, whose death has cured all our diseases and maladies. This comfort
does H. N. take away from his Family, and places in steed thereof his own
precepts, without comfort to a troubled mind. For his doctrine is, That we
must grow up unto the manly oldnesse in the love, which in plain terms, is
to grow to perfection, and to be without sin, which they affirm in this
life to be brought to pass. If this be good doctrine, then the holy Scripture
is contrary. 1. John first Chapter If we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves, and there is no truth in us. Likewise Paul Romans 8. verse 20. The
creature is subject to vanity, not of his own will, but by reason of him that
subdued it under sin. To the Galathi Chapter. 5. verse 17. The flesh Iusteth
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh continually. These are
contraries the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye
would. And Almighty God did pronounce upon man at the beginning, this saying,
God saw that the wickedness of man's heart was great, and all the imaginations
and thoughts of his heart were evil continually. Genesis Chapter 6. verse 5. The
whole scope of the holy Scripture does prove, that God has shut up all under
sin. Now if H. N. or his Il luminate Elders will still avouch that they are
without sin, then may I as truly aledge y^ they are without Christ. Let the
terrible example of Sharp and Allin move you to consider, how desperate a
doctrine you embrace, whose souden deaths, without any comfort in Christ, may
remain as an example to all posterity. For the Author of this error is
Satan, who in a desperate state leaves his pupils. For it was pride that
caused almighty GOD to execute his judgment upon him, his state being
angelical: so likewise he seeks to bring man into the same destruction by the
same means, through pride and presumption, that we are pure and without sin,
and so exalting our selves, we might have the swifter damnation. For Almighty
God has cast our condition and state so low, that without his mercy set forth
by Christ, we all perish: as is witnessed by Paul, * God has included Romans
7. Romans 3.
us under sin. * Also both Jews and Gentiles are under sin, (as it is
written,) There is none righteous, no not Psalm. 14.
one, etc. We are never so near unto our God, as when we feel our sin as a
burden or heavy load lying upon our conscience, nor never further off, then
when we feel or testify that we are without sin: which persuasion Satan
does feed our humors withal, contrary to the holy Scripture.

Therefore, I conclude that this principle, to live in this life without sin,
is merely the suggestion of Satan, and not of the spirit of God. Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners. And again, I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. If Henry Nicholas, and his Illuminate
Elders be now without sin, Acts. 4.
Christ came not for to save them.* For there is none other name under heaven
given to men by which we shall be saved, but Christ Jesus: Therefore manifestly
it appears, that H. N. and his Illuminat Elders are clean excluded, and have
no need of Christ: for his office and death does properly belong to sinners,
then consequently not to them.

Therefore ye nouices of the Family, which see not into what danger
Christopher Vittell, and H. N. does miserably bring your troubled minds,
look well betimes, espy their subtlety, leave the doctrine which is without
comfort, and has no warrant in the holy scripture: forsake those peevish and
dark riddles of H. N. and cleave unto the holy scripture: leave the
fantasies of H. N. and his scholar Vittell, and by little and little ye shall
epsy their craft and subtlety, how they set up them selves and not Christ
Jesus: how they teach false doctrine, which dare not abide the light, nor they
are not able to defend: and yet persuade you in corners, that it is the spirit
of God, by which they speak. How grievous ye are unto the Church of GOD, may
appear by the travel which is taken for your sakes: what offense ye give,
what stumbling blocks ye are unto the simple whom ye ought not to offend, no
not the least, let your conscience bear witness. * It is necessary Mat. 18.
that offenses come, but woe be unto them by whom they come. Know this for
certain, without the Arc there is no salvation: except ye abide in the vine
Christ, ye bring forth no fruit: ye cannot serve two masters, being so
contrary.

If ye cleave to H. N. and his doctrine, ye have no part nor fellowshippe with
Christ Jesus, for H. N. destroys the office of Christ our Lord, and takes
away the comfort of his Gospel, in steed whereof he places his upright
freedom, with a perfection in this life, such as the holy Scripture allows
not.

For our battle is continual, and shall never have end, until our flesh be
dissolved: and we at rest in Christ. If we must atteine to such perfection in
this life as H. N. shows, then our Savior Christ did in vain teach us to
pray continually, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive, etc. Also Lead us
not into temptation. Which petitions are without effect if his doctrine be
true. Therefore as ye love your own souls, beware of his doctrine, examine it
better, acknowledge Christ Jesus and his Gospel, and leave the drowsy dreams
of a doting Dutchman, and the erroneous spirit of Christopher Vittell arude
and unlearned Ioyner. And although they boast never so much of the spirit, yet
use the counsel of the holy Ghost. Believe not every spirit, but try y^
spirit, whether he be of God. Think not within your selves that they cannot
err, it is a privilege not given to mortal man, but only to our immortal God.

God is true, and all men are liers. Believe not that his Books are written by
the spirit of God: for God is not contrary to himself: the doctrine of H. N.
is manifest contrary to God, and the doctrine published by Christ in his
gospel. If ye continue in the Family of H. N.. ye deny Christ. We may not hold
of Paul or Apollo, for they were not crucified for us: we are counted Christ's
friends, if we do those things that he commaundth. What have we to d^e with
H. N. or his commandments* Deceive not ^our selves with your pretenced the
we of a holy life, but confess with the Prophet David, Psalm. 130. If thou
Lord should look straightly upon sins, Lord, who should abide it* Even
the hol^est y^ ever were, (being ^arthly men) have need to call upon God, in
this manner, with the beloved Prophet David. If you imagine that your works do
help or profit you to salvation, ye are with the Pelagians and Papists,
demers of the grace of God in Christ our Lord: in which doctrine of merit,
there is no comfort nor consolation. If ye continue still in the Family of H.
N. there is neither hope nor: help for you. Christ's sacraments you conte^ine,
which are to us the seals and cognisances of our redemption, and tokens of his
covenant and promise. Ye have forsaken the faith which Christ Jesus planted in
you, and have dug up puddels of corupte waters unto your selves. Consider I
pray you, front whence ye are departed, and whether you are come: ye are gone
from the comfortable promises in Christ Jesus, touching the forgiveness of
our sins, our consolation, and redemption, and are driven too and fro with
many vain persuasions of H. N. that first you shall be made partakers of the
holy understanding, then inioye the upright freedom, to be free from sinning,
and lastly come to be an Illuminate Elder, to be Deified with God: with such
fantasies are ye fed, and such doctrine are ye taught, but how these things
agree with the holy Scripture is partly showed before. Miserably is your
simplicity deceived through these false teachers, and yet how unwilling ye
are to see this your nakedness made manifest, by proof I can testify. Have a
regard at the last unto your own souls which Christ has dearly bought,
(if you perteine unto him) and let them not be snared in such doctrines of men:
(yea men of the worst sort.) But if there be any love of GOD in you, love the
Lord Jesus, and be of his Church: which you can not be, embracing H. N. and
his doctrine. Consider his love, his mercy, and his patience in suffering us
to fall into many temptations, that our return might be the more joyful to
him. I pray you mark but this one thing in their teaching, how they drive the
true sense of the holy Ghost into allegories: And when so ever any text of
the holy Scriptures is alleged by any of Gods children, they answer that we
little understand what is meant thereby: and then if they be pressed to
expound the place, by and by it is drawn into an allegory. For they take not
the creation of man at the first to be historical, (according to the letter,)
but mere allegorical: alluding, that Adam signifies, the Earthly man, the
Garden, the Woman, the Serpent to be within man: and applying still the
allegory, they destroy the truth of the history.

H. N. in the first Epistle, division. 19. For. H, N. bids his Family, Come
eat of the tree of life that stands in y^ midst of the paradise of the Lord,
Come, eat, and taste of the hidden bread of the Love, and live eternally.

And as they expound this place thus: even so do they all the whole course of
the scripture, leaving nothing certain to our faith: for by as good right may
they make an allegory of Christ's death and Passion, and say that CHRIST
signifies anointed, and so alluding and following that sense, deny that the
man Christ Jesus died, and so by application of the Allegory diminish our
faith and hope. And in deed, when I was earnestly solicited by some of the
Family to embrace that way, which the mercy of the Lord kept me from, the
first step that I should have entered into the depth of their divinity, was,
to learn the signification of the Hebrew names of the Scripture, and thereby
to expound the same.

What a miserable case is this to see the holy Scriptures thus drawn from the
true sense, into Allegories, which may be taken many ways, even as the vain
imagination of man can devise? And surely it is very pernicious and hurtefull
thus to expound the holy Scripture: and yet the simple people (not seeing the
deceipte hereof) do think that these be notable men, and have the spirit of
GOD, and that they teach them such things thereby, as they never heard of
before. I deny not, but sometimes the allegory may be well applied, and to
good purpose, but when we apply the allegory to destroy the true sense of ye
holy ghost, it is by no means to be admitted. For if we take such true
histories as the holy Ghost has left to his Church, whereby he shows what his
will is, and draw the same into an allegory, what do we leave certain, that
our faith may depend upon? and where is our hope, if allegories may have place?
For as I said before, they expound this place of Saint Paul. 1. Cor. The last
trumpe shall blow, and the dead shall rise, etc. The last trump is the last
doctrine which shall be blown upon the earth, which is this of H. N. And the
dead shall rise, that is* such as were dead in sin, shall be raised up by the
same trumpe of doctrine. What a horrible matter is this, to see the holy
Scripture thus drawn like wax unto every purpose? A man would think, that no
man having his senses, would ever credit such fantasies and vanities, but I
know too many, that have a special liking of this teaching, and do unbrace it
as the truth of God. Many parts of this our country is pitifully snared by
such vain techers as Christopher Vittell is: yea, not a few ministers of the
simple sort are her with entangled, (with sorrow I speak it,) and I would to God
that the chiefest place in this realm were free of these men. If we should
examine what is the cause of this error: surely our sins is the chief,
which does provoke the justice of GOD, to afflict us with such false teachers,
and the negligence of our ministers, which either can not, or will not impugn
their error in country towns where it is embraced. The malice of Satan is
not behind, who seeing the joyful succeeding of the Gospel of Christ the son
of God, does stir his stumps in his members, to impugn the same. There is no
Apothecarie in the world able to qualify the bitterness of his potion or
medicine, as our enemy is to qualify the bitter and poisoned doctrine of H. N.
and Vittell, with such sweet pretenses of a holy life and upright
conversation, which in deed are but mere visars and cloaks to shadow horrible
blasphemy. Such subtlety has Satan, that now envying Christ* Jesus and his
gospel, does stir up his members to disquiet the Church of God with this
absurd and senseless error. And surely we were forewarned of such seducers,
that in the latter times would deceive the simple: the holy Ghost does set the^
forth what kind of men they should be, proud boasters, y^ they have the
spirit of God, as is witnessed: 1. Tim. 4. verse. 1. In y^ latter days some
shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto the spirits of error,
and doctrines of devils. And again, the 2. Epist. 3. chap. verse. 5. Having a
show of godliness, but have denied the power thereof: turn away therefore
from such. Also Peter 2. Epist. 2. Chap. verse. 1. But there were false Prophets
also among y^ people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, which
privily shall bring in damnable heresies, eue^ denying y^ Lord that has bought
them, and bring upon them selves swift damnation, and many shall follow their
damnable ways, by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

The same Chapter, verse. 21. For it had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from
the holy commandment given unto them. Also the Epistle of Jude, verse. 4. For
there are certain men crept in, which were of old ordained to this
condemnation, ungodly men they are, which turn the grace of GOD into
wantonness, which deny God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus
has the holy Ghost decyphered all false teachers, and given warning to his
children to beware of them. It is necessary that heresies be (says S. Paul)
that those that are perfect may be manifested. And surely Gods children have
thereby great trial and exercise of their faith, and the Lord our God can
make such heretics to serve his purpose, even to his own glory: that his
children being strengthened by him, may not be over taken in the sleightes and
subtilties of Satan, nor his impes, but in the great temptation and seas of
errors, may abide steadfast in the Lord Jesus, and in his promises, maugre the
malice of the devil. If ever there were disturbers of the Church, whereby
these scriptures and prophesies may be fulfilled, I think that now is the
time: For what with the bloody Papists with their fire and faggot, continual
war, with horrible murders on the one side, and the Anabaptists, Free will
men, Arrians, Pelagians, and the Family of Love on the other side, Christ's
Church has little rest, and small favor in the sight of man, but spurned at
on every side.

But blessed be the Lord our God, who in the midst of all calamity and
misery which his children daily suffer, yet can not be driven back by any
torment, to deny the Lord Jesus, nor his known truth, manifested to all the
world: and the Lord raises up still some of his children to withstand Satan
and all his rabble, which strive against grace. And surely these and like
errors are great exercises of our says, how constant we will abide in the day
of trial. Therefore though the world rage never so much, yet our graund
captain bids us to be of good cheer, saying, Ego vici mundu^. I have
overcome the world. In whose comfortable promises we stay our selves, and
assuredly believe, that although the ship of Christ be tossed up and down with
boistrous winds, yet perish it cannot, nor the lest y^ pertain to him. No
dout, many of Gods dear children fall into many snares of errors, but they by
grace are called back again, if not willingly, yet forceably, so that they
can not perish in those ways. For as our savior says, that such times should
come, that if it were possible, the elect should be deceived. But it is not
possible to be deceived and perish, though our God does many ways try us, and
makes us examples and patterns one of us to an other, that his loving kindness
might appear more notable in our preservation, and we be provoked thereby to
show a thankful heart in obedience to his will, and also be occasioned to crave
at his hands continually, a perfect perseuera^ce of our faith in him, even to
y^ end: Which we shall be sure to obtain, so that no false doctrine of H. N.
Vittel, nor any other, shall prevail once to touch us, because our hope
rests in the Lord Jesus. And I verily believe, y^ although some of Christ's
household be entered into those steps of H. N. yet I dout not but the Lord in
mercy will call the^, and if they will not come, he will forceably compel them, if
they be his. Therefore, you that are entered into the Family, through the
sweet and sugared persuasions of Vittell or any others, I beseech you, even for
y^ Lord Christ's sake, consider from whom you are departed, even from our
Lord Jesus, who has bought you, whose arms are stretched abroad, ready to
receive you again, with the rejoicing of Angels over your conversion. How
acceptable you should be unto Christ his Church, by proof shall be perceived,
but especially how beneficial you shall be thereby to your own souls, and
what rest to your conscience, none can express, but such as taste the same,
and are partakers of the same grace of God in Christ Jesus. For this is
undoubtedly true, that to wander astray, is a property belonging as well unto
Gods chidren as unto others, and their often falling is by many examples of the
Scriptures made manifest, but that they continue streying, and never return
home, or that by falling, they willingly wallowe in the mire, is a certain
note and mark that they pertain not unto the Lord Jesus, nor are partakers of
his death. Therefore if ye willingly persevere and continue followers of H. N.
Vittell, or any such, you are strangers in Christ's school, and it will be
said unto you, Depart, I know you not. Avoid therefore the danger ye be in,
acknowledge that your teachers may err, and are mortal men. For since the
Apostles times, there have been none so privileged, but that he might err.
The old writers did ever give that title unto the holy Scripture, and desired
to be believed no further, the^ they agreed with the same: but your teachers
will needs have their doctrine to be credited and believed, without
examination or trial. Assuredly if you did discern them aright by the holy
history, you should easily perceive the^ deceivers, and your self deceived.
For if it be a truth they teach unto you, why teach they in corners, which
truth loves not. Every truth is able to defend it self, especially the truth
of God: and it is of that courage and boldness, y^ there is no power, (be it
never so mighty) but it dare stand fast and abide the trial, so invincible a
virtue is truth. Did Christ or his Apostles, being threatened not to publish a
truth, c^^ceale the same for fear of life? No verily: to the loss of life and
limme, they stood in the quarrel of God, against the tyrants of the world, and
prevailed. But Christopher Vittell your teacher, thinks it sufficient to
seduce you in corners, and suffer you to be imprisoned: but for him self he is
safe enough. A good sheepeheard (says Christ) will give his life for his
sheep, but your shepherds will not hurt their fingers for their Family, but
lurk in corners, and delude and deceive greatly your simplicity. Alas, why
are you so bewitched, or so berest of sense, so to imagine, that a mortal man,
an obscure Author, whom you never saw nor knew, has only the truth, and
all the world else seduced and deceived: for so he him self confesses: and
that any other truth then the scriptures teach, is of necessity to be
believed: or that his Glass of righteousness, which you never saw, has in it
the wisdom* of God fully made known: or his Euangelium regni, Gospel of the
kingdom, is that testament sealed by Christ's blood. Surely beware, I advise
you betimes, provoke not the Lord our God so vengeance with these absi^rde
blasphemies. For it is witnessed, He will hasten his coming, and will not be
slack. You once did abhor the Pope as Antichrist, and now do embrace an
Author; a right chicken of the Church of Rome, who has opened the mysteries
of the Mass, and every trifling toy therein, at large, in his book entitled.
A declaration of the Mass. Alas brethren, is your faith which once you had in
the merciful promises of Christ Jesus come to this, that an obsc^re man,
whose person you know not, and whose books you did never understand aright,
has stopped that lively fountain that did once flow in you? Assuredly, it is
the malice of satan that has brought this to pass, y^ you being led out of
the way, into the bypathes of man's devices, might perish in the same. But my
hope is, that as many of you as pertain unto our Lord and savior Christ
Jesus, and are members of the holy communion of Saints, shall at the last be
brought to see how deep you are fallen, and how sore ye have been wounded,
eue^ to death, by that deceiuer Christopher Vittell: a man borne (as it were of
purpose) for that intent: whose erroneous spirit the Church of God has tasted
many ways. And mark this thing well: that man that once is entered into
heresies, and not well reclaynied, is subject to manifold temptations of our
enemy: which is well proved in your instructor Vittel, who teaching the
monstrous opinion of Arrius many years together, now is possessed with
infinite more errors, and is the child of destruction ten fold worse then
before. It is a wonder to see, that men having once known Christ Jesus, do now
notwithstanding deny the effect of his office, which the doctrine of Henry
Nicholas does in many points, and yet is believed and embraced very greedily
of you, yea, above measure. It should appear that Christ was not surely fixed
in your minds, for if he had, no blast of H. N. Vittell, nor any, could have
separated you from the love of Christ Jesus. Such wandering errors are they
subject unto, that perfectly do not embrace our Lord Christ, according to his
promises manifested and declared in his word: but feed themselves with
fantasies and devices of men, yea, such men as never learned Christ Jesus truly.
Such are verified in the scripture, Exiere a nobis, sed ^on erant de nobis:
They went out from us but they were not of us. Every error that has been in
the world, has had some patrones and defenders, learned and skillful men in
science and art: but this error of the Famil^e has neither Author nor
disciple, which are endued with true knowledge or learning. For H. N. does
despise such as bring forth any doctrine out of the learnednesse of the
Scripture, he says, it is all seducing and lies that such do preach or teach,
yea, and it is further avouched by H. N. that none of us in the Church of God,
^an teach the truth of Christ Jesus, but only he, and such Illuminate Elders as
are brought up in his Family. But as I have before proceeded, it is ^^uenient
that their Author speak himself, that the Family may judge that I deal
indifferently. His words be these.

In the prophecy. Chap. 8. verse. 6. Strangers which walk not with the
Family of Love, or deal falsely therewith, taste not of the lovely being, for
earthly are all their minds and thoughts. The Scripturely learned man has no
knowledge of Gods matters, he can not understand any tittle, much less
expound or interpret the same to others. All Scripture appear to such,
covered, secret, in signs and parables: neither comprehend they what the same
(according to the truth) is. It is given only to the Family of Love to
understand the sesecretes thereof.

Hereby it is manifest, that H. N. does signify unto his Family, that none
can speak the truth but he and his Elders, nor none can understand the
scripture but they. Upon this persuasion it comes to pass, y^ few or none in
the Family does credit or believe any other that teach, except H. N. or his
Elders. How pernicious this matter is, if you credit his speech, shall appear.
And if truth be tied except he be sent. If H. N. can prove unto us that he is
sent of God, (as he boasts) then he is to be credited: but we have showed
that his voices are not the voice of God, revealed to us by Christ Jesus, but
mere contrary: therefore by no means to be credited. For none that is sent
by God, will teach any doctrine contrary to that which is revealed in the
scripture. For we are not to believe him, although he be an Angel from heaven.
For H. N. teaches not Christ, but himself, extolling him self, his doctrine,
and his wisdom: which is a token and mark, that he is not led by the spirit
of God, but is puffed up with ye arrogant pride of his mind, in boasting
manner, which Gods children did never follow. For the holy spirit does
promise to dwell in the man that has a lowly and humble heart, and not in the
proud and arrogant person that boasts himself. The spirit of God is never
boasting, but in humility, meekness, and patience, does set forth the glory
of God and Christ. And because we may better take a ^^ll vewe of H. N. and his
spirit, I will set down his own words, whereby it may be the better
discerned, of what spirit he is. His words are these.

In the preface to his crying voice. Although our cause for a time be
condemned and despised, yet the just and upright understanding ones, do praise
and commend our godly wisdom.

In the first exhortation. Chapter. 16. My children, and you Family of Love,
give ^are to me your father, live according to my doctrine, that it may go well
with you, take heed to my doctrine, and what I do set forth, and teach: that
it may be a seal of life, and a witness of truth in our hearts: For it is your
life.

Eodem libro and capitulo. If you humble your selves unto the school of grace,
whereunto you are called by me H. N. in the house of life, and forsake your
ignorant knowledge and good thinking: then shall ye live and inherit the
peace.

In the Prophecy, Chapter 4. O Ye Caynish ceremony ministers, and ye
persecuters and murderers of the Abellishe upright hearts: ye have falsely
judged the upright hearts, as men worthy to be rooted out of the earth.

If therefore thou cease not from thy wicked works, and from thy judging of
God his matters, (which doubtless thou understand not, therefore iudgest
falsely) if thou repent not, all the curses of the Law shall be executed
against thee.

In the last time, the glorious Lordlinesse of the Lord God shall in us become
manifested and declared, and in us fulfilled.

Here may thou discern H. N. and his boasting spirit: how he commends
his godly wisdom, then how he extolleth his doctrine, saying, that his
doctrine is their life: then he promises, that his Family shall, if they give
ear unto him, and his doctrine, live and inherit the peace. He threateneth
the ministers of God (whom he calls Caynish persecuters and murderers,)
that they have falsely judged his Family. He commands them to cease from
judging God his matters, saying, they understand it not. He pronounces the
heavy curses of the law against them; if they repent no^. Last of all, he
tells, that the glorious Lordlinesse of GOD, shall in him be manifested,
declared and fulfilled.

If H. N. do not show him self naked and bare in this his pride, I report me
to the indifferent view of the Family: (especially such as are not entered into
that gulf, that no truth can be taught by any other then by H. N. and his
Elders) whether these speeches proceed from the spirit of God, or from the
spirit of pride and presumtion. Let them indifferently judge and epsy the
deceit where it lurketh: namely, to discredit all the children of God which
teach the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and to plant his doctrine and teaching in
stead thereof, and in deed it is the mark he shoots at, but I hope in vain,
to al y^ be Gods children. What is this but to take away our comfort in
Christ's death and promises, and to be deceived with the subtilties of a
seduced, and erroneous spirit, and to discredit the Gospel, that we might
depend upon H. N. and his doctrine: O subtle Satan, if thou could bring
this to pass, which thou go about in thy members, then had thou thy
desire, to set up thy self, and tread down the blood and death of the Lamb
of God which has taken away the sins of the world. But our God has
promised to keep us his children even as the apple of his eye. For as a Father
has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on them that fear
him. Psalm. 103. ver. 13. So that Almighty GOD does provide for his
childre^s safty, from such poisoned infection, and suffers others, that
willingly will wander out of the plain ways of Christ, which the Scriptures
of God do point unto them. Of all the errors that ever the devil did sow to
disturb the Church of Christ, none is more subtle then this, y^ no truth can
be taught by any other then by H. N. and his Illuminate Elders: it is false,
seducing, and deceiving, what any other do teach. Alas, why should mortal man
be thus lifted up, and take upon him Christ his office and calling: for this
prerogative only has Christ Jesus, and none other, to teach all truth, for
it is one of his special titles, I am truth. Whither does H. N. thrust
himself by this proud challenge, y^ al truth is only taught by him, and his,
and ca^ not be taught by any other? sure into Christ his seat and office: but
with Lucifer the Prince of pride, he shall be thrown down headlong, and all such
as in their puffed minds do exalte themselves above their state and
condition. For of all vice and sin which man does commit, none is more
odious in God his sight, then pride, especially the pride of the mind in the
highest degree, as this is, to place a vile man in Christ Jesus his office and
calling.

Into such errors do they run which content not them selves with the
manifest and plain testimonies of God, to us revealed in his word: but
curiously seek for novelties at ye hands of mortal men, yea vile men, and of
the worst condition: and yet, so close they stick unto this heresy, by the
persuasion aforesaid, (that no truth can be taught but by H. N.) that I fear
me the disease is incurable* except the Lord in mercy open their eyes, that
they may ^spie at the last, into what miserable and vile errors and heresies
they are snared: which they shall never do, so long as they hold that
principle aforesaid. Yet we of the Lords household, will not let to do our
duties to admonish you, and show you the greatness and danger of your
backslydinges, in charitable manner. And although this simple admonition will
little prevail to stir up your minds to acknowledge (with us) the truth of
Christ Jesus his Gospel, yet know this undoubtedly, that almighty God has in
his Church, men of zealous minds, that will not see Christ's glory so defaced,
and his Gospel so despised, but will in learned manner write against your
Family, and are able to declare your errors, which my unlearned head is not
able to bring to pass. Although this will not move your minds, yet my
conscience is quieted, in that I have done my best for your conversion, and
discharged my duty, which I owe unto the Church of Christ, (as a member
thereof) to open and detecte your leaders and teachers which abuse your
simplicity without measure, and instruct you, that conference is not good,
that you may profess the doctrine of Henry Nicholas inwardly, and be subject
to the doctrine of the Gospel outwardly: which in plain speech is, to
dissemble with GOD.

For you are obedient to such doctrine as is taught, you communicate with us in
Christ's sacraments, you hear our teachers expound the scriptures, and yet
you credit and believe only H. N. and his doctrine taught by Vittell. Is not
this plain hypocrisy? will God be thus mocked? If God be God, follow him: If
Baal be he, follow him. In Gods truth we must be of a single mind without
halting, hypocrites and dissemblers he utterly abhors. If Christ's Gospel
be a truth, as the devils were driven to confess, then assuredly H. N. by the
same doctrine is manifested to be a liar, and has not the spirit of God, but
the spirit of pride in a boasting mind. Lift up your heads, and see in time
unto your health and salvation, search the scripture more diligently, and
leave the riddles of H. N. and you shall perceive more contrari^tie in their
teaching then I have expressed: you shall rest in the comfortable promises of
Christ our Lord, and as for H. N. and his promises, what have we to do with
them? let them with their Author perish in oblivion, and be deceived no more
therewith: then shall ye feel how sweet the Lord is, and what comfort we have
in Christ Jesus, which none can express but such as taste thereof, and feel
it working in them selves to immortality: which comfort is not found in the
writings of any mortal man. Know this for certain Lex Domini immaculata
conuertens animas, The Law of the Lord is a perfect Law, and conuerteth
souls* The laws, precepts, and writings of men, are all imperfect. Why do
ye cleave unto H. N. and his Books, and leave this perfect law of
righteousness, which leads to life everlasting?

If this warning will not serve, I shall sorrow until God open your eyes, that
ye may see your gree^ous reuolte, and into what grinnes and snares of the
devil you are wittingly led, but my prayer shall not be wanting for you, to
desire the Lord in mercy, for his Christ's sake, that he will at the last
mollify your stony hearts, and renew a right spirit within every one of
you, that your conversion may be to Gods glory, and the rejoicing of his
Church.

If it please you to read these simple instructions which I have written for
your sake, hurt thereby you can not have: if any good happen, and that the Lord
do hereby open your eyes to behold your error, give glory to the Lord our
GOD, whose mercy is over all his creatures, and imagine, (as truth is) that I
have not so contumeliosly used your Author H. N. as he has bitterly dealt
with us, in iudgeing the Church of Christ, and all others that are not of his
Family. I will use his own speech.

In the first exhortation Chapter. 7. 1 All such as believe not the Love, nor By
baptism he mea* neth not the sacrament of Baptism.
are baptized in the name of the Father, it is not meet to account such
unbelievers, and unbaptized ones, for Christians, at whose hands we should
look to find any word of truth.

Capitulo eodem. 2 The day of the Lord, and righteous judgment of God shall
burn in wrath and fury, over all vngoldly which have despised the Love and
her service, and shall consume them as a fire to everlasting condemnation in the
fire of hell, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

Article. 10. 3 We confess that no man shall obtain grace nor forgiveness of
sins at Gods hands without the same commonaltie of holy ones in the Love.

In the sixth Chapter. 4 But seeing we can not perceive or find the true
belief of Christ, among any people upon earth, that walk without the
commonaltie of the love, but the same is manifested unto the holy ones of GOD
in the commonaltie of the Love, nor can be witnessed by any other people or
nation, but only the commonaltie of the holy ones in the Love.

In the prophecy, Chap. 18. verse. 38. 5 Ye shall through the requiring of the
gracious word in the service of love, become incorporated to the lovely nature
of God.

1 Here I have repeated certain sentences taken out of H. N. whereby first is
showed, that none can have the truth which believe not in the love, y^ is,
which believe not as they do, nor are baptized in the name of ye father, which
they take not to be y^ sacrament of baptism, but a mystery exceeding my
capacity to utter, of incorporating us into God. 2 The^ such as despise the
Love, and her service, shall be consumed with fire ever lasting, that is, their
teaching and service. 3 No man can obtain grace nor forgiveness, except they
join with their commonaltie. 4 No people upon earth can truly believe in
Christ, but their Family, and such as walk with them. 5 Last of all they shall
become incorporated to the nature of God, through their service of Love.
Here ye may see the sum of that godly wisdom that is in your Author, and
his deep divinity. And surely in my mind it requires no large discourse to
confute the same: the speech of it self does sufficiently bewray the mind
of their Author: the effect whereof is, he and his Family have only the
truth, and all the world else are deceived. But I may boldly say, and more
truly, that no people in the world that have any religion, but they hearing H.
N. and his doctrine, will judge him to be a false Prophet, a vain boaster, and
a deceiuer of such as put any confidence in him: whose doctrine is so absurd,
senseless, and without comfort, that none but idiotes, or men without true
religion, will embrace the same. And although many simple people do embrace
this vain way, by the subtlety of Christopher Vittel and others, yet I have
no doubt, but the Lord in mercy will behold their simplicity, and give unto
them a right spirit, to discern truth from falshod.

If I were disposed to lay abroad every odious matter, and every Tragedy
that I have intelligence of in the Family, I should but infert the ears of
Gods children with much vile matter: which I had rather bury in silence, then
by naming the persons, to make them abhorred of the multitude. I think it
convenient therefore, to cover their turpitude, rather then by manifesting the
same, to publishe such odious stuff, as would even defile my pen to write.

Sir William Moore, a worthy Justice in Surrey, had the examination of one or
two of the Familye, who uttered much matter, which I am loath to write. I do
gather it upon this ground, that for so much as their Illuminat Elders do not
sin, and what so ever they commit, it cannot be sin, (therefore if they fall
into any act, be it never so ungodly) it can not be counted sin, as it
proceeds from them, because they are Deified. And what act so ever they do,
it can not be sin, no more then the Prophet Osees, which was commanded to
take a Harlot to his wife, and to beget children in fornication, and he did so.
Upon such false and vain persuasions, what vile doctrine does follow, the
very simple may perceive. I do abstain therefore from further declaring, or
dylating of any such matter as this is, least I should even infecte the air
therewith.

And if any of the Family do suppose that I write maliciously, and without
proof, let them signify their minds unto me, and I shall satisfy them
privately of all such matter as I have intelligence: with the process, wholly
and particularly. And if they deny that Henry Nicholas does boaste himself
to have the Spirit of GOD, (as I have affirmed) and not by participation, but
Godded with God, or incorporated into GOD, as he uses to speak: for my
discharge, I will let H. N. tell how and in what manner he has it, that you
the Family, and all other may perceive what he is, rightly. His words be these.

The first Chapter of the prophecy, the 2. division. The Lord God of heaven
moved me, which is in him.
in his mind or spirit, his power compassed me with a rushing noise, and the
glory of the same God, became great in my spirit of his love, in such wise,
that the clearenesse of God wholly environed me, and shined round about me,
wherethorough the sight of mine eyes became clearer then the crystal, and
mine understanding more brighter then the Sun.

He does not let to utter unto the Family, how mightily and gloriously the
God of heaven is in him: so that his sight and understanding became clearer
then the crystal, or the sun: which if it be true, then it is meet that
all generations of the earth submit themselves thereunto, as he says in his
dialogue. And surely this his boasting does darken the glory of Christ Jesus
with his Family, exceedingly. And this is believed and credited among them,
(the more pity) and the simple are deluded and mocked with such vain boasting
spirits, and it increases daily in the country, and creeps as a canker
every where, through the smooth speech of their Elders. But how close they keep
them selves, and will not utter their minds to any other that is not of their
company, I can be both an eye witness, and ear witness: which is a very
subtle persuasion of satan. For that man that will not utter his grief or
sickness, and where the pain is, how or when ca^ he be healed? it is an
impossible cure. Even so, in the Family, they are so close and so wary in
their speech, that they will not utter their grief to any that can ease them.
Therefore so long as they continue in that mind, they are remediless. I shall
not need to confute their doctrine by the testimonies of holy scripture (which
in deed is easy to be done) I do reserve the same to some zealous pastor in
Christ's school, which I dout not, but as occasion serves, they will be willing
to perform. It is enough for me to begin the skirmishe, to display the
Family, to make ready the way, and to discrie their force, that others may
come after and overthrow their camp, and put them to silence for evermore. He
that will rightly consider the original of this heresy, with the Authors,
what persons taught it first, and when it did increase and grow: shall see,
that even when the Gospel began to shine again, being covered with clouds,
and darkened with dreams of men, then began Satan in David George to envy
the prosperity of the Gospel. David died An. 1556. and then Henry Nicholas
supplied his turn, and followed his steps, not in David's name, but in his
own name, as a Prophet sent of God to rebuke the world, and to bring them (as
he says,) to the right ways. But more truly may it be affirmed, that they
pervert the simple, which were entered into the right and plain ways of
Christ our Lord, and have brought them from the pure waters, which are drawn
out of the fountain which the holy Ghost by the scriptures does offer unto
us, and do give them dregs and puddle, which ungodly men have dug out of
the mire of their own imagination, and do deliver it as drink sent of God to
quench their thirst: but they deceive them most shamefully.

For to all our senses it does appear to be rank poison, and does slay the
souls of every one that does usually drink thereof. If these simple
admonitions may do the least of you good, give glory and praise unto the
Lord our God: if not, I have discharged my duty which I owe unto Christ
Jesus and his Church, in letting you see the beginners of your bewitched
folly. And I shall not let to make my humble prayers unto the Lord our GOD,
even for his son Christ Jesus sake, that he will open your eyes, and
mollify your stony hearts, that you may behold the Lord Jesus, which was
crucified for you, who with his blood has cleansed and washed your sins, be
they never so great, that in his goodness and mercy he will take away this
erroneous spirit wherewith ye are possessed, and create in you a right spirit,
to be obedient to his will, and not to the will of mortal men, which seduce
you, and lead you headlong to destruction: and that he will bestow upon you
his grace, to see rightly into his word, without the vain shadows of
allegories which deceive you, and leave to us nothing certain: and that you
may ^leaue unto the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and forsake the vain trust you have
in your Deifying, and to live without sin: which I instantly desire our Lord
God to bring to pass, for his son Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

Certain absurd speeches taken out of the books of H. N. as errors of the
Family of Love.
1 How and in what manner the Lord God has appeared to H. N.

THE Lord God of heaven moved me Proph. cap 1. diui. 2.
in his mind or spirit, his power compassed me with a rushing noise: and the
glory of the same God of heaven became great in my spirit, in such wise, that
the clearenes of God wholly environed me, and shone round about me, where
thorough y^ sight of mine eyes became clearrer then the crystal, and mine
understanding brighter then the sun.

When I then perceived or understood Cap. cod^. diui. 5.
it so, the Lords meaning and will unto me, even such as his being or essence
spoke unto me.

For the being of God gave forth his sound and voice, and spoke unto me. H. N.
through the spirit of his love all these words.

2. The secrets of our hearts are known to H. N.

For although ye dissemble with me, Cap. 3. diuisi. 2.
and how craftily so ever ye cover you before me: yet are nevertheless, all
the counsels and falshoodes of your hearts manifest before me, and so much
the more naked and bare before the eyes of my heart and spirit.

For, no (beloved) no, ye can not bide Diui. 3.
covered before me, nor before the face of my God.

3 H. N. can no more err then Christ and his Apostles.

They do judge Moses, the Prophets, Cap. 13. diui. 8.
Christ, and his Apostles, and his Minister H*N. to err, and miss the right:
rather then to acknowledge them selves in their imagination to be ignorant and
lying.

4. The scriptures are fulfilled in H. N. and his Family.

To the end now in the very last, the Scripture and all what God has spoken
Cap. 19. diui. 3*
by his holy Prophets, and what is written of Christ, should in us and with us
become fulfilled, to the honor and glory of God, and to our joy: like as it
stands written, Luke 1. ca. 24. verse. 44.

This is assuredly the hearty mercifulness Diui. 11.
of God over us, now in the last time, to the end the glorious Lordlynesse of
GOD should in us become manifested and declared, and the Scripture fulfilled.

5 No man must mistrust H. N. in doctrine, nor any evil to be in him.

They ought to beware that they distrust Exhort. 1. cap* 13. diuisi. 11.
not the eldest in the Family of Love* nor suspect any manner of evil or
vnwisedome by him: nor yet also in any wise persuade them selves, that the
exercises, documents, and instructions, which are taught or set forth before
them, by the Father of the Family of Love, (or oldest Elder) are too slight,
too childish, or too unwise for them to follow after, or to obey: but with
perfect hearts, humbly and singly minded, even as good willing children unto
obedience, to receive the same instructions, proceeding out of the wisdom and
counsel of the Eldest: and to stand eue^ so submitted always, unto the manly
oldnesse in the love.

6 The manner of shrift used in the Family.

It is expedient, that they make maninifest Ibi. di. 12.
their whole heart, with all their counselles, minds, wills, and thoughts:
together with all their doings, dealings, and exercises, naked and bare before
the Eldest in the Family: and not to hide any thing, (be it what it is) and
al what their inclination and nature draws them unto, and al things wherewith
they become tempted in their heatrs.

If ye chance to offend or commit sin, confess the same before the
priests and Elders: and let all appear nakedly and apparently before them.

7 That we must live without sin.

The upright freedom is this, that the Exhor. 1. cap. 15. di. 26. fol. 40
heart, mind, and spirit is wholly released, purged, or purified, from all
wicked nature which has reigned over him, and that there dwell, live, nor
rule, any other thing in him, namely, in all his spirit, thought, mind, and
soul, but alone the true godheade, with his lovely being of the upright love:
yea, to be so wholly replenished with all the virtues of God: and that there
flow nothing else in him, namely in this spirit and mind, but the spiritual,
heavenly, and living waters.

8 How H. N. judges of us, because we acknowledge our selves to be of the
Church of Christ.

For that cause, if thou now account Proph. cap 11. fol. 27.
not thy self for an whore, but esteemest thy self for the faithful espoused
wife of Christ, my ielous conceiving can not stand otherwise, but that thou art
a presumptuous whore, which playest the hypocrite with Christ, and covertly
committest whoredom: thou shall be constrained to drink the bitter cursed
water of my ielosie.

9 No man be he never so learned or godly, can understand or interpret the
scripture, but only the Elders in the Family.

The Scripturely learned man has no Proph. cap. 13. fol. 27.
knowledge of Gods matters, he can not understand any tittle, much less
expound or interpret the same to others: all Scripture appear to such
covered, secret, in signs, and parables: nor can comprehend what the same
(according to the truth) is. What such conceiueth or speaks, is false and
lies. It is assuredly given to the family of Love to understand the secrets
thereof.

It is assuredly all false lies, seducing Exhor. cap 11. fol. 44
and deceitful, what the vngodded or vnilluminate men, out of the imagination
of their knowledge, and out of the learnednes of the scripture, bring forth,
preach and teach: they preach in deed the letter, and the immagination of
their knoweledge, but not the word of the living God. Let them esteem
themselves as holy as they will: they are a false Christianity, a devilish
synagogue, or schole.

10 That all men must submit themselves unto the godly wisdom in. H. N.

Seeing now that I (my father) find Dia. cap. 7 fol. 45.
out in deed, that the Lord the most highest, has revealed his mercy
seat, y^ possession of his most excellent Majesty and heavenly riches in
thee, and with the same being of the perfect Godhead, made a godly dwelling
with thee: so were it meet and convenient, that all the generations of the
earth submitted them selves unto the same mercy seat and godly Majesty, and
assembled them thereunto.

11 How the Elders are Godded with God.

It becomes not that any should Exhort. fol 43. cap. 16.
take in hand to teach, but only the Illuminate Elders in the Family: which
also have received the word of life from the living God, and are even through
the same, Godded with God, or incorporated to God, with whom also God in on^
being and power of his spirit, is Hominified, or become man.

An admonition to Christopher Uittell.
THe cause that moved me to set forth this little piece of work, has not ben
(as I doubt you will imagine) of a malicious mind toward your Family, the
Lord is my witness, I lament you, and malice you not: but of a sincere
affection I owe unto all Gods children* who by you are deceived with the
doctrine of H. N. whom I have manifested and made thoroughly known unto the
world. And I would to GOD that you could have contented your self with the
Authors books, and not have published them to our brethren, the simple ones
in the country: who are led easily into any new doctrine which they never
heard, by your subtle persuasion. And for as much as I know your person, and
what capacity is in you, I do verily think, that the drift of H. N. is not
unknown to you, namely, to set up him self as a Prophet, to tread down
Christ Jesus our Lord, and to destroy the effect of his office. These things
you see well enough in H. N. and yet you cease not still to ertall your
Author, and his books, and miserably seduc^ the simple. Do you think to
escape the heavy stroke of Gods hand? No: he comes, and will not be slack
to take vengeance of such as lead the simple and blind out of the ways of the
Lord our GOD, and make them partakers of doctrines of men possessed with
Sathanicall spirits. It is necessary that offenses come, but woe be to them
by whom they come: it were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and he cast into the Sea. If this doctrine be not offensive to Gods children,
judge it your self. Consider that the blood of those simple ones will be
required at your hands, which perish by deceit. Cursed is he that leads the
blind out of the way. Woe be unto him that says, sweet is sower, and sower
sweet. Your erroneous spirit is well known to Gods Church, I heard you at
Paul's Cross recant the blasphemies of Arrius doctrine, the copy of which is
forth coming: and now Satan has possessed your mind with infinite more
blasphemies of H. N. Is this no sin, thus to deceive the simple? You are one
of those Elders that keep all the Commandments of our GOD, and yet are a
blasphemer and a sinner in the highest degree. Your deceit is known, your
treachery is manifest, some of your own Family can testify, that you are an
hypocrite, and a dissembler, and live of the spoil of the poor, and have left
your art and calling to live mere ydlely, by sowing heresies, (as it were of
purpose) to the destruction of many simple people. Alas, have you a pleasure in
their destruction? Does it delight you to lead them headlong to perdition?
Will not a day come when the Lord our God will charge you with this matter most
sharply? Remember in time, and mortal man, that thou shall answer for every
soul that is perverted. Although they perish, thou shall not escape the Lords
hands. The more thou leadest into error, the more grievous shall be thy
destruction and damnation. Think not that thy counterfeit show of a holy life,
can any thing avail. Now thy visard and cloak is pulled off, I doubt not but
the simplest will epsy thy deceit, and be no more deceived with thy pretenses,
to gather their money daily, to set forth the works of H. N. and enrich thy
self, as will be proved. If thou fear not the vengeance of God, yet let the
shame of y^ world drive thee to confess thy fault, and as thou did before
recant the error of Arrius, so now come forth out of thy den, and recant
the blasphemy of H. N. that the poor and simple may be brought into the ways
of Christ our Lord, out of which they have wandered over long. Then shall the
Church of Christ rejoice over your conversion, and Satan and his ministers
shall be put to flight: the poor strayinge sheep shall be brought to the fold
of Christ Jesus, and you shall be willingly received into the communion of
Saints, where the faithful rejoice in nothing but in the Lamb of God, who
was cruci^^ed for us: singing praises and thanks to him for evermore. O Lord
in mercy, grant that this may come to pass, for thy son our Savior
Christ Jesus sake.

Amen.
A confession made by two of the Family of Love, before a worthy and
worshipful Justice of peace, the 28. of May, 1961. touching the errors taught
amongst them at their assemblies, and also their behauiours. And although they
have reformed some of these gross matters since that time, yet I have thought
good to manifest their wa^ering heads and unconstant minds, that Gods children
may beware of their impious dealinges.
1 FIrst, they be generally all unlearned, saving that some of them can read
English, and that not very perfectly, and of them that can so read they have
chosen Bishops, Elders, and Deacons.

2 Their Bishops, Elders, or Deacons, do call those that be of their sect
together, by the name of a congregation, into one of their disciples houses,
which they call also a Raab: where they commonly meet, to the number of
thirty, or above, and their Bishop or Deacon does read unto the congregation
the Scriptures, expounding the same according to his own fancy.

3 When any person shall be received into their congregation, they cause all
their brethren to assemble, and the Bishop or Elder does declare unto the new
Elected brother, that if he will be content that all his goods shall be in
common amongst the rest of all his brethren, he shall be received: whereunto he
answering, yea, then he is admitted, with a kiss. vz. All the company both men
and women kiss him, one after another.

4 At their meeting, either to receive a new brother, or to read the
scripture, they all have meat, drink, and lodging at the cost and charges of
the owner of the house, whom they call a Raab: and there they do remain as
long as he has good victualles for them, whereby sometimes they do loose their
Raab, seeing himself so far ouercharged with them.

5 They are called together ever in the night time: and commonly to such
houses as be far from neighbors, one of them does always warn an other: and
when they come to the house of meeting, they knock at the door, saying: here
is a Brother in Christ, or a Sister in Christ.

6 When they be altogether, before their Bishop, or Elder, or Deacon will read
the Scripture unto them, he says these words. All ye that are but weak, and
not come to perfection, withdraw your selves a while, and pray that you may be
made worthy thereof. Whereupon those weakelings do repair into an other
place, and be not partakers of the doctrine that then shall be taught, but
afterward, as the Bishop, Elder, or Deacon sees them frame themselves, they
shall be received to hear the doctrine.

7 The Elder must not speak, the Bishop being present: nor the Deacon in the
presence of either of them.

8 The Bishop or Elder does always tell his congregation, that he has more
to teach them: so that he does continually feed them with expectations of
new matters.

9 Every one of the congregation is inhibited to speak, or declare any thing
that he learneth, until he be admitted so to do: and if he do, he shall be
excommunicated, and, with great repentance again received.

10 In the beginning of Queen Mary's time, they would not come to the Church,
thinking it damnable so to do* but within a year after, they were changed from
that opinion, openly declaring unto their brethren, that they were al bound to
come unto the church, and to do outwardly, there, all such things as the
Law required then at their hands, upon pain of damnation, although inwardely
they did profess the contrary.

11 They can not abide, any of their sect to pray, but those that be new
received brethren, whom they call weaklings: thinking it a great fault to the
rest, whom they affirm to be perfect, to pray unto God, as though they were
importunate troublers, and ve^ers of him, having no need to do so.

12 They s^orne all those ye say, Good Lord have mercy upon us miserable
sinners: saying, they that so say, declare themselves never to amend, but still
to be miserable sinners, whereas we do live perfectly and sin not.

13 They may not say, God speed, God morrow, or God even, but to those that be
of their sect: and to others, they say, Speed, Morrow, Deuen.

14 They may not say, God save any thing. For they affirm that all things are
ruled by nature, and not directed by God.

15 They did prohibit bearing of weapons, but at the length, perceiving them
selves to be noted and marked for the same, they have allowed the bearing of
staves.

16 When a question is demanded of any of them, they do of order stay a great
while, ere they do answer: and commonly, their word shall be, Surely, or, So.

17 They may answer to every demaundant (not being one of their sect) in
such sort as they think best shall please him. For they say, they are bound
to deal truly with no man in word or deed, that is not of their
congregation: alleging, that he is no neighbor, and that therefore they may
abuse him at their pleasure.

18 When their wives are to be delivered of child, they must use the help of
none other, but of those, that be of their sect: so that sometime the women
are delivered in the fields, for that they would eschew the coming of others
unto them: as one of them was, having no woman with her at her travel.

19 If any of their sect do die, the wife or husband that ouerliueth, must
marry again with one of their congregation, or else the offense is great:
the marriage is made by the brethren, who bring them together sometime, that
dwell above a hundredth miles a sunder: as for example, Thomas Chaundler of
Wonerse, in the county of Surrey, had his wife fetched out of the Isle of Ely
by two of the congregation: the man and the woman being utter strangers,
before they came together to be married.

20 They do divorce again themselves a sunder if they can not agree, before
certain of the congregation: as the said Chandeler. and his wife did, upon a
mistyking, after they had been one year married together.

21 Whosoever is not of their sect they account him as a beast, that has no
soul, and shall yield no account for his doing: but as a beast shall dye and
not rise again, in body or soul. And to prove it, they allege a place out of
Esdras that, Who so is not of God, shall be as a drop of water that falls
from the house, and comes to nothing.

22 They hold, that he which is one of their congregation, is either as
perfect as CHRIST, or else a very diueti.

23 They hold, it is lawful to do what so ever the higher powers command
to be done, though it be against the commandments of God: and for that they
allege the words of S. Peter. Submit you selves to the ordinances of the
higher powers.

24 They deny that Christ is equal with God the Father in his Godhead: upon
this place of Scripture, My Father is greater then I.

25 It is odious for them to say, God the Son: for they deny him to be God
as is aforesaid.

26 They deny the Trinity, scorning them that say, God the Father, God the
son, and God the holy Ghost: as though by saying these words, they should
affirm to be three Gods.

27 They hold, that no man should be baptized, before he be of the age of xxx.
years. And therefore have diverse of them been baptized at those years and
vpwardes.

28 They hold, that every man ought first to be in an error before he can
come to the knowledge of the truth.

29 They say, that as Christ raised the dead, cleansed the lepre, gave sight to
the blind, and walked on the waters, so do they.

30 They hold, that heaven, and hell are present in this world amongst us, and
that there is none other: and for proof thereof, they allege the xvij. of
Matthewe, of Christ's transfiguration: that as the cloud removed, Peter did
see Elias, and Moses: so if the cloud were removed away, both heaven and hell
should be visible unto us.

31 They hold, that they are bound to give alms to none other persons, but to
those of their sect: and if they do, they give their alms to the devil.

32 They hold, that they ought not to bury the dead, upon this place of
Scripture: Let the dead bury the dead.

33 They hold, that they* should so provide, that if any perish, all should
perish: so that every one of them should relieve him with his goods, that
decays.

34 They hold, that none ought to receive the sacraments before he receives
their whole ordinances: as first, he must be admitted with a kiss, then his
feet must be washed, then hands laid on him, and so received.

35 They hold, the Popes service, and this service now used in the Church, to
be naught, and yet to be by them used as free in the Lord, to whom nothing is
unclean.

36 They hold, that all men that are not of their congregation, or that are
revolted from them, to be dead.

37 They hold, that no Bishop, or Minister should remain still in one place,
but that they ought always to be wandering from country to country.

38 They hold, that the Angels Raphael and Gabriel and others, were borne of a
Woman.

39 They hold, that they ought not to say David's Psalms as prayers: for they
are righteous and without sin.

40 They hold, there ought to be no Sabbath day, but that all should be like:
and for that they allege. The Son of of man is Lord over the Sabbath day.

41 They hold, that as God made heaven and earth by Jesus Christ: vz. the
word: so did he it by them.

42 They hold themselves to be Mary's: and say, that Christ is come forth in
their flesh, even as he came forth of the virgin Marie.

43 They hold, that there was aworlde before Adams time, as there is now.

44 They hold, y^ they ought to keep scilence amongst them selves that the
bertie they have in the Lord, may not be espied of others.

45 They hold, that no man should be put to death for his opinion: and
therefore they condemn Master Cranmer, and Master Ridley, for burning Ioane
of Kent.

46 They can not abide any exposition of Scriptures, but their own, conferring
one place of Scripture with an other, and so to say their minds of it, without
any other bodies exposition.

47 If any of them be conuented for his opinion, and does deny the same by
open recantation: he takes that to be a glory unto him, as though he had
suffered persecution in this doing: and yet still inwardly mainteyning these
opinions.

48 They brag very much of their own sincere lives, justifying themselves,
saying, Mark, how purelie we live.

49 If they have any thing to do, touching the ordering of their temporal
things, they must do it by advise: as to ask counsel of the Lord, vz. they
must go to one of their Bishops, or Elders, and to ask of him counsel, what
he shall do, and he must follow it.

50 When they give their alms, there is a hat set by the Bishop or Elders
upon a table, and then every one of the congregation does put under the hat,
that he is disposed to give: all which money comes to the Bishops or Elders
hands, and so the same is by him or them distributed, as they will: but to
whom, none of the congregation knows.

51 They have certain sleightes amongst them, to answer any questions that
shall be demanded of them, with deceiving the demaundant: as for example: if
one of them be demanded how he believes in the Trinity, he will answer, I
am to learn of you: and so provoke the demandant to show his opinion
therein: which done, he will say then: I do believe so: by the which words he
means, that he believes the demaundant says as he thinks: but not that he
thinks so.

52 They do decree, all men to be infants that are under the age of thirty
years: so that if they be demanded, whither Infantes ought to be baptized,
they answer, yea, meaning thereby, that he is an infant, until he attain to
those years, at which time ^e ought to be baptized, and not before.

53 Their Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, do increase in riches, and become
wealthy, but their disciples become poor and fall to beggerie.

I. R. To the reader.
SInce the imprinting of this book of the displaying of the Family of Love, I
have been answered by diverse letters, but from whom they were sent, it is
not expedient that I declare, for as much as I do but guess at the matter. by
the reading whereof, you shall perceive, that some in the same Family are
touched so nearly, that they begin to kick and spurn against the truth, and
stir up themselves with all the poor skill they have (which God knows is
but a little) to defend both their Author and his doctrine. Many are the
causes that have moved me to publish these their private letters with my
aunsweres there unto. Especially ij. the one is, that the Godly learned seeing
wherein these of the Family are grieved touching our doctrine, may plentifully
in places convenient confute their opinions and defend the purity of doctrine,
which is taught. An other cause is, the books have come into diverse men's
hands, who never heard of the family of love, which do imagine that I have
devised this my self, their errors are so gross: having no occasion so to do.
Therefore I have for my discharge let the world see, that such there are as I
have manifested. And some there are you may perceive, that can say somewhat to
defend their author and his doctrine. Some will not think it well done to
make that common which was written privately for conscience sake, to whom I
wholly agree in all things saving heresies, (and especially those y^ are
secreat) therefore for my excuse I protest I could very well have kept these
private conferences secret, had not some Godly and learned, ernestly moved me
to the contrary. And if I had thought that these rude aunsweres should have
come abroad. I would have used some more diligence in penning them: but since
the family have coppies hereof, I mind not to add any thing least they exclame
against me as you see they do. What part of our doctrine they find fault
with, by perusing these leters thou shall perceive. The Lord in mercy open
their eyes that they may at the last behold their backsliding from the right
ways of the Lord our God manifested, and bring them O Lord again into thy
fold, that we all may reverence that good sheepeherde of our souls Christ
Jesus.

Amen.
A Letter of the Family to I. R.
I Have bestowed diligence ( M. Rogers) in perusing the Book which ye set out,
entitled, The displaying of an horrible sect of gross and wicked heretics,
naming them selves the Family of Love, with the lives of their Authors, and
what doctrine they ^each in corners: with yet certain Articles confessed by two
of the Family before Sir William Moore. which when I went about to peruse, I
found it so frivolous and void of good, argument, that I much marvelled what
might be the cause, why the author devised such untruths, and chiefly,
because he put it in print at the instance of his friends, (nay rather
enemies): for friends persuade honest things, and enemies dishonest. You write
that the pains you took, was for a private friend, fallen into that error,
and though you were moved to put it in print, yet you were loath for diverse
causes: but chiefly because your conscience told you, that the eyes of the
world should by that means see your manifest untrue reports, for falshoode
would have corners, and fears the light. If it were only ignorance, it were
the better to be borne withal: but indeed (as it seems) it is come out of
malicious envy: Many goodly shows can not color the matter: for it is a
custom for men for good manners sake, to allege great wants to perform their
intents, and yet will adventure their follies, with hazard of good or evil
success. A rude style is never hurt to an honest cause, for the honesty
beautifieth al deformities of rudeness. But for the brag to have some other
of more judgment to reply, I verily think that no honest man of any wit, will
assay to defend so dishonest attemptes, least he be drawn in by that means with
this Author [ I. R.] to be found foole-hardy, or rashhastie, perfourming
therein (as well by writing as by deed) uncharitable i^ueighings and
impugnings o^ that which you confess you are not acquainted withal: and for
that cause you are rightly termed of some, for slaundrers. For in deed many
(knowing the people slandered, to be honester then the slaunderers) call in
doubt whether those sayings might be true which are vitered against them. Now
ye shall see this good childs care, as out of duty to Gods Church [euen as
blind as bolde] steps in first, to reprehend and condemn the love of God
and Christ (which is the holy Ghost) even out of a zeal to advance his
purpose, whereby he might show the fruits of a justifying faith: and (because
he has long time looked about, and yet finds none that will be so maddas to
enter with him) see now, how he can (according to his blindness) reprove
others: not seeing that they out of more modesty for certain causes, forbear
to write, least that they with like rashness, should enter into like folly.
This Family of Love (says he) is much increased within many Shieres of this
realm, which he rueth much. who s^eth not this his great blindness and
follic? Could any man (I am bold herein with you M. Rogers) r^e the prosperity
of the household of God, unless he him self were of the household of the
devil? and who would speak so shamefully [or rather shamelesly] against Gods
Ministers (as you do) were he not one of the Ministers of the devil? I pray
you consider: the ground whereon you lay your foundation; is against one H. N:
whom you never knew nor understood of. For that I have heard thereof, truly
it is not the signification of any man's name: But as Christ gave out his name
by two Caracters or letters A. and ^* so I see not (...) he [that is to say
Christ.] may be as well all the other letters between them two, in as much as
he is the first and the last. But it is very far from M. Rogers mind, to
look* so narrowly into the matter. I remember in the Apo. 2. it is written. To
him that overcomes will I give to eat Manna that is hid, and will give him
a white stone: and in that stone ^ new name written, which no man knows,
saving he that receives i^: Now if he that has inueighed against H. N*) has
(in the omnip^tent power of the most highest) overcome in that manner as is
aforesaid, then can he know this name: Otherwise let him and all his
adherents for ever hereafter be silent, least they (seeming to teach GOD what
he has to do) perish according to the witnessing of the Prophet. Behold ye
despisers, wonder and be confounded: for I do a work in your days, which ye
shall Aba. 1. a Acts. 13. f
not believe, albeit any one should tell it you. I must also a little put you
in mind of your impudent dealings. You say you have read a confession of their
faith newly made, which neither you nor any of your adhere^ts can in any word
justly reprove: why should you then (unless it were out of cankered envy,
and according to your forefathers nature and accustomed manner) so standerously
report of us, as that we are ashamed to acknowledge our belief? You affirm
also, that much more false doctrine then you have set out in that book, is
taught among the people, which (to confute) you complain your self to be
unable to perform for the lack of learning, nevertheless, you will give us a
taste of this doctrine, to give the children of God to beware thereof, yet many
books (you say) are abroad which you have not seen, and again, some you
have seen, but yet had no leisure to peruse: for the use of the people is not
to let any but their own company, to see their books, neither will they
confer or talk in any points of doctrine, but with such as them selves. Now I
pray you ^ee what a Caveat you put in to excuse your malice (in that you have
not seen some of the books, and yet those some which you have seen, you had
no time to peruse sufficiently, neither could you confer with the people for
their subtilties cause). Lo, here is like to proceed some good stuff I
warrant you! For how can you say, but at adventure, of the things which you
neue^r heard ne saw? I would you had played an honest man's part, and had used
but equal weight and measure, and not have (contrary to your promise, where
you said you will allege the Authors words, and neither add ne diminish) taken
here three or four lin^s, and then pass over ten or twelve, and then again
take two lines, and again pass over six lines, and take half a line, etc.
and so make a sentence thereof. Thus is your doings found out of so many as
have compared your allegations with the books of the Author: Notwithstanding
all this, you protest that you are void of malice in your untrue book,
seeming rather to pity the poor seduced people, then otherwise intending
envy. You promise likewise to put down nothing whereof you have not sufficient
warrant by certain in the Duche Church, [but sure I am, not of Christ's
Church, for as much as they exercise not their mouthe^ with Iyes]: but you have
heard so, and therefore it is so, men of good credit say so: I had rather
hear an honest poor man's report truly spoken, then a rich credible man's that
is a liar, and it is well known to some of the Duche Church, that your
credible men are liars, yet can you be content to favor their reports. And as
touching the cyting of H. N. his own words, without adding or diminishing (I
am ashamed of your disorderly dealings therein) that shall so appear in the
answer to the book, as ye shall be proved therein as in y^ rest, a falsister
of both. The speech which you pretend to have had with many of the company, I
dare affirm it to be a great untruth, and is but a visard (as you have said
of them) to cover your malice withal. I would shame would let you tell the
truth, then should you say as it is, that your mate E. L. (one of your own
family) has prompt you forward in these matters, especially against
Christopher Vital [a man whose honest life and conversation, you were never
able to come near^, nor shall, unless you mend your words, deeds, weightes,
measures, and waxes]. But will you see one notable matter which you have
gathered out of this Authors words more: that is, The truth has not been
taught in the world since the Apostles time, but now by the Family: the
Scripture affirms Scripture evil applied.
that Christ (the only truth): has said: My kingdom is no^ of this world,
and how can the truth be taught, where the kingdom is not? for it has been
ever hid from the world and her wise, but yet always manifested amongst the
outseuered ones from this world. And even as the enemies of the same truth
have always martyred Gods holy ones, even so now would such worldlings as
you are, do, had you power thereto. And this I assure you, that the very same
doctrine which those Martyrs have taught, the same does H. N. teach: but you
say, truth seeks no corners, (see your appliment herein) Christ commands
his disciples, saying: When they persecute you in one city, flee unto an
other, and we read that Christ also many times went from place to place, to
avoid such your forefathers, the Scribes and Pharisees, who sought his life.
And I pray you, did not Jacob flee from his brother Esau, Noe from the whole
world, Lot from the Sodomites, Elias from all men, David from Saul, with
infinite more examples? Then how do you approve your matter? It can (belike)
be no truth, except you allow it to be true, a sound consequent. Likewise, you
say, untruly citing the words, that the Illuminate Elders can not err nor
sin, nor dare before the simple ones in Christ's Church, approve their
Authors doctrine: you have (I am sure) good warrant, to sever the Illuminate
Elders in the godly wisdom and holy understanding, out of the Church of
Christ. But I have better to prove that you are not thereof. You disallowe
others of bosting, because you might boast alone: is ye suffering with Christ
to rail upon his true members? or else in patience to take up our cross, and
so suffer, till (by his suffering in us) we be delivered and justified (but I
dare say you understand me not now) from sin, death, diuill, and hell? but
your words are no slanders as you think, else would you season them with
truth, for very shame. For were it permitted that company (with indifferency)
to avouch the truth of their cause, as it is permitted you and your company
slanderously to blaspheme, you should then be showed in your right colors.
Ye say also that their Rabies or Elders have recanted Arianisme at Paul's
cross: as well might you be charged with other matter, etc. But your objection
is false, witness my Lord of Canterbury that now is: and yet more were to
be said, but the company hops your conuertio^, although at this present
your brethren in Christ (for their good faithes cause they have in your
licentious doctrine of predestination and free election) fill all the prisons
The opinion of the Family of Love concerning predestination.
almost in England: but what reason have I to charge you therewith, but
forsooth to put you in mind, that you look to your self and yours, before
you reprove others, which (me thinks) is but reason. You give a glaunce also
at the greatest house in this realm, which you wish were clear of such
errors, but (put up your bolt I advise you) whether that house has authority
to ouerlooke you and your adherents, that may you know hereafter. Moreover,
you say you could (if you listed to be a blab) tell out many discentions among
them, who yet (you confess) will not in their best things make you or any
other acquainted, much less in things against them selves: but it is true like
the rest: all this is but to make your speeches wonderful, and your modesty
greater then it is. You forget thereby many Protestants (I think excelling you
in understanding) in Rome, Spain, Italy, and other places under the Bishop of
Romes inquisitio^, which hold it good policy to defend them selves and their
consciences in keeping them from such Tyranny. Will you not allow to others,
as you gladly challe^ge to your self* then we must say you are unequal in your
doings. But will you see the most egregious untruth that can be spoken by this
new shameless writer. He alleges John Leydon and Snypper Dolling at Munster
in Westfalia, which were duly punished for Anabaptisme by the governors and
Lords of that time and place, as appears by many writers, as John Sleydon
and others. And because these men were Hollanders, and as he affirms,
scholars of David George, therefore H. N. must be belike (by that reason) one
of that confederatie. For although many learned writers do affirm their matter
to be Anabaptisme, yet this man will have it the Family of Love. Fulwell do
you open your malice herein as in the rest, with your forefathers, who said
that Christ had the devil, and was a wine bibber, a companion of sinners, etc.
but repent least that chance to you that came upon them. And again, look I
pray you, how you stumble in your own tale. You would prove that none has
received their ministry from the mouth of God (you'speake of Paul) did not
Christ speak to him after his ascension from heaven? and I pray you tell me,
what ministration (that ever was true) came from other then Gods own mouth?
you are taught to flee such boasters: like enough, for so Satan has always
taught his children. And as concerning the badge whereby you would know them,
is (as you set down) by public declaration, which is utterly false. For
Moses only showed his ministration to the Israelites: Abraham, to his
children: Noc, to his family: Lot, to his household: and all the Prophets, to
Gods peculier children: the Apostles, in private houses, etc. And now (to be
short) the disciples of Christ* or his word, which are taught by the doctrine
of Christ our savior out of the mouth of H. N. do confess freely before all
men, the ground of their faith and religion: and though you will not credit it,
yet it does not follow that it is not so: except this reason (as God forbid)
should always hold, like as it has holden of late: Because men say I am a
thief, therefore no proof of law: the testimony of my neighbors with whom
I live, nor mine own words (against so simple an alligation) must be
permitted: but all is untrue now except it be to prove your false words and
slanderous brutes true. Here we find will and injustice, on your part, to
have more rule, then equity or good reason. And now therefore ( master
Rogers) will I (even out of love to an admonition of you to your preservation)
display unto you a little of the difference betwixt the doctrine of H. N. and
yours. He exhorts (according to the doctrine of Jesus Christ mentioned in the
Scriptures) to true repent^unce: godly love: an upright faith: and dutiful
obedience, etc. (even like as many of you at this day, in words do,) but yet he
with more power: for he manifests according to the truth, that none among
all the children of men shall be found meet (in the sight of the Lord) to bear
the names of Christians (boast they never so much of their Christianity,
freedom, or justification by Christ in their unregenerated life as they will)
which has not submitted them selves in true repentance, under the obedience of
Gods holy law, which is administered unto them in the service of Love: for to
become first disciples of the same word, to a reformation of their own ways:
and not to go presently forth with the knowledge, and teach others (as you do)
before they be come taught and reformed thereby: neither yet to judge others
therewith (as you now do) before they be come first judged thereby: which he
calls the true baptism, in the name of the father. And then (being so taught
unto Jesus Christ in the holy law) to take up (in the belief) their cross
daily on them, with Christ against the sin (which he calls, the true
baptism in the name of the Son) until that Christ (which is the way, the
truth, and the life it self) have gotten a living shape or form in them by
faith: and that they (through the Spirit of love or Christ) be raised up
again in a new life (which he calls the true baptism in the name of the
holy Ghost.) whereunto all the Family of Love or of God, at this day are
lovingly called: and do mean (by Gods assistance) most earnestly to endeavor
themselves, (: but yet with much more quietness) might they have rest by such
enemies to all godliness as you are. Although you be unacquainted with this
doctrine* or rather true baptism, here following: yet would we not therefore
have you belie us (according to your accustomed manner) and say, that we deny
the holy sacrament thereof. And although this infallible Christian doctrine, of
Love, Faith, Obedience, and Life, which is taught by H. N. in the service of
Love, and accords with all Scriptures, remains yet unknown (much less
practiced) amongst you free ones or Lybertines, and this true repentance which
is taught (under the obedience of the holy law of God the Father): this true
cross of Jesus Christ (which is taught under the obedience of the belief of
God the Son) and this true resurrection or newenesse of life (which is taught
under the obedience of the love of God the holy Ghost) is Romans 6. a. b. c.
etc Ephc. 4. ^. Collos. 2. b 2. Timo. 2 c. d. Gall. 3. d
now blasphemed, despised, and resisted, as an vnneedefull thing of you: yet
is the same nevertheless (by the Family of Love or of God) found to be the
old and true way, corespondent with all the doctrine of the Apostles of Jesus
Christ, and therefore so needful, that without it (look over the Scriptures
again so many as be wise among you) there shall no man find mercy with God,
or else (through Jesus Christ) become saved. Then (Alas master Rogers* alas)
what have you done: (I hope nothing yet but out of ignorance) I would then you
would look better into the matter: for if H. N. be a minister of the Lord,
then you have much ouershot your self. I leave Stephan Bateman to the
righteous judgment of the Lord, as one in whom there is small hope of any
goodness. Wherefore, the Lord God for his Christ's sake, grant you eyes of
understanding, and a repentant heart to ask forgiveness, for so maliciously
blaspheming Gods love and truth extended toward us (out of mercy
undeserved) and to ask mercy for deprauing such a gracious work of God,
published forth now in the last time to all men's preservation that desire to
walk* therein: whereof we shall be right glad: and then shall you be delivered
from that lying spirit, which now seeks (like as in times past) with most
horrible slanders and lies to deface all good, and all such as endeavor
themselves thereunto. So shall it come to pass, to Gods glory, your salvation,
and our comfort. Amen.

Your unknown friend.

The answer of I. R. to* the letter of the Family.
I Received a letter from you as from an unknown friend, containing matter
inuectiue against my book, as also very many contumelious and slanderous
speeches touching my honesty: both which to answer you shall find me ready
and willing, although not with like speech of disdain, sauouring of the
spirit of envy and not of love. To all which speech touching my honesty this
shall serve for answer: the Lord deal so and so between us, as you unjustly
charge me with waightes, measures, wares, etc: but the contents of my book
disquieteth your mood, the which you shall find more large in aunswering.

1 The first matter: you tell me that no honest man would assay to defend so
dishonest attempts: to defend my honesty I will not in this place, my
protestation shall serve: but if the cause be dishonest then I am worthy great
reprehension: but you mistake me utterly that I reprehend the love of God and
Christ: far be that from me: it is self love that I discommende in your
author, and in you all of this family. For the love of God is manifested to us
by Christ our Lord, which is our only comfort. So God loved the world etc.
John.
You love your author so well that this love of God little appears.

2 Could any man, (you say) rue the prosperity of the householde of God,
except he were of the devil? no verelye. If you were of Christ's householde, we
as fellows would embrace you, but strangers from that household ye are, and
as strangers lurk in corners.

3 My foundation you say is against H. N. whom I never knew, nor understood
off: True it is touching his person, but by his doctrine he is not unknown to
me, whose books I have to show.

4 You say, as Christ in the revelation is shadowed by two caracters A. and O.
so none can know his name except he overcome in the spirit, therefore we must
be scilent hereafter, for H. N. is not the signification of any man's name. This
is a great mystery in deed, for if H. N. be not a man, then have I utterly
mistaken my self: but sure the books were not written by Angels, man was the
minister, and the man that write them, his name is Henrye Nicholas, and the
same man's life I have truly set down: not hearesayes, but the truth: not of
enemies, but of his neighbors and familiers: not one man, but many: they will
not only speak the truth, but are ready upon their oaths to testify the
same.

5 Where you judge that you are suer they are not of the Church of Christ, it
is very rash Judgment: I could testify of their honest life and manners, but
it shall be here impertinent. You make your comparisons unequal, because Christ
by two letters did testify his majesty and power as god: will you admit H. N.
by like reason to use two letters significant. In deed I have ^en answered y^
H. N. signifies Homo nouus, but such follyes will not serve: you must of
necessity acknowledge H. N. to be a man: as one of our Family at Farnam,
before the Bishop of Winchester did acknowledge and confess him, that is to say,
H. N. not only to be a man, but also a sinner: and least you should burden me
with untruth as you have done, I will give you his name: R. W.

6 You put me in mind of my impudent dealing, in that I have said that none
of your family dare set forth your doctrine in principles, that all men may see
wherein you and we differ, and you refer me to a little book called The
confession of the Family, which book I have read: but that is very plausible,
nothing differing from us. If you held no worse points then that book does
utter, suerly I would come before you al, acknowledge my fault, and crave
pardon: but this is a mere mockery of the people, to set down your faith
common with us, and nothing contrary to us, where as your author in sundry
places terms us a devilish Sinagogue or school^, and that we are not the
Church, but a harlo^t. If you and we profess one Christ, one baptism, one
faith: why are we severed in communion? but it is a world to see your doings
in this matter. When any of your family are conue^ted before any officer in
Christ's Church, then you subscribe to any form, you recant in your own
churches, you promise never to profess H. N. nor his doctrine: and yet still
after so sollemne protestations you retain your secret doctrine, which in
few words is not plain dealing. If your doctrine be a truth, why do you
still deny it? if the power of God has shone through H. N. so mightily, why
do you not in principles draw your doctrine, that the people of God may see
upon what grounds and stays you have severed your self from us? but you use
the policy of the cuttle, a fish, whose property is to trouble the water, that
she may not be seen: so with your dark speeches and mysteries, you would cast
a mist that no man should see your meaning: and then stand upon your tiptoes
and say, that your sentences have such profounde majesty, that our simple and
gross capacities cannot comprehend the same. Plain dealing is ever best. If
we be in error, show it to us in what points, and for my own part I will (if
you can convince me by the testimonies of holy scripture,) yeald unto you or
any.

7 What conference I have had with your family, diverse of your family can tell
you.

8 You say my disorderly dealing shall appear in the answer to my book,
which for my part I shall long look for: for hitherto you have not set down any
one place where in I have mistaken your author. In deed I took not upon me to
write against any one book, but to display what absurdities I find in your
authors Doctrine: you shall find that performid or it be long by Master
Knewstubs, who has written a book to confute your Euangelium Regni. You apply
this text of holy scripture very fondly: Christ says, my kingdom is not of
this world.

9 You ask how the truth can be taught where his kingdom is not? If you
mean by this word kingdom, power majesty, and dominion, then it is showed
in y^ world, and manifested to his Church: But by kingdom the Evangelist does
understand (as I take it) an outward show of principality, which the Jews
looked for to be in their deliverer or Messiah, which he denied to be in him:
which may better appear in that which follows. For then would my ministers
surely fight for me.

11. I know that Christ chiefly reigns in his Church: but who are the
Church is the question. Every heresy seeks to shadow it self with the
title of the Church, but by the life of Gods holy word they have been found
heretics and seducers: and yet I never heard of any error but drew their
doctrine into principles, and durst disspute with any in their opinions, except
one Basilides which Eusebius in his 4. book Chap. 7. makes mention of: who
feining sundry titles of unknown names of Prophets, to amaze their hearers,
depending upon Revelations, and visions: amongst other things taught this,
that in time of persecution their faith with perjury might be denied: saying.
Iura periura fide^ prodere noli. Now surely if I might without offense compare
your dealings with Basilides, it should be found little differing.

12 You say that the same doctrine which the Martyrs taught in the primitive
Church. H. N. teaches now: but we plainly deny that ever any taught a
perfection to be atteyned unto in this life, to live not daily committing
sin: or that our battle is ended when we be re generat: or that any H. N.
has received such power of teaching extraordinary, as you imagine. For we
deny that he has the spirit of god, and say that he teaches mere contrary
doctrine unto the scriptures. It is therefore convenient that you show us where
in you and we differ, in what points, and in what doctrine: and then we shall
think that there is some show of good meaning in you: otherwise if you
continue disslikers of our profession, and show us not wherein, but refer us
to your authors books, we shall never find out the difference between us.

13 In deed in your long discourse you have showed your disliking in one part
of our doctrine, to wit, of predestination, which you impute to be the cause of
the fulness of prisons in England, but before the doctrine was set forth,
prisons have been full of leude persons, and such as regard no religion.
Therefore you do not well to charge the doctrine of predestination with so
foul a fault. Which doctrine stands upon the omnipotency of God: so that
they that acknowledge his almightinesse, must of force grant his power in
predestination and election. And although some stumble at the same yet the
fault is not in the doctrine but in the persons, who take it by that part which
it is not to be holden by. For as a sharp two edged sword being taken by the
blade or point to defend a man, may as soon hurt himself as his enemy,
even so who takes the doctrine by such part as the holy scriptures have
appointed, it will be to their comfort: otherwise it may hurt the^. Many have
written largely in that argument, whereunto hitherto few have replied. And if no
other matter grieve your minds but this doctrine, I doubt not but reconciliation
may easily be bad: but I am affrayde our Justification in Christ, our
acknowledging ourselves to be sinners, our weakness in perfourming y^ law, is
also some cause of discention between you and us: which I would be glad to
understand for my erudition.

14 You say that H. N. exhorts to true repentance, godly love, and upright
faith, etc. If we did not the like we were impions hipocrites: but he you say
does it with power: which we would gladly feel.

15 Our justification and redemption brag we never so much thereof (say you)
helps not, except a regenerate life follow. We agree with you, that a
regenerate life does show a justified man, but makes not a man just: For it
is the fruit and not the root of our justification.

16 But that you term our repentance, obedience, faith, love, etc. the
upright baptism of the father, your meaning I am ignorant of. To take up in
the belief our cross daily against sin, and this to be the true baptism of
the son, as you say. And when Christ has gotten in us a living form or
shape by faith, and so be raised up in newness of life, this you call the true
baptism in the holy ghost. All which I do acknowledge may have very apt
application, so long as we imagine not a perfection to be wrought in us, as to
be without sin. For to be like to Christ, or have his image, is to be
understood, to be like minded to him who did not sin, but that privilege
only pertains to him and not to us. For he is like to us in all thing, sin
except: but this bar, sin, is the badge whereby his death and office
works upon us to our salvation. And except we with all the Prophets,
Patriarchs, Apostles and other Gods children (doing our best) still
acknowledge our selves sinners, I cannot see how Christ's death does by any
means perteine unto us. Gladly would I be resolved in this point.

17 And now at this day we are called as you say, and might find much more
rest if such enemies to al godliness as I am were not. This is very sharp
judgment. Because I manifest your family, does it follow that I am enemy to
all godliness? Is there no godliness upon earth but among men of your profession
only? Christ's household were very small then: and yet as I am an enemy to your
doctrine, so your persons I have not hated: For whom in their trouble I have
sought delivery, and have known of your meetings if I had been enuiously
minded: but far be that from me.

18 As for E. L. I protest unto you, even by the Lord, that he is utterly
ignorant of any my doings, neither did I see him this year and half: yet did
he participate to me of Christopher Vittals behavior long ago. Now
touching your free confession before all men out of the mouth of H. N. of your
doctrine: certainly it is shadowed with such phrases and circumstances, that few
can find any sense in his books, but many good words without conclusion,
which should not be in the purity of a good cause.

19 As for those prophetical speeches in the Apocalipse, of the white stone
with a new name written therein, which none knows saving he that receives
it, if this be H. N. as you would slily insinuate, tell us in plain terms.
For your hidden mysteries will not longer serve.

20 You ask what ministration was ever true which came not from God his own
mouth, I answer as before, that there must be both an inward calling which is
from God, and an outward calling from men. Now if H. N. or you will show us
that he is called from God his own testimony is not sufficient, neither do
his books manifest his calling. Therefore for the credit of his new
doctrine, it is required that he work miracles: or else prove unto us that
his doctrine is not disagreeing from the holy scriptures, and that
substancially. If you would go plainly to work, and show unto us your
authors doctrine by principles, and prove the same by holy scripture, surely
I and others would conceive that upon some ground of good conscience you were
severed in judgment from us. For so long as the matter remains hidden: men
construe your doings worse peraduenthen it is: and it augme^teth suspicion,
that being called to witness forth your doctrine, you are found so fearful
and fainte, that it shows not a testimony of the spirit of God: For where
the spirte of God rests, there is joined wisdom, audacitie, constancy,
truth and plain dealing.

21 And where you hold it good policy to flee from one city to an other
being sought for, I grant it to be reason: yet being called and brought before
y^ magistrates, then fearfully or cowardly to fainte, is mere impiety in a
just cause. He that denies me before men, I will etc. For either ye utter such
a confession as is holden of us, and believed among us, or else venie your
author and his doctrine utterly. Did the Martires in the primitive Church so?
Did our brethren in Queen Mary's days so? Nay clean contrary: being called,
they did boldly publishe the truth of Christ with open and plain speeches, and
did set down their faith in principles to the eyes of al men, and not keep it
secret in corners.

22 Assuredly if H. N. be a minister of the Lord, then have I much ouershot my
self, and if you can prove it to me, I shall gladly receive it, and will be
ready to recant and call back all my words and ask mercy, in like form as
you have prescribed: but hitherto as I am persuaded, and as my conscience
bears me witness, I have not in any point slandered you, nor of malice
spoken any thing against you: for if I did know any nerer way to salvation then
y^ which our savior Christ has taught in his Gospel, I would with all
greedenesse embrace it. And if I can understand that ever this your doctrine was
taught publikly since christ our Lord his assention, by any godly writer in
Christ's Church, I will cease and subscribe unto you: otherwise blame me not
though I continue in that mind, which the Lord in mercy by his Christ has
made manifest to me to my comfort. The God of mercy and consolation give you
a right spirit to depend upon the purity of his word written by the holy
Ghost, and not to depend upon the uncertainty of man, giving testimony to
him self: so shall both you and I be brought to see rightly into our
weakness, and shall hear y^ joyful voice y^ Paul heard. My grace is
sufficient for thee. For y^ Lords power and love is manifested and made kno wen
unto the world through our weakness, and all our righteousness is Sicut
pannus menstrualis. God in mercy give us all his grace, that in seeking the
true way that ledeth to life everlasting, we be not led into y^ by paths of
error: but lead us and guide us O Lord, so shall we know thy ways aright,
and embrace our saving health in Christ, declared to all nations. If it please
you to reply I shall receive it thankfully.

London the 12. of February. Your friend I. R.

A Letter of the Family to I. R. written by E. R.
M. Rogers, these are to signify vntd you, that I have perused a book, whereof
you are the author. In your preface you say, you have used this order, to set
down the authors own speech, not adding or diminishing any thing, with the
name of the book, Chapter, or folio. I do wish that your word and deed had
agreed therein. I call to mind, that I have read many authors books within
this 35. or 36. years, and among them all, I have not found any writer that
has taken such an order as you have done: for who so ever will write, to
confute an Author, he should set down the Authors own words, as they
stand written in his books, and so to confute them by the Scriptures orderly,
and not to take out, here some, and there some, and of diverse sentences, and
part of diverse sentences, to make one sentence. You have added and diminished
in diverse places, (and to enlarge your book withal, you have set down the
most part of the sentences in two places) as y^ readers may perceive, if they
do confer your book, with the Authors books, and w^y them with
indifferency. I am fully persuaded, that the sober, discreet, wise, and godly
learned, do, ne will not allow of it, that any Author should be so abused, as
you have abused this Author, in wresting, belying, and perverting his
writings. Salonton says. Prou. 14 a
A false record will make a lie. Prou. 19. a
A false witness shall not remain unpunished, and he that speaks lies
shall not escape. I pray God open the eyes of your heart, that you may see your
ignorance, and repent. You do ground one point of your matter upon Adrian
Gisling, a man of credit (as you say) y^ he did read in a Duche book,
entitled the Glass of righteousness, wherein the Author does certify his
Family of Love, that they must pass four most terrible castles, full of
combersome enemies, before they come to the house of Love, the first is John
Calvin, the second the Papists, the third Martine Luther, the fourth the
Anabaptists: how good of credit so ever Adrian Gisling is of, he has not at
any time read any such matter in any of that Authors books, (he might perhaps
read of such matter, in some other book having that title.) I my self have
read over diverse of the books, and also the book called, the Glass of
righteousness, of that Authors writing that you take your occasion against,
and there is no such Castles written in any of his books, therefore Adrian
Gisling is therein utterly deceived, and I do believe no less, but those other
things that you have written upon report, against ^ Author, to make him
odious unto the people, is as contrary. I suppose you should have done well,
if you had not come in with a flourish to attempt battle, and begin a
skirmish against those that have no pleasure or delight in war or battle,
but much rather do desire peace and unity. It is not reckoned for a manly
part, that an armed soldier should take up weapon, and fight with a naked
child. It is written, 3. Reg. 20. b.
Let not him that puts on his harness, boast him self, as he that puts
it off. If the little 1. Reg. 17. f.
unarmed child David, do come to battle with his sling, and stones, one of
the stones may happen to hit Golias in the forhed, be he never so well
appointed for battle, and trusts in his own strength. But what you have
done, you can not undo, it is too far past your hands. And where you call in
doubt that the family will carpe (as you term it) at your book, and do
offer, if they do answer it, a speedy reply will be performed, I for my
part (I give GOD thanks) am not ignorant of the Land of strife and
contention that ye walk in (and as it appears, ye have a pleasure therein) I
have wandered up and down there ouerlong, and consumed much time there
about, to my great grief and sorrow: for those that do love strife and
contention, would have other like to them selves. S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 2. d
The servants of the Lord must not strive. And Saint James says, Iam. 3. c.
If ye have bitter envying and strife in you hearts, rejoice not, neither be
liars against the truth: and then following, where envy and strife is, there
is unstableness and all manner of evil works. In the Homily for whitsunday the
second part, ye may read this sentence. But to conclude and make an end, ye
shall briefly take this short lesson: where so ever ye find the spirit of
arrogancy and pride, the spirit of envy, hatred, contention, cruelty,
murder, extortion, witchcraft, Necromancie, etc. assure your selves, that
there is the spirit of the devil, and not of GOD, albeit they pretend
outwardly to the world never so much holiness. I have no desire, pleasure,
nor delight, to carpe at your book, nor to strive or contend with you, or any
one, neither is there any other (who do desire peace and unity) that will
have any delight or pleasure in strife and contention, but leave every one to
the Lord. Solomon says, Prou. 29. ^
The sin of the wicked is his own snare. Saint Paul says, Gala. 6. ^.
Every man shall bear his own burden. And Romans 12. d.
Vengeance is mine, and I will recompense says the Lord, My hearty desire
is of the Lord, that he will for his son Jesus Christ's sake, be merciful
unto us all, and forgive us all our sins, and pour into us his holy spirit,
that we may learn of him, where he says, Matt. 11. d
Learn of me. for I am meek and lowly in heart. Saint Peter says. 1. Pet.
2. d.
Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an ensample. that we should follow
his steps. And Christ says, Matt. 5. ^.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Again, Luke. 6. c
Be ye merciful as your heavenly father is merciful. And further, Matt. 7.
b.
What so ever ye would that men should do to you, even so do to them, This
is the laws and the Prophets. etc. Many other such fruitful and comfortable
documentes, we may read in the holy and sacred Scriptures* which being well
considred of, we could not strive, contend, envy, belie, nor persecute one an
other of us, for as much as we are all creatures of one Gods creation. It is
written Malachie. 2. c. Have we not all one Father, has not one God made us?
Why does every one of us then despise his own brother? S. Paul says, Gala.
5. c.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. If ye byte and devour one
another, take heed least ye be consumed one of an other. If any do err for a
time, let every one whom God has delivered out of error, do his best
(according to the rule set down to us in the holy scriptures) to help the
Gala. 6. a. Ephesians. 4. a.
burdened, These. 5. b.
Romans 15. a.
frail, weak, and erring man, Iam. 5. d.
hoping upon ye goodness of the Lord, and wait when the Lord of his mere
goodness and mercy, will open the heart of the erring man: for those causes
are between God and his creature, and God will be avenged on all such as
wilfully and willingly do err, and have a pleasure to remain therein: but he
will be merciful unto al those that have a desire to reture and seek him in
true repentance. It is not Christian like, that one man should envy, belie,
and persecute an other, for any cause touching conscience. William Tindale
compares them to Antichrists disciples, that do break up into the consciences
of men, and compel them either to forswear themselves by the Almighty God,
and by the holy Gospel of his merciful promises, or to testify against them
selves. Again, he says, secret sins pertain to GOD to punish, and open
sins, to the king. He says also, A Christian man has Christ's spirit. Now
is Christ a merciful king: if therefore thou be not merciful after the
example of Christ, then have thou not his spirit. If thou have not Christ's
spirit, then art thou none of his. Romans 8. nor have any part with him. If
any man do willingly err, he shall have everlasting damnation for his reward
at Gods hand, unless he do earnestly repent. Is not that punishment sufficient
which God has ordained, but that one Christian must vex, torment, belie, and
persecute an other? Solomon says, Prou. 14. ^.
Without doubt they do err that imagine wickedness, the envious man, the
liar, the persecuter of his poor brother, imagines wickedness, and therefore
he is not void of error. I have not read in any of the authors books, y^ he
has striued, envied, rayled at, slandred, belied, or wished per secution to
any man, or has named contumeliously any man: but his writing and striving is
against the nature of y^ sin, which has borne so long dominion in the man,
etc. And where you take exception, as though the Author were against the
learned in the Scripture, because he uses in diverse places of his writings the
false Scripture-learned. Answer. There is not any true meaning man, which
reads the scripture, that can of right take any exception thereat. Can any
true, honest, or plain hearted man, be offended with any godly and learned
Preacher, to hear him speak against, and rebuke murder, theft, adultery,
covetousness, Idolatry, and such like? Are we not al scripture learned, that
do read and talk of the scripture? Does not every man approve his sect or
opinion (as much as in him lies) by the scripture? Does not this author also
approve the testimony of his writing by record of the scripture? He speaks
not against those that do desire to walk according to the counsel of the
scripture, but against the false hearts of the scripture learned, that have more
desire to be talkers thereof, then to do what the scripture requires. An
exsample: The Merchant that uses his trade in balance, weight, and measure,
etc. according to the rule of the scripture (as ye may read, Leui. 19. g. Deu.
25. c. Pro. 11. a. 16. b. 20. b. Eze. 45. c. and Miche. 6. c.) may well be
taken for a true Merchant, but he that uses deceit, fraud, guile, etc. may be
taken for a false Merchant, yet both are merchants. Our savior Christ says,
Matt. 7. c.
Not all they that say Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but
he that does my fathers will which is in heaven. Luke. 11. c
Happy are they that hear the word of God and keep it. John. 14. b
If ye love me, keep my commandments. Romans 2. b.
Before God, they are not righteous which hear the law, but the doers of the
law shall be justified. S. James accounts him James. 1. d
happy that is a doer of the work, and not a forgetful hearer: and see that ye
be doers of the word, and not hearers only. S. John says, Apo. 22. d
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that their power may be in the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gate into the city. The Preacher
says, Eccle. 12. ^
Let us hear the conclusion of all things: Fear God, and keep his
commandments, for that touches all men. Happily ye may object (as some have
done that I have communed with) and say, it is impossible to do and keep the
commandments. Answer. What the scriptures last before recited does require,
you have heard, and many more there might be alleged to the like effect,
whereof I have here set down some for an ensample (if you please, you may
examine them by the Scripture) as Exodus. 20. a. Leuit. 22. d. 26. a. Deuteronomy. 5.
b. 10. c. 11. b. Iosu. 22. a. 3. Reg. 8. f. Psalm. 78. a. Proverb. 2. a. 3. a.
4. a. 7. a. 19. b. Ezech. 18. Ecclesiast. 2. c. Matthew. 19. b. John. 15. b. 1. Corinthians 7. d. 1. Timothy. 6. c. 1. Ioh. 3. d. 5. n. Apoca 12 d. etc. And S.
Hierome says, Accurssed be he which says, God commanded impossible things.
And again, he which says, y^ we can fulfill the co^mandments of God wout the
grace of God, accursed be he. You say, no one man dare once open his mouth, or
put pen to paper, to defend the author in England, but you are therein deceived,
there be y^ has done both, as some of your own familiar friends can testify:
Nevertheless, the authors own writings are sufficient to answer for him, were
they weyed in the balance of equity. You term the said Family simple: how
much are they bound to laud the Lord, and to give him most high thanks and
praise, that they are simple. Moses says, Number. 11. g
Would God that all the Lords people could prophecy, and that the Lord would
put his spirit upon them. So do I wish from the bottom of my heart, that all
the Lords people were simple, (concerning evil and malice) then strife,
contention, envying, backbiting, lying, persecuting for conscience cause,
theft* murder, whoredom, drunkenness, Idolatry, and such like, should not
bear so great dominion as it does. Is it an odious matter in your eyes to be
simple? I pray you peruse well these few sentences of Scripture here following.
Psalm. 19. b.
The testimony of the Lord is pure, and gives wisdom to the simple. Psalm.
69. a.
God thou know my simpleness, my faults are not hid from thee. Psa. 113. b
He takes up the simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the
mire. Psalm. 116. b
The Lord preserves the simple. Psalm. 119. c
When thy word goes forth, it gives light and understanding even unto the
simple. Eccle. 9. d.
A simple man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard. Job. 24. c.
Timely in the morning do they arise to murder the simple and poor. Zach. 9. b
Rejoice thou greatly O daughter Sion, be glad O daughter Jerusalem, for lo,
thy King comes unto thee, even the righteous and Savior, lowly and simple is
he. Zach. 11. c.
The poor simple sheep, that had a respect unto me, knew thereby that it was
the word of the Lord. You say, the zeal of the Lords house carried you so
far, that you could not stay till you had published such matter as came to
your hands, I for my part can not so conceive, that it was the Lords zeal,
for there could not any one deal in such sort, and use such spenches in
writing as you have done, if he were carried by the zeal that the lord does
require. It may rather be gathered, that you had such a zeal as Jesus the
son of Syrach writes of, where he says: Eccl. 30. d
Zeal and anger shorten the days of life, and also, Eccl. 40. ^
There is nothing but wrath, zeal, fearfulness, unquietness, fear of
death, 'rigours, anger, and strife, etc. But my desire is of the Lord, that he
would plant the true zeal in us all, and then the love (v3. to love God above
all, and our neighbor as our selves) should not be so despised and had in
contempt with many as it is now in these days. You say that Sir William
Moore, a worthy Justice in Surrie, had the examination of one or two of the
Family, who uttered much matter which you are loath to write, and yet in the
end of your book, you have set down the Articles that were confessed before
Sir William Moore, the 28. of May, 1561. by two of the Family of Love. You
would have it appear to the readers, as though there were two at one time
before a worshipful Justice of Peace, and one or two at an other time before
Sir William Moore, and all those confessors were but two parties, and one
matter as you well know, for you have, or have had, the written copy of the
Articles, with the names of those two parties, that (as it is said) were the
confessors of the said Articles before Sir William Moore, who was not at that
time (v3. the 28, of May. 1561.) known or called by the name of Sir William
Moore, for he was but an Esquire. What false and forged matter is set down in
the said Articles, and that the confessors of them, are, nor never were of
the Family of Love, I leave to the judgment of the same two parties, and of
all those that have had, have, or shall have, the cause in question, and will
consider of it with indifferency. Concerning the citizen your neighbor, whom
you do so often name in your book, to discredit him as much as in you lies
(although you have n^ just cause so to do, I leave to the judgment of all
those discreet, wise, sober, and honest citizens his neighbors, who have had at
any time to deal with him, there, or else where, and also to the discreet,
wise, sober, virtuous, and godly learned, that have had at any time conference
with him. I hope you will from hence forth, take heed how you m^ke any such
attempts. to speak, or write upon report, nor belie, wrest, ne pervert any
authors writings, for Apo. 21. c
liars shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone.
What Author has written any book (if one should deal therewith as you have
done with this Authors writing) but there might be found many faults etc. To
me, as I suppose you are unknown, but if I should write what I have heard of
you, (and of Master Bateman your furtherer in this your attempt) upon report,
happily you, nor he, would scarce take it in good part. It were good, and
according to the rule of the holy Scripture, that all fault finders would first
look into them selves, that it be not said, Matt. 7. ^*
Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou
see clearly to pluck out the mo^e that is in thy brothers eye. etc. I have
presumed to be so bold as to certify you my mind, touching a few points of
your book, hoping not less but you will take this my simple, plain, and rude
hand writing in good part (although it lack good Method) and do wish that my
time of leisure would have permitted me, to certify you my mind in many
other paintes of your book, but for as much as my time will not serve thereto,
I am constrained to hold my self contented. Thus M. Rogers I bid you farwell,
wishing to you as to my self: and although there be many ways and paths walked
in (of those that do travel in religion) ^reuer the right pathway be found,
which is to follow Christ Jesus our Savior in his footsteps: yet I hope, our
God will in the end, bring us all into the same right path, and that our sins
shall be (by and through the death, passion, and bloudsheading of our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ) done away, and be of the number of those that shall be
set on the right hand, to who^ our savior Jesus Christ, when he comes in his
glory, and all the holy Angels with him, shall say unto Matt. 25. ^
Com ye blessed children of my father inherit the kingdom, prepared for you
from the beginning of ye world etc. and to ye end I might through the power of
ye lord, be one of ye number of the elect, have I had my exercise in the
Scriptures. And to the end that I might be furtherer in the understanding of
the Scriptures, I have read diverse Authors, who have set too their helping hand
to the opening of the Scripture, so far forth as the Lord gave them
understanding thereof, and although some have in diverse points varied in
judgment, (Solomon says, Prou. ^7. c
Diverse men have diverse hearts) that is Gods work to revenge, or redress
the same (according to his own will and pleasure) and not to man's. To the
which kingdom the Lord bring us all, for his son our Lord Jesus Christ's
sake. Amen.

Dat. decimo quinto die Decembris. An. Domi. 1578. Per me E. R.

The answer of I. R. to the letter of the Family of love written by E. R.
I Received a letter from you touching my book, wherein you seem to be
offended for diverse matters: For answer whereof, I refer your in many things
to my letter sent ad amatorem charitatis. You say that I take up weapon to
fight with a naked child, and so sport your self in amplifying the example
of David and Goliath, but to any article of doctrine which I have charged you
with all, there is no mention. It were convenient that you would prove unto us
such points of doctrine as you hold contrary to us, and not to dally in
friuolus and needelesse matter. I have said that your author H. N. does not
speak nor write by the spirit of God, that your illumined elders are not
without sin, that the law of God is not possible to be kept, etc. Unto these
matters you answer nothing, but blott much paper in needeles probations. You
give us a note that where the spirit of envy, pride, contention, cruelty,
murder etc, is: there is the devil and not God. If I should now enlarge this
matter and put it over unto you, you would think me uncharitable. For I grant
it to be true, and the holy scripture is our ground, our line, our square,
without any man's mixture, and if H. N. had never writ, the scriptures are
sufficient to us, and the church of Christ has tasted sufficiently his mercy,
without him: and you had been in much better case if he had never been borne.
For alas what doctrine do you hold, but that which many heretics have held,
and have been condemned by the Church for the same? It is not Christianlike
that one man should persecute an other for conscience sake you say: but does it
follow that heresies and blasphemies may be maintained and no man manifest the
same? Let us leave wrangling and come to the truth: if you hold a truth (as I
have often said) why is it hidden and kept secret? If we be in error, why do
you not through love and charity manifest ye same plainly unto us? your
authors dark and ranging style (which you esteem mystical) does not
sufficiently declare any false doctrine we teach. If you strive for a godly and
regenerate life, certainly we will with our whole hearts join with you: For we
acknowledge y^ our bare confession of Christ with our mouths is not
sufficient. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, etc. Yet may the devil under
the outward cloak of holiness nourish in our hearts many false suggestions:
there fore the Godly evermore have had an eye to satan's deceit, and in
humility of spirit have still bewailed the greatness of their sins, and
acknowledged the same: which H. N. does not in any books that I have read.
For many standing upon the security of keeping Gods laws, have utterly
deceived themselves. The Pharisees boasted of their holiness and the
observation of the law, but Christ reproved them as ypocrits, the Manachits,
the Donatists, the Marcionits, the Montanists, etc, have outwardly sought and
prescribed to them selves straict rules and severe obseruances of piety, but
yet mainteyned under the same blasphemous doctrine: and every heresy set out
their holiness, and commended their patrons as men having the spirit of God
mightily working with power. And do not you in like sort affirm H. N. to have
the spirit of God, and to have published his doctrine with much more power
then any in these latter days? Let us not strive for vain glory, heaping
applications of holy scripture without conclusion, and so far from the
purpose. Let us content our selves with the glorious name to be called
christians, and let this term Family of Love go as a new devised thing
without warrant in holy scripture. The householde of faith is mentioned of, but
not love. Touching this point of doctrine, of the possiblitie of keeping the
commandments, I know those places of scripture very well, and what God
requires: but our weakness in performing the same, appears Genesis 6.
chapter, verse 5. Job. 25. chapt. 5. verse. 4. Romans 4. chapter, 20 verse: but
I delight not in many cotations, but how to purpose the holy scriptures are
applied: therefore only I will give you to consider two places, the one of
saint Paul in 11. Romans 32. verse. For God has shut up all in unbelief,
that he might have mercy on all. Galathians 3. chapt. verse 22. but the
scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by ye faith of Jesus
Christ should be given to them that believe. But before faith came we were
under the law, until the faith should after be revealed. Wherefore y^ law
was our schoolemaister to bring us to Christ, that we might be made righteous
by faith, but after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolemaister.

I pray you note how the holy Ghost teaches us not to trust in the
perfourmaunce of the law: For it is such a burden as wenor our fathers were
ever able to bear, but includes us under sin and the curse of the law,
that the blessings which by Christ's death we obtain through faith, we might
notably become heirs by promise and not by the law. The Law therefore does
show our weakness, and sends us to Christ, who fulfilled it for us, and
all his obedience and righteousness is ours, by imputation: and we by grace
through faith are made heirs, and not by the deeds of the law: yet we reject
it not, but with reverence and fear endeavor our selves to perform in every
point what it requires, but still we feel our weakness in perfourming the
same, and therefore flee unto Christ Jesus in whom we find rest to our
conscience, confessing our unableness and infirmity, finding in him strength
and ability, which still by faith we apply to our troubled minds, when the
justice of God or the law does by any means threaten us. And this is our
anchor hold of faith, manifested to us by the scriptures of God to our
everlasting comfort. We are taught to say when we have done our best, Luke
17. That we are unprofitable servant. Christ is said Act. 13. verse. 3. to
deliver us from all things which we could not be justified by the law of
Moses. By him every one that believes is justified: for if salvation come by
the law, Christ died in vain. For it stands not with the glory of Christ
Jesus, that any such perfection should be given us, to keep the law. For if
by our infirmity the strength of Christ be made perfect. Cor. Chap. 12. so
contrary wise by our perfection Christ's death and passion is impaired and
lessened. Look therefore into Christ's office with a right spirit, and you
shall see plainly in him the Law to be fulfilled for us, so y^ what he has
fulfilled, y^ have we full filled: for it is made ours by grace, otherwise we
cannot keep the law but by Christ, neither are you able to show us any example
that any Patriarchs, Prophets, or Apostles that ever were, did ever keep the
law of God in every point as good requires.

Now touching the authority of S. Jerome: I answer by Jerome: who writing
against Pellagius, does show two manner of perfections, the one to be agreeable
to the virtues of God which is void of all sin, and here one earth declared
in the person of Christ: the other which agreth with our frailty and is not
pure from sin: which argues an impossibility to fulfill the law, otherwise
then in the person of Christ. And in deed almighty God did not command
impossible things, for so much as Christ being perfect man, fulfilled y^ law for
us, which utterly declares our weakness and inhabilitie to perform the same.
For if by any other means y^ wrath of God could have been pacified, or his law
satisfied, Christ his only son our blessed savior and redemer had not neded
to have been incarnat and to become man, to work this great effect for us. And
surely they ye acknowledge our ability in perfourming the law, do mightily
shake the office and death of Christ our Lord, and leave in our conscience such
a clog as is hardly removed. David demands Who can say my heart is clean?
again, God looked down from heaven among the sons of men: and there was not one
righteous, no not one. Many of the fathers did see our impossibility in
perfourming the law, and therefore Austen says, all the commau^dements of God
are accounted to be don, when y^ is pardoned which is undone. To conclude,
almighti god never gives such grace to any his children absolutely to fulfill
his law, but only to Christ: and by him is that performed. It is no derogation
to our God in giving a law which we cannot perform, but commendation in
saving and delivering us from y^ law, notwithstanding our weakness in
performing y^ same. And if we did right ly examine our selves, our own
conscience does well verify the same: but satan is an enemy heretoo, ye he
might by pride puff up our minds with a vain imagination ye we are able to do
and perform y^ which God in his law requires, and so to persuade our minds
thereby ye Christ's death does smally avail or help us here in. But of this
argument this is sufficient, y^ Godly and learned are able to say much more, if
you require herein to be satisfied. The Lord direct our minds into the way of
truth, and let thy people O-Lord not be led into error by satan's practice.
Then Lord give us al humble minds. Amen. This answer is to E. R.

Your friend I. R.

An other letter of the family, containing a Reply to the answer of I. R. to
their first letter.
WE have received a Letter from you (master Rogers) dated the 29 of January,
as an answer to a former letter which came to your hands, wherein you say,
was many inuectiues against your book, as also very many contumelious and
slanderous speches, touching your honesty, etc. whereunto we answer
breefely: he is honest that honestly does. But we use no disdainful speeches
sauouring of envy and not of love, like as you unrightly report of us. we
charge you not, but we say your allegation concerning Christopher Vittell is
untrue, as my lord of Caunterburie that now is can witness: and therefore (say
we) look well to your weightes, measures and wares, from henceforth. The
contents of your book disquieteth not our mood: your cause is surely
dishonest, then what honesty (we ask) can proceed thereout? but yet (we
hope) you have done it all out of ignorance, and therefore worthy of less
reprehention. And in that you have reprehended the love of God and Christ, we
have not therein mystaken you at all: for were the love of God and Christ
manifested in you (like as you say it is unto you) then could you not verily
have (so impudently in the face of all the world*) belyed and slaundered your
poor neighbors, as you have done, who never did you harm. You say, if we
were of God and Christ's household, you and we were fellows, and you would
embrace us: but you call us strangers of the household, and as strangers lurk
in corners, etc. we answer, of such an household as you have challenged to
your selves we are strangers, and the fear of your rigorous dealings, has
in deed made some of us to fly and lurk in corners. we say still your
foundation is against one H. N. whom you never knew nor rightly understood
of: and you answer that his doctrine is not unknown unto you, whose books ye
have to show. We wish it were even so. And whereas the name of Christ is
shadowed by two carecters A. O. even so we have heard, that there is some
meaning, more then you or we can well tell, in these two carecters H. N.
Notwithstanding if any man become so captious, as to gather and report
thereupon, that we should therefore deny any outward man or creature, he does
not only mistake us, but also (in reporting the same again to others)
slander us therein very much. You say, you have truly set down the same
man's life, not hearsayes, but the truth, etc. whom yet you confess you never
knew, then it can be nothing but hearesayes that you write. And you say that
the reporters are honest and of Christ's church. To which we say again, that
those of Christ's church occupy not their mouths with untruths, albeit then
they stand never so well liked of you or any other, for we know that they say
not truly. And whereas we have set down the true principles of our faith and
religion in a brief rehersall, (which ye confess to be sound and good:) yet
(because that agrees not to your mind, in that we confess not somewhat
therein whereby ye might have your slanders verified against us, which ye
look for, by our own confession) it is you say pla^sible and mockery. See
into your disposition, if we would accuse our selves (albeit falsely) with any
matter, that you accept gladly: but if we in truth and simpleness answer
for our selves, that ye reie^t utterly. Oh what nature (that good is) would so
seek to hurt his brethren. And further ye say, that the auctor of those
books terms you a devilish Sinagog^e or scoole, and that you are not the
church, but an harlot, and if you and we (say you) profess one baptism, one
Christ, one faith, etc. why are we scuered in Comunion? Of this matter, we will
speak here following. And where you say that certain of our family have
been convinced, subscribed, and recanted, and have promised neuermore to
profess H. N. nor his doctrine, and yet have turned to the same again: we do
not deny but that some have been constrained so to do, and that it is no
plain dealing. And I pray you tell me, has the like matter ever been heard
of ere this tune, that simple men, who can scarcely read English, because
they have read a book, or heard it read, should be compelled to yield an
account of the spirit of the author that wrote the same? I think not: except
you will allow by like reason, that every simple man that hears a doctor
preach, should be compelled to deliver forth all his divinity, or else to be
committed to straight prison. Learned men dispute with the learned: and it has
ever yet suffised amongst Gods ministers, a simple person to yield an account
of his belief simply etc. were not think you playner dealing better? you say
that we use the property of the Cuttell etc. Do you not remember that the
fleshly minded Jews, could not see their Savior when he was daily amongst
them, and yet they boasted very stoutly of their sight, and would not in any
case confess their blindness? We stand not upon our tiptoes, (as you say)
but we daily acknowledge our blindness, and wait upon the Lord for our sight.
We say not that you are in error, but we say, that we have (through that
sinful nature of the flesh, that earthly lying being, which has wrought that
disobedience in Adam, where through we are all fallen) been bewrapped in all
ignorance and blindness, and for that cause are not ashamed to confess our
error. We will not go about to convince you by the testimonies of the holy
Scriptures, for that lies not in our power, neither were we so dealt withal.
It is the Lord (by his grace) that has convinced us, and brought us under his
cross* if he also convince you, then are ye rightly convinced, and so the
praise thereof appertains only unto him. And whereas you desire to know
wherein you have mistaken the author, to that we say, that you have not set
down any whole sentence, but patched and peeced the same without all order,
contrary to your promise. For you say, you will not add nor diminish, but set
down the authors words word for word: which you have done, even as one may
take the ten commandments and leave out some words, and thereby say that
God commanded such things: as for example. Thou shall have none other Gods but
me. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not committ adultery, etc. Leave out
none and not, and then what is the commandment? If this be good dealing, then
you have dealt well: let all men judge. You say moreover, you took not upon
you to write against any one book, but to display the absurdities you found in
the auctors doctrine, which we shall find performed ere it be long by master
Knewstub: who (as we suppose) shall displaye him self therein, even like as
you have in your book displayed your self and your adherents. You say we
apply this text, My kingdom is not of this world, etc. very fondly: we take
his kingdom not to be outward, but inward, vz. peace, righteousness, and joy
in the spirit, which things the world is ignorant of (you may expound it at
your pleasure) though we expressed our mind therein in plain dealing, might
it please you so to take it. You say moreover, you know that Christ reigns
in his Church, but who are the church is the question. In deed master Rogers,
you say very well: and now give us leave to use plain dealing with you,
least otherwise we might hap to slander or belie you. In your book, one
leaf before your admonition to Christopher Vittell, these be your own words.

How H. N. judges of us, because we acknowledge our selves to be of the
Church of Christ.

For that cause, if thou now account not thy Prophecy. 11. fol. 27.
self for an whore, but esteemest thy self for the faithful espowsed wife
of Christ, etc.

And now (for as much as we use not, neither are so taught, in the service of
love to judge rashly or unadvisedly of any people, to their reproach, like as
you have done of us) let us entreat you, to read in the book (called The
prophecy of the spirit of love) the tenth Chapter, sect. 12. 13. 14. and in
the 11. and 12. Chapters throughout, and then see (with an vnparciall eye) what
manner of Church that it is which he does there reprove, and you shall find
it in deed to be that fleshly and wicked nature, that lying being, which
spares not (with his earthly knowledge) to set it self to judgment, and to
give sentence of the godly matters: which he calls a false seed, an
adulterous generation of the earthly man, which has inhabited the earth with
unrighteousness, judged it falsely with her lies, seduced the simple,
oppressed the little ones, murdered the holy ones of God, and spylt the
innocent blood on the earth. He calls it moreover, a bronde of the venomous
Dragon (yea, of the devil, and of the earthly lying generation) which is
begotten of the seed of the Serpent and viperous generation, which has
always been a false and a wicked whore upon the earth, etc. which church
you now do challenge to your selves, and acknowledge your selves as members of
the same, even like as we (in times past) have also done. Which thing (so
soon as the Lord let us see into, then fell we down before the Lord, and
shamed not to confess our faults before him, as that we had ouerlong taken
part with that whoorishe nature of the earthly, fleshly, and sinful being,
whom we do now (by Gods grace) utterly abhor, hoping dailye (by the might
of Christ Jesus our Lord) to see her filthy nakedness (in us, and in many)
disclosed, abhorred, and rejected for ever more.

You desire to know of us, the difference betwixt you and us: Could any man
tell it more plainly, then you (in your words) have here manifested the same?
Consider advisedly of it: so shall you not need (henceforth) to demand of us
any further resolution in that point, but must of necessity (if you do well)
fall down before the Lord, and cry with us: Peccauimus cum patribus nostris,
unjust egimus, iniquitatem fecimus. You charge us unjustly with the error of
Basilides, as though we were forswearers of our selves, whereas yet
(notwithstanding) there has never been proved any such matter against any of
that company, or in any of all that authors works: which may well suffice to
stop your mouth, if truth will serve to answer you. And yet I remember that
Tindall a learned man, and writer, in his book of Obedience writes these
words: Break not up into the consciences of men, after the example of
Antichrists disciples, which compel them, either to forswear themselves, by
the Almighty God, and by the holy Gospel of his merciful promises, or to
testify against them selves, which abomination our prelates learned of
Caypha^. Math. 26. saying: I adiu^e and charge thee in the name of the living
God, whether thou be Christ the son of God, etc. Let that which is secret
to God only, whereof no proof can be made, nor lawful witness brought,
abide to the coming of the Lord, which shall open all the secrets etc. which
council, if ye now followed, poor men might enjoy liberty of good
conscience without such stretching and strayning as is now used. You also
deny that ever any in the primitive Church taught a perfection to be attained
in this life: whereat we much marvel: for that we know assuredly, that the
Apostles taught the perfection to be attained in this life, of all, and among
all, that could believe, and stood good willing thereto: and so have all that
has since taught Christ Jesus, who is the perfection of all the works of God.

Is not this much ignorance, that we who acknowledge (as we say) Christ
Jesus* should deny his perfection? But it seems we look not for his shape
to be wrought in us, as the Scriptures require. Paul to the Corinthians. 1.
13. Chapter. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is
imperfect shall be done away, etc. You must agree with us, that all the holy
ones from the beginning have taught us to leave sin, and surely that doctrine
lyketh us best. But all your citations are to defend and maintain the sin,
which seems to like you best. For surely it were well that all true
Christians should rather take part with righteousness, then be such advocates
for the sin, as most men be at these days. Now further it seems most
strange unto us, where you also say you know not what we mean concerning
our confession, made in our said letters, as concerning our true baptism, In
the name of God the Father, God the Son, and of God the holy Ghost, which
is the taking up of our cross, and right direction unto Christ: who having
then gotten in us a living shape, confirms us, through his holy spirit, in
an assured hope of his promises, in the resurrection, and in the everlasting
life, (yet as you grant, it may have an apt application) we see not any
other way to possess the kingdom of heaven: and the whole new and estament
is full giving witness there unto. But if ye have found out any easier way
thereto, so are not we therein against you: which till ye can let ds perceive
and feel, we pray you to suffer us in rest by you, in this our foolishness
(as we do you) vnhindered, vnmolested, and vnslaundered etc. we also say not
(as you imagine) that our battle is ended when we are regenerate: but we
say, that Christ Jesus (that man of God from heaven, which is borne of God,
and in whom the seed of God remains, and therefore sins not) he has the
power to subdue his enemies and end the battle in us. Where you also say that
H. N. has not ye spirit of God, and say moreover, that he teaches mere
contrary doctrine to the Scriptures, you have therein (think we) entered very
far into Gods secrets, judging also greatly of your self therein: for it is
now adays a common thing that every man can say, show me a good man, when as
in deed in their beholding none is better the^ themselves, and therefore cannot
believe that god has such work with any man, as to bring any goodness more
(the^ they have) to any other. And further we know, that with what mind a man
beholds another, in such form he appears whom he beholds: for a mind
of envy cannot discern any pattern of Love, no more then a black Moore
looking in a glass, can see his face altered into white color, etc. And as
for difference which ye demand to know between you and us, we have fully
answered you before, by your own words. Now for our mind concerning Gods
predestination, take us not therein so short, for we allow of it simply and
reverently, in his kind: and yet further also, even as the holy Scriptures
allow the same: but we like not to contend therein, nor desperately to seek
liberty of life thereby, neither foolishly to search for things therein above
our capacities. It seems also in your letters that ye fear our minds stand
not to agree with you, in your justification by Christ: in your acknowledging
your selves to be sinners: in your weakness in perfourming the law: and that
we sever us from you therein: wherein ye are too much deceived: for we
acknowledge our justification to be had by none other means, but alone in,
by, and through the death, passion, and resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord
and Savior: we daily confess our selves to he most miserable sinners, and
of our selves altogether unable to perform the law: and therefore we
acknowledge and steadfastly believe the only possibility to consist in the
Lord our God, through Jesus Christ our righteousness, and wait for the same:
whatsoever you or any other say of us to the contrary. Ye say further, to be
like unto Christ, or to have his Image, is to be understood, to be like
minded unto him, who did not sin, but that privilege (say you) only
apperteineth to him, and not to us: then in vain (as it seems by your
words) was this written unto the congregations: Let the same mind be in you,
that was in Christ Jesus, etc. But as we have said, the power thereto is not
in us, but in him. But you take part overmuch with the sin (as we think) and
we overmuch with the righteousness (as you think.) And because we are enemies
to our uttermost through the might of Christ against the sin, you unjustly
imagine therefore of us, as that we (of our own power, without Christ) meaned
to subdue the same: but far be that from our thoughts: and surely, who so
says so of us, slaundereth us much. Now further you say you are not enemy
to our persons, which we would be glad to see, (for we are taught to forsake
that false sinful nature of the devil, that contrary nature to God, and to
grow into that good lovely being of God and Christ in the spirit) whereby
we see no cause ye should be enemy to so good doctrine neither. And as for
Edmund L. you confess as much of him as we charged you with. Further ye say,
we slyly mean H. N. by the white stone spoken of in the Apocalips. But
understand, we mean (as the text imports) by all such as overcome in that
battle, and not by any one particulerly. But thus much for certain note well,
such as have no lust to overcome (in the cross of Christ) that earthly
sinful nature, but have much more lust to take part therewith, and yet
notwithstanding do claim a freedom with Gods holy ones, in Jesus Christ, in an
unrenewed mind, know nothing thereof: for it is written, no man knows that
new name save alone he that receives it, boast he never so much of his
knowledge.

Therefore to conclude, for our true principles we refer you to the brief
rehersall, and for any other difference to these premises and all other
doubts, we have sufficiently resolved you (as we think) in plain speech
out of hearty love. Let this therefore suffice for an answer at this time.
The Lord for his mercy grant you and us all, inclyned hearts to do his
will (but first to leave our own will) and to endeavor us (with all the elect
of God and Christ) to the renouation in the spirit. vz. that we all (in one
heart of godly love) might, as living stones, be fast couched, or coupled
together in Jesus Christ, to an holy house, temple, or family of Love or of
God, in as much as God is Love: and not any longer to strive, but much rather,
as seruanntes of the Lord, in all meekemindednesse, to humble our souls under
this his great grace, love, and mercy, whereunto we all are so lovingly
called, and warned by him and his holy Gospel, in the ministration of the
love, in the last time. Amen.

This answer is to your first Letter.

Your lovers and friends. F. L.

The answer of I. R. to the reply of the Family of Love.
BY perusing of your reply to my first answer, I perceive that our conference
is to small purpose, for that you continue still of the same mind you were, and
your crabbed and slanderous words toward me is nothing impaired, with your
smooth answer, saying, we charge you not with weightes, wares, etc. If you of
purpose had not charged me here with, what needed any mention of such
slanders? but as in other things, so in this you bewray your stomachs and of
what spirit you are. You take witness My Lord of Canterbury, whose mind
concerning your great Rabby Vittell, is known to many. You affirm the cause I
take in hand is surely dishonest. The cause is Christ's, whose office and
death is impaired and made of no effect by your doctrine of perfection, and
shadowed by H. N. so darkely, that the children of GOD abiding in the unity of
his Church, do greatly lament your folly. You say I have belyed and slaundered
my poor neighbors impudently, and yet you show no matter wherein: only you
find fault with unorderly setting down your Authors speech. No man can keep
order with him that is without order. Of adding and diminishing you often
charge me and show not in what place nor in what sentence. I will not use your
dishonest terms of impudency: but surely you deal in this case as the
Papists are wont to charge the doctrine of Christ's Gospel, which we
profess: that it breeds sedition, that it pulls Princes out of their
seats, opens a gap to liber tie, etc. which how truly these are imputed,
the eyes of al do at the last behold. The fear of our rigorous dealing forces
you to lurk in corners, you say: what rigor I pray you was ever showed either
to you or your companions the Papists for their conscience? Imprisonment you
would say, upon submission, which is no rigor. Of such an household as we have
challenged to our selves (you say) you are strangers: we confess our selves to
be of no other household then of Christ's, staying upon the purity of his word:
if you will be strangers from the same willingly, it is great pity. You had
rather follow H. N. then Christ, and yet confess that H. N. signifies not any
man's name, but has some other meaning which you ne we can tell. What a
lamentable case is this, that men having any sense or understanding, would
credit such uncertain ways, to follow an Author and doctrine so egerly: and
yet confess you are ignorant who he is, or what he is. As for your confession
published, (as I said) it is a mockery: for it is sound and agreeing to us.
Why halt you so cunningly? Why will you dance in a nett and not be seen? Do
you in your confession impugn the doctrine of predestination, or the
possibility of the law, etc. or do you once mention the same therein, and yet
in your letters you show your dislyking of such doctrine, terming it
licentious? Is not this deep dissembling, and yet call it plain dealing? I
would not have you accuse your selves as you unjustly charge me, but use a
simple and plain truth, and show your minds truly, and not hide it craftily,
and set down points of doctrine agreeable with us, and say it is your
confession of faith, where you conceal the chief matters in variance between
us. Oh when will you deal plainly? a wicked doctrine requires shifts and
delays, but truth opens her self plainly to al in y^ day light. And for
your weakelings which have recanted, you say they were such as could scarsely
read English. You forget your self very much: was Sharp and his company
which recanted at the cross, were they such (as you would bear us in hand)
simple? Sharp was a teacher, and others that I could name were not of the
least account among you: yet to help their weakness you call them simple men,
etc. I know that some of the^ have followed the doctrine, of H. N. these 18.
years: I take you not to be so old a scholar in the Family. You say you will
not convince us by the testimonies of the scriptures, for it lies not in your
power, neither were you so dealt withal. Surely this is very strange. It is
the Lord that has convinced you, and brought you under his Cross: but I pray
you came this to pass by revelation or by man's ministry? If man was the
minister, you would have us believe that H. N. was he: but it appears not
that you are under Christ's Cross: for in patience he suffered all wrongs, and
there was no deceit nor guile found in his mouth. He commanded his doctrine to
be published to all the world, not in corners, but on the house top: not
faintly and fearfully, but boldly and courageously: he suffered contumelious
speech and slanderous, but you do use speech of slander and disdain as
appears: so that you have not learned Christ's cross, but H. N. his cross.
As for Master Knewstubs doings, (as yet not exstant) you rashly and foolishly
cavil at him before you hear him, and condemn his doings before you see
them, and say that he will display himself even as I have done. This is
impudency in the highest degree, to judge and condemn a man before he be
heard what he can say: this does bewray of what mind and spirit you are. What
conference can do you good? It seems your heart is hardened with the riddles
of H. N. y^ so make your selves known to all Gods children: it had been more
agreeable to the spirit of God, to have suspended judgment until the work
had been seen. My adherentes in diriston you often name, I tell you truly that
the church of Christ Jesus are those adherents: for I maintain no other
doctrine then y^ which in Christ's Church by public authority is taught and
preached: put up your deriding terms, for they best become your selves.

Now touching the Church, you allege H. N. in diverse places of his
Prophecy, to say that that fleshly and wicked nature, that lying being, that
has oppressed the little ones, murdered the holyones, and spilt innocent blood
on the earth, which has been a wicked whore upon earth etc: who would ever
judge H. N. by these words to mean our corrupt and wicked nature, and not
rather a congregation or society of me^, per secuting the just: for how can
our wicked nature be said to persecute, to murder, and to spill blood, when
this is done by the whole power, knowledge, and consent of men? The wicked
nature of man can never be properly termed or called a whore. And as I have
collected it, to be spoken against the Church of Christ which we profess,
and you to be those holiones persecuted: So in my judgment herein I have not
falsified, corrupted, nor maliciously slan dered your Author as you have
collected of me. You say we challenge our selves to be of the persecuting
Church, and so your selves have been in times past: but now the Lord has
made you see, and you are ashamed of that whorishe nature, and you abhor her,
and hope by Christ's might not only in you to be disclosed, but abhorred and
rejected for evermore. If this be spoken of our wicked nature, can you reject
it? ca^ you cast it of for ever? We rather by y^ scripturs affirm y^ we may
keep it under, and not to reign in us or bear rule in us, or have dominion
over us: but utterly to quench sin, or reject it for ever, the holy Ghost
teaches us not. Whosoever has been rightly scholed in Christ's Church, can
by experience tell you, that to keep under sin, by grace we may: but to
extinguishe the motions we can not: and all those places of holy scripture
which tend to the abolishing of sin, are rather as marks to aim at or
level at, then to hit the prick of perfection, which shall never be in this
life* You meruel notwithstanding.

Touching Christ's perfection we doubt not, but steadfastly believe he was and is
perfect and has fulfilled for us all the law which God required of us,
perfectly, but we utterly deny this to be wrought as you affirm in us: For
neither does he work this perfection in us, nor by us, but merely without us:
and in deed this is a principal difference between you and us, and I doubt
not but touching this argument you shall hear more hereafter. It blemisheth
over much Christ's triumph over death and hell, if we shall also triumph by
strength in him. Our triumph stands not in doing, but in believing in him
which did. The glory of Christ Jesus his office and death is by this doctrins
impaired, darkened and shadowed, (as I have often said) therefore better
consider of it, it sauoreth to much of presu^ption and pride, attributing that
to be wrought in us which is not: and mightily herein you deceive your selves
and others. His shape to be wrought in us, you affirm Paul. Cor. 1. 13. When
that which is perfect is come, the^ that which is imperfect shall be done
away. but this shall not be until mortality shall put on immortality, and
corruption incorruption. In the same chapter 4. lines after the place recited
there shall you find S. Paul opening his meaning more fully when that perfection
shall be wrought. Saying Cor. 1. Cha* 13. ver. 12. For now we see through a
glass darkely, but the^ shall we see face to face: now I know in part, but
then shall I know as I am known etc. does not S. Paul plainly mean that
this perfection shall not be brought to pass in this life, but in the life to
come? Who has eyes to see and beholds not these things? You affirm us to
maintain sin, and that we are advocates for sin, and you take part with
righteousness: but with more modesty you might say, that we acknowledge with
the Scriptures, that sin is still lurking in us, against which we have daily
fight and combat, notwithstanding our election and redemption, and you affirm
a perfection to be wrought in us by Christ which the scriptures allow not.
That christ is able to work such a work in us we deny not: for all things are
to him possible, but it is said, Omnia quod voluit fecit in celo and in terra:
He does al things y^ he will in heaven and in earth: but that it stands with
his will reueiled in the scriptures, we deny. We are no mainteners of sin, we
are humble acknowlegers of our sins and imperfections. You mention often y^
Christ must have in us a living shape: by shape, if you mean a perfect
form, then we deny any such shape or form to be in us: but if you mean,
by shape, to be like minded to him, therein we agree with you, as the
scriptures teach. But herein we affirm, that as it stands with the weak
condition of a mortal creature to be like that excellent creator of heaven and
earth, or like minded, so our human frailty must strive to attain as near
the prick as stands with his good will and pleasure to grant us. You pray us
to suffer you in rest with your folishnesse. I would you thought as you
speak: but your words are Ironia: for you account it high wisdom, although
you term it foolishnes. Your disquietnesse I never sought, it is your
ame^dment: it is your co^uersio^ from H. N. to Christ Jesus y^ I seek to bring
you to.

In the matter of predestination you desire not to be taken so short, for you
say you allow it simply and reverently in his kind: you like not to contend
therein, nor desperately to seek liberty thereby: yet I will put you in mind
what you your self have spoken thereof in your first letter, saying: your
lycentious doctrine of predestination and free election, which is the cause of
the fullness of prisons in England this day. Now see how you agree with your
self: if you have better considered the matter, I would be glad, and give the
Lord hearty thanks, but if herein you speak (as your manner is) sometime
affirming, sometime denying, then we say you are unstable and wavering in your
ways. Now, whereas I affirmed to be without sin is a privilege belonging
only to Christ Jesus our Lord: you say if the case be so, then in vain was
this written unto the congregations. Let the same mind be in you which was in
Christ Jesus, etc. You further say we charge you that by your own power
without Christ this is brought to pass, that sin is subdued in you: but we
tell you plainly, that this perfection that you speak of, nor such a subduing
of sin as you mean, is not wrought in us, neither stands it with Christ's
good will to work the same so effectually as you imagine.

Sin is kept under, and has not dominion in us, it reigns not in us, we
are not servants to sin, this the scripturs teach in many places: but that
we shall quench it utterly or subdue if, with all the motions thereof, the
scriptures teach us no such doctrine, being rightly understood. Look I pray
you, what that holy vessel saint Paul spoke of himself after he was
regenerate, Romans 7. verse 14. I am carnal sold under sin, for I allow
not that which I do. For what I would that do I not, but what I hate that do
I. It is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. Again verse 23. I
delight in the law of God concerning the inward man, but I see an other law in
my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive
unto the law of sin which is in my members.

When he entered far into the consideration of this his frailty he exclaymed
and said, verse 24. A wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
body of this death? And in these extreme considerations and battle which we
have with sin continually (even until death make an end) saint Paul by the
spirit of God does plainly arm Gods children, and shows the remedy in
like co^flicts, saying: I thank god through Jesus Christ our Lord etc, this is
brought to pass by him that sin is not imputed unto us. But as David said:
Blessed is the man whose sins are covered: And this is wrought only without
us, and not in us, as you imagine. So y^ our battle is continual and never
ended in us, until we be dissolved and at rest with Christ Jesus, contrary to
your assertion. You see no cause (you say) that we should be enemies to so
good a doctrine as you profess. If your doctrine were good and agreeable to
the holy scriptures, we would embrace it: but because it is contrary there
unto, we reject it. To forsake that false sinful nature, with you we simply
agree: but with the Poet we say, Naturam expellas furca, tamen vsque recurret.
To be at defiance there with, and bid battle against it we agree: but to
conquer it, to kill it, or subdue it utterly in this life, that we deny. That
God can do this by his power in us we deny not, but that he will do it in us,
(as you affirm) the scriptures allow not of. For it stands not with the
glorious office of Christ Jesus, that such perfection and such a conquest of
sin should be wrought in us, but that we feeling our miseries, our wants, our
weakenesse^, might sue by peticion in earnest prayer, for strength, for mercy,
for delivery: which all the Godly in Christ his church have ever done. For we
are never nearer unto our God, nor never more accepted with him, then when we
feel sin as a burden or load lie heauely upon us: nor never further of,
then when by illusion of satan's persuasion, we imagine sin to be quenched or
conquered. All such as overcome in the battle (you say) shall know the name
written in the white stone mentioned by John. You say further that such as have
no lust to overcome that earthly sinful nature, but have more lust to take
part therewith, know nothing thereof: although they boast of their knowledge
or freedom never so much. This knowledge therefore you would conclude to be in
you and not in us. Your knoweledge we envy not, nor your seeking to serve the
Lord uprightly: For our whole care, study, and mind is bent to do the same:
and we pray you heartily to join your selves to us, that you and we may serve
the Lord our God as he has commanded, and not H. N. and his precepts. Look
into the holy books of our God, and deal not with the dark riddles of H. N.
Set not up his books in your minds so highly. The Scriptures are our comfort
and our stay, without H. N. He exercises a great Popedom among you. You had
rather speak and use his phrases, not found in holy scripture, then content
your self with the phrases of the holy Ghost. You often mention these terms,
the lying being, the upright freedom, Godded with God, the newest day, the
lovely being of the love, etc. Are these to be found in the holy Scripture? or
are they not devised by H. N. to bring admiration to his doctrine, by strange
and unaccustomed speech? If the love of God be in you, (as you would have us
believe it is) love the Lord Jesus and his holy word, and let H. N. with new
terms and phrases go? Believe not that God has wrought in him any such a
work as you pretend: examine his doings and sayings better: you will credit
nothing that is spoken against him be it never so true, you except it as lies
and heresies, what soever testimony his neighbors and famyliers who knew him
long, upon their oath shall affirm: but according to your conceived opinion,
you like him, you embrace him, you only credit his testimonies, dislyking
others: which if you continue, as you begin, there is neither hope, nor help,
nor conference that can do you good, until the Lord shake away the mist of
darkness which over shadoweth your eyes, through the doctrine of H. N. that
you cannot behold the bright beams of Christ his glorious gospel.

Your authors doctrine is not sufficiently known unto some of you, the
fragments whereof you are but meanly acquitted with: the secreat part of his
purpose I doubt as yet is not extant, and more of his works are abroad then are
come to your hands: therefore for the love of God look better into his mind,
and credit not his bare sayings without warrant of holy scripture, neither
believe that almighty God has wrought in him any such extraordinary power as
is imagined. The cause ye moved me to write these things is, a little book
came to my hands of late, called Man's falling away, his coming again and
Lordlynesse. In the first section you shall find this written word for word:
H. N. his words. Sect. 1


See and mark ye beloved, in the beginning when god made al things well, then
was the Lord one Lord of his kingdom, and one God of his works: there was
also no more but one God and one man, and they were one, and had in all one
order, being, and nature: for God was all that the man was, and man was all
that God was.

Beloved, when God looked on the Sect. 2.
man which he had made according to the like being of his godhed, then looked
he upon him self, as the same clerenesse of his living godhed.

Likewise when the man looked upon Sect. 6.
his God, his ientle, clean, and unspotted manhood, in all full comeliness, in
all honesty, and fayrenesse, in all fashion and being, according to the same
Godhed, so this was al one God and the man. I pray you look into this doctrine
which your Author H. N. teaches: examine it by thy holy scriptures, and
judge rightly therein, whether this can by any color of speech be qualified or
expoundedsoundly, or christianly: if you have not this book among you, I shall
be content to send you either the book or the coppie thereof, yt you may
examine your Authors doctrine better. For in my opinion this is blasphemy.
And where you say that the world shall know ere it belong, what your meaning
is therein I am uncertain: except you would that these our conferences should be
published, which if it be your mind, send me word, for I am not ashamed of any
thing that I have written, and then let the children of God in the world
judge where truth and plain dealing is: then shall appear the difference of
doctrine between us. The Lord work his will in us, that in all our actions we
seek his glory and not our own praise. Amen.

The 16. of March. 1578. Your friend. I. R.

A brief Apology to the displaying of the Family.
IT does appear by reading of these discourses, that in ye family there are
some, who to defend their author and his doctrine have used some diligence:
what clamors they have uttered against me does appear: how often they have
charged me with falcifying their Authors sayings is manifest: how they do
discredit such testimony as is produced against H. N. (of such as knew the
man long, and were his familiers) is showed. What untruths, what slanderous
speeches, what raylinge words, what caueling, what wrangling, which does
bewray the family of what spirit they are, and with what spirit they are
guided. Many frivolous matters I have not touched, as not worth answer: and
many things are but slenderly handled, as the nature of a private letter,
(which requires briefenes) will permit. Of all which falsefying and
perverting of their author, only they show one place, wherein I collect that H.
N. speaks against the Church, which he terms a whore: which they affirm
is spoken against the wicked nature of man. But whither of us more truly have
showed the true sense of the words, judge I pray thee. How they term us
free ones and libertines: how they call the doctrine of predestination
licencious: how they impunge the confidence we have in Christ's death, calling
it our brag: how they affirm the Law possible to be kept: and many other
such matters, does manifestly by reding these letters appear. Whereby the godly
Christian, may as time and occasion shall serve (having conference we any in ye
family) see in what matters these men are captiued, and so to endeavor to heal
y^ sore, now ye wound is opened.

And where as I protested in my preface that I have dealt truly and
faithfully, not maliciously and corruptly, as I am accused: For further proof
hereof I will briefly declare my evidence, that the world may see the
exclamations they make are frivolous cauilles. Touching the story of David
George* it is published by the university of Basil, in print, out of which I
have collected the story truly. For H. N. as before I have showed, the
testimony of his neighbors I have to show, being a live, and of honest
credit in the Duch Church. For their doings in Munster, I have showed my
opinion, and the reasons that moved me so to think. Also the articles which
they published, what coherence and agreement they have with the Family, and how
the Anabaptists hold none of the same. Although I know that Martin Luther, John
Sleydan, and others do call them generally Anabaptists, I have declared the
reasons that moved me to think the contrary. Let every man credit these
things as God shall move, only I clear my self, that of malice I have done
herein nothing. The other matters are produced (...) the books of H. N. and
gathered b^ (...) ference with the family. Now tou(...) (...) the confession
which I say two (...) (...) Family made before a worshipful Justice of peace,
they deny that they were of their Family: but this is certain, the parties
are living and followers of one Allyne of Woneherst, a great companion of
Christopher Vittells, which Allin died soudenly by the high way, going to
Farnam to be examined before y^ bishop of winchester. Thus have I briefly
touched the stories which the family do discredit.

Now if I might utter my simple conjecture touching the said Family with
out offense. For as much as their beginning was in Englang about the latter end
of Queen Mary's rainge, when many of our brethren were entered into that gulf
of freewill, teaching that common grace reserved in Adam was appropriate to us
also: and likewise certain Arrians, with Pellagians joining together, found an
author for their purpose, under a new devised name of Family of Love. What do
they teach but the old (...)ry leuin, of such heretics as were long ago
known and condemned? and in deed take from them the weapons of the foresaid
heretics, and you shall find them unarmed and naked: and yet (under a new
visor) they would not be noted as any touched with their doctrine, but that
they are new matters broched by H. N. only, and not known in the world
until now. Surely the papists do not magnify their pope as the Family do H.
N. whose books and doctrine may not be discredited, neither can he err. For
by no means can they be brought to acknowledge that H. N. may err. Therefore
this new Pope deludeth the pore Family with his dark speeches and ranging
style without conclusion, where in they imagine that very divinely and with such
majesty their authou(...) written, that we simple ones (...) understand: and
no mauell, for su(...) doubt he understands not him(...) For if a man will
follow his qu(...) ons of Scriptures which he (...) down, so thick and so
close in the (...) give of his books and epistles, a(...) meanly excercised in
the holy scrip(...) may well perceive how far from the purpose of the holy
ghost H. N. has applied them.

The Lord of mercy and consolation give the^ the true understanding of thy
holy word, and let not satan lead the simple sheep out of the ways of the
Lord our god, but give thy people O lord the wit of serpe^ts to beware of
satha^s sutilties, who envying the prosperity of thy gospel, sets himself
against the same, by raising up old sects under new cloaks: so that thy
people being preserved under thy defense, may evermore extol and magnify thy
glorious name, and rejoice over the conversion of our brethren, that they being
brought home again into thy fold, we may all praise thy ^^orious name, and
with one voice a^^ ^inde may cry. Veni domine Jesus (...) Amen.

I. R.

^^printed at London by Henry Middleton for George Bishop.


