THE TRVE CONVERT. OR AN EXPOSITION UPON THE WHOLE Parable of the Prodigal.
LVKE. 15.11.12. etc.

Wherein is manifestly showed; 1. Man's miserable estate by forsaking of God. 2.
Man's happy estate by returning to God.


Delivered in sundry Sermons, by Nehemiah Rogers, Preacher of Gods Word, at St
Margarets Fish-street. And now by him published, intending the farther benefit
of so many as then heard it; And the profit of so many as shall please to read
it.

ACTS 3.19. Repent you therefore and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord. LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold
at his Shop, at the West gate of Paul's, at the sign of the Star. 1620.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL Mr. THOMAS WOOD Rector of St. MARGARETS Fish-street, with
the two Churchwardens, and the rest of the Parishioners, his loving Friends and
well-willers; All health and happiness.
Worshipful and welboloued in the Lord:
WHen that Master in the Gospel delivered his goods unto his servants, he
gave them withal a straight charge, that they should Occupy until he came:
(...) Luke 19.13.
And put forth those talents which they had received; that so upon his return
he might receive some answerable increase. This charge does bind me as well
as any other; for what though my receipts be small and little? yet for this
little I shall be called to account; (for so was he that had received but one
talent, as well as he that had received five) (and how soon I know not. Math.
25.24.
I have been, and daily am summoned to make ready: Deaths darts have lighted
round about me; and since my coming amongst you, two piercing Arrows have
been shot at me; the one of them lighted in my bed, the other by my bedside;
a Wife (so gracious, so dutiful;) a Child (so apt, so forward) have been
taken from me. The falling of these shafts (besides much sickness,
weakness, and other bodily infirmities) (for all which I bless Gods name)
do call upon me to prepare and make my reckonings even. Psalm. 4.
But alas! casting up my accounts, and communing with my own soul upon my
bed, concerning my receipts and gains, I found my self to be much behind
hand with my Master, which caused me to cast about how I might redeem part of
that time which formerly I had so idly, so wretchedly, misspent. At last
(having with all, other special reasons moving me thereunto) I resolved upon
this course; And as by preaching, so by publishing some part of what I had
taught in Print, to seek Gods glory, his Churches good, and my own comfort
and rejoicing, in the day of the Lord Jesus. I do confess I have ever thought
it, and still do think it, to be safer for me to follow Market nigher home,
then to traffic abroad into other coasts and countries with my Little; To
spend my time in preaching, rather then in printing such common stuff as this.
But forasmuch as ability of body (though not of mind) is wanting, so that I
cannot do what otherwise I would; I am enforced to do what I am able. And
thus like a venturous young Merchant I launch forth into the deep, aduenturing
this my Ship upon the dangerous and cross Seas of men's different opinions. I
know I shall be tossed with some stormy winds of evil censure, (though many
would persuade me I shall have a fair gale, and a good voyage of it:) But here
is my comfort, my Ship is sound, and my tackling good, Hope is my Anchor, and
Faith my Cable; Love my Sails, and Christ my Pilot. I doubt not then but I
shall save my Vessel, and bring it safe unto the Haven. What though I be
somewhat sea-sicke in this my first voyage? I trust it will be but as Physic
for me, happily it will cause me to give an eternal farewell to all such
voyages, and make me resolve never to thrust my self into any more such rash
adventures. In the mean time (my worshipful good Friends) this is yours, and
so is the Author of it, who by many your respective favors toward him, does
acknowledge himself to be much obliged to you. And forasmuch as this is a
time wherein every grateful person does by some gift or other, show some sign
and token of their loving and kind affection; In this I conform my self to
custom, and send this Paper-gift unto you for your New-yeares gift, giving it
(not after the old custom of the Heathen, who consecrated them after an
Idolatrous and cursed manner in the names of Ianus, and of Saturn, Suet. in
Tiber. cap. 34. Tertul. lib. de Idol. cap. 14.
which custom Tiberius (as Suetonius does report) did by an edict forbid, and
was after condemned and abolished by the Church, as Heathenish, yea devilish)
but as a testimonial of my thankful heart, and as a pledge to all posterity
of my affection toward you; desiring only to be esteemed grateful, and no
otherwise to be recompensed, then with your conscionable perusing of what is
here presented. And so nothing doubting of your acceptance, I take my leave;
Not ceasing to pray for you, that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment; and that you may discern things that differ,
and may be pure, and without offense, until the day of Christ, Resting

Your servant in Christ NEHEMIAH ROGERS.

THE AVTHOR to the Reader: AND IN SPECIAL to the Parishioners of St MARY
ABCHVRCH London, sometime his Christian Auditors, Grace and Peace from the
Prince of Peace.
HOw unwilling I was to bring these unpolished Collections to light, there are
many that can witness with my conscience. For first I knew the great
difference that is betwixt preaching, and reading, of one and the same matter:
Lively voice having a kind of secret force, Habet nescio quid latentis (...)
viua vox. Hier.
and more lively energie in it, then writing or reading has. Secondly, I well
remembered, how censorious the world is grown; so that no man's works, how
godly soever, lacks some envious calumniator and reproacher: and can I look
to speed better, then my betters have sped before me? Thirdly, I considered how
many aged Worthies, have refrained, and do yet refrain, from laboring in this
kind: Now for me to speak, when they are silent, does argue intolerable
boldness and presumption. Fourthly, Quam sit mihi curta supellex.
I know my own insufficiency, and am privy to my own weakness, ingeniously
confessing, I have more need to sit at home, mending my nets, then thus to
launch forth into the Ocean. These many and weighty discouragements, did cause
me for a time to withold the publishing of these Notes, and resolutely to
withstand the earnest requests of some of my loving friends for the printing of
them. But at length (what through importunacie of some (the common excuse for
the Press in this p^inting age) and my own weakness yielding thereunto) I
came to some second thoughts, and began to consider; First, what good might
redound hereby to the Church of God: for albeit Preaching be the chief; yet
writing is not without it use and profit. Some are lame, and sick, and weak,
and cannot come to the hearing of the word preached: now for such to have some
plain Exposition or Sermon upon some part of Scripture, must needs be very
comfortable and useful Yea, and in some respect, writing may seem to claim
the privilege; Quo liceat libris, non licet ^re mihi.
for this reaches far and near. My books may be admitted where I cannot
come. And further, this tends for the good, not only of the living, as
Preaching does, but also for the good of such as are yet unborn: In which
respect, says one, He that speaks profits for an hour, but he that
writes profits for ever. Secondly, I considered, what an excellent help it
was, both for the Understanding, as also for the Memory. Alas I how dull are
we of conceiving, in the things of God? so that a thing once spoken, is as good
as never spoken, such is our corruption. But this gives a man leave to pawse
upon, and ponder on the things we have heard delivered: So that, though
Preaching, moves the Affections, and works more upon them: yet Printing may
be said to teach more, and better to inform the judgment. And so for our
Memories; who finds not how leaking and siue-like they are in reteyning of
divine truth? strawes and hairs indeed will these sieues hold; some odd
conceit or broken phrase shall be remembered, when the pure water shall run
out: Sound solid matter shall be quite forgotten. But now by our often reading,
things are brought again into our minds, and a long time retained in our
memories; and what formerly we have heard delivered, is as it were still
sounding in our ears. Thirdly, I remembered, (what never can sufficiently be
bewailed) my time misspent and lost; which caused me to redeem some time with
the loss of my own case and pleasure, that I might do good this way to Gods
Church and people. And lastly, the evil reports that some malignant spirits
made of me, when I preached them, ( viz. that I taught novelty, and false
Doctrine; and what I did, proceeded from a spirit of gall and bitterness, and
the like,) has much moved me to this work. All these things being well
weighed, did darken my former thoughts, and caused me to pervse my Notes, and
as I had time, to fit them for the Press; which now I send into the world,
desiring the blessing of heaven to accompany them, that they may be profitable.

As for the Matter, I doubt not, but it is sound and good, and how ever,
Eccles. 1.9.
There is no new thing under the Sun; And that there can be nothing said, but
what has been said before, as the Heathen man could say; Nihil est iam
dictum, quod non sit dictum prius.
yet there may be a more full opening, and a more perspicuous delivering of
points: yea, and daily is, to the great benefit of the Church of God, though
happily in regard of the sum and substance of matters; the former saying may
be true. I cannot then here promise thee (Christian Reader) any new thing,
which thou have not before heard of; but this I can promise thee, though
nothing else; Thou have here this Parable handled more amply and fully, then (to
my knowledge) thou ever have had it heretofore, for I know not any that have
travailed throughout in the opening of it. I do confess, I (with the little
Be) have flowne over many a Garden, and sucked many a flower for this little,
and have been beholding to many an Author, both old and new, for some matter
and stuff, toward the erecting of this building. But blame me not for this,
seeing I have done no other then all other Expositors have done before me; and
withal have labored by enlargement to make those things as useful to thee,
as I could.

As for the style, it is plain and homely (though I trust not ouerhomely) I
have ever desired, (and I hope for ever shall) so to speak, as that the
simplest might understand, aiming in all my teaching, at that to which the
whole Scripture drives, viz Humility, Comfort, and Conscience of obedience.
Romans 3.27.
First, at the humbling of the obstinate and impenitent, and abasing of their
pride. Secondly, at the comforting of the distressed soul, Romans 5.1.
and settling of his conscience in true solid peace, through the assurance of
Gods love. Thirdly, at the framing of men's hearts to a constant desire, and
care of pleasing God, and to the provoking and stirring up of the penitent to
more obedience.

1. Cor. 2.1.4.
Now this I know cannot be performed with excellency of speech, nor with the
enticing words of man's wisdom. If then the style dislike thee, as too homely,
harsh, or ragged, being neither round, nor fluent; know, that matter was more
regarded, then Rhetorical terms: And the Author desires rather to work upon
the conscience, then to tickle the ear with affected eloquence. And to be
plain, he has no skill in crooked conceits; which if he had, yet he would be
loath to spend his time so idly, as to feed that itching humor of many, which
has more need to be purged then to be nourished. But to be brief, seeing that
this book is come into thy hands, let me desire thee, first, to read it
through; begin not only but make an end: thou know not, the best wine may
be reserved until the last. John 2.10.
To read by snatches, and by peece-meales, here a little and there a little, or
else by fits, as it were, upon rainie days, seldom proves profitable: read
constantly, and read it over; and when thou have so done, over with it again;
upon thy second reading, what formerly seemed difficult, will appear more
plain.

Secondly, I desire thee before thou read to amend those faults which are
escaped in the Printing, and where so ever thou find words falsyfied;
sentences dismembered, or confounded by false poynting, or the like, cover them
with thy love. Besides literal and punctual faults, which are too too many,
there are many material faults, which do much pervert, and obscure the sense,
especially in the former part of this book (for a more heedfull regard was had
for the remainder, after it was perceiuied) as page 1.1. line 23. it is thus
said, It speaks against the Devils Diana, this Idol of vice with so many
worshippers, when it should have been thus printed, That speaks against the
Devils Diana, this Idol vice which so many worship. And so again, page 29.
line 16. you shall find it thus printed, I confess this affection in worldly
men's judgments is a strange Paradoxe, when it should have bin thus, I confess
this assertion, etc. And in the 45. page, and the last line, you have it thus,
God is immediately the first cause of all things, produced by the two causes,
when it should have been, produced by the second causes. And in the next page
to that, line 3. it is thus, the same writer also does confirm the third, when
it should have been, does confirm the second. And in the 47. page, and 23.
line, it is thus, For put case many so be, when it should have been, for in
such a case they may be. And page 225. line. 11. there is far more, for, for in
one: though this fault in most coppies is amended. I will not trouble thee with
any more errors here, thou shall find them set down at the end of the Book,
only these I do in special manner mention, because they are so gross, and
desire thee in special manner to correct, how ever thou dealest with the rest.
I must needs say, the coppie was very close, and much of it not re-written, but
delivered to the Printer, as it was set down at the first draught; for my
employments would not afford me so much time, as indeed it was fit I should
have had. It is needless to say more, for what Apelles sometimes said to a
foolish painter, thou may say to me; I should have judged thy work to have
bin done in have, though thou had said nothing.

In omnibus meis scriptis non modo pium lectorem, sed liberum correctorem
desidero. Aug. in Proam. lib. 3. de Trin.
I submit my weakness to thy censure, smite me friendly, such balm shall not
break my head. Remember, I am a man, and it is not incident to humane frailty
to be without faults. What faults I find, or hear off, shall be amended, if I
live to see it come again unto the Press. In the interim, accept of this, as
it is meant unto thee. I mean thee no hurt, if thou meanest me any, the Lord
forgive thee. And amongst others, I especially entreat you that were my
Auditors, to take my meaning in good part; it is your good I especially intend
and aim at. If any of you received comfort when these points were preached, or
shall get any good by them now that they are Printed, give God the praise, and
me thy prayers, that true grace may be more and more increased in me, and so
Gods people have more and more profit by me. If thou do thus, I shall be
sufficiently recompensed, and ever rest;

From my Study in St Margarets, Fish-street, London this 7. of January. 1619.
Thy true friend, in the Lord to be commanded; NEHEMIAH ROGERS.

A SVMMARY OF ALL THE DOCTRINES COLlected out of the several verses of the
Parable of the Prodigal. Luke 15.
Verse 11.
Doct. 1. Conviction is the ready way to conversion. page 8. 2. It is now no
easy matter to bring a sinner to a true sight of his sin. p. 10. 3. It is
lawful for a Minister to use similies and parables, for the illustration and
pressing of their points. page 12. 4. God is content in Scripture, to make
himself known to man, as a man, to this end that man might know him in some
measure. page 15. 5. The Church visible is a mixed company. page 18.
Verse 12.
Doct. 1. Sinners are childish and foolish. p. 27. 2. All that call God Father,
are not obedient children. p. 33. 3. Nothing is more grievous to the wicked,
then to be under Gods government. p. 35. 4. Wicked men esteem of Gods
blessings, but as due debts. p. 38. 5. God is kind and gracious, even to the
wicked and rebellious. p. 40. 6. God oftentimes leaves man to himself, and
suffers him to take his course. p. 42.
Verse 13.
Doct. 1. Wicked men are ever worst to God, when God is best to them. p. 51. 2.
Man being left to himself, cannot long stand. p. 55. 3. Sinners cannot abide
Gods presence. p. 59. 4. To follow sin, is to forsake the Lord. p. 60. 5.
Wicked men proceed from evil to worse. p. 63. 6. Sinners are great wasters
and spend-thrifts. p. 68. 7. Ungodly men spend Gods gifts in sins service. p.
70.
Verse 14.
Doct. 1. Common gifts are of a wasting nature. p, 73. 2. The Land of sin is a
Land of famine. p. 75. 3. God does often punish sin in it own kind. p. 77.
Verse 15.
Doct. 1. Sinful man being in misery, tries all other means, before he will
seek to the Lord for help. p. 81. 2. Those that refuse to serve God, shall
be enforced to serve a harder master. p. 85. 3. Sinners are brutish and
swinish. p. 87. 4. The service of Satan is a most base service. p. 89.
Verse 16.
Doct. 1. No earthly thing can content the soul. p. 91 2. Man's doctrine is but
a frothy doctrine p. 94. 3. The Lord does usually take from those whom he means
to save, those sinful means whereon they rest, p. 97.
Verse 17.
Doct. 1. Every wicked man is a mad man. p. 98. 2. Examination of our hearts,
the first step to repentance. p. 101. 3. Crosses and afflictions, are excellent
means to make us look home. p. 105. 4. Sense of Gods mercy causes repentance.
p. 110. 5. In Gods house are many hirelings. p. 115. 6. God provides a large
diet for his household. p. 116.
Verse 18.
Doct. 1. Sound Resolution necessary for the leading of a godly life. p. 125.
2. Serious consideration, brings forth sound determination. p. 127. 3.
Repentance from sin is tho first resurrection. p. 130. 4. Good motions are
not to be quenched, but to be nourished and cherished. p. 131. 5. Grace
grows by degrees. p. 133. 6. The bosom of the Lord is the best shelter. p.
136. 7. Preparation needful before we come into Gods presence. p. 138. 8. Sin
is the godly man's greatest sorrow. p. 142 9. All men sin, God looking on. p.
150. 10. The forgetting of Gods all-seeing eye, does increase the sin, and
aggrauate the same. p. 154.
Verse 19.
Doct. 1. Where there is true repentance, there is a sight and sense of a man's
own unworthiness. p. 157. 2. Gods blessings are better known by their want,
then by their enioyment. p. 165.
Verse 20.
Doct. 1. Where there is true repentance, there is not only a purpose in the
heart, but a practice in the life. p. 166. 2. True repentance consists of two
parts. p. 172 3. Where true repentance is, there is a turning from sin. p.
173. 4. In true repentance, there is not only a rising from sin, but there
is also a turning to the Lord. p. 176. 5. Repentance is not to be delayed, but
presentlently to be set upon. p. 178.
Verse 21.
Doct. 1. True Grace will manifest it self, both by deed and word. p. 192. 2.
Confession necessary before remission. p. 195. 3. Confession of sin is to be
made only to God. p. 207. 4. It is the property of a true Penitent, to
aggrauate his sin, and set it out to the uttermost, p. 211. 5. The only way
to obtain Gods favor, is with an humble heart to seek it. p. 215.
Verse 20.
Doct. 1. Our couersion is from Gods free grace. p. 222 2. True repentance
brings us into Gods favor. p. 227. 3. The first motion to repentance (if
true) is highly pleasing to God, and is accepted of him. p. 229. 4. God is
ready to show mercy to every one that seeks it. p. 231. 5. God is more ready
to show mercy then we are to seek it. p. 236. 6. God does not only love his
children, but he will manifest it unto them, by signs and tokens, that they
may not doubt of it. p. 239.
Verse 22.23.
Doct. 1. God will never upbraid any with their former courses, that do truly
repent. p. 250. 2. God gives his gifts, not immediately by himself, but
mediately by the hands of his servants. p. 254. 3. God is larger in his gifts,
then we are in our requests. p. 256. 4. Nothing that is needful shall be
wanting, where Gods favor is not wanting. p. 258. 5. God gives to his
children, as for necessity, so for delight and ornament. p. 263. 6. The
Conversion of any does bring great joy to the Saints and servants of God. p.
279.
Verse 24.
Doct. 1. Every wicked man is a dead man. p. 283. 2. He only may be said to
live, that lives the life of grace. p. 289. 3. Wicked men are Strayes. p. 301.
4. Our conversion and calling is from Gods mercy and grace. p. 302. 5.
Regeneration does not abolish joy, nor any other natural affection. p. 303. 6.
It is pardon of sin and assurance thereof, that brings joy and comfort to
the soul. p. 307. 7. The godly man's joy in this life, is but the beginning of
joy. p. 308.
Verse 25, 26, 27. etc.
Doct. 1. The wicked repine at others preferments in Gods favors. p. 310. 2.
It is the property of the wicked, to expostulate the cause with God. p. 317.
3. Wicked men have fair pretenses for soul sins. p. 323. 4 When God has to
deal with sinners, he deals with them in a mild manner, and not in fury
and rage. p. 328.
Verse 31, 32.
Doct. 1. We may not exasperate the wicked when they are incensed, but give
way unto their fury. p. 335. 2. It is lawful for a man to speak in his own
defense. p. 336. God will maintain the righteous cause of his children. p.
340.
The end of all the Doctrines.
THE TRVE CONVERT, OR AN EXPOSITION OF THE PARABLE OF THE PRODIGAL.
LVKE 15.11.12. etc. 11 And he said, A certain man had two sons:

12 And the younger of them said to his Father, Father: give me the portion of
goods that falls to me. And he divided to them his living.


AS God in times past diversely, Heb. 1.1.
and many ways spoke unto our Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last
days spoken unto us by his Son; so also this his Son, Acts 10.58.
whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds:
while he wa^ ^ere upon the earth, going about, doing good, did speak, and
teach his people after diverse forms and fashions; often by plain principles,
and affirmative conclusions, and not seldom by parables, and dark sentences,
in all, seeking his Fathers glory, and his Churches good.

Reasons why Christ spoke by Parables. First reason. Psalm. 78.2.
Many reasons are given, for this his parabolicall kind of teaching: these are
some:

First, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, which had so spoken of him; I
will open my mouth in a Parable, I will utter dark sentences of old.

Second reason Luke 8.10.
Secondly, that Gods treasure might be hid from the obdurate wicked; and the
mysteries of his kingdom might not be revealed to the scornful: to such it
shall be spoken in Parables, that seeing they might not see, and hearing they
might not understand.

Third reason. Mat. 13.36. Mar. 4.10. Luke 8.9.
Thirdly, to stir up his hearers, to a more diligent attention; as also that
they might hereby take occasion to move doubts, and ask questions, as the
Disciples did, What might this Parable be?

Miscetur vtile dulci.
that none might be cloyed, nor any discouraged.

Ioh. 3.12.13.
who best understand homely comparisons, and are sooner persuaded with plain
similitudes, and familiar examples, then with subtle reasons, and accurate
discourses: hence is it that parables and borrowed speeches, from vulgar
matters, are compared by some to Mid-wiues, which further our travel in
heavenly knowledge; thus he teaching by plain and known things, did lead his
scholars to the better understanding of what was unknown.

and impression in the mind, as experience shows; there are many that
remember a familiar example, which they heard from a Preacher, for many years
together, when as many other deep points, and matters of more substance, which
were then delivered, shall be clean forgotten.

Seauenthly, that every one in his occupation and vocation, Luke 8.5. Mat.
13.33.
from legal principles to instruct Lawyers: from the field and sowing, to
teach husbandmen; and from a Leaven, to instruct women.

And lastly, that he might convince the sinner of his 2. Sam. 12. Mat. 21.33.
as we see in the example of David, and others.

These are some reasons amongst many others, which Divines have given, why he
opened his mouth in parables, and taught the people after this manner.

In this Chapter; Christ uses this dark kind of teaching, propounding three
parables, which are as so many instruments of music, playing one and the same
tune: In that of the lost sheep, ver. 3.-8. And that of the lost groate, ver.
8-11. And this of the lost son, he teaches one and the same doctrine. The
occasion.
The occasion of his propounding this, and the two former parables, is to be
seen in the beginning of the Chapter, which was, the murmuring of the Scribes
and Pharisees against him, for his receiving of Publicanes and Sinners, which
came unto him. The scope of the Parable.


His scope and drift in it is to convince them of sin, for this their so
doing, and to bring them to a sight of it, and Repentance for it: for which end
and purpose he does use two Arguments, both taken from Gods dealing The first
may be thus framed;

Piscator in loc.
If God be willing and ready, to receive such as become Ergo. The Proposition
or first sentence is omitted, and taken as granted.

The Assumption is proved, and illustrated in the former part of this parable:
where, by the readiness of the Father to receive his son, he shows the
readiness of the Lord to receive penitents.

The second Argument he uses, is this, If God disliketh and condemns such as
are offended with those, who are ready to receive penitents; then you sin,
who are offended with me for this cause: But God disliketh and condemns such:
Ergo: The Proposition is omitted. The Assumption he clears and illustrateth
in the latter part of the parable; by showing how the Father reprehendeth his
son, for that his murmuring. And thus we have seen the scope and intent.

The use of this Parable.
This Parable is of excellent use to the Church and children of God: it sets
forth unto us our decayed, and restored estate; our decayed estate through our
wilful disobedience and manifold transgressions; through our original
corruption and actual aberration; Our restored estate, in our conversion to
God, by true and unfeigned Repentance, in a holy life and godly obedience.

It is full of mysteries and matter of great moment, and is by some termed (and
that worthily) the Epitome of the Gospel. In a word, there is no one bed in
the Lords Eden; no place of holy Scripture in the whole Bible, which yields
more sauourie or comfortable doctrine, Parables consist of 2. parts, a body
and a soul. Aug. Ser. 70. de temp.
then this parable does afford.

Now as man so Scripture, and as all Scripture, so parables in special consist
of two parts, a body and a soul. The external sound of the letter is the
body, but the true sense and meaning is the soul of it: we will therefore,
seek out the sense and meaning, and leave the letter.

The Fathers, and other Interpreters make this the mystical exposition of this
parable. The Father is God, the two Sons are the Scribes and Pharisees (who
are meant by the elder) and Publicanes and Sinners, signified by the younger:
the far country wherein this prodigal walked, is the region of sin,
wherein they lived: the goods which he wasted, were those common gifts and
graces which were bestowed on them: the Famine be sustained was the want of
that bread of eternal life, whereof they were deprived; the Citizen he cleaued
to, was the Prince of darkness, who rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience: the Swine he kept, were reprobate and wicked ones, with whom they
accompanied: the husks which rather burdened then relieved his stomach, were
the vanities of this world (or rather the traditions and frothy doctrines of
the Scribes and Pharisees) which rather cloyed then satisfied their hungry
souls: his return home, was their return from sin by repentance: by robe,
ring, shoes, and calfe, are signified the riches of Gods graces, whereby he
supplied all their wants: the servants who are willed to fetch these, are the
Ministers of Gods word, who bring his graces to us: the banquet, mirth, and
music, does represent that joy and happiness which neither eye has seen,
ear has heard, neither can the heart of man conceive of. Each of these we
shall further prove in their several places.

In this parable, we may consider first an Introduction. ver. 11. Secondly, a
Narration; from the twelfth verse unto the end.

In the Introduction we have first the party propounding: He said. Secondly,
the parties propounded. A certain man had two sons.

In the Narration, we are to consider; first, the prodigal his Egresse, which
is laid down from the 12. verse to the seventeenth: secondly, his Regresse,
or return: from the 17. verse unto the end.

In the first, we have his sin, in the 12. and 13. verses. And then the
punishment of his sin, in the 14 15. 16. verses. His sin, and what it was,
first, before he had received his portion verse 12. and secondly, after he had
received i^, verse 13. Before he had received it, and that was double, first,
his greediness of it. Secondly, his impudency in calling for it: both
contained in those words; Give me the portion of goods that belongs unto me.
The punishment of this his sin, which was common upon the whole country with
him, verse 14. And Personal on himself; wherein, we may observe, first, his
distress, and that is laid down briefly verse 14. and more largely, verse 16.
And secondly, his shift in this his distress; he went and joined himself to a
Citizen of that country, ver. 15.

In the prodigal, his Regresse; there, we have his repentance, ver. 17-22. And
the success thereof, from the 22. verse unto the end: in his repentance,
consider these three specials; first, the motives, or occasion thereof; which
was, first in general, a communing with himself, and calling his ways to
account; or secondly, a more special and particular consideration, and that of
his own misery. I perish with hunger: and of his Fathers mercy; How many
hired servants of my Fathers have bread enough verse 15. Secondly, we have his
resolution, wherein we see what he resolved to do, I will arise, and go, and
say, Father I have sinned verse 18.19. And thirdly, his Practice verse 20.21.
wherein consider his work, he arose: and his words, which are a confession of
his sin; wherein we have the matter of his confession, I have sinned, and
secondly, the circumstances. First; to whom, viz. to his Father. Secondly, how,
and that is first with exaggeration; against heaven, and in thy sight.
Secondly, with humiliation: and am no more worthy to be called thy son. Thus
for his Repentance. Now, for the success thereof, which is diverse viz. his
Fathers good will, and his brothers anger and ill will: his Fathers good will,
verse 20.22.23.24. And therein we see, first his readiness to receive him, verse
20. Secondly, the entertainment he gave him, verse 22.23. And thirdly, the
reason of it, verse 24. His brothers ill will, that is laid down in the
25.26.27. verses, with the rest unto the end; where we see, first from what it
arises, viz. from the understanding of his fathers love, verse 25-29.
Secondly, how he does express it, viz. by reasoning with, and accusing of his
Father, verse 29.30. And thirdly, how it is qualified, viz. by his Fathers
entreatie of kindness, verse 28. Secondly, by his Fathers reproof of
unkindness, verse 31. Thus we see the tree and branches, now to the fruit.

We might gather many good instructions out of this parable, if we should
consider it according to the letter, Instructions might be brought from the
letter of the parable. Parabola enim de nullo non conuenit.
which I cannot see but we have liberty to do; for Christ borrowes no
similitude from that which is not, and the things from whence the similitude is
fetched, is the same in it self, for which it is brought to illustrate
another. So then it might be handled without regarding the simile, as if it
were a plain narration, as Galat. 4.1.2. Bernards faithful Shepherd. Page 55.
The scope is, to show by that similitude that the law of God makes not free,
but keeps in bondage; for it does with us as Tutors and Governors do with an
heir (being a Child) even keep them under as a servant. Now besides the
lesson from the scope, may not this lesson be drawn from the letter, That a
wise Father will bring up his Son well, (though he be his heir) under Tutors
and Governors, and so Romans 7.2. Romans 7.2.
may not this doctrine be gathered, That the condition of a wife is subjection
to her husband. And again, That they be bound each to other so long as they
live. Thus may we do in parables, Yet not from every thing therein.
yet with this caution, that we gather not lessons from every thing therein,
for so many absurdisies might and would follow, being neither intended in the
spiritual sense, nor yet true in the literal; for many things in parables may
be supposed, as if they were so, to teach the truth by things feined, as
Judges 9.8.9.10. So in the parable of Dives, who is said to speak in hell, and
have a tongue, which is not true; we are therefore to be wary in using our
liberty, though we may: Sobriety had need to guide our course, when our
navigations lies through the depth of a parable: for mine own part I will omit
all collection, which might be gathered from the letter, and confine my self
to the scope and drift of it, desiring rather to be short then look beyond.
Before I come to handle the particulars, give me leave to propound a doctrine
or two in general.

And first, from the scope and drift of Christ in propounding of it, which was
(as ye have heard) to convince them, and bring them to a sight of their sin,
and so to repentance. Doctr. Conviction is the ready way to conversion.
Hence learn, that Conviction is the ready way to conversion: the readiest way
to bring any to repentance, is first, to convict and convince them of their
sins; and therefore was it the Lord did charge his Prophet Ezechiel to cause
Jerusalem to know her abominations. Ezech. 16.2.
Isay 58.1.
The like charge does he give to his Prophet Isay, To show Israel her
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. 1 Kings 18.18. Acts
2.23.37. John 4.18.19.
This was the course Elias did take with Ahab, Peter with his hearers, Christ
with the woman of Samaria; which examples are remarkable for the proving of
this point.

Boanerges before a Bar- Jonah; and bring thy people first to a sight of their
sins, and secret filthiness, hold before their eyes the glass of the law,
that they may see their misery, and what need they have of a Savior; set their
sins distinctly before them, deal plainly without flattery; this is the way
to bring them to sound repentance, that so they may obtain remission and
forgiveness.

Secondly, It may serve as an apology for such Ministers as, conscionably and
faithfully, labor to convince the consciences of their people of their sins,
and endeavor by preaching of the law, to bring them to a true sight thereof;
these are they who are usually thought to have a spirit of gall and bitterness
within them, and to be the only men which drive many to despair. I confess
there may be, and often is, a great fault on the right hand in harping too much
on this sad string of judgment. Some there are indeed who are never well, but
when damnation does end their sentence; this is too bloody and butcherly a
kind of teaching. But yet let me tell you: We now live in such times wherein a
sermon of mercy is like a dead letter; there are thousands who are not worthy
to hear of mercy, not to hear the sound of the word, much less to hear the
doctrine of remission of sins taught. Now what course must be taken with
these? Is not the sharp razour of the law to be taken, and incision to be made
therewith into their souls? until the wound be launced, and the core thrust
out, a wise Surgeon will never power in oil. And as for thee, who thus
condemnest the Ministers of the Lord, for delivering of the terrors of the
law, and art ever calling for gospel, gospel; I tell thee, it is to be
feared, of all others thou art most unfit to hear it, for it is usually seen,
none call more for it to be taught, then such as most despise it and condemn
it, those that are loath to know themselves, are ever loath to hear the law
delivered. O how far art thou from holy David's mind, Psalm. 141.5.
Let the righteous smite me for it is a precious oil, a foul sign of a
guilty soul.

Thirdly, We may hear see the reason, why so many gulf or violent stream, if
it be at midnight, fears not because be sees not any danger: Per^ins
exhortation to repentance.
but bring the same man the next morning, and let him see the narrowness of
the bridge he went over the night before, the fearful downfall and furious
violence of the stream that runs under the same, and then will he wonder at
his own boldness, and shrink for fear to think of it, and will not by any
means venture to do that which carelessly he did the night before, because he
sees the extreme danger which before he saw not. So is it with a sinner,
while he is in the estate of nature, he sees nothing, no wrath, no judgment,
no hell, for the God of this world has blinded his eyes, and therefore walks
on boldly and securely in sin, he sees not the narrowness of the bridge of
this life, nor the fearful gulf of hell under it, which he falls immediately
into if he flies off: but when God shall open his eyes, and touch his heart to
consider of his estate, and see himself; then he sees how narrow the bridge
of this life is, then he sees hell the gaping gulf under it, and how little
a step there is between him and damnation; then he woonders at his desperate
boldness, which so securely plodded on to destruction; and blesses God for
keeping him from falling into hell, then he leaves his former ways, and
turns his heart unto the Lord who has thus preserved him, and will not by any
means go the way he went before. And thus, until men's eyes are opened,
there will be no amendment, before their conviction there is no hope of
conversion.

In the second place, In that our Savior has tripled this parable, in every
one of them laboring to bring them to a sight of their sin; this does teach
us this lesson. Doctr. It is a hard matter to bring a sinner to a true sight of
sin.


It is no easy matter to bring a sinner to a true sight and acknowledgement of
his sin; yea, it is a very hard and difficill thing. Hence it is that our
Savior does triple this parable, and propounds their sin in the person of
another, that seeing their sin in the person of another, they might be
brought without partiality to condemn it in themselves. So this proved in the
first sinner upon earth, Genesis 3. Genesis 3. Genesis 4.
how much ado had God to bring Adam to a sight of his sin; so also with
Caine, how many questions did God propound, yet all would not do, he could
not bring him to it. But amongst many other examples remarkable is that of the
woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4. John 4.11.12.
what a stir had Christ with her before he could do any good upon her; how
unhappily does she reason against Christ's arguments; how scornefully does she
reject the water he offers her? how does she scoff and frumpe, and break
jests upon him, before she is convicted, and thoroughly touched for her sin.

1. Reason. Because sin has so insinuated it self, Ruth and Naomi, Ruth.
1.17. Math. ^ 29 Colos. 3 5.
nothing except death shall part them sin is as dear unto him as are the
members of his body, as his right eye, or his right hand. Hence it is that his
speech is harsh barbarism, it speaks against the Devils Diana, this Idol of
vice, with so many worshippers. Act. 19.^8.
Hence, did the Jews hate Christ, because he testified their deeds were
evil. Now then, considering this, that the mind of man is forestalled with a
love and liking of it, no wonder if he be hardly brought to leave it.

2. Reason. The Devil is a great enemy to man's salvation,

Use. This shows the folly of such as think to repent when they list: but
do thou know, that the first step is hard to tread, and especially when a man
has gotten a habit in sinning: Consu^tudo peccanda tollit sensum peccati. Sero
medicina paratur; Cu^ mala perlongas invalucre m^ras.
for custom of sin takes away sense of sin, thoe at first, the conscience
is as it were raw and bleeding, yet after it becomes feared. 1. Tim. 4.2.
Custom will inveterate the ulcer, and as now thou sinnest and carest not, so
hereafter thou will sin and know not.

Use. Exhortation to all such as have their eyes opened to see their sins,
and Consciences touched to grieve for their sins, to be truly thankful, for
this great blessing which sets them in a good forwardnes, toward Gods
kingdom; bless God therefore for it; for far better is it for thee to have a
working, then to have a sleepie Conscience. What though thy corruptions are now
troublesome? it is no otherwise with thee then with the poole of Bethesda, thou
may shortly look for help and deliverance.

Use. Instruction to every one in our places and callings, whether Ministers,
or governors of families, parents, and the like, not to be negligent in using
all good means, for the conviction and conversion of sinners: give not over at
the first, but use means again and again: our Savior propounds three
parables one after another, one may prevail, if not the first, yet the second,
if not the second yet the third, one may do good. Thus much in general. Now
we come to the Introduction, and therein first for the propounder which was
Christ.

Doctr. It is lawful for Gods ministers to use parables and similitudes for
the further illustrating and pressing of their doctrines.
He said] Now in that Christ himself does teach them hereby parables, we
learn: That it is lawful for Gods Ministers, not only nakedly and barely to
deliver the truth, but with the helps of invention, and Art to use similitudes,
comparisons, proverbs, parables, for the further illustrating and urging of
the same.

We see that Christ himself, who taught with authority, who was a Prophet,
mighty in word and deed, Luke 24 19.
before God and all the people, whose speech provoked reverence and amozednes
in his hearers, it was so gracious and so powerful: Math. 13.1.24.31 33.41.45.
Mark 4 33, 34.
spent not the least part of his doctrine in parables and similitudes; he knew
what easy apprehension worldly things would find in us, what hard impression
heavenly things would make on us, therefore so often by plain comparisons did
he teach secret doctrines, and by histories mysteries.

The Use may be first for instruction unto us, who are all unto all, 1. Cor.
9.22.
as S. Paul professes of himself, that we may win some: Caueats in using
Parables, Allegories, Similies, etc. 1. Caveat.
let us frame our selves to all men's knowledge and natures, as Christ himself
did by Allegories, stories, parables, and the like; yet in using this method,
these caueats are given.

First, they may not be far fetched, but fitting for the matter in hand, serving
more for edification and profiting of the hearer, then for ostentation or
setting forth the vanity of man's wit.

Secondly, that they be borrowed and drawn from 1. Cor. 9.24.
and apt. For the end of all speech, is to convey the sense to the
understanding of those to whom we speak; they may not therefore be dark* then
the thing it self is, which we should illustrate; as when they are drawn from
poetical fables, from diverse things in Philosophy; unless they be made easy
to the peoples understanding: Christ did ever take them from common things,
wherein the people were well beaten, appearing in the garden to Mary as a
Gardner, and unto the Disciples traveling he appears like a traveler: what
better pattern can be followed by us?

Thirdly, that we turn not all into Allegories, to the destroying of the
letter, and making of plain things obscure, as Origin sometimes did, whose wit
served him to allegorize almost the whole Bible.



Luther) to set forth and garnish a house already builded, Luther. Com. in
Galat. 4.
so is an Allegory to set out the light of a matter already proved, and
otherwise sufficiently confirmed.

Galath. 4. 1. Cor. 15.
we may well use our liberty in this kind, we having the example, both of
Christ and his Disciples, for the warranting hereof.

Math. 13.33. Quid prodest clavis aurea si no^ aperiat? quid obstat ligura si
aperit?
or other domestical business, do we any other then Christ himself did?
remember iron will do that, which oftentimes gold cannot do; and so this
plain and (as the world esteems it) blunt kind of teaching will do, that
which the more glorious, glistering and gaudie course can never effect. And
this from the Propounder: now to the propounded.

Hominem alloquens, humano more loquitur.
A certain man] By man (as I take it) we may without danger, understand God
the Father, as other Expositors do, who (albeit he be a Spirit, and has not
any visible shape) is content to descend, to our capacities, and in our own
familiar terms, speaks to our shallow understandings; and because we cannot
conceive of his majesty as he is, he speaks to us of himself as we are;
insinuating thereby his love to us, the sons of men.

The point we may learn is this: Doctr.
God is content (in Scripture) to make himself known to man as man, not
because he is man, but because man may know him in some measure.

Amongst all creatures, none more familiar to a man then a man, and amongst all
men none more kind and loving then a Father; therefore the Lord to express
his love, and make known his goodness toward us, shadows out himself unto
us, like a man, and such a man as is our Father, and that not only here, but
in many other places of Scripture. Hence it is also, that he is often in
Scripture set out by the parts and members of man's body; as also the senses,
affections, and actions of man for this end are given unto him.

As for the members of man's body, many are attributed unto him, as the Head,
Dan. 7.9. Exodus 33.20, 23. Psalm. 27.8, 9. and 31.16. and 34.16. Eyes, Ps.
34.15. and 17. Eye lids, Psalm. 11.4. apple of the eye, Ps. 17.8. and Zach. 2.8.
Mouth, Ioh. 9.14. Ier. 9.12. Ears, Ps. 31.2. and 34.15. Nose, Ier 25.37. Hand,
Ps. 8.6. Arm, Exodus 6.6. Fingers, Math. 12.28. Feet, Ps. 110.1. So are man's
Senses attributed to God, as Seeing, Genesis 1.4. Psalm. 11.4. Hearing, Ps. 11.4.
Ps. 6.8, 9. Smelling, Genesis 8.21. and the like: so are man's affections: as Joy,
Judge. 9.13. Sorrow, Genesis 6.6. Anger, Pro. 1.18. Zeal 9.7. Hatred. Romans 9.13.
So, humane actions, as to breath, Genesis 1.7. to come to. Ioh. 14.13. to return,
Zach. 1.3. Psalm. 6.4 to descend, Genesis 11.7. and 18.21.

Now, by all these, and many more, he signifies (not what he is indeed) but
what is needful for us to know of him. For being well acquainted with the
use, office, and effects of natural things in our selves. We may better guess
at the knowledge of that God to whom they are ascribed by translation.

The uses.

Per figuram non naturam.
for these are ascribed to him, non secundum affectum, sed secundum effectum,
he has them by resemblance, not by nature. Let us use them only as helps,
the better to conceive of him, and his goodness.



Mat. 7.11.
is man kind, is not God kinder? are parents provident for their children, and
shall God be wanting unto his, has man an eye, wherewith he sees, and shall
God he blind? has man an ear to hear, and shall God be deaf? Psalm.
115.4.5.6
oh beware of making him like those Idols spoken of, by the Psalmist, Who have
mouths but speak not, eyes but see not, Ps. 94.9.10.11.
ears but hear not, hands but work not, and the like, he that planted the
ear, shall not he hear, says David, he that framed the eye, shall not he
see, he that chastises the heathen, Ps 49.9.10.11.
shall not he correct, he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know, shall
we abuse his majesty so far as to think him not so perfect as our selves,
take heed of this, again I say take heed of it; lest our wickedness reprove
us, and we find the contrary in the end, by woeful and miserable experience.

Exhortation; let us not dishonor that nature that God has so highly
honored; once (says one) he made man to his own similitude, but often
describes himself according to man's similitude; what a shame is it then to
defile those members by sin, whereby God expresses his own goodness and
glory? Does God express his dietie by thy head, his favor and presence by thy
face, his providence and good will by thy eyes, his strength by thy arms, his
blessed spirit by thy fingers? Oh then beware how thou abasest thy body, Romans
6.13.19.
or any member of thy body to sins service; Give not thy members as weapons
of unrighteousness to sin, but yield your members as instruments of
righteousness unto God.

Had two sonnes] By these two sons, Text.
some understand the elect Angels and men, but this cannot be, for they murmr
not, at any compassion that is showed unto us; others by them understand Jews
and Gentiles, true it is, that the Jews are elder brethren, but surely they
are not figured hereby this eldest son; for they have forsaken their fathers
house, and are now strangers from the tents of Sem: Others, by these two
sons, understand the Pharisees and Publicanes: of this mind are the most and
the best, from whom I will nor dissent; for the Pharisees grudging at Christ,
for his familiarity with the Publicanes, gave him occasion to utter this
parable (as formerly we have seen) and by it he does convince them.

But these Pharisees were sinners, Object.
and such as before whom, Christ preferres Publicanes and Harlots; but this
eldest son here spoken of, says he never brake any of his Fathers
commandments: Answer.
Sol. The Pharisees were righteous in their own eyes, as Christ else where
does plainly declare; Luke 18.
no wonder then they did thus brag they were obedient sons, when as in
truth it was nothing so; for, had this son been as he did profess, he would
never have murmured, nor repined at his fathers just and equal proceedings.



Answ.
Christ would not now exasperate the Pharisees, but from hence draws an
argument. q. grant you be dutiful and obedient, yet you do not well to be
offended with this my dealing, etc.

And thus we see who are the two sons here spoken of.

In the estate of this Father in his children (says one) the estate and
condition of the Church militant is not obscurely shadowed and prefigured: his
two sons represent the two sorts of people that are in it: if this be so, we
see that the Church visible is a mixed assembly: Doctr. The Church visible is a
mixed company. Mat. 13.34. Mat. 13.47. Mat. 3.12.
it is a mixed company both of good and bad. The Parables in the 13. of Matthew,
so set it forth. It is compared to a field, wherein is darnell and stubble, as
well as wheat. It is compared to a net, which gathers together of all kinds
of fish, both good and bad. It is compared to a floor, on which lies both
corn and chafe: sundry other comparisons are brought in Scripture by our
Savior, to confirm this truth. Mat. 25.1.
It is compared to ten virgins, whereof 5. were wise 5. were foolish: to a
marriage feast, where some had wedding garments, Mat. 22. 2. Tim. 2.20.
other none: to a great house, wherein are vessels of wood, and vessels of
gold; and may well be compared to that great sheet, Act. 10.11.12.
wherein are all manner of beasts and fowls, clean and unclean: thus it ever
has been; thus it ever will be, until the great Judge with his fan shall
purge his floor; Mat. 3.12. Mat. 13.30.
till the Angels shall carry the wheat into the barn of glory: until this day
comes, some rubbish will be in the net; some tares amongst the wheat, some
chafe upon the floor; some goats amongst the sheep; some with the mark of
the beast in the Congregation of Saints; on Ismaell in the Family of Abraham;
amongst the Disciples there will be a Demas; amongst the Deacons a Nicholas:
and amongst the Apostles themselves, there will be a Judas.

The cockle must grow for the corns exercise; Reason. 1. Cor. 11.19.
there must be heresies, says the Apostle, that they which are approved
amongst you might be known: the faith of Gods children must be tried, as Peter
says, 1. Pet. 1.7.
and how can that be, were there no bad to try them?

Uses.

Foully then are they deceived, who think there is no Corinth, a false Church,
1. Cor. 5.1.
because they had amongst them wicked men? Why then did the Apostle call it a
Church of Christ, 1. Cor. 1.2.
and a company of Saints? was not the Church of Thyatira, which suffered
Iesabel to teach, to seduce, and commit fornication, Revel. 2.20.
a true Church? Is a wife no true wife, because she has a blemish; And was
not Rebecca, the true wife of Isaac, though she had an elect and reprobate in
her womb? And why then should not that Church be a true one which has both
Jacob and Esau within her: As for their separation, thus much I confess, if a
brother walk disorderly, we may withdraw our selves from him: 2. These. 3.6.
but that we are to withdraw our selves from the church because of him, I
utterly deny: we may not leave Gods floor, because there is some chafe;
neither may we break Gods net, because there is some baggage fish; neither
depart out of his house, because there be some vessels of wrath; nor yet run
out of his field, Non propter malos boni deserendi, sed propter bonos mali
tolerandi: August. Epist. 48. cont. Don:
because there grows some cockle: for the bad which are in the Church we may
not forsake the good; but rather tolerate the bad for the good their sake. And
this we are to know, it is heaven that has ^one but good: hell that has none
but bad: Earth that has both good and bad: to have all good and none bad is a
property of the Church triumphant; to have all bad and none good, a property
of the Church malignant: but to have both good and bad mingled, is an
inseparable property of the visible Church militant, here upon the earth: I
will conclude this use with that exhortation of the Apostle, Heb. 10 25.
Ecclesiam tento plenam tritico et palta, em ^do quos possum, tolero qu^^
emendar^ non possum; fu^io paleam, ne hoc sim; non aream, ne ni^il s^m^ Aug.
Heb. 10.25. Forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner
of some is: but exhort one another; and so much the more as you see the day
approaching. Amend whom thou can; tolerate whom thou can not amend: but in
any case run not from thy fathers house, because a bad son or servant is in
it.

And so I come to a second use. Which is, for trial: are there both good and
bad mingled in the Church visible? then examine thy self, what a one thou art.
There Israelites do, hypocrites and wicked men do; but make diligent search
and inquiry, whether thou be a sound member of the Church invisible, or
Catholic; whether thou be of the number of those faithful ones, whom Christ
redeemed with his blood.

Quest. Answer.
But, how shall I know, whether I am such a one or no?

There are many signs, whereby it may be known, I will give thee one, which
shall be instar omnium, all in all; and it is this; Holiness a mark of a true
member of the Church.

Perk: on the Creed. Revel. 11.2. Ephe. 5.29.


a constant practice of holiness. By this may thou know, whether thou art a
sound member of it; for every true member of the Church Catholic, is
answerable to the quality and condition of it; now that is holy: and so are
they: so S. Peter terms them, a holy Nation. And in other places so are they
styled: art thou then holy? Do thou seek after it, and follow it? Art thou
sanctified and cleansed from the filth of sin? 1. Pet. 2.9.
Do thou express holiness in thy conversation, having respect to every
commandment of God? Art thou holy at all times, in all places, about all
actions? Have thou it written in thy forehead, as it was in the breast of the
high Priests robes? If it be so thy estate is good; be thou assured, thou art a
true member of the Church Catholic, and shall never perish: but yet again,
let me admonish thee not to deceive thy self, but look that it be so; see
that thy holiness be true and unfeigned: for I tell thee, there are thousands,
that deceive themselves about this matter of holiness, contenting themselves
with a cracked groat, pleasing themselves with a counterfeit, and why may not
thou do so? What I said before, I therefore say again and again, be well
advised, bring thy holiness to the touch: try it well, and examine it
thoroughly; thou have great need, because there are things so like, and so near
of kin unto it, which indeed are not it. Two things especially like
holiness, but not it.

Cognatae sanctitati.

Differences betwixt true sanctity and civility. 1. Difference. Mat. 23.25.
Mat. 5.21.27. 1. These. 5.23. Ephe. 4.23.


Two things there are especially very like it, which thousands in the world
take for it: but are foully deceived: And these, they are Civil honesty, and
Restraning grace, these two are cousens to it, they are nigh a kin, but not
the same: be not then deceived by these: which, that thou may not, I will
show thee some difference between them and this.

And first Civility reaches only to the outward man, as for the inward, it
is not regarded: thus was it with the Scribes and Pharisees, their greatest
care was for the outside of the cup, and to keep themselves from the outward
act, and to be free from reproachful crimes: but now sanctification like
leaven, spreades over the whole lump, no part or power of soul or body, but is
leauened; it cleanses the mind from gross ignorance and vanity, it makes us
to be careful, about the evils of the heart, and makes us to be watchful
over the thoughts and affections.

Secondly, Civility respects principally duties of the Tit. 2.12.
and (if any difference) has more respect to the first Table then to the
second duties of piety as well as of Justice, and charity shall be conscionably
observed.

Third difference.
Thirdly, the works of Piety, which Civility performs, are but ceremoniously
observed, to preserve credit, or for fashion sake; it rests contented with
the bare act doing; never regarding the inward power of godliness: but true
sanctity performs them even for conscience sake; and is much offended if he
feel not the power of godliness in them; it is still complaining of dullness
and deadness, and is grieved at the heart, for serving God so drowsliy.

Fourth difference.
Fourthly, Civility for the most part contenteth it self in abstaining from
evil; it does no man wrong, it pays every man his own, none can say it has
stolen either ox or ass: 1. Sam. 12.3.
this it thinks to be enough, though it never does any work of mercy, or
charity: and so for the first table, it thinks it sufficient, to be no
Idolater, profane swearer, or the like: albeit they be ignorant of the true
God, and in the grounds of his worship, and though they never honor him with
their tongue; but true holiness teaches both to eschew evil, and do good,
knowing that abstaining from evil, Esa. 1.16. 1. Pet. 3.11.
is but one of the steps to heaven, doing well is the other: both which a man
must take, if ever he would come thither. And these are some differences
betwixt true sanctity, and that same mock-grace Civility, which so couzens
many.

Now for that other counterfeit, viz. Restraining grace, it may be discerned
from true holiness, by these ensuing signs.

Difference betwixt true holiness and restraining grace 1. Difference.
First, Restraining grace does not hate the evil it abstaineth from: it is the
Maiestrates sword, shame of the world, or fear, or sense of Gods wrath that
does curb them in, and make them to abstain: or else it may be, the want of a
mind disposed, or of an occasion proposed, does keep them within compass: as
for the sin it self, they love and would commit it, had they ability or
occasion offered: but true holiness does eschew evil, because it is evil,
and hates the evil is escheweth: yea, it hates it with an unfeigned hatred,
Psa. 119.
so that were there no law or magistrate, yet it would be a law unto it self,
it needs not to be bridled by the terrors of the law. No, it is the love of
God that constraines to do good, and the same love restraines from evil.

Secondly, Restraining grace does not willingly obey, 2. Difference.
but like a stomackfull Horse, does champ the bitt within the teeth, it is
inwardly discontented at, Gods commands, yea, it is great pain to be curbed,
and crossed of it will; nothing is more painful then to leave sin, nothing
is so grievous as to be in subjection to Gods law, these they count as bands
and cord, Psalm. 2 3.
this yoke is esteemed as the heauiest burden: but the heart truly
sanctified, desires to be curbed; it is inwardly grieved when it is not
restrained; no yoke is so grievous to it, as the yoke of sin, no yoke so
easy as the yoke of Gods law: what good it does, it does willingly and
chearefully, what evil it commits, it does grudgingly, and with repining.
By these, we may discern true holiness, from both these counterfeits, Civil
honesty, and grace restraining: fall now to work, be not hearers but doers
also, Iam. 1.22.
deceive not thy self; as it is to be feared, thou have hitherto.

Answer me directly to these questions I propound, and let God and thy own
conscience be witnesses to thy answer: Have thou as much regard of the inside
as of the outside? Does thy evil imaginations, sinful cogitations, trouble
and disquiet thee, are these heart-euils, and secret sins, they that molest
thee; if it be thus, it is well with thee, but if otherwise, thou art but a
Ciuilian at the best. Again, I demand, whether thou have respect to the first
Table, as well as to the second, and to the second as well as to the first?
Do thou as well make conscience of blaspheming Gods name, of profaning Gods
sabbath? as thou do of murdering a man, or robbing by the highway? Answer
me in truth, is it thus or no? And further, I demand, do thou perform good
duties for conscience sake? Do thou lament and bewail thy dullness and
deadness, thy drowsines and heaviness in the performance of them? Art thou
grieved and disquieted when thou find not the efficacy and fruit of those
good exercises in thy heart? Is it thus with thee, art thou sure of it? Then
let me once again demand. Have thou learned to make conscience of sins of
omission, as well as of sins of commission? Do thou as well open thy mouth to
speak to his honor, as keep it shut from dishonouring of him? Do thou as
well make conscience of doing these good duties on the Sabbath day (hearing,
reading, meditating, and the like) which God requires, as thou do of
abstaining from the works of thy ordinary calling, which he forbids? And
do thou not rest in Negatiues, abstaining only from what is forbidden; but
have thou also regard to Affirmatiues, doing what God has enioined to be don,
esteeming this latter as necessary a branch of Christianity as the former:
surely if it be thus, thou may have comfort, that thy holiness is sound and
good, it is of the right breed, and no counterfeit. But yet let me examine thee
a little further; thou abstainest from gross evils, such and such sins thou
do not commit, but what is the ground of thy abstaining, is it the law of the
Magistrate? Fear of Gods wrath? Or shame of the world? or is it, because thou
want ability, or opportunity, and the like, if this be the ground, let me
tell thee, this is a false holiness, which will deceive thee in the end. But
do thou leave these, because they are evil and displeasing to the Lord?
Do thou fear the Lord, and his goodness, H^s. 3.5. Psalm 130.4.
and tremble to offend him, because of his mercy? Why then it is excellent, an
evident sign of a sanctified soul: and yet once more answer me: do thou
feel it painful to be restrained from evil, and art thou discontented when
God puts his bit into thy mouth? Is his law as bands and cords unto thee? are
his commandments heavy, so that thou can not bear them: if it be thus, it
is a foul sign, that thy holiness is but restraining grace, and such a
holiness as a Reprobate may have? But if on the other side, thou art desirous
to be restrained, and thou countest it a misery not to have thy flesh bridled,
if thou art willing to draw in Christ's yoke, and take delight in obeying of
his will: thou may then conclude, and that without fear, that thy holiness
is sound and unfeigned, and so consequently, that thou art (not only a member
of the Church visible) but also a true member of the Church catholic and
invisible: oh my beloved, that we would deal truly with our selves, that we
would now at the last learn to be wise, and not gull our own souls, as most
do. You see that all are not good, that are in the Church, there are many
dissembling hypocrites, as well as sincere professors, there are goats as well
as sheep in this fold of Christ, Now he that has not the spirit of Christ, is
none of his: Romans 8.9.
What hope then can they have, who have not so much as a show of godliness?
How desperate is their estate, who even in outward appearance, show nothing but
profaneness? Gods name which is holy they blaspheme; his Sabboths which are
holy they profane; Religion which is holy they contemn; and in a word: all
the laws of God, which are holy, they violate and break. And most fearful
must the estate of such be, who mock and scoff at holiness and sanctity, and
will not stick to profess, they are none of these holy ones; but know thou
profane wretch, whosoever thou art, that every true member of the Church
Catholic is holy, and who ever is not a member of that Church here, shall
never be a member of that other hereafter; and therefore consider what thou
say, and be thou better advised. Cast of thy profaneness, and follow
holiness, which thou have so long despised, for without it no man shall ever
see God to his comfort. In a word, to conclude, all you that profess your
selves to be true members of this Church, declare it by your holiness, 1 Pet.
1.15.16.
holiness becomes the Saints of God, be you therefore holy as God is holy. God
is holy in all places, at all times, about all actions, so must thou be, or
else thou art not holy as God is holy, he is holy in the day, so be thou; he
is holy in the night, be thou so also. God is holy in the earth, so see thou
be; God is holy in the heavens, so pray thou may be; his words are holy, so
must thine; his works are holy, so let thine; oh that we could be thus holy as
God is holy! Remember the Heavens are holy whether thou art going, the Angels
are holy with-whom thou must dwell, and the Church is holy wherein now thou
live. And therefore see thou practice holiness, otherwise though thou live
in the Church, yet thou art not of the Church, but art one of those Goats
which shall be set at Christ's left hand, and hear that same fearful saying
of Away from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. Math 25.




VERSE 12. And the younger of them said to his Father, Father, give me the
portion of goods that falls to me. And he divided to them his living.

13. And not many days after, the younger Son gathered all together, and took
his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with riotous
living.


HEre begins the Narration, wherein we have laid down the Prodigal his
Egresse to the 17. verse, and his Regresse from thence unto the end. In his
Egresse, we are to consider first his sin, verse 12.13. Secondly, the
punishment of his sin, verse 14.15.16. His sin, which was either before he
had received his portion, verse 12. or after he had received it, verse 13.
Before he had it, his fault was double, he is greedy of it, and he is as
impudent in calling for it: After he had it, he also commits a double sin,
first, he leaves his Fathers house; and secondly, he wastes and consumes his
goods with riotous living.

And the younger. Quest.
] But why is the Prodigal figured by the younger, rather then by the elder
brother?

I answer, Surely because of his folly and indiscretion, Answ.
which is most incident to youth that is headdy, rash, Solent iuniores minus
esse prudentes. Maldon. in loc. Stella in loc.
and soonest seduced. Hence is it usual amongst us to term such as want
foresight, and have been outreached, younger brothers, oh, you were made a
younger brother, etc. Thus this prodigal was the younger, not in years, but
in manners, not in age, but in want of wisdom. So then, by this term and
Epithet, the folly and indiscretion of the prodigal seems to be set forth,
which if it be (as I suppose it is) then this will be the point.

Every sinner is a younger brother, foolish and indiscreet. Doctr. Sinners are
younger brothers.
Sinners are childish and foolish, they want wisdom and discretion,
whatsoever reckoning the world makes of them, or they make of themselves, yet
indeed they are no other.

The holy Ghost in Scripture does every where befoole them, Ierem 4.22.
My people is foolish, they have not known me: they are sottish children they
have no understanding: Yea, but it seems the Prophet in that place has to
deal with idiots and naturals: and against such to direct his speech; nay: for
mark what he says further, They are wise to do evil, Ierem. 5.4.
but to do well they have no knowledge. So in another place, Surely these are
poor, they are foolish. And in another place, Psalm. 5.5.
The foolish shall not stand in thy sight. And in another place, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Verse 28.29.
Do ye so requite the Lord, oh foolish people and unwise! And again, They
are a nation void of council, neither is there any understanding in them. O
that they were wise. Prou. 1.7.22. Mat. 25.1. Math. 7.26. Luke 12.20. Romans
3.18. Psalm. 111.10.
Solomon affirms this in his Proverbs, almost, always, styling the wicked
man the fool. And Christ Jesus (a greater then Solomon) does plentifully
confirm it in his Gospel, comparing them to foolish Virgins, to foolish
builders, and the like.

If you would know the reason, this is it: they are strangers to the fear of
God, that is not before their eyes. Now the fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom, Prou. 1.7. Ierem. 8.9.
Initium sapientiae; the very beginning of it, as if it were the A. B. C. to
it, how then can they be wise when that is wanting?

Object. Luke 16.8.
But Christ himself says, that the Children of this world are wise, yea, wiser
then the children of light. How then can this be true?

Answ. They are not in genere, wise; but in genere suo, wise to do evil. Ier.
4.2.
Most true it is, they are wise, and indeed wiser then the children of God,
according to Christ's speech: but yet mark the restraint, he accounts them not
wiser absolutely, but only secundum quid, they be wiser in their generation,
that is, in the things of this world; wiser in their generation then the
children of ligh^ in theirs, for by reason of corruption that cleaves so fast
to; and of sin that hangs so fast on; Hebr. 12.2.
we reach not to that measure of wisdom which we ought to do. This
therefore makes nothing against our former point: we may then hold it as a
sound Maxim in Diuintie, that sinners are fools. The uses may be these.

First, to reprove such as judge contrary judgment Politicians, have profound
reaches, and have a deep insight into the world, though they be profane
swearers, drunkards, Sabboth-breakers, or the like, yet these are the only
wise men counted. But were this so, then would Pharaoh have had been wise, and
Achitophel that grand Politician, and so Gebezi, and Achan, and Hammon; yet who
played the fool more egregiously then these? have they not their folly written
in their foreheads, so that who so runs may read it? have they not a
Nouerint vniuersi set over their heads, that all may know them for fools to
the worlds end? I confess this Affection in worldly men's judgments is a
strange paradoxe, and it is no wonder, for the natural man perceives not the
things that are of God, neither can he perceive them because they are
spiritually discerned. Yet that their mouths may be stopped, Six remarkable
properties of fools, natural to every wicked man.
and (if it be possible) that they may in some measure discern it, let us
consider some of the properties of fools, and then see whether they are not
natural to every wicked man.

One property of a fool is this, he is ignorant and indocible, indocible, and
will not be taught. And does not this fitly agree unto the wicked? are not they
as ignorant, can they tell why the Lord made them, or about what business they
came into this world? do they not drudge and droile, moile and toil, and
spend their whole time for the getting of a little vanity? do not their lives
say (though their tongues are silent) that their chiefest errand hither was to
get riches, to procure honor, to follow pleasures, to hunt after fashions, and
to fill themselves with a few vanishing contentments of this present life; and
can they tell whether there be a God, or what this God is, or how he will be
worshipped and served: alas they cannot, and which is worst of all, they will
not learn, they are ignorant, and will be ignorant, they are carelessly sottish
of those things they daily hear and see; Suidas.
like that fool Amphistides, who would never learn to tell above five, or to
know whether his Father or Mother brought him forth.

selfe-conceited, no persuasion can alter or change their minds, their own
ways they like best, and their own courses they think safest. Thus is it
with the wicked, their own ways they will follow, their own courses they
will take, though destruction be the end, no persuasion that can be used, no
argument that can be brought, can recall or reclaim them. Like that Noblemans
fool, Gilbert lib. 1. N^ro.
who being sent for wood, would always draw out from underneath the pyle,
thinking it the best way to do the hardest work first, and the easiest
afterward, when indeed he spent more time in pulling out a stick, then be
should have done in carrying in an armefull, if he had taken off the uppermost
which had been most ready; yet by no means could he be diswaded from this
course till the pyle fell upon his head, and slew him. Thus obstinate are the
wicked in their evil ways, they drive in sin as if they were mad, (as it
was said of Iehu in another case) and will not be reclaimed till death and
damnation seize upon them. 2 Kings 9.10.


Gaderens esteem their Hogs more then Christ, Mark 5.17.
the things of this life before those so far surmounting joys of a better.
Such a profane fool was Esau, Heb. 12.16.
who preferred a mess of a pottage before his birthright; a large brood of
profane ones he has left behind him (though he himself be dead and gone)
who will not stick to part with Heaven for a little pelf, for a mess of
meat they will be content to loose, their souls, their Heaven, their God.

Fourthly, Idiots and fools are all for the present, having Quaeres are, What
shall I eat, Math. 5.
or what shall I drink, or what shall I put on. But as for Heaven, and
eternal salvation, they never open their lips to make any inquiry.

Fifthly, Fools are very desperate, they are still a meddling Ludit cum spin^^.
Pro. 10.23. and 14.9.
It is a pastime to a fool to do mischife, (says Solomon.) Sin is as it
were his babble wherewith he makes himself sport, he makes a mock at it;
drunkenness, whoredom, theft, murder, and the like, make him merry at the
heart; but know thou fool, in the end these will sting like a Serpent, and
bite like a Cockatrice, they owe thee a shame, and assure thy self they will
pay thee.

Sixthly, Fools are very mischievous and harmefull, sleep departs from them,
except they cause some to fall. See how the Apostle sets them forth in the
third to the Romans, at the 13. verse, Romans 3 13.
Their throat (says he) is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have
used deceit, the poison of aspes is under their lips. Whose mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness. Verse 14. Verse 15.16. Verse 17.
Their feet are swift to shed blood. Destruction and misery are in all their
ways: and the way of peace they have not known. What fool is or can be more
mischeiuous then a wicked man is.

Thus you see how fitly these properties of folly agree to all wicked ones: and
now what think you? shall these be wise in thy esteem? can thou judge these
to be discreet, that behave themselves as we have seen? it cannot be, no
not possible: thou must needs set to thy seal, Wicked men not natural fools,
but artificial fools.
and say that they are fools. True it is they are not natural fools, wanting
natural wit (for then they were the less to be pitied) but they are
artificial fools, fools of the devils making, and therefore the more to be
detested. But carnal men in this life cannot see this, and therefore will not
say this; but one day (to wit, at the last day) they shall acknowledge it.

The best work of a wicked man is but a fools sacrifice. Eccles. 5.1.
that they are fools, let them esteem themselves to be never so wise? then
assuredly their best works are but folly in Gods esteem, their hearing,
reading, praying, preaching, what are these but the sacrifice of fools, and so
does Solomon term them? What a miserable thing is this that a man should live
20. 30. 40. 50. or it may be more (according to the term of time, he lives in
his natural estate) and offer up in all that space no other sacrifice then a
fools sacrifice unto the Lord? Oh woeful! Oh lamentable! can God be pleased
with this? shall God accept of this? No, he cannot, nor he will not consider
of it, therefore. (Oh man) spend one hour in serious consideration; the time
will not be lost but redeemed. Math. 5 22. Revel. 3.14.
And further consider, if he be in danger of hell fire, that says, thou
fool, as Christ Jesus that faithful and true witness does affirm. Then how
much more likely is he to go to hell, that is a fool indeed? Is the very
calling of one fool, (who is not) so great a sin, as that the slanderer is
in danger of hell torments? Then how much more greater torment does abide him?
that makes himself a very fool by committing of sin, which is termed folly in
Scripture language.

Dan. 4.
and entertain the true fear of God into thy heart and soul, so shall thou
be aged whilst thou art but young, Number. 11.16.
and be an Elder, when thou art a child; but if thou continuest to go on in
sin, thou shall be still a child, Esaias 65.20.
though thy head be hoary, and though thou live the years of Methuselah,
thou shall never attain to years of discretion.

The fourth use is for Admonition: Are the wicked Hoc that walks with the
wise shall be wiser (says Solomon) but a companion of fools shall be made
worse. And as for their judgments we need not pass: alas they are without
wit, let them mock on, be not thou discouraged; should one of the Kings
Guarde cast off his livery because a fool laughs at it, he might justly be
thought to be a worse fool then the other, a yellow coat would better become
him then his red. Do not thou then cast off thy livery, forsake not thy
profession because the fools of the world deride thee, they are fools and so
esteem them.

Father.] He calls him Father, yet gives him not a son-like respect; his
carriage does not show what his tongue professes.

A man may profess God to be his Father, Doctr. All those that call God
Father are not dutiful children. Mal. 1.6.
yet for all that be a disobedient Child. All are not obedient that call God
Father, some prove but disobedient Sons. A Son honors his Father,
(says the Lord to the rebellious Israelites) and a servant his Master; if I be
a Father, where is my honor; and if I be a Master where is my fear.

Use.
Trust not then in lying words, which will not profit, it is not the bare naming
of Father, Ier. 7.4. Exodus 20.12.
that can prove thee a dutiful child, prove what thou say by thy dutiful
carriage: a son honors his Father. Is God thy father, then see thou honor
him; he that gave that law for honoring of your parent, does look to be
honored of all his children: Mat. 26 49.
good words cost nothing, who cannot give them? Judas himself can say, Hayle
Master. Words are but Court-holy-water, they will pay no debts: call not God
then only Father (as many do) but give him all dutiful and sonne-like
respect (as few do. Verba rebus proba, says the Philosopher.
) Words are but vocal Interpreters of the mind; actions real; what a man
does we may be sure he thinks, not evermore what he says; see then that thou
carry toward him the affection of a child, love him, reverence him, fear
him, obey him: otherwise so often as thou openest thy mouth, to call him
Father, so often out of thy own mouth shall the Lord condemn thee. 1. Pet.
1.17.
I shut up this in a word, with the saying of the Apostle. If you call him
Father, who without respect of persons, judges according to every man's work;
pass the time of your dwelling here in fear.

Give me the portion of goods] A very impudent and saucy suit, so imperiously
to claim it, and that as debt due unto him, was it not safe in his Fathers
hands? Or he well under his Fathers government? that now he must have it in
all have, and be at his own dispose: surely, this Father might have pleaded
iudicially with his son, as sometimes God did with his people of Israel: Oh
my people, Mic. 6.3.
what have I done unto thee, or wherein have I grieved thee, testify against
me. Could he allege against him his unnatural clemency, or unkind
entreaty, or want of things necessary? Could he plead for his departure, Genesis
31.4.
as Jacob for his, when he went from his uncle Laban, his countenance is not
toward me as formerly it has been. Romans 3.4. Psalm. 51.4.
Surely he could not. Let God be true and every man a liar, that he may be
justified in his sayings, and clear when he does judge.

But now to some instructions, and first we infer, Doctr. Nothing is more
grievous to the wicked, then to be under Gods government. Psalm. 2.3.
that nothing is more grievous to the wicked, then to be under Gods government,
and in subjection to his laws. Come (say the wicked) let us break these bands
and cast away these cords from us. They counted themselves to be in bondage,
while they were in subjection to Gods most holy laws, and therefore they call
upon one another to cast off the yoke. So Psalm. 12. Who is Lord over us, Psalm.
12 4. Ier. 6.10.16. and 7.23. And 23.35.39. Isay 48.4. Zach. 7.11.
our tongues are our own, Who shall control us? It is lawless liberty they
affect. They will have no hand over them to keep them in, or restrain them.
There are many places which I could heap up, to confirm this point, but I
will be sparing. Now, some may demand the reason. What are not his laws just
and equal? Surely yes. Deuteronomy. 4.8.
For what nation is so great, that has ordinances and laws so righteous? What
then. Are they not hard and difficult to be kept. No neither; for my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light. Mat. 11.30.
What then should be the reason, it may be, there is small profit in keeping of
them. Yes, that there is, for in keeping of them there is great reward: Psalm.
19.11.
But if you would know the reasons, then these they are.

First, they are contrary to their natures, and therefore Romans 8.7.
the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the
law of God, neither in deed can be.

Secondly, they are as a light that discovers their John 3.20.
because their deeds are evil.

Thirdly, Gods laws does cross them in their sins, 1. King 21.
that Gods laws to them are as Eliah to Ahab, always troublesome, let them
hear them or read them, they never prophecy good unto them, how then can they
love them? these are the reasons.

Now for the uses.

Romans 7.23.
do thou find this inward coffeehouse in obeying? Are Gods laws as bands
and cords in thy esteem? And as a stomackfull Horse, do thou foame at the
bit, which is put into thy mouth? An evident sign of a rebellious heart; but
on the other side, art thou content to submit thy neck to Gods yoke? Art thou
desirous, that thy nature would be more conformable to Gods law? Art thou
content to be restrained, and if it were possible to have the wicked
inclinations of thy heart utterly abolished? Surely, then thou need not to
want comfort, thy estate will afford it: Go on therefore, and the Lord be with
thee.

But in the second place. This serves for the discovery of many to be sons
of Beliall; lawless, lewd, and dissolute persons, to whom nothing is more
grievous, then Gods government; and nothing more distasteful then the
commandment of the Lord! Gods word is like hard meat, lying heavy upon the
stomach, that cannot easily be digested. Those precepts given, for the
ordering of our ways; swear not at all: sanctify my Sabbath: Mat. 5.
they are hard sayings, who can endure them? Nay, they could wish, they were
razed out of the book, and there were no such injunctions: debar them from
swearing, you were as good sow up their lips; keep them from their sports on
the Sabbath day, why then take away their lives; nay, they cannot, nor will not
be so straight laced. Their sports they must follow; their pleasures they must
take, and no day fitter then that. Thus Sampson like, they break Gods laws,
like twind threads, and say, depart from us, we will none of thy ways: Job
21.14.
oh but these speeches are blasphemous, they come not out of our mouths, such
speeches as these we abhor and detest.

Answ. Yet, your works speak as much, Tace linqua, lequere vita.
though your tongues are silent. Sins whereof you are guilty, and of which
you have been often convinced, are not yet left, nor forsaken, but held; and
your tongues like so many pieces of sugar, though your sinful ways are
condemned, yet you obstinately persist in them; and what is this, but with
those servants to send word after the King, they will not have him to reign
over them. Luke 19.14.
Is not this to renounce the Lords government? To cast away his yoke, and
break his bands? See what he himself does testify of such courses. Psalm.
81.11. Psalm. 81.11.
My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me: in not
hearkening to his word, they refuse and reject the Lord himself: let all such
then know, that, (pretend what they will) they are but lawless persons,
children of Beliall, who desire nothing more then to be from under Gods
government, and to cast his yoke from off their necks.

In the third place. Let it teach us to submit our selves Beliall, wicked,
lawless, and dissolute persons. Oh then beware of wilful breach of Gods
laws: 1 Samuel 1.16.
for by them he gouernes and rules his people; in casting them behind our
backs, what do we else but cast off GOD himself, as Samuel tells Saul. 1.
Sam. 15.23.
Rebellion (says he) is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as
iniquity, and idolatry: because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he
has also rejected thee from being King: think well of the speech, and make
good use of it.

Give me the portion, etc. Text.
] Here see how boldly he calls for it, and that not as a gift, but as a debt,
give me that which belongs unto me.

This teaches us thus much: Doctr.
That Gods blessings are counted but as due debts, Go^s blessings are esteemed
but as due debts by sinful men.
by natural, sinful, and unregenerated men. They lay claim to them as to a
debt owing. Thus was it with those dissembling Israelites. Esaias. 58.3. So with
those Mat. 7.22. And me thinks the Apostle does intimate so much. Romans 10.3.

Reason.
And surely, it is no wonder: for ignorance breeds pride and contempt; now this
is the issue of pride, not to think it self to be beholding to God, for any
thing received.

Romes religion seems to be so sweet, and so many drink of the cup of her
fornications: while doctrine of merits is agreeable to the flesh, no wonder so
many run mad with conceit, what unregenerated man cannot make an excellent
Papist, with a little help. Surely, there is no man in his mere naturals, but
is a fit piece of timber for the Popes building: Romans 7.8.
this doctrine being so pleasing to the flesh, we may well fear it is cursed
of the Lord.

according to their doctrine is their practice, challenging God as a debtor,
claiming heaven as a penniworth for a penny: their doctrine and practice is
well known to all the world, and therefore I will be sparing: so much having
bin both said and written by so many learned men against it, only this I will
tell you, there is none of them but upon their death beds call for mercy,
though in their life they plead their merit. Feign would I see any of the
learned of them, when they are a going the way of all flesh, thus to exalt and
lift up themselves, as to say, Lord I am worthy of thy mercy, I have deserved
thy kingdom, pay me what thou owe me, I desire no hing gratis, but to have
according to my desert: surely howsoever in their doctrine they in effect teach
this, yet I am persuaded at such time as the snares of death shall compass
them about, none of them will be then so presumptuous: but will (as many of
them have) at that time confer our doctrine, which in their life time, they
do so much oppose.

A second sort to be reproved, are many ignorant, and proud Protestants (and in
this point very Papists) who, esteem of, and lay claim to Gods gifts, whether
temporal or eternal, as to a debt owing to them: alas, how common is this
with the sons of men? As for Gods good gifts, which are of a temporal
nature, how few, do otherwise esteem of them? Health of body, peace and
liberty, food* and raiment, seasonable weather, how lightly are these
blessings esteemed of? Surely, if God were bound unto us, we could not possibly
be less thankful: let these things be for a time withheld, our murmuring,
repining, do evidently declare, we think God does us great injury, in not
paying what (as we think) is owing.

And as these stand thus affected concerning things temporal, so is it also
with them concerning things of a better nature. They doubt not of their
salvation, as for forgiveness of their sins, and eternal life, they are out
of fear: but upon what ground do they build this their assurance? Why, they
love God above al, injury no man, pay well their tithes, tend their Church, and
live peaceably with their neighbors, and speak well of all: and thus they
hope to have heaven for their well deseruings: but such build their hopes upon a
weak foundation; their building will at length fall upon their heads, for
should God give to man according to his best desert, he should reign fire and
brimstome upon his head, thi^ would be the portion of their cup.

A third use of this doctrine, may be to admonish every Luther.
a Pope in his belly, a high conceit and opinion of his own works, (whereby
we think we tie God unto us) albeit there be in us no real virtue, no true
substance. We can of right challenge nothing at his hands, be our works never
so good nor excellent: before thy conversion what can thou deserve, when
every work and action, Tit. 1.15. Heb. 11.6.
are as so many sins: for to the impure are all things impure; and without
faith it is impossible to please him. Secondly, after thy conversion, all thy
works are tainted with sin, whereas if they could meri^ or deserve, they
must be absolutely righteous. Challen^^ then nothing for thy works sake, thou
know their (...) perfections: or in begging any blessing, use no other plea,
but the freedom of his grace, let Papists lay claim to them, as they are
servants, we will lay claim to them as we are sons.

As this point ought well to be considered of us all: so in a special manner,
of such as are mourners of Sion, who are much cast down, because they cannot
mourn sufficiently for their sins, persuading themselves, if they could so
do, that then God would be gracious: let such know, that this is a spice of
that corruption which cleaves so fast unto us, as flesh unto our bones; for
how ever we may think it proceeds from humility, yet in deed it is
otherwise: it comes from natural pride, for shall God be gracious, because
of thy tears? Can this procure pardon at his hands? Learn thou, to renounce
thy self, and thy best works, and fly to his mercy: and because thou can
not mourn, nor grieve as thou should, or would; let Gods mercy be thy
only merit, and make it so.

Text.
And he divided unto them, etc.] Here is the Fathers condiscending to his
sons request: he gave him his portion according to his desire. He lets him
have what he sought, and suffers him to go.

Doctr.
From hence in general, in the first place, we may learn; God is kind and
gracious, even to the wicked and rebellious; he gives gifts unto them, as well
as to the godly. God is kind and gracious, even to the wicked and rebellious.
Mat. 5.45. Psalm. 17.11. Psalm. 37. Psalm 73.2. Reason.
He suffers his rain to fall, and his Sun to shine upon the just and
unjust: he filles their bellies with his hid treasure. Yea, so plenteously,
that the Prophet David complains of their prosperity; my feet (says he)
were almost gone, etc. because the wicked prosper in the land, having riches in
possession, and doing what they lift.

The reasons of Gods liberality toward the wicked, may be these;

1. That his bountifulness might lead them to Repentance, if they belong unto
him, as the Apostle shows. Romans 2.4. Romans 2.4.


2. That they might be the more inexcusable, at that great day, when they must
appear, to give account of their ways; if they belong not unto him.

3. That God might reward that little seeming good, 1. King. 21.29. 2. King.
10.30.
which is in any of them: So Ahabs temporary humiliation obtained the remoouing
of a temporal judgment; and Iehu his obedience, in destroying Ahab^ house,
was recompensed with Gods blessing upon his house, to the fourth generation.
These may be some reasons amongst many, why the Lord deals so liberally with
the wicked, in bestowing upon them many good blessings, as well as upon the
godly; Now we will come to make some use of the point.

Seeing this is so that God is so good to such as are very Luke 6.36.
learn to be merciful as your Father is merciful. And though we cannot
equal God in mercy, (for alas all our mercy is faint and finite) yet let us
imitate his example so far as we may; Ephe. 5.1.
and be followers of God as dear children. True it is, a little child cannot
tread in the steps of his Father, yet he may walk in the path after his
father: So let us follow God, though we cannot overtake him in goodness. God
is kind to the good, be thou so too; God is kind to the bad, be thou so
too; God is bountiful both to good and bad, see thou be so also.

Esaues riches, nor Iesabels birth, nor Goliahs strength, nor Achitophels wit,
nor Absolons beauty, nor Saul's stature, nor Dives clothes, nor the Fools
great Barnes that can certify the soul, of the favor of God; all these a man
may have yet be of old ordained to condemnation.

Joseph made a good use of his Masters bounty, Gene. 39.8.9.
oh that we could make the like. God has dealt more kindly with thee in
bestowing many favors upon thee, health, strength, wit, wealth, food,
raiment, and the like. How then can thou commit such great wickedness and
sin against God, let his kindness overcome thee, and make thy heart to melt
for thy former disobedience.

R m. 8.32.
but delivered him up for us all; How shall he not with him also freely give us
all things?

Now in the second place, in that the Father yields to his sons desire,
Doctr. God oftentimes suffers man to take his own course.
and gives him what he seeks: Hence we may note,

God of^entimes suffers man to take his own course, and leaves him to the
satisfying of his own desire, see for proof Psalm 81.12. Romans 1.26. pregnant
places to confirm this.

Now for the more profitable handling of this point* Two kinds of Desertion
et^^n^ll, or temporary.
let us know that Gods desertion and forsaking of man, is of two sorts. It is
either Eternal, or Temporary: The one in part only, and for a time: The other
wholly. And for the temporary desertion, which does befall Gods dearest
children, it is also of two sorts. First, Temporary desertion of two sorts; in
sin, of in punishment.
desertion in sin. Secondly, desertion in punishment.

Desertion in sin is, when God withdraws the assistance of his spirit, and
leaves a man to the committing of some grievous crime; thus was Noah left to
fall into drunkenness, David left to fall into adultery, and Peter left to the
denial of his Master.

Desertion in punishment is, when God delays to remove his hand which he
has laid upon his Children, or to mittigate their sorrow; an example of this
see in Judges 6.13.

Now, these desertions are but temporary for a time, and never beyond the
compass of this present life, Esaias 54.10. Gods children may be left for a
time: and the reas^ns of it.
For a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee, for a little season; but
with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, faith the Lord thy
Redeemer.

The reason of Gods thus leaving his children, may be

Secondly, That, that hidden and spiritual pride, which 2 Cor. 12.7.8.
There was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

Thirdly, That God may make trial of the estate of of our graces, that we may
be thankful.

Thus do we see how the Lord leaves his children, yet but for a time, for
his kindness toward them for ever shall remain.

How the Lord leaves the reprobate.
The other kind of desertion which is eternal, whereby God (upon lust causes
best known to himself) leaves man to himself wholly, and for ever,
befalls reprobates, and only them; as Caine, Esau, Judas, and others, who
are of old ordained to condemnation. The beginning of which desertion is in
this life, when God bestowing upon them benefits either spiritual or
temporal, as he does upon his own servants, withdraws that part of his
benefit which has the promise of eternal life annexed to it: the
accomplishment whereof shall be in another world, when as they shall be
totally separated from the presence of the Lord, and be left unto the devils,
eternally to be tormented.

Est causa deficiens, non efficiens.
though he permit and suffer the same to be done, yet he is not the author
nor worker of it.

Rhem. Annot. in Mat. 6. verse. 13. and Iam. 1.13. and alibi.
See then the wicked dealing of the Church of Rome, who amongst many slanders
cast out against us, are not ashamed to lay this to our charge, that we
maintain God to be author of sin, which is utterly untrue; for we teach
privately, and publicly, by word, and by writing, in Schools and Churches,
that God is not the author of sin, but the devil, and man's corrupt will.
This is our doctrine, this we maintain; the other we abhor and renounce as
open blasphemy. Most true it is, that we do teach, Actor in male, but not
author mali. August. lib. que. 83. qu. 3.
that God is an actor in that which is evil, and that sundry ways; which may
well be, and yet he free from sin, and no way the author of evil. The
actions of God concerning sin may be referred to these three heads.

First, He is the universal cause of all things, How God is actor in evil.
Acts 27.28.
he sustaineth mankind, that in him he lives, moves, and has his being;
yea, he vpholdeth the being and moving of all his actions, so that no man
could move hand or foot to any action, were he not sustained and supported
by God. The act then is of God, and God is a worker in every sin, so far
forth as it is an action; for every action as it is an action is good. One man
kills another, the very moving of the body in the doing of this villainy is of
God; but the wickedness of the action is from man, and the devil. Perkins on
the Lords prayer.
A man rides upon a lame horse, the rider is the cause of the motion, but the
horse himself of the halting in the motion. Thus is God the author of every
action, but not of the evil in any action.

Secondly, God is a worker in sin, by withdrawing his graces, as he did from
Saul; neither can this be a sin in him, because he is not bound to any; he is
free to bestow where he will, and to restrain where he sees good. And here
is a difference between the action of God, and the action of Satan; God holds
back grace, whereupon they fall into sin; the devil suggests evil motions,
Deus deficit gratiam detrahendo, diabolus afficit malitiam apponendi; homo
seipsum inficit duritiam contrahendo.

Licet Deus non sit author tame^, ordinator est peccatorum ne vniuersitatis
naturam turb^re, vel turpare permittantur. Aug. contra ^austam. lib. 22. cap.
78.


which causes them to run into all evil.

Thirdly and lastly, God works in sin, in ordering and directing of it as
it pleases him; sometimes he restrains it that it shall not pass, nor
proceed further then he appoints. Sometimes he turns it to another end then
the person intended that practiced it; both these we see evidently in Jobs
temptations. Sometimes he makes way for sin to pass, that thereby he may
punish one sin with another. All this may God do and be free from sin.

Thus we see the truth of this doctrine; and may it not be confirmed out of
their own popish writers? Who do affirm as much in this as we do. For the
first, that God is immediately the first cause of all things, produced by the
two causes: but of things evil he is the mediate cause, O^^ha^ qu: 5. (...)
in that he produces and preserves the creature. These are the words of one
of their own side.

The same writer also does confirm the third, in saying that God is a debtor
to no man, O^hani 3. qui 12 in (...).
and therefore he is bound neither to cause that act, nor the contrary; nor
yet not to cause it; but the will of the creature by Gods law is bound not to
cause the act, and so consequently sins by doing of it.

Bellar. de amissi. great. lib. 2. ca. 13.
The third way of Gods working in sin, Bellarmine (their graund-champion) does
maintain. Who says; that God not only permits the wicked to do many
evils; but he also ouerseeth their evil wills, and rules and governs them,
he boweth and bends them by working inuisibly in them. Thus we see that our
adversaries do in plain terms maintain that which they exclaim and cry out
against us for. But I wonder with what faces they dare challenge us, for that,
whereof they themselves are so guilty, have they forgotten what is written in
their Canon law, viz. that the Jews had sinned deadly if they had not
crucified our Savior Christ: (oh horible blasphemy) whereby they do affirm
that that immaculate Lamb in whom was no sin, and in whose mouth was no
guile, was justly and worthily condemned. Can they show any thing of us
touching the providence of God, which comes near to this impiety? Let these
things stop the grave of their slanderous throats, if they have not a whores
forehead, being past shame. But I may leave them as a people that have cast off
all shame, 2. These. 2.9.10.
spurned against the truth, and trodden under feet the blood of the new
covenant, and therefore damned (if they convert not) through the just judgment
of God, of themselves.

not be given over to thy own hearts lusts. It is the saying of a worthy
man, if God should give him the option to choose the torments of hell, with
hope to recover his gracious favor; or thus, utterly to forsake him, of his
grace, and leave him to his own ways: he would wish rather hell torments,
with expectation of deliverance, then this giving up to the lusts of his own
heart: and surely except God should presently send us down to that place of
torment, where is pain endless, easelesse, and remediless, I cannot see,
what greater judgment can befall.

But shall a child of God, always be thus left? Object.
Has not God promised to return again: how then can this be so heavy a
judgment?

As I have formerly said: so again I say, Answ.
the desertion that does befall Gods children, it is but temporary for a time,
and not for ever: were it for ever, it were hell it self. But albeit, it be
but for a time, yet for that time, their case is grievous. These temporal
desertions are more grievous unto them, then temporal death, and if they might
have their choice, they would rather choose to die a thousand deaths, then to
be thus forsaken: and no wonder, for put case many so be, that they can
discern small difference, if any, betwixt themselves and a Reprobate: nay,
they may hereby be so tormented, that they, even Gods own dear children,
(they I say) may blaspheme God, and cry out, they are damned; read these
places. Job 13.24.16.12.22.3.4. And see whether Job was in any better estate.
Read also Psalm 6.1.-4. And judge how miserable was David's condition. It is
the judgment of a worthy Divine, that the pangs which David felt, after his
fall, before he could recover again Gods former favor, were more sharp and
vexing, then those that did accompany his first conversion unto grace. Oh
beware! beware! ye that now stand, beware lest you fall; 1. Cor. 10.12.
be more provident for your own good, then to give God occasion by reason of
your sins, to deprive you of his favor, and leave you to your selves. If ever
you do recover your loss, many a sigh and groan must be sent from the heart,
before it can be obtained. Many a salt tear, and longing look up toward God,
Romans 11.20.
before the sense and feeling of Gods spirit can be regained: be not then high
minded but fear, be fearful of this heavy judgment; and in a special manner
take heed of the causes thereof: for as all sin in general does cause the
Lord to leave us to our selves: so there are some sins, Special sins that do
cause the Lord to leave us for a time. Romans 1.21.24. Ingratum si dixeris, omnia
dixeris. Psalm. 116.12.13
which in a special manner will lay us open to this danger. I will name them,
that you may the better avoid them, they are these.

The first is, unthankfulness for graces received, as our Apostle Paul does
make manifest, thus speaking: because when they knew God, they glorified him
not as God, neither were thankful etc. God gave them up to uncleanness,
through the lusts of their own hearts, etc. O beware of this same sin, it is
an excuselesse sin: this is the only tribute God does expect from us, for
all his mercies that he has done unto us. And surely, I am persuaded, this is
one cause, why Gods children are often thus left and forsaken of the Lord; and
why his blessed spirit departs away, because they take no more notice of those
graces which are wrought in their hearts; neither are they so thankful as they
should be: they are ever complaining, they have nothing in them; no grace in
their hearts, etc. This grieves Gods blessed spirit, that thou art no more
thankful for his good work that is begun: and causes him to leave thee for
a time, that thou may at last be more thankefu^l; take therefore such notice
of thy infirmities, for thy humiliation, as that thou forgettest not, Gods good
gifts and graces, for thy consolation.

The second sin that causes desertion. Luke 19.12.
A second special sin which causes the Lord to leave and forsake us, is, the
ill use, or no use of good gifts bestowed. The slothful servant, that employed
not his tallent, shall have his tallent taken from him: such gifts as are not
employed, shall be blowed on, and soon come to nothing: let this be considered
of every of us: art thou a public person, whether Maiestrate, or minister?
has God given thee gifts fit for thy function? employ them, and employ them
well, for the advancement of Gods glory: art thou a private Christian; Mat.
25.25.
and have thou a tallent given thee, oh take heed lap it not up in a Napkin,
but employ it to the behoof of thy master. In a word; let all that have
received, spend their gifts, so as that their stock may be increased: Breasts
not often drawn, will soon dry up: gifts not well used, will soon abate, and
cause the Lord, and his blessed son to depart.

A third sin to be taken heed of, is spiritual pride: A third sin.
a high conceit of our selves, in respect of those gifts wherewith God has
furnished us; this sin is a dangerous sin, and such a sin, as the best
of Gods children, are proane unto: a disease that the very elect are sick of:
yet God is said to resist the proud, 1. Pet. 5.5.
and to give grace to the humble: let every one therefore whom God has gifted
in any special measure, take out that lesson of the Apostle, be not high
minded, but fear: fear thy heart, Romans 11.20. Pro. 28.14.
it is deceitful; fear all thy ways: Oh blessed is he that fears always.

Fourthly, the Lord does leave and forsake us, and gives us over to our own
lusts, when we do not profit by the means which he does vouchsafe, to give us
for our good. As does evidently appear. Esaias. 1.5. Heb. 6.8. and Ezech. 24.13.
Oh beware how you neglect those means of your good, which God does offer and
afford, if you will not be given over to his fearful judgment.

These are the sins, A fourth sin which must be avoided.
especially to be avoided of all such as would not be left unto themselves,
and forsaken of God, in whose presence is fulness of joy, and at whose right
hand, there are pleasures for evermore: avoid them then, yea, carefully avoid
them, least thou give the Lord occasion to withdraw his spirit: it is quickly
lost, but not so soon regained. Thou may loose it in a minute, not recover
it in a year: remember that and be watchful.



Text. Ver. 13.
VERSE 13. And not many days after, the yo^^ger Son gathered all together, and
took his journey into a far country, and there, wasted his substance with
riotous living.
THus we have seen what was the prodigals sin before he had received his
portion: now let us see what was his sin after he had received it. It is
here laid down to be twofold. 1. the leaving of his fathers house in the
former part of the verse. 2. his spending his goods riotously, in the latter
part of the verse. In the first we are to consider these two circumstances. 1.
the circumstance of time, when he went, which is here said to be after he had
received his portion. 2. Not long after. 2. the circumstance of place, whether
he went, into a far country.

In the second branch, we are to consider. 1. What he spent, it was his
substance. 2. The manner how: which was with riotous living. And of each of
these in their order: And first of the first, which was his leaving and
forsaking his fathers house: and therein first of the time, It was after; and
not many days after.

In that this Prodigal does leave his Father, after his Father had been, thus
beneficial unto him. We may hence learn; That the wicked are most undutiful
to God, Doctr. Wicked men are worst to God, when God is best to them.
when God is most beneficial unto them: When God is best to them, then they
are worst to him, they are never more ready to rebel, then when God
multiplieth his mercies upon them. See this further confirmed in Moses his
song. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Deuteronomy. 32.8.15.
Where he reckons up many great favors, that God had showed, and many
blessings that he had bestowed upon that people of Israel: He chose them for
his own inheritance: he kept them in the wilderness, as the apple of his eye:
he bore them on his wings, as the Eagle her young ones: he fed them with the
best, and gave them plenty of all things: honey out of the rock, and oil out
of the flintie rock: butter of kine, milk of sheep, fat of lambs, and
rams of the breed of Basan, and goats, with the fat of kidneies, of wheat:
yea, they did drink the pure blood of the grape. These, and many more
blessings did the Lord bestow on them. But now behold Iesurun waxed fat, and
kicked: he waxed fat and was grown thick, yea, he was covered with
fatness: then he forsook God, which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock
of his salvation. This caused Moses, with admiration, Ver. 6.
to cry out, Do you thus requite the Lord? Oh foolish people, and unkind!
Thus, it is with sin and disobedience, in stead of Gods leading you with his
favors, leading and pressing him down with your sins; Hos. 4.7.
another proof of this point, we have in the fourth of Hosea, the 7. verse,
where the Lord speaks thus by his Prophet; As they were increased, so they
sinned against me. The more I multiplied my blessings upon them, the more they
multiplied their sins against me: So then we see, that whereas Gods liberal
bounty toward them should have made them thankful unto God: contrariwise
his benefits made them wanton, proud, and forgetful of God: and not only
negligent of all good duties, but made them prone to all manner of impieties.
Again, Hos. 13.6.
this is further confirmed in the 13. Chapter of the same Prophecy, verse 6.
the words are these, According to their pasture, so were they filled: they were
filled, and their heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me. Where we
see their great abundance, which should have made them thankful and dutiful
to the Lord, Esaias 5.12.
made them unthankful and forgetful of him. The like place have we in Esaias.
5.12. But I need not be prodigal, in bringing Scripture for proouing this,
which daily experience does make manifest: compare the Court, with the
country, the Palace, with the prison, and it will plainly appear, that
where there is greatest plenty of Gods blessings, there is greatess penury of
grace; amongst such as fear not God.

The reason of this is, the corruption of man's nature, which being poisoned
with sin, spider-like turns all into poison: a corrupt stomach, makes all
meats have an ill relish; and a naughty temperature, the more it is fed with
good nourishments, the worse it becomes: so is it with an ill tempered soul,
the more it is fed with God, good blessings, the worse it is. Thus we see the
truth of this point, with the reason thereof: let us now see what use it will
afford.

Israel was so often warned, before they came into the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy.
6.10.11.12
to take heed to themselves, least when they had it in possession, they forget
the Lord, and rebel against him; and why then rather then at another time?
Surely, because riches, and pleasures, abundance, and ease, would be such
baits, that then they should be in greatest danger, to be drawn by them to
forget Gods mercies: this is the corruption of our nature, and the poison of
sin: oh then be you careful, whom the Lord has anointed with this oil of
gladness above your fellows: and upon whose habitation this Sun of outward
prosperity shines bright: the path wherein you walk is slippery, like the
fat, fertile soil, whereon a man may sooner catch a fall, then on the rugged
grauelly way: stand therefore on your watch, let your blessings proportion out
your obedience, and with every blessing, desire a greater measure of grace,
that you may not forget the Lord that gave them.

In the second place, I must fall from admonishing, to

Neither is this the sin of one, or two, but it is Epidemicall, the sin of
many; many are the favors which God has showed to this land, he has laden us
with his blessings, both spiritual, and temporal, and wherein has he been
wanting unto us? But alas: the more Gods blessings do abound, the more pride,
forgetfulness of God, contempt of Religion, and the utter neglect of all holy
duties, abound also: our peace and plenty has bred pride, and security,
cursed daughters of so good mothers: had Moses cause to cry out against
Israel: and have not we much more cause to cry out against England? Do you
so requite the Lord, oh foolish people and unkind: For his many favors heaped
upon thee, do thou thus multiply and heap up sins against him? To return
evil for evil, is a damnable sin: but to return evil for good, how shall
we answer it? But thus it is, let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he
not learn righteousness, Esaias 26.10.
in the land of uprightness, will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the
majesty of the Lord.

Oh how much better, to want the world, and enjoy the Lord, then to gain the
world, and loose the Lord.

return great unkindness? Well, be not too too impatient, considering thou
show thy self much more unthankful against God, to whom thou art
infinitely more indebted; in their glass see thy own face; in them behold thy
own fault.

Not long after.] As this prodigal forsook his Father, Text.
after he had received his portion: so it was soon after: for he being left to
himself, incontinently manifests his own weakness; hence then we may note

That man being left unto himself, cannot long stand: Doctr. Man being left to
himself cannot long stand.
the many falls and infirmities of Gods own children do evidently confirm
this truth, Noah, Lot, David, Peter, how foully did these worthies fall, when
God a little did withdraw his hand? Nay, Adam himself in the estate of
innocence, how long stood he? being at his own dispose: some are of the mind
he fell the sixth hour. August. Theoph. Tho^ Aquin.
Others are of the opinion, be fell the ninth hour. Others, that he fell the
twelfth hour after his creation. Most agree, that he fell the same day wherein
he was made.

And is it any wonder, Reason.
if we consider how weak we are become by that hereditary disease, which we
had from our first Parents. Man at the first was made of a mutable nature, in
power of standing, and possibility of falling. The power to persevere in
goodness he had, yet the act of perseverance was left to the choice and
liberty of his own will: he being assailed by Satan's temptation, abused this
his free will, and received a downfall, whereby he left all power to God, and
brought on himself a necessity of sinning: in which estate all his posterity
now lie; so that man is not now able to sustain or bear up himself in any
good course; he has not now power left not to fall, but lies under a
necessity of sinning.

Secondly, as we are weak, so the Devil he is strong we want; and when he
has found us, he fitts us: thus, dealing like a cunning fowler, having his
nets and his call, and every thing in a readiness, if once he becomes
acquainted with the birds note, and diet; he makes no question of the game:
thus his poison meeting our nature, is easily devoured; considering then how
ready we are to run hard, how forward the Devil to drive, it is no wonder,
that (except God keep us) we make no more stay.

Use. This first reprooueth such as trust too much to their own strength, For
reproof.
and rely too much on their own power: these of all other are in greatest
danger, for pride goes before destruction, Pro. 16.8.
and a high mind before a fall: look upon Peter, he was never more weak, then
when he thought himself most strong; how cowardly did he behave himself in
denying of his master, even then, when he made that courageous profession:
Alas! how secure do men grow, thrusting themselves wilfully into dangerous
places, exposing themselves to dangerous temptations, yea, tempting the Devil
to tempt them, as if Satan dorst not set upon them; or if he did, as if they
by their own strength were able to withstand al his encounters: and hence it
is, that through this their carelessness, God does leave them to themselves,
and so they run on headlong into all ungodliness, committing such sins as
the sun does blush to see; and the very earth does groan to bear.

Romans 11.20. 1. Cor. 10.12.
and of all strength of the flesh, Be not high minded, but fear, and thou
that now stand, take heed, thou may fall. Art thou as stronges Sampso^, as
righteous as Lot, as holy as David? yet thou can not long stand without Gods
grace. Mat. 14.30.
Peter would needs walk on the sea, he thought he could have done as his
Master did, but as soon as he sets his foot on the waters he is ready to
sink, had not Christ caught him by the hand and held him up, he had been
gone. So is it with thee and me, unless the Lord reach out the hand of his
grace to support us we cannot but fall. A staff stands while the hand stays
it, but when the hand is with-drawne it falls immediately to the ground. We
are to the Lord as the sick man to his keeper, who cries, take me up and I
will rise, hold me and I will stand, help me and I will go, etc. Let us
then learn to renounce our selves, and rely wholly upon the Lord and the
power of his might, for by that shall we be strengthened, Esaias 6 10. Es^y
1.11.
without that our strength is weakness. Doctor Pembletons story shows this,
of whom we read in the Book of Martirs. Phil. 2.12.
Work out therefore thy salvation with fear and trembling. True it is in
respect of God, thou have no cause to fear. 2 Timothy 2.19.
for his foundation remains sure; but in respect of thy self and own
frailty thou have great cause to fear, least by falling into sin thou do
displease the Lord, and cause him to hide away his face; and should not the
Lord strengthen thee by his power thou would hazard thy salvation every day,
and forfeit heaven. It is not with us as wi^h a child, who after two or three
years may be let go alone, God must still lead us; if he hold us not by the
hand we shall soon have a knock. Nay more, 2 Samuel 44.
as Mephibosheth Ionathans son, we shall catch such a fall, as that thereby
we shall become lame until the day of our death. Conclude therefore with
David, Psalm. 73.28.
It is good for me to hold fast unto the Lord. Trust not to thy own strength,
2 Cor. 12.10.
fear thy own weakness, then shall thou be most strong when thou art most
weak. When thou art most weak in thy own apprehension and acknowledgement,
then shall thou be most strengthened by a gracious supply from a higherhand.

In the Third place this doctrine may serve to humble bear an ague, nor the
touthach, nor the collicke, nor the gout, much less greater torments: should
God withdraw his hand what Apostates should we prove? what sins would we not
commit? we deceive our selves if any of us think that it proceeds from us, or
that it is out of our strength, that we live so blameless a life, commit not
such nor such gross evils as others do: bless God for it, no thanks to
nature, thine is as bad as others. Let this be well considered of, it will
help thee to that jewel which is so much set by of the Lord. Namely a humbled
and a thankful soul.

He took his journey into a far country] we have seen when he went, now let
us see whether he went, the text says, Regio longinqua suit obliuio ori. Aug.
quaest. ^ euang. 33.
into a far country: where we must consider what is meant by this far
country: Secondly how he went into this far country, for the first, the far
country here spoken of is, the region of sin. As Austine does expound it, the
country is far not in regard of the distance of place (for every part of the
world is a like near unto the Lord, Esaias 46.12. Psalm. 139.7.
as Jonas found when he took his journey from Ioppe to Tarsus) but in regard
of distance of affection, then is a man farthest from God, when he is most
unlike unto God, Ier, 2, 5.
so the Lord himself expounds it. What iniquities have your fathers found in
me, that they are gone away far from me? so the Ephesians are said to be
far of, Ephesians; 2.17.
while they were in the estate of nature.

And thus we may see the Second point also cleared, which is, Non pedibus sed
affectibus.
how he went into this far country? he went not by the feet of the body, but
by the affections of the soul, he withdrawed his heart from the Lord, and set
it upon vanity, Non interuallo locorum deu^ relinquiter, sed pranitate morum.
Amb. in psa. 119.
he departed far from him, in regard of the opposite and differing disposition.
God his volo, being his nolo, and his nolo being Gods volo. Secondly he went
far, in regard of the great and many sins he did commit, for multiplication
of sins is like multiplication of steps, which at length carry a man far away
from the place where he was: Both these ways may this prodigal be said to
take his journey into this fair country.

Thus having seen the meaning of the words, let us now come to the
instructions; the first shall be this.

It is the nature of sinners, to fly from Gods presence, Doctr. Sinners cannot
endure Gods presence. Job, 21.14. Gen, 3.8.
and get far away out of his sight. This is there desire and endeavor.

See this proved in the 21. of Job. 14. so Jonah. 1.3. also confirmed by
examples. Adam who hid himself in the bushes. These fled from God in their
affections and by their sins; and manifested it by a foolish desire, to
convey their bodily presence out of his sight.

Reasons. First the remembrance of his presence does

Secondly, there is as great contrariety betwixt God and

Thirdly, sin makes a man Gods debtor, for the law

Let us therefore examine our selves, whether we be Psalm. 16.8. Psa, 26.8.
Ca^t. 3.1.
do thou bewail his absence as the bitterest cross: and never restest
seeking with the spouse until thou have found him? and can thou long and
look for his appearing in glory, 2 Cor. 5.8.
destring to be absent from the body, that thou may be present with the Lord?
are these things in thee in truth? do thou find thy heart and soul thus
affected? is it thus with thee? art thou sure of it? why then without question,
thy sins are pardoned debts discharged and thou at peace with God: But if it
be otherwise, and if the contrary be in thee, if thou put God out of thy
remembrance, and can not endure to have him in all thy thoughts; Psalm. 10.4.
if thou respectest not his house, but esteemest it as a iayle, being never
well while thou art under his roof, and never better then when he is lost: and
if thou desire that he might never appear, or thou never by death or
judgment might be brought unto him: Let me then tell thee to thy face thou art
still in thy sins, thou art infinitely indebted to the eternal God, thou
may every day expect a capias corpus to be fetched from hence and thrown into
the iayle, Math, 5.
from whence thou shall not depart till the uttermost which will never be.

In the next place; let this serve to admonish such, as would be able to endure
Gods powerful presence, especially at that great and terrible day: to break
of their sins by unfeigned repentance, and labor to have their debts
discharged by Christ, for otherwise thou shall call to the mountains and
hills, Revel. 6,
to hide thee from his presence that sits on the throne.

Doct. 2. The following of sin is a forsaking of the Lord.
In the Second place, we may observe this doctrine, The following of sin is a
forsaking of God, and the further in sin the further from God.

The Scripture is plentiful in proofs, as Deuteronomy. 32.15. Iud. 2.11.12. 1. King.
11.33. Isa. 1.4. Ier. 2.5. and 5.7.

Object. Psalm. 1 39.2.3.4 5. etc. Answer.
But does not the Prophet affirm that it is impossible to fly from the presence
of God? Psalm. 139. wonderful are the testimonies, the prophet there brings
to amplify Gods illimited presence, how then can this be true?

In a word for answer, know that out of Gods reach no man can fly, but out of
his favor he may, and from his awe by his rebellious will. Thus do sinners
fly from God and forsake him, as I formerly showed even now in the opening of
these words. And therefore it is now needless to stay your ears with a
commemoration, of what I so lately said, now for the uses.

First this sets forth the miserable estate of all impenitents: Rom, 3.
horror and shame will ceaze on them in the end. For lo they that are far
from thee shall perish, they shall be destroyed that go a whoring from thee. He
that leaves the light must needs walk in darkness, Psalm. 73.27.
and he that forsakes the God of life, whether is he posting but to eternal
death? when Cain went away from God, there was no more account made of him,
then of a vagrant, Genesis 4.14.
and vagabond, is their estate any better; who by commiting of sin depart
from the Lord, what are they but Cains, Outlawes, Rebels, Runnagates?
traveling as it were without a pass, whose fairest end, will be to be sent to
the house of correction: but greatly to be feared of most, to the place of
execution.

Use. 2. Admonition to such as are yet in their sins, Isay. 45.22.
(as Esaias exhorts) as you have gone from him by sinning, turn to him again
by daily repenting, that it may be spoken of thee, as Paul speaks of the
Ephesians. You who were once far off are now made near. Ephesians. 2. Psalm.
119.28.
Conclude with David Psalm. 119.28. It is good for me to draw near unto the
Lord.

Oh consider, advisedly consider, the estate thou now live in, make a stop,
and call to mind whether thou art going, thou have kept a course of sin from
the first day of thy birth to this present hour, every thought that came from
thy heart has been a step; so every word, and much more every deed. Thus have
thou multiplied steps, and been walking on for this twenty or thirty year,
and whither has thy course tended, surely to perdition and destruction, Prou.
5.5.
Thy feet go down to death, and thy steps take hold on hell. Pro. 4.15.26.27.
Be wise now at the last, walk on no further in this way, Avoid it, pass not
by it, turn from it, and pass away; the further thou go, the more sighs,
sobs, Heb. 13.3.
and tears it will cost, if ever thou returnest. Take heed then that thou
depart not further from the living God; if thou will persist and wilt not be
reclaimed, why then, what remedy; if thou will needs perish, perish; but know
that in the end it will prove an evil thing, Ierem. 2.19.
and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God.

Prou. 15.29.
he is far off when they call. True it is, Solomon does affirm it, but where
lies the fault? in God, or in thee? surely in thy self, and none else, for
God goes not from man, but man from him. But we play like some foolish
Mariner, who sailing nigh some rock, thinks the rock runs from the ship,
when indeed the ship sails and the rock stands still: so we leave the ways
of God, and run our own courses, and then complain the Lord has forsaken us,
James 4.8.
and is far away. Draw near to God by grace, he will be near to thee in
mercy.

And there wasted his substance with riotous living.] As it was not long after
he had his substance that he departed from his Father, so was it not long
after he had left his Father that he departed from his substance. This is the
fruit of forsaking God. A man that will forsake the Lord and cast away his
government, can neither keep himself, nor the good gifts which God has given
him. But I will not prosecute this point.

Obser.
Observe we here how this prodigal being over shoes, never rests till he have
plunged himself over head and ears, he goes on in sin and makes no stay
till he come unto the top; being once impudent to call for his portion, he
grows past grace, and cares not how lewdly he spends it. This may teach us
this general truth.

That it is the nature of the wicked not only to sin, Doctr. Wicked men
proceed from evil to worse, they make no stay but wilfully run on.
but to proceed and make a progress therein, going on from evil to worse,
not ceasing till they come to the extremity of profaneness.

This truth may be further proved, Ier. 9.3. 2 Timothy 3.13. Isay 1.5.

The Scriptures are full of examples (for the further confirmation of this
point) both of the wicked and godly. Thus was it with Eve, Genesis 3.6.
first she listened to the devils temptation; secondly, she made a light
resistance; thirdly, she began to doubt of what God had affirmed; fourthly,
she grew in concupiscence, the eye like the heart lusted, and both of them
desired the forbidden fruit; lastly, she fell to flat apostasy and rebellion.
Thus was it with Cain, first, Genesis 43.8.
he was an hypocrite offering sacrifice only for fashion; secondly, when he
perceived God respected his brother better then himself, he waxed angry and
wrath; thirdly, he grew to have a deadly hatred; lastly, he became a most
unnatural murderer.

Thus also Judas was first an hypocrite, then a thief, then a liar, lastly a
traitor. What need I speak of David, Noah, Peter, and many others, who like
a cloud of witnesses will prove what has been delivered.

The reasons are many, one taken from the nature of 2. Tim. 2.16. 1 Cor. 5.6.
Mat. 13.33.
Paul compares it to leaven which is of a spreading nature, as Christ shows
in the parable of the leaven, it cease not until the whole be leauened. So
sin getting once the heart, diffuseth it self over all the body, and never
cease until all be infected, it leaueneth the hand, the eye, the ear, and
closely creeps from part to part, till the whole man be leauened.

Iam. 1.15. Ezekiel. 47.1.4.
Many other comparisons there are in Scripture, that does set out the nature of
it.

Monitor is dead, or speechless.

Psalm. 81.11.12.
which fell on the old Israelites for not hearing the voice of the Lord. They
would not be admonished nor reclaimed, Romans 1.28.29.
Therefore he gave them up to the hardness of their hearts, and suffered them
to walk in their own counsels. Thus God does punish sin with sin: the
sin that follows is as a punishment of that which went before; he punishes
the first sin with a second, and the second with a third; and for their not
obeying in smaller matters, he gives them up to the swindge of their
affections.



him, and not to thee. Bless not then thy self from these gross evils, for
thou may prove as vile a Nero, a Julian, a Judas, as ever the Sun saw,
or earth bare, there wants but a temptation to drive thee to the grossest
evil; there is that leaven, that poison in thee which (without Gods
wonderful power in restreining) will at last discover it self in the
practicing and following of the most flagitious courses. Oh how happy were it
for thee if by this that has been said, the eyes of thy understanding might
be opened, that thou might see thy self what thou art, and what thou art
like to be.

A second use may be for further terror to the wicked: wrath against the day
of wrath, Romans 2.4.6.
as Paul does witness. Thus is every wicked man a woeful hoarder up of
treasure. Thou that hear this, or read this, who art in thy natural
estate, consider advisedly what is said, could thou number exactly the
multitude of thy actions, both spiritual, natural, and civil, could thou
reckon up the millions of words, and put in the best words into the number,
thou have ever spoken, that ever passed between thy lips, etc. could thou
sum up the infinite number of thoughts that ever has been in thy heart; if
thou could do this, thou might put down in thy Catalogue so many sins;
and with every of these make account for a measure of indignation and wrath
proportionable to thy sin. Oh consider this, the Lord Jesus give you hearts
seriously to consider it, and think of it; happy had it been for thee, thy
mothers womb had been thy grave, or that thou had perished many years
ago, except thou repentest of thy sins, for long life in sin is no
blessing but a curse. Esaias 65.20.
Accursed shall thou be though thou live an hundred years.

Psalm. 50, 16, 18, 19, etc.
One Swallow makes not a Summer, nor one Sin a Sinner; but, as we may judge
a man to be of such a Trade, if he follow it carely and late, earnestly and
constantly, and (in a manner) busy himself in nothing else, so if a man trade
in wickedness, and make it his occupation, we may be persuaded he is profane.

Heb. 3.13.
it is deceitfulness it self: Have therefore no dealing with it. It plays
with us, as the Levites father in Law, persuading us to stay this dinner, this
night, and so at last makes us stay two days longer then we would, or should:
Pro. 24.33. Sin is a shameless Beggar.
It says as the sluggard, Yet a little sleep, Yet a little slumber, A little
folding of hands to sleep, Yet a little more sin, Yet a little more good
fellowship, Yet a little more deceit; and so many of these littles make a great
deal. Pro. 17.4.
But what Solomon says of the beginning of strife, is true, also of any other
sin; it is as the opening of the waters, those that have given the onset to
Sin, have as it were opened the floud-gates of impiety, which are not again
so easily shut, for the violence of the stream bears all things before it:
open not therefore those floud-gates, though it be but a little, the waters will
gush out, there is no easy stopping them: Have nothing to do therefore with
sin, no not with the least sin (for they do but usher great ones; and like
little Rogues, being crept in at the window, open the doors for the biggar to
come in) but keep it off, even as thou would an enemy at the swords point,
for if once it enter, it is like the unwelcome guest, it will not away:
Wickedness is much easier to keep out, then to cast out: While thou art on
the the top of the hill, it is at thy choice whether thou will thence throw thy
self down or not, but, if once thou throwest thy self down headlong, it is
not at thy choice to stay, before thou come to the bottom. They utterly
therefore delude themselves, and pitifully gull their own souls, that
running headlong into a course of sinning, conceive an opinion to leave sin
at their pleasure, what need they Saint it in their youths, they have time
enough to repent in their age? Oh that this Doctrine were well considered,
surely it would take away this conceit, and evidently show them their madness
and folly, for does not custom prove another nature? does it not bring such a
hardness on the heart, Romans 2.5.
as that man cannot repent; it is no easy matter for a man to forget that he
has been long a learning: be admonished therefore to stay from entering into
any ungodly courses. Would thou keep thy self from Murder, then repress
rash anger; from Sodomie, fly adultery; from Perjury, beware of common
swearing; for as no man on the sudden becomes most excellent in virtue, so
no man on the sudden becomes desperate in evil, but comes to the height
of sin as it were by degrees: and therefore none can be too wary or
watchful over himself in the preventing of the first beginnings, yea in
killing and slaying of sin, while it is in the thought, as men do Serpents
in the shell, and Ravens in their nest. This is a high point of heavenly
wisdom, and therefore let us all be learners of it.

A last use, is for our imitation, though not for the to another, why then, see
that thou grow better and better, 2. Pet. 1.5, 6.
proceed from one degree of grace to another, to faith add virtue, to virtue
add knowledge, etc. God in his Arithmetique loves addition in good, and
substraction in evil; but the Devil, contrary: as then, he that is unjust
becomes more unjust, Revel. 22.11.
so let him that is righteous become more righteous; constancy and growth, if
in goodness is a virtue, but if in vice, a sin, be good, and the Lord
increase thy growth.

Text.
Now we will come nigher unto the words [And there, etc.] Wherein observe,
first, what he did in this far Country: The Text says, he wasted his
substance, that portion which his father gave him, he spent and consumed:
Secondly, how he spent it; it was with riotous living, he did not only spend
but mispend it, he wasted it upon Harlots, and in other flagitious courses.
The instructions that I do gather from these words, are these two, Doct. 1.
Sinners are great wasters.
first, that every sinner is a great waster, secondly, that Sinners spend and
wast Gods good gifts in sins service: for the first of these, and the proof of
it, viz. that Sinners are wasters and spend-thrifts: See it proved, by two or
three instances, Take notice of the wast that Adam made, by sin at the very
beginning, What a wast made he of his knowledge, wisdom, liberty, glory,
peace, and other good gifts and graces, by forsaking of his God? Did he not
loose that in six hours, which God was providing for him in six days?
Consider Esau, what a wast made he? how many privileges lost he at once: Genesis
17.7.
for first, he was by Nature, heir to the Covenant that God had made with his
grandfather Abraham, which was, That God would be his God, and the God of his
seed after him. Secondly, he was heir to all his grandfathers and fathers
lands. Thirdly, all his brethren and sisters must do reverence unto him: Now,
all these he wasted and sold away: but what had he? surely but one dish of
meat, Genesis 25.34.
and that a mean one, A ^esse of Pottage.

The reasons may be these:

First, they want wit, id est, spiritual wisdom, and viz. to his glory, and
their own profit, and the good of others: what is not thus employed, is but
wastfully spent.

Secondly, they are so greatly in league and love with their own lusts, Iam.
4.3.
(as so many Harlots which they maintained, and keep) that they think nothing
too good, or too dear for them: What is laid out on them is leudly wasted:
They will at length wast all in maintayning these.

This in the first place may reprove such as judge contrary judgments,
esteeming wicked worldlings, covetous misers, and others of the like stamp to
be excellent husbands: True it is, they are still in trading, buying and
selling, and seem to thrive, but if the matter be well weighed, they make but
a sorry gain, they get earth, loose heaven, get a little vanity, and
vexation, and loose an eternal right of glory, now is this any better then
Esaias his pennyworth? What gain is this? What profit brings this? Is it profit
to win the whole world, and loose the soul, which a thousand worlds cannot
redeem? this is but penny wise and pound foolish: these courses are no
thriuing courses, let us therefore reform our judgments, and esteem of them
as they are indeed, great wasters and spend-thrifts.

Secondly, let it admonish every one of us, and such as are Masters, in a
special manner to take heed of dealing with the wicked, for they are
stroy-goods and spend-thrifts, they wast their own goods, and what hope is
there they will husband thine better, nay do they not bring Gods curse at
their heels, which will consume, and, like a Moth, fret what they go about?
Deuteronomy. 28.
has not God threatened to curse whatsoever they put their hand unto? Take heed
then how any of you open your doors to a graceless person, without you want a
waster and a spend-thrift; if so, then set open your do es, and entertain the
wicked, and bid them welcome. It may also admonish Parents, and put them in
mind in matching of their children, to beware of such: Every one desires to
have good Husbands for their daughters, and provident Wives for their sons;
if so, then match with them that fear the Lord, for they will as well being in
as lay out; their ear and eye gathers, as well as heart and hand spends. But,
as for the wicked, they lay out of the whole stock, and have no care of
increasing of their goods, and what good husbandry is in this? In a word, let
all be warned, and of all let my council be regarded, lest thou mourn at the
last, when thy flesh and body are consumed: and say, How have I hated
instruction, Pro. 5.11, 12.
and my heart despised reproof.

Now we come to the second point which I observed, and that is this, Doctr. The
wicked spend Gods gifts in sins service. Hos. 2.8, 9.
The wicked spend Gods gifts in sins service. read Hos. 2.8, 9. Where we may
see how liberal and bountiful the Lord was unto them; he gave them Corn,
Wine, and Oil multiplied their Silver and their Gold, but these they employed
in the service of Baal, which they should have employed to the glory of God.
Amos. 6.4. Romans 3.13.
So Amos 6.4. they abuse these outward blessings, to gluttony and
drunkenness. So see Romans 3.13. as they thus abuse gifts of body, so also gifts
of mind; their Knowledge, they abuse to Gods dishonor, employing it in curious
prying and searching into hidden Mysteries; their Wit and Learning also, they
thus employ, as does evidently appear in the Stories of Jeroboam, Saul,
Achitophel, Hammon, Herod, and others. I shall not need to stand further upon
the proof, it being so evident, and therefore I will come to some use.

Use.
And first, this serves sharply to reprove thousands in the World, who thus
abuse those gifts which they have received from the Lord. How many are there to
whom God has given the fat of the earth? whose bellies he has filled with his
hid treasure? whose barnes are full? whose cup does ouerflow? whose corn and
oil he has wonderfully increased? that truly seek to glorify God by these
their riches? Is it not a rare matter to find one amongst a thousand? Let
experience speak, who more griping, more covetous, more proud, more
forgetful, more unthankful, then they who have greatest abundance of these
outward things? Again, do not many spend their riches on gorgious attire,
unbeseeming their places? upon gorgeous buildings, for the Screetch-owle and
Batt to dwell in? upon excessive cheer, and vain pleasure, spending more at
one banquet, then would keep twenty poor members of Christ Jesus, in good
sort all their days? Are there not as many, nay more, that do offend in
abusing the gifts of the body, employing every member thereof to the service of
sin? their eyes making windows of vanities, having their ears open to
filthy talk, songs, and ribald speeech; their tongues are not they used to
cursing, and swearing, and blasmeming of the most sacred name of God, which
they should fear and reverence? their hands, are they not cursed instruments
of sin? wholly employed in deceit, filching, or fighting, or the like: Their
feet, are not they employed in walking in the ways of sins, to places of
uncleanness, Stage Plays, Bull-batings, Bawdy-houses, and other such like
cages of uncleanness? Do not most of you thus use those members, to his
dishonor who has bestowed them upon you. Alas, alas, it is too too apparent.
And as for these inward gifts, the gifts of mind, which God has bestowed on
men, as Wit, Knowledge, Learning, how are they abused? for the nourishing of
contention, and the maintenance of injury, oppression, and injustice.

Thus then you see how many in the world come under this reproof, let every
one of us look well unto it, for he is one of a thousand that deserves not to
be taxed: See therefore, and confess your faylings, and employ Gods gifts to
his own glory. Oh! consider how you will answer it; should a loving Husband
give unto his Wife rich jewels and fair bracelets, and she bestow them on a
Stranger, could this be well taken? or should a King give many Lordships, and
much Revenues unto a Subject, and he employ them in the enemies service, would
not all count him for a rank Traitor? And what art thou better? God has given
thee many Jewels, and bestowed on thee many Lordships, as thy tongue, thine
eye, thy hands, thy body, thy soul; these thou wholly do employ in the
service of Gods enemy: thou give them to the Devil, by thy blasphemy,
drunkenness, by thy pride, by thy uncleanness. Oh wretch! to receive thus
with the one hand from the Lord, and to give with the other unto the Devil. But
in a word, to conclude, remember all you that any way thus mispend these gifts
of God: I say, Matthew. 25.30.
remember the servant that was unprofitable in not employing his Masters Talent
to his advantage, but returned to him his own, wrapped up in a napkin: he (I
say) had his portion in that Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone. Now,
if he were thus punished in not using of it, how shall you be plauged, who do
abuse them wickedly and maliciously to his dishonor: surely, if you persevere
herein, the hottest fire in Hell shall be your reward. You that are in
authority, (I speak to you and warn ye) abuse not your authority, pervert
it not to injustice, or oppression: Rich men, I speak to you, let not your
wealth make you swell with pride, let it not cause you to be contentious: I
speak unto you all, and from the eternal God I warn you, not to abuse any
good blessing that God has given you, for be you assured there will come a day
of reckoning.

VERSE. 14. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that
land, Ver. 14.
and he began to be in want. 15. And he went and joined himself to a Citizen
of that country, and he sent him into his fields to feed swine. 16. And he
would feign have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and
no man gave them unto him.
IN these three verses, we have laid down to be considered the punishment of
his sin, which is common upon the whole country with him, ver. 14. or
personal on him in special, ver. 15.16. To come to some instructions briefly,
which this 14. verse will afford, and so to hasten to the next verses, Doctr.
which are principally to be weighed of us. In general we might observe, That
where sin goes before, punishment will follow after: as we have heard of his
sin, now here follows the wages: but I will only name this.

And when he had spent all. i. e. Text.
All that portion the Father had bestowed, those common gifts which his father
had given unto him, these were they, that were spent and wasted. This may teach
us thus much.

Common gifts are of a wasting nature: Doctr. Common gifts are of a wasting
nature. 1. Sam. 16.14.
they may be utterly spent and consumed, and finally be lost. Thus did Saul
loose that portion of common gifts God had given him, for the text says, the
spirit of God departed from him: not the spirit of regeneration, which works
in the elect; for that dwells where it once enters. But by spirit, we are
there to understand the common gifts of the spirit, as wisdom, fortitude, and
other morrall, civil, and ordinary gifts, wherewith Saul was endued, and which
God had vouchsafed unto him, for the enabling him to the duties of his
government; as for the spirit of regeneration, and the sanctifying and saving
graces of that spirit, he never had. Heb: 6.4.
So also Heb. 6.4. the Apostle does confirm this truth, where he shows, that
some that are partakers of the holy Ghost, they may fall away: Any common gift
or grace, as knowledge, learning, or the like, may be lost: and so for the
things of this world, which God gives in a plentiful measure, to the men of
this world, they are but of a wasting nature; For the world passes away, 1
Ioh. 2.17.
and the lusts thereof, as John affirms.

Use. Let this teach us to learn, to put a difference betwixt that portion,
which God gives to his children, and to the wicked, between the earthly and
heavenly inheritance: the one may be wasted by the using; the other shall be
increased; the one may utterly be spent: the other never: most true it is, the
sanctifying graces of Gods children are subject to a kind of abatement, and
decrease; for want of using, and renewing, but finally be spent they cannot;
Romans 11.29.
for these gifts and graces are without repentance.

Caduca spern^^e, coelestia spirare:
but labor for a portion of a better nature, namely, for that inheritance
which is reserved in the heaners: what folly is it for thee to spend thy time,
and bestow thy pains, in getting that which is of no continuance, which will
consume and wast like wax before the Sun: oh be more wise and choose the
better part, Luke 10.42.
that shall never be taken from thee. Weane thy heart more and more from these
perishing pleasures, and make choice of that portion that endures for ever: get
true faith, and other saving graces, and be assured Hell gates shall never
prevail against thee.

thy way, and be thankful, for thy freehold is far better then their
coppie-hold: thou have no cause to complain.

There arose a mighty famine in the land. Text.
] By this famine is prefigured the want of al heavenly comfort, which how ever
it was before, in this land of sin, yet he felt it not before, and therefore
it is said, he began to be a hungry. i. e. to feel it. The point that I will
note is this;

The region of sin is a land of famine. Doctr. The region of sin is a land
of famine.
There is no food for the soul to be found in it: As no corn to be had but in
Egypt, so no succor but in the Church of GOD, in all the world else there is a
great dearth. This Solomon does confirm in his Ecclesiastes. Eccles. 1.
All the world can afford, is but vanity and wind unto the soul; nay, so
far is it from satisfying and refreshing of the soul, that the best things
it can afford, does but oppress and vex it.

Sin is merely contrary to the soul of man, as poison

It is a way of darkness, therefore comfortless. Pro. Pro. 4.19.
4.19. How uncomfortable was the darkness of Egypt, to Pharaoh and his
subjects.

Let us apply this to our selves. And first behold the Lamen. 4.9.
Better is he that perishes by the sword, then he that perishes by this:
they that be slain by the sword are better then they that are slain with
hunger. For those pine away. No other punishment is so tedious; they are
dispatched in an instant; only famine is like hell, where every part is
pained, a man being already dying, yet never dead. Amos 8.11.
And yet this is but the famine of the body, behold a greater famine then
this, a famine of the word: a famine of the soul, which most sustain, yet
feel not, know not: the one is felt and bewailed, the other not respected nor
regarded. What God said to the Church of Laodicea, may truly be said to many
thousands in these days, thou say thou art rich and increased with goods,
Revel. 3.17.
and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art poor, blind,
miserable, wretched, naked. May not this be spoken to many in this City, who
have their corn and wine increase, their cups run over, their bodies fat, and
in good liking, thou think thou art rich, increased with goods, and art in
good case, and have need of nothing, when alas, thou know not thou art
poor, miserable, and ready to be starued. Oh that you did know it, you
profane ones, whose bones are well covered with flat and flesh, Ezekiel. 34.18.
I would that you could feel it, then should not Gods pastures be contemned
and trodden under foot, Esaias 55.1.
nor Gods waters fouled; then should not Gods servants need to spend their
strength, and wast their spirits, in calling upon you to come and drink, nay
you would cry with Sisera, give me drink, or else I perish. But this famine is
not felt nor discerned. Where shall one find that man that complains for want
of means, these birds are rare ones; but to find one, nay, many that say,
they have enough, is no hard matter, they hear once a week, once a month,
once a quarter, and their souls are in as good a case to Godward, as the
best. But is this like, thy soul can be in so good plight, with so little
food? Can that thrive well when it is, bereaved of her daily meals, and weekly
feasts, which she should have? be more wise, and well consider of the matter:
what man's heart does not ache, that has in him any spark of remorse, to pass
by your Prison grates in this your City, and there to see such ghastly
countenances, and hear such rufull complaints, for want of food. But had every
soul a grate to look through, and liberty to cry for her self, a thousand
times more lamentable would the cry be in all places and companies where you
come.

committed to your trust, for a small time, and for which thou must assuredly
stand, before Gods tribunal, and render an account: let us consider how by it
we live and breath, should that leave us but a little, for a moment, we should
return unto the dust, and be but a dead corpse; and shall we not feed it? oh be
more wise, give it the bread of life, as well as thy body the bread of wheat;
let thy soul have her meals daily and duly, as well as thy body hers:
suffer her not to be starued with these inferior things: they are pauca,
parua, praua, few in number, small in measure, bad in abuse; there is bread
enough in your Fathers house, why do you then sicken your spirits in a
voluntary want, and fast from it, which is able to feast a world of faithful
guests?

And he began to be in necessity.] Text.
The country being punished with a great famine, the Prodigal is here said to
have his share in it, as these words and the words following do make manifest.
Wherein observe, first, his distress, which is laid down briefly in these
words, but more largely, ver. 16. Secondly, his shift in this his distress,
with the effects of it. ver. 15.

For the first, he began to be in necessity; he had made great wast, and now
he sustaines great want: how justly is he paid home in his own kind: here in
general we may learn this lesson;

God does often punish sin in it own kind: Doctr. God does often punish sin
in it own kind. 2. Sam. 24.10.15.
of what kind is the sin, of the same kind shall the punishment be, proper
and proportionable to their offenses. This may plentifully be proved out of
Gods book: this was Gods dealing with David, he sinned in numbering of the
people, and God does punish him in diminishing of the number: so, for his sin
of adultery, as he defiled the bed of another, so should others defile his; 2.
Sam. 12.11. 1. King. 21 29. 1. Sam. 15.33.
thus did God deal with Abab, who shed the blood of innocent Naboth, in the
place where dogs licked up the blood of Naboth, should dogs lick up his blood
also. Thus was Pharaoh paid also; he drowned the males of Israel, and he
himself shall be drowned in the red sea. R^uel. 16.5.6. Dan. 6.24. ^st^r 7.10.
Judge. 1.6.
Not to heap up more places (which were a thing easy, if as needful) take
notice of that one in the first of Judges, verse 7. and so an end; threescore
and ten Kings had their thumbs and great toes cut off by Adoni bez^h, and
were made to gather their meat under his Table: at last he himself is taken,
and his thumbs and toes are cut off also: now hear what he himself
professes, Ver. 7.
As I have done, so has the Lord requited me. The Lord paid him home in his
kind, his punishment was in the like, proper and proportionable to his offense.
Mat. 7.1.2.
This is that same retaliation of sin, which God returns into their own
bosoms that harbor it.



First, hereby his Justice is cleared, and the mouth of iniquity stopped, He
has the law, which is called Lex talionis.
for what has man to say for himself, how can he complain of injustice, so
long as he receives his own, and is repayd with his own coin.



Psalm. 7.5.8.
so God will one day hold unto it the cup of vengeance; a cup of wine, of mixed
wine shall thou drink, to the very bottom: thou adulterer look to have fire
added to thy fire, the fire of hell to the fire of lust: Iam. 2.13.
art thou merciless, having no regard of the afflictions of Joseph; judgment
merciles shall be showed unto thee, thou Dives look to it, who now wastest so
many tons of wine, Defiderauit guttum qui non dedit micam. Aug. Hom. 7. Psalm.
109.11.
the time will come thou shall not procure a pot of water, nay, not one drop
to cool thy tongue: art thou a covetous extortioner, or a griping usurer,
expect that thy posterity shall be devoured by it, and thy house eaten up by
the extortioner.

Let me further apply this to you that are inferiors, art thou a disobedient
child unto thy parents? do thou contemn thy fathers and mothers wholesome
admonition, 1. Sam. 2 25. Genesis 9.22;
as Hophny and Phineas did the counsel of their father Ely? or do thou mock
and scoff at them for their infirmities, as cursed Ham did? Judge. 17.1.2.
or do thou beguile them, or closely convey any of their goods from them, as
Micah from his mother? Genesis 27.41.
or art thou sick of the mother, or longest thou after the death of thy father
as Esau did? Be thou assured, who ever thou art, that there is a just God in
heaven, who (if ever he bestow posterity on thee) may withhold his grace from
them, and suffer them to be as disobedient, scornful, theeuish, undutiful to
thee as now thou art to thine, and see thou expect it without repentance: so
thou that art a servant, do thou give stubborn, or moyling answers to thy
master or mistress, as Hagar to Sara; or sleeuelesse answers, as Gehezi to
Elisha? or do thou belie thy master, 2 Samuel 16.3.
or falsely accuse him, as Ziba did Mephibosheth? or runnest thou from thy
master, and wilt not abide with him, like the servant of Shimei; or pickest and
pilferest from him, 1. King. 2.39. Phile.
as Onesimus from Philemon? Look then to reap, even as thou sowest; and to be
paid home in thy own kind; for God is just, and what has been may be, as
God has dealt with others, he may deal with thee.

A second use we may make of this is, to teach us in thou slandered and
backe-bitten, are there reports raised of thee that are not true? why, it may
be thy heart can tell thee that thou have slandered others. Eccles. 7.21.22.
Have thou disobedient children, servants, etc. call to mind thy former ways,
it is to be feared such disobedience was then in thee. And so in all other
kinds of punishments, or manner of judgments whatsoever, take them, and lay
them on thy sin, as salve upon a sore, so shall we make them profitable; yea,
this benefit will come of it, we shall justify God, judge our selves, and
prevent further judgments, that otherwise we may look to fall upon our heads.

Sarepta she relieved the Prophet of the Lord, wherefore God relieved her and
her whole family, 1 Kings 17.16. Ierem. 39.18.
for the meal wasted not, neither did the oil fail. So Ebed-melech saved the
life of Jeremiah, and therefore had his own life given him as a prey. Many
other examples might be brought. Oh how should this encourage us to all good
works! What a spur would this be if it were well considered to well doing?
Let it be considered of us, and let it stir us up to do good to gods Church,
and people: Do good to them, thou do good to thy self, Math. 7.1.2. Eccl.
11.1.
for thou shall receive measure for measure, good for good, blessing for
blessing.

This is general. Now we might here further take notice of the cursed
disposition of the wicked, who though they be miserable in regard they are
strangers from the life of God, yet do they not know their misery, until by
want of earthly comforts they be brought to necessity. This prodigal was
miserable before, yet he felt not his misery until now: and now having lost
all, and consumed his portion, it is said, he began to be in necessity; that
is, he began to feel himself to be in misery.

Thus then it often falls out, Obser.
that so long as Gods creatures are enjoyed, the great want of God himself is
not felt. But of this I shall have occasion to speak more, when I come to
speak of the occasion or motives of his conversion. Now then to the next verse.

Then he went and claue, etc.] Though this prodigal begins to feel his
misery, yet he returns not home unto his Father; but tries further, and
seeks other means to supply his need.

In him behold the corrupt disposition of man by nature, Doctr. The wicked in
misery use other helps before they fly to God. Hosea 2.7.
Who being in misery assaieth all other means for deliverance, before he
flies unto God for help. To his Father this prodigal will not go, till a
failing in other courses does enforce him: to God man will not seek, until a
kind of absolute necessity does compel him. See this proved in the example
of the Israelites; who being afflicted for their sins, and hedged in with
troubles and grievous afflictions, run unto their Idols, and follow after
their lovers, hoping and expecting deliverance from them. They betake not
themselves unto the Lord, until they see themselves crossed in their wicked
courses, and are out of hope by any other means to have help or deliverance
out of their present misery; and then shall she say I will go and return unto
my first husband; that is, they shall then resolve and determine to forsake
their Idols, and return unto the Lord, and of him seek help. Thus was it
also with Ephraim and with Judah. For when Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah
his wound: Hosea 5.13.
then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Iareb. God was not sought
to, nor enquired after until he was to Ephraim as a Lion, Verse 14.
and as a young Lion to the house of Jacob, until he did hide himself and
return unto his place, Verse 15.
then did they acknowledge their offense, and seek his face; yea, in their
affliction they did seek him early, saying, Come, Chap. 6.1.2.
and let us return unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 28.3.
for he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind
us up. What shall I need to speak of Saul, of Asa, and others, of whom
Scripture makes mention, who have sought to others, before they sought unto
the Lord.





Reproof of 3. sorts. First sort reproved.
if they begin to be an hungry to have a sight of their sins, or if they
be in any other distress fly to vain helps. Thus does the Papist, who has
his several Saint for each several sickness, to S. Anne they fly in
poverty, to S. Roch they fly in sickness, to S. Vrbane in time of hunger, to
S. Margaret in the time of travel. What shall I stand reckoning up their
rabble of unknown Saints, to whom they seek for themselves and others,
allotting to one the head Anastatius.
, to another the eyes Otilia.
, to another the teeth Apallonia.
, to another the neck Blaz^.
, to another the belly Erasmus. Job. 5.1.
, and to each of them they fly according to their needs. Should now that
question be propounded to them which Eliphay did once to Job, To which of the
Saints will thou turn? They would quickly make answer, I to this, I to that,
they want not for Saints to turn unto; for the number of their hee-Saints and
shee-Saints is so great, as that they have no more room left in the Calendar
to put others in.

2. Sort to be taxed.
But to come to our selves: Many amongst us come under this reproof, who in
time of their distress withdraw their hearts from the Almighty, using sorry
shifts, yea, sinful courses, for the relieuing and easing of themselves: are
they inwardly troubled with a sight of their sins, terror of conscience, or
the like? then they seek and have a foolish hope to deceive this their inward
anguish by some by-imployments; thus, going to a stage play, reading of some
merry books; a game at Cards, or Tables are held to be excellent helps
against these spiritual qualmes and melancholy fits, as they please to term
them; or are they outwardly crossed, themselves or their Children strangely
visited, or their Cattle lost, or languishing with any extraordinary disease?
then by and by they seek to this cunning man or that cunning woman; then they
run either to Baalzebub the God of Ekron, or to Beelzebub the Prince of devils
for help; they expect succor either of the witch of Endor, as Saul did; or
fly to the wizard of Pether, as Baalak did; or to the sorcerer of Babel, as
Nebuchadnezar did, one wizard or other must be found out. And thus they forsake
the Lord that made them, flying to the devil himself for succor and relief.
This sin is rife and common, yea, so common as it is counted but a cipher.
When Saul sought unto the witch, we read, 1 Samuel 28.
He changed his garment that he might not be known; but in these days men
are grown more bold, they change neither coat nor countenance.

Obser. But oftentimes we have help by seeking, Obser.
and were it not lawful thus to seek for help, why does God give them such
power of curing?

First, the devil (being indeed very skillful in things Vulnerat anima^
sanando corpus.
recompense this homage and service done unto him, with a cure of the disease
or sickness; yet know, that it is but a pitiful cure where the devil is
physician; and better were it for thee to die of thy disease, then to be thus
cured.

Secondly, I answer, God permits this to be, not Moses says of the false
Prophet, Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3.
may be spoke of them in this case, If there arise among you a Prophet, or a
dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign or wonder; and the sign or wonder
come to pass whereof he spoke unto thee: You shall not hearken to his words.
For the Lord your Good proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God
with all your heart, and with all your soul. So then, we see though the things
do come to pass that they foretell, yet are they not to be believed. Let all
such consider this as either have or do seek to these helps for succor; and
remember Saul never went to the witch of Endor till God had left him, 1 Samuel
28.15.
as he himself confesses.

3. Sort to be taxed.
Others there are that make Gods unto themselves, for their deliverance of
riches, friends, policy, and power, seeking not to God for help, 2 Kings
18.21.
but wholly rest upon these vain things, which will at length prove as the
Reed of Egypt, which will not only break when it is leaned on, but (flying
into splinters) does pierce the hand of him that trusted on it.

Psalm. 73.28.
say thou with David in every distress, It is good for me to draw near unto
the Lord. For assuredly, this is the only way that will bring a man peace at
the latter end.

Ambrose.
Unto a Citizen.] The far Country (as we have heard) is the region of
sin. Now this Citizen may seem to represent the prince of darkness, with
his cursed confederates, the reprobate Angels, called Citizens in the kingdom
of sin, because they have not only sinned, but they abide and continue in
sin, they dwell in it, and cannot leave it. But let him be whom he will, he
was but a hard master toward this his servant, he put him to base work, and
gave him but small wages, not food for his belly.

Learn then, Those that refuse to give service unto God, Doctr. Those that will
not serve God shall serve a harder Master. Deuteronomy. 28.41.48.
shall be enforced to serve a worse master, Deuteronomy. 28.47.48. And what does the
scripture speak of such as are not converted nor returned to the Lord, does it
not say such are ruled by the God of this world, id est. the Devil: who works
in the hearts of the children of disobedience does it not testify, 2 Timothy 2.
vlt.
that such are in the snare of the Devil being taken captive of him at his
will.

Reason there are but 2. Reason.
Lords and commanders of the whole world. God and the Devil: forsaking the
service of the one, we must needs go into the vineyard of the other, there is
no remedy.

The use of this is, for admonition to us that we know Math. 7.22.
Call him not only Lord Lord as many do: but let him indeed be thy Lord as few
do. Did service consist in wearing of a livery or taking of wages or giving
good words, then God should have servants enough: but there must be more,
obedience is required, in a cheerful doing all that is enjoined: be not then
stubborn, withdraw not the shoulder from yiedling obedience unto the Almighty;
carry thy self in all things like a dutiful servant, deserve not to be cast
out, lest thou sing the song of this prodigal. How many hired servants in my
fathers house have bread enough, 1 John. 5.3.
and I perish for hunger. This master is liberal, he gives the best wages and
for the easiest work: every one of his servants are advanced to be sonns:
every son is an heir, every heir a king: every king has an eternal
kingdom: thus God rewards with honor, but Satan with shame: do not then by
swearing, by drunkenness and such like sins, thrust thy self out of Gods
doors, and enter into the service of that beggarly master the Devil, who has
nothing to give his followers, but hell and ever lasting torments, keep then
in Gods service and thou art made for ever.

Text.
And he sent him to his feilds to feed swine] By farm or feilds we may
understand this world, by swine, sinners, wicked, and ungodly men of the world;
his feeding of them, is his keeping company and conuersing with them. This
seems to be the morrall exposition of these words. Now for some instruction,
and first in that the wicked are compared to swine, we may observe thu^ much.

Doctr. Wicked men are no better then bruit beasts.
Men without grace are no better then beasts without reason, they are swinish,
brutish.

Hence it is that the holy Ghost (who can give most congruous names to natures)
does so frequently in scripture, compare the wicked to bruit and savage
creatures; sometimes to Lions, Psalm. 58 6. Psalm. 59.6. Psalm 80.13. Psalm 22.12.
Psalm. 32.9. Math. 10 16. Luke. 13.32. Isay. 1.3. Math. 7.6. 1 Pet. 2.22.
sometimes to Dogs, sometimes to Bores, sometimes to Bulls, sometimes to
Horses, and Mules, sometimes to Woulfes, sometimes to Foxes: sometimes to the
Ox and Ass, otherwhiles to Swine: do not all these names serve to set forth
their brutish disposition.

Reasons of this point may be these, first because man by sin degenerateth
into the nature of the beast, by it them from bruites. This the Prophet shows
plainly in the 49. Psalm. the 20. verse. Where he says that man being in honor
and understands not, is like to the beasts that perish. Here the Prophet
shows that man's honor above the beasts, is his understanding, which he
loosing by sin, does degenerate into the dishonorable rank of bruit
creatures.

Secondly, because wicked men give up themselves to 2. Pet. 2.12.
this reason Peter gives in his second epistle the second chapter and the 12.
verse, so the Prophet Jeremiah, Ier. 5.8.
expresses this property in the wicked Jews, where he says, that like full
fed horses, every one neigheth after his Neighbors wife.

The use we are to make of this point is manifold; first, it may serve to show
us the cursed and malignant quality of sins: which Circes like does
transform men into beasts, and makes those who at the beginning were made
after Gods own Image most glorious and beautiful, to be more ugly in the
sight of God then the most brutish creature that he has made.

Secondly, it may teach us how to esteem of the wicked, surely as God himself
esteems of them, no better then of beasts; nay, well were it for them, if they
were no worse, for when the beast dies, his misery ends, but when these die,
their unhappiness begins: These are the heard of unclean Swine, whereinto to
the Devil is entered, and will at length fling them into that bottomless Lake.

Thirdly, let wicked men take notice of their own them; nay, worser in Gods
account. What man would endure to be called a beast, to be termed an Ass, an
Owl, a Dog, or the like? yet the brutish practices of many, show they are no
better. How many live like Swine, rooting in the earth, trampling under their
feet the holy things of God? contemning the Word and Sacraments, and wallow in
the mire of uncleanness and drunkenness? How many resemble the Horse and
Mule, who will not endure bit or bridle, nothing can curb them or keep them
in compass? mercies, judgments, promises, threatenings, all are too little,
their Rider they will cast, and give him a farewell with their heels, such
iadish tricks too many use. What a number of two-leg'd Dogs are abroad in
the world of all sorts and kinds? some resemble the Mastiffe, worrying Christ's
Lambs, by grinding the faces of the poor; some have the quality of the
Spaniell, fawning and flattering, good for nothing but to fetch and carry;
tale-bearers, busybodies: Others, of the Greyhound, out-running all
moderation, running in all excess of riot, spending on back and belly their
whole patrimony: There are many also resemble your bawling Curres, Raylers,
Reuilers of God and goodness: And as many the Bloud-hound, persecuters of the
Saints and servants of God, who are never well till they have their blood to
drink. Thus we see how many resemble these bruites in their practices, who
(notwithstanding) would think foul scorn so to be esteemed: but thou wicked
graceless person, whosoever thou be, esteem as highly of thy self as thou will, yet thou art a very bruit, and no better, God does so account thee, and
who dares otherwise esteem of thee.

thou do retain both the place and shape of a man, yet being in thy
qualities and properties like a beast, thou art no better in the eyes of God.

To feed Swine] Here is the work this new Master did employ this Prodigal in;
to keep his Pigges: Text.
Here was a sorry preferment, to forsake his sonne-ship, and become a
Swine-heard. The point we may from hence learn, is this:

The service of Satan is a most base service. Doctr. The service of Satan is a
most base service.
What more base then this, to keep at the Hogges-trough, and serve sin? yet
this is the work whereabout he was employed: so then, his service is but base
drudgerie; never did the Taske-masters of Egypt impose on the Israelites so
base a work, as Satan on his slaves; for their making Brick was not
unlawful, but these must do that only for the Devil that is unlawful;
every brutish lust must be yielded to; every lewd and sinful companion
conuersed with; the body must be defiled; the soul and conscience corrupted;
yea, 2. Sam. 13. 2. Sam. 17. Math. 27.3. 2. Pet. 22.
all their works and ways polluted: What was the service whereabout Ammon,
Judas, Achitophel, were employed? was it not most base, and vile? and why is it
that the Holy Ghost compares sin to the mire, nay, to the dogs vomit, if it
were not to set for the baseness of it.

Such as the Master is, Reason.
such must needs his service be: now Satan, is become the very basest of all
Gods creatures, therefore his service must needs be base: he can employ his,
in no better service then he has for them, viz. to rake continually in the
stinking kennels of sin, whereby to stain and poison themselves, yea the
whole World.

The Use that we are to make of this, may be first for reproof of such as
glory in their shame, bragging and boasting of their base servitude, of their
wicked sinful and flagitious courses which they daily follow, and think it
to be a credit, to swear, swagger, drink, carouse, and the like: surely, if
it be a credit to be a drudge and slave unto the Devil, to be at the command of
every base lust, and to be employed about the basest scullerie, then they have
whereof to boast. Deceive thy self no longer, thou profane liver, but see thy
condition; brag and boast of thy freedom, and privileges, wealth, and
worship never so much, yet know thou art but a drudge, and a base drudge, being
at the command of every lust be it never so vile, and can thou be free? no,
no, thou art not free till Christ does make the free, and then, Ioh. 8.36.
thou shall be free indeed: So long as thou seruest sin, thou art not freed
by him, but art still a bond slave unto the Devil, 2. Tim. 2.26.
being taken captive by him at his will.

Nehemiah? so say thou, Shall such a one as I, who was made but a little
inferior to the Angels themselves, created after the Image of God, nobly
descended, borne to a Kingdom, suffer my self to be the Devils Scullion? nay,
I will not, I will hereafter carry my self more lofty, and think scorn to
inthrall my self to so base a bondage.

Text. Ver. 16.
And he would feign have filled his belly with the Husks.] By Husks, is
generally understood the vanities of this present evil world, which can give
no true content to the soul of man, having nothing in them but emptiness,
vanity, vacuitie, and no sollid nor substantial nutriment. Yet there are
some, who by them understand the Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, August.
which was frothie, and without substannce, being stuffed with tales and
fables, and many traditions received from their elders; which Doctrine of
theirs, (being thus of their own devising) could not satisfy nor nourish the
hungry souls of poor sinners, but they went away still as hungry as they
came: and this they take to be meant by the words following, And no man gave
unto him. If this exposition be taken (which in my judgment may well be) I
cannot see any inconvenience will follow. But forasmuch as the whole current of
expositors do give the other, it will not be amiss to speak somewhat of
both, though the briefer: Taking the former, this is the point, No earthly
thing can satisfy the soul, Doctr. No earthly thing can content the Soul.
nor confer any true content unto the mind: They are but husks, a frothy
substance, they may puff up, but not nourish. All things are full of labor,
says Solomon, man cannot utter it, the eye is not satisfied with seeing,
Eccles. 1.8.
nor the ear filled with hearing: hear a wiser then Solomon speak, Christ
Jesus who is wisdom it self, John. 4.13.
Who soever drinks of this water shall thirst again. There is a defect in
the water of Jacobs well, and so in every other earthly thing whatsoever, it
cannot quench this inward thirst, but causes a greater thirst then was before.

The reasons of this point may be many. Reason.
The First is this, because God is the proper object and center of the heart,
now we know if a man had all the music and melody in the world before him,
he could not hear it with his eyes, because it is the proper object of the
ear, if never so gorgious shows he could not see them with his ears, because
it is the proper object of the eye: and again take a stone and fling it out of
a sling, it never rests until it comes unto his center, no more will our
hearts until it rest upon the Lord, Fecisli nos Domine propter te and semper
inquietu^ est cor nostrum donee requiescat in te. August. 1.
who is the proper object and center of the soul: excellently therefore said a
father. Thou made us o Lord for thy self and our heart is ever unquiet till
it rest in thy self.

A Second Reason may be this, because every thing in this world is transitory;
now where there is no assurance Prou. 23.5.
therefore not in riches, honors, nor the like: these fly away like an Eagle
as Sol: speaks, not like a tame bird that may again be caught by running
after, nor like a Hawke that may be called to the lure: but like an Eagle
strong of wing, swift in flight, whose wings thou can not clip nor pinion.



Eccles. 5.9.
all the treasures, riches, pleasures, delights, that are in the world; yet he
would still be seekeing and thirsting after more.

Thus we see the reasons of this truth now we will come to apply this doctrine
to our selves.

Isay. Wherefore do you lay out money and not for bread? why spend you your
labor for that which satisfies not? Why do you so earnestly, so eagerly,
pursue the vanities of this world, Isay. 55.2.
foolishly imagining to fill and satisfy your hearts with them: which cannot
be; for what though by your eager pursuing of these earthly things; you get as
much as possibly can be had, yet shall you be as far from content; nay
farther then ever you were before: Esaias. 29.8.
much like unto the hungry man (of whom the Prophet speaks) who dreameth that
he eats, but when he awakes he has still an empty stomach. Or like those
unclean spirits who seek for rest but find none, Mat. 12.
you will in the end be deceived of your hope and not only so, but find that
you sought not, namely vanity and vexation of soul.

Secondly let this admonish us, not to seek for content, Noah sent forth of
the Arc went flying up and down, finding no rest for the sole of her foot,
Genesis 8.9.
till she returned again to Noah, so is it with thy soul no place of rest
will it or can it find, nor any creature to content it, till it return unto
the Lord from whence it came. He only must content thy soul; all other things
may vex the soul of man, Caeteris rebus occupari potest, repleri non potest.
Bernard.
but cannot fill it, but he will fully fill it and thoroughly satisfy it, and
though it should enlarge the desires of it self beyond the heavens, yet shall
no part thereof be empty or vnreplenished. Set therefore thy heart upon the Lord
and not on things below. Remember how in the creation God rested not his work
until he had made man; he wrought the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Genesis 2.2.
days and saw his works in their several kinds, that they were all good, yet
no sight of these creatures could content the Lord till man was made, all the
thoughts of that divine mind aimed at him: and when he was made then is it said
that God rested and not before. Wherewith will thou oh man requite this
kindness of the Lord, surely in this do thou labor to show this thankfulness,
that as the Lord would not rest till he had made thee, so do not thou rest till
thou have found him, but choose him for thy portion, with the Prophet David:
Psalm. 73.25.
have none in heaven but him, desire none upon the earth besides him.

Thus much for the former exposition of these words, now for the latter; i. e.
by husks we understand the doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, which was
stuffed and mingled with their own traditions, delivering for doctrine (as
Matthew shows) men's precepts. Mat. 15.
Then this may be the point.

Doctr. Man's doctrine is but a frothie doctrine.
Man's doctrine is but a frothie doctrine; such doctrines as are of man's
invention, either contrary or besides the written word of God, are but frothie,
no better then husks without kernels; that will not, cannot, nourish the soul
to salvation. Jeremy 23. Verse 16.
This doctrine is notably confirmed in the 23. of Jeremiah, in many places of
that Chapter, in the 16. verse he says thus, Hearken not unto the words of the
Prophets, that prophecy unto you; they make you vain; they speak a vision of
their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. Where we see, that
their doctrines are far from feeding of the soul: they oppress the soul,
and make the people vain, and not better. Again, Verse 21.22.
verse 21.22. the Lord says thus. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they
run; I have not spoken unto them, yet they prophesied. But if they had stood in
my counsel, and caused my people to hear my words, then they should have
turned them from their evil way, and from their evil doings. In which words,
the Lord does imply thus much; that the reason why the people were not turned
from their sins, Verse 28.
was, they taught their own councels, and spoke their own words. So again,
in the 28. verse, it is thus said. The Prophet that has a dream, let him tell
a dream; and he that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is
the chafe to the wheat, says the Lord? Where you see in plain terms their
doctrine is termed chafe. A light thing, without any solid substance, or good
nutriment: Verse. 32.
And in the 32. verse, you may find these words. Behold I am against them that
prophecy false dreams, says the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people
to err by their lies, and by their lightness: yet I sent them not, therefore
they shall not profit this people at all. So that you see by these many places,
this truth strongly confirmed, that man's doctrine is but light, husks, chafe:
unprofitable for the souls nourishment.

the soul, let them strike at sin, the blow is given, but with a leaden
dagger; the sword is not sharp enough to cut it down.

Secondly, it wants Gods blessing; now man lives Mat. 4.
is it so with the body, then much more is it so with the soul: it is Gods
blessing that must make this food comfortable; but God has promised to bless
only his own ordinance, and not man's inventions.

These may be the reasons. Now let us see what good uses it will afford unto us.

First, this serves to set forth unto us the miserable estate David, nor of a
fresh hue with Daniell: I mean the constitution of their souls can never
thrive thereby: true it is, they have several dishes for the feeding of their
senses; brave objects for the eyes; melodious tunes for the ear; and the like:
but by these they are not brought a step nearer heaven. Let a man that begins
to be in want, and begins to have a sight and sense of his sins, be brought to
the seeing or hearing of this their melody and music, shall his mind be ever
the more satisfied? Surely he may as well feed his stomach with painted
plumes, as his soul with such foolish guegays: let us therefore pity them,
and pray for them, that so many of them as belong unto the Lord, may have their
eyes opened, to see their misery, and that they may have better food, and more
solid nourishment for their souls.

Manna in such a rich measure, falling about our camps: there are thousands in
the world, nay, in this land, that would be heart glad of those Sermons that
you regard not, but sleep out and despise, oh how happy were we if we knew
our happiness I but we like pampered children, play with our meat; and like
the carnal Israelites, stumble at the plenty of our Manna: the onions of
Egypt have a better relish in our mouths: well framd words, quirks and tricks
are more affected then profitable matter; but should the Lord once show us the
terrors of hell, and visit our consciences with the apprehension of his wrath:
then the very crummes of the Gospel would be welcome, when now we loath the
full dishes of consolation. Then to hear but one sentence of the Gospel
plainly expounded, and to have but one of the promises powerfully applied,
would be more acceptable, then all the fine devices of the wit, delivered in
the perswaseable words of man's wisdom: let not therefore these things be hid
from your eyes, take notice of your privilege, your glory, your advantage,
wherein God has blessed you above other cities, countries, and nations. Italy,
Spain, and other rich countries in Asia and Africa, abound with wealth, but in
stead of their rich mines of gold and silver, we have this inestimable treasure
of the word, the value whereof is far above all precious pearls: the outward
blessings that God gave unto his people are compared to the ornaments of the
body, Ezech. 9.10.11.
as Bracelets, Abilements, Rings, Chains, and the like; but his giving of his
word and statutes unto them, is compared to his marriage with them, let us then
take notice of this our happiness, and rouse up our hearts to daily
thankfulness.

The third use, is that which the Apostle makes; Beware Colos. 2.8.
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ. Let us not be beguiled by false teachers, neither let us lend our ears
to their frothie doctrine: please the care they may with the enticing words of
man's wisdom; save the soul they cannot without preaching the words of
Christ, that only is the word of life, and the power of God to salvation; all
other food is but dust and drauery, no better then husks, fitter to feed
swine, then to nourish the sons and daughters of God, to eternal life.

In the last place, here is a lesson for us ministers, that Mat. 28.20. Ezekiel.
3.17.
Let us teach therefore what he has commanded us to observe, and hear the
word from the mouth of God, giving warning from him: oh let me exhort and be
exhorted to remember whereto we are called, and wherefore we are sent: is it to
please the ear, or save the soul? Preach I man's doctrine or Gods (says the
Apostle) or go I about to please men? Gal. 1.10.
for if I should yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ: More I might
say, but I will not; a word to the wise may be sufficient.

Now, further in that it is here said, No man gave unto him, we might observe
this point of doctrine;

The Lord does usually take from those whom he means to save, those sinful
means and helps whereon they rest, Doctr.
and makes them insufficient for the satisfying their desires.

Thus dealt he by his people Israel, as does appear in the second of Hosea. 7.

But I will not stand on this general point, I will show what use might be
made of it, Use.
and so I will leave it. Art thou disappointed of thy vain hopes, and deprived
or forsaken of these means wherein thou trustedst, whether goods, or friends,
or strength, and the like? Know and be persuaded, the Lord hereby does chastise
thee for thy vain confidence, and withal, does beat thee from these worldly
stays, that thou may fly to him for succor, and for help: consider of
it, and make this use profitable as occasion serves. And so I pass from his
Egresse to his Regresse.

Hitherto of his Egresse. Now of his Regresse, and return: wherein we have his
repentance, and the success of it: his repentance is laid down from the 17.
verse, to the 22: the success in 20, 22, 23, and so to the end.

In his repentance are obseruable these Specialls; first, the occasion thereof,
or motives, inducing him thereto, laid down in this 17. verse: secondly, his
resolution, grounded upon the former motives, verse. 18, 19: thirdly, his
practice, and revolution, verse 20, 21. To begin with motives, or occasion of
his turning, laid down first generally to be a serious consideration of his
ways and his courses: then more particularly, first a sense of his own
misery, I perish, etc. Secondly, a hope of his Fathers mercy, which is
nourished in him by the consideration of his Fathers liberal dealing, even
toward his hired servants, which makes him confident to look for goodness
toward himself, being his son. How many hired servants, etc?

Text.
And when he came to himself.] Something of the phrase, before I speak of the
particulars; the Prodigals regentance is termed a coming to himself, as if he
had been out of his wits, or besides himself before his amendment: and indeed
so much the very phrase does import. So then we conclude.

Doctr. A wicked man is a mad man.
A man in his sins is out of his senses, he is a mad man, and out of his
wits, Sinners are Bedlems and Lunatickes, void of sense or reason. Esaias ^6.8.
Calvin in loc. hertatur vt cer redeant hoc est resipiscant: Menizerus, Redite
praeuaricatores ad cor. Dissesserant ergo, a cord. Muscul.
Me thinks these words of the Prophet Esaias, may sufficiently prove this in the
46. Chapter ver. 8. where he says, Remember this, and show your selves men,
bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors! the words may be thus read,
Return to your minds, O ye transgressors! or, Return into your heart, as
Calvin reads them: observing this very point from thence, that they were not
well in their wits before. So Misculus, Mentzerus, with many other.

And indeed the words usually used for repentance, both Greek and Latin, does
show as much; (...).
the Greek word is derived of another, which signifies Folly and Madness,
and is as much as after-wit: Resipiscentia quasi receptio mentis ad Se.
Tertullian. Vol vt alij Resipiscere quasi resapere. Luke 23.34. Acts 7.60.
and for the Latin word, the Prophet in the former place cited, seems to
give the signification of it. And it is no wonder, for their reason and
judgment are now corrupted through sin, so that, as our Savior Christ and
blessed St Steven says, they know not what they do. And is it not the very
definition of a madman to be without judgment? to follow his fancy, and to
be led by appearances without trial?

Let the uses of the point be these, Use.
first it may inform our judgments concerning sin and sinners: Sin is
madness; Sinners are Lunatikes, being possessed with a spiritual frenzy and
madness: look upon them but with a spirituaall eye, and their actions will
declare it. Some run to and fro stark naked, and blush not, Wicked men show
that they are mad men diverse ways. Exodus 32.26.
tearing off, and casting away the garments of holiness and innocence. Were
they ashamed (says Jeremiah?) nay, nay, they were not ashamed? Are men ashamed
of their flagitious courses, which lays them naked both to shame and
judgment? Alas no, they glory in them, never blushing for the committing of
them. Others, (though sometimes they keep within compasse^, and seem to be
well governed, as if they were no such men) being a little displeased, or any
thing crossed, straight fall a playing of their mad prankes, raging and rauing
against heaven and earth, cursing and banning all that speak to them,
infecting the very air with their vile speeches and horrible oaths, as if
they would pluck God out of his throne, and again crucify the Son of God
afresh.

Others, foame at the mouth, their talk is idle and beastly, sauouring neither
of wit nor honesty; sparkles of hell come forth from their lips, whereat the
Devil kindles fire of dissension.

And again, how deeply are others possessed with this spirit of madness? who
are never well but when they are wounding, beating, and destroying of
themselves and others: wasting their estates, consuming their bodies, and
pitifully gashing of their consciences and souls, yea killing and destroying
whoeuer they company with, drawing them into the same excess of riot, that so
they may all perish together.

And in a word, what mad property is to be seen in any Bedlem, that is not to
be found in a wicked man: Oh! happy were it, if the rod of discipline were
better used, then there would be hope of more sobriety.



The last Use, shall be an exhortation to such as are yet

And thus much shall serve for this point, which the phrase has afforded: now
to the motives or inducements causing his turning: He first takes himself
aside, and begins to consider of the estate wherein he stood: [He said,] whence
learn, Doctr. Examination of our hearts the first step to Repentance. Ier. 8.6.
That a taking our selves aside, and diligent examination of our hearts and
ways, is the first step to Repentance. Thus much is implied in these words of
Jeremiah. cap. 8. ver. 6. I hearkened, and heard, but they spoke not aright, no
man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? They repented
not: why? surely, because they examined not themselves, they communed not with
their own hearts, saying, What have I done? Thus much also is expressed by him
in the 3. Chap. of his Lamentations, and the 40. Lament. 3.40.
verse. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord: there
must be a searching and trying, before there can be any turning.

The reason is plain, Reason.
because we can never know our ways, what they are, nor whither they lead,
without a serious consideration and strict examination of them; a Physician
cannot know the estate of a man's body, without some good search and
inquisition; how then can a man know the condition of his soul. Now the
ignorance of a man's own bad estate is never severed from a false persuasion of
a man's own good estate; Revel. 3.
as we have example in the Church of Laodicea; he that is ignorant of his
own ways, ever thinks his ways to be the best ways, and who in such an
error will desire any change or turning.



What have I done; and again propound it, wherein am I failing. Take the light
of Gods law, that will show thee thy filthiness, that will discover unto thee
thy great corruptions, and many failings: Be not backward in this duty, the
more backward thou art, the greater cause have thou to fear thy estate. It is
a secret guiltiness of sin that causes a backewardnesse in our examination.
Bankcrupts that are not worth a groat do not, dare not look into their
estate, because they know they be worse then naught. Be then persuaded to call
thy courses to account, consider the estate wherein now thou art, thy case is
fearful because thou art ignorant of it, but it is desperate; if thou will
not be persuaded to look into it; but on the other side, if thou will take thy
self aside, and commune with thy own heart (as David speaks) surely then
thou will be in a fair forwardness to a sound conversion. Psalm 4.


Lastly, Let me add a word of exhortation unto all Psalm. 119.59.
this was David's practice, I have considered my ways (and what follows) I
have turned my feet unto thy testimonies. As often as he considered his ways
he ever found some defect that needed redress; so will it be with thee, thou
shall never strictly examine thy estate, but thou shall ever find somewhat
that needs amendment. Make conscience then of the practice of this duty, we
see how needful consideration is in the things of this life, for without it
no estate of life can be well ordered. The Mariner must consider his course by
his Compass, or else he is in danger to run on rocks or sands. The
Merchant, if he consider not his affairs by his Count book, will quickly
prove bankcrupt. The Traveler, if he considers not his way, will soon go
wrong; if he sees many ways before him, he considers with himself which
of them to choose, neither will he go on till he be well advised which is
the best. How much more then should we consider of our actions, whose course is
to the kingdom of Heaven, for every way leads not to it. Does every one use
consideration in every estate of life? And shall a Christian only be
careless, far be this from us. There is no passing from earth to Heaven
without consideration.

How many hired servants.] See here the two motives of his turning. First, he
saw his own misery, and that drove him from himself, I perish with hunger.

Secondly, He remembers his Fathers mercy, and that brought him unto him. How
many hired servants of my Fathers have bread enough.

Math. 6.
By hired servants, are meant principally the Scribes and Pharisces, and under
them all others, who serve God mercenarily, only for the reward sake, and not
of love.

Pani^ est doctrinalis, Sacramentalis, victualis, Ludolph. John 6.51. Panem a
(...) multitudinem salutum, magnitudinem sol^minum plenitudine^ omnium bonoru^.
These had Bread enough. Bread has a large extent in Scripture, for under it is
contained a sufficie^cy of food and nourishment, both for soul and body; and
therefore some would derive the Latin word from a Greek, which reaches far
and wide, and so make it a comprehensiue word, signifying all things needful
whether to corporal or animal sustenance. It implies then (says one) much
health, great comforts, fullness of all necessary good things: but (as I take
it) in this place that exposition is too large; for by bread, is especially
meant that bread which Christ brake amongst them, I mean, his doctrine and
miracles, of this bread they had enough, for they often heard the one, and saw
the other. Now to the instructions.

The Prodigal was miserable, and in great distress, hunger had already
consumed his flesh, and almost brought him to rottenness and worms. I perish
with hunger, this he had a sense of, which drive him home to his Father.

Here then observe, what excellent means crosses and afflictions are to chase
men to the Lord, and make them look home.

The Scriptures are full of proofs for the confirming of this truth: in the
26. of Isay and the 16. verse, Doctr. Crosses and afflictions are excellent
means to make men look home. Esaias 26.16. Psa. 107.10.13. Hosea 5.15.
the Prophet says thus, Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they poured
forth a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. So in the 107. Psalm, verse
10-14. They being bound in affliction and iron, etc. cried unto the Lord in
their trouble and distress. This the Lord himself does further witness in
the 5. of Hosea 14.15. I will be to Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to
the house of Judah, I, even I, will tear and go away, I will take away, and
none shall rescue. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge
their offense, and seek my face; Chap. 6.1.
for in their affliction they will seek me early. And so indeed they did, as
does appear in words following, Come, and let us return unto the Lord, Esaias
17.6.7.
for he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us
up. So also in the 17. of Esaias 6.7. the Lord telling the people of the common
destruction that he would bring upon the^ for their sins, says, that then
they should look up to their Maker, and their eyes should have respect to the
holy one of Israel. And hence it was (as it may seem) that the Prophet David
(preferring the salvation of his enemies (out of a holy love and spiritual
charity) before their outward estate) prays thus, Psalm. 83.16.
Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name O Lord. Many
examples I could bring for the proof of this point, if it were as needful as
easy so to do, as of Manasses, 2 Cron. 33.11.12.13. Ier. 31.18. Acts 16.
Reason.
Ephraim, the Iaylor, the danger of whose outward man, was a means to save
both the outward and inward man, besides many others, but these are sufficient.
And it is no marvel they should be so available, for hereby we are fitted
and prepared for the hearing of Gods voice; true it is, the spirit of God is
the principal cause of our saving hearing, for he opens the heart, and
bears the ear, that we may attend to it, and receive it, as he did the
heart of Lidia, Acts 16.14.
but yet affliction and tribulation is a special means, Job 33.16. and 36.15.
which he uses for the fitting and preparing of us hereunto, as Elihu
declares in the 33. of Job, verse 16.17. and also in the 36.15. he delivers
the poor in affliction, and opens their ears in oppression: when therefore
with Eliah we have had our share in this stormy tempest, 1 K^n. 19.11.12.
and have been well shaken with these earthquakes, then are we well prepared
to hear the still and soft voice of the Lord, speaking unto us in the ministry
of the Gospel. Thus then you see they further our conversion, as they fit us
and prepare us for the hearing of the word, which is the ordinary means of our
salvation.



Object.
But if this be so (may some say) how comes it then to pass that so many have
been afflicted, yet are not bettered, 2 Cor. 28.22.23.
as the Lord himself has showed, Esaias 1.5. Amos 4. and as we see in the
example of Ahaz, who in the time of his distress did trespass yet more
against the Lord. And also by the example of Pharaoh, Saul, Jeroboam, with
others.

Answ. Esaias 45.7. Amos 3 6. Sim: Poison of it self is hurtful, but by the
skillful tempering of the Physician becomes profitable^
We must know that it is not affliction in it own nature, that works this
repentance (for in their own nature they are evil, and teach rather auersion
from, then conversion unto the Lord) but by the secret operation of Gods spirit
these fruits are brought forth. Now this working of the spirit is wanting in
the wicked, neither are afflictions sanctified unto them, but are still curses
(be they never so many) and not crosses, and make for their further hardening,
not mollifying. This therefore is to be understood only of the elect, and no
other. True it is, they may make the reprobate for a time to be humbled; as was
Pharaoh and Ahab, with others. But this is worldly sorrow, which brings death.

Now for the uses.

And first, it may serve for the reprehension of such, as Psalm. 73.15. Mat. 3.
Esaias 53.3.4.
then must we needs condemn the generation of Gods children, yea, Christ
himself (that well-beloued of his Father) who was a man full of sorrows and
acquainted with grief, smitten of God and afflicted; such a conclusion then
cannot be drawn from hence, for whom God does love them does he correct, yea,
Heb. 12.6.
he chastises every son that he receives. Be not then too rash in judging any
whom the Lord exercises with afflictions: the choysest flower in the garden,
lies open to a storm, as well as the nettle in the wilderness. Neither
think the better of thy self, because the rod is not on thy back, for the
wholesome means of thy amendment is withheld from thee, and thou may justly
fear, the reins is laid on thy neck, and thou art given up to thy own ways.
A tree that is fruitful will be well cudgelled and beaten, when a tree that is
good for nothing but the fire shall never be disturbed: the wheat endures
more then the chafe: and yet the wheat is for the board, Nihil insaelicius
faelicitate peccantium. August.
and the chafe for the dunghill. Bless not then thy self in this estate:
count not thy self blessed, because thou art never afflicted, for thou art
sore plagued when thou art spared; neither is any thing more unhappy, then
this felicity.

But for a second use: is this so, that crosses and afflictions to such as have
often been afflicted, and yet are not bettered. The Lords hand has been
often upon them and yet for all that they have not turned to him: sin is not
left; their wicked ways are not forsaken, surely such may fear, their case is
desperate; seeing these are such excellent means, and ordinarily the last
means to bring a sinner home, and yet with them can do no good: what cause
have such to fear, that they shall be given over of the Lord, as a hopeless
cure. Hear and tremble at that which the Lord speaks by his Prophet
Ezechiel. EZech. 22.18.19.20.
Thus says the Lord God, because you are become dross, behold therefore I
will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem, as they gather silver, and brass,
and iron, and lead, and tinn, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire
upon it, to melt it: so will I gather you in mine anger, and in my fury, and I
will leave you there, and melt you. Yea I will gather you and blow upon you in
the fire of my wrath, Verse 18.
and you shall be melted in the midst thereof, etc. The Lord had in the verse
before these words, complained of the house of Israel, that it was become
dross, they were all brass, and tinn, and iron, and lead in the midst of the
furnace; that is, in the furnace of affliction, they would not be bettered, nor
purified, as they ought to have bin, therefore does the Lord threat, that
fearful judgment, to fall upon them. Oh consider of this, thou that have
often been afflicted, by sickness, losses either of goods, friends, or any
such like cross: I say ponder on it, consider how fearful a thing it is to
be afflicted, and not purged by affliction, to be stricken with the rods of
God, and no conversion to follow: What is this but a sign of a fearful
induration. Consider another place in the Prophecy of Jeremiah, and weigh it
well. The words be these; The bellows are burnt, Iere. 6.29.30.
the lead is consumed of the fire: the founder melts in vain: for the wicked
are not plucked away. Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord
has rejected them. Lo here, if those afflictions that the Lord has laid upon
thee does not better thee, nor pluck thee away from thy wickedness, swearing,
whoring, profaning Gods Sabbath, and the like: Reprobate silver shall men call
thee, and thou may fear the Lord has rejected thee.

Let a third use of this doctrine therefore be admonition Mic. 6.9.
and commonly call for repentance, and turning, look to it therefore, that thou
be not a non-proficieus in this School; let every cross purge away some
dross and filth, wherefore does the Lord send them, but for this end; let not
God loose his end, but let thy crosses become corrections: now how are they
corrections, when they work no amendment. Be not thou more fearful of being
afflicted, then thou art careful of not being reformed, by that thy
affliction, and so may thou have great comfort that thy affliction is
sanctified unto thee; that it is a part of Christ's cross, and not of Adams
curse. Be careful to come out better then thou wentest in, for if thou be
hardened, not melted, thou art clay, not gold.

The last use, may be comfort for Gods elect, for seeing yet he deals no
otherwise with us, then David did with Saul, 1 Samuel 26.
who finding him sleeping in his camp, would neither slay him himself, nor
suffer Abn^^ to slay him, only he took away his spear, and his water-pot,
which also after he had wakned him, he restored again: no way intending his
destruction. Thus deals God with us, who many times finds us sleeping in
our sins, when we should be waking, yet he slays us not, neither intends
our destruction, but happily takes from us those things wherein we place our
strength and trust; which also after we are awaked, he restores again unto us
in a most gracious manner. What cause then have thou to murmr or complain,
when thou art afflicted? nay, how great cause have thou of thanksgiving, and
rejoicing? Be not then deceived, it is needful and profitable for thee, to
drink of this cup, it was good for David that he was afflicted, and as good
for thee and me, and the rest of Gods children. Be not then cast down under
the hand of God. Of al herbs in the garden, esteem of Rue and patience.

And thus much be spoken of this motive the sense of his misery: now for the
next, which is the persuasion of his Fathers mercy. The point hence will be;

Doctr. Sense of Gods mercy causes repentance. Zach. 12.10.
That the sense and knowledge of Gods mercy and goodness is, that which
causes us to turn unto him.

This is notably confirmed in the 12. of Zachary, ver. 12. The house of David
and inhabitants of Jerusalem, are brought to Repentance, and godly sorrow, upon
a consideration of Gods infinite love toward them in Christ Jesus. Psalm. 130.4.
So says the Prophet David Psalm. 130.4. There is mercy with thee, that thou
may be feared. So says S. John. 1 John. 4 19. Heb. 11.6.
We love him, because he loved us first: and what does the Author to the
Hebrews else mean, in saying He that comes to God, must believe that God is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him.

work on them. True it is, the heart may be pricked by the Preaching of the
Law, and humbled with sense of a man's own misery, but it never comes to
break forth into hearty confession, and true grief for sin, as it is sin,
and a breach of Gods law, until the sense of Gods mercy is in some measure
tasted of. Could misery alone turn one to God, then might the Devils have
been long ago converted: and Judas also might have repented, for he felt
anguish enough, and horror of conscience, but that did rather drive him from
God, because he could not apprehend the kindness and mercy of God toward him.

The works of Gods favor and mercy toward us

Is this so, that the persuasion of mercy should cause Romans 2.4.
Know thou not (says the Apostle) that the mercy of God should lead thee
to Repentance: But thou despisest the riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long suffering, and after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasurest
up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath: how often hear we this
apollogie returned, when all other defenses fail, oh God is merciful: it is
true, but to whom, it is to such as turn from their sin, not to such as
continue in sin: Esaias. 27.11.
as for such Esaias reads their doom; He that made them will not have mercy on
them, and he that formed them will show them no favor. And Moses fearfully in
the 29. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
of Deuteronomy. He that hears the words of this curse, and blesses himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imaginations of my
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst. The Lord will not spare him, but then
the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against him, and all the
curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall
blot out his name from under heaven. A fearful thunderbolt thrown on the
head of all such impious beasts, as make Gods mercy a cloak for sin, take
notice of it thou filthy profane liver, who being reproved for thy
drunkenness, and such like uncleanness, have this for thy defense, and holdst
up this for a buckler; no, no, he has no mercy for thee, so long as thou
walk on in thy impenitency, but wrath and severity, which he will one day
manifest.

Julian; Nero, Judas that ever the earth bare: this then is Gods mercy, Gods
great mercy toward thee: oh let it lead thee to repentance. If mercies of
this kind cannot move, then in the Second place call to mind his sparing
mercies, for albeit thou have not committed such gross sins as some others
have, yet thou have done enough, yea a thousand times more then enough, to
cause God, and that justly to have destroyed thee long before this hour Lamen.
3.
and to have thrown thee into hell, and given thee thy portion amongst the
reprobate. Consider Gods justice on Zimry and Cosby you Adulterers, on Iezabell
you proud ones, on Senacherib you blasphemers, on Achan you worldlings, on
Ananias and Saphira, you liars. And then tell me if Gods mercy be not great
toward thee; thou live in the like sins, thou know it, yea and happily
thy conscience condems thee for it; these were stricken suddenly in the very
act of their sins, thou have committed them over and over again, and yet art
spared. Oh the mercy of God toward thee! consider of his goodness. There are
many thousands in hell for those sins thou live in, and yet have not
committed them so often as thou have done: and others that have not committed
so great gross sins as thou, behold then Gods severity toward them, but his
mercy toward thee. Let this lead thee to Repentance: If mercies of this kind
prevail not, then in the third place consider, his Renewing mercies, whereby
he does renew his favors to thee daily, and lodeth thee with his blessings,
though thou ladest him with thy sins, does he not daily renew his favors
with the light, giving thee life, health, food, raiment, and many other
blessings which others more dutiful then thy self do want? There is never an
hour in the day nor night, but thou forfetest all health, wealth, peace,
liberty, yea heaven, and thy salvation. Yet for all that is God thus gracious?
and opens his hands liberally to bestow good things upon thee; shall he be
thus gracious in renewing his mercies, and will thou be so graceless as not
renew thy obedience? be not so wretchlesse, let these cause thee to repent.

If yet these will not do, then in the last place consider, his pardoning
mercies; he is ready to pardon all thy sins, and willing to pass by all thy
offenses, upon thy repentance, be they never so many, Esaias. 1.18.
Were they as red as scarlet yet they shall be made as white as snow: how ever
thou have lived and thy sins be many and great, and they all double dipped
and died, will thou repent? the strength of his mercy shall undo them, shall
change them, and make them as if they had never bine done, thy sins shallbe
forgiven in Christ, and never imputed nor laid to thy charge; if yet these will
not prevail, then put all together consider his Preventing, his Sparing his
renewing, his pardoning mercies, and if there be any hope of thee, they will
move thee to look home, and with this Prodigal to return to thy fathers
house. Oh how inexcusable art thou whom these mercies cannot allure? art thou
not worthy of double condemnation? the sins committed against the law, may be
cured by the grace of the Gospel, but when this grace is despised, and men who
may receive mercy for repenting, will not repent, wherewith shall this impiety
be healed, does there remain any more sacrifice for sin; shall any new
Savior be sent to save such men? Surely no, there remains nothing for such,
but a fearful looking for, Heb. 10.27.
and expectation of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour them.



I cannot yet dismiss this verse, before I speak something of a point or two,
which I cannot well baulke, they lying in the way, and offering themselves to
our consideration. First, in that these are termed hired servants, which were
in his fathers house; let us note;

All in Gods house are not dutiful sons, Doctr. In Gods house are hyrelings.
Math. 6.2.
for some are hyrelings: Such were the Scribes and Pharisees, here they served
God only for reward, and did other duties mercinarily; as does appear by the
words of our Savior Christ, Matt. 6. and so in the Parable of the Grounds,
Math. 13.20.
one of those kinds receive the Word with joy, but it is only for by-respects,
and temporary causes, and therefore fall away in time of persecution. Ioh. 6.
Such also were many of Christ's followers, who sought only after the bread
that perishes, as appears by Christ's words. John 6.

And therefore, seeing this is so, Use.
it stands every one in hand, truly and thoroughly to examine himself,
whether he be a son or hyreling; thou may know it by the end thou aimest
at in the service of God: Aymest thou at his glory principally, or thy own
good? Is his glory the White thou leuelest at? Or, art thou corrupted with some
other consideration? If Gods glory be the mark, then art thou a son, but
if thou professest the Gospel for other ends, and by-respect, thou art a
mercinarie, and a hyreling.

But Moses is said to have an eye to the recompense of reward: yea Christ
himself, (the Son of God, Ob. Heb. 11.26. Heb. 12.2.
in whom was no sin) for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God.

I answer, in performing of good duties, Sol. How we may have respect to the
recompense of reward in doing good works. Annet. Fest. Math. 3.10.
an eye may be had to the recompense of reward, and the consideration of it may
be used as a help to our dullness. But let us know, that we are not
principally to respect it, for were there no reward, neither heaven for the
good, nor hell for the bad: yet a child of God is bound, yea and would obey the
Lord for conscience sake: Take notice then here by the way, of a shameful
untruth, wherewith the Rhemists do charge us, namely, that we condemn all
doing of good, in hope of heaven; or leaving of evil, for fear of hell; and
that such kind of preaching, we utterly dislike. How true this is, our
Congregations can testify; we exhort men to do good, in respect of the
reward, and we use (as motives) both heavens joy, and hels horror: howsoever
(indeed) we exhort not men to do good only and principally for the rewards
sake, but rather in duty and thankfulness to God, that he may thereby be
glorified.

Now further see: these hired servants, have bread enough, yea, and more then
enough, for they have to spare: Doctr. God provides a large diet for his
Household. Pro. 9.1.2.
Hence we gather, God provides a large and liberal diet for those of his
household. The very hyrelings have such plenty, that there is to spare, and
then surely his sons shall not be pinched. For the confirming of this point,
see Proverbs 9.1, 2. Wisdom has built her house: She has hewne out her
seven Pillars: She has killed her Beasts: She has mingled her Wine: She
has also furnished her Table. In which words, the bounty and magnificence of
the Lord toward his Church, Psalm. 36.8.
is reprepresented by the plentiful provision of a liberal Feastmaker: so
also, in the 36. Psalm. ver. 8. They shall be all abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thy house: and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy
pleasures. And in the 25. Esaias 25.6.
of Esaias most excellently: In this mountain shall the Lord of Hoasts make unto
all people a feast of fat things, a feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat things
full of marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined: The meaning is, that God
will provide for his Church and people (both Jews and Gentiles) a sumptuous
and royal feast for the refreshing of their souls: which bountiful
provision, our Savior Christ also sets forth in the Gospel by a parable;
comparing the kingdom of Heaven (that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel) to a
marriage Feast, Math. 2^.4.
which a King prepared for his Son: Now mark, first it is compared to a
Feast, therefore costly: secondly, made by a King, therefore not common, but
plenty: thirdly, to a Wedding feast, therefore not sparing, but liberal and
large: fourthly, to a feast made at the marriage of his own Son, and
therefore so much the more sumptuous, and magnificent. So then we see this
truth strongly confirmed by these Scriptures which have been brought. Now
hear the Reasons.

First, God is of sufficient ability that he can do it:

Secondly, as he is able, so he is willing, his love is David, Psalm. 23.
Nothing shall be wanting that is good.

The first Use, is for reprehension, and that twofold; first, of such as being
in the place and room of Stewards, do scant the household of that liberal
provision which the Master allows: thus do the Papists, who brag and boast
that they are the faithful Stewards in the house of God, yet (by their leave)
sacriligiously rob the Family of Gods allowance, providing for the people such
a poor thin diet, as is not able to keep life and soul together, for
whereas God has appointed for his Church large fare, and a feast of fat
things, both the Word and Sacraments, to be taught and administered; and
charged, that as faithful stewards, every one should have their portion: They
deprive them of some, and corrupt the rest; giving them Gall for meat, and
Vinegar to drink, as the Psalmist speaks. Psalm. 69.21.
For the Word, (behold their dealing) they keep it from the people, and lock
it up in an unknown Tongue, Harding.
condemning it as, heretical, for them to have it in the vulgar Language
charging, upon pain of damnation, Quest. Why the Papists keep the Scriptures
from the people.
that none read it without special license.

But what may be the reason of this, may some demand? Why do the Papists thus
coffer up the Scriptures, and keep the people from reading of them?

The true cause.
Surely, the true cause is this, that their works of darkness may not be
discovered: Should this light be set into his Candlestick, their rotten wares
would lie rotting upon their hands, they would want vent for for their filthy
Merchandise of Pardons, Masses, Indulgences, and the like; therefore to have
the better sale, like deceitful Tradesmen, they care not for the light; or,
like unto thieves, they put out the candle, that they may rifle more safely in
the dark.

Their pretended Reasons. Psalm. 19 7.119.130. 2. Tim. 3.16.
I confess, they allege other causes of this their dealing, they say it is
dark and obscure, hard, and kno^^ie, yea, a breeder of heresies, and maker of
strifes, and many pervert it to their own dectruction. But I am sure, the
Holy Ghost says, it gives wisdom to the simple, and will guide them in the
way, as also, that it is profitable to improve, and not to impair the truth;
it is as a hammer, to bruise errors, and not to breed them: and what if some
do pervert it, shall therefore all be deprived of it? then away with
preaching, for to some it is the savor of death. 2. Cor. 2.16. 2. Cor. 11. Luke
2.34. Romans 9.33. 1. Pet. 2.7.
Away with the Sacrament, for to many it is a seal of damnation: yea, and
with Christ himself, for to many he is a Rock of offense. Now then, because
some abuse it, shall we take away the right use of it? Is it a good reason to
prove that no Vines must grow in Lacedemon, because some drunkards did abuse
them to excess? or, because some abuse a Sword, therefore let none wear any?
Were it not cruelty in a Nurse to refuse to give children milk, for fear of
dropping upon their Clothes? and cruelty in a Mother, to take bread from her
children, for fear the dog may snatch it? Is it less cruelty in these to
keep the Word from the people under these pretenses?

Object.
But (may some say) this seems to be a slander, for they permit the people to
read the Word, and have translated the Testament into their vulgar Tongue, so
that any may understand.

True it is (the curses of the people have been so many, Answ.
for their engrossing up this grain into the mustie garners of their Bishops
houses) that now within these few years, to stop the peoples mouths, they
have vented some of their corn; but it is such mustie, mildewed and blasted
grain, so corrupted with Apocriphall additions, and humane traditions, that
their sin is no less now in poisoning, then it was before in staruing.

But yet may some say, they take pains in preaching, Object. Answ. Dr. Boys on
the Festin. Ps. 3. Dr. Bassinet.
and what is wanting one way, they supply another. Let the words of a learned
man, be an answer to this. In former times, it was as great a wonder to hear a
Bishop preach, as to see an Ass to fly (as one of their own side in a
public Oration before the Bishops assembled in Aninion did testify: What
doctrine Papists teach.
) Now indeed they preach more then heretofore, but their Doctrine savors of
policy more then of piety, tending rather to King killing, then soul saving.
Their Divinity tracts are worse then their humane learning; and their Sermons
are the worst of all Divinity; being stuffed with lying legends, and not
according to the wisdom of Gods Law.

The Jesuits (says my former Author) (alluding to the words of Seneca) in
their preaching are male Agentes, as making merchandise of Gods holy Word.
Magna vitae pars, elabitur male agentibus, maxima nihil agentibus, rota aliud
agentibus. Senec. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 1. Legant, qui volunt, and inueniunt,
aut falli imprudenter, aut fallere impudenter. August.
The Friars in their preaching, are nihil Agences, understanding neither what
they speak, neither whereof they affirm: for the most part, all Papists in
their preaching, are aliud Agences, either beyond the Text, or behind the Text,
or besides the Text. Thus the Jesuits with their too much learning; and the
Friars with their too little, wrest and wreath the Scripture to serve their
own turn.

As this is their dealing with the Word, so the like is their dealing with them
about the Sacraments: for whereas Christ bequeathed both the Bread and the
Wine, to his Church, and prepared a full meal for his people; they bar them
of their allowance, giving only the bread, Math. 26 27. Mark. 14.23.
keeping back the cup from them: whereas Christ says, Drink you all of this;
they say, no, only you Priests, drink you of it. But let us hear their
reasons. Reasons which the Papists bring for withholding the Wine from Layitie.
Answered 1606. Answ. We receive not Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament
as he lay in the manger, but as he was nailed on the Cross.
Christ's blood (say they) is in his veins; now, (say they) receiving the
bread, which is the real body, we must have the blood also which is in the
body.

Answer. We receive not Christ's body in the Sacrament as he lay in the manger,
or as he is in heaven, but as he was nailed on the Cross: and his blood, not
as it is in the veins, but dropping from his heart: and therefore in the
Institution it is said, This is my body broken for you, and this is my blood
shed for you: And further, if this reason be good, why do they then drink?
for what reason can they bring, why they may not receive the blood in the
veins as well as the people?

Secondly, they say, the Wine is in danger of spilling, but there is less
danger of the bread.

If this be not a silly reason, what is or can be? for shall Answer. Christ's
institution may not be broken for some inconvenience that may follow. Ob. The
Wine that is spilt is no part of the Sacrament. Sol. 1. Cor. 10.4.
And admit that some were spilt, it were no such heinous crime: True it is,
that it is a fault against that holy, comeliness which ought to be regarded,
but no such fearful sin as they make it.

But is not the Wine that is spilt, a part of the Sacrament? how then can this
be so small a sin as you make it?

I answer, Only so much is consecrated as we receive; and no more is the
Sacramental sign: for to prove this: That water that the people of Irael
drunk, was sacramental water: And that only, and no more, I hope none will
say, that that which the cattle drunk, was such also.



Answ. By this reason they may deprive the people of both, for the bread was
given to them, Answ. The people may as well be denied the bread, as the wine.
Mark 14.24.
and only unto them; but I would they would consider better of Christ's words,
then would the controversy soon be ended. This is my blood, etc. which is
shed for you, and many. Now, who were those many? Were they not such as should
ever after believe in him? From whence we reason, To those, for whom the blood
of Christ was shed, the Cup must be administered. But the blood of Christ was
shed for the people, as well as for the Minister; and therefore it ought to be
administered to the one, as well as to the other.

In the fourth place, they say, there ought to be a difference

I grant, the Ministers calling is above the peoples, Answ. The Laity have as
great a part in Christ's Passion as the Clergy. Gal. 3.28.
and so there is difference. But if we regard their persons, the people have as
great a part in Christ, and his Passion, as any of the Clergy. Outward
differences there are, but in Christ there are none, as our Apostle teaches
us, There is neither Jew, nor Greek; there is neither bond, nor free; there is
neither male, nor female: for you are all one in Christ Jesus.

And thus have we seen their wicked and sacriledgious dealing with the Church
of God, in keeping from Gods household that large portion which God has
afforded; for which they must one day give a fearful account, unless the
Lord please to open their eyes, and give them repentance. But now to our selves.

For are there not many amongst us also, who being set in the place of
Stewards, allow to Gods household a thinner diet then God himself does
afford? Oh that there were not such amongst us! who feed their sheep in
short pastures, and lead their flocks by the still waters (I speak it in
another sense then David did) feeding them quarterly or monthly, Psalm. 25.
but scarce weekly can their voice be heard, clean forgetting the rule of the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.2.
preach in season and out of season. Hence it comes to pass that the sheep
belonging to their charge are like Pharaohs Kine, so lean and evil favored,
and so weak as every bush is able to entangle, and every ditch ready to
drown, every blast of vain doctrine able to blow away. Oh that we did
consider that charge the Apostle gives to him, 2 Timothy 3.
and in him to us, that we would remember that woe that belongs unto us for
not preaching the Gospel. Art thou a Steward? art thou an Ambassador? why
then do thou not deliver thy message? why do thou not distribute Gods
food unto his people? how will thou be able to look him in the face, at whose
bar one day all flesh must stand.

There be good injunctions for the comely ceremonies of the Church (says one)
so likewise many good orders for the reverent administering of the Sacraments,
Doct. ^oys.
and diligent preaching of the word; let not the one be true Canons, while the
other are made only pot-guns. And thus much for the first sort that come under
the reprehension of this use.

2. Sort reproved.
Now for the second, and they are such as will not feed on Gods delicates. It is
Gods good pleasure to have them well fed, but they can be content with a sparer
diet, they are afraid of growing too fat at the heart; quarterly preaching is
well, and monthly preaching very sufficient, but if it be once a day it is more
then needs; they can hear more in an hour then they can practice all their
lives; and I believe them. And as for the Sacrament to receive that at Easter,
or at every good time, is enough in conscience. But consider you unwise amongst
the people, and you fools when will you be wise; does the Lord deal thus
graciously with thee, and art thou so unthankful? Does the Lord provide such
plenty, and dare thou call it wast? Oh times! Oh manners! how heart-sicke
are we grown of peace and plenty. What a surfeit have we taken of Gods good
blessings, a happy and a blessed cure were it to restore us to our former
days of health; but alas, our disease is grown so desperate, that Gods
physicians know not which way to turn their hands, or heads, to help us. It
i^ therefore to be feared that God himself will take the cure into his hand;
and as physicians prescribe abstinence, when a surfet's taken, so the Lord will
diet us, and bring us again to our former appetite, by withholding of the
means as he long since threatened to his people. Amo. 8 11 12.13
Be you therefore warned, esteem more highly of the Lords favors, lest you be
deprived of them, and those days come wherein you say, (for lo they will come
without repentance) surely there has been a Prophet amongst us. EZ^k 33.33.


And now for a second use, is this: so, that God provides Peter's words does
import, all maliciousness, and guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and evil
speaking must be laid aside, before we can desire the sincere milk of the
Word, 1 Pet. 1.2.
to grow thereby. All these must be purged away by godly sorrow, Esaias 55.1.
John 7.37.
before we can get that hungring and thirsting whereto we are so often exhorted
in Scripture.

A last use may be for comfort to every true member the fruition of the Word
and Sacraments may make amends. The very remembrance of these dainties did so
comfort the heart of David, that though he were banished (for the present)
from the assemblies of the Saints, and was in a barren and dry wilderness
pinched with hunger, and pressed with thirst; yet (I say) the very remembrance
of those things that were passed long before, and the meditation thereof, did
satisfy his soul as with marrow and fatness, and made him most cheerfully
to undergo all his penury and want. If the remembrance of this afforded him
such comfort in the time of his absence, Psalm. 63.5.
how much more should they comfort us being present at the same? And thus much
for this point, and for this Verse. Now we are to come to the next, which
contains in it his purpose and resolution which he had in his heart, upon the
consideration of the premises.

VERSE 18. I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I
have sinned against heaven, and before thee, 19. And am no more worthy to be
called thy Son: make me as one of thy hired servants.
IN the former verse we have this Prodigal in his deep meditations, comparing
things together, and weighing them in the balance: But behold, whilst he
mused the fire kindled in his bosom. And now he speaks. I will arise,
[Surgam] quia iacebat, [and ibo] quia long aberat, [ad patrem meam] quia sub
princ^pe porcoru^, erat. August.
(for by sin he fell:) And go, (for he was far departed;) To my Father,
(for he was under the regiment of the Prince that rules in the world, and in
the hearts of the children of disobedience;) And (I) will say unto him, Father,
I have sinned, etc. In the words, these three specialls are observed. First,
What he resolves to do, I will arise. Secondly, To whom he will go, viz. To
my Father. Thirdly, What he will say, Father, I have sinned.

Something may be profitably observed in general, before we enter upon the
particulars. As this first.

Sound resolution and serious determination to walk as may please God, is very
necessary for him that would live godly, Doctr. Sound resolution needful for
him that would lead a godly life.
and lead a life pleasing to the Lord. It is needful (I say) for such a one
as would thus do, to have a mind bent and resolved to strive toward all good
courses, and to set it self against all ungodly ways whatsoever.

This was that which Barnabas persuaded the Antiochians unto, Acts 11.22.
That with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. This also was
David's practice, Psalm. 119.57.
as appears in the 119. Psalm, verse 57. I have determined to keep thy word.
It was the resolution and determination of his soul, the full bent of his
heart was thereupon. And as it was with him, so ought it to be with all other
that would walk in the ways of God, they must resolve and determine upon it,
that they will not sin, that they will not persist in their evil ways and
courses, but will avoid every known evil way, come on it what will. For if a
man's heart be not thus set, if he be not thus resolved, if he have not this
settled determination and resolute purpose, he will never hold out in that which
is good.

The first reason is, that arms him against all lets and impediments Dimidium
facti, qui been caepit, babet.
So that whosoever thus begins well with sound resolution, is as good as half
his way, in the course of a godly life, the way to heaven.

And the second reason is, because the devil is subtle, and leaves not till
he have it done; so in this case if Satan find us doubting and wavering, he
will the more violently assault us, and not rest until he overcome us, when if
we were resolute and constant, and did thus resist him with settled
determination, he would be out of heart, and as James says, she from us. This
then you see is needful.

^ per. Psalm. 119. Psalm. 119. Verse 57.
there are three excellent helps to a godly life which David does deliver in
the 119. Psalm, one is Determination, that makes a man to begin well, I have
determined to keep thy word (says he) then he adds, Verse 58.
Supplication, which makes a man to continue well, I have made my supplication
in thy presence, with my whole heart: and then Consideration, which causes a
man when he goes wrong to return, and reduces him again into the way of
God, when through weakness he has wandered from it, contrary to his first
determination, Verse 59.
I have considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. Thou
see then what great use there is of this in the whole course of thy life.

In the second place, we learn. Doctr. Serious consideration brings forth
sound determination. Psalm. 119.59.
That it is serious consideration, that brings forth sound determination: He
does not thus resolve, before he had well considered in what estate he was, but
having seriously communed with his own heart, he presently upon it, thus
determines, I will arise and go. This may be further proved by David's
practice, I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies; he
first considers, then resolves and does: this is the reason we are so often
urged to this, as Deu. 32.29. D^u^. 32.29.
Oh that they were wise: that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end: So David: Psalm. 4.4.
stand in awe and sin not, commune with your own hearts upon your beds, and
be still.

The reason is this, Reason.
because hereby the judgment becomes informed, and the understanding
enlightened; and these are the commanders of the will and affections; for as
the mind is enlightened, and the judgment informed, so is the will inclined to
do, or not to do, and thus we see the point clear.

This is a point I have spoken somewhat of before, yet let none think much to
hear of it often, Nunquam satis d^^i^u^ quod nunquam satis addissitur. 2.
Peter. 3.1.
it is never taught enough, that is never enough learned, and therefore give me
leave to stir up your pure mind, by way of remembrance, for we are much
wanting in this duty, which is so absolutely necessary in the life of a
Christian: it is needful, therefore we should be put in mind of it often, to
add somewhat therefore, to what formerly has bin taught. This may seem
first, to give us to understand the reason, why there is no sounder
determination: surely, determine to leave sin? because they consider not what
estate they are in, by reason of sin; or happily if at any time upon hearing
the word, and Gods judgments threatened against their sins; or if upon
consideration of the day of judgment, and terrors of hell, their hearts are
pricked, so that they do purpose and resolve to leave their courses, Hos. 6.
yet it soon dies, and proves like the morning dew, or a flash of lightning,
because they digest not what has bin taught with due meditation and
application to their own souls: they think superficially on these things,
not earnestly nor seriously, and that is the reason they bring forth no better
fruits, worthy amendment of life; Mat. 3.
for did they but well consider of the danger of sin, and the fruits of the
same, viz. horror of conscience here, and hellfire hereafter, they would
never be so fool hardy, as to adventure upon the committing of it, or
continuing in it.

Psalm. 119.
how soon would we turn our feet unto Gods testimonies, and how constantly
should we walk in his ways. The thought is as the seed and conception of all
our actions; now, as after conception, there is travel to bring forth, and a
birth in due time: so when the soul by thought has once conceived, presently
the affections being moved, the will is inclined, and the will being thus
bent, commands all inferior powers (like an Empress) to execute her
pleasure. Mat. 2.1.
It is thus in evil, and it is thus in good: the blessed man's meditation in
the law, Psalm. 1.2.
does stir him up to a doing of it. So many of you therefore that truly
desire to fear the Lord, and constantly to walk on in his ways; be frequent
in the performance of this duty; it is the practice of a godly one, to
meditate day and night; no day shall pass over his head, without some line of
meditation, consider therefore of thy estate, wherein thou live, Matter, for
consideration.
whether it be of nature or of grace, consider advisedly of thy ways, what
they are, and whether they tend; consider often of thy end, and of the account
that thou must give unto the Lord (when all flesh must appear before him) of
all thy works, and words, yea, of every idle word, as Christ affirms; and
therefore much more of wicked profane swearing, blaspheming speeches; consider
seriously of the joys of heaven, of those unspeakable joys, of those
super-abounding pleasures, which God has prepared for his, such joys as
neither eye has seen, 1. Cor. 2.9.
ear has heard, neither can man's heart conceive of: and think of the pains
of hell, of those intolerable torments, Mark. 9.48.
prepared for the wicked, which are endless, easelesse, and remediless.
Endless for the fire is unquenchable, there, their worm dies not, and the
fire never goes out: there, Mat. 3.12. Mark. 9.46. Revel 20.10.
shall be torment day and night, for ever and ever. As it is endless, so also
it is easelesse, there shall be no ease, no comfort, no mitigation of pain:
Revel. 14.11.
there shall be no rest day nor night: there is nothing but pain, anguish,
vexation, and torment; there cannot be had a drop of water to cool Dives his
tongue. And lastly, they are remediless; Between us and you there is a great
gulf fixed, Luke 16.24.
so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they
pass to us that would come from thence, as Abraham answered Dives: from thence
there is no redemption: Verse 26.
thou parent, thou can not there help thy child, nor the child thee, nor thou
husband redeem thy wife, nor thou wife thy husband; there is no sucker nor
help to be had by any. Let these and such like considerations be ever in thy
mind, and pondered on, then will thou have sounder resolutions in thy heart,
and better performances in thy life.

Now to come to the particulars; and first, we are to consider what he resolves
to do: A threefold resurrection of a Christian.
I will (says he) arise and go, etc. There is a threefold Resurrection of a
Christian. The first is Sacramental; and thus we rise again in Baptism: the
second, is Corporal, and so we shall rise again in the day of the Lord Jesus,
in our bodies from the grave: the third is Spiritual, which is his
Resurrection in this life in soul, from the death of sin: thus did this
Prodigal arise, and thus does every true penitent arise, while he here lives
on the earth. The point may be this;

Doctr. Repentance from sin is the first Resurrection. Ephe. 5.14. Revel.
20.6.
That repentance from sin, is as a Resurrection from death, this is plain by
the Apostles words, awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light. And the holy Ghost does thus call it in the
twentieth of the Revelation, verse 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in
the first Resurrection, on such the second death has no power.

Verse 24.
to which place I refer the farther handling of it: a word therefore for a
second use, and so to proceed.

if thou do not here, awake, stand up from the dead, and with Lazarus come
forth: the means that are to be used for this end. I refer with the farther
handling of this point, to the place before named.

And goe] It was a good and holy motion, Text.
which he had of arising, this he does not quench but cherishes and nourishes
it; he adds more fuel, to this fire begun, though but a spark; to the good
motion of arising, he adds the second of going. I will arise and go. First
then learn.

The good motions of Gods blessed spirit, at any time, Doctr. Good motions are
not to be quenched, but cherished.
in any measure (though never so weak) begun; are not to be choked, but to be
cherished. When the Lord shall put any good motion into our hearts, we are to
nourish and cherish the same; to one good motion we must add a second, and to
that a third, and to them a many; and so fall to blowing, and give not over
until at length they break forth into a comfortable flame of godly practice:
1. These. 5.19.
Quench not the Spirit says the Apostle: that is, quell not, choke not the
gifts and motions of the holy Ghost; He uses a metaphor borrowed from fire,
whose heat and light when it is put out, is said to be quenched. 2. Tim. 1.6.
Thus also he exhorts Timothy, to stir up the graces of God which be in him.
And writing to the Ephesians, he says thus; Grieve not the holy spirit of
God. Ephe. 4.30.
He permits them not so much as to give it any occasion of withdrawing the
vigor of his operation in them.

He brings a forcible reason. Whereby you are sealed This is the only evidence
we have of freedom from condemnation: this is Gods mark and character, set on
us, and seizing us for his own: This is like the blood that was stricken upon
the doore-posts, which shall make the Lord to pass over us, Exodus 12.22.
and not to suffer the destroyer to come near us, when he goes to smite the
Egyptians. By this we are assured, that the day of Judgment shall be to us no
day of wrath, but a day of redemption. So then thus we may take the Apostles
meaning: As you desire to retain assurance of your deliverance from the wrath
to come; and that the Lord should take notice of you for his, in the day of
that dreadful separation; so see that by all means, you cherish in you the
gifts and operations of Gods holy spirit: grieve it not by strangling and
choking of those holy motions suggested by him: but give all endeavor, that
all his holy motions and operations be cherished and preserved in their fullest
fervor, without any the least abatement. Thus we have seen the point proved.
Now it remains to apply it.

And first, this serves to condemn such as nippe the bud so soon as ever it
peeps forth, and quench every spark that at any time appears; yea, wilfully
set themselves to repel all good motions, hasting to their cursed company, to
chase away those (which they call profanely) qualmes of devotion, sweet
inspirements of Gods holy spirit. Oh the cursed unthankfulness of these men!
What unkind, ungrateful, discourteous dealing is here with the spirit of
grace? Thus shutting him out, so soon as ever he begins to enter? Would
thou deal so unkindly with thy friend, who comes to thy door? Why dealest
thou then so discourteously with Christ Jesus, Revel. 3.20.
and his holy spirit? who stands at the door and daily knocks, but can get no
entertainment. Beware, Act. 7.51.
beware, of this resisting of the holy Ghost; the sin is fearful and
discomfortable, for hereby thy heart may grow more obdurate, and thy life more
brutish and abominable.

meditation, Christian conference, prayer, and the like: let no means be
neglected, that God has ordained for the working of establishment. And as thou
layest on fuel, so see thou give this holy fire vent: exercise and employ,
and put these holy motions into practice. Much wood piled on a coal (if vent
be wanting) does soon smother it, and put it forth. See then thou exercise the
graces God has given to thee.

But how may I know and be able to distinguish between the motions of Gods
spirit, Quest. How the motions of Gods spirit may be known from Satan's
suggestions.
and the suggestions of the Devil?

Surely thus, if the motions that are put into thy heart, speak not contrary
to Gods word: if the word and they speak one and the same, then are they of
God, not from Satan.

Secondly, if they lead thee not beyond thy calling, Esaias 8.20. The second
mark.
or the measure of gifts that God has given thee: There are many that are very
much excited to reform some abuse, that belongs unto the Magistrate: or it may
be, are desirous to enter into the Ministry, when they are not gifted: these
motions certainly are not of God, they are but Diabolical delusion.

And lastly, The third mark.
thou may shrewdly suspect them if they be too violent, and neither
interrupted, troubled, nor mingled with other evil motions: such a motion as
is so violently, and not controuled with thy own corrupti^^ thou have cause to
fear, and may well suspect. Take these rules for trial, until thou have
learned better.

A second doctrine, that may be hence gathered is this; Doctr. 2. Grace grows
by degrees.
Where spiritual life, and new birth is once begun, there will be a growth,
and an increase in grace. There will be no standing at a stay, but a proceeding
by degrees: (after a rising there will be a going.

Christ confirms this by a Parable of seed growing secretly: So is the
kingdom of God, Mark. 4.26.27.
as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and should sleep, and rise
night and day, and the seed should spring, and grow up, he knows not how.
Thus true grace will have it proceedings, from one degree unto another: And as
it is in the natural conception, after the first quickening, the Infant
stirs, and grows more strong every day then other: so is it in the
spiritual. He compares grace (also) in the heart, to a grain of
musterd-seed, which is small to see to at the beginning: yea, less then all
the seeds that be in the earth. Verse 30.31.32.
But when it is sown it grows up, and becomes greater then all herbs,
and shoots out great branches, so that the fowls of the air may lodge under
the shadow of it. Thus when grace is once planted in the fruitful ground of a
regenerated man's heart, it springs up incontinently, increases speedily,
spreads mightily, and prospers exceedingly. The Prophet David also proves
this, in the 92. Psalm, where speaking of the regenerate, says thus; The
righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree, Psalm 92.12.13.14.
and shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon: such as be planted in the house of the
Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall still bring forth
fruit in their age, they shall be fat and flourishing. Thus we have seen the
point proved. Now (in a word) hear it thus applied.



George on Horseback, ever riding, but never go a step further: where you
leave them this year, there you may find them the next. This is a fearful
sign, and most uncomfortable: the child that is ever sucking, and yet thriues
not, we will soon judge to be in some consumption: So may we judge of these,
who are ever learning, 2. Tim. 3.7.
yet never come to the knowledge of the truth: but are as lean, lanke, and
evil favored, after many a years means, Genesis 41.3.
as Pharoahs seven lean kine were, after they had devoured up the seven fa^.

In the third place, let this admonish every one to grow let us forget that
which is behind, Phil. 3.13.
and endeavor to that which is before; let us press hard toward the mark,
for the price of the high calling of God. Let us not be evermore as smoking
flax, or bruised reeds, or as new set plants, but let us abound more and more.
1. These. 4.1. Non progredi, est regredi.
At a stay we cannot stand (judge what we will) not to go forward is to go
backward, not to increase is to decrease: like as the Sun we are evermore in
motion; and as the Sea, ebbing or flowing: And as the Angel on Jacobs ladder,
ascending or descending. See then that you proceed in sanctification, and go
from strength to strength. Psalm. 84.
And to this end use the means God has ordained; be constant in religious
exercises, hear the word, receive the sacraments, 1. Pet. 2.2.
read, pray, meditate, and be not wanting in these, which are as requisite for
the souls increase in grace, as meat and drink, and the like necessarie^ for
the bodies growth and strengthening. If you be in Christ, never rest until you
become strong men in Christ. Nay, if you be in Christ you will not rest til
you come to some perfection in him; Join therefore unto your virtue faith, 2.
Pet. 1.5.
and with faith knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance
patience, and with patience godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindness:
for if these be in you, and abound in you, they will make you neither
unfruitful, nor unprofitable.

The last use may be for comfort to such as are partakers Phil. 1.6.
He that has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ. Many of Gods children are much discouraged; and why? the reason
is; there faith is weak, their hope is feeble; there love is cold; and there
is so much corruption they fear there estates not good: But that grace thou
have, is it true grace? if it be, then fear not, it will grow more strong, by
thy daily feeding it in the using of the means: If thou bear any fruit, God
(like a careful hus-bandman) will prune thee, John. 15.2.
that thou may bring forth more fruit; other trees at last decay though
formerly they have bore fruit: but trees of Righteousness, the more they yield
the more they shall be replenished; and the elder they grow, the more shall
they flourish, and the better shall they prosper. Keep then thy grace in an
honest heart, and it will increase, though yet it be small, like the widows
oil in the cruise and meal in the barrel; when great graces in an unsound
heart shall vanish away and come to nothing.

Text.
To my Father.] Not to my brother; or fathers servants or to my harlots: But to
my father. Hence learn.

Doctr. The bosom of the Lord, is the only best refuge in the day of calamity.
Releife is to be sought for, only at Gods hands in time of misery and
distress. To him are we to betake our selves and to none but him.

This has Gods Church and children showed, by their practice: David being in
misery, ever flies to the Lord, this was his ordinary course, as might be
made plain by many particular instances, fetched out of the Psalms, Where we
may often read of these and the like sayings I called upon the Lord in my
trouble, and again, In my distress I cried to the Lord, Psalm. 3.4, Psalm.
120.1. Psa, 142.4. Psa. 116 4.3. Psalm. 107.4.5.6.
and again When all refuge failed me, I cried to the Lord. Such sayings are
frequent. This course did the Church take in time of trouble. For when they
wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way, and found no city to dwell in,
being hungry and thirsty their soul fainting in them: Then they cried to the
Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distress. Verse.
12.13.
When their heart was brought down with labor and they fell, there being none
to help them; t^ere also they cried to the Lord in their trouble and he saved
them out of their distress. Verse. 17.18.
When they were afflicted because of their transgressions and iniquities, then
they cried to the Lord and he saved them out of their distresses: yea, Verse.
27.2^.
when they were at their wits end by reason of their afflictions, they cried to
the Lord out of this their trouble, and he brought them ought of their
distresses. It were endless to bring what might be brought for the confirming
of this truth: Psa. 99.6.
I could tell you of Moses and Aaron amongst his priests and Samuel amongst
them that call upon his name; how these called upon the Lord and were answered.
But what shall I need, to underprop so known a truth; let me give you the
reason and then I will show you the use.

All power to help is in his hands alone, Reason. 2 Chronicles. 20.
as Iehoshaphat does confess when he says thus. O Lord God of our Fathers,
art not thou God in heaven? and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the
heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able
to withstand thee? Job. 5.6.
Afflictions come not out of the dust, neither spring they from the earth: but
from the most high God do they proceed. Hos. 6.1.
Now who shall bind up the wound, but he that made it? who shall heal, but he
that has smitten? to him therefore must we turn; to him must we seek for
help.

Let this serve then to reprove such, as betake themselves Coniurers, Witches,
or such like unlawful means here upon the earth. This was King Ahaziahs
sin, 2 King. 1.2.
who being sick sent messengers and said unto them. Go enquire of Baalzebub
the God of Ekron, whether I shall recover of this disease: contrary to that
charge which God does give his people. Regard not them that have familiar
spirits; Leuit. 19 31.
neither seek after Wizards, to be defiled by them: I am the Lord your God Of
this I have formerly spoke more, and therefore a word or two here shall suffice.

Secondly, let this te ch us to betake our selves unto help from him, and that
by means; yet only by such lawful means as he has warranted in his Word.
And beware of trusting in the means that God has warranted. It is lawful to
seek to the Physician, and use of his help, yet to trust in the help of the
Physician, more then in the help of God, and to seek first and rather to the
Physician then unto God, 2. Chro. 16.12.
is sinful. This was Asa his sin, and remains as a blemish upon his name
to this day, and will do for ever: Trust not, then in the means, but in God
who must give a blessing upon the means. Let them have their place, and set
them not above their place, for by one blast of God, they may become
unprofitable and vnsuccessefull. See therefore thou be more desirous of a
blessing, then of the means: let this be the chief means that thou do
use to fly unto the Lord, and power forth thy soul before him; and then be
thou assured (at length) to have redress and help. What we say of some
special medicine, that has often been tried, we may say of this, probatum est.
Gods children never took this course in vain.

Text. Verba sunt, poenitentiam, meditantis, in confessione peccati, nondum
tamen agentis. August.
And say unto him, Father.] He does here, fore-thinke what he should speak
when as he comes into his Fathers presence (for as yet he was not.) From his
practice learn, Not to come into Gods presence without preparation: but
consider what to say, and what to seek, before you speak.

Doctr. Preparation needful before we speak to God. Eccles. 5.1. Hos. 14.2.
Reason.
Be not rash (says the Wiseman) with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be
hasty to utter any thing before God. We must confer with our own hearts,
and prepare them before we come into the Lords presence. To this, does the
Prophet Hosea seem to exhort Israel, Take unto you words, and turn to the
Lord, and say unto him.

The reason of this, Solomon gives in the place before cited: For God (says
he) is in heaven, and thou art upon the earth: as if he should say, God is full
of Majesty and wisdom, but thou an infirm and wretched creature: He is both
Lord and Judge, but thou a miserable and sinful worm: And therefore, it
concerns thee to consider advisedly what to speak.

This serves to reprove many, Use.
who rashly come into Gods presence without any preparation, or due meditation
of what they are to say or crave. Small is the number indeed of such as do
pray, but smaller is the number of such as prepare themselves to pray: Few
there are that frequent hi^ house, fewer there are that preparedly come into
his presence. Genesis 41.14.
In preferring some petition to a King, or if that suit be but to some meaner
personage, what preparation shall be made beforehand? how careful will we be,
of the well placing of our words, that our speeches may not be distasteful? Are
we thus circumspect when we have to deal with man? how comes it then we are
so careless when we come before the Lord? Why are we so rash with our mouths,
and hasty to utter any thing before him? Surely, this is our sin, and it
goes not alone, Math. 6.7.
but often causes a vain and idle repetion of what formerly was uttered;
which Christ condemns.

And therefore in the second place, let this admonish

But hear this Question may be moved: Quest. Whether a set form of prayer be
lawful.
Whether it be lawful to use a prescript form of words in Prayer? and whether
(without sin) a man may imitate this Prodigal: For that form he framed and
devised, the same he uses, as appears verse. 21.

To this I answer, that it is lawful, Answ. Numb 6.23, 24 and 10.35, 36.
and for some very behooueful. That it is lawful, it is evident by the Word.
Moses was enjoined by the Lord to use a form of blessing of the people, which
form was to be used ever after by the Priests. Now, if this were lawful for
the Priest, (whose lips should preserve knowledge, and at whose mouth the
people were to seek the law, and therefore, without question, were able of
themselves to conceive a Prayer, as the Spirit of God should give utterance and
ability) can it be thought unlawful for the people (who have less gifts,
Deuteronomy. 26.3.15.
and therefore had need of more help,) to use the like? A form of prayer was
also prescribed for the people to be used, at the bringing of the first fruits
unto the Temple. Psalms there were also which were appointed to be used on
special occasions: Psalm. 92. Psalm. 22.
One was, to be used every Sabbath day: Another, to be used by the Priests and
Levites every morning, containing in them matter of praise and petition:
Another there was, appointed to be used in time of affliction, Psalm. 102.
entitled thus, A Prayer for the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and
powers out his complaint before the Lord. 2. Cro. 29, 30.
Yea the Levites were commanded by Hezekiah the King, with the rest of the
Princes, to praise the Lord with the words of David, and of Asaph the Seer. And
as we have warrant for set form of Prayer in the old Testament, so also have
we sufficient for it in the new. Romans 1.7. compared with 1. Cor. 1.3. and 2.
Cor. 1.2. and Gal. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. and so the rest. Math. 26.42, 44.
The Apostle Paul observes a set form of blessing, in the beginning and ending
of his Epistles, and Christ himself (whose example is without exception) did
use the same words in Prayer three several times, as the Evangelist Saint
Matthew does affirm: (who not contenting himself to say he prayed thrice,
adds withal this, that he said the same words.)

Thus we have seen it proved, that set Prayer is lawful. Now, as it is
lawful, so for some it is very necessary and behouefull: For every Child and
servant of God, though he have an honest heart, yet he has not evermore a
flowing tongue; but often wants the gift of utterance, G^g^ on the Eph^s.
and of boldness; of invention, and of order; having simple capacities, and
frail memories. Now to conceive a Prayer, all these are required, he must be
able to utter, and to order, to invent and to discern: He must have gifts of
audacitie and of memory. Now are all the godly thus qualified? or shall we dare
to blot them out of the Register of Gods chosen that cannot thus do? For these
then, a prescribed for me made by themselves, or others, either conned by
heart, or read out of a Book, is very helpefull: Perk: Case of Conscience.
as a Crutch for one that is lame in his limbs, who though without it he
cannot go a step, yet with it can walk apace. Not always to tie our selves
to a set form.
Thus then we have seen it lawful; and for many needful, to come before the
Lord with a set form of words, as this Prodigal did before his Father: yet
withal, let me give this caution, that we do not always tie our selves to a
form of words.

For first, what form of prayer is there wherein are

But we want words to express these our desires, Object.
neither can we alter the form but very rudely, so that we are afraid, to
leave the former form that we do use.

In Prayer, Answ. Romans 8.26.
the groans and sighs of the heart is the best Rethorick. God does not measure
our prayer either by the multitude, or finenesse of the words, but by the
feruencie of the spirit. This is the soul of prayer, words are but the body,
which without the soul is but a dead carcass. He will be content to bear
with Barbarismes in our prayers, so that the spirit be present. Albeit then
thou can not invent nor order; though thou want eloquence and words, yet
make up this want, by groans and sighs: Romans 8.27.
for God knows the meaning of the spirit: Math. 6.
Words are but to make thee understand thy self, and not to give God
understanding of thy needs; for he knows whereof thou have need before thou
ask. When words are wanting, then fall to sighing. A father has pity upon
his child when it complains: but if it cannot speak but only weep and
groan, and lift up the hands and eyes unto the father, oh then his bowels erne,
and his compassion is doubled So the Lord, he hears his children when they
speak unto him; but when they cannot speak, when words are wanting, all they
can do, is thus to lift up their hands and watery eyes, sighing and groaning
for deliverance and ease: This moves the Lord much, and causes him to pity.

Heb. 6.1.
and in all things labor to come to perfection. We may not evermore stand at
one stay, nor always be as children, who needs leading by the hand, but we
must grow more and more in knowledge and in judgment. And thus much may be
spoken of this point, we are now to speak of the words themselves, Text.
which he devised to speak. Father I have sinned, etc.

In these words of his acknowledgement, we may see what it was especially that
touched him to the quick; namely this, that he had abused and wronged the love
and kindness of so good a Father. This was that which made him so much to
insist upon the name of [Father.] I will go to my [Father:] I will say
[Father.] The misery that he was in (as his want of bread and other
necessaries) no doubt was grievous; yet all this troubled him not so much as
this, that he had carried himself so undutifully toward so gracious a parent.
Let this then be noted.

Doctr. To the godly sin is the greatest sorrow. Ps. 51.4.
That nothing is so grievous to a true penitent, as this, that by committing of
sin, he has offended God. This was that which most troubled David, and went
nighest to his soul, that he had sinned against the Lord, and offended his
Majesty by his committing of evil. Against thee, against thee only have I
sinned, and done evil in thy sight. It is not hi meaning to lessen his
offense, the words may not so be taken but his speech shows what went nighest
to hi^ heart, and lay heauiest on his soul. His trespass against Vriah, in
taking away his life, was grievous to him: His trespass against Bathsheba, in
drawing her to unchastity, did also trouble him, but that (by both of these)
he had offended God, this did most of all perplex him; Against thee, against
thee have I sinned. Nothing touched him so near as this, no not shame of the
world, nor fear of hell.

Thus is it also said of the house of David, that the spirit being powered upon
them, they shall mourn for him: Zach. 12.10.
That is, when the godly shall come to see what evils and miseries their sins
brought upon Christ, and how odious their offenses have been toward him, this
should pierce their hearts, and nothing more. Thus was it also with the people
of God, who are said in the day of their fast, to draw water, 1. Sam. 7.6.
(namely out of their hearts) and to power it out before the Lord. By all which
is meant, they wept bitterly and abundantly for that they had offended the
Lord by their many sins. Joseph being tempted to folly by his laciuious
Mistress, said, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?
The wrong that he should have done his Master, was nothing in his eye, to the
offense against the Lord.

The reason of this, the Apostle Saint Paul gives. Reason. Romans 8.15.
They have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but they have
received the spirit of adoption: Which Spirit, does make them love the Lord,
and fear to offend, and exceedingly grieve when he is offended: As it is with
a true lover toward his beloved.

Now for the uses, and first we may see here a difference Ahab as well as
David. Differences betwixt the sorrow of the godly and wicked. 2. Cor. 7.1.
Judas as well as Peter. Yet the sorrow of the one is godly and brings life:
the sorrow of the other worldly and brings death: For hear is the
difference. The sorrow of him that is truly penitent, Malum peccati.
is most conversant about the evil of his sin; and is more for Gods cause
then for his own; more that God is offended, then for any manner of respect
unto himself. Were there no shame, no danger, no punishment, neither here nor
hereafter, in this life or in the next; yet this would wound their souls and
grieve them at the heart, that by sin God was offended. Thus is the godly
sorrow: This is that which causes repentance never to be repented of.

Now the sorrow of him whose repentance is unsound, is of another nature, and
is principally occupied about the evil of punishment. Being more for there
own sakes then for Gods. Malum paenae.
There sin has no place in their sorrow, nor God offended. It is shame and
punishment that causes them to grieve, Cain grieves, but why? his punishment
is greater then he can bear. Genesis 4.13.14 Exodus 9.27. 1 Samuel 15, 24, 25 1
King, 21.21, 27. Genesis 27, 38. and Heb. 12.17.
Pharaoh howles and takes on; but it is the thunder and hail that causes it;
his sorrow is gone over with the storm. Saul mournes, but it is because, God
had cast him away from being King. Ahab puts on sackcloth, but it was the
evil that was to come upon his house, with the taking away of his posterity
that caused it. Esau wepes, but he more respects his own loss then Gods
dishonor: the blessing is lost. Thus self-love is the moouer of it; were
there no shame, judgment hell, there should be no sorrowing for sin. This is
the sorrow of the wicked, which brings repentance to be repented of, and is a
sorrow to be ever sorrowed for. We see then how each of these differ in the
object, that either of them is exercised about.

thou have committed. But deal now truly with thy self, and ransacke thy own
conscience: what was it that did most perplexe thee? what was it that lay
heauiest on thy soul? what did most trouble thee? was it thought of shame and
fear of hell? was it caused by some such by respects? rest not then in it, for
a reprobate may thus sometimes greiue, and therefore I say rest not in it; I do
not simply discommend this sorrow: For I confess it is a good preparation to
repentance, and as the needle which makes way for the thread, so does wordly
sorrow for godly sorrow; the spirit of bondage for the spirit of a^option. But
I wish thee to go further: for this sorrow as yet is but worldly, and brings
death being rested in. But is it otherwise with thee, is this the maine cause
of thy grief, that God is offended and if there were no hell nor punishment,
neither hear nor here after, yet do thou find in thy self, an
inclineablenesse to mourn for thy sins thou have committed? art thou grieved
that by thee God has bine dishonored; can thou gree^^ for sin as it is an
offense against God? if thou do thus; then thy estate is blessed, yea thrice
happy is it; for thou shall never repent of this thy sorrow. Yet let me tell
thee, thou may deceive thy self, and think it is thus, when it is not; for
the heart is full of guile and deceit, and will cry peace peace when there is
none.

And therefore for thy further establishment, Signs of true sorrow for sin.
know if thou do thus grieve, these things shall thou find in thee.

First thou will grieve for sins of all sorts, 1 A grief ^o all kinds of sin.
original and actual; of ignorance and of knowledge; of commission and of
omission: secret and open: for lesser as well as for bigger; whatsoever is
sin thou will mourn for, because Gods law is by it broken, and so his
Majesty is offended. Psa. 51.5.
Thus was it with David in sin I was conceived, he mourns as well for his
sin, original as actual, for sins of nature, as of life. And again, Psalm.
19.12.
who can know the errors of his life? Oh cleanse thou me from secret faults. He
as well mournes and desires to have pardon for his sins unknown and secret,
as for them that were open and apparent to himself, or others.

2. If we grieve for the sins of others.
Secondly, If thou grieuest because God is offended, then will thou grieve also
for the sins of others, as well as for thy own, because God is dishonored by
the one, as well as by the other. 2 Pet. 2.8.
Thus was it with righteous Lot, For the righteous man dwelling amongst the
wicked, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with
their unlawful deeds. Thus also was it with holy David, His eyes gushed out
with rivers of tears, Psalm. 119.136.
because men kept not Gods law. So did those mourners, marked for Gods own
people, Ezekiel. 9.4.
mourn for the abominations done in Jerusalem.

3. A greater desire t^ (...) of sinne^ (...) of any other (...) cross. 2 Timothy
2.19.
Thirdly, If thy sorrow be godly, and is for sin as it is an offense against
God, thou will then be more desirous to be aid of sin, then of any other
cross whatsoever; yea, as heartily desirous never to commit it, as thou art
desirous that God would never impute it. The foundation of God stands sure,
having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his. And let every one that
names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. Many other signs and marks
might be brought, but these are enough, to manifest the soundness or
unsoundness of thy sorrow. Thou that formerly wast well persuaded of thy
self, ask thy self now once again whether these things be in thee, yea, or
no; think it not labor lost the second time to put thy self unto the trial:
the better assurance, the sounder will be thy comfort. Do thou grieve for
every sin, as well as for any sin, for the corruptions of thy heart, thy
secret and unknown sins? Do thou acknowledge and bewail thy hidden
corruptions, and lesse-grieuous crimes? Do thou condemn thy self before
God, for such sins as the world knows not of: as have been done in secret,
God and thy own conscience only seeing thee? And do thou not grieve as well
for thy omission of good duties, (as prayer, reading, meditating, relieuing
others in their necessities, and the like) as well as for commission of evil?
And do thou blame thy self as well for the evil that cleaues to thy best
works, (as pride, vain glory, hypocrisy, dullness, deadness, etc.) as for
thy evil works? If it be thus with thee, it is an evident sign that sin,
as it is sin, and a breach of Gods law, does wound thy soul. But in the second
place, I demand of thee whether thou grieuest in secret for the corruptions of
the times; for the pride, drunkenesse, blasphemy, contempt of Gods word,
profanation of the Sabboths, that does every where abound, do these and the
like sins fetch groans from thy soul, and tears from thy eyes, bring thee on
thy knees, cause thee to wring thy hands, to see God so dishonored, is it thus
with thee? But is it so indeed? oh then well is it with thee, thy case is
happy. And yet lastly answer me, is it thy greatest desire to be rid of
sin, yea, of every sin, be it never so gainefull or profitable? And do thou
as earnestly desire to leave it as thou do to have God forgive? Why, this is
an excellent sign, a neuer-failing sign of thy sound sorrow; this is a
certain testimony to thy soul, that thy grief is unto life, and that thou
art a child of God. Oh! let these things be well thought on, and often
remembered, and let us often search our hearts by them, that we may know what
we are, and what sorrow we have, whether godly or worldly. Without question
many of Gods children want that sound comfort which they might and should have
for want of this search and trial; for without it, it cannot be but we must
remain either in error or in doubtfulnesse.

Now, in the third place this may serve for the reproof, yea, for the terror
of many, who rest in a counterfeit and unsound repentance. For, does a true
penitent grieve more for Gods cause then for his own; is he more grieved for
the offense against God, then for any manner of respect unto himself? Then
surely such are far from true repentance, who (were it not for fear or
shame) could be content to live in sin, and tumble in it all their days. A
kind of sorrow indeed many have, but it is only worldly, slavish, devilish;
their respect is wholly to themselves, to God nothing. They loath sin, but not
because God abhorres it; they grieve, but not because God is displeased by it;
but because they cannot make their parties good enough against him, in keeping
of their sins, and preventing of his judgments. Who almost makes conscience
of secret sins? Where is he that grieves for less evils? that mournes and
grieves for his omission of good, and neglect of duties God has required? for
few are there that sigh and cry for the abominations committed in our shops
and streets: should God send his Angel through this City, to mark those
that thus mourn; Ezekiel 9.4.
how small would be the number of those that receive the mark? How many of us
have this desire rather to be freed from sin then any other cross, and are
as willing not to commit it, as to have the Lord not to impute it? Can we then
think that repentance is so common as the world takes it to be? Surely,
surely, these things do testify to our faces that we are far from it. Be
it known therefore unto thee, thou that mournest not for thy secret
corruptions, who abstainest not from secret sins, that grieuest not for other
men's sin, as well as for thy own, thou that have not this earnest desire to be
rid from all sin whatsoever; be it known unto thee (I say) and certified
to thy soul, that though thou do mourn and grieve, and art sorry thou
have done amiss, and also could wish that many things could again be
recalled which thou have committed; yet thy sorrow is unsound, it is but a
heavy and comfortless sorrow, and the beginning of sorrows everlasting. And
therefore content not thy self with it, as if it were godly sorrow, for it is
not, and it will turn to bitterness in the end.

conversion, to use all good means, that they may find their hearts thus to
be affected: Never rest satisfied till thou can mourn for sin, because it
is sin, and make thy sin to be thy greatest grief. Rest not contented
until thou find thy heart humbled for thy close corruptions and hidden
sins; yea, for every sin, as well as for any sin; for the sins of
others, as well as for thy own. Means to be used for attaining to true sorrow.
Know nothing by thy self whereby God is offended, that thou do not as
heartily desire to leave, as to have the eternal God forgive. Till it be thus
with thee, thou can have no hope that thy repentance is sound and good. Use
all good means for the attaining to this grace. And amongst others these.

Often meditate on those cords of love, First, meditate of Gods love.
Gods works of mercy toward thee, both in things temporal concerning this
life present, (as health, life, liberty, peace, prosperity, and the like;) as
also in things spiritual that concern a better, wherewith the Lord does
compass thee. Ephesians. 1.7.
And amongst all others forget not that rich grace and mercy in giving of his
Son to be a reconciliation for thee, when thou were a slave to Satan, and a
firebrand of hell; that he should send his Son, and give him up to death;
yea, to that shameful death of the cross, to redeem thee from all iniquity,
Psalm. 86.13.
O great is thy mercy toward me (says that kingly Prophet) for thou have
delivered my soul from the lowest hell. Great it is indeed, what mercy
greater? In this one mercy a world of mercy is comprehended. Consider then of
this one mercey, this free mercy, this full mercy; and thou can not, but
needs must grieve to offend so good a God.

Secondly, Pray for Gods spirit, 2. Prayer. Zach. 12.10.
for that works true compunction and contrition in the heart. I will power
upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of
grace; and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall
lament for him, as one that mourns for his only Son, and be sorry for
him, as one is sorry for his first borne. In which words we have both these
means laid down that I have now named. Let these be especially used, and we
shall find them very available for the obtaining of this grace. Let me
entreat thee for the Lords sake, and for thy own souls sake, to put them
then in practice, and that daily. It is a matter of special behoof, and very
important, it concerns the eternal salvation or damnation of thy soul, and
therefore look about thee.

Sion comfort themselves therefore with these words.

And before thee.] That is, in thy sight, as afterward verse 21. This did add
much unto his sorrow, and did very much aggrauate his fault. Two points are
here to be observed.

The first is this, that Gods eye is on all men's actions.

The second is this, the forgetting of Gods all-seeing eye in the committing of
evil, does aggrauate the sin, and increase the same.

Doctr. All men sin, God looking on. Heb 4.13. Psalm. 139.2.
For the first of these, viz. That Gods eye is on all men's actions, he is an
eye-witnes of every work done and sin committed. All things are naked and
open unto the eyes of him with-whom we have to do, (says the author to the
Hebrews.) And excellently David: Thou know my downe-fitting and vp-rising:
thou understand my thought a far off. Verse 3.
Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my
ways. Verse 4.
For there is not a word in my tongue, but lo thou know it altogether. Thou
have beset me behind and before. Verse 5.
And again, If I say, surely the darkness shall cover me, even the night shall
be light about me; yea, the darkness hides not from thee, Verse 11. Verse 12.
but the night shines as the day, the darkness and the night are both alike
to thee. That whole Psalm may be a proof for this truth. And in another
Psalm he says, Psalm. 90.8.
Thou have set our iniquities before thee: our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance. The Lord himself does testify this by his Prophet Jeremiah,
Ier. 7.9.
Will you steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn
incense unto Baal, and walk after other Gods whom you know not; Verse 10.
and come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and
say, we are delivered to do all these abominations. Behold, even I have
seen it, Verse 11.
says the Lord. So in another place, Am I a God at hand, Ier. 23.23.24.
says the Lord, and not a far off? Can any hide himself in secret places
that I shall not see him, says the Lord, and do not I fill Heaven and earth?
I will not be too prodigal in spending time in underpropping so known a
point, which all confess for truth, and for which Scirpture is so strong. To
come then to the reasons.

First, God is every where present, he can be shut out Do not I fill heaven
and earth, Ier. 23.24.
says the Lord? Am I a God at hand, and not a far off? And therefore it
cannot otherwise be, but he must needs behold our doings, and our actions.

Secondly, It is he that made the eye, and shall not he see, Psalm. 94.9.10. God
is (...).
he gives knowledge, and shall not he know! Can any thing be hid from him
from whom they have their being? The work is known unto the worker; the art
unto the artificer, the pot unto the potter: and shall not the creature be
known unto the Creator? These reasons shall suffice, though many might be
brought. Now for the uses.

And first, this may serve for terror to all such as live their doings. Come
hither then and learn thou dissembling hypocrite, thou that coggest and
dalliest with the Lord, give care, attend: God has spyed and does epsy thy
rottenness within, for all thy painted outside: He knows that though thou
wearest Christ's livery on thy back, thou wearest the Devils favor in thy
bosom. Think upon this you lurking Dans, close enemies of the Church, whose
sleep departs from you, till you have caused some to fall: The Lord sees your
plotts and cunning devises, your close practices against his Church, and
people; But he that sits in heaven shall laugh you to scorn, the Lord will
have you in derision. Take notice of this also you adulterers and
whore-mongers, who say in your hearts, Who sees us? We are compassed about
with darkness, we need not fear: Behold the Lord himself, who shall be thy
judge, he sees thy vilany, and looks thee in the face, in the act doing. In
a word, all you that think of secrecy, and hope for ever to avoid, both the
reproach and punishment of your sins committed: consider this and be better
advised, think not by denying, excusing, coloring, or cloaking them to avoid
the shame; For what if men do count you innocent, yet God will bring in
evidence, to find you guilty. He himself took you with the manner, and was in
place at the deed doing: Psalm. 50.
and therefore he himself will witness against thee, and set thy sins in
order before thee.



his strength, when his masters eye is on him? So, who is it (were he well
persuaded that the Lord is a spectator and beholder of his doings) would not
put forth his strength to the Lords work? Were this well considered, how
courageous should we be, both in the duties of our general and special
callings? how forward would we be to every good work? Be not then slothful in
Gods service, stand not al day idle; be ever doing of good: not the least good
can be done, but he does know it, be it done never so secretly, yet he sees
it, He sees thy prayers; he hears thy groans; he bottles up thy tears,
which are shed, and made at midnight, and will reward them: thou needst not
look for witnesses, to take notice of thy actions, God himself is wit^^^^ and
thy own conscience also. Thy conscience is as a thousand witnesses, and God as
a thousand consciences; How many witnesses would thou have? can thou desire
more? Let this inflame thee to piety, and cause thee to make ever holy
thoughts, precious: For, as there is not the least evil in the heart, which
can escape Gods knowledge: no more is there the least good motion and
cogitation. Oh that this were well weighed! then should we not have such a
number of lazy Christians, as now we have: let it be considered, and let his
knowledge support thee in every good action.

Fourthly, this point affords us a use of comfort; for, Psalm. 94.7.9.10
the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it, yet they
shall know, that he that made the eye does see, and he that chastises the
heathen shall correct. Secondly, it may comfort us in time of persecution; Are
we any way wronged in body, or in goods? why, the Lord stands by, he is an
eyewitness, and takes notice of all our wrongs. I have surely seen the
affliction of my people, Exodus 3.7.
which are in Egypt, says the Lord, and have heard their cry, by reason of
their taske-masters: for I know their sorrows. Commit therefore thy cause unto
the Lord; say only with David, Lord thou see it. And thirdly, it may comfort
us against the censures and slanders of the wicked. The Lord knows us and our
desires; he knows our hearts and innocence, what ever the world either say
or think. This was Jobs comfort in the like case; my witness is in heaven,
and my record is on high. And thus the Apostle Paul, when he was disparaged by
the Corinthians, I pass not, says he, to be judged of you, my judgment is
with the Lord, he judges me. It matters not what the Prisoner says, so the
Judge acquit us: And thus we see what comfort this affords.

The second doctrine, hence to be observed is this;

Doctr. 2 The forgetting of Gods eye, does aggrauate the sin.
That the forgetting of Gods all-seeing eye, in the committing of evil, does
aggrauate the sin, and increase the same. This he insists upon, as an
aggrauation of his fault, that he had not feared in the sight of God to offend.
The speech of Ezra in hi^ confession, may seem to make much to this purpose,
EZra. 9.15.
Behold we are before thee in our trespasses, for we cannot stand before thee,
because of this: As if he should say, our sin is increased, in that we had no
mo^e regard of thy presence, and stood not in that awe of thee that we should,
but now we see that we were all the while in thy view, and because of our
neglect hereof, we now perceive, we cannot stand before thee. Thus does David
aggrauate his sin, Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done
evil in thy sight.

of Gods eye? Now when we respect not Gods eye, and fall into evil, we suffer
sin to break out against the good means, that should restrain it: This is
a fearful aggrauation.

Secondly, we rob God of his honor, and give not that

Let the use of this be to admonish every one of us to Jacob did of Bethell,
what he then said, urge still upon thy soul, The Lord is here present, and I
was not aware of it. Let thy shop be a Bethel, thy chamber a Bethel, thy closet
a Bethel; for God is there present. Oh that this meditation did take place in
our hearts, how many sins would it keep us from? how conscionably should we
walk? how upright would we be? The chief fountain of all hypocrisy, is
either ignorance, or not considering of this divine property of God. And
surely, if any thing will banish hypocrisy, this will do it. As many of you
therefore as call upon the name of the Lord, and desire to depart from
iniquity and sin, remember the vbiquitie of Gods eye. A man cannot choose but
be good (says Boethius) who still remembers, that he stands in the presence of
the Lord: let this meditation then be ever in thy mind, that God is before
thee, and behind thee, without thee, and within thee, on thy right hand, and
on thy left hand, always near and never far of: and so shall thou walk
uprightly.



our consciences tell us, we would not do; nay, we should have been ashamed
to have done, if the eye of the least child had looked on us? Oh let this
humble, and in making thy confessions, let not this be forgotten; bring thy
soul to a humiliation even for this, amongst the rest, that God was not
remembered. In doing of evil, the sight of God was little reckoned of. Let this
be put in thy Catalogue of sins, and for this very particular, afflict thy
soul before him.

And am no more worthy to be called thy son. Text.
] See how he humbles and abaseth himself, even to the uttermost. I am not
worthy to be thy son, nay not worthy of the name of a son, make me but as a
hired servant, and I shall think my self most happy. Oh rare humility! yet
greatly necessary, because God is good to such. But, as for the proud, he
beholds them a far off. But to come to the Lesson, and this it is; Doctr.
Where there is true repentance, there is a sight of a man's own unworthiness.
Where there is true Repentance, there is a sight and sense of a man's own
unworthiness. The better repentance, the more humility. Before, there was no
place in the Family good enough for him; now, he thinks himself not good
enough for any place in the house. Thus they that have their eyes opened, and
are truly penitent, will esteem God to be great, but themselves base. It was
the speech of Abraham, the Father of the faithful, I am but dust and ashes.
Genesis 18 27. Genesis 39.10. 2. Sam. 7.18. Iud. 6.15. Ioh. 42.6. Luke 5.8. 1. Cor.
15.8, 9. 1. Tim. 1.15. Math. 8.8.
It was the voice of Jacob, I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies. It
was the speech of David, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou
have brought me hitherto? It was the voice of Gideon, My Fathers house is the
least in all Israel. It was the voice of Job, I abhor my self, and repent
in dust and ashes. It was the voice of Peter, Depart from me, Lord, for I am a
sinful man. It was the voice of Paul, I am not worthy to be called an
Apostle: and that he was the chief of all sinners. It was the voice of the
humble Centurion, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof. What
shall I need to speak of Ezra, Nehemiah, Daniel, Mary Magdalen, with others;
who have been vile and base in their own eyes, though great in the Lords
estimation and sight. If you go through the whole book of God, from the
beginning to the end, you shall ever find, that the fairest Saints have
esteemed themselves to be the foulest sinners.

Reason. Revel. 3.17.
And it stands with good Reason; for the affections must needs follow the
temperature of the mind; so that as the conceit of holiness and happiness
does puff up a man in pride and presumption; so the true sight and sense of
his sinful and wretched estate, must needs cast him down with shame and
sorrow: as may be seen in the Prophet Esaias, Isay 6.5.
when he cried out; Woe is me, I am undone, because I am a man of polluted
lips, and I dwell in the midst of people of polluted lips.

Signs of an humbled soul.
then art thou poor in spirit, and broken in heart. And if it be thus with
thee, these marks will make it manifest.

First, trembling at the Word. Esaias 66.2.
First, a trembling at Gods Word: To this man will I look, says the Lord, even
to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word. I am
not ignorant how some refer this only to the Law; which threateneth,
terrifyeth, and denounces the horrible judgment of God against sinners; but
it is to be taken more largely (as Calvin does) in regard that the faithful
themselves tremble at the Gospel. Cal^in loc.
So then, a trembling at the Word, yea at every word of God; the threatening
word, the promising word, the commanding word, First, at the threatenings.
is a sound sign of a humbled soul. First, a trembling at the hearing of Gods
threatenings: When he he hears the menacings of Gods vengeance against sin,
there is a kind of inward quaking and fear, lest by sin we should incur
the danger of Gods wrath, and bring on our heads the curse denounced against
the breakers of Gods Law. Thus David, Psalm. 119.120. Hab. 3.16.
his flesh trembled for fear of God, and he was afraid of his judgments.
Thus was it with Habakkuk, His belly trembled, and his lips quiuered at the
hearing of the voice. Rottenness entered into his bones, and he trembled in
himself, that he might rest in the day of trouble.

Secondly, as they tremble at Gods threatenings, Secondly, at the promises.
so also at his promises. The hearing or reading of Gods mercies and promises,
begets in the humbled soul an inwa^^ fear and quaking; lest through
unthankfulness and disobedience, he should deprive himself of the use and
fruit of the promise made. To this does the Apostle exhort the Hebrews; Heb. 4
1.
Let us fear lest at any time by forsaking the promise of entering into rest,
any of you should seem to be deprived. And let not this seem strange to any,
that a child of God should tremble in hearing of such comfortable Doctrine:
that the hearing of Gods mercies and promises, should cause him to fear: For
these two may well stand, and are mixed together in the heart of every believer.
He hears the promises, Psalm. 2.
conceiues the sweetness, takes much comfort in them; Hereupon he fears lest
that he by his misdemeanour should miss of such happiness.

Thirdly, he trembles at Gods precepts, Thirdly, at his precepts.
fearing to transgress, because of the authority of the commandment. Thus
was it with David, Psalm. 119.161.
Princes have persecuted me without a cause, but my heart stands in awe of
thy Word. God had commanded; he stands in awe of this command, and will give
obedience. Thus we see one mark of a truly humbled soul, a trembling at Gods
word, yea at every word; both Threatening, Promising and Inioyning.

Secondly, if thou art indeed humbled, The second sign, a renouncing of our
own works.
and have a base esteem of thy own self; thou will renounce thy own works
and merits, and disclaim all opinion of thy own virtues and goodness,
resting only on the mercy and favor of God in Christ Jesus. Thou do see the
imperfections of thy best works: and how thy best righteousness is like a
menstruous cloth, filth and polluted, and therefore do not dare to think,
any thank due unto thy self for the obteining of any good blessing be it
never so small.

The third sign. Thankful acknowledgment of the least of Gods favors. Genesis
32 9.10.
Thirdly; if thou have this humble heart; then there will be a thankful
acknowledgment of the least favor or mercy that God does bestow: As a poor
man is thankful for every farthing, so will thou be for every small blessing;
acknowledging it to be infinitely abo^^ desert, thou being lesser then the
least of Gods mercies.

Thou will be thankful for thy health, peace, liberty, yea, for the benefit of
the light, use of thy senses: for thy going upon the earth, for thy breathing
in the air: for the least crum of bread, or drop of water thou do receive.
For thou art not ignorant how unworthy thou art of the least of these.

The fourth sign. Contentation with the hardest measure.
Fourthly if thou have this contrite and humbled soul, thou art content with
Gods seuerest courses: and patiently submittest thy self unto his will. Thou
art content to receive evil at Gods hands as well as good. Thus was it with
old Ely, when he heard of the intended judgment against him and his house. 1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord (said he) let him do what seems him good. And thus it was
with David also. Psalm. 119.75.
I know o Lord that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness
have afflicted me. So says the Church. Mic. 7.9.
I will bear the wrath of the Lord because I have sinned against him. So then
we see that when we are once thoroughly humbled under the sense of our sins,
we will patiently submit our selves, unto the greatest afflictions that God is
pleased to lay upon us.

Fifthly if thou art thus humbled thou art then teachable, The fifth sign.
Teachablenes.
for a broken heart is ready to receive impression; but pride is impatient of
admonition, it will not be taught; it is deaf on that ear? The proud
Pharisees take it in great scorn, Ioh. 9.39.40.
that Christ should reprove them of blindness. 2 Cor. 18.23. Isay. 39.8.
Proud Zidkiah cannot endure Micaiah his admonition. But let a Prophet deal
with a humble Hezekiah, you shall hear him say. Good is the word of the Lord
which thou have spoken.

Sixthly and lastly, The sixth sign. humble carriage expressed.
a humble heart will show it self in a humble carriage toward others,
accounting other of Gods servants better then themselves: Striving in giving It
will cause us patiently to David by Shemei; God has bid him curse. It will
make us sparing in our censures, and Publican did; yea we will account it

There wants nothing but a diligent examination, to tell us whether we have
this humble heart yea or no: and consequently, whether as yet we have soundly
repented. The Lord give us hearts to examine our selves, and grant us his
grace, for the better performance of this duty that we may not deceive our
selves as we are too too prone, but that we may have a certain knowledge of
the estate of our souls.

But in the Second place I must fall from exhorting to 2 Pet. 3.4.
saying the vision is as wind and where is the promise of his coming? are not
the promises of the Gospel abused, and made matter of licentiousness? and is
not the grace of God turned into wantonness, Romans 2.
by men of the world? And as for his commands who stands in awe of them, who
does yield to that which God requires; Psalm. 85.8. Psalm. 2.2. Ier. 5.5. Psalm.
50.17.
or hearkens to that which the Lord will say? alas men break the bands, and
cast away the yoke; hating to be reformed. And again, what trusting to men's
own works, what boasting of our own goodness is to be found amongst us? and
how little relying on Gods favor and mercy? Further what horrible ingratitude
does reign amongst us? what devouring up Gods blessings? and how little
acknowledgement of Gods goodness? Isa. 1.3.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib. But England does not
know, this people does not consider. Great blessings are vnderprized; but
smaller mercies altogether despised, the Gospel and the fruits of it as peace
plenty etc. these are vndervallewed and slightly regarded: and as the
Israelites of there Mannah; Number. 11.6.
we think basely of it; our peace we grudge our selves: never better times
then when more war say many. Is this our thankfulness to God for this his
goodness? oh wretches that we are, to be so unthankful for so great a
blessing.

And as for common mercies how commonly are they neglected? as food, raiment,
lodging, preservation, how few are thankful for these things? We swallow these
up, as the Swine the acornes, not looking up to the tree; Scarce blessing our
meat we eat. And why? oh these are but ordinary? and are they ordinary, the
more have we to answer for our unthankfulness.

For Gods goodness is the greater, in that he continues these unto us, albeit
we daily make forfeiture of them by our sinning. And so for other blessings
both privative; (as keepeing us from diseases, saving us from dangers, keepeing
us and ours every night from fire, from robbers, from ruin) as also positive,
in giving of us life, health, strength of body, use of the senses, in feeding
us leading us in our going in and out, refreshing us with sleep every night,
our great vnthankfullnesse for these good blessings, plainly shows that
humility is wanting. Besides how wonderful impatient are we under Gods
correcting hand, what murmuring, complaining, repining, against God and his
proceedings; when any loss befalls us, or other cross lies on us? We are
content to receive good from him, but evil by no means can we endure. In the
day of trouble our spirits are as short as Iehorams was, 2 Kin. 6.33.
Behold this evil comes from the Lord wherefore should I attend on the Lord
any longer. Oh our impatience, our impatience, I say when gods hand is on us,
our murmuring and grudging against Gods proceedings, our freting in the day of
our tribulation, as if some injury or wrong was done us, does evidently
testify we are far from this humility of spirit.

Moreover, how impatient are we of admonition? How do we swell when we are
told of our faults? What a disgrace do we hold it to be told of our duties,
though in never so humble and submissiue a manner? Yea, though it be by the
mouth of God, or Nathan. Yet what a spirit of contradiction do we manifestly
show, returning reproof for reproof, rebuke for rebuke. If we should see one
that is dangerously sick, instead of taking a potion prescribed, fling it in
the Physicians face, Ostendo illi latu^, aspergit me luto: Ostendo illi
speculum, and allidit parieti.
we would pity his estate, and think it desperate. The case of such is
little better, that do cast a reproof into his face again that gives it.
Does not this show our hearts are haughty, void of all true humility and
meekenes? And lastly, (in a word) does not our carriage and behavior toward
others condemn us? What condemning of others, and justifying of our selves?
What censuring and judging of our brethrens infirmities? Do not these argue
haughtiness of spirit? And do not our proud speeches, countenances, goings,
and apparel signify a vain and proud heart? If all these testify against
us, where is then repentance? the counterfeit of it may every where be had, but
the true grace indeed is rare to be found. Oh! what cause have Gods children
to run to the gap? what need have we all to fly unto the Lord, for there is
abundance of sin in every place and corner; but little repentance the Lord
he knows. You therefore that fear the Lord call upon him: you that have any
interest in the Lord, pray unto him: down at morning, down at evening, give
him no rest until he have sheathed up his sword, which he has drawn out
and is now a furbushing and making ready for the battle, with which he will
shortly strike, if the prayers of Gods children do not hold his hands.

Hab. 2. 4.
word for my warrant. Behold (says the Prophet) his soul which is lifted up,
is not upright within him. All those that are void of humility are far from
vprightnes: The higher the Sun is, the shorter is the shadow; the more
grace, the less conceit: The emptiest vessel ever sounds lowdest, and the
fuller the baser. Wood that in burning yeeldes the greatest smoke, does
commonly give the smallest heat. Altitudo non est valida, Chrysostom. Hom. 20.
in Epi. ad Romans
Those bows which are most laden with fruit; those ears which are fullest of
Corn, do ever bend downward; when the barren bow, and empty ear stands
upright: So those that are emptiest of grace, evermore make the greatest
ostentation and crack most of their own goodness. But of this I shall have
occasion to speak more hereafter.

They are less then the least of Gods mercies and favors. And with blessed S.
Paul, They are the worst of all sinners, who upon diligent search find in them
the former marks and signs of true humility; let such comfort themselves.
This is a great argument of sound grace; It is an evident testimony of sound
repentance, and of Gods favor; and certain it is, and therefore hold it for a
truth, the viler and baser thou art in thy own esteem, the more dear and
precious thou art in the eyes of the Lord.

Make me as one of thy hired Servants.] As if he should have said, I dare not;
I do not make suit to be as before I was, a son: I am unworthy of such
favor, yet vouchsafe me that favor that I may belong unto thee: and although
I am not worthy to be called a Son, yet vouchsafe me to be a hanger on; let
me have a room and service in thy house, though it be amongst the company of
thy hired servants.

Here we see the case is altered; while he was in the house no place was good
enough for him; but now that he has been a while in a far Country, and
wanted of that bread which his Fathers servants had, he does desire to be in
the basest office.

This teaches us this lesson. Doctr. Gods blessings are better discerned by
their want, then by their enioyment. 1 Samuel 3.1. Isay 4.2.
Gods blessings are better known, and more esteemed by the wanting of them,
then by their enjoying. The worth and value of Gods good blessings are not
known till we be without them. This vision was precious in the days of Ely,
when that was wanting. And the Prophet Isay tells the people of Israel, that
the blessings of the Lord should be excellent and pleasant to them, after they
had been pinched with the want thereof, in their captivity, yea, the bud
shall then be beautiful, etc.

The use of this (in a word) is to teach us to esteem more of the good
blessings we receive from God, Use.
and beware of vnder-valuing them, least we give the Lord occasion to deprive
us of them. These common blessings of the shining of the Sun, breathing in
the air, meat, drink, preservation in our going out, in our coming in, use
of the senses, strength of body, and the like, let them be more esteemed of
thee: alas, consider how miserable thou art without these! The Lord is f^ine
(so great is his mercy, and our corruption) to deprive his children of many of
these good blessings, till they know the price and worth of them; and in their
restraint make them enjoy the smallest blessing more thankefully and
comfortably. Hunger is good sauce, and gives good relish and taste to course
meats, and homely fare, when for want hereof dainty dishes are but contemned.
Should the Lord deprive thee of thy health, strength, sense, sleep, then
would thou see what a benefit thou have enjoyed. Bewail therefore thy own
corruption in this kind, and pray for this wisdom, that thou may rather
know the worth of Gods blessings by the enjoying, then by the wanting of them.

And he arose, and came to his Father, etc.] This Prodigal now puts in
practice, what formerly he had resolved to do. As resolved to arise: So, he
arose. In this his practice we must consider; First, what he did; Secondly,
what he said. For the first; the Text says, He arose, and came unto his
Father. Where we have first the parts of his repentance; which are two,
Auersion from his sin, [He arose.] Secondly, Conversion, to his God, And came
unto his Father.

Secondly, We have to consider the circumstance of time when he did it, which
is implied in this word [ And, or, So,] that is immediately, he deferred no
time, but presently put in execution what was before but in purpose and
resolution. Something in general from the dependence, before I come to the
specials.

Doctr. Where there is true repentance there is not only a purpose in heart,
but an endeavor in life. Psalm. 32.5.
In the former verse we heard his purpose, in this verse we see his practice.
Hence learn: Where there is true repentence, there is not only a purpose in
the heart, but a holy endeavor and practice in the life. The true penitent
does not only purpose to leave sin: but also does put in practice what
formerly he has purposed. This may be confirmed by many examples in
Scripture. David resolved to confess his sin; and he was as good in
practice, as he was in purpose. Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither
hid I my iniquity: For I thought, I will confess against my self, my
wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. So
also in another place, Psalm. 119.59.
he thus says, I have considered my ways, and turned my feet into thy
testimonies. He did not only consider and determine, but perform and do.

Because they have the same arguments for the one,

Secondly, The s^^e spirit which works in us the Phil. 2.
and it is as well able to work the one, as it is to work the other.

First, Let this serve to reprove the folly of such, as Agrippa, they are
almost persuaded to be Christians. Act, 26.28.
They are almost persuaded to take better courses: But there they rest. Many
there are also, who when the hand of God is upon them by losses, or sickness,
or such like visitation; they purpose and promise great reformation: but when
Gods rod is removed, and his hand taken away, they are as bad as ever they
were: so that we may say of them, as the wise man by shearing his Hogs, Here
is a great deal of cry, but a little wool. Here is a great deal of purpose,
but a little practice, abundance of resolution, but small store of action. And
herein they deal with the Lord as the people of Israel did, who when God
brought any calamity upon them, Psalm. 78.33.34.35.36.37.
they presently returned and sought God early. But (as the Text says) they
flattered him with their mouth, and dissembled with him with their tongue. Thus
many there are who make many good profers of coming forth of their sins: but
(alas!) they presently recoile like Zarah in Thamars womb, and Perez steps
forth. These passions the Prophet compares to the morning dew, Hos. 6.9.
which is soon dried up with the heat of the Sun, as if it had never been:
Of such a nature are all these qualmes that many have, they soon pass away,
and are of no continuance. It is true indeed good motions are to be respected,
but if they bring not forth good actions, and if there follow not good
endeauours, they are no other then such as may be in the very wicked and
reprobate; many have gone as far as this, who are now in torments. Hells
mouth full of saint purposes and desires.
Many as good resolutions as thou have any, are now in hell; many who are of
old ordained to condemnation, have been Sermon-sicke, as well as thee; have
resolved to leave sin as well as thee; and will thou then rest in this?
Pharaoh can sometimes cry out, Exodus 9.27. 1 Samuel 24.17.
I have sinned. The Lord is righteous, and I am wicked. Saul in a passion will
confess to David, Oh my Son David, thou art more righteous then I.

Nebucadnezer in his fits can purpose well, when he sees the excellent
prophetical spirit of Daniel in interpreting his dream, he is then so
affected, That Daniels God is the only true God: Dan. 2.47.
a God of Gods and Lord of Kings, and a reuealer of secrets. But alas this
motion lasted not long, for a while after his idol must be worshipped on pain
of death as the story shows. Cap. 3.16.
And after this, the sight of the miracle in the three childrens delivery did
so wonderfully affect him, as that it did wring from him the acknowledgment of
the true God; and caused him to make a decree. Cap. 3.29.
That every people, nation, and language: which spoke any thing amiss, against
the God of Shadrach Meshach and Ab^dnego, should be cut in pe^ces and there
houses made a dunghill, because there was no other God that could deliver after
that sort. Cap. 4.30.
Yet for all this not long after you may see him letting it in his palace, and
as proudly as ever advancing himself above the Lord. Rest not therefore in
these purposes and passions, which thou see are in very wicked men and
hipocrites. Do not think thou have truly repented because thou have had a
purpose to forsake thy sin, no, know it for a truth thy repentance is not
true, unless these motions and purposes conceived, bring forth good actions in
life to be practiced.

In the next place, let this serve to urge a former point delivered, viz. that
we bring good motions unto perfection, and not suffer those good resolutions,
which God has put into our hearts to die, but ever proceed from purpose to
practice: would wishing and purposing serve the turn, Baalam would have bin in
heaven long ago: Number. 23.10. Purposes are but fools purchases.
I tell you, hell will be full of good intents, but heaven of good actions;
thou, therefore who would have any comfort to thy soul and conscience in thy
repentance, ever join these two together, resolving and doing, when ever Gods
spirit has put into thy heart any good motion, follow it hard until thou
bring it to perfection, and then thou shall be blessed in thy deed; Iam.
1.25.
imitate this prodigal, what thou resoluest to do, do. As thou say thou will confess so confess, as thou resoluest to return so return; let it not
be said of thee, as of that foolish builder, this man began to build, and was
not able to finish. Luke 14.30.
To lay a foundation, and not build higher is but ridiculous; resolution
without practice is no better. Make not thy self ridiculous both to God and
man: we all love lasting stuff in a suite, we cannot away with that horse that
will tire; and can God like such as do not continue? he cannot do it.

But some may demand, What good means are to be used, Quest.
for the bringing these good motions to perfection? which is no easy matter,
the Devil being ready to steal every good motion out of our hearts, and our
own corruption to extinguish it, before we can bring it forth into actions.
Answ. Means for the bringing of purposes to perfection. First resolve on a
good ground


For the attaining to this, let these rules be practiced; First, resolve upon a
good ground, build thy resolution on a strong foundation: if thou resoluest to
leave any sin, consider well the absolute necessity of forsaking of it, the
danger it will bring if it be continued in, both in this life, and another:
the impossibility of obtaining heaven, without repentance for it, and the
like, and so also for doing of any good duty, build thy resolution on a good
foundation, that in time of trial and temptation, thou may stand fast. And
surely, here is the reason so many good purposes vanish away, Hos. 6.4.
like the morning cloud, and come to nothing, because they do not seriously
consider the absolute necessity of doing, or leaving undone, that which they
resolve on.

Second means to determination and supplication.
Secondly, add to thy determination earnest prayer, and supplication: have thou
any good motion, and does it come thus far as to a holy resolution, to leave
such or such a sin: or do this or that good duty, then second it with a
petition, lift up thy heart unto the Lord, and call for grace. Thus David prayed
in the behalf of the people, when he saw them so well disposed in their
cheerful offering to the Temple, 1 Cro. 29.18.
O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel our Fathers, keep this for ever
in the imagination, of the thoughts of the heart of thy people.

As he did in their behalf, so do thou in thy own, Lord keep this for ever
in the imagination of the thought of the heart of thy servant: it is thou Lord
who have wrought in me the will, be thou pleased also to work in me the deed:
oh suffer not this my resolution to die, but give grace to practice what I have
now resolved. Thus be thou earnest with him, and call upon his name, for be
thou assured, thy best resolution will prove but a vanishing motion, unless
thou be strengthened with grace from above.

Third means, speedy execution.
A third means is speedy execution: delay not but speedily put in practice:
before the iron cool it is good striking; and while the wax is pliable, it is
good setting on the seal, and therefore what Solomon exhorts in the case of
vows, Eccles. 5.3.
is generally to be practiced in all holy purposes and motions, be not slack
to perform them. They that know themselves, know how fickle and unconstant
their hearts are: now as we would deal with a variable and unconstant man, so
let us deal with these hearts of ours; we would take such a one at his word,
and lay hold of the opportunity, when we find him in a good vain, least
within a short space he alter his mind. Our hearts are far more variable and
unconstant then any man is or can be, let us then learn this wisdom,
presently to lay hold of every good motion, and put it in practice, do not
stand debating the matter, when God puts any good thought into thy heart, or
raises up any good purpose, or desire within thee, but presently proceed to
execution: make no long tarrying before thou do put them in action; there
are many, who have been much affected in hearing of the Word, and have
resolved to leave such a sin, or do such a duty, and put in practice what he
has heard, but by reason of their deferring until the next day, or such a
time, those motions die, and purposes vanish, and come to nothing, and
therefore let this be amended of all you that would be constant, and let this
rule, with the rest, be carefully observed, of al you who desire to be as good
in action, as you are in purpose and affection, and so by Gods grace, and help
(without which all is unprofitable) you shall see much benefit and profit come
hereby.

Thus much for the coherence and dependence which this verse has with the
former, he puts in practice what there, he did but purpose.

Now to come nigher to the words of this verse, wherein we see what this
Prodigal did, he arises and goes to his Father: he leaves his sin, and
turns to his God. Secondly, the circumstance of time, when he did this,
which is implied in this particle And, or So, that is presently upon his
resolution, he did not debate any longer upon the matter, but forthwith rose up
and went his way.

He arose and came to his father. Text.
] His arising is nothing else, but his leaving of sin (as formerly we have
heard) and his coming to his Father, is his turning to the Lord. Terminus a
quo, and terminus ad quem.
So then here we have the parts of true repentance laid down, which are in
number two, first, Auersion from sin: secondly, Conversion to God.

First, we might observe this general Doctrine;

Doctr. True Repentance consists of two parts. Psalm. 34.14. and 37.27. Esaias.
1.16. Ephe. 4.22.24. Act. 26.18. Use.
That true repentance consists of two parts, viz. Leaving of sin, and turning
to God: According to that of David, Eschew evil, and do good. And that of
Esaias, Cease to do evil, and learn to do well. And that of the Apostle, Put
off the old man, which is corrupt, etc. And put ye on the new man, which after
God is created in righteousness, and true holiness. And I might from hence
take occasion soundly to lesson such, as think true Repentance to consist
only in a forsaking of some evil, and abstaining, from some gross sins;
how often do we hear this Apollogie made? when other reasons are wanting to
prove the soundnes of repentance? I am neither whore, nor theife, nor
murderer. Well and what then, this may be true, yet thou may be a Reprobate:
He that goes no further, goes but half way to heaven at the most, and he
that rests in the midway, is like never to come thither: what shall I say to
thee, to speak as favorably as I can, thou art but half loyal, and is such
a one a good subject? thou art but half a son, and therefore a bastard; thou
art but half hot, Revel. 3.
and therefore lukewarm. What then can thou look for, but to be spewed out
of GODS mouth, as loathsome and unsavory unto his stomach? Think of this, oh
you civil honest men! who bless your selves in your civil carriage; you do
no man wrong, you oppress none, you have took no man's ox, nor ass* This may
be, yet know this can be no good argument, to prove thou have repented: many
go thus far, who are of old ordained to this condemnation: think of the
Parable of the talents, Mat. 25.25.
there thou shall find that the servant which gave God his own, did not
escape hell, cast you that unprofitable servant, into utter darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Behold here though thou give God his
own, yet that will not save thy soul; could thou say thus unto the Lord,
behold Lord here is my talent, I have not spent it, Note this you civil honest
men, note it.
here is my time, thou did lend me, while I was upon the earth, be it 40. or
50. years, or more or less, here it is; in all this time, I have not swore
one oath, nor spoke a word that might tend to thy dishonor: not an idle word
has passed from between my lips; here is also my substance, not one penny
wastfully spent, on my own lusts or pleasures, take Lord thy own, there it
is, could thou say thus? which alas, thou can not, yet, if thou could
thus speak, and truly so speak, yet I tell thee, thou would come short of
blessedness, because thou have been unprofitable; what do thou more then
the bruit beasts? they dishonor not God with their tongues, but in their kind,
they glorify him, are not they then nigher happiness then thy self? Consider
well what I say, 2. Tim. 2.7.
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. But I intend to stand on
this General: I come to the Specials.

He arose.] The point we may observe hence, is this; Text. Doctr. Where there
is true repentance, sin is left.


Where there is true Repentance, there is a rising from sin; there is a
leaving, and a forsaking of all former evil ways, and courses. This point
might be confirmed by many examples: As of Paul, Peter, Zacheus, with others,
who left their former courses, and committed them no more. But amongst all
other examples, that is most excellent, to prove this in the 19 of the Acts,
who to show the truth of their repentance, brought their curious books, and
burnt them openly. Hence is it also that the servants of God have ever called
upon the people, that they would testify the truth of their Repentance, by
their forsaking of evil; thus Samuel enjoined the Israelites, 1. Sam. 7.3.
to put away their strange gods from amongst them. And Peter laid this task
upon his hearers, that they would amend their lives. Act. 2.37.38. Ion. 3.8.
So the King of Nineveh, gives this in charge, that every man should turn from
his evil way, and from the wickedness that is in his hands; he full well
knew, that there was no auerting or turning away the judgment, threatened by the
Prophet, but by repentance; and that there was no true repentance, if sin
were not forsaken.

Romans 6.6.
in the sixth to the Romans, at the beginning of the Chapter, Knowing this
(says he) that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin: thus Christ's
death being applied by faith, will work in us the death of sin, and cause us
to forsake our former evil ways.

Romans 8.4.2.
and is become his guide, and this spirit freeth us from the law of sin and
death. This expells sin, and will not suffer such filthiness to remain in
the room where it does lodge. These may be the reasons of the point

The uses follow.

2. Cor. 5.
words, and actions, are all old things done away, and new come in the place
thereof? is there a forsaking of sin, a reformation of life? if it be thus,
then it is well, for thus it is, and must be with every true penitent. True it
is, in the time of our impenitencie, like wild, and mad horses, we gallop in
the way of sin: yet in the day of our repentance, the spirit of God, as with
a bit or bridle gives us a ierke, and turns us back, and sets us as fast
a going the other way, Insomuch that our companions stand wondering at the
matter; admiring that we so suddenly break of company, 1. Pet. 4.4.
and run not with them to the same excess of riot. So great is the change,
that not only ourselves, but others also see it and admire it. Now then thou
that talkest of Repentance, is this change in thee? assure thy self, if thou
have repented, it is, and all the world may see it; can thou with good
conscience say of thy self, 1. Cor. 6.10.
as Paul did of the Corinthians, I was once a theife, a drunkard, an adulterer,
a reuiler, an extortioner, a covetous person, and the like. But now I am
washed, Verse 11.
now I am sanctified, yea, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the spirit of my God. Can thou thus say of thy self and that in truth? Why
then (to thy comfort be it spoken) this is a notable evidence of the truth of
thy repentance; but if it be otherwise, thou may deceive thy self, but be it
known unto thee, thou art as far from it, (for any thing that I can see) as
they are that rob by the high way side, and it may be farther.

Secondly, this may serve for terror to such as find Awake, gull not thy own
soul, thy torment shall not be the less in hell, because thou fallest in
before thou be aware. Delude then thy self no longer, but look well about
thee: Thou can not endure others should cozen thee, why cozenest thou thy
self? Happily thou have had some spiritual qualmes, or upon hearing of the
Word have shed some tears; but what then? if no reformation follows, these
are not signs of true repentance. Mala praeterita plangere est,
plangendaiterum non committere. Amb. Vera paenitentia est quando sic panite^
hominem peccasse, vt crimen non repetat. Born.
This is true repentance (says a Father) so to bewail sins past, as that
we commit them no more, which we have bewailed. It is to no purpose then for
thee to bewail thy former courses, unless there follow hereupon a due
amendment, let not then this deceive thee, for thou do but mock, and not
indeed repent, when thou still do that whereof thou have repented. This is
true repentance, so to repent, that thou have sinned, as that thou do so no
more. Till therefore thou do cease from sin, Inanis paenitentia quam
sequent culpa coinquinat. Aug. Soliloq.
and reform thy ways, until thou do find this change in thy self, so
that thou can truly say, I was thus and thus, but now the case is altered,
thou can have no comfort in thy repentance, for assure thy self, that
Repentance and continuance in thy old wicked courses, can never stand together.

John 9.
who had his light restored, One thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I
see: whereas I was filthy and unclean, I am now washed and cleansed, oh happy
is the condition of such a one! thrice blessed is thy estate, only let me
admonish thee, that thou manifest this change unto the world, that others may
also say; Amb. lib. 2. de paenitent. cap. 10.
How is this man changed from what he was? Ambrose makes report of a young man,
who having a long time lived in lust and uncleanness; at length traveled, and
in his travel was converted: afterward returning home meets with one of his
old acquaintance, with whom he had been often naught, but passed away and
would not salute her; at which the Strumpet wondering, speaks to him after
this manner; What; have you forgotten me? It is I: Sed ego non sum ego.
His reply unto her again was this, yea, I know it, but I am not I. Thus it
becomes thee to manifest this change thou find to be in thee: that as
others have been witnesses of thy sin, so they may be also witnesses of thy
Repentance. And thus much shall serve for this first part of his repentance,
viz. his Auersion from his sin; Text. Doctr. In true repentance there is not
only a rising from sin but also there is a turning to God. Ier. 4.1.
now we come to the second, which is his Conversion to God.

And came to his Father.] From hence we learn;

In true Repentance there is not only a rising from sin, but also a turning
to the Lord, and a setting of our hearts toward him and his kingdom. This
therefore is enjoined us (as well as the former) in many places of Scrpture: If
thou will return oh Israel, says the Lord, return unto me: and again, Oh
Israel return unto the Lord thy God: take with you words, and turn to the
Lord. And again, Hos. 14.1.2. Joel. 2.13. Act. 26.20.
Rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord. This was Paul
willed to exhort the Gentiles to; that they should repent and turn to God, and
do works meet for repentance. Many more places might be brought to confirm
this: but what need I? By the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall every word
be established.

The reason is this: As by faith we are ingrafted into us to walk in newness
of life, Romans 6.4.11.
and live unto the Lord. Secondly, the same spirit that does cause Abba-Father,
as the Apostle speaks.

Use. To reprove many, who will indeed confess, Romans 8.15.
there Stuliidum vitant vitia, in contraria currunt. Romans 2.22.
from atheism to popery? from profaneness to hypocrisy? now alas; what is
this, but to turn out the Devil at the porch, and let him in at the posterne?
As for turning from all sin to God, that is no ordinary thing to be found in
these days; And therefore assuredly, repentance is not so common, as the world
takes it to be.

And if these are to be reproved, then much more are Ephesus, Revel. 2.5.
Remember whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, or else
I will come against thee quickly, except thou repent.

In the last place, let this admonish us, to look that our turning be a true
turning: And as by sin we have departed with this Prodigal from our Fathers
house, so let us also arise with him, and set forwards toward heaven: fix thy
eye upon the Lord; make toward him with thy foot: Let the maine current of
thy affection, be on things above, Colos. 3.2.
and thy heart be upon thy God. And thus turning from the one unto the other,
thou may have comfortable assurance, that thy repentance is true, and sound.
Now I come to the circumstance of time, when he repented, employed in this word

Text. Doctr. Repentance is not to be deferred but presently to be set upon.
So, or And.] After this Prodigal had resolved to go and humble himself unto
his Father, he did not debate any longer about the matter, but forthwith rose
up and went his away.

Repentance is not to be deferred but presently to be set upon, so soon as God
shall put the motion into our hearts. There may not be deferring nor
procrastinating, but a speedy practice, and execution.

To day (says the Prophet David) if you will hear his voice, Psalm. 95.7.8.
Esaias 55.6. Gal. 6.10. Heb. 3.7.13. Iocl. 2.12.
harden not your hearts. Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him
while he is near (says the Prophet Esaias.) While we have opportunity, let us
do good (says the Apostle:) And again, Exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day: many prooffes might be brought: and as many reasons.

God is to be first served. Deuteronomy. 15.21. Pro. 3.9. Exodus 13.1. Mal. 1.8.
and the first borne: The firstlings are his darlings; the fattest Lambs are
fittest for his sacrifice: Now has the Lord respect to beasts? Nay, surely,
but hereby he shows us our duty: the maine he aims at in all those types,
was to teach us to give him the first and best.

Because man's life is short and uncertain.
and uncertainty of life. Our lives they are compared to a pilgrimage, to the
flower of grass, to wind, to smoke, to a vapor, to a dream, and the like:
all which shows the shortness of our time: and therefore our whole life is
little enough to spend in Gods service.

But farther, as it is short, so also it is uncertain: Nihil c^rtius morte,
hora mortis nihil incertius.
We have no assurance to live one hour; we are here but Tennants at will,
and know not how soon our great Landlord will turn us out of this earthly
tabernacle: We may be cropped off like an ear of corn: Job 24.24.
for what is this life, but as a nest of straw and clay, soon shaken a pieces.
Many have seen a fair bright morning, who never beheld the evening (as the
Sodomites. Genesis 19.24.
) And upon many the Sun has set in the evening, to whom it never appeared
rising in the morning: So was it with the rich Glutton in the Gospel. Seeing
this is so, Luke 12.20.
we have great cause speedily to repent.

Thirdly, the longer we live in sin, the harder will Qui non est hodie, cras
minus aptus erit. Sicut non potest aliquis dedisc^rematernam linguam, sic vix
longam peccati consuetudinem. Basil. Ier. 13.23.
our sins will grow more strong; And secondly, we our selves shall grow more
weak. By continual sinning we get a custom and habit of sinning, and it is
not easily left, a man may as soon forget his mother tongue, as leave it, Can a
Black-more change his skin, or a Leopard his spots? then may you also do
good, that are accustomed to do evil, (says the Prophet.) Where he seems
to make it a thing impossible, for one that has continued long in sin, to
leave and forsake it. And indeed, with man, it is impossible, though with God
it is not, for with him are all things possible: Art thou not able to pluck up
a plant when it is new set; how then will thou be able to do it, when it is
often years growth? And as repentance will be the harder in respect of sins
strength; so it will be the harder also, in respect of thine own weakness:
for the longer thou live in sin, the weaker will thou grow in all the
powers and faculties both of soul and body. Experience shows, that the
longer a sickness does continue, the more is the body weakened, and made unfit
for labor: so the longer sin (which is the souls sickness) remains
unrepented, the more weak and unable will we be to shake it off: Our
understandings will be more darkened, our wills more perverted, our affections
more corrupted, our hearts more hardened, our consciences more feared, and all
the powers and faculties, both of body and soul, more and more disabled. And
therefore we have great reason, to make have, and no longer to defer and put
off repentance.

Is the great danger that the sinner is in for the present.
the wrath of God hangs over thy head by a twined thread, if thou had eyes to
see it: thou eatest in danger of thy life, thou drinkest in danger, walk in
danger, sleep in danger, lying between death and the Devil, as Peter did
between the two soldiers, Acts 12.6.
bound with two chains. Now who would be in such a danger one hour, for the
gaining of a world? every creature is up in arms against thee, they wait but
for a watch word: would God bid them strike, they would soon dispatch thee;
and Hell, that gapes for thee, longing to devour thee. You have little cause
then to defer one day, one hour, or one minute. Thus you see some reasons:
many more might be brought, but we hasten to the uses.

whenever a sinner repents him of his sin, he will blot out all his
wickedness out of his remembrance. As he dealt by the thief, who was received
to mercy at the last hour, though his whole life was spent in wickedness; so
will he deal with thee: What need thou then, as yet, think of repentance;
seeing thou may enjoy both the pleasures of this life, and of that which is
to come also? And thus he carries thousands blindefold to hell (who know not
they are nigh it, until they they fall in it) gulling them most shamefully;
teaching them to reason against their own salvation: how often do you hear
these reasons brought? Thirdly, many lets of timely repentance. First hope of
long life.
I have time enough to repent in: What tell you me of Repentance, as yet? Is
not God merciful? Did he not show mercy to the thief at the last gasp? I
doubt not but to be saved, as well as the precisest of you all. But thou who
thus go on headlong to damnation, come hither and let me show thee thy
monstrous folly: that, if it be possible, thou may be recovered out of the
snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26.
who art thus taken by him at his will. First, It is a folly to defer
repentance upon hope of long life.
thou blessest thy self with hope of long life, thou will repent when thou art
old: but how know thou, that thou shall live till thou come to be old?
Do not thou see, how upon the stage of this world, some have longer Because
many die before. Matthew. 20.1.2.
And as we enter into the Lords vineyard, do we not so go out? that is in
such a manner, and at such an hour, some in the morning, some at noone: some
at night, some die in the dawning of their lives; passing from one grave unto
another, being no sooner come out of the womb of one mother, but another
mother receives them into hers: Some die in youth, as in the third hour,
others die at thirty, forty, or fifty, as in the sixth and ninth hour, and
other some very old, as in the last hour of the day. Now tell me how many die
before fifty, for one that live till they be past that age? What hope have thou
to live till thou be so old? Do not thou daily see and hear of many,
that go well to bed at night, and are found dead in the morning; and of many
other, that are suddenly slain, or come to some untimely death: why may it not
be thus with thee? how vain then, and false is thy hope of long life? seeing
no man can tell what a day, what an hour may bring forth.

Because old age is no fit time for it. 2 Samuel 19.35.
yet consider how unseasonable a time this is for repentance. Behold (says
Barzillai to David) I am this day fourscore years old, and can I discern
between good or evil, has thy servant any taste in that I eat or drink? Can
I hear any more the voice of singing-men and women? wherefore then should thy
servant be any more a burden unto my Lord the King. Here see how he
confesses, that by reason of his age, he was unfit to attend upon the King, or
do him service: and therefore much more shall a man be disabled in old age,
for this work of repentance. Solomon calls the days of old age, evil days,
and withal, Eccles. 12.1.
wills the young man to remember his Creator before they come. They are termed
evil, not because they are so in themselves, but because of the many-fold
miseries that do accompany them, and so the Philosopher called old age, Diog.
Laert. in vita Dion.
The Haven of all evil, because of the innumerable maladies, and aches, and
pains, that do flock thither, as into a common receptacle: For then shall the
keepers of the house (by which Solomon means the hands, which are the
protectors of the body) tremble and shake. Eccles. 12.1.
And the strong men (that is the legs, that should carry the body) bow
themselves, and wax faint and feeble; and the grinders (by which he means the
teeth, the mouth being as the mill, and the two rows of teeth, like the upper
and nether mil-stones) shall cease, because they are few: and those that look
out of the windows shall be darkened, (that is, his eyes shall wax dim, and
his sight shall fail him ^) then shall the door be shut in the streets, when
the sound of the grinding is low. The mouth and the jaws shall hang down, and
not be fast; neither shall they eat as young men use to do: He shall rise up
at the voice of the bird; his sleep shall not be found, but it shall be taken
away, yea with every little chirping of a bird he shall be awaked: and all
the daughters of music shall be brought low; their cares shall wax deaf,
they shall not delight in music; they shall also be afraid of that which is
high; they shall then go hanging down the head and shoulders, as they use to
do that are afraid (for these are the height of the body.) And the Almond tree
shall flourish; that is, the head shall be full of gray hairs, and wax hoary;
And the Grasshopper shall be a burden, that is, his leanness and bones
sticking out, his crooked back shall be wearisome; and then shall his desires
fail, his meat and drink and all other pleasures shall be loathsome, he shall
delight in nothing. See here how age is described, and do but consider whether
this be a fit time for Repentance: Is it like thou will be able to undergo so
great a task as that, when thou shall feel so many aches in thy bones; so
many cramps in thy joints, and so many pains in all the parts of thy body?
when thou art dull in apprehending, and of bad capacity and remembrance;
without a good leg to bring thee to Church, without a good ear to hear at
Church, and without sight to see to read a letter in Gods book? Oh think how
far unfit thou will then be for this weighty work of Repentance.

As therefore it is an exorbitant course, Boys p^st.
while the Ship is sound, and the tackling sure, the Pilote well, the Sailor
strong, the gale favorable, the Sea calm, to lie idle at road; and when the
Ship leakes, the Pilote is sick, the Mariners faint, the storms boisterous,
and the Sea outrageous, to launch forth, and hoise up sail for a voyage into
far Countries: So is it as absurd for thee to spend the morning of thy youth,
and soundnes of health, and perfect use of reason, in the service of sin, and
thy own lusts, and never resolve to weigh anchor, and cut the Cable that
withholds thee from seeking Christ. But when as thy wits are distracted, thy
senses astonished, all the powers of thy mind, and parts of thy body
distempered, then to begin to seek after God, thinking suddenly to become a
Saint at thy death, though thou have lived like a devil all thy life. See then
thy monstrous folly, and condemn thy self for it; Lay not this task on thy
old bones; Thou would condemn him for a fool, who being to go a far and
foul journey, and having a great burden to be carried; would lay it upon a
weak jade, that has much to do to bear up it self, and let a stronger go
empty. Yet this is thy wisdom, who do intend to lay the great load of
Repentance upon thy faint and feeble dote age, which is hardly able to bear it
own burden.

None is then sure to find grace.

Iustum est, vt a Deo contemnatur morions, qui deum omnipotentem contempsit
viuens.


having understanding, memory, sight, and sense, etc. yet who can tell whether
God will hear thee at the last gasp? For what can be more righteous, then
that the Lord should contemn thee at the hour of death, who have contemned
him in thy whole life? and that thou should forget God when thou art going
out of the world, who would never remember him whilst thou were in the
world? And that thou should die impenitent, who have lived in impenitencie?
Has not the Lord threatened this? are not these his words? Prou. 1.24.4.
Because I have called, and you have refused; Verse 25.
I have stretched out my hand, and none would regard: But you have despised all
my counsel, and would none of my correction. Verse 26.
I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes.
Verse 27.
When your fear comes like sudden desolation, and your destruction shall
come like a whirlwind; Verse 28.
when distress and anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but
I will not answer, they shall seek me early, Verse 29.
but they shall not find me. Because they hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord. Let these words take deep impression in thy heart; For
if thou will not know God in thy youth, he will never know thee (for ought thou
know) when thou art gray headed: If thou will not give him the young and
sound, and that which is without blemish, he will never take in good part the
old, and sick, and evil favored, which no man will give to his friend, or
dare offer to his Prince. Mal. 1 8.
He that would not have a beast, that had no eyes, in his service, will have
thee whilst thou have eyes to serve him. The Lord complained of the Israelites
for offering the sick, and lame, were they no good offerings then, and are
they now good ware? Will the Lord be pleased with the blew bottom, when the
devil has had the cream? will he accept of the devils leaving? Take thou
heed then how thou dare put off repentance till hereafter; send it not
before thee to three or fourscore years; thou may never overtake it, nor
obtain mercy. Heb. 12.16. Math. 25. Revel. 2.21.
Let the example of reprobate putters off, move thee to prevent the devils
penitential hour. Remember Esau, and the five foolish Virgins, and that false
Prophetess Iesabell, who had time to repent, yet repented not, but put it off
from day to day, until she found no place for repentance. Be not like these in
their wicked practices, lest thou be like them in their fearful punishments.
Second Let of repentance is presumption of Gods mercy. The great folly in
putting off repentance upon hope of Gods mercy.
Thus thou must needs see the folly of this in course in putting off repentance
upon hope of long life.

Now, for the other Let which keeps thee from timely turning; and whereby thou
do confirm thy self in wickedness, and hearden thy heart in sin; let us
speak somewhat of it. Thou alleagest God is merciful, and will receive thee
whenever thou do turn. That God is merciful, none can deny; Ephesians 2.4.
Psalm. 145.9.
the very devils in hell will confess it. He is rich in mercy; yea, His
mercies are It is ingratitude.

Quae maie^riniqui as, quam vt inde a to creator contemnatur, vnde plus amari
merebatur. Bern.


But now consider what an unthankful part is it for thee to offend so
gracious a God? What greater iniquity can there be, then that thy Creator
should be contemned of thee, for which he deserves the more to be loved and
respected by thee. There is mercy with thee (says the Prophet David) that
thou may be feared; not that thou might be despised or contemned, that
teaches us no such lesson. How do thou suck poison out of this honey? Is
God such a one as thou imaginest? the more is thy sin to deal so wretchedly
with so good a God.

gracious and merciful, God is just, etc. Parauit caelum, sed parauit and
tartarum. Parauit resrigeria, sed parauit etiam aeterna supplicia. Cyp. Ezekiel.
33.11.
so is he also just and true; and as he has prepared heaven for some, so has
he also prepared hell for others. Now, the question is, who shall taste of his
mercy, and who of his justice; for whom he has prepared Heaven, and for whom
he has prepared hell. Surely God himself does show us in his word: As in
that place (which is so much abused by wicked ones, for the nourishing of
themselves in carnal security) of Ezekiel, I will not the death of a sinner,
but that he turn from his way, and live. Here we see the Lord speaks not
of all sinners, but of such as turn from their evil ways, and repent. As for
such as do not, but continue still in sin taking occasion by Gods mercy to
continue in their un-, repenting, Romans 2.4. Deuteronomy. 29.20.
despising the riches of his bountifulness, his patience and long-suffering,
The Lord will not spare him, but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book
shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven.
Exodus 20.5. Exodus 34.7. Multu^ deiectat omnes peccateres, quia misericors and
miserator dominus, etc. Sed si amas tam multa initia, time ibi and vltimu^ quod
ait and verax, Aug. Quanto diutius deus expectat vt ^mendetis, tanto grauius
iudicabit si neglexeritis. A^g. de Van. saec


So then we see, no carnal secure one has cause to bless himself, for so
long as he continues in his sins, without repentance, mercy belongs not to
him; but judgment. Thou therefore that blessest thy self with a false
persuasion of mercy, walking still on in a course of sin, deceive thy self
no longer, for God is just as well as merciful. And will visit the iniquities
of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of all
such as hate him, and he will by no means clear the guilty. It is very
pleasing (says one) to all sinners to hear of those lovely attributes, The
Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, abundant in goodness, keepeing
mercy for thousands forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin etc. But if
thou love so many good beginnings; fear that which next follows, for God is
also just and true; and further know, that the longer God in mercy has
expected thy amendment, so much the more grievously will he punish thee for
neglecting of it.

And lastly; let me tell thee; Qui promisit paenitenti veniam, non promisit
peccanti peui. e^^am.
though God has promised that at what time soever A sinner does repent him of
his sins etc. He will put all his wickedness out of his remembrance. Yet he
has not promised to give repentance to such as have despised it. And if he
give it not, thou will never have it: For as all good gifts come from above
from the Father of lights. So must this also. Thus then thou see how little
reason thou have, to harden thy heart in thy sins because God is merciful.

But in the third place, The third let of repentance removed; which is the
example of the theife converted at the last. Luke 23.43. Vnus miserecordiam
inuenit hora vltima, ne quis desper^t, et vnicus, ne quis presumat. Aug.
thou alledgest the example of the theife upon the Cross, who had spent all
his life in sin, yet repented at the last gasp. It is most true that the
Scripture makes mention of such a one, and but of one; of one (says a father)
that none might despair, of but one that none might presume. This then is a
medecin against desparation, and no cloak for sin: Look upon his fellow
theife, who was crucified with him, what place found he for repentance? And for
this one have we not many thousands that have perished? know thou then that
this is but one particular, and an extraordinary act of Gods mercy, and
therefore, thereof thou may make no general rule. Is it not madness to
look every day for the Sun in the firmament to stand still or go back
because it has done so once? Ios. 10.13.
or to think to hear every ass speak, because Balaams once did, 2 King.
20.11. Number. 22.28.
It is as great a madness for thee to hearten thy self in sin by this one
example, and farther (that thou may come to a sight of thy folly) let me show
thee what difference there is betwixt him and thee: Great difference between
the theife and such presumptuous sinners
for first (in all likelihood) this was his first call, which presently he
hearkeneth unto; and willingly entertained the good motions of the spirit. But
thou have bin often called, invited, allured, yet all will not do: The spirit
of God has many times stood knocking at the door of thy heart, but thou have
not opened but unkindly and churlishly sent it away without answer.

Secondly, he never resolved (as thou have done) to persist in sin, and
reserve his old days for God, but he (without question) continues in his
sinful courses through ignorance, and not through wilfulness; But it is
otherwise with thee; thy conscience does witness it.

Thirdly, see what fruits of repentance he brings forth.

Luke 23.40. Verse. 41.
For First he confesses his sins, and reproves his fellow theife for his
wickedness: Then he earnestly prays to Christ for pardon and forgiveness:
Verse. 4^.
He further confesses Christ to be his Savior and redeemer even then when all
his disciples for fear forsook him: These and many other fruits appeared in
this convert, which did manifest his repentance to be unfeigned and sound:
Seeing then there is such differences in your purposes and courses, I cannot
think there will be the like in your repentance and salvation; Let not then
any of these things, hinder you from a present conversion, but see your former
folly and bewail it, and suffer not thy self, to be held in the snares of the
devil any longer. Weigh well these reasons; ponder on them: they will convince
thee or convert thee.

Abraham rose up betimes to sacrificie his son; Genesis 32.3.
so do thou make have to sacrifice thy sin. Zacheus came down hastily when
he was called, why then do we defer coming to our Savior? Harken not to
that same crow-crying cras, cras, to morrow, to morrow, the voice is dismal.
In worldly business deliberation is very necessary, and it is held a point of
wisdom, to deliberate long before a man determine any thing: but in this
matter it is dangerous. It is not safe for the hunted beast to stand still when
the hounds pursue him; Psalm. 140.11.
nor for thee to stand musing when Gods judgments follow thee at the heels.
Escape for thy life (said the Angel to Lot, when he lingered in Sodom) least
thou be destroyed: so say I to thee, fly for thy life, make all possible speed
to come out of thy sins, linger not in Sodom, nor about the borders of it,
least thou be consumed with the fire of Gods wrath. Consider of the former
reasons, and let them move thee hereunto. And remember the longer thou
delaiest, the more matter thou preparest for thy own sorrow and grief: If the
best does happen, that thou hopest for; if ever thou do truly repent (which
if thou go on still is much to be feared) for the greater sin, the greater
sorrow: every sin will fetch a groan from thy soul, and tears from thy
eyes, if ever God do give thee grace to turn unto him, and therefore break
off thy sins betimes, and heap not up more matter of grief to thy own
soul: let every one of us be warned to amend: you young men, Eccles. 12.1.
who are now lusty and strong. Remember you your creator now in the days of
your youth. You shall not see my face, said Joseph to his brethren) except you
bring your younger brother with you: how can thou behold the face of the Lord
Jesus, if thou dedicatest to the Devil thy lovely younger years, and give
him nothing but thy loathed old age? How long (says a Father, speaking to all
young men in his own person) shall I say to morrow to morrow? why do I not
now? Quamdin cras cras, quare non modo, quare non hac hora finis turpitudini^
meae. August.
why do I not this hour make an end of sinning. So, why do thou not now at
this very instant, cast away thy filthiness, thou know not what may happen
before to morrow: while thou have time turn; Challenge not to thy self
thirty or forty years hereafter, for thou art not sure of one day or hour.
As for you that have neglected your youth, and slept that out, now awake, if
ever you will awake; Awake, for it is high time: and as the Israelites gathered
twice as much Manna the day before the Sabbath, as they did at any other time,
Exodus 16.22.
because on the Sabbath they might gather none: So thou that art aged, who
look every day for thy last Sabbath, should redeem thy time by double
diligence, that thou have formerly lost by sloth and negligence: hear twice
as much, pray twice as much, do twice as much good as any young man does: It
stands thee much upon, for thou have a great journey to go, and but a short
time allotted.

In a word, to you all: Repent, and that while it is called to day; defer no
longer, thou have deferred too long: be now more wise, and do that in time,
which all the world would do out of time, and cannot. All men seek the Lord
at last, Esaias. 55.
but wise men seek him while he may be found: what wretch so profane, that
upon his deathbed, does not make the Lord his refuge? Then the eye, the hand,
is lifted up unto him; then will they call for mercy, and desire others to pray
to God for them. But oh that there were such an heart in thee, that thou
would do thus now while time is, and the gate of Gods mercy is set open for
thee.

The old world had a time for repentance, while Noah preached: Sodom had her
time, while Lot visited: Jerusalem had a time, while Christ conuersed in her:
So had Dives his time; and Esau his time: the five foolish virgins their time:
and Iesabell her time for Repentance: which, being neglected, they had no more
time offered. If the filthy Sodomites, if profane Esau, if the foolish
virgins, if the rich Glutton, if whorish Iesabell were now alive, what would
they do? or rather what would they not do, to obtain salvation? Nothing
would be so much esteemed, as a trice of time, which heretofore by days,
weeks, months, years, was lauishly misspent. Oh that thou knew what
treasure time offers to thy soul! thou would then look with a jealous eye
on the hour-glasse, and sigh at the dropping of every sand that falls: Be not
so foolish as to hazard thy soul to the last hour. Remember the reasons that
were formerly brought, and well consider them: thou have no lease for thy life:
this night may thy soul be taken from thee: and say thou do live till thy
hayres be gray, what likelihood is there that God will then give thee grace to
repent, who have obstinately refused grace all the days of thy life? Has not
God showed his visible judgments on such putters off? Some dying suddenly,
others sottishly, others desperately, as that wretch, who was wont to boast,
that he could repent, if he had time to say but three words, Domine miserere
mei.
Lord have mercy on me; which time he had, and did speak three words, but
they were not those he did intend, but three other more fearful: for, riding
over a water, upon a broken bridge, his horse stumbled, and both fell in, and
were drowned; yet before his drowning, Capiat omnia Demon.
he had leisure to use these three words, The Devil take all, and thus he
perished. This and many other like examples, are for warning unto thee, that
thou should not defer, as they have done: by their harms learn thou to
beware, and venture not the salvation of thy soul upon uncertainty. There is
no hurt comes by timely. Repentance, but much damage by delaying, and
deferring. Never did I know any repent of their timely Repentance: but I have
heard many lament, for their turning no sooner: Paenitentia serae raro vera.
Iam te peccata dimittunt non t^ ^lla.
And indeed there is great cause to suspect that Repentance, which is thus put
off till the last hour, and which many thousands frame unto themselves at the
last gasp: for it is many times more forced and feined, then safe and sound;
sin then rather leaving man, then man his sin: defer not therefore, but
presently fall about this work; make not any tarrying to turn unto the Lord,
but with David, make have to keep Gods commandments. Psalm. 119.60. Amb. ad
paenitent agend exhort.
Remember the words of Ambrose (with which I will end this use and doctrine) He
that repents at the last hour* and is reconciled, and so departs out of
this life, whether he be secure and safe from condemnation I am not certain:
Do I say he shall be damned? I say not so, neither do I say he shall be saved.
But would thou my brother be out of doubt, concerning thy salvation? And
would thou be delivered from uncertainty? Repent then while thou art in
health: for, if thou do truly repent in thy health, and the last day so
find thee, then thou art safe: because thou have repented, whilst yet thou
might have sinned. And thus we have seen what he did. Now we are in the
next place, to hear what he says, according to my proposed method.

Text. Verse 21.
VERSE 21.And the son said unto him, Father I have sinned against heaven, and
in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.
THere are some who say and do not, and some that do and say not, but he does
both: whence learn this in general;

Doctr. True repentance will manifest it self. Romans 10.10. 2. Cor. 4.13.
Where, there is true grace, there will be a manifestation of it, both by deed
and word. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation, says the Apostle. And again in another
place he thus says, I believed and therefore have I spoken. We also believe,
and therefore speak. See one example amongst many that might be brought, Act
^9.18.
to prove this; In the believers of Ephesus, it is said of them, that they
confessed, and showed their deeds; As they had true grace, so they made it
manifest both by speaking and doing.

The reason is, because the grace of Christ is every whit as large as the sin
of Adam: Reason.
And as there is no part, 2. These. 5.
or power of soul or body, but is corrupted, so there is no part or power of
soul or body, but is in part sanctified: and howeuer this power of Gods
sanctifying spirit appears not alike, evidently in every part, yet has every
part and particle his seasoning with grace. Look then as corruption does show
it self in every member (as hand, tongue, eye, ear, feet, etc.) so will

Reproof of two sorts. 1. Hypocrites.
This then serves, first, for reprehension of two sorts of people: first,
Hypocrites, who say but do not, and secondly, Nicodemites, who do, but say
not: For the first, they fry in words, but freze in deeds; talk by else, but
work by inches; they confess fair, but practice foul: their works and
words differ, as it is to be seen in some tap houses, where the walls shall
have sober sentences on them; as fear God, honor the King, watch and pray, be
sober, etc. When there is nothing but drunkenness in the rooms. What was said
of Julian the Apostata, may be said of these; they have a busy tongue, but a
lazy hand. With these kind of painted Sepulchers, is our Church pestered, it
were well, if they would once learn either to be as they profess, or profess
to be as indeed they are: But I have small hope to prevail with these, and
therefore I will spare my breath, Second sort, Nichodemites.
and come to the other sort, and they are our Peter like professors,
Nicodemites, who think it sufficient, if they believe well, though they
confess nothing at all. We have many that live in the bosom of our Church,
who carry themselves so closely, that a man may be acquainted with them many
years, yet not know of what Religion they are of, they may be Atheists, or
Papists, or Brownists; a man cannot tell by their profession. If they be
Christians, a man had need be told so, for it does not appear by their works
and actions. Look what course the foolish Painter does take with his
ill-fauoured pictures, writing underneath their names, as, this is a Bear, or
this is a Lion, that so all may know them; the same course had we need to take
with these, that they may be known to be believers and professors. But let
such know, that had they true grace, it would break forth like fire, Iere.
20.9.
after it has been long kept in, and discover it self both by deeds and
words. Grace will find vent first or last, where ever it be, and manifestly
declare, and make it self known both by hand and tongue.

Secondly, let this teach us, to make manifest the graces are for a medicinable
use, and therefore may not be wanting. Remember the words of Christ, and
consider of them, Matthew. 10.32.
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before my ^^ther, him
will I also deny before my Father in heaven. Be not then ashamed of the
profession of godliness, unless thou would have Christ to be ashamed of
thee at the last day.

Now we come more particularly unto the words, which are a Confession of
sins made by this Prodigal unto his father. Division of the Text.
Wherein observe; First, the matter of his Confession, I have sinned. Secondly,
the circumstances; as first, to whom, viz. to his father: secondly, the manner
how:

And that was with Exaggeration, Against heaven, etc. Humiliation, And am no
more worthy, etc.


Quest.
But why does this Prodigal leave out that same latter clause, which he did
purpose to use, verse 19. make me as one of thy hired servants: here he
confesses his sin, but craves no pardon.

Maldon. in loc.
for it is usual in Scripture, when any thing is repeated, which formerly has
been said, to omit something of what formerly was spoken.



but, in the next verse seem to imply.

These may be the reasons. Now to come to some Instructions.

And first, in that the Prodigal makes a confession of his sin: we may
hence learn:

Without confession there is no remission. Doctr. Confession necessary before
remission.
Whosoever would have pardon and forgiveness of sins from God; must bring
them in an acknowledgement and hearty confession, before him.

Now (for the further explanation of this point) we are to know that there is
a twofold confession: There is a twofold confession. Civil; and that is of
two sorts.
Civil, and Religious.


Civil confession is either Public, or, Private.


Public, 1. Public. Ios. 7.19, 20.
is that which is made before a Judge or Magistrate by malefactors, such a
kind of confession was that which Achan made, when he was examined before
Joshua.

Private, 2. Private. Genesis 20.7.
is that which is made by one man to another, for some trespass done, or wrong
offered. Thus Abimelech was willed to confess to Abraham, the wrong that he
had (though unwittingly) offered. With this kind of confession we have not now
to do.

Religious confession is that which is made to God, Religious confession; which
is either public, or private.
as a part of his worship; and with this we have now to deal.

And it is either Public, or, Private.


That is public, Public confession is either general or particular.
which is made in the public assemblies. And that either Generally, by the
Minister with the whole Congregation: or else Particularly, by some one man
before the Congregation.

This general confession, General confession is, Ordinary.
which is thus made by the whole Congregation together, both Minister and
people,

Is Ordinary, or, Extraordinary.


Ordinary, as at usual times and common assemblies, as that of Aaron, Leuit.
16.21.
who was commanded to lay his hands upon the live Goat, and confess over him
all the iniquities of the children of Israel.

Extraordinary.
Extraordinary; As in time of some great and general calamity: Joel 2, 15.16,
17 Ezra 9 5. N^h^m. 9.2.
Such was that Joel 2.15, 16, 17. which the Priests and Ministers of the Lord
are willed to make, and that which Ezra and Nehemiah did make unto the Lord.

Particular confession: what it is.
The Particular confession is that, which is made by one man particularly before
the whole congregation, for some public and heinous sin, or sins, by him
committed, 2 Cor. 2.6.
that so the Church might be satisfied, which is by him offended; and such a
confession was that of the incestuous person, 2 Cor. 2.6.

Private confession; what it is, and when to be used.
And thus we see what this public Confession is, now for the private; which is,
when the fault is confessed privately; and this must then be used, when the
sin is private:

This also may be made to God, or, Man.


To God; and that either in General, or, Particular,


General: and how. Ezra 9.6, 7, 8. Isa. 59.12. Isa. 59.12. Particular: and
how. Isa. 59.13.
In General, as when a sinner does only in general manner confess that he is
a sinner, that he has offended God, and done wickedly: so did the Jews
confess; Our transgressions are multiplied, etc.

In Particular, when there is an acknowledgement of particular sinne^, which we
are guilty of. Thus did the Jews also in the place before quoted, where they
confess and say; In transgressing and lying against the Lord, and departing
away from our God: speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from
the heart words of falsehood. Ezra 9.2.
So did Ezra, who acknowledged in the behalf of the people, their special
sin of marrying strange wives.

Private conf^ssio^ unto man, and in what ca^e.
To Man also, may private confession be made, as in trouble of conscience to
find peace: when sin lies heavy upon the soul, and clogs the conscience,
notwithstanding confession has been made unto the Lord, then may a man make
known his grief to another in private, and voluntarily confess (either to
his Pastor, or to some other discreet and faithful Christian, who is able to
counsel and to comfort him, to pray with him, and for him, unto God, that such
or such a sin does trouble him, according to S. James his council, James
5.16.
Confess one to another, and pray one for another.

Thus we have seen the several kinds of confession, now he that is truly
penitent, will not stick, neither may he stick to make confession, according
to the nature of his sin: if it be public, his confession must be
public; if private, his confession may be private. Thus must he confess, if
he would have forgiveness, as may be proved by many examples in Scripture.

Public examples we have in Nehemias making a large confession of his and the
peoples sins. Neh. 9.5, 6, 7. Ezra 9.6, 7. Dan. 9.5, 6, 7.
So in Ezra and Daniel, who in the behalf of the people confess that Justice
belongs unto God, but shame and confusion to themselves: Hereunto may be
annexed the example of the Ninevites, Jonas 3.8, 9. Matthew. 3.6.
who openly confessed their sins to God. And of the people who came to John the
Baptist to be baptized of him.

Presidents also for this private practice we have many: 2 Samuel 24.10.
David confesses and bewaileth his folly in numbering of the people; his
adultery with Vrias wife; his murder in causing her innocent husband to be
slain, and for these he is content (if I may so speak) to do penance every
Sabbath day in our Congregations, Psalm. 32. Psalm. 51.
where his Psalmos are preached, read, heard, spoken of, and sung; for in how
many Psalms has he recorded his offenses with his own hand, that all Gods
people might take notice of his false, and be warned that they commit not the
like offenses. The like confession is made by Paul of his misled life in the
time of his unregeneracy, 1 Timothy 1.13, 15.
I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and an oppressor, etc. and confesses
himself to be the greatest amongst sinners.

The reasons of this point are these; first, God cannot in justice forgive,
except we make our confession unto him. 1 Ioh. 19.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins
(says Saint John). But if there be no confession, then there is no promise:
How can God then without violating his truth show mercy unto such? and
therefore says Solomon, Pro. 28 13.
He that hides his sins shall not prosper: but who so confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy. Such a one then as does thus confess, may
look for mercy and none else.

David, who so soon as his heart smote him for numbering of the people cried
out. 1 Samuel 24.10.
I have sinned exceedingly in that which I have done. Thus, out of the
abundance of the heart will the tongue speak as Christ says.

These may be the reasons.

The uses follow.

Use. To reprove such as do not confess.
And First (seeing this is so, That whosoever would have pardon of sin must
confess the same.) This serves to reprove such as look for pardon on Gods
part, but will bring no confession for their part. And there are diverse sorts
of these.

First ignorants.
As first all ignorant ones: For how can these confess sin truly who know not
what sin is: They have never had a sense nor feeling of it, and can such
bewail it? True it is they will confess in general they are sinners as
others are, and God forgive them; but yet there sins never trouble them,
nether have they any feeling of what they say. Let such know as are yet in
^gnorance, that there estate is fearful; for there is no hope of pardon, till
we make confession and that we cannot do until the Lord open our eyes to see
our selves.

Secondly concealers.
A Second sort to be reproved; Are such as do conceal their sins. These have
knowledge of them, and do feel the burden, yet are loath to utter them, and
ashamed to confess them. But here is shame misplaced: Where it should not be
there it is, and where it ought to be there it is wanting; God gave shame for
sin, and boldness for confession; But (here is that saying true) The Devils
in it For the matter is so inuerted, that when sin is committed shame is
absent; but when sin should be confessed then shame is present. It Is strange
me thinks, that men should be bold and audatious in committing evil, in the
view of the whole world, and yet will have none to know them to be penitent for
their faults: This is a bashful devil; cast it forth, And if shame will move
you, then be moved with the greatest shame; for whether is it a greater shame,
to confess sin before the Angels and the whole world, God sitting in his
judgment seat to condemn it, or before man God sitting in his mercy seat to
pardon it? For confessed it must be either here or here after. In the meanetime
know, thou hidest mercy from thy self, but not thy sins from God, who
knows them (and except thou do confess) will one day Set them in order
before thy eyes, Psalm. 50.21.
to the horror of thy soul.

A Third sort are such as do excuse them. The third sort are excusers.
They will not altogether conceal and hide, but they will shift it off; and
lay the fault on others. This corruption is (within a day) as old as Adam, who
posted of the matter from himself unto his wife. Genesis 3.12.
The woman that thou gave me she gave me of the tree. And so the woman after
his example, lays the blame upon the serpent; The Serpent beguiled me and I
did eat.

This milk we have sucked from our great Graund-mothers breast, and are
grown as skillful in it as they themselves were; we can excuse and poast off
sin, and lay the blame on others; we are grown expert at it; Sometimes the
Stars shall be in fault, I have done badly, but it was my destiny, surely I
was borne in an ill hour: Otherwiles the Times shall bear the blame, this is
not well I must indeed confess, but the times are bad wherein we live, we can
do no other, God help us, O^^ upon this wicked world; They are well that are
with God, and thus we daube up the matter: When the Apostle uses this as an
argument to make us more watchful, Ephesians. 5.16.
In redeming the time because the days are evil. Sometimes we blame ill
company, and lay the fault on them: But for such a company I had not done thus
or thus. This is Tyburne language common in the mouths of theiues, Oh that I
had never seen his eyes, I would I had never known him, and thus we shift the
matter from our selves. And many there are that do not stick to lay the blame
on God; It was Gods will that I should do thus or thus. But let all these
know, that so long as they thus seek to excuse their sins, and lay the fault
on others, they are far from that ingenuous confession, which must be made
before remission and forgiveness can be obtained.

A fourth sort are deniers of sin. 2 Kin. 5.25. Acts 5.3.
A fourth sort are such, as do deny their sins, and will not at all
acknowledge them; if they be told of them yet they will outface it. Such a one
was Gehezi; Thy servant went no whether. And of the same brood were Ananias and
Saphyra, who made no bones of lying to the holy Ghost: many such we have
amongst us, who have great skill in this art of denial, reprove them and they
will outface it: take them in the manner, yet they will deny it: or if they
be brought to confess any thing, it shall be this; That, the first time of
their taking, was the first time of their sinning.

A fifth sort are defenders of sin.
A fifth sort to be reproved, are those that with a brazen face, and whorish
forehead, will defend their sins. Drunkenness, that is good fellowship, and
they will maintain it. Pride, is but handsomeness; and how would you have them
go? Fornication, a trick of youth, and the best are inclined to it. And as
for Swearing, they hope they may swear, so they swear truly: Thus is
worldliness, usury, oppression, maintained and defended: These are far from
confessing sin, Culpa cum defenditur, geminatur.
when they thus defend it, and so double it: and as they are far from
confession so are they also far from remission. These do but feed themselves
with wind, while they hope for heaven.

And a last sort, are such, as brag and boast of their lewd courses, yet will
not stick to say, they look for heaven as well as any. These can make
themselves merry with their drunkenness, and whoredoms, thefts, and murders.
They will confess, they did such, and such a vilany, at such a time, and in
such a place. But this confession is rather a profession, and committing them
afresh; and shall these find mercy? Certainly a man need no great skill to
read these men's doomes; for, except the Lord give them a great measure of
repentance, the very blackness of darkness is reserved for them.

Thus then we see the error of all these, who make themselves sure of
remission, though they never bring their sins into a confession, but either
conceal, or excuse, or hide, or defend, or boast of their evil actions. Let
these in time look well about them; For though they make themselves never so
sure of heaven, yet let me tell them, that this certainty, is but a senseless
presumption, which will at length destroy their souls, if they bring not
themselves to this confession, which God requires: And now for a second use.

Is this so, that there is no remission, where there is no Achan to hide that
cursed thing, it will prove thy overthrow; Be not Secretary to the Devil, it is
no good office; conceal not that which God commaundes thee to make known.
Sins that are smothered, will in the end fester unto death: Remember
remission is promised, but upon condition of confession; suffer, then, no sin
to go unconfessed, which thou would not have to go unpardoned. The only
way to have thy sins covered is to uncover them: Dum agnoscit reus, ignoscit
Deus.
the only way to have them hid, is to reveal them. For, when man vncouers,
God does cover; when man condemns, God will justify; when man accuses, God
will pardon; But God will never cancel, what man does conceal. Is thy offense
public? let thy confession be so. Be not ashamed of a needful confession,
when God may be glorified by it. A sincere heart will not stand upon terms of
private reputation, much less will dare to give the price of a Harlot, for a
sacrifice for his sin; seek not by money to buy out thy confession, thou
can have small peace in it: If thy offense has been private, go to God in
private, and humble thy self; give not over confessing, until God has spoken
peace to thy soul, and given thee some assurance, that thy sins are forgiven
thee.

Motives.
And to stir you up to the performance of this duty, consider of these three
motives, (besides what has been already said.)

First, it brings glory to God. Josh. 7.19 Bis Deum landamus, vbi pie nos
accusamus.
First, by thy confession, thou bring glory to God; his Name is honored,
when thy sins are confessed: Thus says Joshua to Achan, My son, give, I
pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession to him, and
tell me now what thou have done, hide it not from me. Where we see he joins
giving glory to God, and confession of sin together.

Quest. Answ. How God is glorified by our confession.
But how is God glorified, when sin is confessed?

Many ways; for in our confessions we give him; First, the glory and praise
of his truth, in acknowledging that to be true, which his word charge on us.

Justice; by acknowledging, that if he should punish us, Psalm. 51.4.
and throw us into hell, we had but our desert; he should do us no wrong.

Thirdly, the glory of his Wisdom; in that we acknowledge, no secret thing
can be hid from him, but that our secret'st sins are naked, and open before
him. Heb. 4.


Fourthly, the glory of his Patience; in acknowledging Lament 3.22.
whereas he might have executed Martial Law upon us, and speedily have
consumed us.

Fifthly, the glory of his Power; in that we acknowledge Psalm. 139.7.
but that the only way for pardon, is by flying unto him.

And lastly, the glory of his Mercy, in that we have Psalm. 32.2.
and not impute our sins unto us.

And thus we see, how the true and sincere confession of sin, does serve
notably to the setting forth of the glory of Gods name. How should this, yea,
how would this prevail with us, if there were any spark of grace in our
hearts? Thou that have a long time dishonored God by sin, make some part of
amends this way, by thy humble and hearty confession of it: Do thou look
for glory from God? then see, that this way thou do give glory to God,
honor him by hearty confession, whom thou have hitherto dishonored by thy
presumption.

Secondly, consider; Second motive it brings confusion to Satan. Revel.
Confession of sin brings confusion to Satan. Satan is confounded, when sin
is confessed. His labor is to accuse us night and day, and therefore is he
called, The accuser of the brethren: Now when we prevent him, and be the first
accusers of our selves, oh the foil that we give him then do we stop his
mouth, that he has nothing to say against us, nor wherewith to charge us.

And lastly, consider, it ^^^gs peace to thy own soul, Third motive, it brings
peace to the soul. Psalm. 3^.3. Verse. 4.
and quietness to thy heart: See this in David, so long as he kept close his
sin, and held his tongue, his bones consumed, and his moisture was turned
into the drought of summer. He was night and day, as it were in Little-ease; he
could have no rest nor quietness, Verse. 5.
till he did acknowledge his sin, and confess against himself, his
wickedness to the Lord, and so he had the punishment of his sin forgiven.
Look then as a sick stomach is eased by vomiting, Quicquid conscientiae
stomachum grauat, totum, vemitu purae confessionis ^uomere ne differas. Bern.
so is a guilty conscience eased by confession, and not before; defer not
therefore to take this vomit, if thou would have ease.

Pharaoh, Saul, and Judas, with many more; if therefore we would speed better
then they did, we must look that our confession be better then theirs was; See
then that you observe diligently the true properties of it, and they are these;

Properties of true confession first, it must be in particular, not by whole
sale. Ezra. 9. Neh. 9. Psalm. 51.4. 1. Tim. 1.13.
First, it must be Particular, and of special sins, and not by lump, or whole
sale: There must be a particularizing of thy faults, and a culling out of thy
chief transgressions, and not content thy self with terms of general
acknowledgment. This has been the practice of Gods children continually. Ezra
and Nehemiah when they make confession, what specialties do they rip up? into
what particulars do they descend? So did David: this evil have I done. Thus
did Paul reckon up his special sins, I was a blasphemer, etc. It is not then
sufficient to say, I am a sinner, God forgive me; but there must be an
acknowledgment of particulars, if we would have God forgive. To the Physician
thou will tell thy particular pains; in what part, in what manner, thou were
taken; and nothing shall be concealed: but see thy folly here; Thou will
confess, that thou art sick, that thou art a sinner, but there is all; as for
thy special sins, God must find them out, Dan. 2.
thou will confess none; dealing with him as Nabucadnezer, with his
inchaunters about his dream; he had dreamed, but they must find what; so we
are sinners, but God must find wherein.

But who knows the errors of his life, who can remember all his former
faults? Object.


Remember what thou can, Answ.
reckon up thy special evils thou know that thou have committed; and the
Lord will be pleased to accept of a general repentance, for the rest as he did
of David. Psalm 19.12. A Second property, it must be with the heart.


A Second property of true confession is, that it be made with the Whole heart;
Such a confession as is fetched no furrher then from the mouth will never be
respected: This lip-labor God hates as a lame offering and maimed sacrifice.

Thus did Ephraim confess, and the poor Publican, ^r. 31.18. Luke. 18.13.
who smote upon his breast, and said, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Far
from the heart are those drowsy confessions which many make; but let such
know, that their cold confession, will bring but a cold effect and fruit of
consolation in the end.

Thirdly, it must be freely and willingly, The Third property, It must be free.
Confessio vt perfecta sit, tria debet habere, scil. vt sit voluntaria, nuda, et
munda. Bern. Psalm. 32.5.
and not extorted or enforced: Many do confess their sins, but they are
drawn to it (as we say) by head and ears; The anguish of their Souls, and
horror of their Consciences; the violence of some sickness, or some other
judgment, does force them to it. But this is no free will offering, and
therefore not regarded: Perfect confession must be voluntary, and so was
David's; I will confess my sin, and so thou forgauest etc.

Fourthly, we must so confess, The Fourth property with purpose to forsake.

Vera confessio and vera penitentia est, qua^do sic paeuit^t hominem p^ccass^,
vt crime^ non rep^tat. Ber.


as that we also purpose to leave and forsake: for otherwise Pharaohs
confession would be as good as ours; then does a man truly confess, when he
leaves those sins, which he has made confession of. We may not then
confess, as the Papists do, who presume to sin because of confession; nor
as the Atheist does, who confesses sin in a bravery, purposing to live in
it; but with good Shecaniah, so confess, as that we make a covenant to leave
and forsake those sins, which we make confession of. Ezra. 10.23. The Fifth
property. It must be with hope of mercy.


Fifthly, it must be in Faith: As with the one eye we must behold our sins,
and the heynousnes of them, so with the other eye we must look upon the mercy
of God in Christ: So are we to dwell on the meditation of our sins, as that
we forget not the riches of Gods grace. We may not then confess, as the
convicted thief before the Judge, who expects nothing but hanging: but as the
sick man to his Physician, in hope of being cured. There is a confession,
which is the daughter of desperation, Math. 27.5.
as we see in Judas, who confessed, I have sinned, and hanged himself when he
had done. Beware of that.

The Sixth property with prayer for mercy. 2 Samuel 24.10.
And lastly, with confession, Prayer must be added, and with the acknowledgment
of our sins, remission must be craved. I have sinned exceedingly in that I
have done, (says David) therefore now Lord I beseech thee take away the
ttespasse of thy servant. He does as well beg mercy and forgiveness, as
acknowledge his offense. But this did did not Cain nor Judas: Though they made
confession of there faults, Genesis 4.
they cried not for mercy, and therefore received no comfort nor grace in time
of need.

Other properties there are necessarily required, as that it must be made with
Exageration, we must aggrauate our sins and not extenuate them; As also that
it be made, with humiliation, and only unto God, not to Saint or Angel. But
these I am in the next place to handle, and therefore I pass them by here. See
then that thy confession be made in this right manner, that it may be
acceptable and pleasing unto God: Confess not only in General that thou art a
sinner, but reckon up thy special sins; say. Lord this and this have I done;
such a word did I speak, such a fault did I commit; at such a time, in such a
place to the provoking of thy wrath, and that most justly against me. And see
that thou confessest with the heart as well as with the tongue, that thou may
call God himself for a witness: Thou Lord who art the searcher of the heart
and reins, know that I confess it with my soul, yea and that freely and
willingly, without any extorting or enforcing, and with a full resolution to
forsake it hereafter. Pardon therefore oh Lord! pardon and forgive. Psalm. 51.2.
And according to the multitude of thy mercies blot out this my offense. Thus
(or after the like manner) must thou come before the Lord and make thy
confession: which if thou do, assure thy self (for God has engaged his
truth upon it) that thou shall obtain pardon and forgiveness.

And in the last place, seeing this is so. That the ready 1 John 1.9.
who has promised, the word is gone out of his mouth, which he will never
recall; he can no more deny it then deny himself. Comfort therefore thy
self, for the more thou confessest the better it is for thee; and how ever, in
the Courts of men, confession brings shame and punishment: yet in Gods court it
brings a cover and reward.

Father.] Here we see to whom he makes confession. It is not to the servants,
nor to his brother, but to his Father. Hence learn;

Confession of sin must be made unto the Lord. Doctr. Confession of sin is
to be made to God. Psalm. 32.5. Dan. 9.4. Hos. 14.2.
I acknowledged (says David) my sin unto the Lord. And so did Daniel, I
prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said, O Lord, we have
sinned, etc. This is given the Israelites in charge, That they should take upon
them words, and turn unto the Lord. It is to God then, to whom we must turn,
it is to him that we must confess.

The reasons are these.

First, All sin is committed against God. True it is, Because all sin is
properly committed against God.
and bring much damage both to the body and goods of others by the committing
of them, as David to Vriah; but the chiefest dishonor is against God, whose
law is broken and transgressed. And hence it was that David did cry out, Psalm.
51.4.
Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight.
Now, if this be so, then am I to make confession unto him him alone, he being
the party wronged, and against whom the chiefest dishonor is.

God only can forgive. Job 34.31.
It pertains only unto God to say, I have pardoned, I will not destroy
(says Elihu in the Book of Job.) The Jews though they were blind in many
things, yet this they knew, that none could forgive sins but God only. And
the Lord himself does testify as much, Mark 2.7. Isa. 43.25.
I, even I, am he that puts away thy iniquities for my own sake.

He only knows the heart.
) Now, this God only does, and none but he: To him therefore are we to come
and make acknowledgement.

It is a part of his worship. Isa. 41.8. 1 Samuel 7.3. Math. 4.10. Object. Answ.
Now, God will not give his glory to another, he will not have any part-stakes
with him, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve.

But then it may seem unlawful to make confession unto men, and to
acknowledge our sins unto them.

Not so: We allow confession of sins to men, both in public and private (as
we have heard in the beginning of the former doctrine) to testify the truth of
our Repentance, and for the setting up of Gods glory, and satisfaction of the
parties wronged.

Auricular confession (held and maintained by that man of sin) which upon
pain of damnation must be made in the ear of a Priest by every one,
immediately before the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. A
cunning invention for the discovering of all states, and for the upholding and
enritching of that covetous and ambitious Sea: Hereby they come to know the
hearts and affections of men, and knowing them, they can quickly tell what
course to take for themselves, either for bringing good or preventing
mischief, Scripture brought to maintain auricular confession answered. Iam
5.16. Matthew. 3.5.6.
for the enriching themselves and impouerishing of others. As for the
Scriptures they allege, they make nothing for them, if they be thoroughly
scanned, Confess your sins one to another (says S. James) an express place
say they to prove Confession of sins to a ghostly Father. There went out
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the regions round about Jordan, and were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins (says S. Matthew:) Lo, say
they, how those conuerts did also practice it. The confession S. James
requires, was to be, 1. In time of sickness.
These are two of the maine pillars which they have to uphold their building,
when indeed neither of them is for their turn. As for the first, Let them know
(if they will not wilfully be ignorant, which is much to be feared) that the
confession of faults which the Apostle there speaks of, is to be made in time
of sickness.

Secondly, In the private houses of the diseased; 2. In the private house.
And not in the Church; in the time of health, and in the ear of a Priest, and
in their holy time of Lent a little before Easter.

Thirdly, 3. It must be one to another. Caictan. Scotus.
The Confession he there requires is to be made one to another. So then by
this the Priest is as well bound to confess to Laymen, as they unto the
Priest; it binds as well the one as the other, as two of their own side have
confessed.

As for the example of those conuerts which they allege; this briefly. First,
The confession of the Conuerts, was, 1. Voluntary. 2. In general, not of every
particular sin.
their confession was voluntary, not constrained.

And secondly, It was general, and not particular of all and every sin; for
had they confessed every one and that particularly, John must have stood from
morning to evening, many years together, because Jerusalem and all Iewry, and
all the Countries round about came unto him, as the Text says; had it
therefore been as the Papists teach, John must of necessity have had shriuing
work enough for all the days of his life. Fulke in loc.
Such a confession therefore, Quod fine numero est, quomedo numerale? Bern. See
Calvin Institut. l. 3. c. 4. And Whites Way to the Church. page 157. 226. 227.
with many others.
as they teach and use, is neither necessary nor possible, and such a doctrine
as was not heard of before Innocent the third, which was twelve hundred years
after Christ, he was the first that made an act and decree touching it. But I
will be sparing in this point (for I intend not controversy) so much having
been written for the confutation of it. I now leave them, and come to a second
use.

Is this so, that confession of sin is to be made unto the Lord: then see
thou fly unto him when thou have offended,

Object.
But God already knows them, what need we then confess them?





Quest.
But cannot God forgive sin, without this condition, that we confess it?

Answ.
The Question is not what God can do, but what God will do: He can do far
more then he will; and will do what he pleases. It is his will, that the end
and means should go together: he has decreed it, and therefore will not alter
it. Plead therefore no longer against thine own salvation, but acknowledge thy
faults unto him: remember he is one that knows before, what and wherein thou
have offended, and therefore seek not to hide any thing from his all-seeing eye.
Set thy self ever as in his presence, in making thy confession, whether it be
in public or private, and bring with thee a holy blushing, a godly sorrow, and
a full purpose to leave and forsake those sins which thou make confession of:
evermore remember thou have to deal with God, and not with man, in this
penitential exercise. Were men thus persuaded, they durst not come with that
impudency and hollownesse, to make acknowledgement, which now they do; but be
thou persuaded of it, and in confessing of sin, add not sin to sin.

Against Heaven, Text.
and in thy sight] He does not mince and extenuate the matter; he says not,
Father, I have sinned, but I had no bad meaning, I knew not what I did. Neither
does he plead the instability of his youth, to extenuate his fault, but he
aggrauateth and enlarges the greeuousnesse of his sin, and sets it out to
the uttermost. 1. I have sinned. 2. Against Heaven. 3. In thy sight. All tend
to the aggrauation of his fault. To break a lawful command enjoined by the
Magistrate (though of ignorance) is a fault; wilfully to break, it is a
greater: but to do it in his sight and presence, argues great rebellion. From
the Prodigal his practice, let us learn,

That it is the property of a true penitent, not to mince, Doctr. A true
Penitent does not mince his sin, but aggrauate the same.
or coctennate his sin, but to aggrauate and set it out, in the worst and
vilest manner that he can. True repentance makes a man large and plentiful in
the accusation of himself, it causes a man to amplify and exaggerate his
offense, and make the most and worst of sin that possible can be. See this
proved by sundry examples. Ezra confessing his own sins, and the sins of
the people, says thus; Ezra 9.6.
Our iniquities are increased over our heads, and our trespasses grown up to
the heavens. And Daniel, he confesses thus, We have sinned, Dan. 9.5.
and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even
by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments. See what terms of
aggrauation he heapeth up, as if all were too little that he could say against
himself, and the rest of the people. So David in his confession, 2 Samuel 24.10.
for that sin of numbering the people, I have sinned greatly, in that I have
done; and now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant,
for I have done very foolishly. Such was his indignation against himself, for
offending God, as that he had never enough in blaming of himself, 1. I have
sinned. 2. I sinned exceedingly. 3. I have done foolishly. 4. Very foolishly.
Thus is he large and plentiful in his own accusation. And so the Apostle
Paul, speaking of his persecuting of the Church, does set it out to the full. I
was (says he) a persecutor, 1 Timothy 1.13, 15.
a blasphemer, and an oppressor, yea, the chief of all sinners. See how he
does load himself with terms of reproach. Neque hoc dicebat mentiendi
praecipitatione, sed existimandi affectione. Bern. De vita solitaria.
Who could have said more against him, then he did against himself? Neither
does he, in uttering this speech, make a lie, or speak for modesties sake, but,
as he thought, in his very heart, esteeming no man's sin like his own, nor
feeling another man's, as his own.

Reason.
The Reason may be this; Because the eyes of a Penitent are in some measure
opened, so that he now sees sin in its own colors, and apprehends it as
a deadly, enemy to Gods glory, and his own souls health. Now we know how
ready we are to speak the worst we can, of those who are enemies unto us, and
to set forth their vile practices to the uttermost. Thus the hatred he bears
unto sin, causes him to think, that he can never sufficiently display it,
and makes him so disposed, as that no malicious wicked man can so set forth
the faults of his enemy, whom he deadly hates, as he desires to set forth the
loathsomeness of his own sin. Thus we have seen the reason. The uses follow.

do so mince the matter, that mountains seem mole-hils, and mole-hils motes.
Sinners they are, but yet not the greatest sinners: they are not alone, but
others are as bad as they. Justify themselves they will with that proud
boasting Pharisie; God I thank thee, Luke 18.11.12.
I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
Publican: so they thank God, they are neither whores nor thieves, murderers,
nor drunkards; and if they do no worse, they trust they shall do well enough.
This in stead of ingenuous confession, is to be seen and heard amongst men,
which evidently proclaims, that true repentance is much wanting.

Secondly, Would thou have pardon at the hands Ah Lord God, how have I
displeased thee? how grievously have I offended thee? Sinning not of ignorance,
but of knowledge, yea, wilfully and presumptuously, with a high hand: against
the light of my conscience, and those blessed means thou have affoorded me
for my restraint: I have grieved thy blessed spirit, and the hearts of thy
children, and I have opened the mouths of the wicked, causing them to
blaspheme, by reason of my sinful crime. Thus am I not only a sinner, but a
rebellious sinner; not an ordinary offender, but an obstinate one: a filthy,
loathsome, unclean Leper, whose soul and body is wholly polluted and defiled;
from head to foot there is nothing appearing, but wounds, bruses, and sores,
full of corruption; all my thoughts, words, and deeds, are evil, only evil,
and that continually. Thus must thou aggrauate thy sins, and article against
thy self. Urge God again and again, to hear this, and this too, Lord, this
sin have I committed, and this also, at such a time, in such a place, amongst
such and such company, there did I do it, etc. And thus must thou exaggerate
thy faults, and confess them largely, and ingenuously. Thou did enlarge thy
sins in the committing, cut them not short in the confessing: Tell the worst
tale thou can against thy self, and thou shall speed the better: And be
ashamed that any should say worser of thee, then thou do of thy self unto
the Lord.

Quest.
But does not a man prejudice the truth, in amplifying of his own weakness and
unworthiness, and in confessing more of himself then indeed is true, as the
Apostle Paul, who says, he was the first or chief of sinners, when there were
many greater sinners then he?

Answ. Doctor Willet on the second of Sam. cap. 9. Quest. 6.
This question is thus answered; First, we must make a difference between the
general confession of the weakness and sinfulness of our nature, which the
most perfect in this world may and must acknowledge; and a particular
acknowledgment of some actual sin which a man is not guilty of: Now, to
confess such or such a sin, which a man has not committed, is a preiudicing
of the truth, and may not be done. And thus Saint Paul, though he say, he was
the chiefest sinner, yet he does not say, he was an Adulterer, or an Idolater,
or the like, which sins he was free from.

Secondly, we are to know, the practice of Repentance (being an act of the
affections) causes a man to judge, and speak of himself, according to the
truth of that he does conceive and feel to be in himself, and so according to
his sense, to make his faults with the most, rather then with the least. And
this a man may do, and yet be within the compass of the truth of his own
conceiving, though beyond the extent of the truth of his sins, in themselves
exactly considered. And thus did the Apostle speak, according to his sense,
and thought himself to be inferior unto all. And thus much for this Question,
as also for this doctrine. Now, let us proceed and come to the next, which is
his Humiliation.

And am no more worthy to be called thy son. Text.
See how he humbles, and abaseth himself unto his Father, I am unworthy to
be thy son, yea, I am unworthy the very name of son, so many have been my
sins, so lewd has bin my course. The instruction hence may be this;

The only way to obtain pardon for sin, Doctr. The only way to obtain
Gods favor is with an humble heart to seek it. 1. Pet. 5.6.
and procure Gods favor, is with an humble heart, and lowly soul to come
before him. The only way to be exalted by him is to come unto him in humility
of soul, and lowliness of spirit. The practice of this Prodigal is a
president for us. For the farther proof of this truth, remember what S. Peter
says. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may
exalt you. And what S. James says, Iam. 4.10.
Humble your selves in the sight of God, and he shall lift you up. It is no
hard matter to bring a cloud of witnesses to justify this, but I will be
sparing, and remember you only of that Parable of the proud Pharisie, and the
Publican, and so away. These two go up into the Temple to pray. Luke 18.10.
The Pharisie begins and prays thus, God I thank thee, Verse 11.
I am not as other men, etc. He shows not vulnera, but munera, not his wounds,
but his worth; not his misery, but his bravery: reputing himself so just,
that he neither says, thy kingdom come, nor yet forgive us our trespasses:
August. Hom. 36. de verb. Dom. secund Luc.
But (as having no sin, and abounding already with all grace) both these he
leaves out; thanking God more for that other were bad, then for that himself
was good. Now the Publican, he stands a far off, Verse 13.
and would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his
breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. As the one exalts himself, in
respect of his virtue: so the other humbles himself, in regard of his sin:
As the one shows his robes, so the other (like a poor beggar) shows his rags,
and (as an humble petitioner) his grieuances. Now mark how Christ applies
this, Verse 14.
I tell you this man departed home unto his house, more justified then the
other: for every one that exalts himself, shall be abased, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

The Reasons may be these:

Reason. Isay 66.2. Isay 57.15.
First, Such only has God promised to look upon, and show mercy too; To this
man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit: and
again; Thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose
name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place: with him also that is of a
contrite and humbled spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones: as for other, they have no promise of favor or
of mercy.



Use.
Let the Use of this, be for Exhortation. Come before the Lord with humbled
souls and contrite spirits, for this is of him much set by. And to stir us
up to the putting on of this grace (as the Apostle does exhort us) consider of
these motives; Colos. 3. Motives to labor for humility, and avoid pride.
Tract. de Passione Dom. cap. 19. First, Pride is the Devils first borne. A
second motive, God exalts the humble, but casts down the proud one. Luke 1.46.
Ps. 113.56.
first, Pride, it is the Devils first borne, and the Devils first poison which
Satan powered into our nature; and this (as Bernard speaks) is the Devils
character: for as the servants of Christ and children of God, are known by
charity and humility; so the servants of sin, and sons of Satan, are
known by pride and cruelty; and therefore let this move us to embrace the one
and abhor the other. Secondly, God exalts such as are humble, but such as are
proud does his soul hate. His deeds has manifested this: he called humble
David, from the Shepherds crook to the Kings Crown. He did so regard the
meekness of the Virgin, that all generations count her blessed. Thus he
takes up the simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the mire.
But he deals otherwise with the proud, and ever has done. The proud Angels he
thrust out of heaven, and our proud parents out of Paradise: For it he drove
Nebuchadnezzar from the company of men, Dan. 4.30.
and made him to have his habitation with the beasts of the field, and to eat
grass as Oxen. What shall I need to speak of Haman, Herod, and others, Pro.
16.8.
whose pride did cause their fall and ruin? by this that has been said we
see the Psalmists saying verified, Psalm. 138.6.
Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly; but the proud he
knows a far off. The most high has especial respect to such as are most
low. Marlo rat. in Luc. cap. 1. verse. 48.
God cannot look above him (says one) because he has no superior: nor
about him, for that he has no equal: he regards only such as are below him.
The lower then a man is, the nearer unto God, and the more exposed to his
sight, who looks from above: but the higher he is, the farther is he off; and
the more proud he is, the less is he respected. Seeing then this is so, how
should this work upon us, and make us to deck our selves with this excellent
grace; which like the Violet (though it grows low by the ground, and hangs
the head under some obscure leaf, as willing to live unseen,) yet is the
sweetest of flowers, and beloved of all.

Thirdly Humility, is the keeper of all graces, A third motive, Humility
preserues grace, but pride destroys it. It is, conseruatrix virtutum. Bernard,
2 Kings 4.39. Eccles. 10.1.
but Pride the spoyler of them. No box better to keep those jewels in, then a
heart well lined with humility. Look as ashes do preserve fire, so does our
humility the sparkles of Gods blessed spirit. But now on the other side, pride
spoils all. This, like Colloquintida, imbitters the whole pot of Pottage. And,
like a dead Fly, spoils a whole box of ointment, causing it to send forth a
stinking savor: This causes our knowledge to stink, our zeal to stink, as
it did Iehue's: In a word, any good thing that is in thee, is spoiled by this
weed. Oh how should this cause us to be in love with that grace, and detest
this vice!

Fourthly, Humility makes us like Christ himself, Fourthly, By it, we become
like Christ himself.
and therefore must needs be an excellent virtue: this grace he wills us to
learn of him, for he was meek and lowly in heart. He disdayned not to wash
his Disciples feet, Phil. 2.5.6.
to teach them humility. He made himself of no reputation, and took upon him
the form of a servant, that we might learn of him to be humble. Let the same
mind therefore be in you (says the Apostle) that was in Christ Jesus. He was
humble, be thou then ashamed to be proud.

Let these things be well thought of, and that by us all, be we never so
extraordinarily graced by God, Pride is such a sin as it steals upon the
very best; and Gods most sanctified children are most buffeted with it.
Therefore these motives are to be remembered by us all, and the Remedies to be
used, Means for subduing pride and seeking humility.
which are these: First, careful and conscionable attendance upon the Word.
This is the hammer that must break the heart, for until it be humbled, there
is no good to be done. Is not my Word like a hammer, that breaks the stone?
This hammer will bruise this stony heart, and grind it to powder, and without
this hammer, there is no hope of ever having the heart truly humbled. Submit
thy self therefore to the stroke of this hammer, if thou truly desire the
attainment of this grace.

I^r. 28, 29. A second means is Meditation. First of Gods Attributes and
works of his justice in special. Heb. 3.16.
A second means is Meditation, and that of a threefold object.

First, of God, and his Attributes, with the works of his Power and Justice,
which are excellent helps to make us quake; and break the stony rock of our
souls to pieces: As we see in Habakuk, When I heard (viz. of these judgments
threatened) my belly trembled, my lips shook at the voice, rottenness entered
into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of
trouble.

Secondly, of thy estate past. Ephesians. 2.3. Psalm. 51.5.
Secondly, of our own estate either Past, Present, or to Come. For the Time
past, what thou were viz. A child of wrath and firebrand of hell. Shapen in
iniquity and conceived in sin. The serious meditation of this would be enough
to humble us and make us strike sail.

For the time present. Secondly of thy estate present, being first frail. Job.
4.19. And 10.9.
Remember how thou art frail and sinful: thou art frail and brittle, being
but dust and ashes, and ready to be broken with every little fillop, and
knock, Thy foundation is laid in the dust, and thy walls are made of clay. Thy
whole body is but a Tabernacle of earth. This is thy estate oh man! and this
is the estate of all men. Some indeed are more painted then other some, but all
are earthen pitchers: Some are more clear then others, but all glasses frail,
brittle. Is here any cause of pride?

Thou art also sinful, Secondly sinful. Romans 7.24.
having much corruption within thee, and carrying a whole body of sin about
with thee, so that the good thou would do, thou do not, and the evil
thou should not do, that do thou daily. Verse 19.
Thou may well cry out with the Apostle Paul, O wretched man that I am.

For the time to come, Thirdly of thy (...) Genesis (...)
remember what thou (...) dust thou art, so to dust thou shall return, yea,
and beco^^ the basest dust. As we see the whitest Snow, when it is resolved
unto water, whereof it was congealed, becomes fouler water then any water else:
so thou Oh man of earth, when thou shall return again unto earth, shall
become viler, and baser earth, then any other whatsoever.

Thus the consideration of thy own natural estate, whether Past, Present, or
to come, will be an excellent means, to take down this Peacocke pride, and
make thee humble.

Thirdly, consider of the estate of others, and without envy cast an eye upon
their gifts: Thirdly, of the estate of others
consider how many thou come far behind in knowledge, faith, zeal, etc.
and other graces. This is the receipt which the Apostle prescribes to the
Phillippians, against this sin of pride, Look not every man on his own
things, 2. Phil. 4.
but every man also on the things of others. This would be an excellent means,
to diminish a self liking, and that ouerweening conceit of our own
excellency.

The last means to be used, The third means is Prayer.
is earnest and fervent Prayer, that the Lord would be pleased to give thee
this grace of humility; and bless the means thou use for this end and
purpose: Every good gift (says S. James) comes from the Father of lights:
and so must this also, else we shall never have it. Thus we have seen the
means, now let us use them, and that conscionably, for let me tell you the cure
of pride is no easy cure, and the obtaining of humility no easy purchase.

All vices are against it; and which is more strange, all virtues are against
it; and which is yet more strange, humility has an opposition against
humility, as if she were false to her own person. Sape homo de vanae gloriae
contemptu vanus gloriatur.
Humility oftentimes by a prodigious and preposterous birth brings forth
pride. How often is a man proud because he is not proud. A secret pride is
oftentimes occasioned by ouercomming (as we think) pride, when alas now pride
has given us the soil, as a cunning wrastler seems many times to take the
fall, for no other end but to get the other upon the hippe. How wonderful
careful then had we all need to be, what need have we to study and pray
for humility yea, in the midst of grace to pray for an humble heart. See thou
remember the former means delivered; and if at any time (as who at sometime
shall not feel) thy heart begin to swell, remember these and the like
sayings, Be not high minded, but fear. God resists the proud, he looks upon
such a far of. Oh they are excellent helps! hear thou any commend thee,
and set forth thy praises, then remember the former sentences, and let them
stand Sentinel, to keep thee from pride. Remember also to meditate (as of
Gods glory and greatness) so of thy own vileness and baseness; remember
what thou were, what thou art, and what thou must be; hold thy self to this
task, Plin. Not. hist. lib. 11. cap. 10.
and it will keep thee from it. It is recorded of the Be, that in stormy
weather it will get up a little stone, that by the weight it may fly more
steddily, and get home in safety. Art thou in danger to be blown away with
pride? get thy self to Prayer, and Meditation, it will be to thee as the
little stone to the Be, or as Ballast to the ship, to keep thee from being
turned about with the waves of self-conceit. Thus get this grace, and when
ever thou come to the Lord bring it with thee, and fear not of speeding, for
they that fall down lowest at Gods almes-dealing, speed ever best. And thus
much for this point, as also for this part of the Prodigalls Regresse.

VERSE 20. But when he was yet a far off, his Father saw him, and had
compassion, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him.
Having spoken of the Prodigals Repentance, we are now to speak of the
success of it; which is laid down in the 20, 22, and 23 verses, and so to the
end. Wherein we may observe, His fathers good will; and his Brothers ill will;
his fathers good will is to be seen in the 20, 22, 23, and 24 verses: his
brothers ill will in the rest. In the former these three things are obseruable.
First, his Fathers readiness to receive him, verse 20. Secondly, the
entertainment he gave him, verse. 22, 23. Thirdly, the reason of both, verse 24.

The readiness of the father to receive his son, is noted; First, by his
looking on him a far off, For when he was yet a great way off, his father saw
him, Secondly, by his running to him, while he was a far off, He had
compassion, and ran. Thirdly, by his kind embracing of him, He fell on his
neck and kissed him.

To begin with the first.

But when he was yet a great way off, Text.
he saw him] Albeit this be put here in the last place, yet it is referred by
most of our Expositors to the first time of his conversion; for it was this
look that brought home this Prodigal. He saw him, and looked on him with the
eyes of pity, and by looking upon him, infused into him the secret efficacy of
his spirit, and pierced his heart with the beams of his grace, which so
prevailed with him, that it brought him to repentance, as it did with Peter,
which made him to go out and weep bitterly for his sins, after he had thrice
denied his Master. Thus they make it, as a cause of his conversion. And taking
it thus, this point will follow.

Doctr. Our conversion is from Gods free grace. John 6.44. Romans 9.6.
The conversion of a sinner is from Gods free grace, Gods grace is the cause of
it. Hence is it, that Christ says, No man comes unto me, except the Father
draw him. Hereunto also comes the saying of the Apostle, It is not in him
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Hence is
it also, that the Church thus prays, Cant. 1.4.
Draw me, and we will run after thee. But most fully and clearly does the
Prophet Ezechiel set out the truth of this point, speaking (in the person of
God) these words, Ezech. 36.26, 27.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will give you a heart of
flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes. See how the Prophet wholly disableth man from the work of his
conversion, ascribing both the beginning and progress thereof unto the Lord.

Many pregnant examples might be brought, both of the Unregenerate before their
conversion, as also of the Regenerate in their falls, after their conversion,
for the further confirming this point in hand. What disposition was the^e in
the Apostle Paul, Acts 9.1.
to further his conversion? was he not breathing out threatenings and slaughters
against the Disciples of Christ Jesus? and had he not procured a commission
from the High Priests, to bind all that were of that way? Did not God behold
him a far off? Did he not look upon him from the habitation of his
dwelling? And did he not thus behold Matthew the Customer, Zacheus the Usurer,
Mary the sinner, Ephesians. 2.12.
and us Gentiles, When we were (as the Apostle says) without hope and God in
the world, being strangers from the covenant of promise, and aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel? I could bring variety of examples, that would serve to
strengthen the point, but I will remember you but of one more, and so hasten to
the uses, and that is of Peter; was not God feign to look on him a far off
before he repenred? Luke 22.
He had denied his Master once and wept not: yea twice, yet shed not a tear
(though the Cock had crowed.) And the third time he denies him, yet weeps not
until Christ beholds him, and then (as the text says) he wept bitterly. Verse
61.
Assuredly, if Christ had not cast an eye on him, and beheld him with a
gracious aspect; had a thousand several persons questioned with him about his
master, he would have denied him a thousand times. Thus a sinner is like an
Echo, he cannot speak first to God, but must answer a voice from God.

The Reasons.
And needs must this be so, because we are dead in trespasses as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 2.1. Colos. 2.13.
and as the Father of this Prodigal avouches of him, dead, not in a sown,
but dead; stone-dead (as we say) and therefore have no more power to stir
hand or foot, for the furthering of our own conversion, then Lazarus had
power to come out of the grave, before Christ called him.

A second reason, why Gods grace is all in all in the Ephesians. 2.8.
By grace you are saved (says he) and that not of yourselues: it is the gift
of God. If any now ask a reason, he gives it in the next words: Verse 9.
Not of works least any man should boast. Thus have we seen the reasons, now
let us hear the uses.

And in the first place, this may serve for confutation, first, of the
Pellagians, who affirm, that our good actions and cogitations proceed only
from free will, and not from Gods special grace.

Secondly, it makes against our Semi-pellagians, I mean the Papists, who are
all for Will, little or nothing for John: that is Gods grace, but (like
Solamons whore) divide that betwixt two, Voluntas human^s non liberate
gratia^, sed gratia libertatem consequitur. August.
God and man, which of right belongs only unto God. God only (say they)
persuades the will, as a man his friend, to take a journey, whereto he is
unwilling: but in the accomplishing of any work, God is only an assistant,
for man by his own power works together with him. This is little better then
blasphemy thus to hold, that the will of man does work with Gods grace in any
thing, that is good. True it is, as they are works and actions, so they
proceed from the will of man; but as they are good works, so only are they
works of grace: For all actions of man may be distinguished into three sorts:
some are natural, as to eat, drink, walk, sleep, etc. Now most true it is,
that in these and the like actions, man has freedom of will, but yet so, as
that he has only power to the doing, but not to the well-doing; he is not
able to do any of these things, to any good or godly end: he may use the
means to obtain faith, and repentance: he may go from place to place: he may
enter into the house of God, or not enter, hear the Word, or not hear it; for
this is left to man, and put as it were into our hands; but it is to make us
without excuse; for so to hear as that thereby our conversion might be
wrought, is not in our power: It is the Lord that must first boar the care.

Other kind of actions are moral; as all oeconomicall, and Political duties.
In these, man has no free will of himself, to choose the good, or refuse the
evil: to embrace the virtue, or decline the vice: but as he is wholly directed
and governed by Gods spirit. Lastly, other actions are spiritual: wherein we
are to consider man with a threefold difference. First, as he is before his
conversion, where his will is altogether corrupt, inclining only to that which
is evil. Secondly, as he is in the very act of conversion, where in respect of
the grace, which outwardly preuents him, his will is merely passive; and he
is in the hands of God, Romans 9.21.
even as the clay in the hands of the potter, but yet in respect of the time,
wherein his conversion is wrought, he is not like a stock, but while he is
healed by the holy Ghost, he is also active. In the very act of conversion, the
will of man is not idle, nor without all motion and sense, but it follows,
Acti agimus.
the spirit of God, that draws it far more, and the same moment God moves
and boweth the will, and causes us to be willing indeed; but yet so as all the
efficacy of the work is from the spirit of God; who of unwilling, makes us
willing: and makes us run, who were before slow and dull.

Thirdly, man is to be considered, as he is after his conversion: where,
because the grace of God bears rule, there is a readiness to obey, as the
Apostle shows to the Phillippians, I am able to do all things through
Christ, Phil. 4.13.
who strengthens me. So then we see the truth of this doctrine, how we have
no ability to cooperate (as they falsely teach) with the grace of God: freedom
of the will to turn to God, and to work with him, is no power of nature, but
the work of grace: For of our selves we are not sufficient, as of our selves,
to think, much less to speak; lest of all, to do any good: Indeed we will,
but it is God that works in us to will; we work, but it is God that works
in us to work, according to his good pleasure.

The second Use is for our humiliation. There is no brought, (as the Papists
would have us) no, do not: the one is odious to man, the other more hateful
unto God; undoubtedly he that knows well his own untowardness to that which
is good, will never dare to think there is any thank due unto himself for
the furtherance of his own conversion in the least degree.

David, 115. Ps. 1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be the glory. For it is of
his mercy, not of thy deserving. Is there any difference now betwixt thee and
a Rebrobate? God found it not in thee, but did put it into thee: Thou art of
the same nature with them; thou had no more ability to work out thy own
salvation, then they had. Thou see many commit lewd prankes; some, murder;
others, whoredom, etc. Thou leauest, yea hate these things: What is the
cause? surely Gods grace, and only Gods grace. Give glory therefore unto God,
Psalm. 103.1.
praise his name, yea let all that is within thee praise him.

Jeremiah, Ier. 10.23. Ier. 31.18. Lumen. 5.21. Isay 5.1. Da Domine quod iubes,
and iube quod vis. Aug. Soliloq. cap. 18.
O Lord, I know the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to
direct his steps. Pray also with Ephraim; Convert then me, and I shall be
converted And with the Church, Turn us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be
turned, for it is God that must loose the bands of thy neck, Oh captive
daughter of Syon, it is even he that must convert thy soul. Pray, pray, with
that ancient Father, Lord give grace to do what thou command, and then
command what thou please; otherwise there can be no good looked for in any of
us.

Other of our expositors expound these words according to the method here
propounded. And refer them to the aftertimes, and so make them as the fruit
and effect. He did no sooner begin to turn homewards, but his father looks on
him with the eyes of pity and compassion; yea, and while he was yet a great
way off, before he could confess his fault, he runs to meet him, and
lovingly imbraceth him.

Taking the words thus, they will afford us these good Lessons; first, that

True repentance is the ready way to obtain Gods favor, True repentance the
ready way to obtain Gods favor. 2. Cro. 7.14.
the father will begin to run, he will soon embrace him in the arms of
his mercy; he will not turn away his face from him, but look upon him with
the eyes of compassion. This the Lord testifyeth, saying, If my people which
are called by my name shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and
turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive
their sin, and will heal their Land. And thus in another place: But if the
wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right: he shall surely live, he
shall not dye: all his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him: In his righteousness that he has done, he shall live. So
the Prophet Esaias, after he had exhorted them to wash and make themselves clean
with godly sorrow for sin, he tells them, that Though their sins were as
Scarlet, Esaias 1.18.
they should be made as white as Snow, and if they would consent to obey, they
should eat of the good things of the Land.

This may be further confirmed by the examples of the Israelites, Manasses,
David, and many others.

So then this is the only way to obtain mercy and forgiveness. And that
first,

Because by repentance, Reason. Isay 59.2.
sin (which is the cause of division betwixt God and man) is now removed,
Your sins (says the Prophet) has made a separation between you and your
God. This is the Partition Wall betwixt God and us. Man, and Sin (says a
Father) are two sundry things; destroy sin which is man his work, and God
cannot but love and embrace man as his own work.

Romans 5.1.
as the Apostle says.

Use.
If this be so, that repentance is the only way to obtain Gods favor and
love; then miserable is the condition of those that are impenitent, and walk
on in a course of sin: Let these never hope of Gods favor, so long as they
take this course. Take notice of this, and let it terrify thee that are
impenitent; whose heart will not relent for thy former sinful ways, who
drinkest in iniquity like water, nay, like wine, freely and greedily, with
pleasure and delight: with facility and ease suckest down and swallowest any
kind of sin that is offered; who never as yet has said so much as what have
I done, take notice of it; and if thou have ears to hear, hear; thou art out
of Gods favor, and not in it. Oh that thou knew thy wretched estate and
condition: What rest can thou have, or what peace, so long as thou art not
reconciled unto God?

Daniel gives to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.27.
break of thy sins by repentance, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to
the poor, that there may be a healing of thy error, take a through notice, of
the estate thou art now in; being no otherwise then a traitor out of his
princes favor. For so thou art in the eyes of the most high God. Come
therefore as Benhadads servants Came to Ahab, 1. Kings 20.23.
even with an halter about thy neck, creeping and crouching before the throne
of grace, throwing thy self down before Gods footstool, in the humble and
penitent acknowledgement and confession of thy sins: never think to have God
favorable unto thee, till thou thus come with a bleeding heart, lamenting
and bewailing thy offenses past, and resolving on a new course for time to come.

A Third use of this may be for a direction, unto such Psalm. 51.
humble thy self before the Lord confess thy sin, lament and bewail, that
thou have deprived thy self of such an inestimable Jewel: Take this course,
and be not too too discouraged; for by this doing thou shall recover what thou
formerly have lost, and howeuer happily God will not presently be found, Hosea.
6.1.
yet assure thy self he will at length return and revive thee, and restore
thee to the joys of his salvation.

The last use which I will make of this point, is for the Zion, let this be
well considered of you, it will be as marrow to your bones, and as the rain to
the new mowne ground; For repentance is the only way to procure Gods favor;
then thou that do daily mourn and confess and bewail thy sins, assure
thy self thou art highly in Gods favor, assure thy self thou have it, and
having it, what Can be wanting? Oh the comfort which that man has that has
this assurance! this will relieve and reviue a man's spirits, even when the
pangs of death are upon him, and when the sorrows of the grave do compass him
about. And this assurance may thou have who do repent, it belongs unto
thee, refuse not then that joy that God does offer. Doctr. 2. The first motions
of repentance, if true, are pleasing to God.


Thus much for this first doctrine now follows a Second which is this.

The very first motions of repentance and beginnings of conversion, if true and
unfeigned, are acceptable unto the Lord. For while the son was yet a far of,
the father had compassion, he had not yet come and fallen down, and confessed,
and yet the father shows mercy unto him, so then we may safely make this
conclusion, that the very first motion, the first step we tread, and take
homeward, is well pleasing to God: for the further proof of this point, Psalm.
32.5.
Consider what David says I said, I will confess, and thou forgauest. Where
we see remission did follow a purpose of confession, it being sound and
sincere, see the story, 2. Sam. 12.7.13. As Soon as he begins to confess God
is so well pleased with it that he does prevent him saying. Thy sin is put
away thou shall not dye.

Reason.
The reason of the former point may serve for this also viz. Because the first
motion to repentance if true and unfeigned, is joined with some seed of saving
faith, which be it never so small or weak; though but as a grain of mustard
seed; yet it makes a man pertaker of Christ, in whom God is well pleased with
us.



Thus then have we seen the point proved, now let us see it applied.

Use.
And the use shall be for comfort to weak Christians, who are much discouraged
with their weak proceedings in grace: they feel not their hearts so broken
as they desire: they desire with all their hearts to turn unto the Lord, to
leave sin, but still they fall and that fowly: The good they would do they
do not, Romans 7.19.
the evil they would not do, that do they daily. Well is it thus? yet be not
thou discouraged, for though thy repentance be but in a beginning, yet if it be
true, God will meet it with mercy. Thou say thou desire; is thy desire
true and unfeigned* do thou desire to walk so as that God may be glorified?
do thou express thy desire by using of all good means? ^. Cor. 8.12.
and is not thy desire idle? and art thou content to do any labor, and take
any pains for the obteining of grace? do thou thirst after it as the Heart
does after the rivers of water? if it be thus, assure thy self thy desire is
highly pleasing unto God, and most acceptable unto him; the Lord he will not
reject it, nor thee in regard of it; He will not break the bruised reed, Mat.
12.20.
nor quench the smoking flax; till he bring forth judgment unto victory. He
does not conteme the least measure of his own grace, he has bestowed on thee.
Be it never so small a quantity if true, it is his own gift, Romans 11.29.
and his gifts are without repentance he cannot despise that which himself
has given, neither take that away for ever, which he has once bestowed. Walk
therefore boldly on, be not discouraged, thy creeping is acceptable to God, go
on with comfort.

And ran] Behold the readiness of this father to receive this his penitent
child, Text.
the one is not so willing to return, as the other is joyful to receive; the
father seeing of him coming, does not stay until he comes but arises to
meet him, yea and when he was a great way of so far as he could see him; he
goes to meet him and stays not for his coming nigher. Hence learn; Doctr.
God is ready to show mercy. Isa. 55.7. Exodus 34.6.7.
God is very ready to show mercy to every true penitent. So says the Prophet
Esaias. He is very ready to forgive. Those titles given him for his name testify
as much. The Lord, the Lord, Strong, Merciful, and Gracious etc. Those
speeches which he so often uses do serve to confirm this truth. Why will ye
die oh you house of Israel? Ezech. 18.31.32. Chap. 33.11.
I desire not the death of him that dies; Cause therefore one another to
return and live. yea, And in another place. As I live says the Lord I desire
not the death of a sinner: turn you turn you from your evil ways, for why
will you die oh house of of Israel?

The reasons are these. First, because man is the workmanship turn, before he
casts it away.

Micah, Micah. 7.10.18. Psalm. 147.11.
mercy pleases him. And David sweetly, The Lord is delighted in them that
fear him, and attend upon his mercy: even as though he rejoiced much in having
an occasion offered of exercising his mercy toward those that desire it.

1. Tim. 1.16.
For this cause I obtained mercy (says the Apostle) that in me first Jesus
Christ might show forth all long suffering for a pattern, Psalm. 32.6.
unto them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. And thus
says David: For this shall every one that is godly, pray unto thee in a time
when thou may be found.

And lastly, God is ready to receive all true penitents to mercy? because
Christ Jesus has discharged their debt, Esaias. 53.5.
and satisfied his justice for their sins. For he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.

Use.
Is this so, that God is ready to forgive every true penitent, then let none
lay the fault upon God, if they perish in their sins; for God is ready and
desirous to forgive: and does often call upon us, to turn from our evil
ways, that so we might not perish.

Object.
But if the Lord would not the destruction of the wicked, it could not be.

This is well answered by one of the Fathers. Answ.
God wileth, and wills not the destruction of a sinner, in a diverse sense: he
wills not their destruction, as concerning the desert, for in that respect he
says, Thy destruction is of thy self oh Israel. Hos. 13.9.
But as it is the punishment of sin, and manifestation of the glory of his
Justice, so he wills it. Accuse not then God at any time, if any destruction
happen unto you, but lay the whole blame thereof where it should be laid, viz.
upon your selves, whose hearts are hard, and will not repent.

Secondly, Seeing this is so, that God is ready to show 2. Sam. 12.13.
say but with David in the truth of of thy heart, I have sinned, and thou shall
soon hear the Lord make answer, The Lord has done away thy sin.

Oh but my sins are many, and great, Object.
and indeed so hideous, and horrible, as that I neither have nor can have any
hope of obtaining mercy.

Are thy sins many? Answ.
then thou have not need to increase them, and make them more, but to lessen
them by Repentance: For thee to say, they are more then can be forgiven, is a
greater sin against God, then the committing of those sins, that lie so
heavy upon thy conscience. For first, thou do derogate from the power of
God, and accusest him of impotencie and weakness: does not he cut short the
Princes power and mercy, that shall say, he can pardon lesser offenses, but not
treason and rebellion? And does not he in like sort shrink up the sinews of
Gods mercy, that says, he can pardon only smaller sins, but not such as are
of a larger size? Again, what do thou but give his Majesty the lie? For he
says, he will extend his mercy unto all that come unto him; Ezeck. 36.25.
and promises to cleanse us from all our filthiness. But thou replyest, No; he
will not extend it unto me, neither will he cleanse me from all my sins: Now
is not this to contradict the Lord, in not giving credit to his word and
promises? Wherefore, though you have sinned greatly, yet despair not of Gods
mercy and grace, nothing can be too hard from him that is omnipotent; whose
mercy is above all his works, and therefore far above our sinful works, be
they never so many. Remember, his promises are made indefinitely to all, that
repent, and turn, no matter what they have been; though Publicans, or
Harlots, Sodomites, or Gomorreans, exclude not thy self, for God does not
exclude thee. Should a Prince send forth his pardon, to a company of traitors
and except none; and if one amongst the rest should thus say; this concerns
not me, because I have been so great an offender, therefore I will still stand
in doubt of my Princes favor, and suspect his word; would not every one accuse
this man of folly, and unthankfulness? Thus do thou, who do still stand
in doubt of pardon for thy sin, though the Lord has sent forth a general
pardon for thee, and all others that do truly repent: Do not thus dishonor
God, and wrong thy own soul, thou can not want mercy, if thou do truly
seek it. Call to mind the days of old; search and see if ever thou can
find an example of any one from the beginning of the world, to this present
hour (were their sins never so heinous or innumerable) who have not found
mercy upon their Repentance and turning. Rahab an Harlot; Abraham (by all
likelihood) an Idolater: Paul a Persecutor: Matthew an Extertioner: Zacheus a
Usurer: even these professed sinners, upon their Repentance, obtained mercy.
And do we not read, how many of those Jews, who beat and buffetted the son
of God, who mocked him, reviled him, and preferred a wicked murderer before
him; and lastly, in most ignominious sort crucified and killed him, were
converted to the number of three thousand of them at one Sermon; Acts 2.41.
and had their sins pardoned and remitted? Who can despair to obtain pardon
of his sins, when they do but remember, that they who bathed their hands in
the blood of the Son of God, should have their souls bathed with it, and
that they should have their sins washed away with that blood which they shed?
Take notice of one example more, and it is that of Manasse, 1. King. 21. Verse
3 4.5.6.
whom the Scripture makes known to have been a horrible Idolater, (sacrificing
his own children unto his Idols) a notable Witch, a wicked Sorcerer, Verse 16.
a bloody Murderer of Gods Saints and Prophets; insomuch, that he filled
Jerusalem, from one end to the other, 2 Cro. 33.12.
with innocent blood: yet this trascendent-sinning King, found favor and mercy
at Gods hands.

Now is not this and the other examples written for our learning, to assure us
of the like favor, if we bring the like repentance? fear not then, though
thy sins be many, yet Gods mercies are above thy sin. It is impossible for
thee to commit more, Math. 12.32. Mark. 3.28.29. 1. Ioh. 5.16.
then he can remit and forgive. I confess indeed, there is an unpardonable
sin, that shall never be forgiven, neither in this life, nor in that which
is to come: but the reason is, not because God cannot forgive it; but because
such as have committed it, cannot relent, nor repent of it; they are gone so
far, that they can never return back, Heb. 6.4 5.6. Object.
as the Author to the Hebrews shows.

This sin I fear I have committed, therefore I am out of hope: Indeed God is
ready to show mercy, but there is none for me.

Do thou fear it? Answ. Such as fear they have sinned against the holy
Ghost, have not. Heb. 10.29.
then I dare pronounce peace to thy soul, thou have not committed it; neither
can thou commit it so long as thou thus fear: for such as do commit this
sin, do it to despite the Spirit of grace, and count the blood of the
covenant as an unholy thing: They are not afraid of it, but (rather) boast of
it; glory in it, and live and dye in it. And therefore be not thou discouraged
from seeking to the Lord; God has mercy in store for thee, yea even for thee,
if thou becommest penitent, be thou what thou will be. But if thou resoluest to
lie still snorting in sin, then let me tell thee, that as there is no sin
be it never so great, but upon thy repentance shall be forgiven; so there is no
sin be it never so small, that thou have committed, but (without repentance)
will be thy damnation. Be wise therefore, and make a good choice, for this day
I have set before thee life and death, at thy choice be it.

Imitation. Let us be like to our heavenly Father; and be as ready to forgive
others who have offended us; as God is to forgive us who have and do daily
offend him. It may be some have offered thee wrong, yea great wrong; yet must
thou forgive, and that redily. Why is there then so much suing and entreating
and begging for reconciliation before pardon be obtained. Remember, God is more
gracious unto thee, and ought not thou to be so unto thy brother?

Doctr. God is more ready to show mercy, then we are to receive it. Esaias
65.24.
Further, in that we here find the son coming to confess, and the father
running to forgive: Hence learn we: God is more ready to show mercy, then
penitent sinners are to sue for mercy: the one comes softly, the other
swiftly. An excellent place to prove this, is that of the Prophet Esaias: Before
they call, I will answer: and whiles they speak, I will hear. God will not
stay until they do call, Verse. 1.
but before they call, he will grant them their desire. And so in the first
verse of that Chapter, I was found of them that sought me not.

My thoughts are not your thoughts, Esaias 55.8.
neither are my ways your ways, says the Lord. It is most true indeed, for
of how stiff, stubborn, implacable a disposition are we of? Have we once
conceived a displeasure against any, how hardly are we reconciled? nay, though
they sue, and seek unto us, yet how hardly are we brought, ever to receive him
to love and favor again within our hearts? so close does wrong and injury
stick unto us. But as for God, behold his goodness, who (albeit he be daily
provoked by our sins) is ready to forgive, and does seek unto us to be
reconciled, being more ready to pardon, then we to beg it. Oh that we were
followers of God herein, like good children! Ephesians. 5.1.


Secondly, let this serve to increase our boldness in God is merciful, and
the like: yet in time of Spiritual distress, to seek to God for mercy, is
no easy matter; it is nothing (says one) in the day of sencelessenesse to
presume: but when once the heart is touched with a sense of sin, it is a hard
matter not to despair. Oh what a hard task is it then to seek for mercy,
and lay hold of it? Consider well what has been said, and store it up against
time of need.

But now happily some will object against this truth, Object.
and say; I have often sought to God for mercy with many a tear and groan,
and yet I have not found, yea and other of Gods children, as Moses, David,
Paul, etc. have prayed and not been heard.

To this I answer; It may be thou have sought for such

Secondly, God may for a time delay to give thee to thy hurt, or else not be
respected as it should. Did God see thee fit to receive, thou should not
want thy desire one hour. In this also is God more ready to show mercy, then
thou to seek.

Paul and Moses, and the rest of Gods servants, with whom God dealt by way of
exchange; keeping from them what they begged, and giving unto them a better
blessing. If then God give not that particular thou ask, but some thing
better then it, for it; (whether it be Patience, Strength, Exercise, or
increase of Grace) thou can not say but God is found: and is as ready, nay
more ready to show mercy, then thou to sue for it at his hands. Let us then
believe, remember, and apply this point for our endless and everlasting
comfort: And beware of sucking poison out of this sweet and blessed flower.

Text.
He fell on his neck, and kissed him.] Here is a joyful meeting, betwixt so
good a father and so badde a son: Mercy, and Truth are met, and each of them
kiss the other: here is truth in the Prodigal, for he dissembled not; and
mercy in the father.

By these circumstances, the heat and fire of his affections is declared, and
his entire love unto his son expressed, for a kiss has ever been as a
pledge and pawn of kindness, which is professed by it: and by this ceremony
or rite, they did express their love in the time of the primative Church one
to another, Justin. Mart. Apolog. 2.
which ceremony continued till the days of Iustine Martyr in customarie use,
before their approaching to the Lords Table; thereby to testify their hearty
reconcilement each to other, 1. These. 5.26.
this was called a holy kiss. It is a ceremony also of civility, and has
been and is still in use. Thus Joseph blessed his brethren, Genesis 45. Ruth. 1.9.
and fell upon their necks and kissed them, etc. When Judas the traitor studied
with himself what course might be the best to bring Christ to his death, he
could devise not a more subtle shift then under a kiss (a pretense of
kindness) to cover his villenie: Cant. 1.
When the Church in the Canticles says to her Spouse, to show his love unto
her, she entreats him to kiss her with the kisses of his mouth, viz. that he
would manifest his love and affection unto her, by manifest and good tokens.
Thus the father kisseth his penitent child, thereby to seal and confirm his
love and good will toward him, that he might make no doubt thereof. So then,
in that the father does thus manifest and declare his love and good will to
this son, after his coming into his presence: hence let us learn this
Lesson.

God will manifest and make known his love unto his children, Doctr. God does
not only love his children, but he will make it manifest by signs and tokens
that he loves them. Romans 5.5.
by evident signs and tokens upon their conversion and turning to him. God
does not only inwardly affect and love his elected children that belong unto
him, but he will also have them resolved of this his love and kindness, and
will in due time make manifest the same by evident signs and tokens, that they
may not doubt of it: The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, (says the
Apostle) that is, the sense and feeling of it, is shed and powered forth into
us, that we might not doubt of it, but be fully persuaded and assured thereof.
And a little after he says; God commends, Verse 8.
(that it, makes known) his love toward us, in that (while we were yet
sinners) Christ died for us.

And were it not so, how could we be affected with it? Reason.
what is it for a blind man to know that the Sun is a most glorious bright
creature when he himself does not see it? so what is it for a man to know
there is much love hid in God, except he have some sense and feeling of it?
That precious ointment, Math. 26.7.
which the woman poured upon Christ's head, gave no savor while it was shut up
in the box, but being shed and powered out, it did then yield a most sweet sent
unto all that were in the room: so the love of God (while it is, as it were,
shut up in Gods decree, and not felt of the Elect, has not that favor with
it: but when they once come to have a taste of it, then it is as an ointment
powered forth, which does exceedingly and plentifully refresh their hearts and
souls.

Quest. Whether Gods Elect, as yet uncalled, are within the compass of Gods
love. Answ.
Upon this that has been said, some may demand; whether Gods Elect, being yet
uncalled, are within the compass of Gods love? for so much does the point
seem to imply.

I answer, They are: God does love his Elect, though for the present, they be
uncalled, as the Apostle does manifestly declare in the place before quoted,
Romans 5.8. Romans 5.8.
where he shows, that God sets forth his love, and makes it known to them,
that he loved them, even while they were yet sinners. So then (in regard of
election) they are beloved of God, being yet uncalled: though indeed, not with
that degree of love it pleases him to vouchsafe to them after their calling.

Now to the uses.

affect his children, but does also manifest the same by signs and tokens,
that they may be out of doubt thereof? Then this may serve to confute that
doctrine of the Church of Rome, who hold that no man can be certainly assured
of the love and favor of God, he may hope well, and so forth: But no man can
have any assured confidence. What is this, but a rack and torment to weak
consciences? What does this, but extinguish the truth and sincerity, both of
faith and love toward God? what fruit brings this, but impatiency in time of
trouble and persecution, and indeed makes a way for desperation of Gods
mercy. Away then with this unsettled doubting, with this uncomfortable doctrine
and false opinion, Acts 5.41. Romans 8.38. Gal. 2.20.
which is contrary to Gods truth, and Saints profession, who have had the sense
of Gods love, and rejoiced therein, even in their extremest affliction, in the
flames of fire, and depth of darksome dungeons.

Secondly, let this stir up every one of us to a diligent with the kisses of
his mouth, whether he has, as yet, manifested his love unto us, by signs and
tokens. For till we have assurance hereof, what comfort can we have? how do
we know whether we be of the number of Elect, or of the reprobate? Strive
therefore to be assured hereof, examine thy self diligently, that thou may
be assured. And forasmuch as we are very ready to deceive our selves in this
matter, thinking we are highly in Gods favor, when it is not so: be therefore
the more careful in thy trial, never give over, until thou can say, I
find this and this sign, whereby I know the Lord loves me.

But how may I come to a knowledge of this? Quest.
And by what signs may I have some assurance hereof?

Know, that whom God loves with this special love, Answ.
to them he gives of his spirit, whereby they are sanctified, The love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given us, says the
Apostle. So then, Signs of Gods special love.

The first sign, the giving of the Spirit. Romans 5.5.

How a man may know he has the Spirit.

1. By the inward working of it.

2. By the outward. Coloss. 4.6.


this gift of the Spirit is an evident token of Gods special love. If any now
demand, how they shall know whether they have the Spirit of God within them? I
answer, as a woman knows her self to be with child, by the stirring of it;
the Spirit will soon be felt and perceived where it is; for it is always
operative, it has such workings, as cannot be hiden.

First, inwardly, enlightening the mind, sanctifying the affections, enclining
the will, and the like.

Then outwardly, framing and fashioning the outward man, unto all conformity,
with the Law of God, both in word and deed. It causes the words to be sauory,
seasoned with salt, and to be such as may administer grace to the hearers: It
drives corrupt communication out of men's mouths, John 2.
as Christ did the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. It also causes men's
works and deeds, in some measure, to be conformable to Gods most blessed
will, making them to leave what God does forbid, and readily to do what God
does command.

Easily then may it be known where Gods Spirit is, if men would take some
pains in examining themselves. In buying of some vessel, men will look both
on the inside and outside, and see it be sound: Do so by thy self, look
first into thy inside, see if thy mind be enlightened, thy affections
sanctified. Then view well the outside, see if thy ways be reformed: If it be
thus, then surely God has manifested his love unto thee, thou art on a good
ground, stand sure. But this mark is somewhat general, and therefore we will
come to others.

The second sign, is love of God. 1 Ioh. 4.19.
If the Lord love thee, then thou do love him again. This S. John does
confirm, We love him, because he loved us first. For, as the cold stone, being
warmed by the Sunne-beames, reflecteth again some of the heat which it
received. So our cold hearts, being stricken with an apprehension of Gods love,
begins to send forth some sparks of love again. The Lords love must first
heat my heart, before I can reflect my affection upon him. Examine then what
love thou bear toward God, try whether it be sound; for certainly, if
thou love him, thou art beloved of him. I know it is thought to be a common
thing, and easy to love the Lord, and he is a wretch, and unworthy to live,
that does not love his Maker. But let every one beware, lest the wretch be
found in his own bosom: For it is not so common a thing to love the Lord,
Tace li^g^^, loquere vita.
as the world takes it to be; All that say they love him, do not love him; many
will love him with their tongues, that hate him in their souls. Be thou
therefore of a good ground, Signs of our love of God.
try thy love by the fruits and effects, and for thy better help, I will touch
a few.

The first sign.
First, if thou love God truly, thou do esteem him and his favor above
all things in the world besides; counting his loving kindness better unto thee
then life, Matthew. 10.37. Psalm. 63.3. Phil. 3.9.
and the signs of his favor thy greatest joy. All things shall be counted,
but as dross and dung, in comparison of it.

Secondly, if thou love God, The second sign of love to God.
thou will then delight in his presence; For the nature of true love is such,
that it earnestly desires the presence of the party which is beloved: Thou will love his house, Psalm. 26.8.
and the place where his honor dwells. Thou will have frequent recourse to
those means, by which the Lord is pleased to converse with his children,
whether Public, as to the hearing of the Word, and receiving of the
Sacraments. Or Private, as reading, singing, etc. taking all occasions to
speak unto him, by prayer and private meditation: yea, thou will have an
ardent desire, to be dissolved, Phil. 1.25. 2 Cor. 5.8.
that thou may be with Christ: and to be absent from the body, that thou
might be present with the Lord.

Thirdly, The third sign of love to God. Psalm. 139.21.
thy love to God may be tried by thy hatred of them, that hate him, and hating
of that which he hates. Thus stood that sweet singer of Israel affected: Do
not I hate them, o Lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those that
rise up against thee? Verse 22.
I hate them with perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies.

Fourthly, our love to God, The fourth sign of true love to God.
may be tried by our readiness in obeying of his commands, love can hardly
deny any work, which the party beloved does enjoin: loath we are to deny to
do any thing, for those whom we entirely affect: He that has my
commandments, Ioh. 14.21.
and keeps them, he it is that loves me, says our Savior.) This is the
love of God, that we keep his commandments, 1 Ioh. 5.3.
and his commandments are not grievous, (says that beloved Disciple.) So then
where there is love, there is obedience, yea willing and cheerful obedience,
His commandments will not be grievous: yea, universal, ready, and cheerful
obedience, his commandments, not commandment, readily will we obey, not one,
but all.

Fifthly, The fifth sign of our love to God.
it may be tried by our willingness and ioyfulnesse, in suffering for his
sake: Love will endure much, and suffer long. It made Jacob serve seven years
of hard service for Rachels sake, Genesis 19.20. Genesis 34.19.
which seemed unto him but a short time. So for the love that Sochem did bear
to Dinah, he was content to suffer the cutting of his flesh, though
(undoubtedly) it were painful and troublesome unto him. Romans 5.3. Acts 5.41.
John 21.19.
This caused the Apostle to rejoice in tribulations: That they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for his name. Thus Peter must prove that he loves
Christ, by being willing to be carried, whether naturally he would not, for the
confirmation of the truth.

The sixth sign.
Sixthly and lastly, if thou love God, thou will have an earnest desire to be
like him in holiness; that child that loves his father, is very desirous to
tread in the steps of his father. Thus it is with him that loves God, he will
endeavor, 1 John 4.17.
as he is, so to be in the world.

By these may thou easily discover the truth of thy love toward God. Fall
then to thy search, and see thou follow this inquiry close: and never rest
until thou find the forenamed marks to be in thee, for till then, thou can
have no assurance (pretend what thou will) either that thou love God, or art
beloved of him: but if thou find them; thou may then conclude thou love
him, and as certainly conclude thou art beloved of him; for had not he first
loved me, I could not love him as I do.

The third sign of Gods love to us. Ephesians s. 3.17. verse 18. verse 19.
Another sign, whereby thou may know, whether God loves thee, is the love of
our brethren: for thus says S. Paul, ye being rooted and grounded in love,
viz. toward our brethren, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is
the breadth, and length, and depth, and height. And to know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge. Thus by the loving of the one, we may attain to the
knowledge of the love of the other. This note S. John also gives; We have
known and believed (says he) the love that God has to us: 1 Ioh. 4.16.
God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. If
then we truly love the brethren, we may know and believe, that God loves us.
It is remarkable, that amongst all the Penmen of holy Scripture, none speaks
more of love then S. John does: and amongst all the disciples that Christ had,
there was none that was more beloved, then he was; who is therefore termed, the
beloved Disciple: John 13.23.
the Disciple whom Christ loved above the rest. Certain it is, he whom God
does most love, is a careful practiser of love to others. See then what love
thou bear toward the children of God, for according as thy love is toward
them, so assure thy self, is the love of God toward thee: And hereby does he
manifest his love toward us, in giving of us grace, to love his children.

Now, forasmuch, as many deceive themselves in this point also, persuading
themselves, Signs of true love to the brethren.
they truly love Gods children, when it is nothing so: let every one of us try
our love, by these few rules.

First, if thou love Gods Saints in truth: First sign. If we love them
especially for their graces. 1. John 5.1. 2. John 1.1. 3. John 1.
thou principally respectest them for the gifts and graces of God that are in
them, and not for carnal ends and by-respects: as because they are friendly,
courteous, kind: or for that thou hopest to receive some good from them. It is
for the truths sake, that thou love them best, as John did the Elect Lady,
and godly Gaius.

Secondly, if thou love them in truth, Second sign. If we love them for the
good report, etc. 3. Ioh. 3.4.
thou shall find and feel the affections of thy soul kindled toward them,
upon any good report thou hear of them, for their faith, zeal, patience,
obedience, and other such like graces, albeit thou never knew them, or had
any dealing with them.

Thirdly, Third sign. If we delight in their fellowship. Psalm. 16.3. 3. Ioh. 8.
thou will then delight in their fellowship and company, counting them the
only blessed companions of this life. Thou will then say with that kingly
Prophet As for the Saints that are in the earth, and the excellent, in them is
all my delight. Thou will rejoice to receive such into thy house and family,
and to enter into affinity with such by marriage.

Fourthly, if thy love be sound, Fourth sign.
then it is large and total, reaching not only unto one, If we love every one
as well as any one. Iam. 2.1.
but unto all; thou will love the poor as well as the rich, and one as well as
another; thou will not have the glorious faith of Christ in respect of persons;
seeing there is the same reason and ground of love in one as in another. I deny
not but there may be different degrees of love; one may be loved more then
another is, but yet there will be love showed and expressed toward all. If it
be true, it will be extended toward every Saint of the most high God, Psalm.
16.5.
be his outward condition what it will be. Thus was it with David, his delight
was in the Saints: he speaks indefinitely, not in one but in all. Ephesians. 1.15.
Coloss. 1.4.
For this the Apostle does commend the Ephesians and Colossians, in that their
love was not partial, but reached toward all the Saints, as well as unto any.
Such therefore as pretend love to one and not unto another, let their pretense
be what it will; let them profess and say, they love them for the truth; yet
they do but deceive themselves, for their love is not sound, but grounded on
some by respect, and for some carnal end: it may be they love them for their
gifts, but not for their graces, I dare say. For it is impossible to love a
Saint as a Saint, but we must love every Saint. Thus may we try the soundnes of
our love toward Gods children, which if upon examination, we find to be true,
then may we make this as a sure sign and manifest token of Gods love to us;
for love them, and be beloved of him. More signs might be brought, whereby a
Christian may assuredly know, whether God has as yet kissed him with the
kisses of his mouth; but these are enough (and I desire not to say all I can,
but enough) to make this known unto us: take then some pains in examination,
and it will straight way appear. Desire thou to know, whether God does love
thee, and would thou be assured of the Lords affection toward thee? then
answer me to these few interrogatories, and thou shall have thy desire. And
first I demand, whether the blessed spirit of God has been (as yet) shed
abroad in thy heart? does it stir, is it working? has it enlightened thy
mind, and sanctified thy soul? Has it wrought a change and alteration in thy
course and carriage? Again, find thou thy heart enflamed with a love
toward God? In so much, that thou esteemest him, and his favor, before all
things in the world? Do thou delight in his presence, still having recourse
unto him, by those blessed means, both public and private, by which he is
pleased to converse with men? And art thou desirous to go unto him? Can thou
say with the Spouse, Come, even come Lord Jesus come quickly? Again, Revel.
22.17.20
tell me art thou desirous to please him, and obey him? Art thou ready with
Abraham, to leave thy own Country, and to go whether he shall please to send
thee? And art thou willing to suffer any trouble for his sake? Could thou be
content to suffer the spoiling of thy goods? the loss of liberty, yea, and of
life (if need should require) that he might thereby be glorified? Moreover, is
it the desire of thy soul to be conformable unto him in holiness and purity?
Do thou love, what he loves? and hate thou what he hates? And labourest
thou to be perfect, even as he is perfect? Surely, if it be thus, thy estate is
good, thou love God, and he thee. But proceed we yet further in this search,
(for a good thing cannot be made too sure) and tell me, love thou Gods Saints
and servants, and that truly and entirely? Is not thy love grounded on some
carnal end? is it not some by-respect that causes it? Is it for their piety
and godliness, thou so much affectest them? Does the very report thou hear
made of them, for their virtues, enkindle love in thy heart, albeit thou have
had no knowledge of them, nor dealing with them? And do thou esteem of
these as the only excellent ones upon the earth, choosing them for thy best
companions, receiving them into thy society? And is thy love total, to all as
well as unto any? Love thou every Saint as well as any Saint? Is thy affection
toward the poor, as well as to the rich? is thy heart upon them in
adversity, as well as in prosperity? If it be thus with thee, thou then
love Gods Saints indeed, with a love unfeigned, and (undoubtedly) art beloved
of him, who is the father of them. But if thou be wholly void of these
things, thy love is no true love, but such a love as may be found in any
unregenerated person.

Thus by a diligent examination of your selves, you may soon determine, and
also soundly; whether God has manifested his love toward thee. Spend some
time therefore in this matter, it will not be time misspent, but redeemed, much
benefit will redound to us by our pains thus bestowed: for the surer ground
thou art of, the more comfort thou will have: and without doubt many of Gods
children deprive themselves of much comfort, for want of a daily examination of
themselves, by these and the like notes; and oftentimes fall into doubting of
Gods love and favor, which in time proves pernicious to their souls.

A third use of this point, may be for reproof of such kissed by him, they
have not as yet his love manifested unto them by the former signs and tokens.
As for temporal blessings, in them indeed they do abound, having great
preferments in the world, variety of pleasures, and sufficiency of all
earthly contentments (which they falsely persuade themselves, are manifest
tokens of his special favor) but as for his spiritual and sanctifying
graces, of them they have never tasted. Now let such know, that their estate is
fearful for the present, and uncomfortable; God indeed may love thee, and
thou may be elected of him, but that is unknown to thee, or me, or any
else, till he does make this manifest, by the fornamed signs. And as for these
common blessings, wherein thou do so abound, know they are usually given in
a greater abundance to the Reprobate, then to the elect: Esau whom God hated,
had as great privileges, as thou have any; and therefore, these premises will
admit of no such conclusion. Never say, that God loves thee, till thou find
the fruits of sanctification in thee, which being once found, thou may then
say with the Psalmist, By this I know, that thou fauourest me: By these, and
these signs, I know, that I am beloved of thee.

And in the last place, this may serve for the great comfort tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, Romans 8.25.28.
or nakedness, or peril, or sword, or life, or death. Yet the certainty of
Gods love will support him. Heb. 11.
This assurance does make bitter things sweet, and gall to relish as honey.
Comfort then thy heart thou beloved of the Lord, let nothing dismay the^ though
the wicked mock, though the world scorn, though thy acquaintance hate thee,
yet remember, God he loves and favors thee, and has manifested the same unto
thee, to put thee out of doubt. Is not my love better unto thee, 1 Samuel 1.
then ten children (said Elkanah to Hannah) so is not the love of God better
unto thee, then the love of ten worlds? Let then the meditation of this, harden
thy face, like brass against all dangers, and cause thee to stand fast in the
evil day, and sad times of temptation and persecution. For God shall give his
beloved rest, they shall be delivered, for he will help with his right hand.

VERSE. 22. But the Father said to his servants, Text. Verse 22.23
Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and
shoes on his feet. 23. And bring hither the fatted calfe, and kill it, and let
us eat and be merry.
WE have heard before of the Fathers readiness to receive him, now here we see
the entertainment he gave him, being come into his presence. He calls for a
robe, yea the best robe, and so cloths him; for a ring to adorn and beautify
him; for shoes for his feere, that stones might not annoy nor hurt them; for
the fat calfe, to feed and refresh him; and whatsoever is wanting he bestows
upon him. Now had the Father fit time, and his sons sins deserved it, that
he should rip up unto him his former faults, and call to remembrance the
offenses of his youth, and welcome him home after this manner; Ah si^ra, are
you now come, is all spent amongst your whores and harlots? return unto them,
let them provide for you; you come no more within my doors. But behold the love
of this his Father; he uses no such thundering speeches, he threatens not to
cast him of: Nor yet does he cast him in the teeth with his former courses, he
remembers not any old recknings; the offenses of his youth are not spoken of.
But he (seeing this his riotous and unthrifty son return home with an humble
heart) presently offers himself to his child, and before he had made an end
of his confession or could beg a supply of things needful, his father
intercepts him by his hasty calling to his servants; Bring hither the best to
be, the shoes, the ring, let the fat calfe be killed, make a feast, send for
music. Now all is forgotten.

Doctr. God will never vpbraid any with their former courses that repent. Ier.
31.34.
So then we see, The Lord will never vpbraid such as turn unto him, with their
former courses; but upon their true repentance will forgive them and forget
them. This the Lord does faithfully promise in the 31. of Jeremy 34 verse. in
these words, They shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest,
says the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquity, Heb. 8.12.
and remember their sins no more: which very words the author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews does cite, and so further confirm the point. See it further
proved in the 7. Micah 7.18.
of Micah, verse. 10. where the Church speaks thus: Who is a God like unto
thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant
of his heritage, who reteineth not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy He will turn again, verse. 19.
he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and cast all
our sins into the depth of the Sea: so in the 103. Psalm this is further
cleared from the 8. to the 13. Psalm. 103.8. to 13.
verse. the words are these; The Lord is merciful and gracious: flow to anger,
and plenteous in mercy. and in the 12. verse he says thus; As far as the
East is from the West: so far has he removed our transgressions from us.

But some may object, Ob^ect.
that the Scripture makes mention of the unclean life of sinners after their
conversion, as of Rahab, who albeit she turned to the Lord, Heb. 11.31. Iam.
2.25.
and forsook her former filthiness, yet she is branded with the name of a
harlot.

First I answer, Answ.
some of our Divines are of this judgment, that she was not an harlot in act
or openly professed filthiness (for the word which is used in Joshua 6.22.
signifies a tauerner or hostess, as well as a harlot, for so she was by
profession. Now indeed those persons and trades, Dr. Halls Contempl:
by reason of the commonnesse of entertainment, were amongst the Jews infamous
for name and note, so that we may well think, that her public trade, through
the corruption of those times, did cast on her this name of reproach.

Secondly, I answer, this is not mentioned to her reproach, but spoken to her
praise; she is not vpbraided with it, but commended, in that she had forsaken
it. We see hereby what she was before her calling, but she is not reproched
with it now after her calling; she is now no longer a harlot, but a true
believer with the people of God: so then it tends not to her defaming, but to
show the greatness of Gods compassion, and the soundnes of her conversion.

Now for the Use which we may make of this truth: make us speedily turn unto
the Lord. Art thou a drunkard, an unclean person, a filthy liver? take notice
of Gods merciful dealing with this prodigal, who is set out for a pattern to
all them that are desirous to come home; see how (upon his repentance) he is
advanced; how liberal his father is toward him; as if from his very cradle he
had crept on his hands and knees to please him: here are no old items, no back
recknings brought in, but all is forgiven and forgotten, as if there were no
fault done; he is as royally entertained, as if he had bin the dutifullest
son that ever the earth bare. Well; thus will God deal with thee, he will
never vpbraid thee with thy drunkenness, with thy swearing, with thy whoring,
with thy theeuing, nor with any other of thy lewd courses. These thou shall
never hear of, if thou become a penitent: But if not, be thou assured thy
sins shall be set in order before thee; and what now thou do in secret,
God will manifest on the house top before Men and Angels.

Secondly, seeing God does deal thus with true penitents, to cover their
sins and cast them behind his back; let us take heed how we uncover the
sins of any that has repented of them, and how we vpbraid any with their
former courses: God has blotted them out of the skore, shall we dare to set
them on again? Let us learn to put a difference betwixt time past and time
present: the Apostle reckoning up many horrible sins committed by the
Corinthians in the time of their vnregeneracie, makes a flat opposition
between their estate before their calling, and that after, Such were some of
you, 1. Cor. 6.11.
(says he) but now ye are washed, but now ye are cleansed, but now ye are
sanctified. So that he that has bin a swearer and repented, is now none: he
that has bin an adulterer, and has repented, is now none; and the like: for
the High Commission Court has cleared him. Shall we say he that is come to
man's estate is a babe, because he was so? or he that is now a freeman is still
a prentize, because he was so? Oh then beware how you esteem of any by the
time past, or cast the filth of their former sins into their faces, when God
has wiped them away. When David, Noah, Lot, Peter, and other of Gods Saints,
had truly repented of their sins, did ever God or Angels cast them in their
teeth? who art thou then, that thou should be so saucy, to uncover what God
has covered?

But is there not a woe against those that call good evil, and evil good?
Object. Esaias 5.20.
how then dare any speak of sin favorably?

It is one thing to speak of the nature of the sin, Answ.
and another thing to speak of the converted sinner: In speaking of sin, as
a breach of Gods law, an offense against God spare it not: but in speaking of
the penitent, the shame and reproach of the sin must be done away. Thus much
in general from the Fathers proceeding: Now in particular to the words.

But he said to his servants etc. Text.
] There are diverse mystical and moral expositions given by expositors of each
of these: by the robe, some understand the royalty which Adam lost. By the
ring, the seal of Gods holy Spirit: by shoes, the preparation of the Gospel
of peace: by the fat Calfe, Christ, who was slain from the beginning. These
and many other expositions are given, which were endless and (in my judgment)
needless to reckon up. Hec simplex sed c^rtum est, catera ingeniosa quidem,
sed incerta. Maldon, in loc.
For, as I take it, by all these is nothing else meant nor intended, but to set
forth the riches of Gods manifold mercies, whereby he supplies all our wants,
fulfills all our necessities, and bestows whatsoever is needful for us, upon
our true repentance, and turning unto him.

In the words we may consider: First, the Fathers liberality toward the
Prodigal, verse. 22.23. Secondly, the joy and rejoicing that was on both sides
upon the return of the Prodigal, verse. 23. and reiterated verse. 24.

In the former again consider,

First, the gifts the Father does bestow, which were of two sorts: some serving
for necessity, as a garment, shoes, meat: others for delight and ornament, as
a Ring, the best Robe, the fat Calfe: he shall have the best and fattest.

Secondly, consider, the means whereby he bestows them on this his child:
he does it not immediately from his own hands, but by the hands of his
servants: He said to his servants. And of these as they lie in order in my Text.

Doctr. God bestows his gifts upon his children not imdiatly but mediatly.
But he said to his seruants] The point hence is this: God conveyeth his gifts
and graces to his children not immediately from himself, but mediately by the
hands of his servants. Thus Paul must go to Ananias and receive his sight: so
the Eunuch to Philip; Cornelius to Peter; Lydia to Paul. Thus must men receive
gifts from God, not immediately from God himself, but by the means of Gods
servants. Hence are those names so frequently given unto Gods Ministers in the
Scriptures, of Messengers, Ambassadors, Interpreters, and the like. See Ephesians.
4.8, 11, 12.

Exodus 20.18.
When the Israelites heard the voice of God in delivering of his law, they were
afraid they should die, and therefore, desire to have Moses bring Gods message
unto them.

Use.
This may serve to reprove the folly of such as refuse to come to the servants
of the Lord for the gifts he does send unto them by their ministry, Nay they
despise these roabs, these gifts and graces, because they are brought by frail
and weak men; Let God send by whom he should send; let him speak by whom he
should speak. But who art thou that thou should teach the most high? or
what art thou that dare be so bold, to prescribe unto the Lord a way for the
conueighing of his gifts? But oh the inconstancy of vain man; when God did
speak immediately by himself then Israel runs to Moses, and desires him to
speak to God for them. Now we have our requests and he has sent us a Moses,
Exodus 20.19.
I mean faithful and painful ministers, by whom he gives his gifts and
conueies his graces, and now we call for God again, whose voice
notwithstanding shakes the heavens, and cleaves the rocks a sunder, and
moves the foundations of the earth out of his place.

Let this therefore in the second place admonish us to Eliah receive his meat
though a Raven brings it. We are beggars let us not be chusers. Would it not
argue intolerable niceness and dayntinesse, to refuse meat because it is
brought in earthen dishes? Would not this argue a queasie stomach? Beware then
of this and learn to esteem of the gifts of God never the less; but esteem
more of the messengers and servants, because by them God does bestow on you so
many blessings. And surely this exhortation would be needless, if you did as
much care to know, (and knowing would wisely apply it to your hearts) how many
high blessings in spiritual things are conueighed and brought unto you by
them, as you are ready to inform and urge what inferior blessings are
conueighed unto them by you. Read, Romans 10.13.14.15. Romans 10.13.14.15.
verses. And when you have read them go backward and begin where the golden
cheyne ends. First God gives his word; then some are sent; whereupon they
preach, thereupon men believe, and then call upon God, and consequently they
are saved: So that if salvation be the object of your desires, and the thing
longed for, then esteem of these golden pipes whereby the water of this longed
for salvation, is conueighed unto you. And thus much shall suffice to have
spoken of the means whereby these gifts were conueighed unto this son, now
to speak of the gifts themselves that were bestowed upon him, which were of
two sorts, some for necessity, others for ornament and delight.

Text.
Bring forth the best Roabes.] The son sought but the room of a servant, but
the father restores him to the dignity of a son; and graciously does prevent
him with his liberal blessings; giving unto him far more then he did desire
or deserve, Let us then note this for our comfort.

Doctr. God is larger in his gifts then we in our requests. Genesis 28.20.
God is larger in his gifts, then a sinner is in his request, he usually gives
more unto his children then they ask or desire. This we may see by sundry
examples in scripture as in a crystal glass, Jacob prays and the whole of
all his petitions is bounded in this narrow compass. If the Lord will give me
meat to eat, Genesis 32.9.10.
and raiment to put on, his desires are not extended far; only he seeks for
food and raiment. But God was more gracious unto him then so, as he himself
confesses, for God gave him two bands; abundance of goods and chattels.

Thus Solomon repuireth but an understanding heart for government; God gives
it to him with an overplus of riches and of honor; such as none should be like
unto him, 1 Kings. 3.9.13.
Ezekias requested but life at Gods hand, God did not only give him life, but
a long life, and certain, graciously adding fifteen years unto his days.
Isay. 38.15.6. 2 Kings. 41.
The Widow woman that was greatly indebted, having nothing to satisfy her
cruel creditor, (who was so importunate that her two sons must become his
bondmen according to the law, there being nothing else to discharge the sum)
required the prophets help unto the Lord in her behalf; So Psalm 21.4.
who gave her oil sufficient to pay her debt, and also to supply future wants;
which was more then she desired. It is no hard matter to produce many more
examples for the further enlarging of this comfortable point. It is no wonder
then the Apostle terms God, 2 Cor. 1.
to be the Father of mercy; And not content heerewith, adds to his style this
just title, The God of all consolation. A kind of absolute and ouer-flowing
mercy he gives unto him and that deservedly,

If any demand a reason of Gods so doing, Reason.
then this may be given, That we may be made the more ready and willing to
obey him: as also, That none might think it tedious or troublesome to come
unto him, making known their requests by prayer and supplication.

The uses of this point may be these. Use.


First, Let us learn to put a difference betwixt God and man. My ways are not
your ways, neither are my thoughts as your thoughts, says the Lord; and is it
not so indeed? Man is liberal in promising, but sparing in performing; hardly
the one half is performed of what is promised, if that: but it is otherwise
with God. True it is, he promises much, and as true it is that he performs
more: Never was promise by him made, but it was performed to the very uttermost.

Secondly, let this serve for the confirmation of our faith Psalm. 33.4.
Has God made thee any promise that he will be with thee in six troubles, and
in seven? Has he promised that he will turn all things to the best to thee
that love him? Has he promised that no good thing shall be wanting to thee
that fear him? why, believe thou these things, God will not falsify the
word that is gone out of his mouth, but faithfully fulfill it.

Thirdly, Is God thus merciful above our hope? let this encourage us to call
upon him in the day of trouble, Heb. 4.16. Psalm. 145.18, 19.
and to come with boldness to the Throne of Grace, not doubting to obtain
favor in time of need: For he will fulfill the desires of them that fear
him; he will hear their cry and save them.

Men in suing to their betters, commonly, ask more then they do expect: but
in suing to the Lord, we may look for more then we do ask. Should a Prince
be known to be thus gracious, to give more (out of his princely bounty) then
his peticioners desired of him, surely he should want no suitors, but men would
resort unto him in flocks and troops. There is no Prince to be compared with
the Lord, none so liberal, none so bountiful: Why then are we so backward in
our suits and requests? Are we in want? would we have supply? fly then unto
him, he is more ready to hear then thou to speak; his ear is often open,
when thy mouth is shut. Desire mercy at his hands, he is ready to grant it;
nay, Phil. 4.6.
two for one. Follow then the advice of the Apostle Paul: Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing (by prayer and supplication) let your requests be
made known unto the Lord.

Text.
Best Robes.] Whatsoever is needful, the father here bestows; he clothes him
with raiment, he puts on shoes upon his feet, and refreshes him with pleasant
and comfortable meat. Hence we gather this instruction.

Doctr. Nothing that is needful shall be wanting, when Gods favor is not.
Psalm. 23.1.6.
Nothing that is needful shall be wanting to those that are in the favor of
the Lord. Such as have his favor, shall have all good blessings flowing to
them, and following of them. David does notably confirm this, in many of his
Psalms: As in the 23. Psalm, where professing God to be his Shepherd, makes
this inference thereupon, therefore I shall not want, but doubtless,
kindness, and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. Psalm. 34.9, 10.
So Psalm. 34.9, 10. verses, The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they
which seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good. Psalm. 84.11.
Also in the 84. Psalm. 11. notably: The Lord God is a Sun and Shield unto us:
the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from
them that walk uprightly. And is not this the blessing that is promised to
such as fear the Lord, that all good things should flow unto them from heaven
and earth: that they should be blessed In the house, in the field, in their
basket, in their store, Deuteronomy. 28.3, 4.
in the fruit of their bodies, in the increase of their cattle, and in the
abundance of all things.

The reasons that may be given will serve for the further clearing of this
truth. For first, Reason.
they are his adopted children, and how then can he suffer them to be in need?
even wicked men will be tender over their children, Lament. 4.3.
and Bears and Dragons will be careful of their young ones; And shall the God
of all goodness withdraw his hand from helping his sons and daughters? It
cannot be.

Secondly consider, God is Omnipotent, and able to

Thirdly, Gods eyes are ever open to see their needs: Psalm. 145.18.
that mortal man (though he be willing to help, and able to help) yet he may
be a sleep, or out of hearing, and far off; so that he cannot do as
otherwise he would: but it is not so with God, night and day, at home and
abroad, by sea and land, is he at hand to send supply.

Fourthly, Whereas many have both will and power, With our God is wisdom,
(says Job) and strength; I^b 12.13.
he has counell and understanding: He knows best when, where, and how to
help.

Thus we see this point proved both by Scripture and reasons, viz. Where Gods
favor is, there is want of nothing that is needful.

But, does not Paul complain of hunger and thirst, Object.
of cold and nakedness? 2. Cor. 11.27.
And have not many of Gods servants been tried, by mockings and scourgings, by
bonds and imprisonments? Heb. 11.36.
Have they not been stoned, hewn asunder, tempted, slain with the sword,
wandered up and down in Sheep skins, and Goats skins, being destitute,
afflicted, and tormented? Matthew. 8.20.
Nay, was not Christ himself in want, when he had not what the Foxes and the
Fowls of the air had; for they had holes and nests, but he had not whereon to
rest his head? How then can this be true that has been now delivered?

Sol. A twofold want.
First, I answer, there is a twofold want; one, in regard of outward condition;
the other, in regard of inward affection. There is many a rich man, that is in
miserable want and poverty, wanting both what other have, (and therefore is
still coveting and desiring) and also what he himself does enjoy; not having
the comfortable use of what he has, but like Tantalus, whom Poets faigne to
dye for thirst, standing in the waters to the chinne.

Again, There is many a poor man, who does sustain some want in regard of
outward condition; yet God does enlarge his affection, and give him true
contentation, which is sufficiency. Thus was the Apostle content with his hard
estate, as appears Phil. 4.11. So then we see the Lord does supply the wants
of his children, giving them either abundance, or cheerful contentation, or
supportation when means fail.

[good thing] does he withhold: And also, Psalm. 34.10. they shall want nothing
[that is good.] So then, no further can they expect a supply of these things,
then makes for their good and welfare. Now, do we not know that oftentimes
Thunder and Rain is more seasonable for Corn and Grass then fair
Sunn-shine? Affliction and adversity, Corporis aduersa, animae remedia.
better for Gods children, then peace and prosperity? Does a child of God
want health, wealth, peace, and the like? Then may he boldly say, they are not
for my good: and God does supply my wants, in withholding from me these things.
Hence is it, The children of God stand in as great want of the rod, as of
meat and drink, this want God supplies. Quest. Psalm. 37.25.
that many of Gods children are brought to their ends, through penury and want,
because it is for their good so to come unto their end: The Lord does call them
home to heaven by such a messenger.

But from hence may another question arise: For if this be so, that Gods
children may be in want, and may be brought to their ends through penury and
want, how then can David's words be true? and how can this stand with that
saying of his, I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging their
bread?

David's speech is well to be observed, Answ. How to understand David's words.
Psalm. 37.25.
for he does not say, The righteous is never forsaken, but, I never saw it,
speaking there of his own experience and observation.

Secondly, He says, he never saw the righteous forsaken, and his seed too.
For if God lay any temporal affliction on his children, and suffers them
(for their good) to be in want, yet he remembers his promise made unto his
seed, and renews his mercy toward them, if they walk in his ways, and
obey his commandments.

Thirdly, He says, he never saw the righteous and his seed forsaken begging
bread, that is, when they came to the strait that they were feign to beg
their bread, yet not then forsaken, q. d. No not forsaken when they were
begging their bread.

Thus having answered this objection, we come now to use and application.

First, this serves to reprove many, Use.
who break their heads till they become hoarie with cares for the purchasing
and obtaining of things here below; but they never go to the fountain,
neither take the right course for supplying of their wants.

It is an universal quaere, Who will show us any good? id est, the way to
become great, to wax wealthy, and the like: Psalm. 4.
But how few cry with the Prophet, Lord life thou upon us the light of thy
countenance? No marvel then, if so many run up and down like hungry
dogs, and are never satisfied. Peter may fish all night and catch nothing,
Psalm. 127.2.
until Jesus speaks the word. What though we rise early, and lie down
late, and eat the bread of sorrow, yet shall we labor in vain, unless the
Lord give a blessing.

Hamman found; to day he is honored, to morrow, hanged. But it is otherwise
with God; his favor brings with it a supply of all things needful, and they
that rely upon it, shall never be deceived, nor disappoynted. We may be bold to
build upon it.

Psalm. 146.
what labor and pains they will endure, and all for the favor of a prince,
whose breath is in his nosthrills, and whose thoughts perish. And yet no King
can be so bountiful to his Favorites, as is the God of heaven. Excellent
things shall be done to the man whom the King does honor, but far more
excellent to him whom the Lord does favor. Why then do we no more respect
his love? Why do we not use the means to become gracious in his eyes? Oh
seek his favor before the favor of Princes; Seek his face evermore.

The fourth Use is an Admonition to Gods children, Commit thy way unto the
Lord, and trust in him, Psalm. 37.
and he shall bring it to pass. Use no unlawful means; take not any indirect
course for obteyning wealth, or supplying of thy wants; for God has engaged
his promise and his truth to see thy needs supplied.

And lastly, let it comfort the children of God in the Elkanah said to Hannah,
1. Sam. 1.
complaining for want of children, may Gods favor speak to all that have
their parts in it, in every distress: Am not I unto thee in steed of riches,
wealth, glory, and greatness in the world? Surely yes; it is in steed of these
and better then all these unto us. Let therefore the enioyment of this serve as
a through supply for all our wants, of what kind soever: make Gods favor to be
that unto thee which thou want: Art thou sick? let Gods favor be thy
health: Art thou weak? let Gods favor be thy strength. Art thou base? let
Gods favor be thy glory etc. He that has this has a sufficient salve for any
sore.

Now further we are to observe, how this Father bestows upon this his child,
not only such gifts as were needful, but such also as were for ornament and
delight. The best Robe shall be bestowed on him, the fattest Calfe shall be
killed for him, and a Ring shall be put upon his hand, to adorn and beautify
him. Learn then

That God does often give unto his children for delight Doctr.
and ornament, God does give unto his children both for delight and ornament.
Psalm. 104.15.
as well as for necessity. He does not only bestow on them, things absolutely
needful, but such things also as may adorn them and delight them. There is an
excellent place to prove this in the 104. Psalm, the 15. verse. where the
Prophet shows, that God gives Wine to make glad the heart of man, and Oil
to make his face to shine, as well as bread to strengthen man's heart. He gives
as well for lawful and honest delight, as for necessity to preserve life and
health.





Ge^. 43.32. Genesis 21.8. Luk 5.29. Acts 2 46. Nehem. 8.10.
Joseph and his brethren with him, did eat and drink together of the best.
Levi the Publican made our Savior a great feast in his own house. The
Primative Churches had their Loue-feasts, as Scripture does record. This
liberty that worthy man Nehemiah wills the people to take, Go eat of the
fat, and drink of the sweet, q. d. feast together, eat of the best, make you
good cheer.

As they have used their liberty in this kind; so also in the other of
apparel; using it not only for necessities sake, (as to defend the body from
parching heat, pinching cold, and the like) but for delight and ornament, for
the decking and adorning of the body; and as the Apostle says, upon their
uncomely parts they have put more comeliness on. Genesis 41.42.
Thus was Joseph arrayed with garments of fine linen, and had a golden chain
put upon his neck, and a ring upon his hand. Genesis 24 22.
So Rebekkah has golden eare-rings and bracelets for her hands. And thus did
the Israelitish women adorn themselves with eare-rings and bracelets, which
was not their sin. Deuteronomy. 32. Iulg. 5.30.
Garments also of diverse colors, and of Needle-worke, Psalm. 45.10.
was no rare thing to be seen amongst them. Thus we see that it is lawful for
Gods children to use their liberty in the using of the creatures both for
delight and ornament.

Now forasmuch as the name of lawful, does

First, then for meats. Rules to be observed concerning God; and sustenance.
That we have a liberty in the using of them not sparingly only, and for
mere necessity, to the satisfying of our hunger; but also freely and
liberally for Christian delight and pleasure, we have seen already proved.
Yet in using of them certain rules and cautions are to be observed, both
concerning the Time, when we are to use them, as also concerning the manner
how. As for the Time, we must know, that upon some occasions, we may be
restrained, and are to abstain from our liberty in this kind; as namely, when
the bond of Religion, Ieiunium religiosum and politicum First, that we abstain
at sometimes from the using them. As first, when the bond of Religion does
restrain us. Joel. 2.14.15. Ester. 4.16.
or Christian policy does require it. Religion sometimes requires an entire
abstinence from the use of the creature: As in time of some great affliction,
whether it be Public, or Private; on the whole Land in general, or on our
selves and families in special. Many examples we have recorded in Scriptures,
of Gods servants, who have abstained from the use of the creatures in such
cases. To this fasting and abstinence were the Jews called in the days of
Ioell, that so the famine then which was amongst them might be removed. This
abstinence Hester, Dan. 10.3.
and her company used, when she heard of the destruction intended against her
people. Thus Daniel gave himself to fasting, when he prayed for deliverance of
Israel out of Babylon: Acts 14.23. Nehe. 1.4. 2. Sam. 12.16. 2. Sam. 3.34.
Act. 10.30.
Thus Paul and Silas when they went to plant the Church, used fasting and
prayer. Thus did Nehemiah, David, Cornelius, and many others, upon the like
occasions, both in private, and public; abstaining from the use of the
creatures, and abridging themselves of those delights and pleasures, which at
other times they have enjoyed.

Quest. Whether a total abstinence in time of fasting be absolutely needful.

Answ. It is most fitting, yet not absolutely necessary, if nature cannot bear
it.

Or secondly, when the bond of Christian policy does require an abstinence
from it.


But in times of fasting, may nothing be eaten, must all meats of necessity be
abstained from?

It is most fitting, that there should be a total abstinence, if nature can
endure it, so that it be not destroyed, nor unfitted for spiritual duties: But
if nature be weak, then may some creature be received, and that so often as
the weakness of the body requires it, but ever provided, that it be very
sparingly, serving only to preserve nature: And without daintiness, or
delicacie to nourish pleasure.

The second bond that does restrain us, is that of Christian policy; when
upon some particular and polliticke considerations, sundry kinds of meats are
prohibited and forbidden, for certain times and seasons of the year. Thus do
our Magistrates and Governors appoint fasting days, not for Religious, but
Civil respects, and ends: As to supply want, preserve the breed of cattle;
and for the maintaining the calling of Fishermen: All tending to the common
good of the Land and Country: And herein are we to obey them, and that for
conscience sake, Romans 13.5. It is one thing to obey in conscience and another
for conscience.

Quest. Whether flesh may be eaten when it is prohibited.

Answ. Perkins treat: of conscience.

Laws are of two sorts, mixed or penal.

Mixed laws are of weighty matters, and delivered in commanding terms: and
bind both to obedience, and punishment. Penal laws are of less matters, and
have especially respect unto the punishment.


though not of the Law of the Maiestrate, yet of the Law of God, which binds us
to obey the Magistrates law (it not being contrary to Gods) and to be obedient
to those that are set over us.

Here it may be demanded, whether a man may eat flesh at such times, as the
Magistrate has forbidden it?

To this Question, this answer has been made. Laws made by the Magistrate,
are of two sorts, either mixed, or else merely poenall. Mixed laws are those
which are of weighty matters, and are propounded in commanding terms: Now
laws of this kind bind men, first, to obedience: secondly to the punishment,
if they obey not. If a man break these kind of Laws, though he be willing to
suffer the punishment, yet is not his conscience discharged of the sin before
God, for his Law binds not only to subjection in bearing punishment, but to
obedience of the bare commandment, it being (as I said before) lawful and
agreeable to Gods will.

For the other sort, viz. such as are merely poenall, they are those, which
(being made of matters of less moment and importance, and not uttered nor
delivered in such commanding terms) do only declare and show what is to be
done, or conditionally require this or that, with respect unto the punishment;
as if the Magistrate should say, if you do this, then you shall forfeit thus
much, now choose you whether: so that this kind of law does especially bind unto
the punishment, and therefore he that is ready (omitting this law) to bear
the punishment, freeth himself from sin before the Lord, because he goes
not contrary to the intent of the Lawgiver. So then the intent of the
Magistrate is to be regarded, and accordingly are we to eat, or not to eat, and
as it is delivered in more or less commanding terms, so to use our liberty,
or not to use it.

For mine own part, I could wish that Christians would have greater care, and
make more conscience of the Magistrates Iniunction, observing and keeping,
especially the time of Lent, (not as any religious fast or observation) but as
a civil and politic ordinance: For if it be lawful for a Physician to
prescribe a diet to his Patient, forbidding some meats, and prescribing others
for the health of his body, then surely it is lawful for a King to forbid his
subjects (for some time) from some sort of meats, and appoint others, as he
sees most fit for his Commonwealth: and if a King may do this lawfully, Romans
13.2. Quest. Whether one that is weak, may eat flesh in time of Lent.

Answ. It is not contrary to the intent of the Magistrate, etc. He may.

Rules which concern the manner of receiving the creatures.

First, that they be sanctified by prayer. 1 Timothy 4.4. Acts 27.35.


then we sin in disobeying his command.

But what if one be weak and sick, may not flesh be eaten at that time; as
well as at any other?

The intent of the Magistrate is not to impair the health of any subject, but
the preservation of it; to such therefore they give liberty, and they may eat,
if necessity require. Let this then serve briefly for an answer to this
question; as also for the time when we are to use our liberty in this kind.
Now for the manner, How we are to use it, and it must be thus.

First, Sanctify the creatures thou do receive, desire God to give a
blessing with them: Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused,
if it be received with thanksgiving: For it is sanctified by the Word of God
and prayer. Thus did Paul, when he was in the ship, He took bread, and gave
thanks to God in presence of them all, and then began to eat. And thus did
Christ himself, who would not eat of the five loaves and two fishes, before
he had looked up to Heaven, and called for a blessing.

Secondly, that our food exceed not our ability. 1 Samuel 25.36.
Secondly, see that thy food and fare exceed not thy ability, place, and
maintenance; but look thou keep thy self within thy limits. It was taxed in
Nabal, that (being but a Country-Farmer) he feasted it like a King. Be frugall
in thy feasting, remembering always, honest delight consists not so much in
having many dishes, as in having of the sweetest, and of the fattest.

Thirdly, Beware of eating to excess or riot: Thirdly, that we feed with
sobriety, and not to excess.
For God allows us a liberal use of the creatures, not to hurt, but help
our selves; to refresh and not oppress our nature, to make us fit, and not
unfit for holy duties. That feeding then, that makes us heavy and unweildy, for
the performance of any work, either of our general or special calling, is no
way commendable, but sinful.

Fourthly, so eat and drink, Fourthly, that we redeem the time in our eating.
Ephesians. 5.16.
as that you remember to Redeem the time, sit not too long by it; and while
you are at it, use good and sauoury speech, season the creatures with
profitable (yet cheerful) talk and holy meditations. Take occasion to speak
of Gods bounty and goodness, and set forth his praise before the sons of
men. If unprofitable talk be set on foot, Jude 14. Luke 14.7.
propound some heavenly riddle or parable, that that idle prattle may be
iustled out. Let thy heart be taken up with holy thoughts, consider how many
snares are set before, for in every dish the Devil has his hook to catch
thee. Remember how prone thou art to dishonor God in feasting. Job 1.5.
Job was suspicious of his sons, be thou so of thy self, thou may blaspheme
God before the feast be ended. Forget not the wants of such as be in misery,
how many want of thy superfluity, who are redeemed with the blood of Christ, as
well as thou thy self, and yet would be heart glad of what thou blowest on?
Remember how far thou art indebted unto God, and show thy self thankful. In
a word, remember that thou art in Gods presence, he beholds thee as well eating
and drinking, as he does when thou art about any other action. See then that
thy whole carriage be such, as may be seem the presence of so great a God.

And these are the special rules to be observed, Rules for the wearing of our
ornaments.
for the right usage of our liberty, in respect of food and sustenance. We are
now to come to such rules as concern apparel, which is allowed, as for
health and honesty, so for ornament, as we have heard before proved. And they
are these.

First, that we use them not every day, but observe times and seasons. Ester 4.
First, for the time, they may not be used every day alike: times and seasons
are to be observed. There is a time of fasting and mourning, when they must be
laid aside, according to the practice of Gods servants, who have clothed
themselves with sackcloth upon such occasions; to signify that they were
unworthy of the worst attire. And this did God give in charge to his people
Israel, Exodus 33.5.
that they should put off their ornaments from them, that he might know what
to do unto them. In times of mourning then, they are not fitting, courser
attire is then best beseeming. Neither may they be for every ordinary days
wearing; in the days of rejoicing and public solemnity, are these fittest to
be worn: For this was the rich man in the Gospel taxed, Luke 16.19.
he was clothed in purple, and fine linen every day. He is not simply
condemned for wearing these, but for a daily using of those costly ornaments,
making them, as it were, his working-daies attire.

Secondly, it must express godliness modestly and sobriety. 1 Timothy 2.9.10.
Therefore it may not be strange nor garish.
Secondly, for the Manner, we have the Apostles rule, Adorn your selves in
modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, etc. which becomes women
professing godliness. So then in ornament, as in every thing else, our
Godliness, Modesty, and Sobriety must appear. It may not then be strange or
garish (which argues neither modesty nor honesty, but leuity and inconstancy)
but according to the sober custom of our Country, from which we should not
vary: for how monstrous and ugly is that part which agrees not with the whole
body?

Nor differing from our sex. Deuteronomy. 22.5.
Neither may it be differing from our sex, but according thereunto; The woman
shall not wear that which pertains to the man, neither shall a man put on a
woman's garment; for all that do so, are abomination to the Lord: The law of
nature and common honesty condemns, to have women mannish, and men womanish in
their attire. Oh then our sin!

Nor above our places, callings, or degrees.
Nor may it be above our places, callings, and degrees. As God has placed some
men above others, so ought men to fit their attire, and habit according to the
quality of the places wherein they are. So Joseph's ornaments were to put a
difference between him, and the inferior Princes of Pharaohs court.

Neither may it be beyond our means or maintenance, Nor beyond our means.
but according to our ability, in our places wherein we are: For to go as
fine and costly as the foremost in our rank, is not sobriety: Our charge and
estates must be respected, and accordingly must we cut our coat, and have our
ornament.

Nor may they be the ornaments of light hus-wines, Nor of known dissolute
persons.
or of known dissolute persons; It is not modesty for women, professing the
Gospel, to go like whores, or to imitate them in their Strumpet-like
behavior. Christians ought not to seem to be such as indeed they would be
loath to be: Nor such as may any way provoke to lust Tit. 2.3.
Neither may it any way tend to provoke inordinate desires in our selves, or
others, but such as may express the virtues of our minds, being correspondent
to decency and holiness. Thus we see the manner.

Thirdly, for the Measure. Thirdly we may not exceed in ornament. Iam. 5.1.
Excess of ornament is to be avoided, we may not have too many on our backs,
nor in our wardropes. Go to now you rich men, weep and howl for your
miseries that shall come upon you: your riches are corrupted, and your garments
are moth-eaten, and shall not these witness against you?

In ancient times such were counted infamous, as did exceed this way: so
Graccus noted Nauius, for a licentious fellow, for having on his hands more
rings then one. Sins which usually accompany excess in ornament. First,
abuse of our wealth.
Beware then of excess in this kind, seeing both Heathen, and Heaven does
condemn it. It is a sin that goes not alone, but draws many after it: For,
first, excess in ornament does cause thee to abuse thy wealth, and makes thee
spend it on needless and superfluous uses, when thou ought to spend it
better, as in relieuing of the poor, and such as are in want.

Secondly, Secondly, covetousness and injustice.
It is commonly maintained with covetousness and injustice: when was more
pride and bravery? and when more oppression and cruelty? What greater cause
of bribing, and extortion, of fraud, and cousenage, of increasing fines, and
inhauncing rents; then this excessive bravery? Pride must be maintained, though
it be with sale of faith, conscience, honesty, religion, and all.

Thirdly, a mispending of time.
Thirdly; It is a thief of time. Many a golden hour is spent in casting how to
be most brave; and what fashion does best become them: and many an hour is
spent in pranking and trimming of the body; in the too accurate and curious
culture of it. Had Plautus lived in these our times, he would never have
wondered why dainty dames are so long in trimming of themselves, if he did but
see what a shop of vanities and fooleries they bear about them. See here a
cause, why such as are most brave, are usually most ignorant and impenitent;
Alas, they have no time to adorn their souls, with Gods saving graces, they
dress themselves by the hour, and therefore can pray but by the minuit; they
want leisure for the one, so much is taken up about the other.

Fourthly, beggary on the whole land.
And in a word, what more impouerisheth the Commonwealth, then our excessive
bravery? our moneys and chief commodities are daily transported into other
countries, and what comes in lieu thereof, but Apes and Peacocks? Costly
stuffes, silks and veluets, gold and silver laces, feathers, and such like to
yes, for giddie pated fools, which within a few days wearing, must be cast
off, and given to some serving man, or maid, and soon after become good for
nothing, but to adorn a dunghill. See then what a fruitful mother of much
wickedness, Excessive bravery is. Let it therefore be avoided of all such as
bear any love to themselves, or their Country.

Fourth rule. That we aim at a holy end. viz. Gods glory
The last rule to be observed, does respect the End, and that must be; not the
priding up thy self, or to cause the eyes of others to be set upon thee, but
Gods glory, while thou do adorn his temple: see then that, that be thy
chiefest aim. And moreover look thou make a spiritual use of the ornaments
thou wearest. Remember the body is more worth then raiment, and the soul more
worth then thy body: Affect not therefore the adorning of thy body, more then
the adorning of thy mind; The Jewel is far more worth then the cabinet
wherein its kept: And the thing covered is more to be respected, then the case
that couers it. Again, let the adorning of thy body put thee in mind, of thy
shame and nakedness, in respect of sin. There is a wound, else what need a
plaster? And these plasters though they be of silk or velvet, argue that under
them are some loathsome sores, which being seen, would shame us. Before man
sinned, these ornaments would have adorned him no more, then a silken case, a
sweet rose; Dow: Christ. Wars: second part 1. Cor. 12.23.
but when his beauty became blemished by sin, then was he driven to seek
for ornaments, and on his uncomely parts to put on more comeliness, supplying
natural defects, with the helps of art. Were this well considered, the best
ornaments would bring rather cause of blushing then of boasting. Has a
Cripple, who has lost his leg any cause to brag of his wooden stump? Or a
thief any cause to boast of his bolts, or glory in his brand and mark of
felony? What more cause have we to brag of ornament? This is that which
indeed should humble us as being a continual testimony of our sin and
shame. Let us then use them as a daily Monitor, to put us in mind of our
deformity by sin, for our further humbling. And thus have we seen some
special rules to be observed in this particular of ornament, which being kept,
we may safely and comfortably use our liberty in this kind also.

But it may seem, that ornament is unlawful, Object. 1. Tim. 2.9. 1. Pet. 3.3.
and may at no hand be used: For the Apostles, both Paul and Peter condemn all
broydered hair, gold, pearls, and other such like costly ornaments, as
unbeseeming Christians.

I answer; neither Paul nor Peter do simply condemn they being used by
persons of low estate, The meaning of the Apostle in forbidding ornament. 1.
Cor. 1.25.26.
and very mean condition: for of such in those days did the Church of God
especially consist: and therefore howsoever it were lawful in it self, yet it
was altogether unbeseeming their estate, being in them little better then riot
and excess.



Admonition, then a Prohibition; he forbids not the using of them, but
admonishes them that they would rather adorn the inside then the outside, and
be more careful of the mind, then of the body; And this evidently appears
by the Antithesis, that is used in both places. Not with broydered hair (says
Paul) [But] with good works. 1. Tim. 2.9.
Not that outward adorning (says Peter) [But] let it be the hidden man of the
heart: 1 Pet. 3 3.
According to that saying of our Savior Christ; Labor not for the meat that
perishes, [But] for that which endures to eternal life: John 6.
the meaning is, not so much for one, as for the other, desire more the
adorning of the mind, then of the body.

Quest. Whether a deformity in the body may be hid, or the face painted?

Answ. Perk: Cas. cons. A deformity may be hid, but a new form may not be set
upon the face, nor a new habit on the body: for, first our form and favor is
Gods work, therefore may none dare go about to mend it.

Secondly, such as do so do in a real language speak falsehood and deceit.


Again, some may demand, whether it be lawful to cover a deformity in the
body, or to mend the complexion, it being less beautiful then others is?
for, seeing the body may be adorned with ornament, it may seem that this also
is tolerable.

But thus is this Question answered; A deformity may be covered, but a new
form may not be set upon the face; neither a new habit on the body. The
outward form and favor that man has, is the work of God himself, fitted
and proportioned unto man in his conception, by his special providence: Now to
take in hand to mend this favor, or proportion, that God has given: what is
it; but first highly to dishonor God, by presuming to adulterate his work,
taking upon them to amend that which as they suppose he has made amiss? yea,
secretly they tax him for want of wisdom, when they thus go about to
correct, and make that better, which God before had made: and can the eternal
God endure this?

Secondly, this is to lie to others, for they make themselves to be others then
God has made them: they speak in a real language falsehood and deceit: a man
may read a lie in their very foreheads. Their favor is a lie, their beauty is
a lie, etc. Is it like there is truth in the inward parts, when they show
dissimulation in their faces?

Thirdly, what is this but to be ashamed of themselves, Thirdly, this is to be
ashamed of the work of Gods hands, which if we be, God will be ashamed of us,
and not acknowledge us for his creatures.

An excuse of vain women answered,


and therefore being displeased with their own color and countenance, they
come like players, masked, and disguised? But art thou ashamed of that face
that God has made thee? then be thou assured, God will be ashamed of that face
thou have made thy self: thy shameless disguising will bring it so to pass,
that the Lord when he comes to Judgment, will not acknowledge thee to be his
creature.

As for the defense that some do make for this their sin, viz. it is to
please their husbands. It is fond and foolish.

For first thou ought not to please man by displeasing God.

Secondly, it is but a delusion of the Devil, in making thee believe, thy
husband will love thee the better for thy painted vizard: for indeed it is
otherwise. These artificial supplies puts thy husband in mind of thy natural
defects; and this at length does breed a greater loathing. I would such as use
these sinful courses would be more wise, and now at length renounce them: for
assuredly it will turn to bitterness in the end. And let these remember, who
was the first that used this plaistering, or painting: was it not Iezabel? and
was not she an arrant whore. Let such as would be so accounted use it, but no
other.

And thus much shall serve for this second use, wherein we have seen how to
carry our selves in the using of this our liberty which God affords.

Rom 2. Galat. 5.13.
who turn Gods grace into wantonness, and use their liberty for an occasion
to the flesh, as the Apostle speaks. How are the creatures abused to
wantonness and uncleanness, to excess and riot, and all under pretense of
Christian liberty? How grossly do we fail in the former rules; both in our
eating and drinking, and also in our dressing and adorning of our selves? and
yet we think we do but use our liberty. When God calls to mourning and
fasting, then are we feasting and rejoicing, drinking and carowsing wine in
bowls; and all under pretense of Christian liberty. What excess in feasting
and banqueting, every ordinary Citizen excelling Cleopatra; spending as much
at one sitting as would keep twenty poor a whole year, (yea it may be, all
their days) with convenient sustenance? What intemperancie in eating and
drinking; overthrowing and not preserving nature, loading the stomach,
oppressing the heart, and altogether disabling the whole man, for any duty,
either of our General or Special Calling? Let me tell you (and I tell it you
with grief) we are slaves to Epicurisme; and all Nations justify it. For
whereas the Africans think the Spaniards gluttons, and the Spaniards think so
of the French, and the French think so of the German; yet herein they all
agree, Africans, Spaniards, Frenchmen, Germans, and all other Nations, think
so, and say so, of us English. What little respect is had, and how little care is
taken, in our feasting to redeem our time by good and profitable talk, and
holy meditations? The passage of three or four hours is never felt at a
feast; when one hour at a Sermon is very tedious. What unsavory speech,
ungodly mirth, filthy songs, idle prattle, is to be heard at your tables?
Zenophon and Plato thought it fit that men's speeches at meals should be
written; so profitable was their talk in those times: but if this should be in
use amongst us, what strange volumes should we have? The time is spent either
in trifling talk, or in inviting others to eat, (when indeed we have more
need of a bridle then of a spur, such is our corruption) let me tell you,
these are spots in your feasts, and to your shame be it told you. God has
indeed given us leave to be merry, but mark the restriction, it must be In the
Lord, and not against him. Philip. 4.4.
And thus we see our gross failings in this particular, to the dishonor of
God, and destruction of our own souls, (except God be more merciful) by
abusing that liberty which God allows us.

And as in this, so in that other particular of ornament, do we fault as
fowly. The Lord wills his people of Israel, Exodus 33.5.
(as we formerly heard) to put off their ornaments from them, that he might
know what to do unto them; that is, that he might spare them and not consume
them in a moment, as he had before threatened: but our ornaments are never more
upon us, then when Gods judgments hang most over us, and are most likely to
fall upon our heads; so that we may well fear the Lord knows not what to do
unto us; that is, he knows not how to spare us, especially considering what
strange and unheard of fashions are in use amongst us. The Lord has threatened
to punish the Princes and the Kings children, Zeph. 1.8.
and all such as are clothed with strange apparel? how then can we escape? Our
Land is as it were the Ape of all other Nations: Surely, if the sin and shame
of all other Countries had not arrived in our Land, their garments should not
be so welcome to us, which are but couers of it. And further how can a man
distinguish between sexes, degrees, or callings, by the habit? Pride has so
dazeled our eyes, that we mistake one another cloths. Men are become
Womannish, and Women, Mannish, both in Ornament and Complement: Purchase, his
Pilgrim.
from the waste upward they will be Men, and from thence downward, we may
conjecture they are Beast. And how ordinary is it with our female sex, to put
off the hat, and make the leg? (I speak what I have seen, and is well known
unto you). Ezekiel. 8.13.
And yet behold greater abominations that they do. They have taken up the
Barbers chair, and that covering which God has given them, they cut off. In
the Apostles time it was held a great dishonor, for a woman to be shorn or
shaven: 1. Cor. 11.15.
but in our days it is counted, amongst our Gallants, a shame to wear that
comely covering: Then it was a great dishonor for women to have their heads
uncovered; verse. 5.
but now it makes for their credit, and their honor, (as they suppose.) I am
greiued and ashamed to show the world, the great abominations that are here
committed; yet it is needful to be known, that it may be lamented for. Let
such as these consider that fearful threatening; Esaias 3.17.
The Lord shall smite with a scab, the crown of the head of such, and he will
discover their secret parts. verse. 24.
And it shall come to pass, that in stead of sweet smell there shall be
stink, and in stead of a girdle, a rent; and in stead of well-set hair,
baldness; and in stead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth, and burning in
stead of beauty. When no hair shall be left upon their crowns, the Barbers
pains shall then be spared. In a word, all sorts are confuted in their habits:
no place, no calling, nor condition is respected or regarded: Gentlemen go
like Nobles; Citizens like Courtiers; the Countryman like the Citizen; the
servant will be attired as his master, the maid like unto her mistress:
Salomons vanity is come again into the world; Servants ride on horseback,
and Masters go on foot: and so far are we from that modest and comely
attyring of our selves, which the Apostle does require, as that the attire
which many wear, better beseems strumpets then honest Matrons; being neither
fashioned to our bodies, nor made large enough to cover those naked parts,
which both God and nature would have covered: how justly may the Lord fashion
our bodies to our clothes, seeing we will not fashion our cloths unto our
bodies. And thus is our liberty abused, which God affords us: for which this
Land and Nation is like to smoke, unless it please the Lord in mercy to look
upon us, and give us hearts to repent for these abominations, which are so rise
amongst us. You that fear the Lord call upon his name; you that love King and
Country fall to mourning; for assuredly these sins cannot escape unpunished,
without there be an universal humiliation and repentance.

And let us eat and be merry] Here was cause of joy on all sides: The father
has cause of joy, Text.
who losing an untoward son, now finds an obedient child: who finds him
humbled, that went away obdurate and impenitent. The son himself has cause
of joy, in finding so kind a welcome, at his Fathers hands, whom he had so
much wronged. And here is cause of rejoicing also for the household servants,
in that their Masters son was now found, who had been so long lost: Therefore
(says the Father) let us cat and be merry; not do Ye, for this my sons
return; or, do Thou my son, for that thou art returned; but let Us rejoice,
let Us be merry; for this, so blessed a return and change.

The true turning of any soul from sin, Doctr. The true conversion of any,
does administer much matter of rejoicing unto the faithful. Verse 5, 6. Verse
7. Verse 8, 9.
does administer matter of exceeding great joy and rejoicing. This is declared
in the two fore going parables. First, in that of the lost sheep, where we
see that the shepherd, when he finds his sheep, lays it on his shoulder,
and coming home, calls his friends together, and wills them to rejoice,
because he had found the sheep which was wanting. Now hear how Christ
applies this, I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in Heaven over one
sinner that repents, more then over ninety and nine just persons, which need
no repentance. So in that other parable of the lost groat, the poor woman
lights a candle, sweepes the house, searches every corner, and when she has
found her groat, she gathers her neighbors together, saying, Rejoice with
me, Verse 10.
for I have found the piece which I had lost. Hear now what follows;
Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God,
for one sinner that conuerteth. As it causes the Angels of Heaven to rejoice,
so does it likewise cause the Saints upon the earth; for when the Jews heard
of the conversion of the Gentiles, Acts 11.18.
and that the Holy Ghost was fallen upon them, as upon themselves at the
beginning: They held their peace (as the Text says) and glorified God, saying;
Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.

Reason.
The reason is, because God is hereby glorified, and his Church and Kingdom is
increased and advanced: Now, as there is nothing that ought to be more grievous
to us, then Gods dishonor, so nothing ought to rejoice our hearts more, then
to see his praise set forth, and his name magnified.

Acts 12.3. and 15.1.
who had rather renounce the Gospel, then to receive them into a fellowship of
the same faith. Thus do many peruersely and maliciously repine, at the
bringing of their brethren into the estate of grace, whereat they ought
especially to rejoice. 1 Pet. 4.4.
Yea farther, they mock and persecute them for no other cause, but because
they have left their sins, and turned to the Lord. But let these know, that
such as be themselves converted, will rejoice at the conversion of their
brethren, and let me wish them to take heed, how they murmr at the mercy of
God, showed in the conversion of any, for fear they deprive themselves for
ever of it.

Gods name; the Angels in heaven shall be exceeding glad, and praise God for
thee; yea, the thrice gloririous and blessed Trinity will also bear their
parts in this rejoicing. The Father will rejoice, when thou (who art by nature
the child of wrath, and slave of Satan) becommest his adopted son and heir
of grace. The Son also will be glad, because by thy repentance, his death and
blood shed becomes auailable unto thee. The Holy Ghost likewise shall rejoice,
because by repentance thy heart is purged, and made a fit temple for himself
to dwell in. Oh what a notable spur would this be to true repentance, if it
were well considered! Consider of it thou, who as yet continuest in a course of
sin, thou shall rejoice the hearts of God, Angels, and Men, if thou will
repent. And surely, if it will bring joy to them, it will bring far greater
joy unto thy self in the end. It is thy good that causes them to rejoice; for
it concerns not them so much as it concerns thy self. Turn therefore from
thy evil ways, leave and forsake thy former courses, thou shall have no cause
of grief for thy so doing. The hearts of others thou will make glad, but thine
own soul shall find the greatest comfort.

Thirdly, let this serve to exhort such as are converted,

Text.
VERSE 24. For this my son was dead, and is alive: Again, he was lost, but
is found: and they began to be merry.
AS the father made great joy upon his sons return, so he had good reason
moving him thereunto: His son was dead, but is now alive; he was lost, but
is now found. And therefore, it well agrees with his fatherly nature to be
glad thereof.

This reason does express the twofold estate of a Christian in this life.

First, it shows what they are by nature, while they live in the estate of
vnregeneracie, they are dead; and lost.

Secondly, wh^^ they are by grace, in the estate of regeneracie, they are
alive; they are found.

Text. There is a twofold death one corporal, the other spiritual, which is
twofold, the one in sin, the other for sin.
Was dead: Was alive.] There is a twofold death: and a twofold life: A
twofold death, the one is corporal, the other spiritual. Corporal, as when
the life is departed out of the body, and it laid down in the grave.
Spiritual, which concerns the soul, and it is twofold also. First, a death
in the present corruption of sin; whereby in this life we deserve damnation:
thus was this Prodigal, and (with him) all others dead, Christ only excepted.
Secondly, there is a death in the perpetual condemnation for sin, which is
first inflicted upon the soul, at the separation from the body, and at the
last day, shall be laid both upon the body and soul in a fearful and full
manner.

There is also a twofold life, one natural, the other spiritual.
Now, answerable to this death, is life: There is a life Natural, and a life
Spiritual; a life of the body, and a life of the soul: The natural life, is
that which we receive from Adam by generation; this we all have. Spiritual
life is that which we have by the means of the second Adam; this is proper
only to the Elect, and it is also twofold: the first is the life of grace,
which God vouchsafes us in this pilgrimage of ours. The other is the life of
glory, which shall be given us in the life to come. It is the life of grace
that is here meant, which this Prodigal and all other of God, elect do live,
after their conversion.

Now to come to the Instructions which do hence arise, and first in that he is
said to be dead before his conversion, we learn, Doctr. Every wicked man is a
dead man. Matthew. 8.22.
that every wicked and unregenerated man is a dead man: He is stark dead,
being utterly destitute of the life of grace. This may be proved by our
Saviors speech to one of his Disciples: Let the dead bury the dead: that is,
those who are dead in sin (though otherwise alive) bury those who are dead
in body. So also in another place: The hour is coming, and now is; Ioh. 5.25.
when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that hear
shall live. By this [voyce] is meant the Preaching of the Gospel, which the
dead shall hear, that is, those that are dead in their sins and trespasses,
being without all spiritual life as yet. The Apostle Paul does notably confirm
this in the second to the Ephesians: the words be these, You, has he
quickened, Ephesians. 2.14.
Verse 5.
who were dead in trespasses and sins. And again, in the same Chapter, verse
5. Even when we were dead in sins, 1. Tim. 5.6.
has quickened us together with Christ. Thus does he also say of the Widow
that lives in pleasure, that She is dead, though She lives. These places
do sufficiently confirm this truth. More might be brought if need were.

The reason is plain, Reason.
because they want the spirit of grace, which does only quicken. Adam was not
made a living man, until God breathed the breath of life into him, that made
him stir and walk. Before that, he was only as a picture of clay lying
upon the ground, having eyes that saw not, ears that heard not, a mouth that
could not speak, and feet that could not go. So until the spirit of grace be
given, which only gives life to the actions of men, they are but as carkases,
like unto Christians, but indeed are not.

Now let us come to the application. And first, it might serve for the
confutation of the Papist, who does teach, that man has power to prepare
himself to receive grace, and has ability to dispose himself to the work
of his regeneration. But does not the Scripture tell us that by nature we are
dead? not in a swond or sick, but dead, stark dead, as I have formerly
showed. And what can such a one do to his own quickening? no, no, this cannot
be, for of our selves we cannot move to life, until God do quicken us by
his Word and Spirit.

Wicked men resemble a corse in 4. things. First they are cold.
lying rotting in the graves of iniquity: Being Cold, Senclesse, Heavy, and
stinking, fitly resembling a corse in these four things. Cold they are; for
the powerful heat of Gods holy Spirit is quenched in them, so that their
preaching is cold, there praying is cold, there hearing is cold, and all other
good exercises they take in hand. And so is it with there seeming graces, there
Faith, Zeal, Love, etc. All are key cold, noe warmth can be felt in them. As
they are cold, so they are Senclesse, Secondly they are senseless. Psalm 58.4.
they can nether Hear, See, Smell, Taste, nor Touch. There Hearing is gone,
clean gone, They are like the deaf adder that cannot, nay, (which is worst of
all) that will not hear the voice of the charmer, Isay. 6.10. Zach. 7.11.
charm he never so wisely, there ears are heavy, yea uncircumcised, open to
any that will speak, Revel. 3.17.
but refusing to hear the Lord calling. As they are deaf, so also Blind: The
God of this world has covered there eyes with a veil, so that though they
have eyes they see not salvation offered, Ezekiel. 12.2.
nor the light of the Gospel shining upon them; neither can they perceive
those things which are of God. Dumb they are also, 1 Cor. 2.14. Ier.
having mouths and speak not, to Gods glory or praise; They bend there
tounges like there bows for evil, but they have no courage for the truth.
They are tongue tied when Gods name should be blessed, and when good talk is
administered; but freedom of speech they have to blaspheme his sacred and
glorious name. There smelling is clean gone; they feel not the savor of
Christ's ointments, for the which the virgins run after him, Cant. 1.2. Psalm.
45.8. 2 Cor. 2.16.
neither of his garments which smell of Myrrh and Cassia; the word it self the
Gospel of grace unto them is a savor of death, they smell no other thing in
it. Romans 8.5.
Miserable men! who being after the flesh savor only the things of the flesh.
There Taste is clean gone; they know not the sweetness of Gods mercy, nor the
saving grace of Christ in the Gospel, Psalm. 34.8.
they have not tasted how good and gracious the Lord is, or if they have tasted
of his mercies it has bin but with the tip of the tongue they have never
digested. As they taste not so (lastly) they Touch not; They believe not in the
son of God: Tangere christu^ est credere in Christum. August. in Joan. Tract.
16.
they do not so touch him by faith as to draw virtue out of him, they do not so
believe in him, as that in believing they might get eternal life through his
holy name. John. 20.31. Thus we see how blockish and senseless every wicked
man is fitly resembling a corse in that respect.

As they are senseless so in the third place they are Heavy, as a dead corpse
is: Thirdly they are heavy. Isay. 24.20.
yea so heavy as the earth groans to bear them, and reeles to and fro like a
drunkard, their transgressions lie so heavy upon it. So heavy are these dead
corpses as that she is not able to undergo the burden but has bin feign to
open her mouth, and receive some into her belly, as we see in the example of
Korah, Dathan, and Abyram: Numb. 16.31.
What do I speak of the earth, when the creator of heaven and earth, even God
himself, mighty and strong is wearied with bearing, Exodus 34. Isay. 43 24.
Amos 2.13.
and is pressed under this burden, as a cart is pressed that is full of
sheaues? No marvel then, wickedness is compared to a tallent of lead seeing
it brings with it such a load.

Lastly they are stinking: Look as a carcass, Fourthly they are stinking.
sends forth a filthy savor after a while lying, so is it with the wicked.
They are loathsome in the nostrils of God and men; (notwithstanding all their
outward ornaments and odours, Esaias. 1 11. And 66.3. Tit. 1.15.
which are but as flowers upon a dead corpse that cannot make the carcass
sweeter, nor better.) Their prayers are stinking, their preaching stinking; and
every other spiritual exercise, Psalm 14.5.
filthy, unsavory, and unclean: yea, their very throats are open sepulchers:
their words and breath is loathsome and odious. Thus you have seen what a
cold, senseless, heavy, stinking corse every wicked man is.

The God of heaven open your eyes, that it does espespecially concern, that
you may see it, and labor to be freed from it. Thou that hear this, art
thou one that have lived all thy time, without remorse for sin, and never yet
reformed thy life? be warned then of thy misery, thou art dead, dead I say in
the present corruption of sin: Dead also in that thou art liable to eternal
condemnation for sin. Thy best works are but dead works, such works as
tend to death, and will in the end bring death without Repentance. Deceive not
thy self then in regard of thy present estate, though thou be alive in the
flesh, yet thou art dead to the Lord, and though thou perfumest thy body, and
bedeekest it with ornaments; yet know thou perfumest but a piece of carrion, and
all thou can do, cannot possibly keep it from putrefaction, Ephesians. 5.14.
and rottenness. Awake, awake therefore thou that sleep, stand up from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Christ in his word does instantly call
upon you all: young man, arise; damsel, arise; Lazarus arise; wherefore I
beseech you, sit up and speak, lie no longer rotting in the graves of
iniquity, but now you hear the trumpet of the Gospel, the voice of Christ
sounding in your ears, rise up and walk.

Ephesians. ^.18. Reasons, first, why so many stinking smells in every corner of the
world.
In the third place, seeing that men are by nature dead, utterly deprived of all
life of grace; See then the reason, first, why there are so many stinking
smells, and pestiferous savors in every place: so many blasphemous oaths used
in every house, shop and market, so much villainy practiced in every corner of
our streets: here is the reason the world is full of dead corpses, that stink
above ground; not a house wherein there is not one dead, nay, hardly a house
wherein there is one alive. Exodus 12.30. Secondly, why the word as preached
with so little profit. Psalm. 101.1.


Secondly, why the word is preached with so little profit, alas! men are dead,
we speak to deaf adders, to dead souls. As good blow a trumpet in a dead
man's care, as sing of mercy or judgment unto them, till God revive them; they
are dead, therefore they depart from the word untouched.

Thirdly, Thirdly, why no more complaining of the burden of sin? Romans 8. Jud.
16.3.
why there is no more complaining of the weight of sin; no more groaning under
that which makes the very earth to groan, but many do also easily bear it, as
Sampson did the gates of the City, their backs never complaining of the
load; here is the reason of it, men are dead. Lay a mountain on a dead man he
will never groan, nor complain: so though they lie under the burden of Adams
transgression, under the weight of their own corruption, under the wrath of
God, which is due debt for their sins and transgressions; all which are
heavier then all the gravel on the earth, or sand on the Sea shore, yet for as
much as they are without the life of grace, they cannot have a sense and
feeling of it. This burden must be felt by grace, and not by corruption; It is
a spiritual burden, no marvel then if those that are flesh, destitute of the
spirit, feel it not.

And lastly, Fourthly, why so many wicked men die so quietly?
would you know the reason why so many wicked men go out of this world, like
Lambs, and die so quietly, insomuch, that they are thought to be the only
beloved of God, and in a happy and blessed estate and condition? why this is
it, they were dead before: They die quietly, because they die sencelesly. True
it is, God does very often lay terrors upon the flesh of wicked men, and suffer
their consciences, like a mad dog to fly in their faces, but if God should
let them alone, the most in the world would die in a wretched sencelesnesse,
and so seem to go away like lambs, not thinking or considering of what will
afterward befall them.

Ier. 10.14. John 1.5. Ephesians. 4 17. Tit. 3.3. Luke 24.6.7. Tit. 1.15. Ephesians.
4.19. Mar. 10.19.20 Rom 14.23. 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.8. Romans 6.19. Gal. 5.21.
Romans 10.2. Romans 6.13.19. Romans 3.13.14.15.16.17.18.
our minds are blind, impotent, vain, foolish: the memory is feeble, apt to
forget good our consciences they are impure, benumbed, erroneous, and
superstitious, or doubting: the will, that is unable to choose good, strong to
evil, yea, altogether auerse and rebellious: no good so truly good, but it
abhorres it, no evil so extremely wicked, but it has an enclineablenes to
embrace it; no servant so ready to do his masters will as it is to do the
works of the Devil; no rebel so desperately set against his lawful
sovereign, as it, against the Lord. And all our affections are unruly, and
disordered. As for the members of our bodies, they are instruments to execute
sin conceived, as the Apostle does evidently declare. Our throat, it is an
open sepulcher; our tongues are given to deceit; the poison of Asps is under
our lips: our mouths are full of cursing, and bitterness; our feet are swift
for the shedding of blood: Destruction and misery are in all our ways: and
there is no fear of God before our eyes; behold thy natural estate and
condition, see what matter that will afford of boasting. What though thou have
many excellent parts, gifts, and graces, bestowed upon thee, yet take heed thou
be not puffed up with pride, or vain glory? look thou unto the rock
whence thou were hewne, and that will afford matter enough for thy humiliation;
and of being vile in thy own judgment.

that haunted the graves. What has the living to do amongst the dead? As thou
therefore hopest to be separated from them at the day of Judgment, see thou
now separatest from them in this world, if not in conversation (for this cannot
be) yet in regard of love and affection, for that may, yea, must be.

And is now alive.] That is, Text.
he is quickened by Gods blessed spirit, and enabled in some measure, to live
the life of grace. The observation hence may be this;

He only may be said to live, that lives the life of grace, Doctr. He only
lives that lives the life of grace.
and no other: They only are living men, that have their souls quickened by
Gods blessed spirit; As for life of any other kind, it is but a shadow of life,
and not worthy the name of life indeed. Were this life, to grow well, wax
strong, then would the trees of the field excel man, which from little plants,
grow at last to be strong and excellent Oaks; Or were this the only life, to
see, hear, smell, or the like; In this the very beasts of the field would
excel man, who go beyond him in these natural faculties; as the Dog in
smelling, the Heart in hearing, the Ape in tasting, the Eagle in seeing, with
many more. Or if we glory in this? that we live the life of reason, then how
many Philosophers have excelled man herein? So then it is not the vegetatine
life, wherein trees excel men, nor the sensitive, which beasts have better then
we; nor yet the reasonable life, which reprobates have as well as we, but it is
the life of grace, which is the life of a Christian, and which deserves to be
counted life, all other are not worthy of the name. This life is that only
that makes us live, without which our whole life is but a death: hence is it
that the Apostle says, we are quickened, so soon as grace does appear, before
which time we were but dead, as formerly we have heard, and speaking of
himself, Ephesians. 2.1.5. Romans 6 13. Gal. 2.20.
he says; I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me, he esteems this a
life, and no other.

Let this then teach us thoroughly to examine our selves, whether we be alive or
dead? then make a trial whether thy soul be quickened by Gods blessed spirit,
yea, or no, and whether thou live the life of God. Ephesians. 4 18. Spiritual
life, how discerned?

First property of life.

Life is active and stirring. 2. Tim 4.18. Psalm. 123.2.


Now this may be discerned by the properties of life, and they are these;

First, life is stirring, it is not without some motion, it is active, and ever
doing. So, where there is any life of grace, there will be spiritual action,
and a practice of godliness in the life and conversation. The eyes will be
directed toward the holy one of Israel: And as the eyes of a servant look to
the hands of his master, so will thy eyes look up unto the Lord, till he have
mercy upon thee. Thou will cause thine ear also to hear Wisdom, Pro. 2.2.
Pro. 19.20.
yea, thou will incline them to hear her counsel, that thou may be wise in
the latter end. Psalm. 79.13.
With thy mouth thou will declare the praises of the Lord from generation to
generation, and wilt not conceal his truth from the great Congregation: Psalm.
40.10. Pro. 15.7. Eccle. 10.12. Pro. 10.21. Psalm. 26.6. Job 31.7. Lamen. 3.41.
Psalm. 134.2. Nehe. 2.18.
But with thy tongue thou will spread abroad knowledge, and utter the words of
grace, and cause thy lips to feed many. Thy hands thou will wash in innocence,
and suffer no blot to cleave unto them; Then will thou lift them up with thy
heart unto God in the heavens; thou will lift them up in the Sanctuary, and
bless the Lord; Thou will also strengthen them to do good, and by them
minister to the necessities of the Saints. Act. 20.34. Ephe. 3.14.
Thy knees thou will bow unto God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: And thy
feet shall delight to stand within the gates of Jerusalem; Psalm. 122.2. Heb.
12.13.
Straight steps will thou make with them, lest that which is halting be
turned out of the way. In a word, every member will be made as a weapon of
righteousness, Romans 6.12.
to serve the living God. Eyes, ears, tongue, hands, feet, all will be in
motion, and not idle. Try then your selves, by this first property, is it thus
with thee? Art thou employed in Gods service, do thou find grace active, and
stirring in thee? surely then it is a good sign of life: but if it be so, that
there is no spiritual motion, it is an evident sign of the want hereof. An
image made by man's art, may lively represent a man having eyes, and ears,
nose, and mouth, as man has; yet I know, for all that it has no life in it,
because it stands still, and stirs not: So, if I see a professor, without
practice in his life, I must needs think he is an Idol; And assuredly what
ever they seem in the eyes of men, they are in the eyes of God, but as the
carkases of Christians. Without this spiritual disposition to spiritual
exercises, pretend what thou will, thou art but the Image of a Christian,
looking somewhat like him, but not quickened by his life.

A second property of life is this; Second property, it ever seeks it own
preservation.
It will ever seek it own preservation: The newborn babe, by crying begs
help presently, so soon as it is borne: And the young ones of bruites, run to
the teat of their dames: Thus it is with such as live this life of grace, they
hunger and thirst for the food of their souls, 1. Pet. 2.2.
and as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that they may
grow thereby, as S. Peter teaches us. Their desire is to be feeding, that they
may be growing, and they are much grieved, when this food is wanting, because
the growth of grace must needs be hindered. Examine thy self, is it thus with
thee, do thou desire after the food of thy soul? and follow hard the
market, to provide for the preservation of the same? If it be so, it is well,
it is a great sign of grace: but if it be otherwise, that thou have no care
hereof, despising or neglecting the ordinances of God, which he has ordained
for the good of thy soul, it is a sure sign thou want this life we speak
of.

A third property is constantly to seek it. Thirdly, as it seeks it, so it
constantly seeks it.
Life does not only seek it own preservation, but it seeks it daily,
constantly, and continually, so long as it has any being. The young infant does
almost nothing else but suck and sleep, then cry for the breast again: and so
any other creature, does daily seek for food: The young lions roar after
their prey, Psalm. 104.21. Ver. 27.
and all other creatures wait upon the Lord, that he may give them their meat
in due season. Thus is it with them that live this life of grace; there is a
daily seeking after food for the preserving of it; a daily using of the
means, as prayer, reading, meditation, and the like. Thus it is said of the
blessed man; In Gods law he does exercise himself both day and night. Psalm.
1.2.
Many examples might be brought for proof of this. Job rose up early to offer
sacrifice: Job 1.5.
this did Job continually. It was Daniels practice to pray three times a day.
Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 55.17. Psalm. 119.164.
And David's, Evening, morning, and at noone-tide will I pray unto thee: yea we
may hear him speaking of seven times a day praising of the Lord. And indeed
there are but few duties of Religion, for which we have not the example of some
Saint for the daily performance thereof. Let this be well considered of such as
hear and read and pray by fitts and starts, now and then, as it were upon
raynie days. Alas! thousands there are in the world, who read not, pray not
from Sabbath to Sabbath, nay nor then neither. Have these any life of grace in
them? Sure I am, natural life must be daily fed, and shall be too; and is
there not as much need for the spiritual? Be it therefore known unto thee,
and certified to thy soul, that thou deceiuest thy self, in thinking thou
live the life of a Christian, when there is no care had to a daily
performance of the exercises belonging to a Christian.

Fourthly, it is sensible of whatsoever is an enemy unto it.
A fourth property of life is this, it is sensible of whatsoever is an enemy
unto it, and does resist it. The more life, the greater sense; and the greater
sense, the more resistance. Thus is it with such as live this life of grace,
corruptions are felt and fought against; the spirit lusts against the flesh,
Galat. 5.17.
and the flesh against the spirit; and these are contrary the one to the other.
Thus was it with Paul, he felt his corruptions, which caused him to sigh and
groan under the weight of them. I have (says he) a law in my members warring
against the law of my mind, Romans 7.23.
and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin: now this sense of sin
caused him to break forth into this complaint, O wretched man that I am, verse.
24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Thus was he sensible of the
opposition, which was made by sin, against that life and power of grace which
was in him: and as he felt it, so did he war and combat against it; he did
resist those rebellious lusts, and set himself against them with all his
force. Examine then thy self by this: Do thou feel thy corruptions, and
strive against them? Art thou sensible of the working of sin in thy self,
and how it opposes the life of grace that is in thee? Do thou feel
unbelief opposing thy faith? Dullness and deadness, thy delight in Gods
service? And do thou struggle and strive against each of these, as the
powers of life natural, does against a disease? Why then this is an evident
sign of spiritual life; a sure testimony of the Spirit of Grace. But is it
otherwise with thee? have thou no sense nor feeling of the power of sin?
make thou no complaints against thy sinful corruptions? Is there no
resisting nor opposing of thy rebellious lusts? Why then assure thy self there
is no life of grace in thee: the strong man has gone away with all, and thou
art still in thy natural blindness and deadnes.

By these signs may you certainly know (if you will deal truly in examining
your selves) whether you as yet live the life of Grace: Deal faithfully then
with thy self in this business, which does so nearly concern thee. For if
thou live not the life of Grace here, never hope to live the life of glory
hereafter. As desirous (therefore) as thou art to know the one, so be as
diligent to find out the other.

A second Use is for our Instruction. Seek to live this breath, sense, soul,
are nothing worth; and not only so but are accursed to thee.

Quest.
But what may I do, or what means must I use, that I may live this life of
Grace?

Answ. Means to live the life of Grace.
I answer: As to live a natural life, there must be a generation according to
the flesh: so if thou would attain to live this life of the Spirit, thou
must of necessity be brought to a second birth: Not to be turned into our
mothers womb again (as Nicodemus thought) but as Christ says, Ioh. 3.1.
we must be borne of the will of his Father. 1. Pet. 1.23.
And (as Peter says) of a seed not mortal but immortal, the word of God.
Faith that comes by hearing; Romans 10.
hearing by the word; Regeneration is a fruit of Faith; Faith an effect of the
word; the word is preached by the Minister. The Spirit of God begets none anew
wthout faith; Faith is not ordinarily begotten but by the word: So then if thou
desire to live this life, be frequent in hearing of the word preached: for
the dead shall hear this voice, Job. 5.25.
and they that hear shall live. The Prophet Ezekiel in a vision is carried into
the midst of a field, Ezech. 37.
full of dead bones, and willed to prophecy over them, and say, verse. 4.
O ye dry bones hear the word of the Lord: So he prophesied as he was
commanded: verse. 7.
And as he prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones
came together bone to his bone. verse. 8.
Then the sinews and flesh grew upon them; and upon the flesh a skin covered
them: then he prophesied unto the wind to breath upon the dead, verse. 9.
that they might live, verse. 10.
and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet,
and they were an exceeding great army. Hereby is signified (especially) the
estate of the Jews after their captivity: yet I doubt not but in them the
estate of the whole Church, in whose heart the Lord works his graces of
Regeneration by little and little, is also lively described. God sends his
servants the Ministers into the world, as it were into a field of dead bones,
and wills us to prophecy, and say, Oh you dry bones, hear the word of the
Lord: But what; can these dry bones live? Surely, oh Lord, thou know! And
therefore we prophecy, as we be commanded: and behold what follows; there is
a first a shaking, a quaking, and trembling of the heart, as we see in Peter's
Conuerts, Acts 2.37. and 16.29.
and in the laylor: then the bones come together, bone to his bone; we (as it
were) gather our senses together, and begin to consider in what state we stand,
as the Prodigal here did; and then lo the sinews and the flesh come upon us,
and the skin covers us above; we now begin to be strengthened by holy purposes
and resolutions, resolving and desiring to live unto the Lord, though as yet we
cannot find in our selves any breath of grace; but then the Lord causes
breath to enter into us, he powers upon us further gifts of his Spirit, for
our further quickening, and then we see we live, and get up upon our feet,
leaping and rejoicing, and praising Gods name for his wonderful mercy. See
then that you attend upon this means, be frequent in hearing of the word; for
this is the trumpet that must awake thee, if ever thou be awaked: Cast not
off all care of thy salvation, as too many do, who hearing that Regeneration
and salvation are the gifts of God, and that it is not in their own power to
convert themselves, grow hereupon secure, and neglect all means: Wherefore
should we trouble our selves (say they) about it? for all is a God will have
it; if he will give it us, we shall be saved, and if not, we shall never
obtain salvation, do what we can. Well, and what of this? Will thou therefore
neglect the means God inioyneth thee to use for the obteyning of it? God
gives it, but he gives it by means, which he has ordained, which if thou
neglectest, thou art the more inexcusable, and thy damnation will be just.

But what will you tie God to means? Quest.
Are not all things possible to him? Is not he able to convert and save without
preaching or hearing, as well as with it?

I answer: The Question is needles and foolish: Answ.
none denies but God can; yet I tell thee he will not, when he gives ordinary
means: Exodus 16. Isay 37.30.
God can give bread from heaven; God can cause the earth to yield corn without
sowing; 1. King. 17.6.
God can cause a Raven to feed Eliah; God can save without food: these and
many other things God can do; but will thou from hence conclude against the
means that God has now ordained? Will thou refuse to eat, because God can
save thee without meat? Or will thou refuse to plow thy ground, or sow thy
seed, because God can give thee a crop without it? Or will thou refuse to take
thy meals at home, and go into the fields, looking that every Raven that
flies over thy head, should bring thee thy dinner? Or will thou voluntarily
cast thy self into the fire, because God can defend thee from the heat of it,
as he did the three children in the hot fiery furnace? Dan. 3 25.
Do these things seem to be ridiculous unto thee? and is it not as ridiculous
for thee to refuse to hear, and yet think to be saved? Know then oh man!
Manna is for the wilderness; an Israelite may not look for it in the land of
Canaan, where he may sow and reap: so while thou live in the Church, where
thou may partake of the ordinary means, use them, else never hope of
obteyning eternal life. And further know, that so much as thou neglectest
hearing, so much thou neglectest thy own salvation: set then this down for a
truth, and be persuaded of it, that by this means thou must be begotten, if
ever thou be borne anew: If by the hearing of this word, thou be not
raised, thou will for ever rot and perish in thy sins.

Object.
Oh! but I have small hope in attending on the means, I have lived a long time
in sin, my sins are great, and many; I am not only dead, but rotten, and
therefore I fear I shall never be raised nor revived.

Sol. Luke 8 55. Lu ^ 7.11. John 11.44.
We read of three that Christ raised from death, Iairus daughter newly dead;
the Widows son dead and wound up, and lying upon the hearse; and Lazarus,
who was dead, buried, and stinking in the grave. August. Ser. 44. de verb. Dom.
These three sorts of coarses aptly resemble (says a Father) three sorts of
sinners: Iairus daughter lying dead in her fathers house, resembles those that
sin by inward consent: The widows son, being carried out of the gate of
the city, those that sin by outward act: Lazarus having been dead and buried
four days, those that sin by continual habit: The young maiden lay in a
bed: The young man in a coffin: Lazarus in a Grave. The first, was dead but an
hour: the second; but a day: the third, four days. All which, teaches us
thus much, that there is no degree of death so desperate that is past help: no
sin so great, but may be forgiven (the sin of the Holy Ghost only
excepted:) though with Lazarus thou have layen four days, Moles imposita
sepulcher, ipsa est vis dura consuetudinis. August.
and art bound hand and foot with bands as he was; though thou have a stone
laid upon thee as he had; though thou have made thy heart as hard as the nether
mil-stone, by a custom and trade of sin, so that in the judgment of man, it
is impossible to recover: yet as Christ's omnipotent voice brought him forth
bound hand and foot, and brake his bands asunder, and set him at liberty: So
is it able to bring thee forth out of the grave of thy sins, and to knock off
those gyues and fetters of Satan wherewith thou art so fast bound, and to
restore thee to the liberty of the sons of God. Be not then discouraged from
following the means, for though thou have a long time lain a rotting in thy
sins, yet in Gods good time thou may be raised to newness of life, by his
powerful voice uttered in the ministry of the Gospel.

A third use of this point is for Exhortation to all such He that has tasted
of this life, shall never see death; but yet let us know, he may feel
sickness, and such sickness as is nigh unto death; and be so sick, as that
he may think there is no way but death; and all for want of nourishing this
new life, which is begotten in him: See then you preserve your life, and that
you grow up in soundness of grace and spiritual strength; be content to use
all good means for this end and purpose: Five helps for the preservation of
life spiritual.
and in special th^se five. First, Food: Secondly, Recreation: Thirdly,
Exercise: Fourthly, Sleep: Fifthly, Physic. You all know, what great good
helps these are, and how needful for the preservation of life corporalle
assuredly they are as good for the preservation of life spiritual, 1 Means is
Food.
and as necessary. As for Food, we all know if it be wanting, the body
cannot long be strong nor last, it must needs famish. So is it with the soul,
if it want it sustenance and due meals, it must needs pine away. It is
requisite therefore, that we be frequent in hearing of the word read, 1. Pet.
2.2.
and preached (as formerly I have said.) As also, in coming to the Sacrament,
there to eat and drink the flesh and blood of Christ spiritually by faith,
John 6.35.48, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55.
for He is that bread of life, and whosoever eats of this bread, shall live
for ever: his flesh is meat indeed, his blood is drink indeed.

2 Help is Recreation.
The second help is Recreation. How available this is for the health of the
body, we are not ignorant of. It is a great means for the preservation of
life; it makes the body more able, and the mind more cheerful, for any
work of our callings. Thus spiritual Recreation is a notable preserver of the
life of grace and therefore must be used of every Christian. Recreate thy self
then in singing of Psalms, Iam. 5.13.
to which St James does exhort us: And when thou art a weary of some one
exercise thou art about (as that we shall soon be, such is our corruption)
then betake thy self unto another: Fall from reading to singing, from singing
to praying, let this be thy recreation, and use it often.

3 Means is Exercise.
The third is Exercise. Without this, the body grows diseased, full of aches and
pains, as experience proves* And so does the soul grow diseased and weak,
yea many times deadly sick for want of it. Exercise thy self therefore daily
in holy duties, as in Prayer, mortification, Good works: And with the godly
man, Psalm. 1.2.
exercise thy self continually in the Law of God.

The fourth is Sleep, 4 Help is Sleep. Ros naturae.
which is most necessary for the entertainment of bodily health. It is the dew
of nature, and as necessary for the body as meat and drink is: To this, is
meditation of Gods word compared; it is as sleep and rest to a Christian
soul, which does refresh and revive it even as sleep does the body. Thou
may not forget to give thy soul this rest.

Fifthly, 5 Means or help is Physic.
Physic is an excellent help (as to keep the body in good order) so to
keep the soul likewise in good temper. With the potion of Repentance, we must
daily purge our hearts, and with the vomit of confession, rid sin from off our
consciences. And be content withal, to accept of that physic which God
himself shall prepare for us: His crosses are his medicines, afflictions are
good, proper, recuring, recovering physic, for diseased affections. Admit
then, (without grudging) of this potion which is prepared for thee by the hand
of thy maker: It may happily be unpleasant; what then? will thou be displeased
with the relish, when thy sick heart is thereby eased of her pains? he is
worthy to dye who will rather choose a wilful sickness then a harsh remedy.
And yet here is not all, for good diet is also necessary unto physic. In
vain does the potion work our recovery, if our evil behavior afterward
bring a relapse. See therefore that (after you have purged your hearts by
repentance) you observe the strict diet of obedience. Refrain from those
corrupt meats whereon your souls have formerly surfetted. Let all sin be
carefully avoided: Come not in evil company, follow no evil example, hearken
to no evil counsel, and then your souls shall live. Isay 55.3.


And these are the means, which whosoever would grow strong in grace, and
preserve the health of his soul, must use. If then thou desire to have thy
soul thrive, and be in good liking, see thou practice them, and that
constantly and conscionably, as in Gods presence. So shall thou find the
benefit of it in the end to be exceeding great.

Better (says Solomon) is a living dog, then a dead Lion. Better it is to be
a living soul (though never so poor) then to be a dead corp^, though never so
well be-stucke with flowers. What though many in the world have thousands of
pounds, great lands, large revenues? yet if they have not grace, they are but
stinking carkases: Far better is thy estate, though thou have never a groat;
for thou art a living soul, borne anew, and an heir of heaven. Bless God
then more for this, then if be had given thee a kingdom, rejoice in thy new
estate and happy condition. It has been an ancient custom for men to
celebrate their birthday, Math. 14.6.
as we see in Herod; who upon that day that he was borne, made a banquet to
his Princes and Captains, and chief estates of Galylee: How much more ought a
Christian to remember (if he can) the day of his new birth, and make that a day
of joy and gladness, a day of feasting and rejoicing to the Lord; after the
example of Zacheus, Luke 19 6, 7, 8.
who upon the day of his conversion made a great feast for gladness, and gave
gifts to the poor with all alacrity. Acts 16.32, 33.
And of the Iaylor, who the same time he was converted, took Paul and Silas,
and washed their wounds, and set meat before them, and rejoiced greatly with
all his household. Thus should Christians do; for they have greater cause to
keep this birthday then the former: For the first birth is unto death, the
second unto life: the first to condemnation the second to salvation. By the
first we are made vessels of wrath, but by the second vessels of glory. The
first birth indeed gives us a being; but it is the second, that gives us our
well-being. By the first birth, we may say to corruption, thou art my father,
and to the worms, ye are my brethren and sisters: But by the second, we have
God for our Father, and Christ Jesus with the holy Angels, for our brethren. Oh
what cause have we to rejoice in this time, above all other times! and to say
with the Psalmist, This is the day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and
be glad in it.

He was lost] Hear we see what (in part) has been before shown, viz. Text.


That wicked men are Strayes. They go astray, Doctr. Wicked are Strayes. Psalm.
119.176. Hoc and prophetae post peccatum, and omni humanae naturae dicere
conuenit. Basil. in Psalm. 119. Use.
and wander out of the way to Heaven. I have gone astray like a lost sheep
(says David.) And this not only the Prophet, but the whole nature of man
after the transgression is bound to confess: And therefore we are well taught
in our Lyturgie, to say, we have gone astray like lost sheep. This is
confirmed further in the two foregoing parables, of the lost sheep, and lost
groat.

I would wicked men would take notice of it, yea every one of us well consider
it. How do men use to deal with Strayes, do they not take them, and pound
them, and if the Owner find them not, does not the Lord of the soil seize
upon them, and take them for his own? This is thy condition: So will it be
with thee, if thou continuest still in thy sins, and wanderest from the Lord,
and wilt not be found of him: At last, thou shall be taken up and pounded, and
the God of this world shall seize on thee, and lay claim to thee, as to his
own proper goods and chattels. But of this I have spoken more before in the
thirteenth verse, where you may find the use and application set down more
largely; to which, if you please, you may add this that has been now said.

And is found] Yea, but who finds him? Text.
had not his father first found him, he had been lost for ever. So then we
see that other point confirmed, viz.

Doctr. Our conversion and calling is from Gods mercy and grace.
That our conversion and calling is from Gods free grace. It is not from our
own wisdom or labor, but from the mercy of God. In the two former parables
we see this cleared and strengthened; for the groat seeks not the woman, nor
the sheep the shepherd; no more do we seek Christ, if he seeks us not, we
shall wander for ever more.

Adam, thou did run from God, when he came to seek thee, and he was feign
to drag thee from behind the bushes; Oh the mercy of God toward thee and me
I had not he dealt thus graciously with us, we had been wanderers to this
hour. If thou art not blind, thou see this, and if thou art not blockish,
thou will be thankful for this.

when thou foughtest him not, Esaias 65.1.
as the Prophet speaks? Then now seek him, and thou shall be sure to find
him. Psalm. 105.3.
Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord, (says the Psalmist. The
meaning is, the heart of them shall rejoice that seek the Lord, yea, they
shall have great cause to rejoice, for they shall find and not miss, if they
seek aright. Now mark what follows: Oh seek the Lord and his strength,
seek his strength evermore. Seeing those that seek the Lord, shall have such
cause to rejoice, then seek the Lord. Again, and again, I say, seek him, I
will end this with recommending to thee a sweet meditation of a father, for thy
imitation. Seek me (says he) O Lord, Qu^ aere me, quia te requiro, Potes
inuenire quem tu requiris. Dignare suscipere quem inueneris. Impone humeris
quem susceperis. Non est tibi pium onus fastidio. Amb.
for I seek thee: Thou may find him whom thou seek: vouchsafe to receive
him whom thou have found, and lay him upon thy shoulders whom thou have
received, It is no weary burden unto thee, to bear thine own, and bring them
home again unto thy self. Thus say thou.

And they began to be merry] Not only his father, friends, and
houshold-seruants, but the Prodigal himself has his part in this joy.

Here then we evidently see, Text.
that

Regeneration does not abolish joy, Doctr.
nor any other natural affection; but only orders it. Grace destroys not
nature, Regeneration does not abolish joy, or any other natural affection, but
only orders it.
but only rectifies it. When the Spirit of God does regenerate the heart, it
does not take away any natural affection of the soul, as Love, Hatred, Fear,
Joy, Grief, etc. but only mooues them to a right object: And therefore we
shall find in Scriptures, that we are often willed to manifest and show them.
Psalm. 31.23. Psalm. 97.10.
Love the Lord all his Saints. Ye that love the Lord, hate that which is
evil. Fear the Lord, ye his Saints. My son, Prou. 24.21. Psalm. 32.11.
fear the Lord and the King. Be glad you righteous, and joyful all ye that
are upright in heart. 1 Cor. 12.26.
Mourn you therefore with them that mourn, rejoice with them that do
rejoice. etc. And many the like places, where the use of affections are
allowed; yea, commanded.

This then serves to condemn; First, the Stoickes, Use. Reproof of two sorts.
1. Stoickes, who condemn all use of affections. Heb. 7.26.
who allow not any use of affections: Men may not sigh, or change countenance
at any kind of accident, but they must be so mortified, as that they never
grieve, or rejoice, or be angry; no, not when Gods own cause requires it. Yet
we find that the cheifest of Gods Saints have had use of them; and Christ
himself, who was holy, harmless, separate from sinners, wept over Lazarus,
John 11.35.
and over Jerusalem, Luke 19.41. Mark 3.5
and beheld the incredulous Jews with anger, being grieved for the hardness
of their hearts.

2. Sort are worldlings, who think grace kills affections, especially Joy and
Delight.

Spiritus Caluinianus, est spiritus melancholicus.

Gods children have their joy and delight, as does appear, First, because they
have only cause to rejoice, they being freed from all evils.

Secondly, they having right to the promise. 2 Pet. 1.13.

Thirdly, their names being written in the book of life. Luke 10 20.

Fourthly, they have peace of conscience. Prou. 15.15.

Fifthly, they daily drawing out of the wels of consolation. Isay 12.3.

Sixthly, they have Gods comfortable presence. Zeph. 3.15.

Secondly, because God commands them to rejoice. Phil. 4.4. Zeph. 3.14. Psalm.
32.11. Isay. 4.1.

Thirdly by many examples of such as have rejoiced. Psalm. 119. Psalm. 14. Esaias
25.9. and 38.19.20.21.


The second sort that are to be reproved, are worldlings and profane persons,
who think that grace does drive out and kill all affections, especially that
of Joy and Delight. They think there is no joy nor mirth belongs unto a
Christian; but when men once begin to live godly, they must give a farewell,
and bid adieu to all mirth and gladness whatsoever, and betake themselves to a
mopish, heavy, lumpish, and solitary life, as their common proverb testifies.
But this is a foul deceit of the Devil, whereby he labors to put godliness
out of countenance: for grace does not abolish this, nor any other affection.
Christians have their joy as well as others have, they do rejoice as much and
more, then any other do or can; and indeed none have cause to rejoice but
they. For first, they only have their sins pardoned, they only are set free
from those infinite evils, which are fruits of sin, wherewith all others are
beset: From Death and Hell are they delivered, and therefore have cause of joy.
Secondly, they, and they only, have right to all Gods promises, that concern
this life, or a better. Thirdly, they, and they only, have a certain
assurance, that their names are written in the book of life, wherein they have
greater cause to rejoice, then if they had the Devils in subjection to them.
Fourthly, they, and they only, have peace of conscience, which is a continual
feast, and makes men glad and cheerful. Fifthly, these, and these only, do
conscionably perform good duties, and are conversant in good exercises, which
are the Wels of consolation, these only have pitchers to draw. Sixthly and
lastly, they, and they only, have the comfortable presence of God to refresh
them, even as the Sun does the earth: how then can it possibly be, but they
must have joy?

Again, if it were so, that they have no joy, why does the Lord command them
to rejoice, yea and that always, Rejoice always, again I say, rejoice. And
why does he give it so strictly in charge to his Ambassadors, to comfort them?
Comfort you, comfort you, my people says our God. And do we not find many
examples in Scripture of such as have rejoiced: and that in time of tribulation
and affliction, when crosses have lien heavy upon them? Surely if they have
rejoiced at such times we may well be persuaded, they are not without joy at
other times and seasons.

But we see no such matter in them. Answer. no wonder for the stranger shall
not enter into his joy, they shall not meddle with it, no nor indeed discern
it, for it is Internal and must be discerned by the eye of faith, rather then
with that of nature. And again the objects of his joy are not Carnal, but
Spiritual, Romans 5.3. Object. Answ. Prou. 14.10. The joy of the Godly
internal, therefore not discerned by the wicked. Objects of a christians joy,
are not Carnal but spiritual. Phil. 4.7. 1 Samuel, 21.9.
he does not rejoice in carnal things as he did before his conversion; he has
now better objects for his joy, as, First God, and then those benefits which of
his love and mercy, flow from him to us in Christ Jesus. Now the stranger who
cannot enter into this joy thinks, he has no joy because it is not on wordly
things as there is is. But would thou know his joy? then practice for a while
holy and religious courses (for it cannot be known but by experience It
passes all understanding, none but he that feels it knows it) and then thou will change thy mind, and say as David of Goliahs sword, None like to it give
it me.

Secondly is this so that Regeneration does not taken away our Joy, nor any
affection of the heart, then we see our Mandate so often) be more in use. Out
upon that lumpishnesse and vnchearfullnesse, which is to be seen in too too
many professors whereby they greatly darken the glory of Religion and cause the
way of God to be evil spoken of. It may be a question whether such do more
dishonor God by serving him so heavily; or not by serving him at all. This I
am sure of, Inconveniences arising, from vnchearfull, and uncomfortable walking.
it opens the mouths of the wicked; and disheartens many that are coming on,
besides the much hurt that comes unto themselves hereby: As exposing of there
hearts to the devils temptations, and making themselves exceedingly liable
thereunto; as also it makes them marvelous unfit for any good duty or
exercise, whether, it be hearing, reading, praying, meditation, or the like.
Further it is under the reign of continual vnthankfullnesse; for how is it
possible, that that man should be thankful to God for his mercies whom they
affect not to rejoicing? And lastly it makes the Lord offended with us: This
was one maine cause of Gods dispeasure against Israel: Deuteronomy. 28.47.48.
and of his giving them up into the hands of their enemies, to serve in hunger
and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things, Because they
served not the Lord their God in ioyfullnesse and with gladness of heart. Now
fie upon it then, that any christian should serve God so heavily, God cannot
abide it, away with it then, and serve God hereafter with more joy and
alacrity. There is nothing that can be true, cause of sorrow to the godly.
Art thou in Christ? then thou can think of nothing that can be true cause
of sorrow to thee: thy sins past are forgiven, and esteemed as if they had
never bin: thy present imperfections are covered with the perfection of Jesus
Christ. The rebellion which rises up in thy heart continually, comes not
from thee, Romans 7.20. Romans 8.28. Math. 5.12. Heb. 2.14. Romans 8.1. Phil. 4.4.
but from sin which dwells in thee. Thy Afflictions shall all turn to thy
good. Does the world hate thee? why Blessed are you. Does death trouble thee?
Christ has over come it. Or does damnation greiue thee? There is none to them
that are in Christ Jesus, Rejoice then in the Lord allway and again I say
rejoice.

themselves. And so much shall serve for that point now we come to another and
it is this.

The assurance of Gods favor in the pardoning of sin, Doctr. Pardon of sin,
brings joy and rejoicing.
is that which causes joy and rejoicing. Now the father had kyssed him and
embraced, and given him pledges of his love, and spoke peace unto him; he with
the rest begins to rejoice and make merry. Therefore David desires of the
Lord this assurance (after his committing the sin of adultery) that so he
might have his soul comforted, which until he had, could not be quieted.
Psalm. 51.8.
Make me to hear of joy and gladness (says he) that the bones which thou
have broken may rejoice.

For until God speaks peace unto us, Reason.
our consciences will still vex and accuse us; And therefore says the Prophet
Isay There is no peace to the wicked, Isay. 4 8. Job. 15.20. Verse. 21. Verse. 24.
and Job shows as much, The wicked man is continually as one that trauaileth
with child, for he trauaileth with pain all his days. A dreadful sound is
in his ears. Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid.

Let wicked men then see their uncomfortable estate. Use. 2 King. 9.22.
What peace says Iehu to Ioram, So long as the whoredoms of thy mother
Iezabell and her witch-crafts are so many. So say I to thee what peace what
comfort, so long as so many sins remain unrepented, unpardoned? I confess
indeed, there is a kind of mad mirth, Eccles. 2.2.
which Solomon speaks of; that most in the world dote upon, one rejoices in
his cupps; another in his barnes, another in his promotion but this is far from
true joy: this is but a swinish and brutish joy, not sound nor solid. It must
be news brought from heaven to a man's soul that his sins are pardoned and
forgiven that must breed and bring it. How far then art thou from having a
merry heart who still abidest in thy sins and have not as yet repented? thou
may counterfeit a smile, but thou can not be truly merry. Thy laughter is
but as the crackling of thorns, Eccles 6.7.
soon gone. The spirit of fear and bondage rules within thee, which keeps
and bars out peace with God and joy in the Holy Ghost. Thou may face out
the matter as much as thou will, yet let me tell thee, thou can never have
ease until thy sins be pardoned, and they will never be pardoned until they
be repented off. Thou may sing, and laugh and be iocund, but alas thy mirth
is no other then that of the theife who goes capering to the gallows; for thou
art a condemd traitor, and know not how soon thou may be fett to
execution. Be then as merry as thou can be; I am sure thy estate and
condition wherein thou stand does give thee no leave that will not afford it.

Secondly this may serve for our direction how to get a merry heart, and
procure true joy indeed. The only way thou see is to obtain pardon for thy
sin: and to get God to assure thy soul hereof, for until then, thou can
never have it, would thou never so feign. A merry heart every one commends,
every one desires and affects; but alas how few take the right course for
obteining of it? Well; though others deal foolishly, yet be thou more wise;
humble thy self for sins past, resolve against all sins, and desire God to
be reconciled. Esaias. 61.3. Psalm. 126.2.3. Math. 5.5.
Remember the promises, of this joy is made to those that mourn, and only
unto those, and therefore mourn for thy sins, and seriously seek for pardon
of them, for unless thou do thus, never look to see merry day in this
world, nor in the world to come.

Doctr. The Godly man's joy in this life is but the beginning of joy. Psalm.
16.11.
Further, in that it is here said they [began] to be merry. This point is noted
from hence by some of our Expositors. That the godly man's joy in this life is
but the beginning of joy. We shall have the fullness of joy hereafter when we
come into Gods presence, at whose right hand it is (as the Psalmist speaks,)
In this life we have but the first fruits of the spirit, and Gods earnest
penny; In that other life we must look for the whole mass and persecution of
blessedness. This point is true, and might be of good use to teach us to long
for to be dissolved that we may be with Christ: for is the joy that we have
here but the beginning of joy, and as it were the first fruits? oh then, what
shall the crop be; does the joy which we hear taste of, and which in this
life we are made pertakers of, pass all understanding, as the Apostle
speaks? what then shall the fullness thereof be, who is able to express it.
But I intend not to prosecute it. I now come to the last part of this Parable,
which shows us the elder Brothers ill will or anger for his Fathers receiving
home, and so welcomming this his Brother.

VERSE 25. Now his elder Son was in the field, and as he came and drew nigh
to the house, he heard music and dancing. 26. And he called one of the
servants, and asked what these things meant. 27. And he said unto him, thy
Brother is come, and thy Father has killed the fatted Calfe, because he has
received him safe and sound. 28. And he was angry, and would not go in:
therefore came his Father out, and entreated him.
IN these last eight Verses the anger and discontent of the elder Brother is
laid down: wherein consider, First, from whence it arises, or how it was
occasioned; and that was upon the understanding of his Fathers love and joyful
entertainment of his younger Brother: For, he heard music and dancing, verse
25. And the servants also makes report thereof, verse. 26, 27. Hereupon (as the
Text says) He was angry, and would not go in.

Secondly, How this his anger is expressed, The parts.
viz. by his reasoning with, and accusing of his Father: which accusation is
amplified per (...). He had been obedient, Lo these many years do I serve
thee, neither at any time transgressed I thy commandment, verse 29. But his
Brother had been disobedient, As Soon as this thy Son was come, which has
devoured thy living with harlots, thou have killed for him the fatted Calfe,
verse 30.

Thirdly, How this is anger is qualified, and that is done two ways. First, by
his Fathers kind entreaty of him, verse 28.

Secondly, by an Apollogie which his Father makes unto him, verse. 31.32.

Wherein we have a Proposition, verse 31. which has in it a Concession of the
former particulars: For the Father would not now exasperate him, but seems
thus to reason, Grant is be so as thou do say of thy self; yet thou do
not well to be offended, for all that I have is thine. And secondly, a
Confirmation, verse 32. where he does both justify his own proceedings, ab
aequo, (for what he did was equity and right.) And also secretly defend his
younger Son, against his elder Brothers former accusation; For though he were
dead, yet he is now alive, though he were lost, he is new found: He is not what
he has been, the case is altered. And thus we see the limbs of this latter
part: My purpose is only to observe some general point from each of these
specialls, and so draw to a conclusion.

And first, in that this elder Son upon the understanding of his Fathers love
and gracious dealing with his younger Brother (who came home humbled and
penitent) does thus repine and grudge, wax angry and d scontent. This gives
us to understand, that

Doctr. The wicked repine at the preferments of others in Gods favors. Math
20.1. verse 2. verse. 3.4. verse 5.6.
The blessings of God upon others are great eye-sores unto the wicked. They
grudge and repine at the preferments of others in the favors of God. This our
Savior teaches us by another parable, A certain householder went our early in
the morning to hyre laborers into his vineyard. And when he had agreed with
them for a penny a day, be sent them into his vineyard to work. And he went
out about the third hour; and seeing others idle sent them in also. Thus did
he also about the sixth, ninth, and eleauenth hour. Now when Even was come,
verse 8.9.
the Lord called the laborers to give them their hyre, and gave every man his
penn^e; to them that came in last he gave as much as to the^ that came in
first. verse. 11.12.
Therefore the laborers murmured against the Master of the vineyard, saying,
these last have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal unto us
which have borne the burden and heat of it. Thus did they envy the servants,
and repine against the Masters dealing. Many are the examples that might be
alleged for confirmation of this truth. But take one for all, God he has
respect to Abel, Gen 4.45.
and to his offering; but unto Kain, and to his offering he had no regard:
Wherefore Kain was exceeding wrath, and his countenance fell down. And
afterward, he slew his Brother: and why was this? 1 John 3 12.
but because his own works were evil, and his Brothers good. God regarded
Abels sacrifice, and had respect unto it; for this cause does his brother envy
him, and at last does murder him.

The reason is, because they are of that same evil one, 1 John 3.12.
as S. John speaks: They are a hellish brood, and are transformed into the
image of the devil, who envied the happiness of our first Parents in the
Garden; Genesis 3.5.
of his nature do they participate, his works they do, and cannot otherwise
choose.

Secondly, as the tree is, such must be the fruit, they Gal. 5.21.

This then serves to reprove many, who Caine-like, and night, Psalm. 112.10.
it causes them to gnash their teeth, and melt away. So that as Joseph's
brethren could not endure that their Father should love him better then he
loved them. And as the Princes of Babell could not abide that Daniell should be
favored of the King above themselves; so cannot these men endure, that the God
of heaven should respect any before themselves, though they continually
blaspheme his holy name, and no day will give obedience unto him. Oh the cursed
nature of this same monster Envy, which fills men to the eyes, and there it
sits, and wheresoever through those windows it espies a blessing, it is
sickness and death unto it. Honor, wealth, prosperity, and whatsoever is good
in any, it repineth at. Men are not well, if they see others better, and in a
manner, Parum est, si ipse sit felix, nisi alter fuerit in faelix. 1. Cor.
15.42.
they do hate to be happy, with any company. Should God send these to heaven,
how would they brook it? for there one star excels another in glory (as the
Apostle speaks) surely hell is the fittest place for such (without repentance)
for there they shall see no matter of envy, but all objects of extreme
misery: And yet there also (so envious are they) it may be they will desire to
sit in the chair, and have superiority, though they receive the more torments.

Motives to shun envy. First, it is the vnprofitablest of all vices.
we need not want for Reasons to move us hereunto; for

First, consider, of all vices this is most unprofitable, having in it neither
profit, nor yet pleasure: insomuch, that one says, (and that truly) an envious
man has a great deal of less wit in his malice, then a very brute; for
whereas neither foul, nor fish, is taken in a snare without a bait, the
spiteful wretch is brought to the Devils hook without any pleasant bit. The
voluptuous man has a little pleasure: the covetous man a little profit; but
the envious neither of both.

Secondly, consider, it is obnoxious and hurtful: Secondly, it is not only
unprofitable, but very obnoxious and hurtful First, to others.
It hurts others, and our selves; Others are hereby wronged, for this vice is
not only against charity, which rejoices in the good of others, as in our
own: but it also tends to cruelty, and causes us to seek the blood of
others: what caused Cain to murder Abel, but this sin of envy? What caused
Saul to seek after David's death, but envy? And what caused the Pharisees to
crucify the Lord of life, but this devilish sin of envy? Romans 1.29. Gal.
5.21.
No wonder then we so often in Scripture find, envy and murder combind
together and joined, as if they were twins, growing in one body, and could
not be separated. Envy is a Bloud-hound, and it seldom hunts, but hunts to
death: sometimes indeed it is called off, but the will is ever good.

As it hurts others, so especially our selves: Secondly to our selves, and
that especially. In qua multa sum mala vnum tantum vtile, quae authori
incommoda. Basil. Carpitque and carpitur vna: suppliciumque suum est vt A^tna
scipsu^, sic se non alios, inuidus igne c^quit. Met^m. Genesis 4.14.
for this profitable quality, this vice above all other, is furnished with,
that the owner thereof has greatest damage: And therefore one says, It is
the iustest of all vices, because it brings with it, its own vengeance; God
has in justice appointed this to be a plague unto it self. A sound heart is
the life of the flesh, but envy is the rottenness of the bones, (says
Solomon.) That is it is hurtful to the body, and painful to the mind, and
will quickly consume a man, and bring him to his end, as the diseases which lie
in the bones and eat up the marrow. Whosoever finds me, shall stay me,
says Caine: So may the envious man say of himself; for either he sees in a
man that which is good, and then he repineth: or else that which is evil, and
so rejoices; and both these ways he slays his own soul. Means for the
preventing of it.
See then what cause every one of us has, to use all sanctified and holy
means, for the preventing and purging of this vice away, it it have seized on
us. And amongst others these.

First, purge away pride.
First, purge away all pride and self-love, from whence this vice fumeth. This
remedy the Apostle S. Paul prescribes to the Galatians, Gal. 5.26.
and in them to us. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one
another, envying one another. Sildome do you see an humble man envious. And
therefore labor for this grace, store your hearts with humility and Christian
charity, for these will make you thankful for your own portions, and glad to
see your brethren blessed in theirs.

Secondly, be well persuaded of, and contented with Gods holy administration in
the distribution of his gifts. Matthew. 20.13.
Secondly, labor to be well persuaded of, and contented with Gods holy
administration, in the distribubution of his gifts, whether temporal or
eternal, concerning this life or a better. Remember God cannot be charged with
folly, nor challenged of unrighteousness; he is an absolute disposer of his
gifts, in what kind soever, and may do with his own what he thinks good.
He is a saucy beggar that quarrels at his alms, because another fares better:
what ever our gifts are from God, they are mere alms; Romans 11.35.
For who has given him first: Let not then thine eye be evil, because his is
good: what ever God gives to others, know that thou have more then thou do
deserve; and they have nothing, but what God will. Away then with this vice of
Envy.

Thirdly, remember others gifts are for our good. 1 Cor. 12.
Thirdly, remember that the graces and good things, which other Christians have,
are for our good and benefit. As the good of one member of the body, serves
for the use of another, in repining therefore against other men's gifts,
Fourthly, look upon the troubles, as well as upon the blessings of your
brethren.
we repine for that which is ours, and malign our own well fare.

Fourthly, do not only eye the blessings, which our brethren do enjoy: but
withal, cast your eyes upon the troubles, sorrows, miseries, and calamities,
which they sustain. Did we thus, we should be so far from envying of them,
that many times we should have cause to pity them, and pray for them.

Fifthly, get a true love of grace into thy heart, Fifthly, get into thy heart a
true love of grace.
which if once thou gettest (though thou have a holy emulation, not envying
their fullness, but thine own want, which indeed thou oughtst to have) thou will not be much troubled with a carnal emulation, envying those gifts which
God has given them, but thou will much respect them, where ever thou see
them.

Lastly, be earnest with the Lord by prayer, Lastly, use earnest prayer to God.
earnestly entreat him to give thee strength, for mortifying of this same
sin. Pray once, and then again, yea twenty times; and if that will not serve
the turn, add fasting to it. Use these means, and I dare promise thee the
victory in the end; for they are approved remedies, and very forcible, for the
curbing in, and subduing of this same sin.

And the last use of this may be for admonition to all Envy: thou can not
possibly escape the biting of it; have thou grace, then thou have matter enough
within thee to cause the wicked to grate and gnash their teeth at thee. The eye
of the envious is sharp lighted, like the Eagles, and can soon see what is
worthy of commendations, and for that they will most malign thee, and seek
especially to defame thee. If thou have any goodness in thee, they will
quickly descry it, and be discontented with thee, and repine against thee for
it.

A Question was sometimes put forth (as I have heard) unto a company of
Physicians, Envy, the best medicine for the quickening of the sight.
what was the best help to the perspicuitie of the eyes, and for quickening of
the sight? Some made answer, Fennel; others, Salendine, etc. But one amongst
the rest, said Envy was best of all. For Envy is very busy, and will spy
quickly, and (like a prospectiue glass) with the most, rather than with the
least. Fertilior seges est a^ienis semper in agru; Vi^inumque pecu^ grandius
vber habet. Ovid. No avoiding envy, if a man do well.
Look then to be descryed and to be envied; thou can not shun it (without
thou should follow the counsel, that sometimes a Philosopher gave, to one
that asked him how he might avoid it: neither to do nor say any thing that is
good.) Thou may indeed save thy self from the Liar, by not speaking with
him; from the Proud, by not accompanying with him; and from the Glutton, by not
eating with him; and from the Contentious, by not disputing with him; but from
the Envious, it is not sufficient, though thou fly or flatter him: he cannot
be well, if thou be well; thy rising is little less grievous to him, then
his own falling. This the Heathen themselves have observed, Diog. ^ion.
and therefore when they saw an Envious man sad, they would demand whether
harm had happened unto him, or good unto his neighbor. And indeed it may be
questionable: for both these alike vex him. Have thou then any gift or grace,
wherein thou excellest; or wherein thou do equal others? then look for
some that will malign thee: praemoniti, praemuniti, fore-warned, fore-arm'd;
the stream ran ever so, and ever will. And thus much be spoken of this first
branch, which is the occasion or ground, from whence this elder brothers
discontent arose.

Now for the second: and that is the manner how he expresses it: Verse. 29.30.
laid down in these words; And he answering said to his Father: Lo these many
years do I serve thee; neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment,
and yet thou never gave me a Kid, that I might make merry with my friends.
But as soon at this thy son was come, which has devoured thy living with
harlots, thou have killed for him the fatted Calfe. Here we may see, how he
expresses this his discontent, by his expostulating the matter with his
Father; accusing him for hard and unthankful dealing; but justifying of
himself for his continual and constant obedience. The point we may hence
learn is this.

It is a property of the wicked to expostulate the cause with God, Doctr. It
is the property of the wicked to expostulate the cause with God.
and to complain against his dealings as too hard and unjust. How common a
thing was this with the carnal Israelites? how ordinarily did they object
against Gods proceedings? Insomuch that the Lord was oftentimes feign to put
his course unto scanning, and to call the people to a pleading, as by his
prophet Esaias: Isay 1.18.
Come let us reason together, says the Lord. And so in another place:
Wherefore I will plead with you, says the Lord. Ier. 2.9. verse. 35.
And again; Behold I will plead with thee, because thou say, I have not
sinned. And in diverse other places, we have the like speech. This was the
cause, why he did so often instruct his Prophets, how to answer the people,
when they began to reason with them about his ways: as Ier, 5.19. And it shall
come to pass, when ye shall say, Ier. 5.19.
wherefore does the Lord all these things unto us? then shall thou answer them,
like as ye have forsaken me etc. So again: And it shall come to pass, Ier.
16.10.
when thou have showed this people all these words, and they shall say unto
thee; wherefore has the Lord pronounced all this evil against us? or what is
our iniquity? or what is our sin that we have committed against the Lord our
God? verse. 11.
Then shall than say unto them; because your fathers have forsaken me etc. In
the 58. of Esaias, in the beginning of it, you may see their practice discovered:
for there we may find them challenging God for hard measure: Wherefore have we
fasted, Isay 58.3.
say they, and thou see it not? wherefore have we afflicted our souls, and
thou take no knowledge? As if God did them great wrong in nor harkning and
attending on their suites. Thus did they in Ezechiels days, calumniate Gods
proceedings of inequality: Ezech. 18.2.
The fathers had eaten sour grapes and the childrens teeth were set on edge.
The fathers had sinned, and they must bear the punishment: what equality was
in this? therefore they cry out: The way of the Lord is not equal. verse. 25.
and Ezech. 33.20.
Thus also in the time of Malachie, when they were reproved for any fault, how
would they turn again, and in a manner challenge God to his face: Malac. 1.6.
You have despised my name, says the Lord: Wherein have we despised thy name,
says the people? Mal. 2.17.
Ye have wearied me with your words (says the Lord) wherein have we wearied
thee, say the people? Mal. 3.7.
Return unto me, says the Lord. But wherein shall we return, verse. 8.
said they? Ye have robbed me, says God: Wherein? say they. Your words have
bin stout against me, says the Lord: verse. 13.
What have we spoken so much against thee, say they? Thus you see how ready
they are to contest with the Lord, in every particular, holding themselves
innocent, and thinking themselves more harder used then they had deserved. And
as this ever has bin the property of the wicked, to plead against Gods
proceedings; so it ever will be. For at the last day, when the master of the
house is risen up, Luke 13.25, 26.
and has shut to the door etc. then shall some begin to say, we have eaten and
drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets: and other some
shall say, Have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out
Devils? Math. 7.12.
and in thy name done many wonderful works? challenging Christ for unjust
dealing in condemning them: Yea, and when they are, as it were going to
execution, and at the last cast, after that fearful sentence of Depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels is
denounced against them; Math. 25.41.
yet then they will plead also for themselves against the Lord: verse 44.
when saw we thee an hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or
in prison, and did not minister unto thee? Thus challenging God for unjust
sentence; holding themselves to be innocent, and guiltles, and to have
committed no such fault, as could deserve so heavy a doom. And thus we have
seen this point (viz.) That it is the property of the wicked to expostulate
the matter with God, and complain against his proceedings, as unjust and
unequal, sufficiently cleared and confirmed.

If any demand to know the reason, then take it in a word, and this it is.

They are ignorant and proud: Reason.
They are ignorant of their own estate and condition; they know not that they
have done evil, neither will they know it; and therefore they think they have
deserved no such things, as God inflicteth on them. Hence comes that
reasoning, and expostulating, that censuring of, and pleading against Gods
proceeding.

Hear now the Uses.

And first behold a difference betwixt Gods children Neh. 9.33. Ezra 9.10.
So much did Nehemiah confess, when he thus said, Surely thou art just in all
that is come upon us: for thou have dealt truly, but we have done wickedly. And
so did Daniel, Dan. 9.7.
Righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame etc. Thus does the
Church acquit the Lord from all injustice in his dealings: I will bear the
wrath of the Lord, Mic. 7.9.
because I have sinned against him. The like affection was in David, as does
appear by these, and the like sayings, Psalm. 51.4.
Just art thou when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest. And again; I
know, oh Lord, that thy judgments are right, Psalm. 119.75.
and that thou have afflicted me justly. And elsewhere he thus speaks; verse.
137.
Righteous art thou (O Lord) and just are thy judgments. This might be further
showed by diverse other instances: as by that of Ely; who hearing of the
judgment intended by the Lord upon him and his house, said thus, It is the
Lord, 1. Sam. 3.18.
let him do what seems him good: as also by that of Hezekiah, who being
reproved, and severely threatened, for his folly, in showing his treasure unto
the Ambassadors of the King of Babel, used these words: The word of the Lord is
good, which thou have spoken. All these sayings manifestly show their their
readiness to submit themselves to Gods good pleasure, without repining. The
like example we have in Job, Job. 1.22.
who charged not God with any unjust dealing (as the Text shows) but in the
midst of his affliction blessed and praised Gods name.

David speaks. Psalm. 32.
) Well how have thou bin now affected and disposed? have thou yielded thy self
with all submission to Gods proceedings? have thou acknowledged the Lord to be
just and upright in all his dealings? and have thou quietly and without
repining, submitted thy self to Gods seuerest courses? if so, it is a good
sign of a sanctified heart: But if (otherwise) thou have murmured and repined,
and expostulated the cause with God, complaining of wrong and injury, esteeming
thy self to be hardly dealt withal to be so used, and withal do please
thy self in this gaine-saying humor. Then let me tell thee, it is an evident
sign of a graceless soul and unsanctified spirit. And if this be a true note
of a wicked one to expostulate with God, and murmr against his proceedings,
as we have seen it is, then it will discover many to be such: For how ordinary
a thing is it in the day of trouble to hear men murmr and repine (yea, it
may be curse and banne) against the Lord? what more usual then to dispute how
this can stand with justice, thus and thus to punish? How are Gods dealings
censured and called into question by the sons of men? And how do men (as it
were) challenge God to his face of unequal and unjust proceedings? I do
indeed confess, that through extremity of anguish Gods dearest children may
forget themselves sometimes: and so did Job and David, Psalm. 73.13.14.
whose feet were almost gone, but in their cooler blood they will recall their
error, and smite upon their thighs, and lay their hands upon their mouths,
and though they speak once, yet they will answer no more as Job speaks: And as
David says, Job 39.38. Psalm. 62.1.
his soul shall keep silence unto the Lord. They will not please themselves
in that gaine-saying humor, but labor to repress all such repining thoughts,
and distempered passions.

Thirdly, Seeing it is a property of the wicked thus to Psalm. 11. Prou. 1.15.
but refrain their feet from this path: Let us learn to iustirie God in all
his ways, and to acknowledge him to be righteous in all his works and
actions. Has the Lord laid on thee sickness, poverty, imprisonment, or any
other grievous cross? see (then) thou undergo it wihout murmuring or
repining: Charge not God with any hard or unjust dealing; for shall not the
Judge of all the world do right, Genesis 18.25.
said Abraham? yea, our God cannot but do right, for righteousness is
essential unto him; it is himself, and he may as soon deny himself as
deal unjustly. His will is the rule of Justice, and therefore it must be just
because he wills it. Let this then be enough for thee and me, the Lord will
have it so. Psalm. 39.9.
Learn thou with David to be dumb and silent, because God has done it. Do
not dare to entertain such a thought within thy heart, as that there should be
any injustice with him; learn (effectually) that golden saying of that kingly
Prophet Righteous art thou, O Lord, Psalm. 119.137.
and just are thy judgments Which verse Mauritius the Emperor uttered when he
saw his wife and children put to death before his eyes: and when he was fitting
himself to lay his own neck upon the block, because when he might have
redeemed the life of his Soldiers taken by the enemy, for a small sum of
money would not, but suffered them all to be put unto the sword. I confess
this is sooner said the^ done, and sooner taught then learned; for it is no
easi^ thing to curb and keep under our own unruly passions: yet let us
strive and labor by all good means to subdue them, Ier. 18.2.
and repress them. Arise, and go down to the potters house, and there I will
cause thee to hear my words (said God to Jeremiah:) So let us arise and go
down to the potters house, and his clay and wheel shall teach us many good
instructions. The clay in fashioning upon the wheel is pliable, and readily
receives any form or fashion. God is the Potter, and we as clay unto him, how
comes it then we grow discontented with his proceedings? Some are poor, others
base; and some are sickly, and othersome deformed; these looking upon others,
who are more noble, rich, strong, proportionable, etc. say usually with
coffeehouse, God might have made me thus, Romans 9.20.
or thus, as these. But who art thou that disputest with thy maker? shall the
thing formed say to him that formed it, verse 21.
why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over the clay of the
same lump, to make one vessel to honor, Ie^. 18.6. Jsay 45.9.
and another unto dishonor? Behold, as the clay is in the potters hand, so are
you in mine, O house of Israel (says the Lord.) Be thou content then with Gods
dealing, for Woe be unto him that strives with his Maker. Let the potsheard
strive with the potsheards of the earth: shall the clay say to him that
fashioneth it, what make thou? If thou will needs contest, contest with man,
with a potsheard like thy self; but beware of contending with the Lord thy
maker. Lay thou thy hand upon thy mouth, and be content, though thou were
assured (which thou can not be) that God has made thee a vessel of
dishonor, and ordained thee to damnation. When then thou feel corruption to
arise, and begin to plead against Gods proceedings, remember the Potters
house, and check thy self. His dealings are always just and equal; and if
thou can not see it, condemn thy own blindness, and not them, nor him for
them.

murmuring or repining, submitting themselves to Gods seuerest courses: And
though the Lord lay on them many a sore affliction, and heavy cross, yet they
still justify him, and condemn themselves: confessing that God is righteous,
but it is they who have done wickedly. And withal, acknowledge it is his
mercy, that he sends no greater, and lays no sorer judgments on them. And if
at sometimes they feel (for indeed, who at sometimes shall not) their own
rebellious passions to arise, and the flesh begin to repine and murmur, they
will straight check it and control it, not daring to harbor a thought or
conceit of Gods hard dealing. Let such as these know, they have a notable
evidence of a sanctified soul, and let them make much of it, for this may
comfort them in the midst of trouble: For assuredly, a great measure of grace
have thou attained unto, who art come thus far.

Now further, mark what a goodly color this elder son has for this his
doing.

VERSE. 22. Lo, these many years do I serve thee, Text.
neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment, and yet thou never gave
me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends. 30. But as soon as this thy
son was come, which has devoured thy living with harlots, thou have killed
for him the fatted calfe.
GOodly paint upon a rotten post: Here is a glorious varnish upon a bad
action. He was indeed discontent and angry, and would not come in; but hoe
gives the reason, and does allege the cause.

Hence learn,

What sin soever wicked men commit, Doctr. Wicked men have fair pretenses
for foul sins.
they have some color for it: They have fair pretenses for their foul
sins. Saul, when he offered sacrifice contrary to Gods will, being reproved
for it, he straight alleges a reason, Because I saw that the peole were
scattered from me, 1 Samuel 13.11, 12. Cap. 15.15.
and that thou came not within the days appointed, etc. I forced my self
therefore, and offered a burnt offering. So for his sparing the sheep and
oxen, and the best of the spoil (which with the Amalekites should have been
destroyed) he has some color. 1 King. 21.13.
It was to sacrifice unto the Lord. Thus Ahab and Iezabel cover the murder of
Naboth with justice against blasphemy. He did blasph^me God and the King (said
those men of Belial, which witnessed against him.) So Judas pretended the
poor, and his great care of them, when he grudged his Master a little
unction; Ioh. 12.6.
when as indeed, This he said, not, that he cared for the poor: but because
he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein. The like we
see in the chief Priests, who taking counsel together, for the putting of
Christ to death, have for their cover, the safety of the people. Job. 11.48.
If we let him alone, the Romans shall come and take away both our place and
nation. And therefore it is expedient (said Cayphus) that one man should dye for
the people, Verse 50.
and that the whole nation perish not. Many other examples might be brought to
prove this, Genesis 34.31.
as that of Simeon and Leui against the Sichemites, who had a pretense to cover
that their cruel murder, Exodus 32.1.
Should he deal with our sister, as with an harlot. So the Israelites
touching their Idolatry. Matthew. 2.8.
And Herod, whose cruel intention wanted not a cover. But these that have been
brought, do sufficiently, prove the point that has been delivered. Hear
now the Reasons.

corrupt, abominable: neither would they have their actions that proceed from
them, to be esteemed as wicked and unjust: Hence is it, that they seek for
pretenses and excuses (as Adam for fig-leaues) to hide their sin and shame.

Reason is one of the principal faculties in man; and therefore, though
oftentimes he denies the rule of reason, yet never will he absolutely deny
reason, (without he will deny himself.) Hence it is, that men will have some
reason (though false reason before they will have none) for every thing they
do, be it never so vile or wicked. The uses follow.

First, this serves the reprove many, Use. Reproof of two sorts.
who set godly shows upon their evil doings, and varnish their sins with
false colors.

As first the Papists, First, the Papist.
who set deceitful colors upon their superstitious practices. As for their
sacrilegious dealing, in withholding the Cup from the people, they have this
color, The wine is in danger to be spilt, and what needs the pe^^le to have
the cup, is not his blood in the veins (say they) and do not the people
receive whole Christ, body and blood and all; when they receive the bread? And
so for their Idolatry, in worshipping of Images; thus they color it, we
worship not the Image, but God in the Image, and Images are Laymens books,
very needful (say they) for their increase in knowledge. The like colors
have they for their praying to Saints and Angels, they honor them (they say)
but as the friends of God, and go unto them, but as unto Mediators; for it
were great presumption for them to come to God themselves, considering their
own unworthiness: and therefore, in humility, they go to these, that they
may entreat God, and make intercession for them. And these fair pretenses have
they, to cover their abominable Idolatry: And hence it is, that the dregs of
that religion are so settled in the hearts of many, so that by no means they
can be rooted out, and all because of this deceitful varnish.

But to our selves; Secondly, the profane Protestant. D. Sclater. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5.
for who sees not in what request this Art of coloring is? Complexion makers
we have (as one says well) not only for withered faces of ouerworne
Strumpets; but also for the vgliest and most deformed sins. What vice so
odious, that has not found a cover? What sin so gross, which (once
committed) has not some fair pretense? Gods Sabboths are broken; his name
blasphemed, Diverse sorts of complexion-makers for sin, reproved. First, such
as plead necessity of living in their callings.
his service neglected, our brethren defrauded, the poor oppressed, and all
under pretense of necessity of living in the world, and maintaining wife and
children, with the rest of our family. Thus many (I say not all) of you
Shopkeepers, persuade yourselues (as your practice testifies) that you could
not live, if you should not lie, and deceive, for by this craft, Acts 17.
you get your gain: So other Tradesmen, as Tailors, Shoomakers, Vintners,
Butchers, Chandlers, and the like, think they may be dispensed with, though
they labor in the works of their callings on the Sabbath day, because
otherwise they should loose their custom, together with their gain, by which
they are enabled to maintain themselves, and theirs. Yea, and under this
pretense, many live in unlawful callings, as Usurers, Players, Gamsters, and
the like: but what better pretense have these, then Harlots, Thieves, and
Pickpurses, who use those courses, because they have no other means to live
and maintain themselves? If this be a sufficient cloak for sin, then
Tiburne has the more cause to complain, where many a one have ended their
days, for their robbing and taking men's purses by the high way side, though
they have pretended, that they had no other means to live by, and if they had
not done this, they knew not which way to have maintained themselves. Away then
with this sottish excuse, and fond pretense, for better were it for thee not to
live at all, then to live in sin, to the dishonor of God, and hurt of thy
brethren; and far better were it that thy body should pine and famish in
this world, then that thy body and soul should for ever fry in hell torments.

Secondly, such as plead poverty, and therefore have no time for good duties
and religious exercises
So other-some being reproved for their neglect of good duties, and holy
exercises which God enioynes; pretend their poverty and mean estate; our
whole time say they is little enough to provide for necessaries; we have no
leisure to hear Sermons, read the Word, pray with our family, as other have;
and if we should do this we may beg our bread, except we should use fraud and
deceit, to supply our need. But let such know, this is no sufficient excuse for
the neglect of holy duties. For one thing is necessary, as our Savior tells
Martha, and we must rid our selves of worldly encumbrances, to choose the
better part. If we would first seek the Kingdom of heaven, and the
righteousness thereof, all these things should be given unto us. We have Gods
gracious promise for earthly necessaries.

Sundry other pretenses do many bring to defend their sin, Thirdly, such as
pretend prevention of further mischief.
as that they do it to prevent a further mischief. Thus do the Papists
excuse the maintaining of their Stews: we do it, say they, to prevent a
further inconvenience.

Others pretend, they do this, Fourthly, such as pretend trial.
or this evil only for this end, that by their own experience, they may see
the vanity and vileness of it. So do many of our Citizens go to see mass
for trials sake, and that again and again, yea, and for a need can bow their
knee to Baal: tell them of this, they color it with this pretense, they go
indeed to see it, but it is with a good intent, Such reproved as refuse
diligent hearing of the word, under pretense of hearing more in an hour then
they can practice all their lives. And so others who refuse coming to the
Lords table, because they are not in charity, or not prepared.
that they might learn the more to loath it. I might instance in sundry other
particulars, as for the hearing of the word, some will hear once a month, or
at most once a day, but no oftener, for, say they, we can hear more then, then
we can practice all our days. And the like, for their coming to the Lords
table, they cannot come, because they are not in charity, or they are not
prepared as they ought to be. Thus are we grown skillful in varnishing of sin,
thus do we blaunch our vile blemishes, and putrified sores, which evidently
shows that we are rank hypocrites, and exceeding sinners against the Lord.

Secondly, let this admonish us, that we color not our actions, when we know
they be evil, neither set a fair gloss on them as the wicked do, always
remembering, that albeit coloring may serve us for advantage to his eyes with
whom we have to do, Heb. 4.
all things are naked and uncovered, He cannot be deceived by any pretense,
though never so cunningly contrived, though man may be: 1. Cor. 4.5.
It is not pretense will stead us at that day, when God shall enlighten things
that are hidden in darkness: then shall all things appear as they are, and
all coulourable pretenses shall vanish away as smoke; then shall the very
secret parts of thy heart be discovered, and thy very thoughts shall be made
manifest.

And thus much be spoken of the second branch, wherein we have seen, how this
elder brother expressed this his discontent, viz. by his reasoning with, and
accusing of his Father for unkindness; which accusation he does amplify, by
an Antithesis, He had been obedient, and his younger brother disobedient.

Now we come to the third and last branch, wherein we are to see how this his
anger is quallified: And that is done two ways.

First, by his Fathers kind entreaty of him. ver. 28.

And secondly, by the Apollogie, which his Father made, contained in the two
last verses.

For the first, and from the first of these, we may learn thus much;

Doctr. God deals with sinners in a mild manner, with quiet and peaceable
terms.
When God has to deal with sinners, he deals with them in a mild and meek
manner, and not in fury and rage. The Father we see does deal with him in a
peaceable manner, he comes and entreats him to come in, and does not in a
fury will him to be packing, and come no more within his doors. Instead of
chiding, he falls to entreating; and in peaceable terms, debates the matter
with him. By whose practice, Gods gracious dealing with sinners is set forth.
For the further proof of this truth, do but remember Gods manner of
proceeding with our Grandfather Adam, after he had eaten of the forbidden
fruit, and had hid himself amongst the bushes. Adam (says he) where art thou?
Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I told thee thou should not eat? Genesis
3.9.
Thus in quiet and peaceable terms did God reason the matter with him, and did
not with fury and violence come upon him. And after the same manner did he
deal with Cain. Genesis 4.9.10.
Where is Abel thy brother? What have thou done? The voice of thy brothers
blood cries unto me from the ground.

Such likewise was his dealing with the rebellious Israelites, continually from
time to time, as is manifest in Scripture, and cannot be unknown to such as
are exercised (though but meanly) in the reading of Scripture.

The reasons of Gods so dealing may be these; First,

And a second reason may be this; Wicked ones (if

Now for the uses. And first seeing this is so, that God and rage, but reasons
with them in mild and quiet terms. How far are these from imitating God, as
good children ought to do? Object.
But I am crossed and provoked, so that I cannot forbear, let me alone,
provoke me not, and I am meek enough.

Answ.
A worthy commendation; The bruit beast will scarce stir unprovoked: and the
Devil himself (according to the Proverb) is good, so long as he is pleased?
And art thou good no longer? Why then let this be thy commendations; thou art
as meek as a Bear, or as a Lion, or as a Tiger: and of as mild a
disposition, as the Devil is, for these are quiet, if they be not crossed, and
so by thy own confession art thou, but not else, for if thou be stirred,
then thou must needs speak, there is no remedy. Coloss. 3.
Is this that Christian meekness which thou art commanded to put on; and
called upon to learn of Christ? Mat. 11.28.
He dealt not roughly with his enemies, no, not with Judas, when he came to
apprehend him, and betray him into the hands of sinners, Mat. 26.50.
but called him friend: Christ Jesus never taught thee to be so hot and hasty
in dealing with thy enemy, much less in dealing with thy friend and brother:
know then thy meekness is no Christian meekness, but a brutish meekness,
such a meekness as is to be found in the Bear and Tiger, as formerly I have
said.

1. Pet. 3.4.
A virtue which is acceptable to the Lord, and much respected of him. A virtue
often commended to all estates and degrees, and commanded both by precept,
Meekness must be showed by all.
and by practice. As to the Magistrate, the Minister, the Master, the Wife, the
Servant, and the like. The Magistrate must show it, even when justice is to be
executed, and punishment inflicted on malefactors; as Joshua did, who (when
Achan was apprehended, and his sin discovered, whereby he had offended God
and troubled Israel) dealt after this mild and gentle manner. My son, Iosu
7.19.
I beseech thee give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto
him, and show me now what thou have done, hide not from me. Thus in a mild
and peaceable manner must they be dealt withal: Mercy and love is to be
showed to offenders, even in punishing of offenders. The Minister also must
remember it. Paul enioynes Timothy to use it toward opposites, 2 Timothy 2.25.
In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure
will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth. That hasty
hot-spurre humor of many Ministers, because they see not present success of
their labors, and endeauours, sorts not with that Christian meekness that
Gods word requires. Masters also are enioined the same task by the Apostle
Paul, Ephesians. 6.9.
when as he says, Ye Masters do the same things unto them (viz. your
servants) forbearing threatening. The like charge is given unto Wives, by the
Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 3.4.
that they put on the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight
of God is of great price. How does that tetchy peevishness which is too too
apparent in many wives agree with this iniunction? and if not that, then much
less those bitter words and reproachful terms which many use. 1 Pet. 2.20.
Servants likewise are charged with it, For what glory is it, if when you be
buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently: but if when you do well
and suffer for it, you take it patiently; this is acceptable with God (as the
Apostle speaks. Motives to meekness and mildness. 1. It is the pathway to
blessedness. Math. 5.5.
) Thus, all degrees and conditions whatsoever must put it on. We want no
motives to induce us hereunto: For first, this is the pathway to blessedness,
Blessed are the meek (says our Savior) for they shall inherit the earth.
Would we then be happy and enjoy all good blessings needful for us? then let
us get the spirit of meekness and mildness into our hearts, 2. It does cause
us to hear the word profitably. James 1.2.
and express the power of it in our lives.

Secondly, It will much avail us in the profit and power of the word, and
therefore the Apostle S. James wills us to hear and receive the Word with
meekness, which is able to save our souls: without this we cannot hear the
Word with comfort, it will become utterly unprofitable unto us.

3. Such are under Gods protection in a special manner. Zeph. 2 3.
Thirdly, The meek are in a special manner under Gods protection, Seek ye the
Lord all ye meek of the earth which have wrought his judgment, seek
righteousness, seek meekness, it may be you shall be hid in the day of the
Lords anger. These shall be hid in the day of the Lords wrath, when it shall
be woe with others, it shall be well with these, read Psalm 147.5.6. and
149.4.

4. It is an excellent piece of armor against incensed wrath. Pro. 15.1. Judge.
8.2. 1 Samuel 25.
Fourthly, A mild spirit pacifieth wrath: Such is the effect of this virtue,
that it does not only keep wrath from breaking out, but it also quenches it
being once enkindled. This was Gideons armor against the rage of the
Ephranites; and this was Abigails armor for her self, her husband, and her
household; when David (being incensed by Nabals churlish dealing) was coming
with a purpose to slay them all.

5. It is a fruit of the spirit. Gal. 5.23.
Fifthly, It is a fruit of the spirit, and the contrary is a fruit of corrupted
nature: If then we would have a testimony that we are of God, and that we have
his spirit in us, let us manifest the same by our mildness and meekness, in
dealing with others, and in bearing wrongs.

6. The example of the Saints, and of Christ himself who have gone before us.
Math. 11.29. Ioh. 13.5.15. 1 Pet. 2.23.
Lastly, The examples of the Saints are many that have gone before us. And
Christ himself sets forth himself as a pattern of this virtue, leaving
himself an example of it by washing the feet of his Disciples, and by bearing
the reproaches of the ungodly.

Thus have we seen how many and how forcible motives, we have to cause us to
exercise this grace of meekness and mildness toward such as we have to
deal withal, yea even toward our very enemies; for so does the Lord deal
with his as we have seen.



Love not thou the praise of men, Answ.
more then the praise of God The praise of God is true praise indeed, seek
after it; as for the estimation of man; without the estimation of the Lord, it
is but a shadow of glory, if it be so much, In this and such like cases, say
with the Apostle: With me it is a very small thing, 1 Cor. 4.3. Verse. 4.
that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment: he that judges me is
the Lord.

But if I be so mild and meek, they will never have

The more mild thou art, Answ.
the sooner will they desist and end: If a dog barks at thee, thy best course
is to pass away, for if thou turnest again and flingest stones, he will
never have done. The strongest resistance is by opposition of contraries; as
fire is soonest quenched by water; and a soft woll-packe is less penetrable at
a Canon shot then a hard stone wall.

But it is hard for flesh and blood so quietly to sit down

True; it is hard indeed; nay more, Answ.
it is impossible for flesh and blood to do it; but let me tell thee if thou
art no more then a lump of flesh, 1 Cor. 15.5. Ioh. 3.
there is no possibility of obteining heaven. If thou be Gods thou have
spirit as well as flesh, what is wanting in the flesh let grace make a supply
off. And thus much shall serve for a second use of the point.

Now we come unto a third and that serves for Consolation; his own children?
This cannot be, certainly if ungodly ones, fare so well Gods children may
look to fare far better. To them he will abound in all riches of grace and
consolation.

And thus much of the Fathers kind entreaty of this his elder son; now for
the apology which he makes unto him: and that is contained in these words.

VERSE 31. And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I
have is thine. 32. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for
this thy brother was dead, and is alive again: and was lost, and is found.
IN it we have, First a Proposition, which has in it a Concession, of what the
elder brother said. verse. 31.

Secondly a Confirmation, wherein the Father does justify his own
proceedings, ab aequo. It was meet that we should rejoice and be glad. He did
nothing but what was equity and right, and therefore, there was no cause of
coffeehouse. And Secondly, he does defend his younger sons cause, for
though he were dead yet he is now alive, q. d. true it is my son: thy brother
was lewd and disobedient, dead in sins and trespasses, but he is now become a
new man, he is alive again, all his former courses are left and forsaken, and
he is now returned home. And therefore it is fit I should give him
entertainment and joyfully receive him.

Now we come breifely to some Instructions: And first in that the Father does
not exasperate his son, and further incense him (he being already moved) by
denying what he had before said, viz. that he was dutiful and obedient, never
breaking any of his commands etc. (which indeed was otherwise) but yields to
this his saying:

This may teach us this point of wisdom.

Doctr.
Not to exasperate the wicked, when they are incensed, but rather to yield unto
them, so much as possible we may, The wicked may not be exasperated when they
are incensed.
and decline their fury. This point may seem to have some affinity with the
former, and therefore I shall not need to stand long upon it.

In a word then; let the Use be first for Reprehension Romans 10.2.
(as the Apostle speaks) not passing by nor winking at the least blemish in
any of their brethren. Zeal, if it be well ordered, is most beautiful in a
Christian; but if not, it is a thing of exceeding great danger: as fire in
moderation is most comfortable, but in extremity most fearful. In all ages,
it has bin found less dangerous to the Church, when men have come short of
the due proportion of Zeal, then when they have exceeded. Auda Bishop in
Persia, in an excess of zeal, throwing down a Temple of the Pagans, was a
cause that the King thereby incensed, threw down all the Temples of the
Christians, as Stories do report. Theod. lib. 5.
Sometimes then to reprove what we see amiss, is to put fire into gunpowder:
at such times it is wisdom to forbear, and watch a fitter opportunity, when
our reprehension may do most good.

And if these are to be reproved, then much more are Math. 18.7.
and Woe be to that man by whom such offenses come. It is the Devils office, to
stir and provoke others unto evil: now what do such but take the Devils
office from him, and follow his trade and occupation?

Thirdly, seeing it is a part of wisdom sometimes to It is no good discretion,
to rouse up a Lion, or to take a Bear by the tooth, or for to pluck a mad Dog
by the ears, or to thrust our hands into a Hornets nest; much danger is likely
to follow upon such like courses. Oh that we could once learn this lesson!
that we would yield a little, and forbear a while incensing others by our
contradiction. This gain saying humor has bred our woe, Dr Halls Vows, lib.
2. Medit. 52.
though men believe it not. The Pelican finding a fire nigh her nest, and
fearing the danger of her young ones, seeks to blow it out with her wings; when
(foolish Bird) by that means she does enkindle it, and at length burn her
wings, and so make her self a prey in an unwise pity. I hope you can tell how
to apply it: Meddle not indiscreetly, when coals are kindled, the blast of thy
wings abate not the burning; it does rather increase then quench: for a while
forbear, meddle no otherwise then by prayers to God: See thy own peace and
safety in the freedom of thy thought, and silence of thy tongue: 2. Tim. 2.7.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

Secondly, in that the Father makes an apology for himself, we may collect,

Doctr. A man may lawfully speak in his own defense. Job 22.5. Job 31. Acts
21.31.
It is lawful for a man to speak in his own defense, and make Apology for
himself, when he is falsely accused and wronged by the wicked. Gods children
have showed the lawfulnes of this by their practice. Thus Job being accused for
cruelty, oppression, hypocrisy, and many other sins, makes a solemn
protestation of his integrity, and speaks in his own defense at large. So
Paul when he was in danger to be killed at Jerusalem by the people, being
rescued by the chief Captain, spoke for himself unto the people, Cap. 22.1.
saying: Men, Brethren, and Fathers, hear ye my defense which I make now unto
you. And thus also did he plead his own cause before the chief Priests and
Council. Cap. 23.1.
And so likewise when he was brought before the Governor, Cap. 24.10. Cap.
25.8.
he made Apology for himself. Thus did he also when he came before Festus;
openly professing, that neither against the law of the Jews, Cap. 26.2.
neither against the Temple, nor yet against Caesar, had he offended any thing
at all. The like was his practice, when he was called before Agrippa, and at
many other times besides. Thus the Primitive Christians, when they had bin
slandered unto the people for disturbing the State, for adultery, murder, and
other horrible sins and greiuous crimes; did usually write Apologies, and put
up supplications unto Princes, that they might defend themselves in open
audience. But what do I speak of these, when we have Christ his example,
(against which can be no exception taken) to prove the point? When the Jews
charged him to be a Samaritan, Ioh. 8.48, 49.
and that he had a Devil, he makes answer for himself: I have not a Devil;
but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor me: so in many other places, as
Ioh. 18.23. and Luke 11.18, 19. Thus did he ever apologize for himself, when
it made for the glory of God, and the good of his hearers.

The reasons may be these:

First, if we should not defend our selves, when we be

Secondly, because the slanders which light on our

And first this serves for Admonition to us all, that we of their own gifts,
and plead in their own defense. For some times it is requisite it should be so:
A man's own good name, and the Churches good does many times require it. Thus
the Apostle Paul was forced, by reason of the Corinthians, more esteeming (at
least in appearance) of other false Apostles then himself, to speak in his
own praise, and to commemorate his own good parts: I suppose (says he) I was
not a whit behind the very ch^ife Apostles. 2. Cor. 11.5, 6.
verse. 10.
But though I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge. Yea he does profess, as
the truth of Christ is in him, no man should stop him of this boasting in the
Regions of Achaia.

Quest.
But how does this agree with Solomon's proverb; Let another man praise thee and
not thy own mouth, a stranger and not thy own lips.

Answ.
Solomon there does mean such a praising of our selves, wherein we chiefly
aim at our own glory: But this praising of our selves, which is for
necessary defense, and wherein we aim at Gods glory, and the Churches good,
and not made for vain ostentation, is not there forbidden: When necessary
defense does call for it and require it, a man may safely speak in his own
praise, and yet be no transgressor of Solomon's precept. Secondly, it suffices
for the truth of that and sundry other proverbs, if they be ordinarily and
usually true, though not generally.

and slanderously spoken, yet they sit down by it. Hence it comes to pass,
Hominum est dissolutorum and ad iniurias diuini nominis secure conniuentium.
etc. Apolog. Jewel part. 1. cap. 3. Diuis. 5.
that the profession is discredited, and the Lord dishonored. For men to be
careless (says one) what is spoken by them and their own matter, be it never
so falsely spoken (especially when it is such, that the Majesty of God, and the
cause of Religion may thereby be damaged) is the part, doubtless, of dissolute
and retchlesse persons, and of them which wickedly wink at the injuries done
unto the name of God.

But must a man for every slander, Quest.
go about to send and prove, when then shall he be at quiet, if this be so?

Such indignities and wrongs as are of the least sort, Answ. In what case we
are to pass by a slander, and in what, not. Prou. 19.11.
and touch only our private persons, may be borne withal and winked at. And
so says Solomon, The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his
glory to pass over a transgression. But if the wrong be of another nature, if
the slanders which are laid upon our persons, redound to the discredit of our
profession, and to the hurting and hindering of the cause of the Gospel, in
this case we may not be silent, lest through our sides the Church of God
receive a blow. John 8.49.
An example hereof we have, in our Savior Christ, who (when the Jews objected
against him two crimes, Melanct. in loc. and Luther.
one that he was a Samaritane, another that he had a Devil) neglected that
crime which concerned his person, and passed it over, as being of the least
sort of wrongs, and stands upon that other especially, which touched his
doctrine, I have not a Devil. A better pattern we cannot have for our
imitation.

And as this concerns all Christians in general; so in special us Ministers:
for our good life is more respected then our learning. Common people more
regard what they hear of us, then what they hear from us (such is the
corruption of our times.) It stands us therefore in hand, to keep a good name
and estimation amongst Gods people, and to defend our own innocence, when we
are falsely slandered and accused. We are to persuade others: Now what can
hinder this more then a bad persuasion of us in the hearts of those, with whom
we are to deal? we therefore, above all others, ought to free our selves
from all false imputations; for a good persuasion of the Teacher, brings a
ready entertainment of the thing that is taught: but a bad conceit does much
prejudice the truth. And thus much be spoken of this point, now we come to
the next and last, viz.

Doctr. God will maintain the righteous cause of his children against the
wicked.
God will make the innocence of his servants known, he will uphold and
maintain their righteous cause against all opposers. This point, though it be
not manifestly expressed, yet it is inclusiuely employed in the text, He was
dead (says the Father) but he is now alive; he was lost, but is found. We
heard before, what the son objected against his father: First, that he had
been dutiful and obedient: Secondly, that his brother had been undutiful
and dissolute; and therefore his father did deal unjustly. Now the father here
cleeres his justice, and answers both his objections. The first, in the 31
verse; and the other in this last: so then, without doubt, this did the father
intend, as to clear himself, so to defend his son. The point then is truly
gathered: now let us hear it further pooued. David persuading Gods people to
patience and confidence in the Lord, uses this as an argument, Psalm. 37.6.
He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgments as
the noone day: as if he should have said: Temple in loc.
Howsoever thy innocence be at sometimes covered, as it were, with a thick and
dark mist of slander and oppression, yet the Lord will in his good time
scatter and dissolve this mist, and so make thy innocence apparent and clear
to the world: yea, he shall make thy righteous cause to be so evident, as the
Sun when it rises? nay, which is more, as at noonday, when it is at the
highest, and shines brightest. I could further show you the truth of this,
Genesis 39.10.
by many examples: Joseph being accused by his Mistress, and upon that false
accusation being imprisoned by his Master, Psalm. 105.18.
where his feet were held in the stocks, and he laid in Irons, found this to
be true: for how did God make his innocence known unto the world, and in his
good time scatter those mists of slanders cast upon him, causing his Sun to
shine with a glorious luster? Thus the Lord dealt with Job; Job 42.7.
howsoever he was falsely accused, and had many slanderous imputations laid
unto his charge, yet the Lord at length made his innocence known, and did
mainetaine and uphold his righteous cause, as his story shows at large. This
also was Gods dealing with Jeremiah, he was accused to be a conspirator, and to
weaken the hands of the people, for which he was cast into prison, Ierem. 37.15.
yea into a loathsome dungeon, but hear him now speak of himself and of Gods
dealing toward him, Rament. 3.55.56.57.58.
I called upon thy name, O Lord, out of the low dungeon, thou have heard my
voice, etc. Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee, thou saydst,
Fear not. O Lord, thou have maintained the cause of my soul, and redeemed my
life: God did maintain his cause against all opposers. As this has been
proved by Scripture, so it may be further cleared by Reasons.

For first; It is his place and office so to do: he is the Abraham says, Genesis
18.25.
and shall not he do right? It belongs unto him to render to every one
according to his works, and therefore at last he will come forth, and bring
the righteousness of his servants into open light.

Secondly, he has promised, to relieve his servants, Psalm. 146.7.10. Romans 3.4.
when they are oppressed, and will he go back from his word, or say and
unsay, as man does? It cannot be, let God be true, and every man a liar.

Seeing then that this is so; Let this serve to encourage to be evil spoken of
by the men of this world; to be persecuted and reviled, for righteousness
sake, and to be condemned of wicked men unjustly. Daniell shall be charged
with disobedience. Amos of conspiracy. Eliah for troubling Israel. Paul for
raising up of tumults. And all Christ's Disciples, for moouers of sedition
amongst the people. But these clouds shall soon be dispersed, and all these
dark mists shall suddenly be scattered. Let not these things then, too much
trouble us, nor any whit discourage us in the practice of Christianity: our
righteousness shall not always lie h^d in the dark, but it shall one day
shine as the Sun, and be brought into the open light. Commit then thy ways
and works unto the Lord, and wait thou upon him. When thou art slandered and
falsely accused, resign thy self to him that rules all things, and so with
patience possess thy soul.

Israel sin, Hos. 4.15.
yet let not Judah transgress: though men of this world do thus, yet you that
fear the Lord, do not ye do so: God has taken upon him to plead thy cause,
and defend thy innocence, and wilt not thou plead his? Will thou suffer his
name to be trodden under foot, and never seek to uphold it? Shall wicked men
speak against Gods truth, and thou speak nothing for it? Oh beware of this,
for fear thou want one to plead for thee at that same great Assizes, when
thou shall stand in greatest need.

Thirdly, does God take upon him to plead the cause Vengeance is mine, Romans
12.19.
I will repay it says the Lord. This is an office which is proper unto God; to
him it belongs peculiarly to take vengeance. Now what do such but sit down
in Gods seat, and turn him out of his throne, and rob him of his honor, and
intrude upon his Prerogative Royal? Mat. 5.
The Pharisees gloss upon the law, pleases us well: Eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, etc. This seems reasonable. To render evil for evil, like for like,
one evil word for another, one evil deed for another, and no more, is counted
good Religion: But let us remember, God will plead the cause of his, and
therefore let all such as are his, commit their cause unto him. True it is, and
cannot be denied, we may seek for help of the Magistrate, either for the
preventing of wrong, or punishing of the doer of wrong: for it is not our
mouths which God shuts up from just complaint, but it is our hands he tyeth up
from unjust revenge. When the Magistrate does revenge, then does God himself
revenge, whose minister he is. Romans 13.4.
All private revenge is that which must be forborne. Let no provocation then of
any Adversary make us usurpers of the Lords authority. Let us wait his
leisure, and not preoccupate his executions. Remember the blood of Christ, and
of the Martyrs, is not yet revenged? and would thou have thy turn served
first? Wait then a while; he that shall come, in the end will come, and he
will not tarry. In the mean time, wait with patience for his appearing. Say
with the Spirit, Come: And with the Bride say, Come; for, He which testifies
these things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 2. line 19 nere for now p 9 l. 27. condemn for contemn. p. 11. l 23. it
for that, and l. 24. with for which, and worshippers for worship. p. 14. in the
margent ligurea for lignea. p. 16. l. 19 consisted for consists. p. 29 l. 16.
affection for Assertion p. 32. l. 15. there wants years. p. 37. l 8. and for
under. p 39. l. 4. confer for confirm. 45 l. vlt. two causes for second
causes. p. 46. l. 3. third for second. p. 47. l. 2. put case many so be, for in
such a case they may be. p. 48. in the margent, special sins does cause, for
special sins that do cause; this fault is in some coppies amended. p. 49.
l. 11. son for spirit. p. 51. l 24. leading for lading p. 69. l. 19. right
for weight. p. 72 l. 22. plunged for plagued; this is in some coppies
corrected. p. 109. l. 7. fear for hear. p. 93. l 28. this for thy. p. 98.
lin. 11. there wants the text, and therefore put out, And so I pass from, etc
else it goes harsh. p. 181. in the marg. Thirdly many for three maine p. 225.
l. 11 for more, r. for in one; this in some coppies is amended. page 239. l.
vlt. favor for savor. p. 265. in the marg God for food.

Christian Reader, I fear there are many other material faults besides these,
for my time will not suffer me to examine the Book so thoroughly as I desire; I
desire thee therefore to correct these, and bear with the rest. Farewell.

An Alphabeticall Index or Table, for the more ready finding out of any
material point contained in this Book.
A
HOw God may be said to be an Actor in that which is evil. page 44 Wicked men
betake themselves to vain helps in time of Affliction. 83. 137 Afflictions
are excellent means to make us look home. 105 Afflictions open the ear to
hear instruction. 106 Wicked men are worse for their Afflictions. 106 Such as
are not bettered by their Afflictions are in a worfull estate. 108 Afflictions
are wholesome medicines to Gods children. 109 Grace does not abolish natural
Affections. 303 A true penitent will Aggrauate his sin, and not extenuate it.
211 God is not the Author of sin. 44 A man may lawfully make Apollogie for
himself being wronged. 336
B
Many possessed with a Bashful Devil. page 199. Men without grace are no
better then Beasts without reason. 86 The beginnings of Repentance (if true)
are highly pleasing to God. 229 The day of our New Birth to be remembered and
kept. 300 Differences betwixt the first and second Birth. ibid. Gods Blessings
are esteemed by the wicked but as due debts. 38 We may not be so earnest in
praying for Blessings, as in praying for a sanctified use of them. 52 Every
Blessing ought to make us more thankful. 52 Gods good blessings are abused by
the wicked for sins service. 130 Blessings better known by their want, then
by their enioyment. 165 God bestows upon us his Blessings by ordinary means.
254 Boasters of sin do afresh commit their sins. 201 All Beasting in our
selves taken away in the work of conversion. 223 There is a holy Boasting,
which a child of God may use. 338 A man may not so boast of his gifts as that
he aims at his own glory. ibid. The reason why no more complain of the
Burden of sin. 287.
C
The Church visible is a mixed company p. 18 Difference betwixt true sanctity,
and Civility. 21 Diverse kinds of Confession. 195 Confession is necessary
before remission 195 God cannot in Justice forgive sin, except it be
confessed. 198 No sin must go unconfessed, that we would not have to go
unpardoned 202 The benefits of true confession many. 202 Confession must be in
particular, and not by whole sale. 204 The properties of true confession. p.
205 That sin which is truly confessed shall never be imputed. 20^ Confession
of sin must be made only to the Lord. 207 Auricular confession condemned,
and the reasons for it answered. 208 Sin must be confessed to God, though he
already knows it. 210 As sin was enlarged in the committing; so must it
also be in the confessing. 214 Serious consideration brings forth sound
determination. 127 Our ways must be often considered. 128 Choice matter for
Consideration. 129 Wicked men fitly resemble a C^arse in four respects. 284
Such as have waking Consciences are to bless God. 12 No earthly thing can
content the soul. 91 Seek not for content in the things that are here below.
93 The godly are content with the hardest measure. 160. and 319 Concealars of
sin reproved 199 Concealars of sin, are the Devils Secretaries. 201 We may
not despair of the conversion of any. 50 Our conversion is from Gods free
grace. page 222. 302 All the praise of it is to be given unto God 226 The true
Conversion of any does bring joy to the godly. 279 The whole Trinity rejoices
at the Conversion of a sinner. 281 We ought not to envy at the Conversion of
any. 280 Conviction is the ready way to Conversion. p. 8. Men live in sin,
because they are not convicted of sin. 9 We must ^se all good means for the
conviction of sinners 12 It is dangerous to keep company with the wicked. 100.
288. The only way to have sin covered, is to uncover them. 202 God will
never vpbraid the penitent with their former courses. 250 Custom in sin is
not easily left. 179 Directions for the right using of the Creatures. 268 We
may not complain against Gods proceedings 321
D
There is a twofold Death; A death corporal and spiritual. page 282 Every
wicked man is a Dead man. 283 The three sorts of coarses which Christ raised
from the Dead resemble three sorts of sinners. 297 Such as defend their sins,
double their sins. 201 As sin, so grace grows by degrees. 132 It is
dangerous to delay our turning to the Lord. 189 Deliberation is good in worldly
business, but not in the matter of Repentance. 88 God gives to his children,
as for necessity so for de^^ght. 264 Desertions of two sorts. 43 What kind of
Desertion may befall Gods child. 43 What kind of Desertion befalls
Reprobates. 44 Of all judgments in this life, Desertion is the forest. 47
Special sins which cause Desertion. 48 A man ought to speak in his own
Defense, if the flander that is laid upon him redound to the discred t of the
Gospel. page ^39 Sound consideration brings sound Determination. 127 Four
Differences betwixt civility and true sanctify. 2^ Two Differences betwixt
holiness and restraining grace. 22 Denies of sin deprive themselves of
mercy. ^00 Doctrine which Papists teach is but a frothy doctrine, and cannot
nourish. 95 Doctrine of Doubting, a rack to the Conscience. 240 The reason why
many wicked men Dye so quietly. 287
E
No Earthly thing can satisfy the soul. page 91 Rules to be observed in our
Eating. 265 In our Eating we must have a care to redeem the time. 269 Where
there is true repentance, there is not only a purpose in the heart, but an
holy Endeavor in the life. 166 The true Penitent apprehends sin as a deadly
Enemy. 212 Envy repineth at every blessing that any other has. 3^2 Hell is
the fittest place for the Envious. ibid. Envy is to be avoided. 312. It is the
vnprofitablest of all vices. 313 Enui^ hurts others, but especially it self.
312 Means to avoid Envy. 314 Envy the best medicine for the quickening of
the fight. 315 No flying Envy, if a man do well. 31^ Excusers of sin far from
Repentance. 199 Many have an excellent faculty in enlarging other men's sins,
but they can Extenuate their own. 213 Examination of our hearts, the first
step to Repentance. 101 Without Examination we know not whether our courses
tend. ibid. No day should pass over without Examination. 103 It is the
property of the wicked to Expostulate the case with God. 317 God is an
Eyewitness of every sin 1^0 The remembrance of Gods All-seeing Eye, should
encourage us to well-doing 153 To forget Gods Eye, when we go about sin, does
increase the sin, and aggrauate the same. 154 Gods Eye ought duly and daily to
be thought upon. 155
F
Painting the Face abominable. 275 We may not be too much discouraged, when we
see some F^ll away. 26 The land of sin is a la^d of Famine. 75 Fasting needful
at some times. 266 A man may eat some thing in time of a Fast, if need
require. ibid. All are not dutiful sons, which call God Father. 33
Impenitent sinners are out of Gods Favor. 228 Such as mourn for sin may
assure themselves of Gods Favor. ibid. Temporal blessings no sure sign of
Gods Favor. 42. 107. Where Gods Favor is not wanting, nothing shall be
wanting 258 Great difference betwixt Gods Favor and Man's. 262 Gods Favor to
be preferred before all things. ibid. How wicked men do Fly from God. 60
Sinners are Fools. 27 They are not natural but artificial Fools 32 Six
properties of Fools, natural to every wicked man. 29 The best work of a
wicked man is but a Fools, sacrifice. 3^ God will Forgive all such as do
repent be their sins never so many 2^3 We ought as readily to Forgive others,
as God does Forgive us. 236 God ^s more ready to F rgiue, then man to beg
pardon. ibid. God ^ound us, we found not him. 302 Where there is true
repentance, there is a Forsaking of sin 175
G
Ill use or no use of Gods Gifts bestowed, causes God to hide away his face
for a time. page 48 Common Gifts are of a wasting nature. 73 God is larger in
his Gifts, then man is in his requests. 256 God makes himself known to man as
man, that man may know him in some measure. 15 We may not ascribe to God any
visible shape. 16 Difference betwixt true holiness and restrayning Graces. 22
God is kind and Graticus even to the wicked and rebellious. 40 True Grace is
ever growing. 68 Heavenly Graces principally to be sought after. 74 True Grace
will manifest it self both by word and deed. 192 The Grace of Christ is every
whit as large as the sin of Adam. ibid. Our Salvation is of Grace. 222 Our
weak beginnings in Grace should not too much discourage us. 230 Grace grows
by degrees. 133 God is the center of the soul. 91
H
Hearers must be content with plain teaching. 14 Wicked men betake themselves
to vain Helps in time of need. 137 Holiness a mark of a true member of the
Church Catholic. 20 Two things much like Holiness, yet not it. 21 We must
show by our Holiness that we are true members of the Church. 25 Such as fear
they have sinned against the Holy Ghost have not. 235 The only way to procure
Gods favor is with Humility to throw our selves down before him. 215 God
has promised to show mercy to the Humble. 216 The humble only are capable of
Grace. ib. God has a special respect unto the Humble and lowly. ibid.
Humility is a preserver of Grace. 217 Humility makes us like Christ. ibid.
All virtues and vices are against Humility. 221 The better Repentance the more
Humility. 157 Hypocrites fry in words but freze in deeds. 193 In Gods he use
are Hyrelings. 113
I
Ignorant persons cannot confess their sins, therefore cannot have pardon. 198
Man's Inventions cannot nourish the soul to salvation. 94 Regeneration does not
abolish true J^y 303 The godly have only true Joy, and none but they. 304 The
Joy of the godly is internal, therefore not discerned by the wicked. 30^ Many
Inconveniences arising, from vncheerfull and vnco^fortable walking. 306 Pardon
of sin brings true Joy. 307 Our joy here is but ye beginning of joy. ^08
Gods fearful Judgments on such as have put off Repentance. 191 God is Just as
well as Merciful. 186
L
Wicked men will not be in subjection to Gods Laws. page 35 The reasons of it.
ibid. Lawful things much abused. 265 Man's Life is short and uncertain. 179
Hope of long Life a let to repentance. 181 It is great folly to defer
Repentance upon hope of long Life. ibid. There is a twofold Life. 282 He only
lives ye lives the Life of grace. ^89 Spiritual Life how discerned. 290
Spiritual Life must be maintained by means, as well as corporal. 298 God
does not only Love his children, but he will manifest it unto them, that they
may not doubt of it. 239 Gods Love while it is shut up in his decree, cannot so
affect his children, as when they feel it. ibid. Gods elect being yet
uncalled, are within the compass of Gods Love. 240 How we may know God Loves
us. 241 Many Love God with their tongues, who hate him with their souls. 242
Certainty of Gods Love will support us in all dangers. 249 How we may know we
Love God in truth. 242 How we may know we Love the Brethren. 245 Such as say
their sins are more then can be forgiven give God the Lie. 233
M
Wicked men are Mad men. page 98 Many Mad pranks they play. 99 Man being left
to himself cannot long stand. 55 Every good thing in Man should cause us to
consider ye goodness of ye Creator. 16 Marks of godly sorrow. 145 Marks of an
humbled soul. 158 Masters should beware of enterteyning wicked servants, for
they are stroy-goods. 69 Means for subduing pride. 218 Means for obteyning
godly sorrow. 149 Means to bring purposes to perfection. 169 Means to live
the life of Grace. 294 Means to preserve the life of grace. 298 It is
dangerous not to profit by the Means afforded for our good. 49 How the Members
of man's body are attributed to God; and why. 15, 16 Meditation of a threefold
object. 219 God is ready to show Mercy. 231 He is more ready to show it, then
we are to seek it. 236 We should be M^rcifull as God is merciful. page 41 It
is sense of Mercy that causes Repentance. 110 It is not sense of Misery
without sense of Mercy, nor sense of Mercy without sense of Misery that can
bring us to Repentance. 114 Four ranks of Mercies daily to be thought upon.
112 Presumption of Gods Mercy a great let to Repentance. 185 It is no easy
matter in time of spiritual distres to lay hold on Gods Mercy. 2^7 God is more
ready to show Mercy then we to seek it, even then when he withholdeth from us
what we desire. 237 Doctrine of Merit taught in the school of Nature. 38 We
may not challenge any thing for our Merit. 40 God deals with sinners in quiet
and Meek terms 328. Meeknes must be showed by all, to all. 330. Motives to
Meekness. 331. The Meeknes of many men is but brutish. 330. By Meeknes we
soonest overcome our enemy. 333 The first work of a Minister is to bring his
people to a true sight of sin. 8 Such Ministers as set men's sins b fore them
by preaching of the Law are not to be condemned. 9 It is lawful for Gods
Ministers to use Parables, Similies, etc. for pressing Doctrines. 12 Ministers
may not teach their own fond devices. 97 The first Motions to Repentance, if
true, are pleasing to God. 229 Good Motions are not to be choked. 131 How to
know good Motions from Diabolical delusions.
N
No man may dishonor his Nature, seeing God does honor it. page 17 Every
Natural man a fit piece of timber for the Popes building. 38 Every Natural
man has a Pope in his belly. 40 Man's corrupt Nature Spider-like turns all
into poison. 52 Many deal with God in confessing their sins as Nebuchadnezar
with his enchanters in finding out his dream. 204
O
Old age no fit time for Repentance. page 182 Such as put off till they be
Old, are not sure to find grace. 184 Omission of good duties is damnable. 172
God allows his children, as for necessity so for Ornament. 264 Rules for the
right using of Ornament. 269 All Ornament must express Godliness, Modesty, and
Sobriety. 270 Special sins which usually accompany excess in Ornament. 271
P.
Papists have a Saint for every sore. p. 82 Papists are all or Will, nothing
for John. p. 224 What Doctrine Papists teach. 119 How Papists color and
varnish over their abominable Idolatry. 325 Papists on their death beds call
for mercy, though in their life time they plead for merit. 38 Reasons why
Christ taught in Parables. 2 Parables consist of two parts, a body and a soul.
4 Instructions may be gathered from the letter of a Parable. 7 Parables may
lawfully be used for illustration of Doctrines. 12 Caueats in using Parables.
13 Christian Policy may sometimes bind us, from using some kind of meats. 266
A set form of Prayer may lawfully be used. 139 We may not tie our selves
always to one form of Prayer. 141 In Prayer, the groans of the heart is the
best Rhetoric. 141 Preparation needful, before we come into to Gods
presence 138 The Reason why there is so much Preaching, and so little
profitting. 287 The Physician may be sought unto, but not trusted in. 138 God
provides sufficient Provision for his. 116 Spiritual Pride is a dangerous
sin. 49 Pride is the Devils firstborn. 216 God resists the Proud. 2 7
Sinners cannot endure Gods Presence, and the Reasons of it. 59 By our loving,
or not loving Gods Presence, we may know whether our sins be pardoned, or not
pardoned. 60 Professors taxed, who think it sufficient to believe well, though
they practice just nothing. 193 Believers must be Professors. ibid. God will be
better then his Promise, to his children. 257 The Prosperity of the wicked
becomes their snare. 53 Of what kind is the sin, of the same kind shall be
the Punishment. 77 In the Punishment we may oftentimes see the sin. 79, 80.
Good Purposes are to be speedily put in practice. 170 Purposes will not bring
a man to Heaven 168 Purposes are fools purchases. 169 The wicked have fair
Pretenses for soul sins. 323
Quest.
Whether a man does prejudice the truth, in enlarging sin. page 214 Whether
the Elect, before their calling, are within the compass of Gods love. 240 How
a man may know himself to be a true member of the Church. 20 Why the
Prodigal son is rather figured by the younger, then by the elder brother. 27
How the children of this world are wiser then the children of light. 28 Whether
an elected child of God may finally be forsaken. 47 How a man can be said to
fly from Gods presence. 60 Whether the Prodigal did confess so much as he
resolved. 194 Whether a man be bound to confess every particular sin. 204
Whether it be unlawful to confess sin to man. 208 Why a man should confess
his sins to God seeing he knows them already. 210 Whether God cannot forgive
sin, without confess^ n be made of it, 210 Why so many are afflicted, yet are
not bettered. 106 Whether in doing good, we may have an eye upon the
recompense of reward. 1^^ How the motions of Gods: may be known from Satan's
suggestions. 133 Whether it be lawful to use a set form of prayer. 139 How
David's words are true, that he never saw the righteous forsaken, nor their
feed begging bread: Seeing many of Gods children have perished by famine. 261
Whether a total abstinence be absolutely needful in time of fasting. 266
Whether a man may eat flesh in time of Lent. 267 Whether the Apostles, Paul and
Peter, for bid wearing of ornament. 273 Whether God can save without preaching.
295 Whether a deformity in the body may be hid, or the complexion mended. 274
Whether a woman may not paint her face, to please her husband. 275 Whether a
man may speak well of himself, seeing Solomon says, Let another praise thee.
338 In what case a man is to pass by a slander. 339
R.
Reasons why men cannot endure to hear sin spoken against. 11 The Reasons
why the Papists keep the Word from the people. 118 The Reasons why they keep
the cup, in the Lords supper, from the Laity. 120 Repentance from sin is the
first resurrection. 130 There are two parts in true Repentance 172 The first
step to Repentance is hard to tread 12 Repentance not to be deferred. 178 Four
strong reasons why we may not defer Repentance. 178 Men confess they must
repent, but few agree upon the time. 180 Three maine lets of Repentance. 181
Late Repentance sildom^ true. 191 True Repentance brings us into Gods favor
227 Where true Repentance is, there sin is left. 173 It is lawful to have an
eye upon the Recompense of Reward 115 Sound Resolution needful for him that
would live godly. 125 The wicked repine at others preferments; in Gods favors.
310 Private Revenge must be forborne. 343
S.
The reason why there are so many stinking savors in the world. 286 If we
would have Salvation, we must seek it from God. 226 Sinful men seek not to
God, until all other helps do fail them. 8^ Every one seeks the Lord at
last, but wise men seek him while he may be found. 190 Such as will not serve
God, shall be enforced to serve a harder master. 85 There is no service
comparable to Gods. 85 God must be served before all. 178 The Service of Satan
is a most base service. 89 Choice Sentences to be remembered, to keep from
Pride. 221 When, and How, Shame is misplaced. 199 Such as separate from our
Church, because of the bad that are in it, reproved. 19 It is no easy matter
to bring a Sinner to a true sight of sin. 10 Sinners are younger brothers. 27
To fellow Sin, is to forsake God. 60 Sin does free like a canker. 63 Such
as make no conscience of little Sins, are often given up to hardness of heart. 64
St^^ers are Strayes. 301 No sin so foul but a wicked man may commit it. p 64
As sin grows, so the curse grows. 65 Sin is a shameless beggar. 6^
Sinners are great spend christ's. 6^ God does often punish sin in it own
kind. 77 Sin (Circes-like) does transform men into Beasts. 8^ All sin is
properly committed against God, and therefore he only can forgive it. 209
Sin is the Partition wall. 22^ No sin so great, but upon Repentance shall
be forgiven. p. 233 Gods Stewards may not scant Gods people of their Masters
allowance. 121 Souls of most men starued, yet they know it not. 76 We may not
rely upon our own strength. p. 56 Superiors are patiently to bear the
undutifulness of inferiors, because they themselves are undutiful to God. 54
To the godly sin is the greatest sorrow. p. 142
T
The example of the Thief converted at the last hour, a let to Repentance p
187 Great difference betwixt that Thief, and presumptuous sinners. ibid There
is a time for Repentance which being neglected, shall never again be
recovered. 190 There must not be only a rising from sin but there must be
withal a turning to the Lord. 176 What kind of turning wicked men make. p. 177
V
Unthankfulness causes the Lord to hide away his face for a time from his
own children. page 48 The wicked are most unthankful, when God is most
bountiful. 53.
W
Gods children are never in want page 260. Wicked men are wiser in their kind
then the children of light. 28. Wicked men are self conceited. 30 They
prefer trifles before treasure. ibid. They are, all for the present, nothing
for hereafter. 31 They play with sin and sport with their damnation. ibid.
The^^ counsel is not to be followed. 33 Their whole life is but a wand ing
from God. ^1 They cry to God and are not heard, because they are so far off.
62 They wax worse and worse. 63 He is a wicked man that persisteth in evil.
6^ No wicked man can be a good husband. 69 They spend Gods gifts in sins
service. 70 They are led by sense and appetite, as Beasts are. 87 They resemble
Beasts in many of their practices. 88 They boast of their base drudgery. 90 A
wicked man is but a deed corspe, being cold, senseless, heavy, stinking. 284.
It is a great blessing to have the Word so plentifully. 96 Conscionable
attendance upon the Word the chiefest means to obtain true grace. 218 The
godly tremble at the Word; yea, at every Word, as well promising as threatening.
^^^ Free will confuted. 224 How; and in what, Man has freedom of Will. ^25 It
is a point of Wisdom to give way to ungodly men's ^age. 335
Y
Wicked men can never attain to the years of discretion. page 33 It is sin
and shame to give the Devil the youth, and God the old age. 183.
FINIS.
The Logical Analysis of the Parable of the Prodigal, Luke 15.11.
In the Parable of the Prodigal are obserueable. 1. An Introduction, wherein
we have 1. The propounder. He said. 2. The persons propounded, viz. A certain
man. verse 11. Had two sons. verse 11.

2. A Narration, wherein we have the Prodigal his Egresse from verse 12. to
the 17. wherein we have 1. His sin, verse. 12, 13. and that either. Before he
had received his portion, ve. 1, 2. viz. His greediness of it. His impudency
in requiring it.
Or after he had received it, verse 13. in Forsaking his Fathers house, wherein
observe the circumstances, First, Of Time, and that was 1. After he had
received it. 2. Not long after.
Secondly, Of the place whether he went, viz Into a far Country.
Wasting of his goods wherein observe First, His Fact, what he did. He wasted.
Secondly, The manner how he did it: With riotous living.


2. The punishment thereof Common upon the whole Country with him, verse 14.
Personal on himself, wherein First, His distress: and that is laid down
Briefly, verse 14. More largely, verse 16.
Secondly, His shift in this his distress, verse 15.


Regresse from verse 17. to the 22. wherein we have 1. His Repentance: and
therein 1. The motives or occasion thereof, verse 17. and that General: A
communing with himself: And when he came to himself, he said. More special.
A consideration of his own misery; I perish for hunger. A persuasion of his
Fathers mercy; which is nourished by his Fathers liberal dealing, even
toward hired servants: For they have bread enough.

2. His resolution, verse. 18.19. what To do viz. To Arise. To go to his
Father.
To say, Father, I have sinned, etc.
3. His practice, verse 20.21. wherein 1. His work: and therein we have 1. The
act of his Repentance, wherein the two parts. 1. Auersion from sin: He arose.
2. Conversion to God: And came to his Father.
2. The time employed in that particle [So.]
2. His words, which are a Confession: wherein 1. The Matter of it, I have
sinned. 2. The circumstances. 1. To whom, viz. to his Father: Father, etc. 2.
The Manner how, viz. with Exageration. Humiliation.




2. The success thereof which is diverse, viz. His Fathers goodwill: wherein
consider First, His readiness to receive him, verse 20. expressed. First, By
his looking on him. Secondly, By his running to him. Thirdly, By his kissing of
him.
Secondly, The entertainment he gave him, verse 22.23. wherein is noted his
Liberality in giving gifts, for Necessity. Delight.
Merry-making with Melody, and Music.

Thirdly, The reason of this his entertainment, verse 24. wherein is set down
man's twofold estate in this life, that of Nature, He was dead, he was lost.
Grace, He is alive, he is found.

Brothers anger and ill will, which is First, Occasioned by the understanding
of this his Fathers kindness toward his younger Brother, verse. 25-29. for 1.
He heard melody and dancing, verse 25. 2. His servants made relation of it,
v. 26.27. Therefore he was angry, v. 28
Secondly, Expressed by his Reasoning with his Father, verse. 29.30. Accusing of
his Father, verse. 29.30.
Thirdly, Qualified by his Fathers Kind Entreaty, verse 28. Meek Apollogie,
verse. 31.32. which has in it a Proposition; wherein thereis a concession to
what his older son had said, verse 31. Confirmation, ab aequo, and bono. It
was meet that we should make merry, etc.








