Christian Courtesy: OR, St. PAVLS Vltimum Vale.

Delivered in two Sermons, on 2. Cor. 13.11. at St. MARGARETS on
Fish-street-hill in London.

By N. ROGERS ( sometimes Preacher there) at his Farewell, upon his remoueal
thence to a Pastoral charge elsewhere.

As many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, and mercy,
and upon the Israel of God. Gal. 6.16. LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Edward
Brewster: and are to be sold at his shop, at the west end of Paul's, at the
Sign of the Bear, 16^^.

TO THE RIGHT Virtuous, and truly Religious Lady, the Lady Margaret Chiborne (
late wife to that worthy, and Worshipful Gentleman, Sir Charles Chiborne,
Serieant at the Law, deceased) long life and good days, with increase of
Grace here, and eternal Glory hereafter.
GOOD MADAME:
I Was no sooner purposed to let this Copy pass the Press, but I was as
soon resolved to send it forth under shelter of your Ladyships name, prefixed
on the front. I know, Gods word can countenance it self, and needs no
shelter of any humane arm: Yet I find, not only the writings of the most and
best; but even some of those holy books inspired from Heaven, bearing in their
foreheads (as from the penmen) a dedication. To your ladyships name I then
inscribe this; these reasons especially me thereunto inducing:

First, your Ladyship had a special hand in the first being and birth of it:
for, it was by your means and furtherance, that I was removed from the place
where then I was, to that where now I am: upon which occasion, these Sermons
were there preached. Which great love and undeserved favor caused me a good
while since to register in my heart a grateful acknowledgement: and wanting
means in real requitance to express the same, I have now presumed in this
dedicatio^ to manifest.

Secondly, in respect of your own worth: whereof if I should make a due report,
they which know you not, would judge I flatter; and if less, the which know
you and your affection toward me, would say, I were unthankful. This I will
only say, That whereas the most of your place and rank, Luke 10.40. Verse 4^.
like Martha, incumber themselves about many needless things; you, like Mary,
have chosen the better part. Your love to GOD, zeal to his house, testified by
your frequent repairing thereunto, your daily performane of religious
exercises; yea, privately in your closet were God only sees and regards:
your conversation lead in fear (the fruit of all the former) testify of you, 2
Pet. 1.17
as did the piety and godliness of that Lady to whom that blessed Apostle S.
John wrote, 3 John 11
that you are Elect: whereof you have more cause to boast, then of any outward
honor whatsoever. For, what is greatness without goodness? but like the
Spartans nightingale, a mere sound and nothing else. Go on, good Madam, in your
godly course: and whiles others strive to settle their lands, secure their
moneys, confirm their estates (leaving their salvation unwrought up) let it be
your principal endeavor, To conform your life still more and more to the rule
of Gods most holy word, and to make sure your election unto your self. For, 2
Pet. 1.10
when men have beat their brains, broke their sleep, wasted their marrow, to
be wealthy, mighty; yet at last they shall be enforced to confess, that To be
saved was simply the best plot. Neither will any study yield true solid
comfort, but what was spent about it.

Let not this my presumption be offensive to your Ladyship. It is more I owe
unto you than I can perform. Let my confession testify my obligednes; and this
be a witness of my thankful remembrance of my duty: wherein I desire to
please at least God, not to offend at least you. The Lord make you to increase
and abound yet more and more in grace and goodness, 1 These. 3.12.13
and make your heart stable and unblameable in all holiness against the coming
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And so I rest; and still will rest

A Petitioner to the Lord for your Ladyships best welfare, NEHEMIAH ROGERS.
Messing in Essex. Aug. 1. 1621.
TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader; especially, to his loving Friends and late auditors,
the Parishioners of S. Margarets Fish-street, with all truely-Religious in or
about London by whose favor or bounty my Ministry there has been
countenanced or any way furthered: all blessings which earth affords, or heaven
contains, be multiplied.
AS a good husbandman deals with his plants; pruning some, removing others, for
their better growth: so deals that most wise and careful husbandman of the
Church, John 15.1
with the members of it. Some he purges, that they may grow more fruitful:
Others he takes away, that are not fruitful. Oftentimes he translateth others
from off that soil whereon they grew, Psalm. 80.9
and plants them on some other ground; and that either because of the barrenness
of the soil, or unfruitfulness of the plant, or for some other cause best known
unto himself. It has pleased him in mercy not to supplant, as justly he
might have done, and that for ever, but only to remove me into another corner
of his Vineyard (Blessed be his name it is any where within that pale). The
soil whereon I grew, was fat and goodly (never plant could grow on better) no
fault in it, of this translation. The Plant it self was badde and barren: and
that (as safest it is for me to judge) occasions it. I have but loytered, when
I should have labored, in gods harvest. Now Lord forgive it me.

1 Cor. 16.24
Seeing now I must leave you, my love my Brethren I leave with you; and this as
a testimony of my love. When I am out of sight I would not be forgotten. Read
and practice what here you find, and what formerly you have beard: and I dare
say I shall not be. These are the last Sermons that I preached amongst you:
let them not be least esteemed: take them as the last Farewell of a hearty
friend. When they were preached to the ear, passion hindered many of your
attentions: I now present them to your eye, Luke 1.4
that you may be more fully informed of those things wherein you were then
instructed.

Let it suffice, my Affection is so great toward you, that I cannot express
it. God works my heart to love those that love him. The Lord imprint in your
minds this seal of that my Affection unfeigned, and enable you by his grace to
do his will; Acts 20.32.
that so at last you may be made partakers of a glorious inheritance amongst
all them which are sanctified: which shall be faithfully prayed, for by him

That unfeignedly desires your salvation, NEHEMIAH ROGERS.
Messing. Aug. 1. 1621.
Christian Courtesy, OR, St. PAVLS Vltimum Vale.
2. COR. 13.11. Finally, Brethren, Farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort,
be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.
Our blessed Apostle, Saint Paul, having in this Epistle purged himself from
such crimes as he was charged withal, by certain false teachers, who were
crept into the Church of Corinth; and especially from that which was the ground
of all, 1. Cor. 16.5.
his not coming amongst them according unto promise made (for which they
accused him of leuity and inconstancy) does in the beginning of this Chapter
renew his promise, The order of the words.
telling them of his readiness a third time to come amongst them, and withal
shows after what manner it shall be; namely, with severity and more then
wonted rigor, against such as were obstinate. Now being to make an end, he
winds up all with a friendly Farewell, wherein he does somewhat allay and
mitigate what-euer he had formerly wrote that might savor of bitterness: and
that he might not leave their minds exasperated, he gives them a taste of the
loving affection he bare toward them, in this his valediction. Finally,
Brethren, Farewell: which words, The sum of them.
with the other following in the verses subsequent, contain in them the
conclusion of the whole Epistle, which is spent in Exhortation, Salutation, and
Prayer. The Exhortation is contained in this 11. verse. The Salutation, verse
12, 13. The Prayer verse 14.

The logical resolution.
In this Exhortation we may consider, First the Manner of it. Finally, Brethren,
Farewell.

Secondly the Matter of it; Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

In the Manner, we have, First, a note of conclusion: Finally.

Secondly, a Loving compellation: Brethren.

Thirdly, a Friendly valediction: Farewell.

In the Matter, observe we, First the duties whereto exhorted.

Secondly, the motive or argument wherewith they are enforced.

The duties, four; First Perfection; Be perfect.

Secondly, mutual consolation; Be of good comfort.

Thirdly, unanimity or consent in matters ecclesiastical. Be of one mind.

Fourthly, concord and agreement in matter domestical and civil: Live in
peace.

The Argument taken, a Commodo, from the profit that thereby will ensue: The
God of love and peace shall be with you.

The interpretations of these words be various: we will search for the best.
The Theological exposition.


Finally. Some read it thus; For the rest; others, Text. (...)
For the Remainder: Not much amiss to take either. For so the word here used
signifies, and may have reference either to the Apostle or to the People. To
the Apostle thus; as if he had said, I have written as large unto you, yet
still there is a Remainder behind for me to exhort you unto, which I comprehend
in these few words: Be perfect: Be of good comfort, etc. To the people thus; As
if he had said, Hitherto I have not been wanting in my duty, but have
sufficiently instructed and admonished you, etc. Now the remainder is for you,
that you do your duty and obey my precepts.

Brethren. Text.
There be three sorts of Brethren mentioned in holy Scripture: First, such as
are brethren by Race: as they who have the same Father and Mother, as Jacob and
Esau had; Genesis 25.25.
or they who are of the same stock and kindred: Genesis 13.8
and so Lot and Abraham were called Brethren.

Secondly, such as are Brethren by Place, who are of the same nation and
country: and so the Jews are termed Brethren in the Law; Deuteronomy. 23.20
To a stranger thou may lend upon usury, but not unto thy brother.

Thirdly, such as are Brethren by Grace; and that either more common, or more
special. More common in respect of creation, and so all men are Brethren: Genesis
9.5
At the hand of a man's brother will I require the life of man; more special in
respect of Adoption, and so Christians are Brethren, and they only. In this
respect does the Apostle call them Brethren.

(...).
Farewell. The word signifies properly to rejoice, and is by most so
translated and read. Yet Erasmus, and some others, renders it as we have it,
as well he may: for, the word signifies as well Farewell as Rejoice: wherein
the Apostle wishes all good to betide them.

(...).
Be perfect. The signification of this verb is likewise diverse, and by some
rendered for consummation; by others, for restoration. The Apostle's meaning
is, that whereas the members of this Church were all as it were bones displaced
and out of joint, they should now again be joined together in love, and they
should endeavor to make perfect what was amiss amongst them, either in faith
or manners: They should be perfect in respect of truth, though not is respect
of absoluteness; they should desire and endeavor after perfection, though in
act they attain it not.

Be of good comfort, or take ye comfort. (...)
Some read it thus, Take exhortation: for, the word here used signifies
indifferently, to comfort, to exhort, to entreat But the former reading is best
liked by Chrysostom, who thinks the Apostle rather intends consolation than
exhortation, in regard of the many oppositions and trials they had and were to
meet withal in their course of Christianity; and therefore wills them to cheer
up themselves, and mutually one another, that they may not make shipwreck of
their faith in the day of trouble.

Be of one mind; to wit, in matters of faith and religion. For, by this
precept he seems to note out, that some things were amiss amongst them, and
that many things were done through contention and vainglory: He wills them
therefore to be alike-minded and affectioned, that all discord and dissension
might be avoided, and the Church no way thereby troubled.

Live in Peace. Peace is of three sorts: Eternal, which is called Pax Numinis, the
peace of God which passes all understanding, which we have with him through
Christ; Internal, which is called Pax pectoris, the peace of conscience, which
is a fruit of the former, and proceeds from that; External, which is called
Pax temporis, the peace which we have with men for the time we live in the
world. This last only is here meant: and this precept respects things civil,
as the former things ecclesiastical.

And the God of love and peace shall be with you. Some construe this clause by
way of enunciation affirmatively; as if the Apostle should have said, In thus
doing you shall have the blessing of God attending you, etc: Others
Imprecatory, by way of wish or prayer; as if he had said, The God of love and
peace be with you, and enable you to do thus. But the former is the better.

God of love and peace. He is so termed, first (say some) because he is love
and peace it self, it is his Essence; secondly, because he delights and takes
pleasure in it; and thirdly and especially, because he is the Author and
Giver of it.

Shall be with you. That is, by his gracious protection and comfortable
presence, to bless you and defend you.

Thus then we see the meaning, as if the Apostle should have in larger manner
thus said:

The Metaphrase.
Hitherto I have at large written unto you, O ye Corinthians, whom I tenderly
affect even as my Brethren in Christ, and to whom I wish all welfare and
happiness both in the things of this life and of a better: And yet there is a
remainder, and something left to be done, which (that I may conclude) in brief
is this; That you endeavor to perfection, purging out sin, increasing in grace,
and so making up what is amongst you wanting; As also that you mutually comfort
one the other, and take comfort one of another, that you may the better be
enabled to withstand the many oppositions you are like to meet withal in the
course of Christianity. See also that you be alike minded and affected in
matters of religion, that the Church may not be troubled by your divisions and
dissensions. And, in things civil, let there be a like concord and agreement
found amongst you, as between neighbor and neighbor, husband and wife,
parent and child, master and servant, and the like: which if there be, then
that God who takes delight in love and peace, and who is the rewarder of them
that live in love and peace, and who is the Author and Donor of these graces of
love and peace, shall be with you by his gracious protection and comfortable
presence, and shall bless you, and bestow upon you all good blessings.

And thus we have seen the Apostles meaning. Now we come to speak of some such
profitable instructions as these words shall afford.

Finally. The Apostle, as we see, Text.
had written largely to these Corinthians, and yet there is still a remainder
behind: for so the word signifies (as we have before seen). Hence then we
gather,

Though Gods Ministers spend their time, Do^t. Ministers have ever something
left to do after their greatest pains. 1 Cor. ^.^
and take the greatest pains that can be taken, in teaching and instructing
their people; yet there will be still a Remainder, and something left to be
done.

Not without cause and reason then is the Ministers task and toil paralleled
with the Husbandmans, who has no vacation: the end of one work is but the
beginning of another: every season of the year brings his several travel
with it. So that no calling is accompanied with more labor or less ease. Ier.
4.3
And thus the Minister: Has he broke up the fallow ground of his peoples
hearts? then must he sow the precious seed therein. 1 Cor. 3.6
Has he sowed seed? then must he water what he has set and sowed. Mat. 13.25
Yea, tares and weeds will grow and soon sprout up, sleep we never so little;
and therefore great need of daily weeding.

Ezekiel. 34.1
when they feed themselves, but not the flock; and do not gather, but eat the
honey. Of such it may be said, Mat. 6.28
as our Savior of the Lillies in the field, They labor not. But, consider it
in its own nature, and as it ought to be performed, we shall find it to be
a service of great imploiment, and his task to be an endless task: so that
none can have just cause to say, that, because he is a Minister, he has an
easy occupation and calling to follow. Haruest-labourers of all other are the
sorest laborers, as we know; no labor more toilsome than theirs is: that,
of all others, as we say, Mat. 9.37
is the sore-sweating labor. And are not Ministers such? surely the sweat of
the Ministry (be it followed as it ought) exceeds the sweat of other callings,
and with the sorest labourer does the painful Minister eat his bread in the
sweat of his brows. There is a labor of the soul as well as of the body; as
there is a suffering of the soul as well as a suffering of the body. And look
as the suffering of the soul exceeds by far any pains that the body
undergoes (for, Pro. 18.14
The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity (says Solomon) but a wounded
spirit who can bear?); so does the soule-labour exceed any other labor
whatsoever. Say not then, that Ministers are idle, and their callings easy,
because they labor not with their hands. What though a Gouerner of a ship
sits still at the stern, while some climb the mast, and others walk upon the
hatches, and others labor at the pump? for, though he does not as they do,
yet he does far greater and better things. Their calling then is not easy,
idle; It is (...) a painful calling, humeris angelorum formidandum.
but laborious and painful: as it is an honor, so it is a burden, and such a
one as requires the strength of Angels.

Secondly, this taxes such as, being entered into this same calling and
function of the Ministry, Isachar think ease is good, Genesis 49.14
especially if they have for some times heertofore labored in the word and
doctrine. Such little understand the nature of their office, as having laid
some grounds of knowledge, neglect the daily urging of practice and
perseverance. A great part of the building is behind, after the foundation is
laid. These are they that occasion the world to judge of Ministers, as Paul the
Cretians, to be slowe-bellies. Tit 1.12
I take no pleasure in defiling my own neast, nor in laying open the nakedness
of men of my own coat: But God forbid that I should as a Fly lie blowing upon
their sores, or use my tongue to lick their filthy ulcers. Let such be what
they will, whether idle or unable, like Aesops Hen too fat to lay; they are a
burden to our Church, a disgrace unto our calling, which allows us no time of
sitting still. Why stand you here all the day idle? Mat. 20.6
It was the Lord of the Vineyards reproof to them that stood idle but in the
marketplace: what sharpness then must such look for as stand not in the
marketplace but in the Vineyard, and idle too; and all their day? It is ill
being idle in the market, but much worse to stand idle in the Vineyard of the
Lord. Let us then, 2 Cor. 4.1
so many as have received this Ministry, 1 Timothy 4.13
not faint; but give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. Is
knowledge planted? then practice must be urged. Is their practice good? then
perseverance, progress and continuance, must be pressed. A Soldier should die
in the wars standing, and a Minister in the pulpit preaching; no better place
to have God find us in. And, when thou stand idle, admonish thy self as
sometimes Plinius Secundus admonished his nephew; Poteras has horas non perdere
Plin Secund^in Epist. ad Marci^
Thou might have not lost these hours.

And lastly, let hearers hence learn their lesson: for, is it so that though
Gods Ministers take the have knowledge in abundance, so that thou art able
with Solomon to discourse from the Cedar-tree that is in Lebanon, 1 Kings 4.33.
even unto the hysope that springs out of the wall, and of all beasts and
fowls, fishes and creeping things; yet still there is a remainder, namely
practice and obedience: for, John 13.17
if you know these things, blessed are you if you do them, says our Savior.

Think of these things, thou who art so puffed up with a conceit of that same
small scantling of knowledge thou have received, as that thou neglectest all
further means of edification. And do thou also think of this, who conte^tst
thy self with a bare hearing of the word, without consequent meditation or
practice. Sermon is don, thou say, when the Minister has done preaching: and
so it is indeed with many, for it is no more thought of after. But, the Sermon
that wants consequent meditation here, may be meditated of in hell hereafter.
Remember that.

Brethren. Text.
The Observations from this Compellation are from the consideration of Paul as
a christian, or as an Apostle.

If we consider him thus calling them as he was a Christian, then we observe,

There is a spiritual kindred and brotherhood amongst Christians. Such as
profess the same faith, Doct. Christians are spiritually a^^n.
and worship the same God, are Brethren. And so we find them often styled in
Scripture. Psalm. 21.22.12
I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren (says David) in the midst of the
congregation will I praise thee. And elsewhere thus; Psalm. 12^.8.9 1 Cor. 5.11
For my brethren and companions sake, I will wish thee now prosperity. So the
Apostle S. Paul wills, If any that is called a Brother be a fornicatour or
covetous, etc. with such a one, no not to eat. And again, The Brethren which
are with me unto the Churches of Galatia. Gal. ^ 2
This our Savior shows to his Disciples, Mat. 2^.8
when he says, One is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are Brethren.

Reason. James 1.18 Gal. 4.26 1 Pet. 1.23 1 cor. 10.16.17 2 Timothy 4.8
And no marvel: for, they have one and the same Father, which is God; one and
the same Mother, which is the Church, in whose womb they lie together: they are
begotten of the same spiritual seed, which is the word: they are fed at one
and the same table with the same nourishment; and look for one and the same
inheritance, even eternal happiness and blessedness.

Reproof of such as disdain to call Christians by the name of Brethren, or to
give any Saint such a title, especially if he be a mean one and of low rank.
But, what disparagement is it, or can it be to any, to acknowledge them to be
their Brethren whom Christ acknowledges to be his Brethren, and God
acknowledges to be his Sons? Forasmuch as you have done it to the least of
these my Brethren (says our Savior) you have done it unto me. Mat. 25.40.
Heb. 2.11
Shall we be ashamed of such as Christ is not ashamed of? Let us beware of this
pride of heart, which does so puff us up in regard of outward condition in the
world, as that it makes us to forget such as are mean and low; and causes us
so to carry our selves as if they were not our Brethren, of the same christian
calling and profession with our selves. True it is, we are differenced in
civil policy, and civil societies; some being noble, some base; some rich,
some poor (which differences, Religion does not take away, nor abolish before
men) yet in that spiritual society, of which Christ is the Head, there is no
such distinction. Here we are all one; all equals; all Brethren. Let not then
our inequality in our civil calling cause great men to forget their equality
in the Christian; nor our equality in our Christian, cause mean men to forget
their inequality in the civil. In both let us carry our selves like men of
wisdom.

And if these are to be reproved, then much more are such profane persons to
be soundly lessoned, who cast this name of Brother as a word of reproach and
disgrace upon such as fear the Lord: Oh, you are one of the holy Brethren, you
are one of the holy Sisters. Now, what do such miscreants, but through their
sides strike the Prophets, the Apostles, yea and Christ himself? Let such
know, that they openly proclaim as it were with a trumpet, that they have not
God for their Father, nor the Church for their Mother; but do openly disclaim
them from being their parents, while they profess, that they are none of that
holy Brotherhood.

As this serves for Reprehension, so in the second Instruction: for, out of
this name we may spell our duties. Look what nature ties natural Brethren
unto, that does grace much more tie spiritual unto.

Duties of Brethren.
Brethren (as we know) love together, and live peaceably one with another.
There is unity and amity amongst them: First.
yea, so strong is that love which is amongst Brethren, as that it exceeds all
other love amongst men. It exceeds the love in marriage (says one) because that
is by choice, this by nature. It exceeds the love between Parents and
children, because that is not reciprocal, for the inequality of the persons:
this is most equal. And therefore the Arabians and West-Indians, as Histories
make mention, prefer brethren before children in inheritances. This is the love
of Brethren by nature. Now, we have obtained a more excellent Brotherhood, and
therefore ought to love; and love as earnestly. Our love must be as the love of
Brethren: and so we are commanded, Be affectioned to love one another with
Brotherly love, Romans 12.10 Heb. 13.1 2 Pet. 1.7
says the Apostle. And again, Let Brotherly love continue. And again, To
godliness add Brotherly kindness.

Tertul. in Apol. c. 39. ad stuporem Gentil.
In Tertullian his time, there was such unity amongst Christians, and their love
each to other was so great, as that it was to the amazement of the Heathen.
See, say they, how these Christians love one another, and are ready to die one
for another. But alas for us! our contentions and wranglings even about toies
and trifles may make men amazed. How shall God be our Father, if we live not
together as loving brethren? Or how shall he call us his children, if we
behave our selves as strangers or enemies one unto another? As touching
Brotherly love, says the Apostle, 1 These. 4.9
you need not that I write unto you; for, you your selves are taught of God to
love one another: As if he had said, Look, as natural Brethren, not
degenerating nor growing out of kind, are taught by nature to love one another;
so you, to whom God has given his holy Spirit, are taught by the same Spirit
to live in love. If love and amity be a lesson taught of God, then reason thus
with thy self; Who teaches me to carry malice and hatred in my breast? who
fills my mouth with railings and cursed speakings? O that we would but think of
this, and remember that we are Brethren! then would there not be so much
bitterness as there is, nor so much envy, malice, spite, found among us: for,
a cause why these evils remain with us, is, in that we forget that we are
Brethren. Let there be no strife, Genesis 13.8
said Abraham to Lot, betwixt thee and me, for we are Brethren. The very name
of a Brother is, or I am sure ought to be, potent enough to quench coals of
contention.

Again: Brethren will take one another part against enemies, though happily
they may dissent amongst themselves; so that wrong one, wrong all. Thus, Jacobs
sons took the abuse offered to their sister, as if it had been offered unto
them; and thought it a sufficient excuse for them joining together in the
revenge of the Sichemites, Genesis 34.31
in that it was done in their sisters quarrel: Should they abuse our sister as
a whore? Thus should Christians defend one another in lawful courses (I say
not, in unlawful), and step out for them when they are slandered and spoke
evil of, and not then be silent; as the manner of too-too many is, who flinch
away as Demas and others did from Paul, leaving him to answer for himself.
Thus, Brethren have almost forgotten that they are Brethren; and every man
stands aloof when necessity requires their succor. Histories make mention of
one Vrsinus a Christian Physician; who, being ready to suffer Martyrdom for
the Gospel, began to waver and faint. Which, when Vitalis a holy man saw, he
stepped to him; and, though he knew it would cost him his life, comforted and
encouraged him. For the which, he also was condemned to death. Nic. de Lyra.
Com. in 1. John 3. Few such friends are now to be found, as will lay down
their lives for their Brethren. 1. John 3.16.

Thirdly, Brethren rejoice at the welfare and prosperity one of another, and
do wish as much happiness each to other as to themselves. Thus should
Christians, when we see God any way good and gracious unto our brethren,
whether it be in matters of this life, or in matters of the life to come, Exodus
18.9
rejoice and be glad thereat. Iethro reioiced at all the goodness which the
Lord had showed unto Israel. Luke 1.57.58.
Elizabeth's neighbors and cosins did rejoice with her when they heard tell
that God had showed mercy upon her. 1 These. 2.19.20
The Thessalonians were Paul's joy, and crown of reioicing. John reioiced
greatly, when he found the children of the elect Lady walking in the truth. And
surely, 2 John 4 3 John 3.4
as Solomon discerned the true mother by her affection, so may we a true
Christian by this mark. Woe then to such, who have no other cause of their ill
will and malice toward their brethren, then this, that it goes well with
them, and God does bless them: As Joseph's brethren hated him for no other
cause, but for that his father seemed to love him best. And so Cain slew Abel,
because God preferred Abel before him. Away with this same envy, nourish it
not within thee: It is the rottenness of the bones, and so the iustest of all
vices, because it brings with it its own vengeance; as a Viper eating out
the bowels where it is bred. It is a bloody sin, Hier. in epist. ad Gal. c. 5
for if it eat not out another heart, it will eat out thy own. Be not an
enemy to Gods favors when they fall besides thee: grudge not that thy
neighbors field is fairer grown then thine. Quarrel not with God, because
thy neighbors flock escapes the rot. Let not thy neighbors welfare be thy
disease: because Heaven smiles on him, will thou look awry upon him? because
God sets on him the seal of his love, will thou set on the seal of thy
malice? Beware of that: Remember still that he is thy brother. And as the good
of one member of the body, serves for the use and profit of the other: So what
he has shall tend to thy benefit, and therefore repine not for his vvelfare,
but rejoice thereat.

Fourthly and lastly, Brethren, as they do rejoice with them that do rejoice,
so they weep with them that weep. There is a sympathy and fellow feeling of
the miseries each of other. If one be in heaviness the other cannot contain:
Affection will then break forth, and show it self. As we see in Joseph, Genesis
45.2.3
who albeit before he had dissembled and hid it: yet when he hears Judah make
such a sad relation, and sees his brethren so overwhelmed with sorrow, then
compassion can be concealed no longer, Affection must break forth violently at
his voice and eyes. He weeps aloud, and tells them he was Joseph their brother?
Thus must it be with us who profess that we are children of God, and brethren
of the faithful. Yea, thus it will be with us, if we are rightly bred and
borne: As we see in Moses, whose affection was so great toward his persecuted
brethren, as that he chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
Heb. 11.24.25.
then to enjoy all the pomp and pleasure of Pharaohs Court. Neh. 1.2.3.4
So Nehemiah, though he enioied much pleasure and credit in Shushan in the
Court of Artaxerxes; yet when he understood by Hanani of the affliction and
reproach of the people of God, all that pomp and glory could not smother his
affection, but he must sit down and weep and mourn, and fast certain days,
and pray before the Lord of heaven. 2 Cor. 11.18.29.
And so Saint Paul, The care of all Churches (says he) comes upon me: who is
weak and I am not weak? who is offended and I burn not?

The want of this Affection shows that we are not brethren. So far are we
from weeping when they weep, as that we rejoice at those things which make
them weep. We can insult over our brethren in the day of trouble, Obad. 10.15
as the Edomites did in the day of the destruction and captivity of Judah, and
speak proudly against them in the day of their distress. Or if we insult not
over such as are in calamity, yet we are no way touched with their misery.
Amos 6.4.6.
We lie upon beds of Iuorie and stretch our selves upon our couches, and eat
the Lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall, we
drink wine in bowls, and anoint our selves with the chief ointments; but we
are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. Are not the bowels of the Saints
wrung with grief; and the Church pinched with the persecutions of her
adversaries? Do not the mighty Nimrods of the world hunt her? And are not
furrows made upon her back with their ploughs? Look into the world, consider
the miseries of the Churches in foreign parts; in France and Germany: and, if
thou have in thee any spark of brotherly affection (nay, if thou have not put
off the very nature of a man) thou must needs abate of thy pleasures, Psalm.
137.2
and with the captive Jews hang up thy Harp upon the willowes. The Ark, and
Israel and Judah abide intents; 2 Samuel 11.11
and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my Lord are encamped in the open fields:
shall I then go into my house, said Vriah to David, to eat and to drink, and to
ly with my wife? As thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do this
thing. See, he would not afford to himself any more then necessary
contentment unto nature, till he saw the issue of that business. Esaias 22.11.13
14
Shall we then feast, and sport, and revel? Shall joy and gladness, slaying
oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine, be found amongst us
in this day, when the Lord of Hoasts calls to weeping and to mourning, to
baldness, and to girding with sackcloth? Surely it will be revealed in the
ears of the Lord of Hoasts: and this iniquity shall not be purged from us till
we die. Let us not, my Beloved, think we have the affections of children, when
we can see our mother sick and sorrowful, without remorse. Let us not think
we have the affections of brethren, when we can hear or see the maims and
miseries of Gods people, without laying them to heart. And therefore, as when
the Church of God flourishes and houlds up her head, we must lift up ours,
though otherwise it goes not so well with us in our own private estate and
condition: so, when the Church mournes and hangs down the head, we must cast
down ours, though our own condition be never so good. For, as the peace and
prosperity of Jerusalem should sweeten our private grieuances; so her
afflictions and dangers should sour, and make distastefull to us, all private
comforts whatsoever.

And thus we have seen the qualities and properties of Brethren: which if we
find in our selves, it is no matter for the worlds mocking and scorning at
this Brotherhood: it is our glory.

If we consider Paul, as a Minister, or an Apostle, so tearming them; then we
thence note,

First, his great Humility. For, though many of them to whom he wrote were
poor and mean, 1 Cor. 1.26
and such as labored with their hands, and few of them wise men after the
flesh, or mighty, or noble; and he himself a Minister of the word, yea an
Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.28
and so in the highest degree of the Ministry, and a planter of many Churches:
yet he makes himself equal to them of the lower sort, in calling them
Brethren; Romans 12
which is a word of equality.

Secondly, his great Mildeness and gentleness of spirit, in that he does thus
gently exhort them, when he had authority to command; and insinuates himself
into them by such a co^pellation, the better to provoke them to do that they
stood bound to do.

Thirdly, his great Affection and Love, in using such a kind and loving term:
whereby he showed, that he did dearly and tenderly affect them in the Lord; and
respect them as those who were conjoined with him by the bond of one truth, one
faith, and one hope of salvation.

From the first we infer; Doct. 1 Ministers must be humble. Luke 21.25.26
Ministers ought to behave themselves humbly in their places and callings.

The Kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise
authority upon them are called Benefactours: But you shall not be so: but he
that is greatest amongst you, let him be as the youngest; and he that is chief,
as though he did serve. The meaning of our Savior in which words, is, not to
take away order, but to take away arrogance and ambition. Saint Peter gives
the like precept: 1 Pet. 5.2.3
Feed the flock of God which is amongst you, etc; neither as being lords over
Gods heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.

Use.
How then does that same Antichristian spirit, usurping authority with tyrannous
usage of Gods people, sort with the Apostles precept and practice? And that not
only of that Arch-prelate of Rome, 1 These. 2.4
who, under that title of Servant of the servants of God, aduanceth himself
above all that is called God: but also of others who are puffed up for their
place and gifts, 3 John 9.10
and with Diotrephes love to have the pre-eminence; and will neither receive
John nor his Brethren. Paul an Apostle equalles himself with them of the lower
sort. But now behold a change. Ordinary pastors and they of the lower sort do
not only equal themselves with, but even advance themselves above Apostles;
taking more upon them than ever they did. Plinius gives this report of
Vespasian; C. Plinius. Epis. ad Vespas. Nec quicquam in te mutauit fortunae
amplitudo, nisi vt prodesse tantundem posses and v lles.
That greatness and majesty changed nothing in him but this, that his power to
do good should be answerable to his will. And I would this also might be
truly said of such, who, either in respect of office in the Church, degrees in
School, riches in the world, or any suchlike outward prerogative, are
advanced above their Brethren. Sure I am, if God advance Hester, Hest. 4.14
Doct. 2 Courteous (...) to be used rather than (...).
it is that she may be a means to relieve the Distressed of the Church of Cod.

Secondly, we learn, that Courteous and gentle means are rather to be used by
Gods Ministers, than rigor or severity to persuade men to obedience.

The servants of the Lord must not strive, 2 Timothy 2.24.25
but be gentle toward all men, in meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, says Paul to Timothy. And you shall find him the same in practice
that he was in doctrine, usually coming to his hearers with I beseech you
Brethren by the mercies of God: Romans 12.1 2 Cor. 10.1 2 Cor. 5.20. and 6.1
I Paul my self beseech you, by the meekness and gentleness of Christ. We
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you
in Christ's stead that you be reconciled to God. How sweetly does he practice
his own precept? And so Saint Peter, Dearly beloved, I beseech you as
Pilgrims and Strangers, 1 Pet 2.11. 2 John 5
abstain from fleshly lusts, etc. And thus Saint John, I now beseech thee
Lady: So that we see what meekness and mildness we ought to use; exhorting
and entreating, even then when we may lawfully command. And no marvel, when God
himself herein goes before us in his own example, Oh that Israel would have
hearkened; Psalm. 81 13 Mat. 23.
And our Savior Christ inuiting the Israelites in the same manner unto
himself, that the Hen does her chickens.

Let this serve then for our Imitation and Instruction, Use 1.
that we endeavor to win our people with gentleness and love. And surely when
ministers speak thus to sinful men; I beseech you by the mercies of God, I
beseech thee my Brother, leave thy whoredom, forsake thy drunkenness, etc. If
the heart be not sealed up with hardness, it must needs pearce it. We see
how in things of this life, men are feign to sue for that which is their own,
and are heart-glad if by fair entreaties they can gather up their debts. If
then we can by earnest exhortations and effectual persuasions get at our
peoples hands this debt of obedience which they owe to God, let it never grieve
us that we come with Brethren, I beseech you.

Cauca^s.
And yet withal great wisdom and circumspection must be used in this manner of
proceeding: for, we must beware, that we so lay down our authority, as that
the word lose not any; but abide still a word of power to command. To this
purpose these rules are to be observed:

First, so exhort and persuade, as that the very consciences of men that hear
thee may conclude, that even there where thou intreatest thou have power to
command, although in love thou laiest down that power for the present. So the
Apostle to Philemon: Phil. 8.9
Wherefore though I might be much bold in Christ to enioyn thee that which is
convenient, yet for loves sake I rather beseech thee, etc.

Secondly, so to exercise lenity, as that thou forget not severity when the
case requires it. Compassion must be had on some, Iud. 23
but not on all: some must with fear be pulled out of the fire. When sin waxes
bold, then must Gods Ministers put on bouldnes; as Moses did when the calfe
stood before him. When the Ministry is like to be brought into contempt, then
must power and authority be put on. 1 Kings 19.13
Sometimes must Gods Minister deliver the word as it were in a soft and still
voice; and otherwhiles he must change his note, and lift up his voice like a
trumpet, and show them their sins. Paul, Esaias 58.1 2 Cor. 10.2.8 Acts
13.10.11 1 Timothy 1.10
as occasion serves, can stand upon his Apostleship and authority: he can
censure Elymas: he can deliver unto Satan, as well as entreat and beseech.

Thirdly, Doct. The Minister ought tenderly to affect his people. 2 Cor. 6.11
in that the Apostle calls them Brethren; observe with what tenderness of
affection a Minister should be devoted to his people.

O Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is made large, says this
our Apostle to this people to whom he now wrote. And, Phil. 1.8
writing to the Philippians, he does vehemently protest his sincere and fervent
love toward them. God is my record, says he, how greatly I long after you
all, Romans 1.11
in the bowelles of Jesus Christ. Such was his love also to the Romans: as he
witnesses, when he says, That he longed to see them, that he might bestow
some spiritual gift upon them to strengthen them. 1 These. 2.7
Such was his love also to the Thessalonians: as appears in that he says,
We were gentle amongst you, even as a Nurse cherishes her children; not as a
Nurse mercenary, but as a nursing-Mother, whose affections are most tender. And
a little after he says thus; We exhorted you, Verse 11
and comforted and besought every one of you (as a Father does his children).
And, writing unto Timothy, he charge him, 1 Timothy 4.12.
That he should be an ensample of the believers in word, in conversation, and
in love. Where he notes the Pastors duty, So to love his people, as that they
might learn by him to love one another.

If Ministers should examine what love they Use.
bear unto their people; I fear, many would find a great want of brotherly
affection. How empty are their hearts of this hearty and unfeigned love, who
seek pretenses of long absence from their flocks? whereby the duties of
teaching, and examples of life in their own persons, are neglected. Surely,
this love overthrows ordinary absence, without just and conscionable causes.
Lawful causes of a Ministers absence from his flock.
I deny not, but there may be some occasions, which may, and that lawfully, draw
a Pastor for a time from his people: as, when the public service of the Chur.
shall require it, Alterius Ecclesian e^ssitatibus euocat^^, ^^mime vobis
solitu^ studium depend^^se v^d^or. Amb. Ser. 28.
for the settling and compounding variances and differences, and such like
profitable imploiments. Thus, when the necessity of other Churches calls for
help at a Pastors hands, here is a good occasion of absence. And upon this
ground, Ambrose excuses himself unto his flock. And secondly, when a Pastor
personally is sought for, and cannot remain amongst his flock without peril of
his life: if the persecution be not public, both of the people and Minister,
but only personal of the Minister alone; here is then good cause of his
absence. So Athanasius did leave the Church of Alexandria, and hid himself
for the space of six years in a dry cisterne, Quis a^^hi mira ^^^ter and
diuinitus ^r^pto vt tio v^rtat, quod non ^t mana^ me quaere^t^n r^cc^^m. Tripa.
hist. l. 6. c 22.
and 4 months in his Fathers Tomb, and made this Apology for himself; Who can
blame me, being miraculously delivered, that I did not cast myself into their
hands (that is, the Arrians) who sought me? Thirdly, when health of body shall
require discontinuance for a time, Phil 2.25.28
it is lawful. This cause stayed Epaphroditus from the Church of the
Philippians: whom, as soon as he was recovered, Paul sent unto them. Fourthly, a
Minister may upon his necessary private occasions lawfully for a time be
absent: as, in following necessary suits of law for defending of his right,
which requires his personal attenda^ce; or in attending some Courts of Justice
whither he is cited, and the like: here are just and lawful causes. And yet in
these cases, Aug. Ep. 188
Augustines rule must be observed: There must be a care had, that the Church
be not left destitute; but the Pastors absence be by others for that time
supplied, and that by such as are sufficient to guide their people: making no
such bad choice of their Curates, 1 Kings 11.31.
as Jeroboam did of his Priests; of the lowest of the people, who were not
Levites, that is, not instructed in the Law of God; but of such as are
painful, faithful, and able to instruct. So, Moses, Exodus 24.14
going up to the Mount, left Aaron and Hur his Deputies. And thus Paul sent
Timotheus to Thessalonica, 1 These. 3.2
to stablish and comfort them touching their faith; and left Titus at Creta,
Tit. 1.5
to redress the things that remain. Yea, if he be sincerely affected to his
people, when the necessity is served, he will have a desire to return and
visit his flock; Romans 1.11 (...).
and he will say with S. Paul, I long to see you. He will have such a desire
after them as is impatient of delays (for so the word signifies which Paul
uses); and will not be long detained, after once he can get to be released:
but plaieth as the old-beaten Hare; Ionga cursitatione def^^lus, cubilibus suis
emori. Esponc. lib. 3. digress. ad 1. Tim. cap. 22.
being weary of long chasing abroad, returns home, and dies in his own
borrough. I could wish then that such as are negligent, would themselves rather
seriously consider this, then give others cause to complain: for certainly
want of love to the flock is the cause of wilful absence from the flock.
Omnis negligenter pascens toties sibi co^mendatum dominicum gregem, co^umcitur
summum non amare pastorem. Damas. epist. 4.
And he who loves not the flock, loves not him whose flock it is: and
therefore our Savior says to Peter, If thou love me feed my sheep.
Whereupon (says one) every one negligently feeding the Lords flock, so often
commended unto him, is found not to love the chief shepherd CHRIST JESUS.

Ob.
But though we feed not commonly by our selves, yet continually by our
substitutes.

R^s.
If the former occasions cause thy absence, this is good; as before I have
showed: If not, it is no excuse, unless thou could love Christ by a deputy
and substitute. It was a saying of one Iodocus, sometimes a famous preacher
within the Realm of France, which he did often inculcate in his Sermons (
Vspence. Adibunt per vicarios parad^sum; in persona ins^^os.
as one that often heard it does report.) That such as feed their sheep by
Vicars (themselves being negligent and idle) shall go into heaven by their
Vicars, but into hell in their own persons: he spoke pleasantly yet uttered
the truth. But to conclude this use, Aaron was commanded to bear the names of
the children of Israel upon his shoulders, Exo. 28.12.19
and upon his heart, for a memorial before the Lord continually. To remember
Ministers, says Bishop Babington (of respective memory) upon the place, How
dear unto them the flock committed to their charge should be, even graven as
it were in their breasts, and ever in their minds to profit them, by all
possible means they may, that they may be saved. Look then we do so: for if
we have no shoulder nor bosom for them, Christ that great Shepherd of the
sheep will find no mansion for us.

A second use of this point may be for people: let them learn to be persuaded
of the love and good affection of their Pastors toward them; and answer it
again with like love and good affection. It is a policy of the devil, to
drive men out of conceit with their Minister, and cause them to suspect his
love and affection toward them: and all for this end, that they may less
profit by his pains. For well does this enemy of mankind know, that where
there is no affection to the person, there will be no regard of the preaching;
where there is no liking to the man, there will follow a loathing of his
Ministry. For the mind being forestalled with this conceit, The Minister
loves us not, makes us misdeeme all things whatsoever are spoken, to suit with
the malicious Fountain from whence prejudice supposes them to proceed (as
when the palate is annoied with some bitter humor, all things seem bitter to
the taste) and hereby is the effect of the word much hindered. We see this in
the example of Ahab toward Eliah and Micaiah whom he hated; and professes his
enmity toward them, 1 Kings 21.19 20. and 22.7.8.
and therefore despised the word that came from their mouths. And without doubt
here is a main reason why men profit not by the teaching of the word as they
ought and might, Because they acknowledge not the love of their Teachers, and
their tender affection over them for their good: especially when they tax and
reprove them for their sins, then they think he loves them not, nor cares
for them, but speaks out of malice and spleen, and so they hinder their
profiting by his teaching. 1. These. 5.12, 13.
But, I beseech you brethren to know them which labor amongst you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them very highly in love
for their works sake. We have done now with the Compellation: the Valediction
follows.

Text.
Farewell. It has been an ancient custom, both amongst the Jews and
Grecians, to begin and end Letters and Epistles with Salutations and Greetings;
and therein they did wish, to their friends, that which they counted the
chiefest good. And hence the Heathen, as they were opinionated about the chief
Good, so they did indifferently wish good things to their friends in their
salutations. The Philosophers wished prosperity: the Physicians health: The
Common People Joy: The Jews wished peace: The Romans safety: And our Apostle
here, Doct. Common forms of salutation both by word of mouth and writing are
commendable.
welfare; under which he comprehends all blessings belonging to this life, or a
better. From hence we learn, Common forms of Salutation and Greeting (both by
word of mouth, and writing) are commendable, and are both ancient and
Apostolical.

A precept for this duty we have given us by our Savior: When you come into
an house salute it. Mat. 10.11
And again, Into whatsoever house you enter, first say, Luke 10.5 Ruth 2.4
Peace be to this house. A pattern we have in Boaz: who, coming among his
reapers, said unto them, The Lord be with you: and they answered him, The Lord
bless thee (Yea, the Angels themselves have used forms of salutations). And in
the Angel that came to Gedeon, who saluted him thus; Iud. 6.12
The Lord be with thee, thou valiant man: And in the Angel Gabriel, who came
unto the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.28
and said unto her, Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee.
The Psalmographer insinuates the commonness of this Christian duty among Gods
people, when he says, They that go by, Psalm. 129.8
say not so much as The Lord prosper you. And we shall find the Apostle Paul
to be very precise in the observing of this point in all his Epistles; who
oftentimes sets down the greetings and salutations of others as well as his
own. Romans 16.4-17
The whole sixteenth chapter to the Romans, in a manner, he spends in this
kind.

But when the Prophet Elisha sent his servant Gehazi to the Shunamites house,
he charged him, Ob. 2 Kings 4.29.
if he met any man, Salute him not; and, Luke 10.4
if any man saluted him, not to answer him again. The same charge did our
Savior give to his Disciples, when he sent them out to preach: Salute, says
he, no man by the way.

The intent and meaning of the Prophet and of our Savior in those places, R^sp.
is not simply and absolutely to forbid greeting and salutation; but only to
enjoin an omission of the practice of those duties of common courtesy and
ciuility, so far forth as they are a hinderance of the performance of
waightier affairs, and other far more necessary duties. This then is their
meaning: Rather then you should any way hinder the quick dispatch of the
business laid upon you, speak to no man that you meet withal by the way. So
then this makes nothing against this truth. Now for the use.



Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, Phil. 4.8
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, says the Apostle (of which
nature, as we have seen, this is) think on these things to do them. And let
no man say, These are small and slender matters to be spoken of, and stood
upon: for, it is a duty we are all bound unto; and our obedience is to be
showed as well in the least as in the greatest matters. And therefore let every
Christian make conscience of it, and of the manner of performing it; and let
him look,

First, to the Form of salutation, Salutations must be first Holy.

Doct. Boys post.


that it be first holy, and not idle, profane, and unsavory, as the
salutations of swearers, swaggerers, and rude ruffians for the most part are:
not, a pox in stead of peace; nor, The devil take you, for The Lord be with
you; not swearing to stead of praying. But our Salutations are to be holy,
heavenly; wherein we are to crave the greatest blessings that are at at the
hands of God, and beg the chiefest good for the persons we salute.

Secondly, hearty; and therefore not hollow, Hearty.
nor formal and customary. Some there are that speak friendly to their
neighbors, but imagine mischief in their hearts: as we see in Ioab, 2 Samuel 3.27.
who cloaked his inward malice with sweet and sugared salutations, and most
treacherously murdered valiant Abner, even in the act of saluting him. The like
was his dealing with Amasa: for, Cap. 20.9
while he said unto him, Art thou in health, my Brother, and took him by the
beard with the right hand to kiss him; with the other hand he smote him with
the sword, and shed out his bowels to the ground. And so Judas can come with
Hail Master, Mat. 26.49
as well as Gabriel with Hail Mary. Many such we have, whom a man would judge
to be the flower of courtesy, and to have all complements of humanity in them:
and yet notwithstanding all is but a mask and vizard to color their
hypocrisy. Others there are, who (according to the worlds fashion) rest
themselves only in a company of idle ceremonies, and childish complements;
ducking and embracing, and the like: wherein consists all the grace of their
greetings. It is well and truly said by one, that A handful of old friendship
is worth an arm full of this new courtesy: for, that which is the pith and
marrow of Christian salutation, viz. the lifting up of the heart in desiring
the welfare of those that we salute, is grown out of fashion. But let us
renew it, and not content our selves in using good and holy forms, as God be
with you, God save you, The Lord bless you, or the like; unless we use them in
a holy manner, feeling our hearts affected with reverence toward God, and
enlarged in love toward our Brethren; still remembering, Salutations are
prayers to God: and therefore our hearts must be lifted up unto him, and his
Name on whom we call must with all reverence be thought upon. For, if we
only speak of custom, not minding what we say, we take Gods holy Name in
vain; Exodus 20.7
for which he will not hold us guiltless. Such a fault this is, as ought to
be matter of humiliation unto all; yea, to the very best.

Reprehension of such as neglect this either in whole or part, through
wilfulness or weakness. Some there are, who are so strongly possessed, and
rankly ouer-growne with malice and revenge, that they will neither salute such
as they meet, nor answer such as salute them. These are possessed with a dumb
devil, which had need to be cast out by fasting and by prayer.

Others there are, and they of the better sort, who take occasion to neglect
this duty, because they are prayers; and therefore think it unlawful to
salute passengers ordinarily with God be with you, or The Lord bless you. For,
say they, we know not who they are we meet withal, neither know we whither
they go, or about what: or if we do, yet suddenly so to say, is a taking of
Gods Name in vain; and so a sin most fearful. To answer these; thus much: 1
Cor. 13.5
Charity bids us to think and hope the best in matters of uncertainty. But
admit that he thou meetest with be an unbeliever, and an alien from the
commonwealth of Israel, yet greetings and common salutations are due to such.
Our Savior, as we heard before, commanded his Disciples whenever they
entered into any house, they should salute the same; Mat. 10.12
and gave them a form of salutation, which they must use whether the Son of
peace were there or no; saying, Peace be to this house. Luke 10.5
And if the Son of peace be in the house, your peace shall com upon it, says
our Savior; if not, your peace shall return upon you. So then, we see there
is no hurt done whomsoever we salute. If they be the children of GOD whom we
salute, then we do good unto them; if not, we do good unto our selves: for,
that good we desire may befall them, shall fall on our own heads.

Ob. 2. John 10.
But Saint John forbids us to salute, or bid God speed, to some; For if we
should bid them God speed, we should be partakers of their evil.

Resp.
Saint John there speaks of dangerous Heretics, who did broach a contrary
doctrine, and teach another Gospel; and therefore, after once or twice
admonition, Titus 3.10.
were to be rejected, according to the Apostles rule. Now such as these we may
not salute; lest we seem to give the least applause and approbation to their
bad proceedings and damnable opinions.

Again, thou know not what intent he has, or where about he goes: What
then? yet, Thy God be with you, will do no harm; much good it may. Do he
intend any wicked action; as to rob, to kill or any such like lewdness? thy
prayer may divert him happily from his purpose: For who can act any wicked
work, so long as God is with him, to direct him by his Spirit? But it can
never further him in his evil.

And lastly, though it be a prayer, yet our hearts may be lifted up to God in
the sudden using of it: For howeuer our devotion is ordinarily more settled,
when we pray for our brethren in the congregation: yet these short ejaculations
by the way, may be profitable to our brethren, and acceptable to God. And
though we do not lift up our hearts in the using of them, yet it does not
follow, that for our failing in the manner, the matter which is good should be
neglected, or left unperformed. Let us still do the one, and amend the other:
and so God will be well pleased, our brethren profited, and our selves
comforted. And so much be spoken for the manner of the Exhortation: The matter
of it follows.

The second Sermon.
BE perfect. Text.
The first thing he exhorts them to, is perfection: And whereas there is a
twofold perfection, the one of parts, the other of degrees; it is the later
that is here meant, and not the former. The point is, Doct. Perfection ought
to be endeavored.
Perfection ought to be endeavored: Our whole course of life should be a
progress unto it. Perfection, in regard of sin to be purged out, In regard
of grace to be increased and strengthened, In regard of our actions and
operations, ought to be hard followed, and striued after. Hebr. 6.1.
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection, Cap. 13.20.21
says the Author to the Hebrews. And again, Now the God of peace, that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Make you perfect in
every good work to do his will. So the Apostle exhorts these Corinthians in
another place of this his Epistle, to perfect holiness in the fear of God. 2.
Cor. 7.1.
And such as his doctrine, such was his practice: Philip. 3.13.14
This one thing I do (says he) forgetting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth unto those things which are before. I press toward the mark,
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 4.8.11.12.
When Christ ascended up on high, he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. For what end? For the
perfecting of the Saints, etc. Till we all come in the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man.

Reason. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. 1. Cor. 9.24.
Christianity, as we know, is compared to a way, and to a race: in which a man
must not stand still, but go onward, if he would come unto the end, and
receive the crown. And Christians are compared unto Children, 1 Cor. 14.20.
and therefore must ever be waxing and increasing in stature; going forward in
knowledge and in wisdom; Luke 2.52.
growing in stature and in favor with God and man, as did our Savior.

Perfectus, that was never Factus? make an end that never yet began. How far
from practicing the Apostles precept is the Drunkeard, the Adulterer, the
Covetous, the Usurer? What perfection aim these at, unless it it be to be
perfect slaves to Satan, or perfect Devils: Perfect vt persecti.
These as yet are perfect imperfect ones. Let all such speedily begin, that
they may continue and end. It is impossible for him to be perfected, who is
still abortiue. Begin betimes, defer no longer, lest Gods end comes before
your beginning. Early holiness (say some) proves ripe corruption: but
certainly, habituated profaneness proves rank damnation; delay is
dangerous. Enter then into the way of piety, and follow it; striving with all
your powers, to grow up to a perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13.
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ,

A second sort to be reproved, are such, as have begun, but go not on;
Dwarfes and Dunses in Religion, always being one, standing at a stay, not
growing at all; notwithstanding the great means God in mercy has afforded
them: Like to Pharaohs seven lean kine, Genesis 41.21.
who devouring up seven fat ones, seemed as lean, and as lanke, and evil
favored as ever they were before. Such as are no wiser at fifty then at
fifteen; oh how we censure it in them! And such Scholars as after many years
teaching profit not, or are no better learned then they were the first day; How
do we condemn? And yet this is the estate of many thousands amongst us: of
whom we may say, as Saint Paul speaks of those silly women laden with
sins, and led away with diverse lusts, 2. Tim. 3.7.
They are ever learning, and never able to come to the saving knowledge of the
truth. They remain in the Schoole-house of Christ; hear Sermon after Sermon;
have lesson after lesson; Esaias 28.10.
precept upon precept; line upon line; here a little, and there a little: yet
never a whit bettered in their knowledge; increased in faith, furthered in
sanctification of life: but, where you left them this year, you shall find
them the next, yea many years after; if not much worse. Much like Fabia in
Quintilian, who for 30 years together would not confess, she was a year older.
The time of their life, and years of their age proceed and hasten unto an end:
yet they endeavor not to make a progress in godliness, they strive not at
perfection, but think they have enough, and made progress sufficient; whereas
all of us should provide, that as the outward man decaieth, so the inward man
should be renewed; and as the body is weakened, so the spirit should be
strengthened. These are like to the Sun in Iosuah's time, that stood still
and moved not.

A third sort to be reproved, are such as have begun well, and held on for a
while, but now recoil like Zarah in Thamars womb; Apostates, backsliders, who
return to their old sins, and start away like a deceitful bow, as if they
never had bin the men: Dan. 2
resembling Nebuchadnezars image, whose head was of gold, and whose feet were
of dirt; beginning gloriously in the spirit, but ending shamefully in the
flesh, as the Apostle speaks of the Galatians. Many there are that have set
out very fresh, like some pamperd jade, which at first is so free that no
ground will hold; but soon after give in and tire. Of how many may it be said,
They have been forward, zealous, careful in the ways of godliness, etc; but
now the world has choked them, the vanity thereof beguiled them, they are not
the men they have been? Alas for such! 2 Pet. 2 22
in as much as they are becomne very dogs and swine. The devil himself can
say he has been good: but what is he the better? nay, he is much the worse.
God will reward us in the present tense, not in the preterperfect tense; as we
are, not as we have been. It were surely better for such, never to have known
the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, 2 Pet. 2.21
thus to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them. These are like
the Sun in He^echiahs ^^e that went backward.
All these come far short of the Apostles precept, Be perfect.

By which rule let us all walk; and resolve, endeavor, contend, and strive for
perfection, as for a prize; adding grace to grace, 2 Pet. 1 Psalm. 84
and growing from As the waters spoken of in Ezechiel grew up by degrees, first
to the ankles, then to the knees, then to the loins, and lastly to the head:
so let us be perficientes, going and growing up; that at the last we may be
perfecti, made perfect men in Christ. Proficiency is comfortable, and a pledge
that the Lord will perfect what he has begun. And, to stir us up unto this
duty, let us consider how natural things do affect, and in their manner long
after, the perfection of themselves. The infant is still growing in the womb,
until it come to a perfection: and so, plants and other living creatures; we
see what little beginnings they have, yet they never cease mounting till they
attain their due perfection. As nature has put this property into such things
as are by her made imperfect, whereby they enlarge themselves, and grow out to
the perfection which does agree unto their kind: so has grace much more this
property, that albeit it has weak and small beginnings; yet if true, it will
grow as a grain of mustard seed, Mat. 1^.31
and increase mightily. It may then justly be feared, that thou have not the
truth of Christianity, who have not a desire and longing after the perfection
of Christianity: and thou that do not aim at the perfection of degrees,
have not in truth the perfection of parts.

As for absolute and Angelical perfection, it is not to be expected in this
world. It was the heresy of Nouatus and Pelagius, Eusebius. l. 6^.42
who boasted of such a purity, and gave the name of Puritans unto themselves.
Our perfection is in part, not wholly; in respect, Imperfecta perfectio. Phil.
3.13.14
not absolute. An imperfect perfection ours is: and this it is; To acknowledge
imperfection, and strive hard toward the mark (which is the thing that now we
press) as the Apostle shows. For the attainment of which, Meant to attain
perfection. Phil. 3.13
these directions may be available: First, learn to forget that which is
behind, and look on that which is before. Think not so much of what thou have
attained, as what remains to be achieved: look not so much on what thou have
done, as on what remains by thee to be done. This is a good course, Often to
consider how far short thou art of that thou should be.

Secondly: Compare thy self with thy superiors, rather than with thy
inferiors, in grace: we often look upon o hers far behind us, and That causes
us to think we need not so bestirre our selves. And hence it is that we seem
to our selves half-Angels, because we are not (as some others) half-diuels.
Such a deceit is this (says one) as that of Drapers, who commend a kersey by
laying it to a rug. Our knowledge is thought superaboundant, because it is more
then what our forefathers had; never considering that our means are more, and
therefore God looks for more from us. And this causes many to sit down, and
rest themselves contented with what they have. And yet in things of this life
men do not thus: for, what man, having a competent estate, will cast his eye
upon a beggar that has nothing; and thereupon conclude, He is rich enough, he
will now give over trading? Rather he will set before him one richer than
himself, to provoke him to greater diligence: And so let us set before our
eyes the most eminent amongst Gods Saints (as, Abraham, Job, David, Moses) yea
God himself; that so our dull flesh may be spurred on, and we caused to
endeavor to be perfect, as he is perfect. Mat. 5.48


Thirdly, be daily conversant in the reading, hearing and meditation of holy
Scriptures: for, they are given by inspiration of God for this end, That the
man of God may be perfect, 2 Timothy 3.16.17
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. What might we come to in Christ, if
we would daily study the Scriptures, and meditate therein continually? for
want of which, we grow so slowly. The neglect of laboring at this oar causes
us to go down the wind and tide.

These means let us use, that we may attain unto perfection. 1 Samuel 6
And as the kine of the Philistines, which drew the Ark of God, though they
were milch and had calves at home; the one to weaken them, the other to
withdraw them: yet, without turning to the right hand or left, they kept on
their way til they came to Bethshemesh: so, having once joined our selves to
the yoke of Christ, and bearing the Ark of his law upon our shoulders in the
way of a virtuous life; though we have many hindrances (worldly allurements,
the devils temptations, and our own sinful prouocations) yet let us keep on
the way of godliness, being not like the old Moon in the wane, but like the new
in her increase; and like the morning light, which grows brighter and brighter
to perfect day: Remembering, that as God is Alpha and Omega, so he will have
his servants to run from Alpha to Omega, from the beginning to the ending in
the constant profession of the faith. Pray therefore for perseverance: and look
to thy self that thou losest not the things which thou have done, but that thou
may receive a full reward. And so we pass from this duty unto the next.

Text.
Be of good comfort. The Apostle well knew with how many discouragements they
were to meet withal (for there is no calling nor duty but has his crosses
attending.) Without; the world, sometimes scoffing at their piety, and laughing
it out of countenance; otherwhiles threatening; otherwhiles vexing; always
laboring to discourage; few to accompany; many to oppose. Within; conscience
of infirmity and imperfection: which is so strong and preualent with many,
that they become weary of well doing, because they are weak in doing. And
therefore the Apostle wills them to comfort their hearts one with another
jointly; and each one severally, that they might be able to withstand in the
evil day, and not make shipwreck of their faith when any boisterous tempest
and storm of temptation did arise. The point that naturally arises out of the
words (to pass by others) is:

Christians ought mutually to comfort one another, Doct. Christians ought
mutually to om ort one another.
and to be comforted one by another. This is the scope of the Apostle and the
sense of the words, as we have seen at the beginning in the Exposition. For
further proof and confirmation, read what is said in the Prophecy of Isaiah.
Comfort ye, Esaias 40.1.2.
comfort ye my people, says the Lord God: speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem.
And in the Prophecy of Zephaniah thus read we: Sing O Daughter of Sion, Zoph.
3.14
shout O Israel be glad and rejoice with all the heart O Daughter of
Jerusalem. Psalm. 32.11
And in the same Psalm which the sweet singer of Israel penned to give
instruction (as the title has it) the righteous are charged with this duty: Be
glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye Righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are
upright in heart: and elsewhere thus; Let Mount Sion rejoice, Psalm. 48.11
and let the daughter of Judah be glad. And in the new Testament our Apostle
does often urge it. 1 These. 4.18 Cap. 5.11 Verse 14
Wherefore comfort ye one another. Wherefore comfort your selves together. We
exhort you Brethren to comfort the feeble minded, support the weak. And in the
same Chapter, Verse 16.
he does enioine a continual reioicing: Rejoice evermore; In all estates,
adverse or prosperous, in whatsoever condition God is pleased to place us in.
Phil. 4.4
So is the precept; Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say rejoice: he
doubles the Mandate, to show the necessity of the duty. And this was the end
of Leuiticall Festiuities. Thus we have seen this point proved: viz.
Christians ought mutually to comfort one another, and to take comfort one of
another.

Reason.
And good reason: For sorrow is a gulf, and swallows up many when comfort is
wanting: as the Apostle shows to these Corinthians, 2 Cor. 2.7
when he requires them to forgive and comfort that excommunicated person. The
devil is subtle: and when any of Gods children are in perplexity, then he
labors to take most advantage against them; as experience makes good.

The uses follow hereupon.

confutation of their sottish opinion, who think no joy nor comfort belongs to
a Christian; and that the life of a man, fearing God, is a dumpish and
melancholy life. And why so? because they cannot take pleasure in vanity, and
laugh and be merry in things sinful. Surely, that which is a carnal man's
greatest mirth is usually the greatest sorrow of a Christian, and makes his
heart to melt for grief. Doct. Hall Decad. 2. Epist. 8
The world is like an ill Fool in a play: the Christian is a judicious
spectatour, who thinks those jests too gross to be laughed at; and therefore
entertaines that with scorn, which others with applause. But have they then no
joy? Yes, matter of great joy. Psalm. 118.15
The voice of reioicing and salvation, is in the Tabernacles of the Righteous.

But who more heavy and vnchearefull, Ob.
more sad and sorrowful? experience shows it: that we see; their joy we see
not. True: R s. Pro. 14.10.
For the stranger shall not enter into his joy, they shall not meddle with it,
nor can they discern it; It being internal, and requires an internal eye, the
eye of Faith to discern it with. And for their sorrow, it cannot be denied
but the Godly are oft-times more sorrowful then they have cause. And yet when
they have cause their joys are an hundred fold more than their sufferings.
Mark 10.^0
And their greatest sorrow is but as a painted sorrow in comparison of the
sorrow of the wicked: and therefore says the Apostle, As sorrowful, yet
always reioicing: 2 Cor. 6.1^
which manner of speech is well observed by one, Ans^l^n loc.
and is worthy to be observed by all. He brings in the sorrow of the Godly
with a quasi, as it were sorrow; not that it is sorrow indeed, but says he,
As sorrowful: but when he speaks of Joy, there is no quasi, but true joy. The
Sorrow of Gods Children then has a quasi, their Joy has none. But now, e
contra, the wicked worldling is most miserable; For his Joy has a quasi, but
his sorrows are without. They are sorrows to good earnest: and therefore they
are bidden to howl and lament, to weep and roar, James 5.1 Florent ad tempus,
pertunt in aeternum: florent falsis bonis, ^ereunt veris tormentis Aug o^ psalm.
5^
for those sorrows that shall come upon them. They flourish and joy for a
time, but they perish and mourn for ever, says a Father: they joy in false
and deceivable good things, and they perish in true and remediless torments.

Secondly, Redargution or Reprehension: first, of Pro. 19.4.7
much less comforted; or if he be, it is very coldly: few words are spoken
whereby his wearied and perplexed spirit may be refreshed. Will you hear the
usual form of comforting? I am sorry, neighbor, to see you thus, say some. I
hope to see it otherwise with you ere long, say others; I should be sorry
else: I have seen others as low brought as you, yet have done well enough. And
here is all. As for deeds, it may be some rich Chuff may send-him-in a pot of
pottage, or a groat; and think he has done a work of supererogation in so
doing. Here is sorry comfort to refresh the bowels of the saints withal in the
day of their distress. Others there are that give gall for meat, and vinegar
to quench thirst; as the Jews, our Savior: adding affliction to them whom the
Lord has wounded, by insolences and exprobrations; as Shemei to David. 2 Samuel
16.13.
Of the same spirit, amongst us we have many; who triumph in the greatest
miseries of their brethren. That misery of miseries, a wounded spirit, many
make it rather matter of exprobration than of compassion: This is the fruit of
your Church-gadding and Sermon-following; or else by questioning sincerity, as
the friends of Job. See, say they, now God has met with him, he is paid home
for his hypocrisy, etc. Of such as these may be truly said. Miserable
comforters are you all.

But let all such miscreants remember and hear their doom which the Prophet
David denounces against them by Prophetical instinct. Psalm. 69.24.26
Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold
upon them: for, they persecute him whom thou have smitten, and they talk to the
grief of those whom thou have wounded. Go on then, thou that art so barbarous
and inhumane: laugh at the Religious: sport thy self with their sorrows: make
thy self merry with their miseries; and count it melody, To see and hear of
the maladies of thy Brethren: Yet know, that light is sown for the righteous,
and joy for the upright in heart. But, as thou have done, Obad 15
so shall it be done to thee: thy reward shall certainly return upon thy own
head. For, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

A second sort that this doctrine meets with, are those who do not fail in
giving, but in not receiving comfort when it is offered. You shall hear these
often effectually comforting others that are in misery, and liberally drawing
out of the wels of consolation for others that are afflicted; yet themselves
will take none. May not the proverb be fitly applied to these? Physician, heal
thy self. They will spend much time in making known their wants, but will not
apply the remedy. No argument can be strong enough to make them cheary; Mat.
2.18
but, as Rachel weeping for her children, they will not be comforted. And why
so? Because they are unworthy of such gracious promises. But do not thou stay
till thou be worthy: take the comfort that is brought, and be thankful. We
would count him mad, that being fallen into some pit, and nigh to drowning,
calling and crying out for help, should yet when help is offered withdraw his
hand because he has done nothing worthy of that love and kindness. Look thou
to those conditions that are required in Gods word, and see thou be capable of
those comforts; and never stand upon thy own desert or merit: for, though it
be too much for thee to have, yet it is not too much for God to give.

Thirdly, Instruction to the performance of this duty. First, mutually one
another; and secondly, every one himself.

Job 6.14.
Man that is in misery should be comforted of his friends, says Job, but that
men have forsaken the fear of the Almighty. You then that have this fear of
God before your eyes, make conscience of this duty: and as you desire to
partake comfort from God, so with-hould it not from the afflicted. It is
reported of the Bees, that when one is sick, Aegrotante vna lamentantur omnes.
Pl^n.
they all mourn: and of the Sheep, that if one of them be faint, the rest of
the flock will stand between it and the Sun, until it be revived. God has
hewn us all out of one rock, tempered all our bodies of one clay, and spirited
our souls of one breath. We are all sons of one Father, members of one body,
and heirs of one Kingdom: in respect of which near linking together, there
should be compassion and sympathy betwixt us. 1 Cor. 12.26
If one member grieve, all suffer with it, says the Apostle. And do we not
see, when a thorn is got into the foot, how the back bows, the eyes pry into
the hurt, the hands are busy to pluck out the cause of the anguish: Even we
are members one of another; 1 Cor. 11.29 Psalm. 41.1.2 2 Timothy 1.16.17
and therefore be it so. So shall God recompense it into thy bosom; and the
souls of the afflicted bless thee.

And for our selves: Let us cheer up our hearts, and not darken the glory of
religion by our uncomfortable walking. If worldlings offend, that they laugh
when they should mourn; we offend no less, if we droop in cause of
cheerfulness. And what estate can we be in, wherein we have not cause of
cheerfulness, if we be the Lords? If both earth and hell should conspire to
afflict and molest thee; yet if thou have God thy Father, Christ thy Savior,
the holy Spirit to be thy comforter, and Heaven for thy mansion: thy sorrow
cannot counteruail the causes of thy joy. Thy losses, crosses, may be great:
but thy joies do far exceed. Mat. 25.21
Enter into thy masters joy, said the Lord unto his servant that was faithful.
Great joy it must be, because our Masters; and because that enters not into us,
but we into it: such, which we cannot comprehend, but are comprehended of it.
Worthily then is it called Joy unspeakable, 1 Pet 1.^
and full of glory. In time of grief then put David's question to thy heart, Why
art thou sad, my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Weigh all
things well in the balance of the Sanctuary; and, I dare say, thou will not
know whether to be more angry with thy self, or more ashamed at the answer.
It may be it is thy body, or thy purse, or thy fame, or thy friends, that
causes that vnchearfulnesse: it may be none of these; only thou art sad
because thou art. But what if these, or more?

D^^. Hall Dec.
Yet, have thou God? If yea, Why then do thou not rejoice? Can thou freeze
in the fire, and starve at a feast? He is the author of all true joy, how
can thou be dumpish? Have thou the conduit of Comfort and yet abid'st in
heauiness? Paul and Silas, they sang in the prison: The Martyrs in the slames:
John Baynam rejoiced, as if he had been in a bed of Roses, when he was at
stake. No doubt, these were sensible of the pain: but the sweetness of that joy,
which they had arising from the fruition of God and his favor, overcame the
feeling of their present torments.

Suffer not then thy self so to be vanquished or dismayed by any grieuance
whatsoever, as that thou should not be able cheerfully to serve the Lord.
And so I come to the next thing the Apostl^ exho^ts unto; and that is Unanimity.

Be of one mind. In which words, Te^^
the contentions and dissensions that were amongst them are noted out; and they
exhorted to unanimity and consent in matters of faith and doctrine. The note
is: Such as profess one and the same faith, (...) should (...) doctrine.
should mind and affect the same things.

In the beginning of the former Epistle which he wrote to the Corinthians as
well as in the later end of this, we shall find the Apostle commending this
duty to them; thinking it to be so necessary, that both in the beginning and
in the end, and at all times, they were to be put in mind of it. Now I beseech
you, 1 Cor. ^ 1^.
Brethren (says he) by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak
the same things and that there be no divisions amongst you; but, that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

And in his epistle to the Romans, the last chapter save one, he makes a most
earnest prayer to God, that this might be found among them; saying, Romans ^5.5
Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be alike-minded one
toward another, according to Jesus Christ; that you may with one mind, and
with one mouth, glorify God. Phil 2.1.^
And writing to the Philippians, he does deeply charge them (yea, strongly
adjure them) that If there were any consolation in Christ, any comfort of love,
any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies; fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of
one mind. Were not this a duty of great importance, surely the Apostle would
never be so earnest in the urging of it; beseeching, praying, yea adjuring us
to the practice of it. And no wonder.

For a great advantage is given to the enemy by dissension: It is a military
principle, Tempt not an enemy by giving him the advantage. We give them
opportunity to shuffle-in their counterfeit coin, whiles we consent not in our
gold: (And yet alas the difference amongst us is not so much about the weight
or pureness of substance, as about the fashion. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
) And this, Eusebius observes, was the policy of the subtle serpent, when
persecutions gave the Church breathing space, Evermore to begin to vex her
with her own divisions.

Rebecca, troubled in her womb with the striuings of two children of contrary
dispositions: which has caused her to complain, Why am I thus. Genesis 25.22.
Ephraim is against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim. Woe to such
unnatural brethren who pity no more the pains of their mother. Surely the
Authors and Fautors of her division have much to answer for before the Lord.
For the sin is so great, if we believe Chrysostom (especially authority
being resisted) that it cannot be expiated by Martyrdom.

Let it therefore admonish and exhort as many Sion, to be knit together in one
mind and one judgment in the Lord. Read how many unities the Apostle puts us
in mind of, that we might be the better won to this unity: Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
There is one Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God and Father of all. Indeed, if we served diverse Lords and Masters, there
might sometimes naked swords be seen: but now contentions must needs be odious.

Again consider, Is it not a shame for the children of God to dissent, when
the children of hell are at peace? The devils in hell are not divided: and it
is necessary for them to hearken one unto another (says a Father) and to have
unity in their distraction, lest they ruin their own kingdom. Expedit ipsis
daemon^bus ^ba^^^ libi (...) in Schisma^. (...) Mat A^^ 29.
For a kingdom, nay that very kingdom being divided against it self could
never stand. Thirdly, consider the effects that follow hereupon. The division
of tongues, as we read in holy writ, hindered the building up of Babell: and it
cannot otherwise be but the division of hearts must needs hinde^ (...) ^ding
of our Jerusalem: Gods Sabbot^ (...) ^eglected: the Word, the Gospel of C^^^^
Jesus, cannot have that free passage, that it otherwise could and would have,
were it not for our own homebred broils. Some will hear none but refusers of
conformity: others take advantage of their disobedience, to contemn their
Ministry: both ways, the kingdom of Christ is hindered. It gives likewise
matter of encouragement unto our enemies. How comes it to pass (say Papists
to us) you have so many sects amongst you? What mean the terms of
Zuinglians, Lutherans, Caluinists? How is it that some are Brownists, some
Baraists, some Puritans, some Protestants? How happens it, that touching
Ceremonies and Discipline (Blessed be God, they can tax us in no other) there
is such disagreement? Strom l. 7. Quia Omnia secta christianismi titulum sibi
vend^cat, tamen alia altam exceratur and condemnat.
Clemens Alexandrinus brings in the Heathen, exprobrating our religion for
untrue, unwarrantable; upon this very ground.

Thus it gives advantage to our enemies to scorn us; yea, and more, to
scourge us. Ask the reason why the wild Boar has spoiled the vineyard; why
the Iim and Zijm, filthy and unclean birds, roost themselves within our
sanctified Dominions. The answer must be, Israel is not true to Judah: the
renting of the ten Tribes from the two, has made both the ten and the two,
miserable: Scilurus his arrows, taken singly out of the sheaf, are broken with
the least finger: the whole bundle vnseuered fears no stresse. By dispersing
our forces we have weakened our selves: and thus we have found the Politicians
rule to be but too true; Make division, and get dominion. Diui^^ (...) imp^ra.
amicorum dispendia hostiu^ compendia.
Dissensions have been, and are, a Lent to our friends, a Christmas to our
foes; gain to the one, and loss unto the other. To draw now to a conclusion of
this point: Let it be enough (yea, and more than enough) that our falling out
has been a grief and heart-smart to our mother: let us proceed no further,
lest we all smart for it in the end. So shall the peace of our Jerusalem break
forth as the light; and the salvation thereof, like the morning-Sun. Let us be
guided by that one rule which God has prescribed in his word; and not decline
from that, either to the right hand or to the left. In such things as are not
revealed, let us awhile suspend our judgments; and wait GOD's good pleasure
for the revelation of them: and, Text. Prius pertinet ad opinionum consensum:
vt s^^l^cet idem de s^de and dogmatibus ips^^ sentiamu^. Alcerum est mutua se
charitate and amorum coniunctione complecti. Call. in loc.
to those things that are revealed, let us hold fast. And this is the way to
have the joy of our Sion full.

Live in peace. As the former precept had respect to matters Ecclesiastical;
so this, to things civil: whether Political, as between neighbor and
neighbor, superior and inferior; or Oeconomicall, which is to be practiced
in the private family between the husband and the wife, the parent and the
child, the master and the servant, etc. The observation is this: Doct.
Christians are to live peaceably one with another.


Christians are to lead a peaceable and a quiet life one with another. All
discord and contention is to be avoided, even in civil and external things:
and peace and quietness is to be followed.

Doct. Hall Romans irrecon sect. 2
There is nothing (says a Worthy of our times) which the Angels did more gladly
congratulate unto men, or which Christ did more carefully bequeath, or the
Apostles more earnestly enjoin, than this practice of peace. How often, and how
vehemently, does the Spirit entreat and command us to have peace, and to
embrace it? We are commanded to love and affect it: Zach. 8.19
Love the truth, and peace. Neither is it sufficient to love, but we are
enjoined to seek it: Psalm. 34 14
Depart from evil and do good, seek peace and ensue it. Neither is this
sufficient to seek it, but we must also have it: Have salt in your selves,
Mark. 9.50
and have peace one with another. But what if peace will not be had? what then?
S. James then charge us to make peace by our endeauours, James 3.18
by our patience. The fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make
peace. But, if in case it be once made and had, what if it will not stay nor
abide with us? Rom 14.19
Then, says S. Paul, Follow after the things which make for peace. And what if
it will needs away, and hide it self? what is then to be done? S. Peter wills
us in this case to follow peace, 1 Pet. 3.11
and inquire after it. And how if we know not where to find it, or how to
follow it? Then must we take the Apostles counsel, 1. These. 4.11 Reason. Col
3.15.
and study for it.

That Reason may be given (amongst many others that might be rendered) for this
truth, which the Apostle makes: You are called to it in one body. Where, the
reason of it is double: first, from their vocation, They were called to it; and
that not only by men, who by their laws require peace, but especially by God:
And that not only in those general precepts of the word before quoted and the
like, where this duty is urged; but in special manner in the word of
reconciliation: That word that conuerts us, which is called The Gospel of
peace, which makes lambs of lions, as the Prophet shows when he speaks of the
fruits of the Gospel in the Kingdom of Christ. The wolf, says he, Isay 11.6
shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie with the kid, and the
calf and the lion, and the fat beast together: and a little child shall bind
them. The meaning is, that in the Kingdom of Christ the Gospel should make
the most mighty, fierce and cruel, who were as lions and wolves, and such
like; to put off their woluish and lion-like nature, and become gentle, mild
and peaceable.

The second reason that he gives, Reason 2
is from their mutual relation.

In one body. They were members of one body. And as it is unnatural and
unseemly, To see a man to rend and tear his own flesh: so is it most
unnatural and unseemly for Christians, To bite and devour the one the other,
by jarring, wrangling, or complaining.

The enemies unto peace are here to be reproved: Such as those of whom David
complains; Use. Psalm. 120.5.6.7
Woe is we that I soiourn in Mesech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar. My soul
has long dwelt with him that hates peace. I am for peace: but, when I speak,
they are for war. They are never well but when they are in brabblings,
contentions, and suits of law: if they be out of these, they are out of their
own element; as a fish out of the water. You shall hear little else come from
between their lips but Law, Law, Justice, Justice; and that for matters of no
moment, for the value of a groat; nay less, for very nothing. And when there is
difference between them and any other, how hardly are they drawn to peace, or
any good agreement? A Bear is with far more ease drawn unto the stake, than
they to that. The like failings may be found in private families between the
husband and wife, parent and child, master and servant; to the dishonor of
God, discomfort of themselves, and ruin of the whole house.

Hence it is that there is so much complaining of the married estate: for,
scarce more use it, than do accuse it. And how so? They themselves make bitter
sauce, and then cry out of the meat: they live not in that estate according to
Gods direction, but after their own lusts; From whence, James 4 1
as Saint James shows, proceed wars and contentions. The house is full of
brawles and chidings: discord drives the blessing out of doors. The Son of
peace is not there: Luke ^0.6
peace does not rest there. No wonder then if they complain.

Use 2.
To the practice of peace let us be all exhorted. Would to God we could once
frame our selves to live in it; and those unquiet spirits amongst us would once
turn themselves to more amiable courses. But let all such as look for peace
from the God of peace, take up David's Motto in sincerity of heart: I am for
peace. Let us long after peace, Psalm. 120.7
and endeavor it; seek peace, and pursue it. Vices follow us: virtues slay
from us. As we must run apace from vice, lest it overtake us: so we must
run as fast after peace and other virtues, that we may overtake them. Does
thy adversary offer thee peace? Then peace follows thee: see thou embrace it.
Does he not offer it? Then do thou knock at the gate of peace, desire to speak
with it: In so doing thou shall show thy self to be a child of peace.

But why should I be so base as to yield to him? Ob.
he did the wrong, let him seek peace.

Nay: R s. Ephesians. 4.26.27
why should thou be so base as to yield unto the devil? For, whosoever
gives place to wrath, gives place unto the devil. He offered the wrong, and
yet seeks not peace: it is his weakness and folly. Do thou seek an end, and
pursue peace: it will be thy wisdom and glory.

There was sometimes a variance betwixt two famous Philosophers; Aristippus and
Aeschines. Aristippus comes to Aeschines, and seeks for peace. Aeschines gladly
entertaineth such a motion. Well, says Aristippus, remember though I am your
elder, yet I sought the peace. True, said Aeschines; and for this I will ever
acknowledge you to be the worthier man. For, I began the strife; but you the
peace.

He that began the quarrel is the worst; and he that procures Peace, the
worthiest.

Motives to peace
Sundry are the reasons or motives which scripture uses to press the endeavor
of this duty. It would be too long to number all: these are some.

1
First, our calling is in and unto peace, as we before noted and now again will
touch: 1. Cor. 7.15.
God is a God of peace; Christ is the Prince of peace; the Gospel is the
Gospel of peace; the Godly are children of peace. We have one Shepherd and
are of one sheepfold, live in one Church which is the house of God, feed at one
table; strong bonds all to bind us to the peace. How foul a thing then is it
to see discord amongst such as are knit together with so strong a tie? The
Creatures in the Ark (as we know) agreed together, though of a fierce cruel
and devouring nature. A great shame then will it be to us, that live in the
Arc of Gods Church, if we agree not: It is for dogs and swine to bark and
grunt one at another, and not for Sheep and Lambs; all the world would
wonder, to see them bite and tear their fellows. If then we profess our
selves to be members of this Church, sheep of this fold whereof Christ is
Shepherd, let us live in love: for how can we, with any comfort, look him in
the face, when we so far differ from the nature and properties of his sheep,
in eating up and devouring of our brethren?

2. Motive.
Again, it is good and pleasant, says the Prophet David, Ps. 132.1.
for brethren to dwell together in unity and peace. And no wonder, H^^ar. cit.
^^a call. de vera pac.
for the very name of peace is beautiful and lovely (says an ancient) and
therefore the practice of it must exceed. There are some things good which are
not pleasant, as Patience and tolerance of evils: Some things pleasant but not
good, as Epicurisme and voluptuous living: Some things neither good nor
pleasant, as Malice, Envy. But of Peace and Concord (says the Prophet) as we
see, it is both good and pleasant: In it, and the practice of it, both these
are met.

Thirdly, where strife is there is confusion, 3. Motive. James 3.16
and every evil work, says Saint James, 1. Confusion, For the breaking of
Relatiues, is the ruin of Substantives: we stand not of our selves, but upon
reference. Liuius Decad. 1. lib. 2.
I have read of a fitting story for this our purpose, and this it is. It
sometimes fell out that there was a great variance between the Nobles and
Commons of Rome, insomuch that the people banded themselves together, to the
great indangering of the Commonwealth. The Senate sent unto the people, one
Menenius Agrippa, a famous Orator, to persuade them; and he tells them this
parable. On a time, the members of the body objected against the stomach, that
it devoured all, and took no pains, but idly and sluggishly lay in the midst
of the body, while the rest of the members labored full sore: Hereupon the eye
would not see for it, nor the hand work for it, nor the foot walk for it, nor
the mouth ask for it, nor the teeth chew for it; but every member refused any
more to do it office. And what followed hereupon? The stomach wanting meat,
and being empty, the eye began to be dim, the hand weak, the seet feeble;
all the members began to be weak, and the whole body to wither: in so much
that at last they were of necessity compelled to grow friends, and be at
agreement with it. By which parable he quieted the people, and brought them to
concord with the Senate. Thus, if the magistrates be unjust, people
contentious, if one profession or society quarrel with another, and deny
mutual performance of their duties each to other; the whole body of that
house, city, society, must needs dissolve. When the husband and the wife draw
not euenly in the yoke: when one brings fire, and the other has no water to
quench it: when children are refractory; servants wasters, and the like: there
must needs be a decay of this family. Thus then we see, Where strife is, there
is confusion. And yet S. James goes further, and adds, every evil work: and
that most truly. For, where strife is, and peace wanting, the Lord sees, and
men may evidently perceive, that there are evil thoughts, evil words, and evil
practices of all kinds. Where sin and satan bear sway, it cannot otherwise
be, but such places must be filled with all manner of pollutions. Let the
consideration of these things so far preuail with us, as that we may be more
in love with this grace which is much set by of the Lord, and avoid strife
which Gods abhorres.

But how may a man become thus peaceable and quiet? Quest.
And what must be done for the attainement of this grace?

First, Resp.
remove all those things which are enemies to peace: and they are either Inward
or Outward. Inward, as thy lusts; which is the fountain of all thy
disco^tentments, as S. James verefieth. James 4.1
Of which there are three principal. The one is Envy; Verse 2.
of which S. James makes mention in the place before quoted: and this is a
great enemy to peace, and a disquieter of it. It was envy which wrought that
unquietness between Joseph and his brethren: for, the Patriarchs, moved with
envy, Genesis 37.4 Acts 7.9
sold Joseph into Egypt. Envy wrought all that unquietness between David and
Saul: for, 1 Samuel 18.8
when once David was in credit above him, he had few quiet days after. And
what is it but Envy, which breeds most of our factions in societies,
opposition in sectaries, emulation in equals, and molestation to superiors? And
who sees not, what a hand Envy has in most suits and debates, which are in our
Courts of Justice daily pleaded? No marvel therefore Saint James, and Saint
Paul, James 3.14 Romans 13.13
elsewhere joyneth them together: for indeed they are seldom separated. If
thou would follow peace, withstand that.

A second is Pride; by which, says Solomon, Pro. 13.10
men make contention: and therefore these two also are well yoaked together as
twins, Phil 2.3
by our Apostle writing to the Philippians, Cap. 2.3. This is that which makes
men now-adaies so prove to offer wrongs, and so unwilling to put up wrongs
being offered. In all ages it has been manifested, that where pride is deepest,
there patience has been shallowest: and they that ouerflow with the one, have
been void and empty of the other. And in another place Solomon has this
Proverb; Pro. ^8 ^5
He that is of a proud spirit stirs up strife. By both which proverbs we
see clearly, that there is no greater instigator to unquietness, then pride and
vainglory is. If therefore we would not vex our selves and others with brawls
and needless contentions, let us purge our hearts of this turbulent humor;
which makes men so stout in their conversation, contentious in provocation,
injurious in action, full of molestation, and far from pacification.

A third lust, which is an enemy to peace, is curiosity or a busie-meddling in
things that concern us not: and therefore the Apostle joyneth these two
likewise; 1 These. 4.11
Study to be quiet, and do your own business. And this was a main cause of
that unquietness which was among the Thessalonians, 2 These 3.11
which walked disorderly (or unquietly) working not at all, but were
busybodies: they loved to have an oar in every man's boat; as our saucy
inter-meddlers do, who love to be meddling where they have little cause, and
less thanks. This was censured as the chief cause of the Emperor Antonius his
troublesome reign, That he was full of curiosity, prying into the estates and
conditions of other men. And who sees not, that busy prying eyes have
troublesome hands and unquiet hearts?

Desire thou peace? would thou practice quietness? then beware of busy
curiosity. It was that which our Savior reproved in Peter, when he enquired of
Christ what John should do. John 21 21 22
What is that to thee, says our Savior? follow thou me. If things be thus or
thus ordered in Church or commonwealth by the wisdom of thy governors, what
is that to thee? follow thou Christ by walking conscionably in thy own
calling. There are necessary duties ^now in that, which require the imploiment
of the whole man. Tantumne abs re tua est tibi, aliena vt cu^^s?
There is work enough at home: why do thou busy thee abroad? These, among
many others, are some inward causes of unquietness and discontent, and enemies
to peace. There are other outward Enemies to the practice of this grace;
personal disturbers of peace, who must be shunned: as first, The talebearer,
who busieth himself in raising tales, and carrying news to the defamation of
others. Of these and concerning these, Solomon thus speaks: Pro. 26.1^
Where no wood is, there the fire goes out: so where there is no talebearer,
the strife cease. 1 Iam. 5.1^
Such were those of whom the Apostle complains: They being idle go about
from house to house, prattling and busying themselves with what is not
convenient. So long as these are entertained, peace cannot possibly be
followed: and therefore abhor tale-bearing and tale-receiuing, if thou
would lead a quiet and peaceable life amongst thy neighbors (for, indeed
there is no great difference between either of these: Fern de consid. l. 2. in
fine.
the one has the devil in his tongue; and the other in his ear; as a Father
wittily observes). And when any of these Peddlers come (for, Leuit. 19.16
that very phrase is attributed to them in scripture) desiring to vent their
ware, sharply reprove them: And, according to that of Solomon, Pro 25.13
As the North-winde drives away rain; so let thy angry countenance, a
backbiting tongue.

As the talebearer, so the flatterer is a great enemy to peace. Pro. 29.5
A man that flattereth his neighbor, spreads a net for his feet, says the
Wiseman. His base mind is well matched with a mercenary tongue, which is a
willing slave to any man's ear: he never regards how true, but how pleasing;
and, like the Chameleon, will turn himself into any color for a booty.
Beware of him, whosoever thou art that love peace. The wounds of a lover are
faithful: Pro. 27.6
but the kisses of an enemy are to be shunned.

And yet amongst many other that might be named, one more must not be
forgotten: and that is the wrangling Lawyer; who makes it the mystery of his
profession to nourish contention; who, out of a covetous desire of gain,
encourages men to contend, and go to law with neighbors: yea, though their
cause be never so bad, yet they will say with Absalon to every man, 2. Sam.
15.3.
His cause is good and righteous. I speak not against all, but against some,
and they that are unconscionable: against whom I take up that complaint of Sir
Thomas Smith; Sir Tho. Smith de rep. Ang.
These busie-heads and prating pettifoggers are permitted by the just judgment
of God, like flies, lice, and other vermin, to disquiet them who would
practice peace. And therefore hearken not to these, you that would live
peaceably: for, they are of Demetrius his resolution; Sirs, you know, Acts
10.10.
that by this craft we get our gain. And thus we have some causes both
internal and external of vnpeaceablenesse: the remoueal whereof is the first
means for peaceable and quiet living.

A second means is practical; Second mea^
consisting in Aequity or upright dealing with those among whom we live: And
this is an excellent means for our living peaceably. David, praying for his
son Solomon, that God would give him his judgments, that he might judge the
people with righteousness, and the poor with equity, adds; Psalm 72.3
The mountains shall bring peace unto the people, and the little hills
righteousness. Which is by some thus allegorized: The magistrates, as the
mountains, shall keep the people in peace: and the little hills, the inferior
subjects, shall enjoy quietness; and all by righteousness. This was that which
Marcus Aurelius did commend to his son upon his deathbed. Would thou live
quietly, my son, said he, and have others with thee and by thee to live
peaceably? Then carry thy self uprightly, deal plainly, judge truly, abstain
from injury, right the wronged, relieve the oppressed, suppress the great,
etc. And this answer did Solon make to one who asked him, what it was that kept
men most from troubles: Do, says he, to others, as thou would be done
unto: so thou shall not disquiet others, nor others trouble thee. From which
saying, see thou receive instruction.

Third means.
To these let Prayer be added, that thou may have wisdom from above; James
3.17
which wisdom (says Saint James) is peaceable. This is more effectual to
the practice of quietness then all the rest: and without this the other will
be ineffectuall; and therefore see thou fail not in this. Pray fervently, and
thou shall be enabled to live peaceaby: Probatum est. And thus we have seen
what is to be done for the leading of a quiet and peaceable life amongst our
Brethren.

Quest.
But are we to have peace with all men, and in all matters? Are there not some
enemies of the Cross of Christ, idolaters and heretics? are we to have peace
with them? And are there not others again so contentious, as that they will not
hear of peace?

Resp
The Apostle answers, If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live
peaceably with all men. First, If it be possible, that is, so far forth as may
stand with your faith and good conscience, and no further: for, under pretense
of peace the truth may not be betrayed. Follow peace and holiness, says the
Apostle. Our peace then must be a holy peace, and not unholy: Melius est
dis^duem pictatis ortum causa, quam vttiosa (...) ordia. Hier.
for, a godly dissension is far better than it. When question is of matters of
religion, when by our silence the truth is like to be betrayed, God
dishonored, and the salvation of our Brethren hindered; in these cases peace
cannot be retained.

Hence Apostles and Apostolic men have chosen to contend by preaching and by
writing against errors and superstitions (as Paul with the Galatians; Augustine
against the Manichees and Donatists, and so others) rather then by holding
their peace to betray the truth of Christ. So ought we then to have peace with
men, as that we do not make war with God. If the truth and righteousness be
violated, pluck up thy heart, be valiant and fight the Lords battle; and
choose rather to lose peace, then truth and Justice. Our peace is a warfare
against Satan and his accomplices. Pax nostra b^llum co^tra Satanam. Tert. l. ad
Mart.


Secondly, So much as lies in us. Some are so quarrelsome and contentious, as
do one what he can to appease and please them, they will have no peace.
Toward these we shall do our duties, when we are peaceably disposed, neither
giving nor hastily taking any occasion of dissension. We are to desire and
seek peace as much as lies in us, that there be no defect in us, no neglect
of our duty. And if then we cannot gain peace with them, we shall be sure to
get praise with God: and though here peace fly from us, yet in the end peace
shall be our portion.

To dream then of an unity with the Papists, of an uniformity with
Schismatickes, is an idle fantasy. For, so long as one is an enemy to truth,
the other an enemy to Peace, both set on mischief, co^bined in faction, though
different in faith; we may wish for it, but never have it.

But is it lawful for a man to sue another at the law, seeing that seems to be
contrary to peace? Quest.


It is lawful if there be just cause: Resp. Romans 13.4
for the magistrate bears not the sword in vain. He bears it to punish
wrong-doers, and defend the right: which he cannot do, if he have no
knowledge of it. And how shall he know, if there be no Plaintiff? And yet with
these Caueats:

Caueats in suing at the Law.
First, not for every trifle or trespass; but in matters





Fourthly, prosecuting it with mildness, not with extremity. As, in suing of
bonds, and recovering damages, mercy must be showed, according to that rule of
the Apostle; Let your moderation be known unto all men. Phil. 4.5
Which rules being observed; As thou may lawfully use physic for the
recovery of thy health: so may thou use the Law for recovering of thy right.

And thus we have seen what the Apostle in this precept requires, and how to
perform that which he requires at our hands. What now remains? but that we
put these things in practice, and endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4.3
Let us not be unpeaceable with the peaceable: that argues a devilish mind;
nor unpeaceable with the unpeaceable: which argues a corrupt mind; nor yet
content our selves in that we are peaceable with the peaceable, for that argues
but a civil mind: but, if it be possible, and as much as in us lies, let us
be peaceable with the unpeaceable: which is that that only argues a true
Christian, and heroical mind. And so should we make it good, that we are
endued with true grace; Esaias 11.6.7.^ Romans 14.17
and are true subjects of that kingdom which is the kingdom of Peace, whose
king is peace.

Peace was that last and rich jewel, which Christ (departing to his Father)
left his Spouse for a Legacy. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you.
John 14.27
It is the last duty I shall exhort you unto; Be peaceable, my Brethren. I have
read of two Noble Lacedaemonians who were at mortal hatred; and being met with
by their King, called Archidamus, in the Temple of Minerua, he requires them
to put their matter to an indifferent Vmpire. They choose the King himself. He
makes them swear to abide his order: which accordingly they do. Now, says the
King, I order, that you shall not go out of this Temple until you be friends.
And so they were reconciled (for, an oath taken in that Temple was unlawful to
be broken). My Brethren, we are the Temple of God, and now here met together
in the Temple of God; and have this day, and now do partake together of the
holy things of God: And yet, as I hear, 1 Cor 6 7
there is utterly a fault amongst you in this respect, in that there are
contentions one amongst another, and going to law one with another, and that
only for such things as savor but of spleen. Might I be Vmpire, the like
order would I give as that King did: you should not depart out of this Temple
till you were reconciled. Remember, my Beloved, the devil is the author of
dissension. He it was that went about at the first to sever man from God: and
it is he that now labors to sever man from man. Christ is our Solomon, the
Lord of peace. The Church is the Shulamite, the Lady of peace. If thou
belongest to Christ, or to his Church, be peaceable. And so much be spoken of
the duties whereto they are exhorted: now a word or two of the Argument or
Motive wherewith they are enforced.

Text.
And the God of love and peace shall be with you. God is here called the God of
love and peace, because he is the author, approuer, and rewarder of it. And
here by the way it is worth our noting, how that the Apostle, praying for
peace, or exhorting to peace, sets God before him, as having that in him for
which he prays, and of which he speaks, giving such titles to him as best
fits the presents argument; Doct. We are to see in God the fulness of these
graces we desire of him.
and may teach us, wheneuer we come to God by prayer, so to consider of him as
that we may see in him those things we desire. Thus the Apostle, exhorting the
Romans to patience and consolation, falls to praying for them, and sets God
before him as a God of patience and consolation. Romans 15.4.5
Now the God of patience and consolation grant you, etc. And a little after,
Verse 13.
he calls him the God of hope. The God of hope fill you with all joy, etc. And
in the very next chapter, persuading to peace, sets God before his eyes as a
God of peace. Cap. 16.20
And thus the Church, when they flew to prayer when Peter was imprisoned,
seeking courage and strength from God, set God before them as a God of power.
Lord, Acts 4.24
thou art God who have made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that in them
is, etc.

And indeed this is a notable help to faith, Reason.
when men come to ask of those whom they know have enough of that they seek:
and asking it only in such a measure, as that it will not be any damage for
them they sue unto to vouchsafe and grant, they then are almost certainly
persuaded they shall speed. So shall we seek things the more securely at the
hands of God, when we see the fulness of those things to be in him.

It causes us also to seek more earnestly and fervently. Second reason.
The sight of the Traueller's own home makes him the more affectionately to
long after it: so the true sight of mercy and grace in God, will cause us the
more longingly to desire it.

Come thou to God by prayer for any grace? Use.
Then see thou see in him the fulness of that grace thou praiest for. Desire
thou mercy in the pardon and forgiveness of thy sins? Consider then of God as
a God with whom there is plenty of redemption. Have thou fallen into relapse,
and committed sin again, a second time? Consider of God as a God that reserueth
mercy in store for all such as fall, though they fall often. Desire thou the
performance of any promise that God has made to the Church in general, or thy
self in particular? Consider then of God as a God of truth, as he is Iehoua,
yesterday, to day, and the same also for ever. Art thou in any grief or misery
in body or in mind, and desire ease? Remember God as he is a God of mercy
and consolation.

And so for any other blessing thou want and desire for thy self or
others, with the ey of faith see it to be in him when thou prayest to him. So
thou shall find a strong proppe for faith, and help to kindle thy affection:
which happily thou thoughtest not of as hitherto. This from the Apostles
practice: now more particularly to the words. Sundry might be the collections
from hence drawn: but I will content my self with this one.

Doct. God is the author of true love and peace. Gal. 5.22
Love and peace are from God effectually, howeuer they may be obtained and
wrought by means instrumentally,

The fruit of the spirit is Love, Joy, peace etc. says the Apostle. So then it
is the spirit of God that works this in us. And how often does the Apostle in
his epistles use this prayer! Grace and peace from God our Father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ. Whereby he shows us who is the author of it, and from whom
it comes. God gives it, in, through, and for the Lord Jesus.

Reason. James 1.17
And no wonder: for if Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes
down from the Father of lights, as Saint James speaks; then these likewise
as well as other.

Use.
Want we these gifts and graces? see then where we are to seek them; even from
God above: and though we are to use the means yet let us not rest in the using
of the means, but see we pray to God to bless the means unto us. The
Scripture is the ordinary means whereby these and other graces are wrought in
us instrumentally: yet it is God that must make his word efficacious and
powerful for this end. Paul plants, Apollo waters; 1 Cor 3 6
God alone must give the increase. Rebecca may cook the venison: but Isack
must give the blessing. All that we can do is but to speak unto the ear:
God is he that must speak unto the conscience. I can call upon you to be
perfect, to be of good comfort, to be of one mind, to live in peace: but this
God of peace must grant it and give grace to do it. Paul preaches to Lydiaes
ear: but God has the key of her heart to open or keep shut at his good
pleasure. Let us so many then as would be perfect and thus live in peace, sue
unto this God of peace for these and all other graces, that we may have not
only Peace External with those amongst whom we live; but also Internal
Peace of conscience (which what it is none knows but those who have it) and
so hereafter that same Peace Eternal which eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, neither is it possible the heart of man can conceive. Now this God of
peace, Heb. 13.20.21
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the
sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make us perfect in these
and all other good works to do his will, working in us that which is pleasant
in his sight through Jesus Christ: to whom be praise for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

