Samuels ENCOVNTER WITH Saul.

1 Samuel Chap. 15. from ver. 13. to ver. 30. Preached and penned, by that worthy
servant of God, Mr. RICHARD ROGERS, late Preacher of WETHERFIELD in ESSEX.

And published word for word, according to his own copy, finished before his
Death.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Griffin, for Samuel Man, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Swan, 1620.

To the Christian Reader.
THe condition of every true servant of God in this world, is fitly compared to
a warfare, Job. 7. 1.
and his life to the life of a soldier, Esa. 40. 2.
in respect of the many, Number. 4. 43.
the mighty, 1. Tim. 2. 4.
the malicious and subtle enemies he is to deal withal. Iam. 4. 2.
This is true, especially of such as serve God in the work of the ministry,
who have not slite to wrestle against principalities and against powers, that
is, against wicked spirits, even the devil and his Angels, and against their
own lusts, which fight in their members (which too are common, with them and
all other Christians) but also (and that in a special manner) Against
unreasonable and evil men. 2 These 3. 2.


Hereof the holy men of God have had experience in all ages in the world. Inde
14, 15
Enock the seventh from Adam, wrastled with such, as may appear by his holy
prophecy, of the second coming of Jesus Christ, whereby he does comfort
himself and others against them. Noah al so, who lived likewise before the
flood, did contend and strive with such, (as a man that goes to law with
another) 120. years together, as Moses shows in the 6. of Genesis Genesis 6. 3.


Who knows not the manifold and continual Combats that Moses that great
Prophet, Psa. 95. 10.
and meek servant of God, Exo. 14. 11. 12. and 15. 24.
(an also his brother Aaron) had with a mutinous and unthankful people 40.
Number. 11. and 14. and 16. and 20. and. 21.
years long in the wilderness? This story is so clearly recorded, so
plainly and plentiful set down in the books of Exodus and Numb. and so well
known to every Christian, that I shall not need to quote any places for the
proof hereof.

Esaias (as the Lords Messenger) complains, Romans 10. 21.
saying, All the day long have I stretched out my hand, to a disobedient and
gainesaying people. And Jeremy cries mainely out: Ier. 15. 10.
Woe is me my mother, that thou have borne me a contentious man, and a man
that strives with the whole land. Does not the speech of the Lord to the
Prophet Ezechiel teach us the same thing, where he says; Ezech. 2. 3. 6
Son of man, I send thee to the children of Israel, a rebellious house. And a
little after, he tells him, that Rebels and thorns shall be with him, and
that he shall remain among scorpions. What shall I say more? For this Epistle
would be over long, if I should speak of our Savior Christ, who in the days
of his flesh, and after, Luc 2 34.
was, Math. 22. and 23.
a sign that was spoken against, Act. ^61 ^2. and 19 28 and 21. 28.
as the manifold oppositions and combats, which he had with the Jewish Priests
do show; or of his Apostles, who (as Paul speaks of himself) fought with
men, as mad and furious as any wild beasts.

Wherefore to omit other testimonies and examples that might be alleged for
proof of this point, let us only insist a little upon that example, which is
set before us in this present text of Scripture, wherein we have (as it were) a
Monomachie, or single combat betwixt the Prophet Samuel, and Saul a King, whom
he himself (by the commandment of God) had anointed.

Now, whereas unreasonable and evil men are of two sorts, some fierce and
cruel, as Dogs and Lions, that will turn again, and rent such as reprove
them, as the Sodomites, Genesis 19. 9.
and Jeroboam: 1 Kin. 13. 4.
others, subtle and crafty, as Serpents and Foxes, full of shifts and fair
pretenses. Samuel in this place, has to deal with the latter. For he has to
deal with Saul, who having (for the time) laid aside his Lyon-like
disposition, wherewith he rored against his eldest son Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20.
30, 31*
does now fall (like his father, the first Adam) to sly and shameless shifting,
Genesis 3.
with Samuel the faithful servant of God.

For first of all (putting on a brow of brass, Verse. 13. 10. 12.
and a forehead of iron) he tells Samuel, by way of prevention, and against
the light of his own conscience, Verse. 15.
that he had fulfilled the commandment of the Lord. Secondly, being put from
that starting hole, and plainly convinced of a flat untruth, he shifteth it
off from himself to the people; whom yet he iustfieth, in respect of their
end and good intent, which was (as he says) to do sacrifice to the Lord their
God. Verse. 20. 21.
Thirdly, being further convinced of his sin, and the root of it (that is,
greedy avarice) being laid open, he hardneth his heart yet more, and with an
impudent face does justify, both himself and the people, as thinking it great
pity, to kill such a goodly Prince as Agag was, and to spoil and cast away
such fat cattle, and make them a prey for the fowls and wild beasts, which
might serve for better purposes; thus secretly taxing the commandment of the
Lord, of too much rigor and severity, and making himself more wise and
merciful then God. Verse. 24. 25.
Fourthly, being driven from this hold, and so manifestly convinced, that he
could not deny it to be a sin; yet he seeks to extenuate and excuse it, as a
sin of infirmity, which he committed not in contempt of God; Exodus 32. 32.
but for fear of the people, which thing also moved Aaron to make the molten
Calfe. Verse 30.
Lastly, being brought by maine force, to acknowledge that his sin could not
be cloked, nor excused, he does not go about to seek reconciliation, and
make his peace with God; but all his care is, to maintain his honor, and to
keep his credit with the people.

To conclude, I consider in this Treatise two things: whereof the first is the
matter and subject thereof; the second, the speech and manner of handling. In
regard of the former, it may be called, The uncasing, or discovering of an
Hypocrite: In regard of the latter, it may be called (according to the phrase
of the Apostle. 2. Tim. 1. 13
) A true type and pattern of wholesome speeches or words. The first is a fit
subject for every faithful Minister of Gods holy Word, to labor often in: and
the other, a lively example of dividing the Word of God a right, 2. Tim. 2. 15
opening and applying of it with that wisdom, plainness, simplicity, and
power, which will prevail more with those that truly fear God, then all the
painted eloquence and ostentation of human wisdom, that the wit of man can
possibly show. To such, I commend the reading and hearing of these godly
Sermons, beseeching God to add his gracious blessing thereunto, even for
Christ Jesus sake, In whom I rest,

Thy loving friend, S. Egerton.

A TABLE OF the chief heads or Doctrine, contained in this book: and
specially the marks of hypocrisy.
THe Preface to the discourse, showing the Authors scope and purpose. page 1:
The general unfolding of the whole context, from verse 13, to 30. page 3.
Doct. 1. Little place for reproof among Christans. page 14. Doct. 2. Every
man's way seems good in his own eyes. page 21. Doct. 3. The worst sometime will
reverence Gods Ministers. p. 28. Doct. 4. The Minister must convict the hearer
of that he teaches. p. 34. Doct. 5. 1 Mark of an hypocriie. When he is
convicted, he falls to shifting, p. 40. Whereto add a second mark. Hardness
of heart and boldness bewray hypocrisy, p. 50. Doct. 6. Whiles we are yet in
mean estate, each benefit is thank-worthy. p. 55. Doct. 7. The greater Gods
blessings be, the greater shall be our account. p. 68. Doct. 8. 3 Mark. The
hypocrite ferueth God by halfes. page 79. Doct. 9. 4 Mark. Hypocrisy
accompanied with corrupt lusts, as covetousness, which is the root of all
evil. page 98. Doct. 10. Sin never goes without company. page 105. Doct. 11.
Sin lies close and bid, till the Word discover it. p. 107. Doct. 12. 5 Mark.
Justifying of himself, a mark of an hypocrite. p. 116. Doct. 13. Has two
branches, containing a sixth and a seventh mark. Hypocrites, under color of
some good actions, would be excused from all blame. p. 122. When they cannot,
then they lay the fault upon others. page 123. Doct. 14. The 8 Mark.
Hypocrites extenuate their sin. page 145. Doct. 15. The multitude consents to
evil, without scruple. page 147. Doct. 16. Sacrifice pleases not God without
obedience. page 170. Doct. 17. Men are far wide in their account of sin.
page 193. Doct. 18. Our shifts will not serve our turn, when God comes to
reckon. page 204. Doct. 19. Our sins bereave us of our best jewels. page
214. Doct. 20. Gods message must be done to all sorts indifferently. page 224.
Doct. 21. A ninth mark. Hypocrites make little conscience of lying. page 230.
Doct. 22. Few to be found, who may be believed upon their word. page 238. So
that God must force their conscience, ere they will bewray the truth. page 243.
A question, Whether Saul's confession went with Repentance? pa. 262 Doct. 23.
Tenth mark. The hypocrite is like himself, at his best. page 273. Doct. 24.
The most careless hearers, shall one day condemn themselves. page 294. Doct.
25. Eleventh mark. An hypocrite hardens his heart against confession, and
repentance, through hope of secrefie. page 297. Doct. 26. Gods favor is
precious to the worst, at one time or other. page 302. A question resolved:
viz. How far forth we may converse with such as are offensive page 310.
Doct. 27. A Christian ought to do nothing, whereof he cannot yield good
reason page 322. Doct. 28. Nothing should hurt us if we cast not off Gods yoke.
page 325. Doct. 29. Twelfth mark, Hypocrites may ascribe much to the means,
though they profit little thereby. page 331. Doct. 30. More will frequent good
company, then make good use of it. page 335. Doct. 31. Hypocrites may always
look for ill tidings. page 344.
The end of the Table.
1. SAMVEL: CHAP. 15. VER. 13, etc. 13. AND Samuel came to Saul, and Saul said
unto him, Blessed be thou of the LORD: I have performed the commandment of the
LORD.

14. And Samuel said, what means then this bleating of the sheep in mine
ears, and the lowing of the Oxen which I hear?

15. And Saul said, they have brought them from the Amalekites: for the people
spared the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy
God, and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

16. Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the LORD has
said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on.

17. And Samuel said. When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not
made the Head of the Tribes of Israel, and the LORD anointed thee king over
Israel?

18. And the LORD sent thee on a journey, and said, Go, and utterly destroy
the sinners the Amalekites, and fight against them, until they be consumed.

19. Wherefore then did thou not obey the voice of the LORD, but did fly
upon the spoil, and did evil in the sight of the LORD?

20. And Saul said unto Samuel; Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the LORD, and
have gone the way which the LORD sent me, and have brought Agag the King of
Amaleck, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.

21. But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the
things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the LORD
thy God in Gilgal.

22. And Samuel said, has the LORD as great delight in burnt offerings and
sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the LORD? Behold, to obey is better then
sacrifice: and to hearken, then the fat of Rams.

23. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornenesse is as
iniquity and idolatry: because thou have rejected the stord of the LORD, he
has also rejected thee from being King.

24. And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have transgressed the
comman dement of the LORD, and thy words; because I feared the people and
obeyed their voice.

25 Now therefore I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with me that
I may worship the LORD.

26 And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou have
rejected the word of the LORD, and the LORD has rejected thee from being King
over Israel.

27 And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt of his
mantle, and it rent.

28. And Samuel said unto him, The LORD has rent the kingdom of Israel from
thee this day, and has given it unto a neighbor of thine, that is better then
thou.

29. And also the strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent: for he is not a
man that he should repent.

SAMVELS Encounter with SAVL.
THE occasion of these words was this. The Lord commanded King Saul by Samuel
the Prophet, that he should go and destroy the Amalekites, all, both man and
beast, and leave none of them alive. Touching the cause (seeing it were too
long to set down) I refer the Reader to Deuteronomy. 25. 18. Saul went about this
work of the Lord very speedily at the first, as appears in verses 3. 4. 5.
but (as it is commonly seen, that men are not so forward and fervent in good
attempts unto the end of them, as they are hot in the beginning) so it was with
him: for afterward, when he had taken the King, he showed kindness and
clemency toward him, contrary to the express charge and commandment of the
Lord, and spared the best of the Cattle, and destroyed them not. For the which
the Lord was sore displeased, seeing he had served him by halfes, and done his
business negligently. Jeremy 48. 10.
God declared to Samuel how greatly Saul had offended him: Samuel was
exceedingly grieved for him, and cried to the Lord all night to pacify him. In
the morning he rose early to seek Saul, that he might by pitying his estate,
move him to pity himself, and whiles the offense was yet but newly wrought,
he might bewail it, and entreat the the Lord against it and repent, not
hardening his heart. This was the occasion of these words.

The Text follows from the 13. verse. First Samuel found Saul glorying in his
Triumph over the Amalekites, The meaning of the whole co^text, from Verse. 13.
to Verse 30.
and far from any thought that he had done any evil that he ought to
repent of, insomuch that at his meeting of Samuel he prevented him, and
began to justify himself, as though he had done well, before Samuel could
tell him how greatly his offense displeased the Lord. Samuel hearing him thus
to speak, was holden and hindered, from telling him what God said to him of
Saul, for the which end he came to him; and therefore is caused first to
convince him, that he had broken Gods commandment, because he heard the
bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen, which he had saved alive,
and brought from the Amalakites. Saul first excuses the matter by shifting,
and not saying any thing directly. Then Samuel bad him hearken what God had
said of him the night before. And he, nothing fearing (though it is manifest
that he had cause) boldly bad Samuel say his mind, as though all had been
well on his side. Then he told him, speaking from the Lord, that he brought
him from a low estate to be a King, yet when he sent him to destroy his
enemies, the Amalekites, he obeyed him not, but did what he thought good. But
Saul blushed not a whit for all this, but washed his words away, freeing
himself from blame, and the fault that was, he laid on the people, that they
indeed saved some of the cattle alive, but the matter was small (he said) for
they did it to offer them to the Lord in sacrifice. This answer Samuel showed
to be weak: for what (said he) did God account of thy sacrifice, in comparison
of obeying him? But as small a fault as thou holdst it, I can tell thee, it
will cost thee thy kingdom. At that word, when he heard of losing his
kingdom, he was much moved. For we see for all his justifying of himself, and
bold desending of his innocence, yet this wrung from him a confession of his
fault, insomuch that he said the clean contrary, that he had sinned and sought
pardon; and desired Samuel to return with him to worship God, but he would
not, but confirmed to him, that God had taken his kingdom from him: yet
afterward Samuel considering that Agag was yet alive, he followed Saul, who
worshipped God, but Samuel did not accompany him therein, but called for Agag,
and slew him: and after that, Saul and he, parted each to his own house, and
Samuel went no more to Saul, to the day of his death: (it is like that he saw
there was no end thereof, neither any good like to come thereby) but much
lamented his estate, being desperate. And this for a view and short sum of
the text in hand.

I proceed now to the division of the words: whereof there are three parts.

The first contains the communication betwixt Saul and Samuel, before the
message was delivered, in the first three verses.

Saul's answer before he confessed any fault, to verse 24.

Saul's confession, unto verse 19. and such other things as follow toward the
end of the Chapter.

Every part I will handle thus. First in some general manner I will show the
meaning thereof, and afterward speak more particularly of the matter, by
setting down the doctrine and the use. For the first. The particular opening
of the first part.
When Samuel had found Saul, and was ready to tell him what the Lord had
said to him that very night before, Saul preuents him (as I said) and tells him
how he had executed the charge which he had received of the Lord, concerning
the destroying of the Amalakites, when it was nothing so, but manifest and
clear, that he had very negligently and slightly discharged it. Then Samuel
was stayed, from telling him what the Lord had said to him, and was driven to
answer him to his so gross justifying and commending of himself, and to
convince him of untruth as he did, saying, if thou have faithfully executed the
Lords Commandment, then thou have destroyed and killed all that perteined to
Amaleck, but that thou have not done, for I hear the bleating of the sheep,
and the lowing of the Oxen, which thou have brought from thence, spared and
saved alive, therefore thou have not fulfilled the Commandment of the Lord.

Saul then being thus convicted by Samuel, when he must either have confessed
himself guilty, and have craved pardon (a man would think) or else defend
and prove his speech to be true, did neither of both, but shifted and washed
off the Prophets conviction, saying, that he for his part, as the Lord had
commanded, had slain the Amalekites, and the meanest of the Cattle: indeed
the people had saved some of the best of them, but yet even that (he said) was
for the worship of the Lord, to offer in sacrifice to him, which he thought was
not to be found fault with. Thus he salueth up the sore (though the plaster
was too narrow) attributing that which was well done, (as the killing of the
worst of the Cattle) to himself, the other (if it were a fault to save some
alive, which he did not think) he said was the peoples fault, and none of his.
And this be spoken, for laying out the meaning of these three verses, which
contain the first communication betwixt Saul and Samuel, after God was
offended with Saul for his half serving of him, when he should have done the
whole, as he was commanded.

Doct. 1. Littleplace for reproves, among Christians.
VERSE. 13. And Samuel came to Saul, and Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou of
the LORD: I have performed the Commandment of the LORD.

The ground of the first doctrine.
NOw to begin with Saul (with whom we heard the Lord was sore displeased, and
therefore Samuel came to him in tender compassion and love, seeing the plague
near him, to counsel him to avoid it by meeting the Lord with true Repentance)
he was so far off, from looking for, or hearing any rebuke from him, that
before Samuel could speak to him he prevented him, but how? not by confessing
his sin and accusing him self for his slight and negligent executing of the
Lord his charge committed unto him, which he had just cause to have done,
before the Prophet came unto him, and much more, when he saw he was coming:
but by justifying himself boldly in the evil he had done, saying, that he had
obeyed the Lord his Commandment, even then, when the prophet came to tell him
of, and reprove him for the contrary; and who does not see that he showed
himself thereby to be far from the grace that became him to have, and that
was in the Thessalonians, 2. These. 3. 4.
of whom Paul said, he was persuaded before he wrote, that they were ready to
do whatsoever he should require of them. Saul I say was far from that grace,
(for else he should have feared and relented for that which he had done)

And thereby we may see what little place there is for reproves and
reprehensions, among Christians (such a one as Saul was) though there be never
so just cause given thereof; and how men harness and arm themselves against
the same, by preventing them, and by defending and justifying that in
themselves, which is vile and naught: yea, and they will have them, whose
office it is to tell them of their faults, to know and think that they are as
well reformed, as the best reformers themselves; and when all that live with
them see their lives full of disorder, yet not only they will acknowledge no
such thing, but contrarily they boldly bear out all, and defend their own
doings. True it is, they will not say they do wickedly and that they will do
so still (for then it might be hoped that they might be made ashamed of so
great boldness) but they do worse, for they call evil good, and so being
wise in their own conceit, they show that there is more hope of a fool, then
of them, Pro. 26. The best men and most approved servants of God that we read
of, how good soever they were, yet in the time wherein they lived, would
ordinarily and daily humble and cast down themselves before God, because they
were sinners, and say, Lord, if thou look straightly what is done amiss, who
shall be able to abide it? Psalm. 130. And our Savior has taught his, that when
they have done God the best service, yet that they should count themselves but
unprofitable servants, Luke 17. 10. If the best be but unprofitable, and that
God may justly challenge them; who sees not that they are far of from a good
estate and condition, who blush not for the manifold sins which they are
privy to in secret, and which men are able to bring against them openly? And
yet as fearful a condition as this is, to this point multitudes are come in
this our age, that as some are grown so seared and hardened, that they will not
at all come to the light, least their evil deeds should be made known, Ioh.
3: So many other so handle the matter, that whatsoever reproves they hear,
that do most concern them, they will admit none, but hate to be reformed,
because they love darkness more then light, and with the Adder stop their
ears at the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely. And as they shift
off reproves in the public place after this manner, so they have learned as
cunningly to deceive themselves in private. For as this age affords not many,
who are so careful to live innocently in their own life, that they may be bold
to tell others of their faults, so they, which are such that they dare rebuke a
mortal man, for taking away honor from the immortal God, they are known well
enough, Men are shy of such as will reprove.
and noted for the most part: and they who are faulty and offensive in their
lives, will be wary enough how they come into their companies; especially they
will be sure to have no familiarity with them, that so they may be free from
their reprehensions, counting such no better then mad men, 2. King. 9. 11.

Again, God his faithful servants pray with the man of God in the Psalm 141
Let the righteous smite me* And the Disciples of Christ Psalm. 141.
when they were yet but weak, hearing their master co^plaining, that one of
them should betray him, could not be quiet nor satisfied, until they might be
resolved, which of them was the offender, and therefore said one after another,
Master is it I, is it I? But how many on the contrary, are so far off from this
readiness to hear of their sins, that if in public preaching they hear
any thing to sound that way, and to come near them, they deadly dislike it:
neither does any thing make their lives more pleasant, and better liking to
them, then in their deepest security, to be without reprehensions: nor nothing
more sting and vex them, then when they are constrained to hear just rebukes.
So far are they off, from reproving themselves secretly, as (if one should
mark it, or could know what they do) that he should not hear one of many to
say, ler. 8. 6. Yet reprouers must be cautelous.
what have I done? I grant that reproves must be kindly, not arrogantly
ministered, that it may beseem the reprouers. They therefore have great grace,
who have learned and are resolved, to hear and admit the words of exhortation,
and to be subject to reproves with willingness, that they may be kept from
evil. But (Lord) how many have turned away from receiving admonition and
correction, till with the fool in the Prou. 5. they say, P^^ ^. ^^.
I was almost brought to evil for it. And this be said by occasion of Saul's
preventing the Prophets rebuke.

Doct. 2. No man's way is evil in his own eyes.
We may further gather here by this, that Saul could make an evil matter,
seem so good as he made his seem to be, that if every man may be allowed to
tell his own tale, the worst person will seem honest, and the baddest case
appear to be good. For why? men can so paint and disguise themselves, that
they will nothing show themselves to be such as indeed they are, but far
better and more gracious. For when God himself bewrays and sets out here
Saul to Samuel, to be so evil that he repented that he had made him king ^
yet does he at the first greeting and meeting of Samuel, so commends, and
magnifies his own doings unto him, that he freed himself from all blame: so
that no man, unless taught of God, would once have thought, that he had been
faulty and worthy to be reproved, to the which end yet Samuel came unto him:
like Gehazai, who when he had by shameless lying enriched himself, and
deserved no more to remain in his place; yet appeared before his master boldly,
as if he had done no such thing, and being asked from whence he came (which
might secretly have made him appaled, knowing himself guitie) yet blushed not
a whit, but answered, 2 Kin. 5. 25
saying, thy servant has been no where: even as the Harlot, who when she
has done wickedly, Pro. 30 20.
wipeth her mouth, and says, what evil have I done?

Talk with an hundredth men who have suites and controversies with others;
Instances of this. I.
scarcely shall ye find one, who has told his tale simply and according to
truth, as it will appear when they come face to face with their adversaries:
so great cause saw the wise man to give a charge to all, Pro. 18. 17.
upon so good proof as he had, that a man should hear both parties: and that,
who so gives sentence in a matter when he has heard but the one, it shall be
a shame unto him when the other shall come forth to be heard.

Nay, to come to matters which do more nearly concern the Lord; how many of
those that profess the Gospel, will seem to others to be a reproach to it,
but will say we must be obedient to it, yea, and woe be to the workers of
iniquity; but yet shall these sayings be found verified, even among the most
of them: with their words they confess God, but with their deeds they deny
him. (...). ^. ^6.
Tit. 1. Having a show of godliness, but denying the power of it. 2. Tim. 3. 5.
2. Tim. 3. 5. and that other saying of the Lord: this people has said well
all that they have said, but oh that there were an heart in them that they
would fear me! Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
Deuteronomy. 5. 29.

All which and the like in men, The cause of this evil.
do arise from the loosnesse of the heart, when they observe not, neither
ponder their thoughts and ways; and from falsehood and an evil conscience,
when they do not resolve to keep simplicity in their whole course: and from
pride and self love, that they like, Note.
and would have others allow all that they do. Which causes that complaint in
Prou. 20. Pro. 20. 6.
The greatest part will boast every one of his own goodness, but where shall
one find a faithful man? I grant that such evil men are found out and
discerned of the godly, where they live, and to such they can do the less
harm by their ill example, seeing they be contrary minded unto them: as
Solomon says of one kind of such, The rich man is wise in his own conceit,
but the poor that has understanding, can find him out. But great offense
these give to such as are strangers to them, who, when they hear them speak
well, and after understand that their deeds are contrary, do cause them to
cry out against such: and seeing they perceive them to be professors of the
Gospel, they are set much further off from embracing it: but on the other
side, they honor both God and Gospel who are faithful, and men of their word.

Use.
The uses of this doctrine be many. and allow of all such as can give a good
show of godliness and honesty, but as we shall have better proof thereof. in
many words there is much sin, Pro. 25.
and only a word in season is like apples of gold, and pictures of silver.
Fourthly, that we make

Doct. 3. They that be bad, will sometime reverence the Ministers.
Thus have we seen Saul his shameless justifying himself, wherein he was most
guilty. And yet as much unbeseeming as this speech of Saul was, he is in one
thing to be preferred before many of our time. For whereas many, not only
refuse to be guided by the instruction and doctrine of their teachers, but
also despise them in their hearts, as Ahab did Michaiah. 1 King. 22. 8. and
count them their utter enemies, for telling them of the truth, as some of the
Galathians did Paul Cap. 4. yea, fall upon them cruelly, as Saul himself did
afterward (when he grew notorious and far worse then here he seemed to be)
yet was he not yet so exasperated against the Prophet (though he were the man
that had before sharply rebuked him) but that he gave him a reverend title, as
the blessed of the Lord, 1. Sam. 13. 13. and therefore thought him an happy
man, though he himself could not seek and embrace, the same love and favor
of the Lord that he did. I do not so much note this, to ascribe any thing to
Saul, whom the holy Ghost condemns, as to bewray too many professors of our
time, They that come not thus far, are far off.
especially the mighty and wealthy, though in degree and place, far under
him: who are not content to cast behind their backs, the worthy admonitions,
exhortations and lessons of those messengers of God, which are sent unto them
(if at any time they will hear any of them) but hate and bite, yea and also
rend them (as we say with their teeth) who are reverend men of God: which does
show that there is another manner of spirit in them (that is more poysonfull)
then that which was in Saul. For he that bears reverence to the messengers,
though he obey not their message, is to be hoped of in many respects, more
then he which contemnes them in his heart, whether he bewray the same by
malicious words, and a fiery face, or whether he counterfeit better things to
them by glosing speech and dissembling countenance. And therefore to what a
fearful point are our days come, wherein the Ministry, which is Gods
ordinance for the salvation and happiness of the people, is in such contempt?
and that not with a few, but almost universally, that the most are so far off
from receiving their Ministers, as the Augels of God for their message sake,
that they are vile in their eyes, and of all people may best be spared of them.
Neither offer they this measure to the idle, ignorant, proud and unprofitable,
who if they are such, as they deem them (their office set apart) are justly so
dealt with by Gods righteous judgments (that seeing they dishonor him, he
leaves them without honor, 1. Sam. 2.
and seeing their lips refuse knowledge, he refuses them for being his) but
they offer this measure even to such, as in tender care of their good, beseech
them as the Lords Ambassadors, in the name of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
to be reconciled unto God (whom to reject, is to reject the Lord himself) yet
these be scorned by the name of Priests, for in such sense they use that
term, that when the persons be in disgrace with them, they may the easilyer
despise their doctrine, not considering the weighty charge of the Lord, who
says, 1. These. 5.
despise not Prophesying, and again, touch not mine anointed and do my
Prophets no harm. Of whom this will I say, that if they who hear the word,
yea, and that with some joy, and give reverence to the Messengers, as Saul here
did, and Herod to John Baptist, yet not receiving their doctrine and message,
to reform and keep them from evil, shall perish everlastingly; that much
greater damnation abides for these, and they bear the mark of it already
Heb. 2. 2. and cap. 10. 29. For such contempt is an infallible token of it, so
long as it shall be found in them: which I do not say as though they were in
case good enough, unless they desire to be reformed also.

Doct. 4. Gods Minister must convict his hearers of the truth he vtters.
VERSE. 14. And Samuel said, What means then this bleating of the sheep in
mine ears, and the loving of the oxen which I hear?

IT follows; Though Samuel came to tell Saul, how God was displeased with him
for his sin before mentioned, yet when he saw how he justified himself,
affirming that he had obeyed him, he stayed for a better opportunity
afterward, and now answered his untrue, bold, and unseasonable commending of
his act done to the Amalakites: and therefore as he offered him fit occasion,
so he took it, and convicted him, and proved by clear evidence against him,
that he grossly deceived himself. Thus: If thou have obeyed the commandment of
the Lord, saying, Why have thou not then destroyed all, both men and cattle?
But have reserved some of them: For I hear the lowing of the oxen and the
bleating of the sheep, which thou have brought away with thee from thence for
a pray. Therefore thou have not obeyed the commandment of the Lord. Thus he
proved, that he was guilty, wherein he boasted of his great obedience. Now
this wise kind of dealing, and careful, the ministers of God must use, for
the discovering and bewraying of the peoples faults and sins unto them, that
they may have no excuse for their lying still in them. Reasons why.
For the people being blind, and full of self-love, do readily flatter
themselves in their sins, and are slow to come to the examination of them:
and therefore if they be not roused up and made to see them as far as they
have given cause, by proving to their consciences, and conuincing them that
they are guilty, they accuse not themselves, but go forward in their sins.
And therefore Saint Paul, among all his grave and weighty exhortations to
Timothy about preaching, charge him to convince the offenders, 2. Tim. 4.
that they be not able to gainsay him: as being privy in themselves, that they
are justly found fault with. And that is most likely, if any outward means
will do good, namely to control the conscience, and to cause those who are
guilty, to see and acknowledge their sins: The which effect every reproof is
not like to work. Therefore our Savior hearing many reproves by the
Pharasies, but all of them unjust, asks them which of them is able to
convince him of sin? Io. 8. 46.
as if he should say, if ye can convict me, I have nothing to defend my self
by. And their manner of teaching and private speaking did he himself use: for
which cause also it is said, that he taught them with authority, which they
could not resist, Math. 7.
and with power, urging their consciences, and not coldly and deadly as the
Scribes: Act. 7.
So did Stephen also convict the rebellious Jews, with such power as they
could not resist. And this manner of dealing with the people, shall through
Gods blessing, prevail with many and do much good: but otherwise, if they be
taught but generally (though I would to God there were that done soundly and in
plainnes) they will easily wind out, from seeing any great matter amiss in
themselves, and so lying still in their sins, they shall the less see what
they are indebted to God, and not have the scriptures in that reverence and
account, that otherwise they should.



Pharoh himself being but a heathen) against themselves, and to give glory to
God, though they be not brought to true repentance: For he, who thought there
had been no King above himself, and therefore said to Moses, who is the Lord
that I should serve him? Yet when Moses by his doctrine and miracles had
proved, that there was one above him, he profited so well thereby, that when
he was violently holden in the waters, pursuing Gods people, and saw them
delivered, he could say then, the Lord sighteth for them against us.

Doct. 5. The hypocrite co^uicted, (...)
VERSE. 15. And Saul said, they have brought them from the Amalekites: for the
people spared the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the
Lord thy God, and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

But now let us see how it wroght upon Saul, when Samuel had so plainly
convinced him, that if he would have dealt uprightly and answered him directly,
he must needs, either have accused himself as guilty, or else he must have
cleared and justified himself: he did not the first, and the last he could not
do, being double hearted: and therefore fell to mere shifting and sophistry,
as appeared by his words, which conteyne two points. The words opened.
For that which was evil done of him and of the people, he lays it wholly to
their charge, and yet he says, if they were faulty in that which they did, it
might be the better borne, seeing they did it to glorify God by sacrifice.
This was the first point of his answer in these words, These shepee and oxen
which thou hear, they have brought from the Amalakites, for the people
spared the best of the cattle to sacrifice to the Lord. The second point of his
answer was, that in the things that God was obeyed in, he had his hand in them,
and was a doer of them among the rest, in these words, the rest we have
destroyed. But in this doing, had he, think we obeyed the commandment of the
Lord? In no wise; nay; he having boldly and manifestly cast it behind his
back, did he relent for and bewail his fault? oh nothing less; then it is
clear as I said, that he did but wash off the Prophets reproves, shamelesly
by a shift. For he knew that he had done wickedly; and yet he had doubled his
sin by a lie; for afterward he confessed it.

And this bewrays another sin in hypocrites: that though in words they can
make good their cause, and can justify themselves to be as blameless as any
other, yet he that will observe it, shall find, that they will never be
brought to plain dealing, nor be willing, what soever they say, to be judged
by the Word of God. The reason is, their conscience tells them they are guilty.
They would make a simple body believe, that none would more readily yield to
have their doings tried by the Scripture then they (as is to be seen in them
who call for the day of the Lord) which if they would do indeed, they should
prove themselves to be such, as they would be taken for, that is good
Christians, and faithful servants of God: but alas it is nothing so with them,
but they please themselves in thinking, that their estate is good, seeing they
do some things that are commanded: but in what manner, and with what affection,
they do them, and to what end, or in how many things they offend, they will in
no sort be brought to examine, as may be seen by the Pharisie in the Gospel.
Lord I thank thee I am not as other men. L k 18*
But if they be driven by some occasion to be more nerely sifted and examined,
whether their lives be as innocent as they boast them to be, then ye shall see
them bewray that they are possessed with Saul's spirit, that is, not to answer,
^or clear themselves by the word: but seeks shifts, by bringing in pretenses
of their good works and prayers: and that they be not (they hope) so bad as
some, and that they would be loath it should be proved by them, meaning some
open and gross offenders, or else thus they shift and say, do not some
professors the same that we do, yet they are thought well of, and they would
that none did worse then themselves, and though they have not such knowledge as
some have (they say) nor cannot make such shows as some do, yet they trust
they have as good hearts, and meant as well as the best. By these and such like
shiftings they defend themselves; but what is all this to the purpose, to free
themselves from blame: Is this to go to work plainly, and to stick to the
Scripture to be tried by them? The which palpable and gross deceiving of
themselves, when it is showed them, do they acknowledge and so repent of it?
which yet if they were truly humbled, they would do. Therefore let it be
taken for a clear note of rank hypocrisy, when any being justly charged and
accused of manifest and great faults, they shall neither clear themselves by
the Scriptures, nor confess their sins, and bewail their estate, but shift
for themselves dishonestly, as has been showed. This is plain enough of
them, which will understand, whether they be sound Christians and true
worshippers of God, or whether they be mere dissemblers and hipocrites. And
thus much of the first part, that is, of their communication betwixt them,
before the message of the Lord was done.

VERSE. 16. Then Samuel said unto Saul, stay, and I will tell thee what the
Lord has said to me this night. And he said unto him, say on.

NOw when Samuel saw how Saul shifted, and would not consider wisely of his
reproof, he thought he should move him by telling him, how God was offended
with him: and for better preparing him heereto, he offers, first to tell him
what the Lord had said to him that night. Out of the which words of Samuel this
may first be said, Oh how did he show that he loved him? and the like spirit
still possessing the godly it may be said. Oh; the desire the godly have to do
them good, whose case they see to be so bad, which is a most commendable thing
as I am afraid for the wicked, Ezekiel. 9.
and they vexed the soul of righteous Lot. Ierem. 9. 1.
But in many where is this love become? Psalm. 11 9.
it is washed away commonly, although what is a more beseeming thing, then to
mourn for the desolation of the people? But to go forward, this might and
ought worthily to have shaken his heart with fear, when Samuel did but say,
that God had that night spoken of him, and that also in finding great fault in
him: for when he hard that, he might by and by have thought of his sin (as
Eli in the like cause feared, when the Lord had called Samuel) and that he was
like to hear of something, 1 Samuel 3. 17
which should be little welcome unto him: as he had before, chap. 13. 13. yet
he was nothing astonished at that speech, but bad him say on, and utter his
mind, which does bewray the hardness of his heart.

Whereby we may note, Hardness of heart and boldness, are signs of hypocrisy.
that when men see their faults, and yet will go about to hide and cover them,
(as he did here) they are most certainly hardened against all doctrine, or
friendly instruction, which shall be offered unto them, and so incur the
danger that is often spoken of in the Scripture: He that hardneth his heart,
Prou. 28.
shall surely come to evil. How true this is, as in Jonah appears, when he
fled to Tarshish, so experience teaches: and how fearful a thing this
hardening of the heart is, may be seen by this, that the hardened heart cannot
repent, and by the contrary, melting and relenting of the heart, which is the
companion of a meek and humble heart: which as it readily receives admonition
and reproof, so it auoydeth that sting and disquietnes, which otherwise would
follow. But this fault of hardening the heart? though he that commits it
grossly does most hardly epsy and see in himself, yet when it is seen of
him, it is not so easily shaken off and forsaken. When it shall be but said to
a man, as here, God has spoken heavily against thee (though the fault be not
particularly mentioned) and as it is said to the Church of the Ephesians by the
Lord, Reu. 2. 4.
I have somewhat against thee: though it be not yet told expressly what, ought
it not, think we, to shake and fear him? and cause him to say, what have I
done? that so he may by inquiry, and deeper search into himself, find it
out. And yet were this no more then became him: but comfortable to them who
should behold it, and profitable to him who would show it.

But such grace is far from them that will not see their sins; no though they
come to the light, where they; have them made known unto them. So much the
more woeful is the estate of this age, whose deeds being evil and their
hearts naught, and they loving darkness more then light, are with hardened
foreheads, armed and settled to shake off all reproves, and words of
exhortation, as though God knew not their works, who yet searches hearts, and
to iustisie their present estate, be it never so bad; and so pulling that woe
upon them, which is spoken of by the Prophet: Esa. 5.
Woe to them which call evil good, and darkness light. And left I should be
thought to speak of the worst sort of these, I say, that even the best sort of
them verisie the words of another Prophet, where he says. Ezekiel. 33. Use.
Thou son of man, this people will sit and hear thy voice as music, but
they will not do thereafter. Therefore they, who desire to profit by this, must
resolve with themselves, to beware conscionably of the smallest sins, and that
such as cannot be avoided, may not yet be nourished nor retained, but with all
possible speed hunted out and pursued, lest if they once begin to wink at any
of them, and so give them welcome, they after harden their hearts to maintain
them; and lastly, beside both, let them walk in a continual suspicion of some
one or other of their sins, especially such as they are most prone to, and
most in danger of. So shall they be free from this hardness of heart, which is
(with pride, whereto it is linked) a certain forerunner of destruction, even
as it is clear note of an hypocrite.

Doct. 6. When we are yet in mean estate, each benefit is thankworthy.
VERSE 17, 18, 19. And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight,
wast thou not made the Head of the Tribes of Israel, and the LORD anointed thee
King over Israel?

And the LORD sent thee on a journey, and said, Go, and utterly destroy the
sinners, the Amalekites, and fight against them, until they be consumed.

Wherefore then did thou not obey the voice of the LORD, but did fly upon
the spoil, and did evil in the sight of the LORD.

NOw in this verse, it follows, how Samuel tells Saul, what God had said to
him that night, to wit, that he had advanced him to the kingdom, when he was
mean and base, therefore that he ought to have honored and obeyed him, whom
he had so preferred: yea, (says he) when the Lord commanded thee to destroy
utterly the Amalakites, thou did not as he commanded thee, how can thou
answer this? Furthermore he said, that thou soughtest thine own gain and
glory, by disobeying him, therefore it repents him that he made thee King.
In these three verses among other things, note this generally, which the Lord
complains of, that when men are of mean estate and low, they can prize Gods
benefits at an high reckoning, and count them great and precious, as Saul did
the raising him to the Kingdom, counting himself unworthy of it, but when they
once wax mighty, they forget themselves, and make his benefits common things,
little worth even as he did, not reuerencing and obeying him that honored him.
A most worthy instruction, and fit for our time, wherein may be found so
infinite persons, which for want of well learning it, have undone themselves,
having their own consciences to accuse them, and their mouths to witness
against them: who, when they were base and of no account, were glad of every
small blessing of God, counting themselves unworthy of the same: but when God
has lifted them up above their expectation, how soon have they grossly and
shamefully degenerated from their former mind and thought, as if they had
never been the same persons? And yet I speak not of the mad, rude, and
ignorant sort of the world, (who being without common honesty, and ciuility,
what other thing is to be looked for at their hands*) but of such as are under
good teaching, and will as readily consent to the doctrine, and speak against
such as are offenders, as soon as any; who yet most woefully do show their
inconstancy, and disguisednes to the whole world.

And to begin with them, Some examples.
who of all other should be furthest off from this sin, 1. In the Ministry.
I mean the Ministers, how many of them, since the light of knowledge did
begin to shine in their hearts: (so that either they were become teachers of
others, being as yet schollersin the universities, or at least old enough to
teach and govern themselves) have said it, and fully purposed, that if they
might be thought meet to be employed in the service of the Church, and to
enjoy living to maintain themselves and theirs, how many I say have said it,
that they would bestow their talent diligently, teaching the Lords flock, and
living among them kindly and Christianly, and painefully and vnoffensiuely,
among whom they should be placed, and with contentation in their estate and
condition: only they have thought themselves unmeet for so hie a calling, and
have said that they were unworthy to reap the fruits of a small people and
congregation. I am sure I speak the truth in many, whom my self have known,
and of others I have heard the same, by men of good credit: who yet when they
began to rise to credit, degrees, favor with their betters, and God had given
them more living then they could desire or hope for, they have little
considered what they had said before; but with their livings and promotions,
their hearts have risen, till they seeing what liberties the time would afford
them, and how they might have elbow room, and to rule over others, as the
creeping Iuie, which ouergrowes and masters the strongest oak, rather then to
be called to their account by others, they by little and little, became utterly
changed, as if they had never been the men, which before they seemed to be:
leaving wholly the care of their flocks, and gave themselves to live at ease,
and to seek after more living: neither seeking the lost, nor strengthening the
weak, they neither healed the sick, nor bound up the broken, yet clothing
themselves with the wool: and some of them (forgetting their covenant sometime
made to the Lord) lived unkindly with the people, and with cruelty and
rigor, and ruling and dominering over them: and attended not to reading,
exhortation and doctrine, as they knew they ought to have done? It is a
general observation, that before the time of Constantine and the good
Emperors, the Clergy being then persecuted and under the cross, stood
stoutly to the defense of the truth, and opposed heresy, and profanenes with
equal courage? Who yet being (as warmed in the bosom of ease and preferment)
grew both divided among themselves, and slack in their zeal and ministry,
seeking their own things, and quite giving over their care of the public
welfare? And out of this root, by degrees arose the Papacy, to that head of
ambition and insolency. But to return, where it now venteth, even just so has
the wine and oil of many forward preachers, whereby they cheered the heart of
God and man, degenerated into the vinegar and dregs of sloth and pride. As the
traveler being put to it, by the wind and weather, claspeth his cloak more
closely to him: but being in the warm sun, casts it off, as not able to
bear it, so have these done: verefying the proverb, that religion had brought
forth wealth, and the daughter had devoured the mother. But alas, where shall
remedy be sought for this if it please not God to break their hearts, and
bring them from that their unfaithful dealing with God, to true repentance, by
considering, how far they have degenerated from former times, and broken
their covenants which they made with him, when they thought they ought to do
no less; and yet I say, they kept them not.

But to proceed from the ministers to the people, A second example of the
people.
how have many of them, after that God has enlightened them with the
knowledge, and liking of the truth, and stirred them up by the examples of
others, to a care of reforming their lives, how (I say) have many testified the
same, by weeping and bewayling their sins, by diligent hearing of sermons,
keeping company with godly Christians, forsaking the fellowship of the
profane, and their profane gaming and playing, into making many purposes,
never to do as they have done: insomuch, that they gave great hope to become
rare Christians? And being mean in their own eyes, when the Lord advanced them
to the hope of a far better estate, and gave them a taste of the life to
come, and favor with his good servants, that yet afterward, not wisely and
circumspectly walking, not fearing the allurements of the world on the one
side, nor the discouragements from duty on the other side, fell from their good
beginnings, and so became reuolters from their first love, declaring to their
just reproach and shame, that now they waxed full, an honycomb was not pleasant
unto them, unto whom sometime every common instruction had been sweet and
sauoury.

And to speak more particularly: A third, of dealers in the world.
how many at their entering into the dealings of the world, and their fathers
inheritance, other in seeking marriages, and some living in hope of commodities
and preferment: and others in their sick beds have seriously couenanted, that
if God would now grant them the desire of their hearts, they would ever after
glorify him, and say that he had done great things for them. Who yet when they
have enjoyed their desires have soon forgot their hot and rash vows, and have
some of them bestowed those benefits of God upon their lusts: Iam. 4.
and others have eaten their word, and have made light of those things which
before, they so earnestly desired, and wished for: as namely in the marriages
of the most, we see daily it is verefied, and so of all sorts it may be said;
when they have got that which they desired, they have become altogether other
men. Therefore they may much rejoice, who can hold that constancy, that they
can think it meet, that all they have, should honor God, and whatsoever they
enjoy, they can remember that once they had nothing, and therefore that they
should not lift up themselves, which is foolishnes, saying they have received
it, nor provoke God, by unthankfulness, to strippe them off all, and to give
them over as the other do, whose last estate should be worse then their
beginning; whereas, if there had been no other reason, to persuade them to
constancy, in care of godly living, this might have been sufficient to them,
that their cause had sometime been far better, and that they had sometime
been glad, namely, in their meaner estate, to make promises to God of better
service, though now they had shamefully neglected it.

Doct. 7. The greater and more our blessiings have been, the greater shall our
account be.
An other thing in these three verses, let us mark and learn, that seeing God
calls him to an account for the use of his benefits, for that he yielded not
to him, the fruit of them, that he will require at our hands, how we have
used, the good things that he bestows on us; For thus he says, I advanced
thee, and did greatt hings for thee, in respect of many others. And why? for
any worthiness of thine? no: but that I might have thee more attendant to me,
and at commandment, and above many other, serviceable unto me: yet thou have
in this great charge of destroying utterly this cursed nation of the
Amalakites, cast my commandment behind thee. And so he said to David,
Jeroboam and others. So that when men come to receive at Gods hands any
benefits, they should not only think of the sweetness and greatness of them,
and how they be enriched by him, which is the next way to make them proud, and
high minded, as we see in the boasting Pharisie, Luke 18.
but we should know that there goes always a charge and a burden with them,
as that God looks, that their hearts should be knitte to him, who has
blessed them, undeservedly above others. Which David acknowledged, and teaches
all others the same, when he says to Michaell his wife, mocking him for
honoring of God, in dancing before the Arc, and rejoicing that it was brought
home unto his City: This that I do (says he) is for no worldly affection, 2 Samuel 6. 21
but for the zeal that I bear to Gods glory, who chose me rather then thy
father and all his house, and commanded me to be ruler over the people of the
Lord. He confessed, that seeing God had so honored him, he was bound, and
could not choose, but he must honor God again, which was the end and cause,
why he had advanced him.

Whereby we may see, that God does look for it at men's hands, that they should
be knit to him, and wholly at his pleasure, when he bestows these benefits
upon rhem, which their best friends, and mightiest potentates cannot: and we
must know, that God does where he gives much, look for much again; Amos. 3.
and upon whom he bestows his talents, he looks that they should
faithfully, Luke 19.
and diligently occupy and employ the same. And who is so ignorant that he
knows not this, that when men of abillitie cast their favor upon any, or
benefit them undeservedly, rather then others, that they look for kindenes
and good will again (though for no recompense) more then in a common manner.
And if all grant that this is so clear, that it needs little proof, that
where more is received of God, they owe more to him again; and so are bound to
set forth his glory, who has raised them from the dunghill, to great
liberties, and prerogatives, how shall men ever be able to answer this, that
whereas they receive all that they have of Gods mere liberality and bounty,
yet they feel not, nor find themselves in any sort affected and knit to him,
or to seek to please him, by doing the things which he commands, neither
wonder at his favors to them, rather then to many others, and so to provoke
themselves with a thankful heart to say as the Prophet did, what shall I
render the Lord, Psalm. 116.
for all his mercies bestowed on me? And again, when they see their
backwardnes, and slownes in such duties, then to stir up themselves, and to
say with him in another place, O my soul, Psalm. 103.
praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name: And if
when they have done all, that they can say, they are but unprofitable servants,
Luke 17.
as Christ tells them, what are they that do not go about, to do that which
they might well do, neither once accuse themselves, though they be idle, Luke
^9.
and burying their tallants in the ground? I say therefore, that men that live
in this our age, to receive so much at Gods hands, as health, wealth, liberty,
peace, the Gospel, with many such, shall never be able to answer it to God,
when notwithstanding all these, they have no zeal for his glory, they obey
not his Gospel, they bring not forth fruit, as they might now, if at any time.
They are not like, but worse then the Ox and the Ass, who know their owners,
and their masters cribbe, and as the Horse and Mule, John 15. 9.
who have no understanding to see, Psalm. 32.
what they owe to him. Esaias. 1.


Our fathers and brethren of happy memory, in the late days of Queen Mary,
could rejoice with thanks, for his mercies bestowed on them, that God by his
providence granted them to be fellow prisoners, together within the same walls:
we have liberty not to be joined together in the same prison, but to enjoy
together the benefits of the Lords Sabbaths, in public and private, and to
keep hollyday in his house, Note.
and it is noisome and wearisome to us: yea, we sit safely under our vine, and
under our figtree, living peaceably in our own houses, with all the commodity
and comfort that may be reaped thereby, yet men cannot now sound forth his
praises with rejoicing, oh that is a dead and wearisome work, they cannot be
thankful, and show it forth by duties of love, and other fruits of faith, as
it were meet, but are lascivious, profane, and despising such as do so,
finding of fault with their lives, seeing that they are better then their own.
This and such like is, the use that the most do make at this day, of Gods
manyfold benefits now; as it is to be seen generally through towns and
families, and in infinite persons, in so much that I do confess (and I will
not be ashamed to say it) that I would think my self, as happy as the most,
if I could weep bitterly for the loss of this people, Esaias. 22.
and if my eyes could gush out with water, for that I see so infinite benefits
of God are so wickedly bestowed and wasted, even especially and cheefely, in
whoredom, drunkenness, pride, idleness, gaming, and other such abominations,
and fruits of the flesh: And if I should go about particularly, to show it
in the diverse and snndry estates, degrees and persons, I should not know
where, nor when to make an end. Therefore I will conclude this point, that
seeing God asks to have another manner of fruit, of his so innumerable
undeserved kindenesses, and that where more is received, there should more be
yielded him again, I will I say conclude with this speech, much like to that
of the prophet Amos. Amiss. 3. 3.
This nation and people among many other has the Lord known, and chosen to
bestow his gospel and benefits upon, therefore he will most surely visit it
for her iniquities, and then it shall see that there was an other manner of
use, to have been made of them. This causes many of them, whom in despite
they call precisians to look somewhat more carefully, to their lives then
others do, knowing what cause they have received to do so, even to render
unto the Lord, the fruit thereof. And yet we cannot yeilde him one of the
thanks, we owe him of a thousand.

Doct. 8. God will not be served by halfes.
What the Lord enjoined Saul, we have heard, that is, that he should utterly
dstroy the Amalakites, and what Saul did we have also heard, that is, that in
part, he did as God had commanded him: but how such obeying pleased God, is
showed here, where he calls it wickedness, all that he had done, and a not
obeying: for thus he says, why have thou not obeyed the voice of the Lord,
but have done wickedly? So that when he served the Lord but in part, and (as we
say) by half service, God utterly abhorres it. To teach us, that he will not
be served of us by halfes, as that we should do some thing which he requires,
and to leave others undone, which he commands: and that we would leave and
choose at our own pleasure, and so to patch up his service as we think good,
and not to give over our selves, in full purpose to endeavor to please him in
all things, God will not bear, nor put it up at our hands.

And great reason, Reasons.
we may see of this: For seeing he does require (as most justly he may) to be
served withal our heart, as we read in the Proverbs, give me thine heart my
son: Prou. 23.
And agine, delight thou in my ways continually, Peo. 23. 26.
And seeing we are commanded, whatsoever we do, whether we eat or drink, to
do all to his honor. 1 Cor. 10. 32
Who does not see but that half service, Colos. 1. 10.
and abridging him of his due, is abominable: and that to obey him, when,
where, and how we think good, although in many things we do that which he
commands, is to serve him negligently, and therefore to be no better then in a
cursed estate, as it is written. Cursed is he that serves God negligently.
Iere. 48. 10


And yet such is the most men's serving of God at this day, even as Saul did
here, not with an honest and upright heart, from duty to duty, and in one
part of their life, as in another: oh! that were too strickt and precise, to
tie up our rebellions and unruly lusts so short, but to part stakes with the
Lord, that the most part of our life be given to our selves, to serve the lusts
of the flesh, and to follow the suggestions of Satan, and the deceiuable
allurements of the world, and the rest if any remain, (as he that is wise,
will easile guess how small that will be) the rest (I say) shall be given unto
God. This is the most men's serving and obeying of God as I said: even as the
common and better sort of civil men, do declare in their own words, who if
they be asked what they think the obeying and serving of God to be, they
affirm simply to go to Church on the Sabbathes, and if farther it be asked,
what then is to be done, they make no question if it be once done, but that
every man may do, what he thinks good, eithe work or play or be idle, as
appears by those that are busy, and go about lazily, and lie at shop
windows, and there prate, and be talking of one body or other, of this worldly
matter or that, which do nothing belong to them, and thus pass away the time.
I speak not now of the scum and of scourings of towns, who yet go as far
beyond these in disobeying of God, and in wicked life, as these herein go
beyond honest and true christians. And so shall ye find it in all estates and
conditions of people.

Now, Such come short of Saul.
if they think and hold this for their opinion, that the serving and obeying
of God, consists in such a slight keeping of the sabboath (as by the speech
and practice of too many may easily be gathered) I in comparing them with
Saul, and making them like to him, ascribe more to them then is their due. For
the story both in this and some other chapters before, does clearly and
largely show, how he besides the public serving of God, did many worthy and
religious actions and commendable, and did see that God was in particular
actions and parts of his life, obeyed of him; wherein he went before the
common sort of such as be called Protestants, who are not troubled from morning
to night, nor from the beginning of the week to the end, how they obey or
disobey the laws of God in the course of their lives, or how they live: but
hold this in their judgment, that they need not stretch their care, nor take
any thought that way. And yet Saul, who did go before them so far (as may
apparently be seen,) because he did not duly look unto, and carefully
discharge such duties as he took in hand, and in part also did perform, we
see how God sets him as it were upon the stage, as a gazing stock to be
looked upon, and for not obeying him sends a heavy message unto him, how he
was displeased with him, and pronounced this fearful sentence upon him, to
wit, it repents me that I have made him King.

And therefore what just cause have the common sort of this people, Application
of the point. 1. To the people of the worser sort.
to lament, and bewail their estate and condition, who in this long time
wherein the gospel has brought light among them, have not [I dare be bold to
say and have proved it] so much knowledge and care as he had; nor occupy
themselves so much in many duties doing to God in their particular actions, 2.
To Ministers.
as he did: Yea, and if this were well considered, what care and diligence
should it stir up in the ministers, to pity this miserable condition of the
people, and with all earnestnes and love, to make the same known unto them, and
to dissuade them from it, as much as in them lies? For if God might justly
challenge Saul, for this serving him by halfes and slightly, what shall he have
against them, who (a few things excepted, and those yet to small purpose)
serve him not at all in their common actions and course of life? And yet that
this may be no defense for them, that they go with others to the public
place to worship God, it may be truly said, that many of them do that more
for love then for conscience: and yet many here think, that for that very
action, they are to be taken for right good Christians.

But now that I have proved that the most part come behind Saul for the
practice of religion, 3. To hollow professors.
and obedience to God, give me leave to go a little further, and by this
occasion of Saul's sin, to show them their face as it were in a glass, who
can in no wise prove themselves better then he was. Of this second sort
therefore a little. For I would be loath, whiles I am speaking against the
serving of God by halfes, to be justly charged in this so weighty a matter, to
do my duty but by halses, by speaking but of the one half of them, whom the
text concerns. To pass therefore from this sort of men, to another, which
more nearely resembles Saul, and in outward appearance goes far beyond the
former in religious duties: I make no doubt but that the greatest part, who
have any vprightnes of judgment and gift to discern, will readily agree with
me in that I have said of the former kind. There will be greater question,
about this latter. Not for that it is so doubtful, but for that many are so
blind in particular causes, and so partial in judgment. For otherwise even
this may determine the question, if in this time of clearer light, men can have
no greater proof of their godliness, and syncerity, then Saul had in a time of
grosser and deeper darkness. I hope none will deny, but that they are as deep
in the punishment, and are as guilty of it, and so continuing, shall as
certainly go under it as he did. And to bewray those two sorts of men, I did
as I said in the beginning, unfold this scripture.

Now therefore this I say, if God could bear Saul no longer, but give him over
to be vexed with an evil spirit, as appears he did in the next chapter, and
that for his halting and obeying God by halfes, and for that he did it not in
synceritie and faithfully, what hope have they to Godward, which do the like?
Therefore, if many now among us, not only worship God publicly, but also
privately take his word into their mouths, so that outwardly and openly, they
show themselves to be good Christians, yea, if in many things they do after
the doctrine which they learn out of the word, yet if they do it but in some
things, and endeavor not in all, Note well.
what vprightnes can be in them? According to that of saint lames, Jam. 2.
he that keeps all the commandments, and breaks some one of them, is
guilty of all: meaning, that he that will not be subject to God in one thing
as well as in another, shall show his contempt of Gods majesty, who is the law
giver, even as he does who shall declare it in many things: which saying of the
Apostle, agrees with that of the Prophet Ezechiell: Ezekiel. 18.
If a man be a thief or a shedder of blood, or has defiled his neighbors
wife, or if he do any one of these things, though he do not all of them, but
has oppressed the poor, or has given forth upon usury, he shall die the
death, and his blood shall be upon him, What can be more plain then this,
Ezekiel 18. 10.
which the Prophet speaks to prove, that though a man be free from many
defilements, and yet ^ainted with some one; or if contrarily he will be
forward in many duties, and yet will not be subject to the will of God in
other, which he knows to be required as well as in them, what is plainer (I
say) then this, that God will not accept of him, but take him for one which
serves him by halfes? And who can gather, that Saul was for any other cause
rejected of the Lord?

Then we must come from this common serving of God, What such should do.
(which yet is far before the former) and yet alike rejected of God as it is:
and consequently all such as desire that God may accept of their service, and
take them that offer it for his beloved, in whom he delights, must bring
themselves into a narrow compass, and stretch their care further; that is to
say, they must resolve and covenant to take heed to their ways, and course of
life more particularly, and labor faithfully in one thing as in another, to
please God according to the measure of their knowledge. And I dare boldly
affirm by the authority of these forenamed scriptures, that he which dies
with less then this, and has not repented for it, nor obtained pardon of it,
dies in the displeasure of God and cannot be saved.

And this is most fearful if we consider, Further use of this doctrine.
that if any believing this, do address themselves to this care and practice,
they are by and by scorned and scoffed at, 1. In reproof of scorning.
and reproachfully taunted, and tawed with odious and reproachful names of
hypocrites, and such like: as if they would boldly contend with, and set
themselves against God in their so doing: when he says on the one side to men,
except they live thus they are indeed hypocrites, and cannot be saved, and
they directly contrary answer and say, if they do live thus, they are
dissemblers, fools and troublesome, in which estate they cannot be saved: For
let him that thinks himself wisest of these contemners and discouragers of
their brethren, speak. Is it for any other cause that they disgrace and cry
out of them then this? that their deeds are good, and their own evil? For if
they could be content to serve God loosely and to halfes as they do, there
should be no rising of heart against them: no verily: but even therefore they
are their songs and matter to talk of. But if for all this they will justify
their half serving of God to be sufficient to commend them to him, and that in
so doing none do live better then themselves, I leave them to a deeper
consideration of it. I have showed what service God requires, even such as
they that offer it, should take heed that there be not at any time in any of
them an evil heart; and that they should endeavor whether they eat or
drink, or whatsoever they do, that all should be to the praise of God: and by
watching and prayer, they should keep from the temptations that others are
overcome of. 2. Comfort to the upright.
And as for the infirmities that cleave to them in this course, they shall be
forgiven them, and shall not hinder them from true and sound rejoicing, which
is a perpetual companion to synceritie: as it is written in the Psalm,
Rejoice ye righteous, and be glad all ye that are upright in heart. And this
shall serve for this point.

Doct. 9. Covetousness is the root of much evil.
VERSE. 19. Wherefore then did thou not obey the voice of the LORD, but did
fly upon the spoil, and did evil in the sight of the LORD?

TO that which I said of Samuels words to Saul before: there is yet another
thing in this speech of Samuells, which he delivered to Saul from God, I mean
an other sin of Saul, though more secret, yet horrible in such a man as he was
especially: and that was that he, though a King, was set forward in this half
service of God, by the desire of the goods and cattle of the Amalakites,
insomuch that his double and deceitful heart caused him to deal treacherously
against the Lord, as in many of his other actions before, cap. 12. 13. 14. he
had done. For when he saw what commodity and benefit he might reap, in
this charge of killing the Amalakites, he not looking vuto the commandment of
God which was utterly to destroy all, but to the booty which he saw he might
reap, was carried away with the coveting and desire of it, and thereby
aggrauated his sin exceedingly. But seeing the very sin it self is
particularly spoken of, for which Saul was rebuked, that is, a branch of
covetousness, in that he turned to the pray, it shall not be amiss to hear
something about and concerning it.

For if Saul a King and therefore rich in all commodities, A caveat.
was caught with the love of that execrable thing I mean the spoil of the
Amalakites which God had commanded to be destroyed, who of meaner estate would
a man think, is like to be free from desiring and coveting the goods of
others? Note.
For the which cause the Apostle charge in his epistle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 3.
6.
that a minister though rare, a christian and reverend Preacher [for such ought
ministers to be] yea, and Timothy himself, fly and be free from the desire
of money, which causes to fall into temptations and snares: warning all that
they may possibly soon fall, yea, dangerously that way, and bring themselves
into many noisome lusts thereby: If Kings the mightiest* and Preachers who
should be examples to others, are in danger of falling into this sin, who has
not cause to fear himself and take warning? For in this matter of profit our
hearts are false and deceitful if in any other, Insomuch as I may truly say
that as many well disposed christians are much disguised by occasion of worldly
dealings, much more other men who have little taste of sound doctrine in them:
for the best armed and seasoned christians must know that they do not without
daily watching and prayer and observing themselves, escape the snares which are
laid for them by the devil this way.

For if any be so suspicious of himself, Hard to digest and use prosperity
well.
as that he take heed he be not lifted up, nor made vain, idle, and worldly,
by growing rich by his prosperity, he is a rare man; the most part even of
such as do love the gospel, decaying as sencibly in grace, as they grow in
wealth: but if the same person be as well prepared to bear adversity, and
decay when God shall send it, he may worthily be counted a rare man, and be
marueiled at, as resembling the Apostle himself, who had learned both to
abound and to want, and in every estate to be contented. Phillip. 4.
But the sin is so common, I say, not for man to ouer-shoot themselves this
way, but also to be justly offensive about matters of profit, that few suspect
themselves about their worldly dealings, no not when they are in great danger,
and have also exceeding cause to accuse themselves. As may appear in the
example of the Pharisees, Luke 16. 14.
who when Christ reproved covetousness among them (teaching that if a man have
not been faithful in the wicked riches, no man will trust him in the true
measure) it is said; all these things heard the Pharisees which were covetous,
and they mocked him. And while men think that Preachers show themselves
ridiculous and worthy to be laughed at, for speaking against covetousness, it
is manifest, that not only they do not, but also that they think they need not
go about to reform this. For oppression and deceiving one another is so well
liked, that as long as they bring in gain and commodity to the practisers of
them, they regard not a whit who sustain loss or smart thereby, or once
suspect or fear that the Lord is provoked to revenge them for their doings.
Oh, therefore how wise is he that is resolved to take heed that none shall
sustain loss by him, but will see that he shall have his due to the utmost,
and (least this should not be enough) provides so, that God may have no
controversy with him, for and about his earthly affairs and dealings, nor any
other way!

Doct. 10. Sin never goes without company.
And this reproof which the Lord by Samuel lays to Saules charge for his
covetousness besides his other sins, this I say teaches us, that sin goes
never alone but has companions, as in Achans sin is to be seen, and in the
epistle to the Romans, Romans 13.
where he shows how one sin leads another, as it were hand in hand: as
gluttony leads drunkenness, chambering leads wantonness, and strife envying:
that no man may rest in the common defense and no less foolish then common:
that is this: that when many are convicted of their witting offending of God,
their answer is, it was but that one, with which they could be charged: and
who is free they ask? whereas in that they confess one, they prove themselves
thereby, that they are worthily put to rebuke, as being guilty of many:
forasmuch as one sin goes not alone without companions. but accompanied with
other as vile as it self: as in the sin of adultery, deceiving, malice
bearing, and the like, who can tell how many noisome sins accompany them?

Sin would lie hid, if the word did not discover it.
But to proceed: the Lord bewraying his sin by Samuel which otherwise
should not have been known to us, or any at that time: does show thereby
that much sin should be hidden, and not be known to be sin, and
consequently purged out and abandoned, if God did not by the light of his word
reveal and discover it. And being hidden frommen (when yet it is greedily and
commonly committed of such as live among them) should bring forth many
dangerous and fearful fruits, and that which is not the least of other,
poison such as see it committed, but not punished and disgraced.

This is apparent how in places where the gospel has not been planted or not
received, 1. The doctrine cleared by instances.
and also where it is truly preached: In the first it is clear, how through
ignorance heathenish and monstrous sins, not only common and daily committed,
are entertained, and cause that no goodness can be admitted and take place
there. For who is bolder then the blind? By this means the lurking and
viperous generation of the Seminaries carry numbers into most peftilent
errors, and the unruly multitude, lead troops after them to horrible
abominations. And savor they never so much of the fashions of the heathens,
and be their prophanenes never so gross, as sorceries and witch-crafts,
whoredom drunkenness and oppression, may-games, lobbes of misrule, and such
like, yet do they not only prevail and bear swaye, but lead the dance to a
thousand silly ones, who dance after their pipe, with many other abominations
besides these, until the Lord bewray them by his word; and make some ashamed
of them that by their good means, other may be restrained.

And if outward and open 2.
evils be unknown to men, till God by preaching bewray them, who doubts
that secret sin of the heart, tongue and life are much more unknown, for
want of the word preached? They that are in hell know no other heaven, and they
that live in darkness, know no other light: all colors are alike with them. So
that as Saul's sin of coveting like Achans, was made manifest by Samuel the
Lords Prophet, which few would have thought of all others, to have been in
him: so if God sent forth his messengers into the dark corners, and towns of
the world, they cause many to behold the treacheries which are wrought against
God, which also are the bane of many thousands of people, though before they
were brought to light by preaching, men never dreamed of any such thing. And as
they do thereby grow to see the wickedness of others, so do they come to know
the many deformities, blemishes, and staynes, which are in themselves, both
inward and outward, which they never imagined to have been so: even as Samaria
by Philips preaching of Christ to them, saw Simon Magus sorceries, and forsook
them. And this is done to the end, that so many as the Lord shall call, may be
brought by the sight of their sin to the dislike thereof, and so to true
repentance and salvation: and the rest may either be restrained from the
excess of evil which before they ran after, or if they will needs go
forward, yet they may have consciences wounding and accusing them, that so they
may sin with less ease.

Now to prove that where the gospel is purely preached, Further proof.
much sin is brought to light, who can be ignorant of it? for how otherwise
could nombers be brought to faith and christian conversation, as many (God be
thanked) daily are if they did not see their darkness and unbelief wherein they
lay wrapped before? And therefore although the blind of the world, do most
scornefully and wilfully cast of the Lords yoke, which is his holy doctrine
and scoff at such as do submit themselves unto it and receive it: yet let all
who have any eyes to see from what Egyptian darkness and bondage the Lord has
brought them by sending his truth and word among them,

VERSE. 20. 21. And Saul said unto Samuel; Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the
LORD, and have gone the way which the LORD sent me, and have brought Agag the
king of Amalek* and have utterly (...) the Amalekites.

But the people took (...) spoil, sheep and (...) chief of the (...) should
have been (...) stroyed, to sacrifice (...) LORD thy God in Gilga^*

WE have heard now, The words opened.
how Samuel told Saul that the Lord was displeased with him, for his
falsehood and wicked dealing about the destroying of the Amalakites. In the
next place Samuel was about to tell him of the punishment which God threatened
him: but he prevented and cut him of: whereby it might have been hoped and
looked for, that Saul should have been sore troubled, and have humbled his
soul in fasting and prayer before God, when he should have heard his heavy
message: But what does he? he stands most impudently in his own defense,
both against God and his own conscience (for afterward he confessed the
contrary) and even as he had done before when Samuel had first told him the
Lords mind: he says to the Prophet he had obeyed the commandment,

(...) ted speeches and multitude of words, make it appear (if it be not well
looked into) to be void of blame, yea, commendable. They will not (indeed)
affirm that they maintain sin, and that they will do a thing though it be
evil, (that were too gross, and in so doing they must show themselves odious
to all (which were no hypocrisy,) and so the impudency of such, seeing it
cannot be hidden, a man would think that such sins were like to be the sooner
repented of, or else they must needs live in contempt in the world. Math. 21.
As we read in the gospel, of him which being bidden by his father to go
work in his vineyarde, answered, he would not: but as he departed,
considering the grossenes of his disobedience, he repented and went. But these
of whom I hear speak, call that good which is evil, that so they may be well
thought of among men, though they deserve the contrary, and deceive their own
hearts with a vain hope. For they set themselves to hide their finne, which is
a sufficient proof that they cannot prosper: Job. 31.
and whatsoever may come against them, they wittingly refuse to see it, least
their consciences should prick and accuse them of it: and so hardening their
hearts, are far from relenting, and to that end they put away the remembrance
of the evil day far from them.

This appears in that Pharisie, who being beewrayed by our Savior to be no
such as he vainegloriously boasted himself to be, did yet justify himself
and say, Lord I thank thee that I am not as others. Luke 18.
whereas the righteous man is his own first accuser, yea, labors to see his
secret sins, and dares not hide, Prou. 28. 14
them and cease not till he renounce and confess the same that he may find
mercy: so far is he of from playing the part of the hypocrites in setting
the best side outward, and seeking to shift, excuse and defend that which is
evil. And yet I say not that he is utterly void of hypocrisy, which
assaulteth the best, but yet he sees it with deadly dislike how it encombereth
him, and (will he nill he) it doggeth him, but he makes no provision to
fulfill the desires of it, as the other does, but groaneth under the burden of
it and of the like sins, till he testify plainly that he does not harbor
them, as may plainly be seen in the poor Publican. And who does not see
that he is not the man which is odious for his sin to the godly that know
him, as the other are approved of them: whereas they in whom there is no
soundnes nor conscience, but they are sly and slipperie, do discredit
themselves, and are neither in favor with God nor men; but like Gehezai, whose
great sin although it was found out of his master the Prophet, 2. King. 6.
yet when he would try what grace there was in him to confess it, though he
had wickedly committed it, he boldly and shamelessely did hide it: and where
he asked him where he had been, after he returned from his horrible facts
he had been about, he answered, thy servant has been no where, (he meant
but where he should and might be, that was about his masters business,) so far
^he was of from grace though a Prophets servant. from clearing himself when he
is manifestly convicted in his own conscience: for among all offenders, as
such an one as hides his finne shall not prosper, so he may be sure to be
excluded from Gods kingdom, if he abide in his sin. And this is one of the
true marks of an hypocrite, illustrated by the true contrary properties of a
sincere christian, which two shall be always able to justify or condemn him,
who will lay his life in the balances, and be content to try himself as all
have good cause to do.

Doct. 13. The hypocrite pleads excuse from all blame under pretense of any
good.
Now follows the second note of an hypocrite, no less needful to be marked
and regarded then the former, and that is this. If they do any thing that is
to be allowed, under the color of that, all that they do must be allowed
also, and borne out by that; and whatsoever they cannot justify, but that it
must needs be found fault with, that they lay upon others. And deriues that
upon others which he cannot shift off himself.
This is most apparently to be seen in Saul, for he says he slew the
Amalakites, therefore he had walked in the way, in which the Lord commanded
him: so that seeing he had done something that God commanded, therefore by and
by he had done all that he ought: but he said, seeing it could not but be
granted that some part of Gods will was left undone by him, namely, the best of
the cattle was saved alive contrary to Gods commandment. therefore behold
that he lays upon the people.

The first branch.
Concerning the first branch of these two: how common is it, though it be most
palpable and gross, that the goodness which men do, One instance in the worst
sort.
shall be spoken of by them, and set forth to the eyes of the world, as if none
were like to them therein: neither might any thing be laid to their charge, how
faulty soever they be otherwise. Now if any allege, that for all their
boasting of their goodness, many abominations are in their lives, they turn
all such accusations behind them, with him who being full of great sins,
healed up all with these speeches, I am no adulterer, I fast twice in the
week, I give alms, etc. so these because they have somewhat to boast of,
therefore all their filthiness must be forgotten, though the stinch of it annoy
all places about them* as is to be seen in that answer of Abner, who being
accused by poor^ Ishbosheth for defiling his fathers Concubine, answered: 2 Samuel 3. 8.
am I a dogs head which against Judah show mercy to the house of Saul, etc?
all his sin must be covered with the good service he had done to Ishbosheth.
Which, yet take it at the best, was in him none of the best, as his own words
after declare, in the 9. verse. But to return, the like practice is at this
day to be seen in Popery, who under a vizoured color of holiness, commit all
kind of wickedness: painted sepulchers they are, full of dead men's bones:
particular instances are innumerable, therefore I say no more, for it is but
lost labor.

And I would to God, A second instance in common Protestants.
this evil rested in them; but (with grief I speak it) even in the land of
the righteous, where God is known, Esaias. 26. 10
and his word preached this iniquity is committed, that under a cerimonious
and hollow serving of God, (which yet is but with lips, and from teeth
outward,) all loathsome sins are sheltred. Math. 15.
For what care or conscience of duty is there in the most, whatsoever they are
occupied about, in their speech or actions, save that they be of our religion,
and come to Church on the sabbath, as others do? Insomuch, as the Prophet
Jeremy who found out this sin in his time, cried out of such, that they made
the temple of God, Ierem. 7. 7.
a den of thieves, and yet they were safe (in their own imaginacion) for all
their adulteries, swearing, etc. as long as they (after the committing of them)
came into the Temple to pray. This is rank hypocrisy, [though in some more
gross, because they have more knowledge then others,] when they leap thus out
of a wicked and unreformed life, to boast of assurance of salvation, and all
because they have somewhat to glory of, as that they pray, or give to the
poor, or do no man wrong, as they say; when they, who are the children of God
indeed, do take so small comfort in this that they do some duties rightly,
that they can find no peace, nor walk cheerfully, whiles they suffer any one
sin to have dominion over them, or to remain quiet or vnpursued in them: And
is it any marvel? seeing they have learned, that God will be revenged on the
breach of every commandment. Psalm. 119.
They believe this, and fear to do against it, that so they may declare by
their practice, that they desire to beseem the gospel in all things, Phil. 1.
27.
and that they are according to Gods own heart and liking, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
who says, oh that there were such an heart in them, that they did fear me
and keep all my commandments always, that it might go well with them.

And as these do highly please God, so are they on the contrary most odious,
which tie God to his stint, and perform some slender task to him, as to pray
in ceremony, or hear sometime, and to confess with their mouths, that we
must live Godly, but are void of the power of godliness in heart and deed: Such
[mark it who will] set not themselves to observe what is amiss in themselves,
if they be able to allege something in their own commendations; and that
they be not so offensive and disobedient, as many others; And yet as apparently
as this kind of people is abominable to God, Note.
but croweth over it, and for want of outward help to authorize and grace this
synceritie and true godlynes, thrusts it to the wall. ordinance, which is the
endeavoring to serve him in all things, and has commanded it in Moses, Numb.
12.
Job, Job. 1. 2.
Samuel and others; 1 Samuel 12. 16.
and also has condemned the contrary in the whole pack and rabble of
hypocrites, Psalm. 50. 16
will both bless and be a father to those which walk after this rule, 1 Pet.
1. 17.
and give them their portion with the works of iniquity, who have been both
practisers, and thereby maintainers of this half and counterfeite serving of
God, as far as they think good: thus dividing those things most grossly
which God has joined together; for that such (I speak of the greatest number)
do know that they do wickedly in thus living, hereby it is manifest, when
they are convinced by strong arguments, that their half serving of God is an
abomination to him, they have no better evasion then this, who can live thus?
and that it is impossible: which answer denies not, but that God requires
such a course and such a manner of living, but they find it to cross their
will, and rebellious heart, and to cut them off from many of their unlawful
liberties, which they will not part from; and therefore they hold on in their
custom and old manner still, wittingly and willingly resisting God; come of it
what will.

The second branch of the doctrine.
Another thing there is in this answer of Saul, well worth the marking: and
that is a near companion with the former, The hypocrite deriues his sin upon
others.
and an other true work of an hypocrite: that in such acts as had been done of
him, contrary to the charge that God gave him, and the Prophet did evidently
convince him of disobedience theretoo, so as he could not deny it: there he
washed his hands, though he was deepest in the fault, and laid it upon others:
saying, the people did it, as though they would have done that without him: and
besides the Prophet did charge him personally, with the very same thing,
saying, why have thou disobeyed the voice of the Lord, and turned to the
spoil? so that it was he, howsoever the people agreed to him which does
bewray another dangerous thing in men's lives, who are yet members of the
visible Church of God. that as they care not how negligent and slack they be
in obeying God, nor how small and mean service they give him, so yet if they
be so urged with some of their doings, that they cannot defend them to be good,
yet how many excuses will they have to free themselves by from blame? and to
make a foul fault seem small or none at all, to clear themselves, though
neither cleanly nor truly: 1 Samuel 19. 17.
and all, that they may not be charged, upon whomsoever it light: In which
kind of dealing, as they are never the more discharged before God (no nor for
the most part before the world] yet thus they love to deceive themselves, and
suffer the devil to blindfold them hereby, and so make a custom of sinning,
till it be most hard to draw them out of it: Far are such of, we see, from
accusing themselves: and therefore far from the estate of righteous men,
seeing the righteous is his own first accuser. And although no man ought to
accuse himself when he is innocent, no more then he is bound to offer
himself to the cross and affliction, which God does not lay upon him; yet
when a man knows himself to be guilty and faulty, and will not see but
hides (...) comes, wearisome and tedious to you, while you live merrily? for
in affliction, how many of you hold your confidence in Christ, which at other
times commonly ye brag of? nay, do you not then fear he loves you not, but
is angry with you? and why? even for that you cannot but remember, that in time
past you have hidden your sin, and by excuses made it seem no fault or sin,
least it should have troubled you, and have caused you to leave and forsake it,
which was as sugar under your tongue: even this excusing of faults is the bane
of the soul; for that emboldneth men to sin, which otherwise durst not: for
did men see that others knew how bad their lives are, would they not be
ashamed, and cover their faces; who now are bold to do whatsoever evil likes
them, because they think they are not seen of men; and therefore when God
plucketh all maskes from their eyes, and arresteth them on their bedds or
otherwise, wounds and pierces them with deep sorrows, then they find it
to be with them, (as this Saul did often, and namely in cap. 18.) to wit, they
are almost in desperation. Therefore let us fear to fly to such deceiuable
shifts, and when we lay the blame on others men, which is due to us, know we,
that we shall be cleared before God, no better, nor otherwise then Adam was,
when he answered, the woman which thou gave me, she caused me to eat.

A further explication of the 2. branch.
Now more particularly let us see by whom he excused himself, and that was by
the people, they (he says) reserved some of the cattle. But will any man
think that the people were not subject unto him, but he rather unto them? we
see how he commanded the people in a small thing, 1 Samuel 14.
and yet too strictly and cruelly, when they were faint by pursuing their
enemies, and for all that none durst disobey him, no namely, that they should
not so much as taste of a little honey, when it would have strengthened and
refreshed them, and have made them fitter to go against their enemies, so
great awe he had them in: And therefore small likelihood there was here,
notwithstanding his charging them that they had reserved of the cattle against
his will: that was therefore a slight excuse, and had little truth in it. And
by this we may learn; that men to shun blame and punishment for their,
sin, care not upon whom they lay the fault, nor who smart, so as they may
escape and go free: though they deserve no such thing. A common fault in the
world, that men can be content that other shall suffer for their offenses, as
many a one is seen to be hanged for the trespass, which another is guilty of.
This was far from David, when the pestilence was on the people for his
numbering of them. 1 Samuel 14. The godly man bears his own burden.
He said unto the Lord, when he saw the Angel smite the people, behold, I have
sinned and done wickedly, but these sheep, what have they done? Let thine hand
[I pray thee] be against me and my fathers house. Even so Paul wished in his
bonds, that all were as he; that is true christians, but without his bands: he
could willingly wish them the commodity, that he himself enjoyed, but without
the smart that he sufteyned. And so an upright hearted christian, cannot find
in his heart to suffer another man to bear his burden; nor to smart for his
fault, neither has any pleasure to ease himself by other men's pain; and
sorrow. Rather he bears the burdens of others, then disburthens himself
upon the innocent. So neither can he hurt, wrong, and oppress another for his
own benefit, much less then can, or dare he live by the sins of other men,
as many do; nor pill, oppress, defraud the poor, with hard impositions,
racked rents; hard penny worths, when he knows they cannot bear them, but
must needs faint and shrink under their burdens. Alas what comfort can a man
take in the commodity that he wringeth from the poor! who should relieve,
and give to him ^^ther; And yet behold, there is no difference betwixt poor
and rich made, so as they who deal with them, may have advantage by them.
Herein men are like unto Saul, who falsely accused the people, of that which
he himself was guilty of, and made them transgressors, whereas himself had
faulted and deserved the punishment. But let us bear our own burden, and be
not so hard hearted, as to hurt the innocent.



Doct. 14. Hypocrites extenuate their sin. THE THIRD SERMON.
VERSE. 21. But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of
the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the
LORD thy God in Gilgal.

SAul knowing himself faulty in that which he laid to the people: does make
light of it. It teaches us, when the hypocrites conscience is accused and
found guilty, it does what it can to extenuate the sin, and make it seem
nothing. The reason is, because it is not repented of, but the offender
purposes to lie still in it: and while it is so, he loves not to hear it
made odious, and to be aggrauated, whereas they, who turn to God in truth,
aggrauate it to the utmost that they can, and why so? surely because they never
purpose to commit, or to have to do with it any more, as we see in David,
Psalm. 51. 2.
and in Paul. In all this, 1. Tim. 1. 15
Saul knew he spoke untruly: for the cattle was not reserved to be offered in
sacrifice, but as Samuel charged him, to his own use; and yet when he saw no
other way to make his part good, he did it by a lie, which he thought could not
be known: It teaches us that he who dares do evil and sin against his
conscience, And (if need be) hide it with a lie.
will (if he be put to it) hide his sin with a lie. As we see it is bred in
nature to do so, for little children if they be charged with a fault, will
make it away with a lie. But what lie made Saul? I say a cunning lie, that
Samuel could not know, except God had revealed it to him: For who knew what
he meant to do, but himself? yet some lies others know to be lies, and are
(as other fruits of the flesh) manifest. Gal. 6.


Doct. 15. The multude consents in evil, without any scruple.
But to leave Saul a little, because I spoke of his shifting before, and to
come to the people, though it be clear that his fault was great in this
matter, yea, and chief, yet we see how readily the people, as it were with one
voice, consent to him, and become partakers of his sin, whatsoever the Lord
by the Prophet had charged to the contrary: but if any object, how did the
people know that there was any such charge given of God by the Prophet of
killing the Amalakites? I answer, it was given openly not secretly, when
Samuel met Saul so that who would might hear it: besides Saul went about it
immediately, gathering the people together, for that purpose, and therefore
they could not choose, but know why they came together; and did begin in good
manner, to execute the said charge, in killing the people and destroying the
cattle, but yet they consented to the saving of the best of them, contrary to
the express commandment of the Lord, which was, that they should destroy them
all; so easy a matter it is to consent and agree together in evil that many
shall be as one man in the executing of the same.

Which, if it were but in some one instance, or few, the less might be said,
Proofs hereof by scripture.
of it. But in what (almost) shall ye find it otherwise? Genesis 18.
For proof by enumeracion of many particulars. When the Angels of God came to
destroy Sodom, separating Lot and his household, who believed it and therefore
regarded it? Yea, rather did they not all mock at his words, resist and oppose
themselves. against Gods message, till they were smitten blind, insomuch that
his kinsemen whom he would have persuaded in more especial manner, jested and
derided him for his labor? and in the absence of Moses 40. Exodus 32.
days from the people, how did they consent together to make a molten Calfe,
and to dance before it committing idolatry with it? insomuch that they
compelled Aaron himself to yield unto them. And when the posterity of that
people, many hundredth years after, was set on a m^dde mood, to forsake the
ordinance of God, in being ruled by Judges, as they had a long time been, but
would have a King to rule over them, as other nations had: who might dissuade
them from it? were there any of themselves heard to quiet and pacify the
minds of the rest, and to hold them in obedience to the commandment of God?
insomuch as when Samuel was sent from God to forbid them, 1. Sam. 8.
yea, and if they needs would have their will to tell them, they should pay
dear for it, was there any tribe or family that desisted and kept silence,
that the Prophet might carry the names of such before the Lord? no: but one was
as another, yea, they knotted and banded themselves against the message, till
God from heaven by an unwonted thunder and tempest, extraordinarily, even in
their wheat-haruest, when the air was still, and the weather fair, flayted
and terrefied them, and made them to see their boldness, and wilful
disobedience, and to confess that they had sinned, and especially in asking
themselves a King. Job. 1.
And therefore God brings in Job, as an odd man among other, that when the
people went as a stream after evil, he withdrew himself and depar^ed from
it. Have thou considered my servant Job says the Lord to Satan, how he
fears God and departs from evil: for the multitude runs headlong to
sin, it is agreeable to their nature; and whereas the well ordering of the
heart, and good government of the soul is the light of the whole life, to
direct it aright, as the eye is the light of the body to carry it: all such
light and spiritual government of the soul, is for the most part far of
from the people, and therefore the way of truth they cannot follow, but run
together to that which blind reason and the lust of the heart leads them
unto.

And this is the cause why at this day there is such an universal consent, And
by experience.
almost in all places, to that which is evil. For although through Gods mercy,
light is come into the world, yea, to this Land, and the blessed gospel, and
glad tidings of salvation is revealed, maintained, Io. 3. 16.
and by his Majesty's highness, defended amongst us, and by his royal authority
and commandment preached thorough his dominion, yet as it is said, men love
darkness more then light, because their deeds are evil: and hereby it is that
inferior magistrates in many places, do not countenance and further the
sincere preaching of it, encouraging (as they ought with all their abillity)
both preacher and people, but rather iustle it out from among them, and content
themselves with the bare reading of the scriptures. And here of it is that the
ministers themselves, who have not the power of the gospel working in them,
and subduing themselves, and therefore loving profit, pleasure, and preferment
more then godliness; cannot, nor will not take pains to enlighten and reform
others, and to beat down the works of darkness, and of the devil among them.
And hereof consequently it arises; that the people remain in ignorance and
bondage to their evil lusts. More particularly to come nearer to our selves:
hereof it is that common discorders, and open abominations remain among us,
now after 60. years preaching in this land, which should be the Land of the
righteous: and hereby it is, that heathenish games, lobbes of misrule, with
money dauncings, are still retained in some parts of it, with Atheism and
gross prophanenes, yea, even on the sabbath it self, and that in time of
divine service, prayer and preaching, are by troops and companiships
practiced, and defended. And the grossest sins, as popery, adultery,
drunkenness, oppressing, deceiving, have so many favorites with like
abomination: that it may clearly be seen, there wants no consent in any of
them, but the practisers are so many and well known, that as all trades in
London of any reckoning, have their companies which profess, maintain and
live by them, as the company of Mercers, the company of Goldsmithes, Merchant
Tailors, Drapers and the like: so ye may reckon up in all kinds of sin among
us, (such is the consent therein, and so great and common are the fellowships
of them; the comepany of whoremongers, the company of Idolaters, the company
of thieves, the company of malice bearers, the company of slaunderers and
liars, with such a rabble of many others; that ye may see consent and company
enough in every kind of sin. Oh, it cannot be expressed, how soon one
follows another in evil? and how soon one consents to another in his
sin: yea, and that which is an increase of this sin, and fills the world
with sin, so are these companyshipps in diverse kinds of sin; not only firm
and sure in themselves, but so alyed and near a kin one to another, that if
one of them were too weak alone by himself, to stand and uphold it self, yet
it should be vpholden and strengthened by another.

And if the power of the word of God were so entertained and embraced in any
place, city, or town, that it were like to break of any part of bad
fellowship in any one kind of sin, all the rest are ready to band themselves
together against that preaching to uphold any sin, or company onship which
were falling and decaying: the ryotous will help to uphold the covetous, and
the mallicious, the flatterer, and the proud will plead for the usurer, and one
for another, to deface the preacher, though one have no great conuersing with
the other, but rather some way, nipping the other secretly; that as Herod and
Pilate were at contention one with another, yet could both set themselves
against Christ: so can the carnal protestant, join himself with the Church
papist, to rail on, and deface the effectual and powerful preaching of
Christ, and the zealous professors of it: yea, I say more such force has
consent in sin, to work mischief, and to infect where it goes, that it
fastneth even upon such, as have showed some good countenance to the gospel,
and have been judged to love it from their hearts: so truly it is said of our
Savior, that the abundance of iniquity, causes the love of many, to wax
cold: for when one sees another take a course, that likes flesh, and the same
to be allowed and maintained, by many, what grace have the best christians
need of, to keep themselves in, that they walk not after the same excess of
riot, that others do? and what is there to hold men in, but the preaching of
the gospel, from prophanenes? and from much loosenes, ignorance and
dissolutenes thereby? And yet few have that sounding in their ears, especially
in any great power, and yet where it has any, it is soon resisted and beaten
back. What is then to be done, but that such as have ears to hear, (knowing
this) take heed to themselves, and follow not the multitude to do evil, but
depart from the steps, companies and acquaintance of such, and say with the
valiant man Iosuah, though there be never so many of them, yet I and mine,
will fear the Lord.

VERSE. 22.23. And Samuel said, Has the LORD as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the LORD? Behold, to obey,
is better then sacrifice: and to hearken, then the fat of rams.

For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubburnnesse is as iniquity
and idolatry: because thou have rejected the word of the LORD, he has also
rejected thee from being king.

We have heard Saul's answer, The sentence thereof.
wherein he would have covered the fault (which he could not deny altogether)
saying, it was to honor God which they did: meaning the beasts were reserved,
to be offered to him for sacrifice, and therefore the fault (he hoped) was not
great; for he had (he said) obeyed the Lord, and gone the way which he had
commanded him. This answer therefore of his, in both points the Prophet shows
to be but glosing, and dawbing with untempered mortar, and therefore not able
to stand him in any stead. For know says he, that as concerning the sacrifice
which thou speak of, if thou had meant indeed to have offered it to the
Lord (which yet thou did not, but reserved the beasts as a pray to thine
own behoof) yet if thou had meant to offer them for sacrifice, the Lord
will take no such offering, as is joined with disobeying him, as that should
have been; but he looks that his commandment should be obeyed. This is the
first part of his reply or reproof, when he says, has the Lord as great
pleasure in burnt offerings, as that his voice should be obeyed? no: but I tell
thee, to give ear is better then sacrifice, and to harken to his commandment
is better then the fat of rams. In the second part of his speech unto him,
he tells him, that as light as he made of his fault, it was witting
disobedience and rebellion against the Lords commandment, and that was even as
witchcraft in his sight, or as the committing of Idolatry.

Therefore in this reply of Samuel upon Saul's answer, he lays out Saul's
sin of disobedience in this verse and the next, and then tells him of the
punishment which God had threatened against him, and that is in the end of it.
His disobedience, because he made light of it, seeing God (he said) was to be
served in offering that cattle to him for sacrifice, for the reserving the which
alive, he was challenged: this his disobedience (I say) Samuel aggrauateth,
and makes odious to him comparatively. First by it and sacrifice together, and
showing that God did nothing account of that, as to be obeyed, but prefers
obedience before it. Secondly, he aggrauatet^ his disobedience by a reason;
comparing it with witchcraft and Idolatry, and makes it like to them. And
this of the sin of this verse. Now, next he shows what the punishment was,
and that was the loss of his kingdom. Both these Samuel stands upon with
Saul, to the end he might rouse him up, and awake him: for we see that he was,
as one in a dead sleep, who stirred not a whit at Samuels calling and crying to
him hitherto. But when he rung this alarom in his ears, of the greatness of his
sin, and of the loss of his kingdom, this (I say) awoke him, as it
appears in the next verse following. And this of Samuells words to Saul in
these two verses, where we see he begins with an interrogation, that he
might make his message more forcible, saying, has God as great, etc.

But now seeing Samuel makes his comparison, A clearing of the comparison.
betwixt obedience on the one part, and sacrifice and burnt offerings on the
other, somewhat is to be said of these two, for the better understanding of
the place, which otherwise has some difficulty, by means whereof, we should
not see the doctrine, that is affoorded us therein: A sacrifice (to begin
with that) was an holy thing brought by him that gave it to the Lord, and
offered by the Priest unto the Lord, according to the Law. But there being two
kinds of them, the one propitiatory, whereby they believed the forgiveness of
sin by Christ, which was figured thereby: The other Eucharisticall by offering
whereof they testified their thanks to God, for benefits received of him. Both
were commanded by God, and burnt offerings were one kind; The first, wherein
that which was offered was wholly the Lords, and did signify that he who offered
it, did wholly consecrate himself, soul and body to the Lord. Now these all
being commanded by God, must needs be therefore accepted of him, which being so,
why was not the offering of them accounted obedience? For the answering of this
doubt, three things are to be marked. First, if obedience to the morrall law,
and sacrifice might go together, they were both accepted. Secondly, if they
could not go together, (as often times it fell out they did not; for he that was
obedient could not always offer sacrifice, and one might offer sacrifice, who
yet was not obedient to God) in such a case, obedience was accepted of God
without sacrifice. Thirdly, sacrifice might be offered by him who obeyed not
God, but that never pleased God. Of this Samuel speaks here, obedience is
better then sacrifice: and if Saul and the people meant to offer any (as he
said they purposed to do) it was nothing being without obedience, and yet this
is the most and the best, that could be said of it. So that, obedience being
better then sacrifice at the best; even when both went together: much more is
it better, when sacrifice goes alone.

Doct. 16. Sacrifice pleases not God without obedience.
This being thus said, which was necessary, let Samuells words [hath the Lord
as great pleasure in sacrifice, as that his voice should be obeyed?) teach us,
that the most religious actions that God requires (such as sacrifices were) as
prayer, hearing the word, the use of the Sacraments, etc. are in no account
with God, if he that use them be not obedient in his life to the commandments
of God and a repentant Christian. A wonderful and fearful doctrine (yet most
true, for this our age, wherein so few are, or think it meet they should be
obedient to the truth in particular, which is taught them, and have nothing to
commend them unto God, unless it be the ceremonious worshipping of God, in
the manner I have mentioned, a service not better then the offering of
sacrifice, which (we see) without obedience was nothing worth. Indeed the
Apostle John says, Revel. 1. 3.
blessed is he that hears and reads, and keeps the contents of that
book, but not he that hears and reads only, but that keeps it also. So
then, this obedience to Gods will, is not to be compared with sacrifices, but
to be preferred far before them: sacrifices were offerings to God which were
commanded, but so as they offered them in faith and repentance also: but
obedience is the fruit of both, therefore to be preferred; The Lord tells the
Israelites, I required no sacrifices of your fathers, after that I brought them
out of Egypt (meaning after that in Sinai) but that they should obey my voice,
Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
and that is our wisdom, Romans 2. 28.
so he is not a Jew which is one outwardly. Therefore our outward worship is
nothing, if the heart go not with it: whatsoever men answer in their defense,
if they obey not, prayer is nothing cap. 13.13 we hold the general, but the
particular, we look not unto, for then our hearts should be taken up wholly in
one duty after another, which now is scarcely done in any, to purpose. And it
is called obedience of faith, seeing we must believe that God requires a thing
of us, before we can, or will do it. But men deal with God, as one with
another, for they cogge and deceive, and time must wash it away, and then good
fellowship again, so they disobey God, and after they would be friends again
with him. The doctrine more fully opened.


Out of the prophets words in this verse and the next, namely the 23. we may
learn in what detestable account all disobedience is to the commandment and
revealed will of God, and withal, how we should censure such disobedience, and
think of it in our selves. In what detestation men's sin is with God,
howsoever they cover it, and whatsoever colors or pretenses they set upon it,
the words (I say) show sufficiently, when the prophet says, has the Lord as
great pleasure in burnt offerings, as that his voice should be obeyed? again,
where he compares his disobedience to rebellion and witchcraft. The prophet
Esaias does in the first chapter, in most odious manner reprove the people
though they offered to the Lord sacrifice, seeing they were disobedient. Esaias 1.
Do you offer to me the multitude of your sacrifices? I am full of your burnt
offerings says the Lord: I have no pleasure in the blood of your lambs and
goats; and that ye come to appear before me, who required this at your
hands? with many like speeches: and yet we know as has been said, that God
commanded all such things. But why then does he thus refuse them at their
hands? and say he will shut his eyes when they stretch out their hands unto
him, and when they pour out many prayers unto him, he will not hear them?
This he says unto them, not simply, because he did dislike the things
themselves, but for that their works were evil who offered these things, and
they did not obey the Lord in other things, which he commanded them: and
therefore he says, wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your
works from before mine eyes, and cease to do evil, or else offer me none of
your prayers nor sacrifice: such a thing it is to disobey the commandments of
God, that they which do so, although they should offer to God their prayers
and praises, and partake the word and Sacraments, Ioh. 9.
yet he will not accept them at their hands, but cast them back in their
faces, as dunge, as not here only, but in many other places he bewrays his
utter detestation of such kind of worshipping him: but behold now he goes
further in disgracing disobedience, for he says, it is as witchcraft and
Idolatry: Psalm. 50. 16
so in Psalm. 50. he makes it odious saying, what have thou to do to take my
name into thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? And in the Proverbs, Prou. 28.
7.
he that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer is an
abhominacion unto the Lord. With which, agrees that of the Apostle to the
Romans, he is not a Jew, which has the outward circumcision in the flesh, but
inward, Rom 2 28.
in the heart. Out of all which it is clear and evident, that if a man be not
unfeignedly resolved to be subject unto God, and obedient to his will, in vain
does he make a show and profession thereof. Now to be obedient in some things,
and in other to be undutiful (we know) is no obedience, but contempt of God,
for which cause Saint James says, Iam. 2. 10.
he that keeps the whole Law, and breaks any one point of it is guilty of
all: for he that will be unconscionable in one, declares that he dare provoke
God, and set light by his authority in other points, who gave him his Law: and
if he dare transgress in one, and take liberty therein to himself, who
doubts but he will do the same in another? so that he, that is not afraid
to offend in one thing, even the least, knowing it to be eeuil, may well be said
to have no fear to offend in any of all, no not the greatest.

So truly has our Savior given testimony to this saying, Luke 16. 10.
He that is faithful in the least, is faithful also in much, and he that is
unjust in the least, is unjust in much. So necessarily has God joined the
obeying of one with the obeying of the rest; and the renouncing of one sin
with the renouncing of all other, (as he says by saint James, Iam. 2.11.
he that said, thou shall not commit adultery, said also, thou shall not kill:
now though thou do none adultery, yet if thou killest thou art a
transgressor of the Law. This is not alleged by the Apostle, nor mentioned by
me, as though we affirmed that any man can keep the Law, or all the
commandments except some one; but to teach, that there is no careful obeying
of one, in him who has not care, and does not endeavor to obey all: and so
do all other scriptures mean, when they require obedience, as well as this
present text of ours, they require it in one part of the commandment as well
as in another, and not generally, but particularly, neither in one, or some
few, but in all.

For else we might endeavor to serve God in somethings, and disobey him in
others, which were an abusing of the doctrine of the holy profession of the
gospel: which if it be so, then it follows, that all which worship God
outwardly, and would be taken to be religious, and look not to their
particular ways, are deceived and lie still in darkness, and God they please
not, but shall be challenged of him, for workers of iniquity: which the more I
consider, the more I marvel at it, because the greatest part take no
knowledge of any such thing: for they that draw themselves from nothing that
they lust after, neither fear to offend before they do evil, nor tremble for
it when they have done, every one saying, what have I done? If they quarrel,
braule, revenge, deceive, slander, lie, maintain sin in other, or do any
such like sin, it is but their ordinary and common course. It is rare with
them to be pricked in conscience, for any thing they do amiss; and as for the
outward service, the Lord is not pleased with it, when his voice is not obeyed:
as the prophet Micah said unto them who bare great shows, Micah. 6. 6.
yet they sought to please God, enquiring thus; Wherewith shall we appear
before the Lord, and bow our selves before the high God? shall we come before
him with burnt offerings, will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or
with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall we give our first borne for our
transgression, even the fruit of our body, for the sin of our soul? The
Prophet answers, he has showed thee (O man) what the Lord requires, and
what is good, surely to do justly and to love mercy, and to humble thy self
to walk with thy God.

Which plainly teaches us, Use both of reproof.
that if men must be so far from committing wickedness, that it is required
of all that will please God, to obey him in the duties of both tables, how
far are they out of favor with him, who in stead of obeying in both, do
grossly and wittingly disobey in both? and repent of neither. And if they be
not in favor with God who offend thus as I have said, that is who regard not
to please God in all things, Colos. 1. 10.
even one as another: 1. Pet. 4. 4.
where shall they appear, who defend that they need not do so? yea, rail on
such as dare not go so far as they in sinning; bayting them with the odious
name of Puritan, seeing they make some conscience of sin, and desire to
offer obedience to God, in one part of their life, as well as in another, and
think their prayers, hearing and confession of sin, to be to small purpose
without it. How unlike are such to them, who having but some one sin, (as
anger) to encounter specially; yet cannot be quiet for that one? And this is
their wisdom if they have any, thus to walk, and not with the foolish virgins
to have their lamps, but no oil in them* and so are all taught of God by
Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.
who says: Behold, I have taught you ordinances and laws, which the Lord my
God commanded me, that ye should do even so, in the land whether ye go to
possess it: keep them therefore and do them; for it is your wisdom and your
understanding in the sight of the people, which shall hear all these
ordinances, and shall say this people is wise, and of an understanding heart.

And if they be wise who obey them (the Lord himself being judge) let them, 1.
Cor. 1. 18
who so taunt the godly, lead such with the name of fools, till God bewray
themselves to be rank fools, because they cannot become such fools also, that
they may be wise. And let us bear reproach at their hands, And of
encouragement.
seeing God calls us wise, and let not us faint in our course, for their
speaking against us; for surely, no such (nay I may say, few of all the
greatest number of professors) do in any other manner then generally and in
words only, hold that we should offer to the Lord obedience, but as for the
observing of our ways particularly to see that they please God, Prou. 4. 18
or the keeping of our hearts with all diligence, that our lives may be suitable
(as the wise man speaks) they hold it as a thing merely ridiculous: for then
should they see cause (as others do whom they count fools,) to look to the
particulars, and to one part of their lives as to another, and to be taken up
in their consultacions and thoughts, how in one duty as well as in another they
might please God; whereas now they show, that al is too little to please
themselves. But such deal with God, as i^ neighbors deal one with another;
for they cogge, misuse, and deceive one another, till they break out into
debate and contention, and hard thinking one of another, and then time and a
little abscence, must wash away displeasure: and so they wind in together
again, and are good fellows and friends: So men deal with God: for if the
hardest fall out with them as they count it, that by the light of preaching
they must needs see, that they are shamefully out of the way, (which they will
not be brought to acknowledge for their common faults and sins) but yet if
they must needs see their lives foulely out of order, and that thereby God is
sore displeased with them, at the hardest, if they come to Church, and there
do as others; they think they ought to be received into favor with God, and
their sins must be forgiven them, and all must take them for good Christians,
or else they do them great wrong. But if God will accept the sacrifice of such
(in reverence be it spoken of his Majesty) he did Saul utter wrong, (which
were blasphemy to say) who did (certainly) many more good actions, both
toward Gods worship and in his calling, as ye may read cap. 14. then the most
of these of whom I speak. And yet seeing it is clear that he was rejected of
the Lord, I do conclude, that such kind of obedience as I have here spoken of,
(that I repeat it not again) is no other then disobedience, and that they
which offer it to God, (dying as they lived, and justifying their life to be
good) if they be saved, it must be by virtue and authority of some new word of
God, for by the judgment of the cannonical scripture, they are condemned
already, though for a very little time it be deferred.

VERSE 23. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is
as iniquity and idolatry: because thou have rejected the Word of the LORD he
has also rejected thee from being King.

We have heard how Samuel showed the weakness, The sense.
yea the badnesse, of one part of Saul's answer, namely, in that he excused his
sin thus, That the people saved the best of the Amalekites cattle alive, that
they might offer them unto the Lord for sacrifice: and what instruction we
should learn thereby, we have heard.

Now follows Samuels reproof, to another part of Saul's answer; namely, his
disobedience and halfe-seruice, that he had not destroyed all. This, I say,
Samuel here reproves, as if he should say, I have proved that thou have done
against the commandment of the Lord, which thou will not see to be any
offense, but perswadest thy self that it is small, light, and not worth the
speaking of: Hear therefore what the Lord says unto thee, even that which thou
countest little, or no sin: I tell thee from God (says he) that it is
before him, and in his account, no better then witchcraft and idolatry, which
are as odious to him, as any other; so is thine, even this thy transgression,
and so is all witting and wilful disobedience. And although I nor this place
maintain, that all sins are equal; yet might Samuel truly tell him, that in
his transgression and disobedience, God was as justly provoked to wrath (seeing
he knew he cast his commandment behind his back) as of them, who commit
witchcraft or idolatry: and therefore although many at this day, are as blind
in seeing their sin as Saul was, and as bold to justify their bad doings;
yet are they in never the better estate, for all that: but in the judgment of
God and all wise Christians, bewitched and deceived by the Devil most
palpably, and therefore miserable and accursed.

Doct.17. Men are far wide in their account of sin.
Now to proceed, seeing his sin was as witchcraft, and yet he made light of
it, let us mark, that this is the point which this Scripture teaches; namely,
how far wide men are, in judging rightly of and about their sin, and how
contrary to the judgment of God, and of the Scriptures, which yet shall judge
every one in the latter day: here, I say, we may see it: for, (...).
that which God pronounces to be odious and execrable, men count light and
small; God shows Saul, that his sin is as witchcraft and idolatry: Saul
asks if it be any at all, nay he says it is none at all, but he had
fulfilled the commandment of the Lord: he sees no cause why he should be
charged with any trespass, as long as he had done part of that, which was
required of him.

And how can men be liker to him then they be? for, Conuictio^ of many sorts,
as guilty of this.
when their disobedience is bewrayed manifestly by the Word of God, Instance 1.
how many shall ye hear of, which accuse themselves; nay, although they not
only see it to be so; but that their sin goes forth openly in the sight of
men, so that all speak of it; yet is moves them not, neither troubles them,
but they make a tush at it, and wash it away boldly and slightly, as if it were
nothing, Prou. 30.
as the Harlot wipeth her mouth, and says, What evil have I done? The reason
is, that they err grossly, Why men slight off sin.
and are corrupted in their judgment, and have evil and corrupted
consciences, and they are so, seeing their lives are naught, and so they will
have them, and will not be reclaimed; but, to maintain their evil doings,
they blindfold themselves, and will not see even that, which is most gross;
but call evil good, and error truth, and so it comes to pass, as it is to
be seen this day, that in the midst of fearful and notorious offenses,
yet it shall scarcely be perceived in persons or towns, that there are many
which see it in themselves; or lay to heart the wickedness of others; by which
it mayeasily be gathered, that they see no great thing amiss. One shall espy
faults enough in another, Luke 19.
and another in him again, and many wrongs and injuries are cried out of, and
complained of; but rarely shall ye see him, who steppeth forth with Zaccheus,
1 Timothy 2.
or Paul, and says, I am the offender, 2.
and I will make restitution: many smart, who are innocents, and suffer without
a cause, both taunts, and mockes, and false accusations, and reproach, even for
well-doing, and for true and sincere serving of God. Yea, notwithstanding
godliness and the Gospel, which teaches it, are both maintained by a most
gracions Prince, so that they have no Law to judge them by.

And what measure (think we) should the righteous servants of God, receive at
the hands of the unthankful and wicked world, if they had liberty to pursue
such, with sword and punishment, as they do with malice in their stomach, and
with their mouths: so, that many baytings and disgraces, the innocent servants
of God, sustain in the world: but where are they, that come forth with Paul,
and confess against themselves, that they have persecuted the Church of
Christ, Acts 9. 4.
and have spoken and intended evil against them without a cause? Of the
infinite whoredoms cried out of, 3.
brought to light; yea, and that in the open courts, how many do we see come to
make satisfaction to the people of God? or if some be brought forth against
their wills, yet how few shall be heard of, who in token of their true
repentance, accuse themselves, and confess to their own shame, and that as
willingly as ever they committed it, (which yet they ought to do) that they
are the great sinners that are spoken of, that fill the Country with fearful
reports, Mat. 24. 12
that thus with the penitent woman in the Gospel, Luk^ 7.
they might revenge themselves.

Thus I might go through the pack of filthiness, committed in the world, and
justify that which I have said, that how bold soever men be in committing of
them, and how common soever the greatest faults are with them; yet, it is rare,
to hear one of many to say, What have I done? but are so far from any check
and prick of conscience, for them, that when they are pressed with them by
preaching (when a man would think they should not be able to go under the
burden) yet even then, they are nothing touched; but bear down all
threatenings of God, and reprehensions lightly, either contemning them, or
scoffing at them, or at the most, not laying them to heart, and laboring to
think of them, as they hear the Word of Ged, to censure them, whereby it may
easily be gathered, that they see little or nothing, worthy to be found fault
with, in them, and therefore cause (as much as in them lies) the preaching of
the Word of God, to be thought needless (which God has commanded so strictly
in season, and out of season, to be preached) so that men say, it is that
which causes all strife and contention in towns, and which brings all other
calamities upon the people.

The Devil has ways enough, The cursed fruit of this sin.
both before they commit it, and afterward, when they should repent of it, to
extenuate it, and make it seem small, till it be too late, and till the
workers of it, have too long lien hardened in it, and then he aggrauateth, at
their death, or by some sting of conscience, which they cannot quench and put
away, and he fiercely assaulteth them with strong persuasions, that it is so
great, that it cannot be forgiven, and so is ready to drive the poor sinners
to desperation; yet, he then makes their offense greater, and more fearful
then the Scriptures themselves do: for, his property is to come and appear to
a sinner first, as a tempter before he commit it, and after, as an accuser,
when he feels the burden of it.

And all this erroneous judging of sin, Unbelief, is the cause of it.
in that they come short, or go too far, comes from hence, that men
believe not the Word. For, either they call a foul and most odious fact, an
infirmity, and make it little, as he in the Gospel, who said, when he was a
gross hypocrite, Luk 18. 3.
Lord, I thank thee, I am not as other men, or as this Publican: or else they
make it so monstrous, that there is no hope of pardon, Mat. 27. 3.
as did Judas: whereas the Word teaches, neither of both, but to make all
sin odious, and to be affrayd to break the least Commandment, that so it
may breed mourning, and true humiliation, and repentance in us, that the more
sowrer and bitter we feel our sin, the more sweet the satisfaction of
Christ may be unto us: But few labor to believe this, neither are wise enough
to see into this mystery; Note.
for, if they did, as the merits and death of Christ should ever be sweet and
sauoury, which now is to the most, both common and comfortless, so should sin
be ever loathsome and fearful. An oath, alye, deceiving and slander,
scoffing, foolish jesting, a thing not seemly, and such like, if they were
accounted of us, as witchcraft and idolatry, we should little rejoice in our
selves, till we did walk strongly armed against them.

Hitherto, these two things have been handled in this verse: first, how odious
disobedience is, which is commonly committed among us, and that by occasion of
Samuels words unto Saul [to transgress, is as witchcraft; and not to obey, is
as the sin of Idolatry.] Secondly, how wide men are, from judging rightly of
sin.

Doct. 18. Shifts will not serve turn, when God comes to to reckon.
Now follows the third. For, by this answer of Samuel reproouing Saul, and
threatening punishment from God unto him; it is clear and manifest, that though
he had used shifts, excuses, and defenses, for his doings, that they might seem
good; yet all would not serve: for, if he could have justified his doings, the
Prophet would not have proceeded to threaten the taking away of his Kingdom.
And this teaches, that no colors, shifts, nor defenses, will serve us, while
God by the Ministry of his Word can convict us, and our sins do make against
us.

Proof of the point.
For if the Prophet Micah faith, that God would not receive sacrifices nor
offerings for the peoples iniquity, no marvel though shifts and excuses will
not serve; nay, (that which is more) a man that walks most ciuilly, and
cannot be charged by men, to be an offensive liver, but shall be taken for the
most innocent of many, yet if he stand upon that, and see not inwardly into his
corruption, blindenes, unbelief, he shall be so far from being justified and
allowed of God, that all his righteousness shall be found nothing but as
painting over a foul stock or Image, and his best works as filthy leprofie:
and for proof of this which I say, consider Paul's words of himself, and of
his former estate, when he was not yet converted, thus he speaks, as touching
my life from my childehood, and what it was from the beginning among my own
nation at Jerusalem, Acts 26. 4.
know all the Jews, which knew me heretofore, that aftet the most straight
sect of our religion, I lived a Pharasie; in which words we have heard what a
strickt liver and righteous man he was: yet that we may not think that this
high commendation was any thing in account with God, hear his words after his
conversion, and after the word of God, was received and believed of him, for
then he speaks after another manner, and as the truth was: I once was alive
without the Law, but when the commandment came, sin revived, but I dyed,
Romans 7. 9.
for sin deceived me and slew me. Here we see that he himself when he
came to himself, as a guilty person he condemned himself, notwithstanding all
the righteousness which he had before, in his own; and the judgment of other
men; so that if such as Paul was (when he lived most strictly in his
profession) who think simply they serve Godhighly, must yet (if ever they
turn to God) be ashamed of that which they gloryed in before; is it like that
they who are by Gods word convinced of great sins, shall escape the danger
of his displeasure, by their coloring of their faults, and by shifts and
excuses? Who had a fayrer show for his doing, Luke 19.
then he that hid his tallent in the earth, which was committed to him: for
that is sure, in so doing he did no evil with it; but did that excuse serve
him? no: but because it was given him to do good with, and to occupy,
therefore it was said to him, thou evil servant, why did thou not put it
to use?

Men bear themselves in hand, Use.
when the Word of God reprooueth them, that they will answer it well enough,
and when Preachers convince them, they hope God will not deal with them so
hardly, as they do: and men love always to have one thing or other, to
flatter and deceive their hearts by; like an evil debtor, who is in danger
already, yet as long as he can find any to borrow of, runs further into
debt, not wisely foreseeing his overthrow to be at hand, but imagines still
he shall come out of it in time. So, when men can shift off the greatness of
their sins, that they may not terrify nor press their consciences, they
think their estate good enough, and so dance in a net, as if God saw them
not; till on the sudden before they be aware, they fall headlong into fear
and desperation; or else become so senseless and hardened, that they be past
feeling, till they die in impenitencie. And how can it be otherwise? Does not
the scripture tell us plainly, that he who follows not the light walks in
darkness, and cannot tell where he goes. But we may know that when men begin
to conceive of their estate, and their doing, not being guided by the light of
knowledge, they are out of the way and deceive themselves, and when they cry
peace, 1. Sam. 8 17 Compared with 12. 20
peace, there is no peace; they find not that which they hope for, much like
unto them who would have a King, and be like other nations, and that they
thought best for them (say the Prophet what he could to the contrary) did they
not find to their costs, that they erred in the imaginacions of their hearts,
Eccles. 12.
and were deceived? The young man to whom Solomon speaks, who will needs
rejoice in his youth, and take his pleasure; if ye tell him that there is any
danger toward him, will he believe it? and does he not therefore come to
judgment, and prove by woeful experience, that his dreams in thinking all is
well with him, are vain, and disapoint his foolish hope? And to shut up this
point, what is clearer then that in the gospel, to testify that no shifts
nor excuses wil'serue, to hold men in their sin? That when certain were
bid to the kings great supper, they returned answer; one this way excusing
his absence, and another that: one had bought Oxen and must go try them; Luke
14.
another had married a wife, etc. did their excuses go for payment? nay, could
any thing be set down more fearfully to hold men from fond and forged excuses
and shifts, to keep in their sin, then that which is there mentioned? for
thus answer was given to them by him that invited them, and that with a
vehemen asseueration, that none of them that were bidden, shall taste of any
supper.

Conciusion of the point* with exhortation.
By all which it is manifest, that no shifts will serve men, when God shall
justly charge them, and when his word accuses and condemns their course and
doings, there is nothing; and therefore least of all their vain defenses in
extenuating their sins or shifts which they devise, that shall ever be able
to stand them in any stead, to help or deliver them. Cease we therefore from
such a purpose, which yet is a common practice amongst men: and consider we,
and be we resolved, that God loves plainness, and regards vprightnes, and
the good meaning of the heart, according to knowledge: and if our consciences
accuse us, God is greater, and has more to charge us, then they can bring
forth against us: and thus let Saul's example teach us, with the rest that have
been alleged, how pregnant soever men be in holding their sin, any way
coloring or excusing of it, yet that it will not serve them, neither shall be
to any purpose, and thereby is the scripture verefyed, Prou. 28. 13
he that hides his sin shall not prosper.

Doct. 19. Our sins deprive us of our dearest jewels.
But another thing is added, here by the Prophet, which follows upon the
former, to wit, seeing he had justly reproved him for casting off the Lord,
and therefore had showed him that all his excuses were in vain, for this cause
he must hear that which he would not; that the Lord had cast him off from
being King: as if he should say, whether thy sin be so light a matter as
thou make it, judge thou by the punishment which God threatens that is, that
thou must loose thy kingdom for it. And so it came to pass afterward; both
another was anointed King, and also that none of his posterity succeeded him.

And from hence we learn, that howsoever we please our selves in our sins,
and will not see them, they shall cost us dear, and deprive us of our best
commodities and pleasures, as they did Saul of his kingdom. For what had he
of greater account then it? and yet this his sin took it from him, and made
him go without it.

The like is said in the Lamentations of Jeremy, Lam. 3 6. 7. Proofs.
that the sins of the people, have spoiled them of all their pleasant things
which were most to be desired. And were it not that men were given to seek and
have their will, some one way, and some another, (though we are taught to pray
thy will be done and not ours,) and to serve their own lusts rebelliously,
they should and might enjoy all good things which they pray for, or better in
their room: but therefore they obtain not when they ask, Iam. 4. 4
says St. James, because they ask amiss, even that they may bestow them on
their lasts. But otherwise as Moses says in Exodus, If ye will hear my voice
indeed, Exodus 19. 5.
and keep my covenant, then shall ye be my chief treasure above all people,
though all the earth be mine: If we be his chief treasure, think we that he
will not delight in us, nor care for us? if he do, can we want any thing that
is good for us? as it is in the Psalm, Psalm. 23. 1.
The Lord being my sheapheard, I shall want no good thing: yea verily, nothing
should be thought too good for us, but blessed should we be in the house, and
blessed in the field, and blessed in all that we set our hand unto: Deuteronomy. 28. 6
of particulars, read furthe^ in Deuteronomy. And therefore he says in
another place; Oh, that there were such an heart in them, C^p. 5. 29.
that they did fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might
go well with them! these promises, 1 Timothy 4 8.
though they shall fully and perfectly be performed hereafter; yet are they
also found verefied in the children of God, in this present life: as saint Paul
writes to Timothy, saying; godliness has the promises of this life, and of
the life to come: and whatsoever might be spoken to the like purpose, (as the
scriptures are most copious in this point) all these benefits do our sins
hold from us (that I say nothing of the horrible and fearful punishments they
bring upon us) and strippe us out of them, as out of our garments: Note.
so that if a thief be odious that spoyleth us of our goods, how odious (in
another kind) ought our sins to be unto us? which (as hail in harvest
beats down the corn) so do our evil qualities and filthy corruptions, make
havoc of all our best and precious things, as health, peace, friends,
credit, yea, even that which passes understanding, as well as our goods, even
as it was no other thing then sin, which first spoiled our first parents Adam
and Eve, of all good things which God had given them to enjoy in the time of
their innocence. And as disobedience took from Saul his kingdom, so from the
rich men in Luke, Luke 12. 20. and 16. 25.
that took their pleasure and goods: 1. Cor. 11 30
from the Corinthians, health and life: from the Ministers in Malachie their
honor and places: Mal. 2. 9.
from the women in Esaias, Esaias. 3. 25.
their beauty, which they so much pleasured in, and turned it into baldnes; and
so does the like sin at this day, take from all works of iniquity, sound
joy and gladness: we see this sufficiently verefied daily among us; for what
mean these many complaints among us, that men enjoy not good days, as they
desire and look for, but are crossed and weary of their lives, they have so
ill success, and though they are blind and see not the cause of this, yet
indeed it is nothing else but their sin? even sundry particulars, as in
another verse of Lamentacions, we may read that Jerusalem had grievously
sinned, therefore she was in reproach, who yet had been honored, and then
remembered all her pleasant things, as her sabathes and other liberties, and
plenty which she had enjoyed: and although this be not fulfilled in all
every day, yet do unbelievers hold their good things in danger and fear, till
the time come that God will pluck them out of their hands, which judgment is
hanging over their heads always, as a sword over a man's head by a twine
thread, with the point downward.

And therefore they are wise, Use.
who beware of offending of God, for so do they provide in every state of life
to live well and happily: as it is said by our Savior blessed are the meek,
for they shall inherit the earth, etc. But if the wicked flourish to day as the
green bay tree, yet full soon shall it come to pass, that no sign thereof
shall remain.

The use of this, is to teach us to acknowledge, that in every particular, as
when we be deprived of inward comfort, outward peace, health wealth, or any
other thing, appertaining either to the soul or body, to check our hearts if
they have led us too far any way, and to waine our selves from any alluring
baytes, which have fastened too much upon us, and finally to rain them in, when
they have in falsehood or folly, wandered and departed from duty: And thus I
conclude that we have great cause to beware of all undutiful walking with
God, and provoking him, as in many other respects, which in this text are not
mentioned; so especially if we have any care of our welfare here in this
life, that I say no more, because that unruliness and wilfulnes, do deprive us
of our best good things, eating away the beauty of them, as a moth disfigureth
the most seemly garments.

Doct. 20. Gods message must be done to the great and small.
VERSE 24. And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have transgressed
the commandment of the LORD, and thy words; because I fedred the people, and
obeyed their voice.

BVr now it is time to return to Saul, having heard how Samuel has labored
to bring him to repentance. It is said here, that Saul, as bold denials as he
made of his sin, and for all his iustefying of his doings, that he had obeyed
the will of God, in this war against Amaleck, yet contrary to all likelihood,
he now bewrays, to his own great shame, that he had lied in so speaking,
and so had not uttered the truth; for so it is said here of him, I have sinned,
in that I did not obey the commandment of the Lord.

But while Samuel does thus narrowly and nearly follow hard upon him, me
thinks I hear some Favorites and Pittyers of Saul, thus scornfully braying
out. Oh severe Samuel! and oh woeful times, and unhappy state to live in, when
great men must be pursued of such base fellows, when Ministers and Prophets
must be so bold with their betters: yet welfare the good high Priest Azariah,
who (say they) with held such open mouthed and uncivil persons, from the Kings
Court. And again, is it meet that a mean Minister should press, and be so
bold with great personages? I have heard little less with mine own ears, of
profane and irreligious Gentlemen (as they are called) but to answer them,
they see it was meet then, and the commandment of the highest King, that the
Prophets of God (who were reverend men of God, and by Saul's own confession,
Gods Chosen, and not base and of mean account) should do his message unto
them, that are great in place and authority, both publicly and privately, and
as they gave cause, and according to the manner and quality of their offense,
should reprove them in the name of God, and yet gave them their due honor, as
became them, for their own parts, being their inferiors; yea, and when they
thus did their message, they were received of such, as were wise and religious,
as became the Amhassadours of the high God: yea, and so did Saul himself honor
and receive Samuel. I say thus it was then, and thought meet it should be so:
but so are men degenerate now from that practice, that meaner persons then
Nobles would, with reproach and contempt, thrust such an one as Samuel from
them, and scorn any reproof that he should bring to them, how just soever,
and in best manner it should be done unto them. And yet I speak not, as
though I thought that all of that estate and degree were such; but know and am
persuaded that there are sundry of them; yea, and of the Noble themselves, who
receive the Ministers of God as his Messengers, to whom (as unto meaner
persons) I wish no worse then this, that both they may enjoy such, plentifully
among them, and receive them with that reverence and credit given unto them,
that they may both make the scorning Atheist, and profane sort, more odions
and shameful, who cannot abide their stinking dunghill to be stirred, and
may themselves reap the blessed fruit of their Ministry, I mean that that
receiving a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, Matthew.10.
they may have a Prophets reward.

Now follows (after Samuels long traversing the matter with Saul) his
confession of his sin: and sithence he is brought after so many shameful and
fearful denials, of that which Samuel had charged him with, at length, to
confess; and for that here are other things of weight, to be considered of, I
will stay a while, and refer that, which I have to say about this matter of
Saul's confession, to these four points. First, I will show the odiousness of
this sin, in that he had so often and boldly denied his being in fault, yet did
now confess it. Secondly, I will declare how, and by what means, he was
brought to confess it. Thirdly, seeing he did so (which he was very unlike
to come to) whether in confessing he repented also. And fourthly, because it
shall appear, that he did not, therefore even his very confession shall be
seen to be another note of hypocrisy in him.

Doct. 21. An hypocrite makes no conscience of lying.
Concerning the first; of the foulness of his sin; in that he had so often
justified himself (as much as in him lay) about the accusations which the
Prophet brought against him, who does not see how odious it was in him? And who
would not have been persuaded, that he spoke the truth, being so great a
person as he was, and so boldly and resolutely affirming it, when he said, he
had fulfilled the commandment of the Lord, when yet Samuel charged him from
God, that he had broken it? And whom (almost) may a man believe, if he might
not be rested in, and given credit unto? This is therefore to teach us, that
it is a most shameful and grievous offense, when men hyd their sin, and deny
that they are guilty, when yet they shall after confess it freely, and be
contrary to themselves, and so lay out their shame to them that live with them,
when they shall affirm boldly, that they are innocent; yea, with oath and
protestation, that it is so, inasmuch as he that hears them shall say;
Doubtless, they speak the truth. And yet afterward, they themselves shall
deny that, which they so vehemently affirmed. Oh how fearful a thing it is?

Examples and instances. A notable example we have of this, in the old Prophet
of Bethel: who, when he had for his own vain credit, drawn the man of God,
who came from luda (contrary to the express commandment of God) to eat in
that place; 1 King. 13.
yet, to his own great shame, he was forced to confess, that he had made a
lie, in saying; that an Angel appeared to him, and bad him do so.

It is the common practice of men, 2.
to say and unsay, to affirm and deny the same thing, though it has been
affirmed with oath and protestation. So that a man shall have peaceable and
fair words of his neighbor, and yet falsehood in his dealings: 2 Samuel 3. 27
as Ioab saluted Abner friendly, and yet smote him so, that he died.

This sin is so bred in nature, and confirmed by custom, that Gods dear
servants are not free; but are sometime overcome of it, as we see in Peter;
who, as well as he loved his Master, and professed himself to be his
Disciple; yet, by a small occasion, was brought to deny that he knew him, by
oath and protestatiou. And if it be thus with men, in sins committed in the
sight of men, as this of Saul was, how much more do men deal with God in
their secret sins? to hide, excuse, and extenuate them, as if they were none,
and asif none were wholer and sounder then they, when yet afterward, when the
Lord sees good to vnskirt them, they be forced to cry out as the Prophet did;
but in a far better case, when he had seen the Lord of glory: Esaias 6.
Woe is me, I am undone.

Such was the case of Jonas, when the Lord gave him his charge, to go and to
cry against Nineueh, he fled from his presence, and went another way to
Tarshish. And least he should have been brought back again (so little was
he troubled for his sin) he made all possible have to be gone, and paid for
his carriage before hand, and went down into the ship, and slept soundly: so
that the fierce wind and sore tempest, that made the Mariners afraid, could not
awake him. Then the ship master roused him up, so that he saw the great danger
that he, with the rest, was in; for all that, he bewailed not, neither cried
out of his sin: and until he was singled out by lot, we read no word of any
remorse that he had for it; but for all his concealing of it so long, then he
was laden with the burden of it and repented. But oh how long first? and how
gladly would he have shifted it off? And thus we would do all, through our
corrupt nature, when we have offended against his Majesty, even fly from his
presence if we could, as Adam did, and shake off all thought, and go from all
desire of confessing it to God. But that shall be with the greater shame to
us, when God shall pluck us out of our dens and corners, wherein we had hid
our selves.

And thus David, who had not accused himself for his foul and gross adultery
and murder, till Nathan the Prophet, from God, had challenged him for it; yet
after that, cried out of his imborne corruption, and affirmed that to be the
cause of the other, saying, I was borne in sin, and by that, was carried to
sin against thee in secret, and so tell to shameful and open sin in the
fight of men.

The use of this doctrine is, Use.
that we should be wary against willing offendings, and if yet through frailty
we be overtaken any way, to espy it speedily and expel it, and in no sort to
set a bold face upon it, as though nothing were amiss, which if we do, may
be the beginning of we know not what trouble. But seeing the further uses of
this, are set down in the next point, I refer the Reader thither. And this
be said of the first of the four things, about Saul's confession, and what a
shame it was to him to be brought to it, after many bold denyals of his fault.

Doct. 22. Few such men to be found, as may be believed upon on their word.
Now follows the second, to wit, how he was brought to it, and that was by
the Lord himself; It was he that wrung this confession from Saul, and to make
him see his sin, whereby, this he brought to pass, that he made Saul eat
his own word, by confessing his fault; yea, even that which he had so
stiffely defended to be no fault at all, as we have heard. But is it credible
will some say, that when he had boldly, and openly, and ost times denied, that
he had displeased God, in that with which he was charged, that he could be
brought to confess the contrary? might it be thought, that he could bear
such shame and reproach, being so great a person, when a mean and inferior body
would hardly have gone under it? what shall we then say if he came to confess
it, (as it is clear he did) but this, whom may a man believe, when he speaks
good words? as Saul did here: whom, if thousands had heard him, they would
have thought he had answered a most sound truth unto the Prophet.

Indeed I must needs say, Es^^^i^lly (...) of (...) cred^^, etc.
that this and such like examples do teach, that there is much falsehood and
deceit, in man's heart, and that further then we have proof and experience of
men's truth and sincerity, in good conscience keeping: we ought not to be too
credulous, nor too ready to believe them in their own case, when they pretend
to tell a truth, and go about to clear themselves from accusation. And most
of all, if it be in a matter concerning their profit or pleasure, as well as
their credit. For, men will lie most grossly, to enrich themselves, and to
seek their pleasure and estimation; and therefore, when these be in ieopardy,
and cannot be vpholden, but by a lie, he is a rare man, which in such a case
will not strain his conscience; yea, and go directly against it, both secretly
in doing, and openly in defending evil. Such a sway sin bears in a man,
and so dear it is to him, that nothing can separate them two, but death; they
are sworn friends, and even as two twins, which go together, and grow
together, so that hurt one, and hurt both; green one, and grieve both; so that
Ruth was not so nearly knit to Naomi, her mother in law, as these, when she
said, Ruth 1.
God do so and so to me, if any thing but death separate us twain.

Now therefore, 2.
they being thus fast knit and linked together, they do as it were, swear
each to other (even like a band of thieves together) that they will never
bewray one another. And hereby it does come to pass, that when men have sinned
grievously, and are brouhgt forth by most clear and evident witnesses, to shame
and punishment; yet hardly, and with much ado, will they be made to confess
it, whereby they cause many to think them innocent, and falsely charged. And
yet to the bewraying of such, and bringing them forth to their shame, and that
the just and upright, who come against them, may be justified, God does often
times himself (when there is no other way to be wray them) bring their
wickedness to light, or force them to confess their guiltiness at length,
even as we see it came to pass here in Saul, and daily does and has done in
sundry other. But the Devil holds them at this point, as long as he can, in
the hiding or denying of the same, till a stronger then he, whom they are not
able to resist, constrains them to say, we have sinned.

And thus it was with Saul, God is in the conscience of hypocrites, forcing
them to betray themselves.
the Lord would have the secrets of his heart disclosed, who had so long and
stiffely denied his sin. And therefore he would bring him to confession of it,
though to no benefit of his own; yet for the instruction of his Church, to the
worlds end: It was neither wrung from him by force (for what man might
constrain him) neither was he brought to it by flattery (for he that dea^t
with him to confess, was Samuel, the Lords faithful Prophet) no, neither did
the most weighty conuincing him by the same Prophet, prevail with him, nor
persuade him to repentance, nor so much as to knowledge his sin, for that he
had done in the verses going before: but Saul washed off all, as we have
heard. But the Lord drew him into it by strong hand, whom he could not resist
nor withstand.

And though the telling him of losing his kingdom went near him; and it is
certain, that he would have done very much, to have kept and retained it, and
he was more moved with the hearing of that word, then all that concerned the
saving of his soul. Yet what was his confession able to do, toward the
preserving of his kingdom, which he knew well enough. It was the Lord
therefore that drew him to confess. And it may teach us, that God who does
wonderful things, he also forces liars, dissemblers, and such as none can
wring from them, the least acknowledgement of sin, which yet is well known,
that they are guilty of it, and do (with tooth and nail (as they say) deny
it, yet after all this, the Lord will make, even themselves to bring it to
light, and confess it.

And this he does for these ends. Reasons 1.
First that all may know how bad and vile the heart of man is, and how stiff,
wilful and subtle it is, yea, and hardened, which would not easily be
believed, except the Lord should by some means bewray it, no other being more
auailable heereto, then the parties own confession, which is more then many
witnesses.

Secondly, 2.
the Lord does it to this end, that we should not hide, deny, or extenuate our
sins when we are convicted of them, or when we ought freely to confess them,
for by so doing we shall increase our sin, and either be forced afterward
with the more shame to confess it, as Saul here did, or be pressed with the
load and burden of it (when God shall visit us) to hardness of heart and
despair.

Thirdly, 3
that we should not be too light of credit to believe men upon their bare
word, no, although they be earnest therein, for they may (for all that) even
themselves avouch the contrary.

Lastly, 4.
to this end God will thus draw men to confession, to fear us from bold
denialls of the truth, and to teach us to rule our hearts, and govern our
lives in such good manner, that he be not driven to such unwelcome arrestings
of us.

To this end I think it not amiss, A remarkable instance of this doct.
to tell you of a report which a grave Preacher uttered in the Pulpit, and it
was this. There was a man who had committed a fearful murder. He was
convicted thereof by the Law, he utterly denied it: he was urged by his
friends to confess it, but in no wise would be brought to it: the Preacher
took him in hand, but he would not acknowledge it, he was brought to the place
of execution, and there he was much labored with to acknowledge it, but for
all this, he would yield no whit. What of all this, ye will ask, or to what
end is this example alleged? I answer to very great, for when all hope was
past, and he was casting down from the ladder, he clasped his hands about
the gallows, and cried out saying, it was I that committed the murder. It is
therefore to be feared, that at the death God will force such men to confess,
(to their woe) that which in their health and prosperity they would never be
brought to. We read of Achan, Joshua. 7. 21
a man of the most honorable tribe of Judah, Other examples.
that when Jericho was taken, and commandment was given, that no man should
take to his private use the execrable things (which were found in the spoil,
upon perrill of death; yet he seeing therein a goodly Babilonish garment, of
great price, and 200. shekles of silver, and a wedge of gold, coueted them and
took them: And when he saw that most solemn inquiry was made (by the Lords
commandment) for him that had committed the trespass through all the tribes
and families of Judah: so that he saw he must needs be found out, yet he
keeps his sin close, and goes for an honest man, (as he was of good wealth
and reputation among the people) and was thought no worse nor otherwise of,
then other his neighbors were, until he was bewrayed, and detected in the
scrutiny, and search which the Lord commanded to be made for the trespassers
by lotte. But to pass to another: when Gehazai the servant of the Prophet
Elisha, had seen great offers made to his master, of silver and gold by Naaman
the Syrian, for healing him of his leprosy, and that his master had refused
them, we read that he went after the noble man, when he was departed from the
Prophet, and by a lying speech, got of him two tallents of silver, and two
change of garments, and when he came as at other times, to stand before his
master, and to minister to him, and he had said to him, whence come thou
Gebazai? 2 King. 5. 25
did he confess it? nay: but with a bold lie covered the fact, slightly
answering, thy servant went no whether, meaning he was but where he should be,
that is about his business: Who would have said, that such an one, being servant
of so holy a man of God, would have wrought such villainy, and have cloaked it
so craftily as he had done, and still would have done, if the Lord had not
bewrayed him to his master? So sweet is man's sin, and so covertly it will
wind in with them that even the wise may be deceived in judging of them, and
would not think so hardly of them, as they give occasion: Which our Savior
knowing, Ioh. 2.
namely, what depth of subtlety and hollownes was in men's hearts, did not
commit himself to many, though such as seeing his miracles, did make show that
they believed in him; and because God has made us acquainted with such a
truth, that there is much falsehood and deceit in the heart, even 7.
abhominacions as Solomon says.

The use heerof is, Use. 1.
that we ever have our hearts in jealousy, suspect and fear them, yea,
search them thoroughly and and prove them, yea, in the things which we love
best, that we be not found guilty of any treachery, Note.
and unfaithful dealing before God, but that our innocence and integrity, may
always be found to abide with, and accompany us, and that whatsoever the
wicked world delight to judge of us, yet they may not have, no not so much as
any show of matter, justly to convict us of: that so we may have that sweet
and precious liberty to rejoice in, which the Prophet makes so great reckning
of, when he says, hereby I know that thou love me, Psalm. 41. 12.
because mine enemy does not triumph over me, but thou hold me in mine
integrity.

Also this should teach us, Use.2.
that we should not be over hasty, to judge and determine of men's estates, no
although we see some good tokens in them, by embracing the tidings of the
gospel, more readily and cheerfully then the common sort do, till we have
experience and proof of their syncerity and faithfulness: for every fair
countenance to it, and to the professors of it, in the time of peace, is no
sufficient testimony for us to judge of their vprightnes; yet neither is it my
meaning to condemn or judge hardly of them, whose hearts we know not, neither
can gage: but as charity is not suspicious but hops well, even so to judge
and speak of them: much less is it meet for us to persuade our selves, that
such as have no care in them, but a show of godliness, by worshipping of God
with us publicly, are to be taken for faithful christians, especially when
we see, with our living with them, that they deny the power of godliness, to
rule in their words and actions: Note.
and yet I say not of those that be such, that we are to give any final
sentence upon them, seeing the Lord changes when and whom he will.

And further, Use. 3.
let us mark that we should not fear ever the more, if we walk in
innocence, though wicked men be secure, bold, and justify their badliues,
sometime shamelesly, as though they would make us believe that God allowed of
their course, and utterly condemned ours: for so it might seemesomtime, when
we see them prosper, and our selves under the cross, even as the godly
Prophet himself was troubled with this temptation, that, he did in vain
cleanse his heart and wash his hands in innocence when he saw them merriest,
Psalm. 73. 3.
who lived most securely and worst.

But this example of Saul and such like, do free us from such fear. For they
must come to confess, that all the iollity of theirs was but froth, and that
they highly displeased God, in the midst of their security, and therefore had
more cause to houle: yea, all such glory of theirs must be to their shame: and
they must vomit up their sweet morsells: And as the Psalmist faith, fret not at
the ungodly whose ways does prosper, Psalm. 37. 1.
for suddenly they shall come to a fearful end: So I say: fear not to see
them bold in evil, as though they could make it good in the end, for assuredly
the time must come, when they must wish that they had never done it, and
confess that therein especially they sinned, in which they most gloried: and
if it be so, then we may well say with the Apostle, what fruit had ye in
those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Romans. 6.
It is the part of a wise man, to begin with some hardness, that he may
afterward enjoy more ease; and our Savior so teaches his, that they must
weep and lament, Job. 16. 20.
but their mourning shall be turned into joy: Whereas the foolish world does
contrarily, for it rejoices in stolen and unlawful liberties, which cannot
hold long: and when they have done; and would feign cloak them, they must go
to howling, sorrow and shame, for committing them: And it comes the hardlier
upon them, and is more unwelcome to them, because they accustoming themselves
to pleasure and ease, they looked for no breaking it of, nor for any change.
And what other cheer did our forefathers find in the book of Judges, in all
their casting of the Lords government and service, but crying? The which what
wise men would have sought and procured it to themselves, especially when it
must be continual, as the most is in such a case, because every one cannot
cry to repent, and therefore must cry in despair and impenitencie.

And because I think this think this point is sufficiently seen into, The
godly have small cause to long after the wickeds deynties.
I will shut it up, concluding upon this that has been said, and up on like
experience, that for my part it little moves me to see men walk after their
own desires, and to be (as they say) at their own hand, to be lawless as it
were, sinning with pride and contempt of reproof, and admonition, and to
please themselves in that which is evil. I say, it little moves me to think
them the only happy people, who live in a manner as they luft, and set
themselves a stint how far, and beyond which they will not go in serving
God: I lament the estate of all such, as look after no serious and true
worshipping of him; more particularly, the sloth, pride, and prophanenes of
many in the ministry: the little regarding of Gods matters, and setting up of
his honor, and magnifying the gospel as they may: in many of them who have
rule over other, how little care they have to rule themselves? (though no time
be too much to look after their own profit, pleasure and preferment) and in all
sorts of people how preposterously they go to work, setting earth before
heaven, darkness before light, loving their foolish delights more then God,
and having a show of godliness, yet deny the power thereof, and are strangers
from the life of God, I see their sorrow and woe not sarre of; Oh that I could
persuade them, that which I know; and that mine eyes were a fountain of
tears, that I could weep bitterly, for the desolation that shall come on
them. for let them say as long as they will with Saul; we in thus living, do
please God and obey him, they shall (as little as they think it) confess with
Saul, that even therein they have sinned; and thereby undone themselves.

A question whether Saul repented.
VERSE. 24. and 25. And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have
transgressed the commandemen of the LORD, and thy words; because I feared the
people, and obeyed their voice.

Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with me, that I
may worship the LORD.

TWO of the four things have been spoken of, the third follows.

Therefore to pass to the third of the four points, touching Saul's
confession, whether he also repented. As the Disciples said of Lazarus to
Jesus, Lord if he sleep he shall do well: so say some of Saul, if he be
come to confess his sin, he shall do well: considering how far of he was
from it, and how hardly he was brought to it. Iudasses confession). (...) nor
he constant in it, and therefore it was far from being a fruit of repentance.

But seeing the cause must first be reasoned of, before it be concluded* I will
first say on both sides somewhat; I mean what likelihood of repentance was in
Saul: and on the other side, what may be brought forth and said against it,
whereupon the truth will soon appear.

That which may most probably be said for it, that I can see or find, is this.
First, that this confession of sin was not only in general, but also
particular, and of that very sin with which he was charged, and which he had
before denied. For if it had been but general, it might have seemed to be
less regarded. And as he did it particularly, so it was that, wherein he had
most offended. Secondly, this may be said for some likelihood of his
repentance, that he did after this, call Samuel to go with him to worship
God, and desired him to pray for him.

But these were very weak proofs, as shall easily appear by them, that shall
be brought on the contrary, and by that which shall further be said of them.
For concerning his confession, it was no better then Iudasses, Mat. 27. 4.
which was also of a particular sin, and that which most concerned him, as may
be seen by his words, when he said, I have sinned in betraying the innocent
blood: and it was nothing like David's in soundnes, who yet did confess, but
generally, saying, I have sinned. Indeed for the outward manner of Saul's
confession laid forth in words, 2 Samuel 12. 1^
there can no ecception be made against it: And I grant that there was no more
to be seen in the confession of the people of Israel, 2 Samuel 12.
whereby they testified their true repentance. But we must know that repentance
is never in the scripture, neither ought of us to be measured by the outward
confession only, but by the vprightnes of heart; lamenting after God, who has
been so sore provoked, and by the unfeigned faith of the party, and by the
renouncing and forsaking of sin.

These graces must be found to accompany confession, Note.
so that it may be sound and good, and without them it is nothing worth: and
Saul's being void of these, was in no wise to be taken for a true note of
repentance. And that these must go with confession, is to be seen in many
places of scripture. For David's confession, that it came both from faith and
repentance, is clear by Nathans words, saying to him, upon his confession
made, the Lord has forgiven thee thy sin: which is never obtained without
them. And so Solomon says: Prou. 28.
he that confesses and forsakes his sin (which is done of none, but of him
who believes it to be forgiven him) he shall find mercy. And therefore
Saul's confession, not going with the forsaking of his sin (for he waxed
worse after it) neither coming from faith, which must have gone before both, I
conclude, that it was void of repentance. And for his worshipping of God which
is the other thing alleged to prove it, seeing he grew worse after it, let
all judge as they ought, and they shall find that as weak, to witness so
weighty a matter, as his confession does, for what change was in him after
(except from evil to worse) or what sign all that present time, or afterward
that his heart relented, and melted for displeasing God? without the which, all
the rest was but as the morning dew, which is soon licked away with the heat
of the Sun: Indeed he said, I have sinned, yea, and to Samuel pray for me
to the Lord, that he would forgive my sin; and again: return with me that I
may worship the Lord: but what of all this? Did he not show himself to be the
same he was before?

But to say any more of Saul's sin, seeing it is manifest in the story
following, and I shall have occasion in my text to say enough of it, I will not
trouble the reader with needless repetitions, but refer him thither.

And thus much of the third point of the four, whether Saul in confessing his
sin, repented also.

From which discourse, Use of this discourse.
yet let this be learned, that many Protestants in our days, come far behind
Saul in his confession: for he made it particularly, and of that sin which
was most brought against him of all other, by Samuel: but those, of whom I
speak, make either no confession, or in general only, as that we are all
sinners; or if of particulars, they shall be such as concern them not: as if
a worldly man should pray against pride and drunkenness, or when they say the
Confession in the Church after the Minister, never marking what they say: and
the best of them do but as he did, that is, confess particularly without
repentance. And those that practice these manners of confession, are many
thousands. These come behind Saul in their confession, as they may easily see.

But to go a little further: let the best look that they have better proofs
of their good estate and welfare to Godward, then the confessing of their
sins, how particularly soever they be made: for, they are no good evidences
thereof. Yea, and not only so, but let them as well beware, that other shows
of godliness (as weeping for sin sometime) do not deceive them, or any other
common gifts of the Spirit, as to be sometime well moved at a Sermon, for none
of them can witness their assurance, or be sound and clear proofs to them of
their salvation.

And therefore let other weak Christians take heed, that they be not
offended, neither take occasion to depart from their good beginnings in their
profession, when they shall see such, who are of good hope, to go away from the
good that seemed to be in them: neither let them faint and say, oh they shall
never hold out to the end, seeing such as they, are thought to be far before
them, are fallen away and revolted. Finally, let us seek out better and surer
proofs of our repentance, and true turning to God, then confessing of sin
only, and calling on God, as those: that we may clear our consciences before
God and men, and that we depart from iniquity, and be not tainted or branded
with any kind thereof, willingly.

Doct. 23. The Hypocrite bewrayes himself, even in his best actions.
I will now proceed to the fourth and last point: he did not show himself to
be the same he was before, I say therefore that Saul, even in his confession,
showed himself an Hypocrite, and that by his own words, who was so accustomed
to accuse sin, by hollow and slight dealing, that even now, when he was at the
best, and came most near to repentance of all other times; yet even now (I
say) he could not be free from it.

For, lest he should have laid too great fault on himself, in confessing his
sin, therefore saying, I have sinned: therefore he said, The 12. note.
I was afraid, if I had not yielded to them, contrary to Gods Commandment, to
save alive the best of the cattle, that they would have rebelled and have risen
up a against me. Lo, this was the bladder without wind, and cloud without
water, which appeared in Saul, when he was at the best, I mean, brought to
confess his sin, which was nothing but a lie, and a colored excuse. For, the
Lord by the Prophet, in the 19 verse, convinced him of a covetous mind and
disobedient, that he himself turned to the prey. So, that as he was hardly
brought thus far, as to confess his sin, so yet when he did it, it was
for fear of losing his Kingdom: yet, even this (which seemed good in him) was
corrupt and naught: for besides that, he bewrayed so much himself, as I have
said, by excusing his fact, so does the Spirit of God by Samuel, bewray the
same in the next verse, where he plainly shows, that he did not accept, nor
allow of it. What shall we say then, if it be thus? Hard for an hypocrite to
leave his trade.
Truly this: that it is an hard thing for an hypocrite, to leave and forgo his
trade of dissembling, even as it was for Demetrius, Acts 19.
to forgo his wicked gain; and for the Blackmore to change his skin, by
washing; which, though it be true of all sins leaning to manward; yet
somewhat more it may be said of the hypocrite, then of other sinners: For an
open offender (as Paul and the Iaylour were) when he is pricked in conscience,
and troubled in mind, shall much easilier be persuaded, that it is in truth,
and shall be forgiven then the hypocrite shall: not that I stint or restrain
the work of the Spirit, that it cannot be as effectual in one, as in
another: but God so disposes ordinarily, that the hypocrite having sinned more
grossly and grievously, shall be harderly able to apply, and be persuaded of
Gods promises, then other sinners; though they be in a like manner delivered
to them both. Ordinarily, I say (though God may, when it pleases him, do
otherwise) but he shall long (for the most part) be under the doctrine,
before he shall resolve of his uprightness.

Whereby it may be seen, A long time ere any great good be done by preaching.
that we, by our preaching and private conferring, may a long time travel and
labor with wicked persons, before we can bring them to see, and turn from
their wicked lives, for the most will not be brought to it (but hope they
serve God, as well as others do) and when we have prevailed so far with them,
as to make them see and confess, as Saul here did somewhat; yet at times, we
have them in never the better case, for all that: but they deceive us still:
yea, themselves rather, and frustrate our hope, that we shall seem to have don
no good, inwearying our selves about them: so that the prophecy is fulfilled:
Ier. 6. 29.
The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed in the fire, the Founder melts
in vain, for the wicked are not taken away: as if he should say, that all the
labor that is taken with them, is lost: and is it not come to this same, or
like point at this day? for, to say nothing of sundry, yea, too many Ministers,
who are far from burning the bellows with any great painetaking (who yet must
know, Luke 19.
that they were hired by the Master of the work to labor, and not to loyter,
and to use their talent, and not to bury it in a napkin) how many diligent and
faithful Pastors, Mat. 11. 17
may make this complaint of the people: We have piped unto yo^, and ye have
not danced: we have mour^ed to you, and ye have not wept. All the day long
has the Lord stretched out his hand, Esaias 65. 2.
but to a disobedient and gaine-saying people: for, though they will hear us,
yet they do but as the people did to Ezechiel in his time: Ezekiel. 33. 32
they sat and heard his words, but they did not after them.

I speak not this, as if I did hereby go about, to persuade that all do so,
and that there is no fruit of our ministry and labors, where they are
faithfully and reuerendly bestowed, for then I should be too unthankful, who
confess that I know even in our parts, where I am best acquainted, that God
has blessed the labors of sundry, who have sought and desired it: and in many
places men have been turned from their evil ways, and to such as sat in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, light is risen up: And it is credible,
that if the ministers generally and throughout, sought the things that are
Christ's, more then their own, and counted it their joy, and that wherein they
might glory at the coming of the Lord, to win many: I say it is very
credible, and little to be feared that an 100. fold more fruitful harvest,
might be reaped by their pains and travel, them now may, or is to be looked
for: But yet to speak of the multitude and greatest number, even where there
is faithful laboring, yet there is small profiting: for, though many come to
confessing of their sin (as they did in the time of John Baptist, many then
came from Judea, and the Region round about Jordan, and were baptized of him,
confessing their sins: yet sundry of them being Pharisees and Scribes
repented not.) Even yet here are too many of them, who do not so lay their
sins to heart, as that they turn from them indeed; coming to the oath and
the covenant, as the people did in Nehemiahs time, that so they may bring forth
fruit, worthy amendment of life: whereas we would think, that when they are
brought so far, the worst were now past, and there were no more danger, or
fear of condemnation.

And what hinders or is the cause why it is not so? The cause hereof.
Even their false heart, and the deceitfulnes of sin; which has blindfolded
and hardened them: that we may learn, what a bondage it is to serve sin, and
for men to give over themselves to the allurements thereof: Whereas if we have
not obtained this at Gods hands, I mean to shake off that which we know will
be our overthrow; what have we to reioycein? I deny not, but that the
experiencedst Christians, have enough to do, to hold under their rebellious
hearts, and sin causes them often to cry out, ob wretched men that we are! but
yet for all that, they give not place to the lusts thereof, but rise again if
they be fallen, and cannot be well in themselves, till they return under Gods
government, where alone they count it good, being to remain.

But when men come to know, Cantic. 5. 3.
there is no peace to the ungodly, and namely, whilst they lie in any known
sin, and when they have confessed and professed against it; yet become slaves
to it again, this is in no wise tolerable: such by custom, and long lying
therein, provide, that when they would show themselves best of all; yet they
cannot then deal plainly, but they shall bewray themselves, to such as can
judge, that they do but halt, and deal hollowly, as Saul here did. For, what
does more bewray them, then their own words, when they shall be ready to
allege, being urged to uprightness and care; they hope there is reason in all
things, an they cannot be Saints, they say, in this life, and they are sure
all are sinners, with such like.

And as this may be observed to be an usual thing, A return to the doctrine:
and fuller clearing of it.
with men of little conscience, throughout their whole course, that though they
acknowledge themselves to be sinners, even in those things, which sometime
they would defend, and maintain to be no faults; yet they forsake them not,
neither abandon them utterly: so ye may see it to be with them, even in time
of affliction, Note well.
to wit, that they be but hollow, as we must think it now to have been with
Saul, when in Gods displeasure, he sent the Prophet to tell him, that he
should lose the best thing he had, even his kingdom.

And yet who would not think, that at such times, men would be ready to yield
to any condition, so that they might be delivered from such troubles, as
oppress them? And much, I grant, they will yield and promise, Examples.
then for fear: but (as ye have heard of him) not heartily, nor in truth. God
had so acquainted Pharaoh, with his punishing of his treachery and
disobedience, that he brought him often to confess his fault, and to covenant
the contrary: but ever, when he should perform and keep his covenant, he
went from it, and dealt falsely: whereupon, all such hollow and dodble dealing,
was called Pharaohs sin.

A most lively pattern of this, Psalm. 38. 34
David sets down, of the people of Israel, out of former histories, saying:
When he slew and plagued them, then they sought him, and they returned, and
sought God early, and they remembered that God was their strength, and the most
high God, their Redeemer: but they flattered him with their mouth, and
dissembled with him, with their tongue: for their heart was not upright with
him, neither were they faithful in his covenant: whereby may be gathered most
clearly, that though they sought to God, for fear of punishment; yet such was
their falsehood, that in their hearts they loved him not: and therefore, could
not mean well and truly, not having due consideration, in their good
speeches, what they said: And yet this is the best dealing, that such deceivers
and dissemblers can afford him: for, as Traitors set on the rack, do utter
much, who yet love not the Magistrate, who racks them: so sinners confess much
under the cross; but by constraint and violence, not willingly and humbly to
iustisie God in his punishing of them, nor for that they are persuaded he
loves them, and therefore they can show none to him again. And therefore, if
men can do no more, but so, idest, confess in theit afflictions, some faults
to God, as the boy under the rod: if neither before their afflictions, they
gave true testimonies of their repentance, nor after, bring forth fruits of
amendment. They are in no better account with God, then they, who never made
any profession, or protestation of amendment, at all.



Reasons why God urges the bad to confession, although bootlesse.
why God does bring them thus far, as to confess against themselves, though
they be never the better for it. One is in respect of his faithful people, 1.
that while he holds the wicked under the cross, Note.
the faithful may have more freedom and liberty to serve him; as the people
of Israel had, while Pharaoh was plagued. For, as many breaches in the sea
banks, may be repaired while the sea goes away: and much corn in the
inconstant weather, may be reaped by the husbandman, while the day is fair
and clear: so the godly may edify, and build up themselves in faith, fear
and the knowledge of God, while he puts his hook in the nostrils of the
wicked, and bridles them from rage, by such a forcing of them to confess it to
be good and holy to live so: and themselves to be held under, with fear of
Gods judgments, is a righteous thing in the sight of God, and the godly are
more encouraged thereto, when they hear the way of godliness to be commended
by them, who were wont to speak evil of it, and to persecute those, which
were the zealousest embracers of it: As, who does not know what an emboldening
it was, to the poor Disciples at Damascus, and round about it, when they heard
that Saul their Archenemy, who brought letters from the high Priests to
imprison them, was constrained by the mighty power of God, to renounce and cry
out of his doing, and to confess his cruelty against the Saints, and to
justify them; yea, when it was not known to them, that he had repented;
neither durst they, as yet, trust to him, that he was truly converted.

And this is one cause, why God does suffer the bad, sometime to confess their
sins, and accuse themselves, although they should not come to true repentance,
and this is done, as all may see, for the Faithfuls sake.

Another cause is, in respect of the wicked themselves, and that is this, that
while they are forced to justify and allow of the sincere course of the
servants of God, and to cry out of their own, they condemn their former
ways, when they lay in sin, and pursued those that were better then
themselves, and they do thereby give sentence against themselves, if ever they
do the like again. And thus much of the painted show of repentance in
hypocrites, by occasion of Saul's confession. And this be said of Saul's
hypocrisy, the last of the sour things concerning his confession.

Now to go forward, seeing Saul said also besides in this verse, that he had
done against the words that Samuel spoke to him, and said moreover, that he
feared the people; therefore of both these a little. For the first: the words
that Samuel spoke to Saul, were the reproving of his sin, and the conuincing
him of it, and the aggravating thereof, as God had commanded him to do. All
which words we have heard, how boldly Saul washed them off, and was nothing
moved at the hearing of any of them.

How is it then, that he now acknowledges, that he had sore offended, in
setting so light by the same? I grant, that his words were but froth, and that
it was but a sudden pang, that caused him to utter them: but yet we see, God
forced him thereto; to the end that he might thereby bewray his hypocrisy,
when it might be seen that he amended not for all that, and also to leave
good instruction thereby, to all posterity in time to come.

Doct. 24. The most careless hearers, shall one day condemn themselves
For thereby we may see and learn that how little regard soever men have of
good lessons, exhortations, and admonitions, for the time when they receive
them (as too commonly we see it to be so) yet so much the more they show
themselves to be destitute of the fear of God, and bewray themselves to be
far from a teachable mind who do so, for the time shall come, in which they
shall find great fault with themselves, for their so doing, and for their
sleeuelesse regard that they have had thereof, even as we see that Saul here
did; or else they shall show themselves, to be in worse case toward God, then
if they did so.

The many Sermons that are slightly heard and little regarded, even as if they
were also as little worth their loose and negligent hearing of them, shall one
day be cried out of as fast, and the committers of the sin, shall cast it up,
as unsavory morsells, which men shall wish most heartily, that they had never
taken them in: even so they shall wish a thousand times, that they had never
committed the sin. For such may not think that the remembering of a sin
afterward, when God shall load the offenders, with it, shall be like the time
wherein it was committed: which ought worthily to vex the conscience of such as
can rush violently into many sins, but are troubled for few: and lay on load
upon another, but cast off none, who if they judge not themselves before the
Lord judge them, the burden will press them down so, 1. Cor. 11.
and in such wise, as they shall not be able to bear it. And it shall be as
much to the comfort of those, who with honest and good hearts, hear and receive
the word now, while it is preached to them, and fear their own frailty, that
they may not offend. They shall not have such after reckonings brought against
them, as Saul here had when he said to Samuel, I have transgressed against
thy words: and as many other have, who hoard up sorrow against themselves for
long time after, because they would not receive instruction a long time before.

And this of the first of the two speeches which Saul vttred, when he (beside
the confession of his sin against God) said also to Samuel, I have
transgressed against thy words.

Doct. 25. The least hope of concealment hardens the hypocrite in sin.
The second follows which was this: [ I was afraid of the people] How he
bewrayed his hypocrisy in these words, even when he confessed his sin, I
have showed before. The thing that I note out of them here, is this: that he
thinking Samuel could not find out this that he alleged, to wit, that he
feared the people, whither he did so or no: he did therefore stand stiffely
upon that, although it was an untruth that he spoke. But herein is lively
bewrayed a common sin among us, namely this: that if an offender think and
be resolved that his fault be hidden from men, no persuasion can cause him to
confess it. The reason hereof in such is, partly, seeing if it be not wrung
from them (which they most desired:) and partly seeing they think themselves
as safe as in a castle, if it be not known, (such is their blindenes and
hardness of heart,) whereas both the Lord has a thousand ways to bring it to
light, if he see it expedient so to do; and yet they are in no such safety
while they conceal it, as they imagaine, but rather in far greater danger,
both toward God, and the world also; to God seeing while they hide their sin,
they cannot prosper, neither repent while they harden their heart: and while
they do neither of both, what is their life worth, but the increasing of
sin, and heaping of judgment? And it is worse for them to menward, because
if it ever after come to light, they utterly loose their credit among men,
without which, it were better for them to be banished from their society, then
to live with them: And if it come not to light, yet they who have committed it,
walk among men, either wounded or hardened, but the least of both is miserable.
Ananias and Saphira his wife may exemplify this more clearly, and Gehazai
with many others.

VERSE. 25. Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with
me, that I may worship the LORD.

Now it is time to pass from Saules confession; The words cleared.
let us hear of the other good things, which are here said to have been in
him. The one was that he asked after Gods mercy, and the forgiveness of his
sin; and would have Samuel go with him to worship God: But before I go
further, let us first see what his meaning was, in bidding Samuel take away
his sin: seeing no man (as the scripture teaches) can forgive sins but God
only. Mat. 8.
The which being granted, it is not like that he meant as the words import,
that Samuel should take away his sin, but he either willed him that he
should pray to God for him) [as he was desired before to do for the people of
Israel] that he would forgive him, or else that he would as Gods mouth and
minister, pronounce him pardoned. For these two ways, the Prophet might then,
and the true ministers may now as instruments, be said to forgive and take away
sins. And whether of these two it was he meant, is not material.

Doct. 26. Gods favor is precious to the worst at one time or other.
This being thus opened, whereby we see what his meaning was; now we may the
better see, what is to be learned from the words. For this is clear hereby,
that though Saul did not fear God unfeignedly, yet he sought now to have his
sins pardoned, and to do other duties to God: which clearly shows that
there is a time when Gods mercy is in price with evil persons, and the favor
of God is somewhat with them, though for a time they have no savor in them: For
what is the delight of the most, but in that which is transitory, as profit
and pleasure. But as such regard not goodness, but by fits and in their good
mood, so they commonly have never the fruit thereof, but deceive themselves,
by means that they have sometimes good motions. For their goodness is like a
morning dew, Hosea. 6. 4.
as the Prophet speaks, whereas it should be constant with them, and one
time as another. For that which is good in it own nature, is always, and not
in a passion to be esteemed and set by: for it is never in kind, but when it
is delighted in. And if that be kind setting by it, then it is the due and fit
season, to prise and esteem highly of it while we live, even always: as the
Prophet speaks; to day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts. 2.
Cor. 6. 1.
So the Apostle willing the Corinthians, that they should non receive the grace
of God (by which he meant the gospel, in vain: Luke 19. 41.
tells them that it was the acceptable time for them to receive and embrace it,
even then when they might in their health, and when it was preached unto them.
And for the neglect of this, that they did not know the time of their
visitation, Christ made that patheticall lamentation over Jerusalem, saying: oh
that thou had known in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace,
but now they are hidden from thee! And as heavenly things, to wit, Gods mercy,
and his true service are always to be accounted of: so in what manner they are
to be prized; let David tell us in that Psalm wherein he seeks mercy,
Psalm. 51. 1
in what a seruent manner he did it: Thus he faith, Have mercy on me [O God]
according to thy great mercy, and according to the multitude of thy
compassions, do away mine offenses. But with grief I speak it, Use of
reproof.
beside that the better sort are too too slouthful, and make too small account
of grace and goodness: so too many drive them off from day to day, and say they
hope to obtain them, and the mercy of God at the last, as well to their
contentment and comfort, as they who have sought them all the days of their
life, by which their speech and practice: they give fearful testimony, that
they shall never have any part in them. Thus much of Saul's words in seeking
forgiveness of his sin.

Secondly, Hipocrites know what Gods due is, though they delight not in it.
note in that he now offers to go worship God, that hypocrites know what Gods
due is from them and how they should deal with him, in often and fervent praying
to him, and walking with him, and that they do not well when they do
otherwise: yea, they go far that way, every one as he has more knowledge
then other, as also may be seen here in Saul, who knew many things
concerning his duty. But unless it be when they are in trouble or in a good
mood, little serves them, but they have soon done in any earnest manner with
serving God: for it is certain they have no delight therein, but draw near to
God with their bodies, their hearts being far from him. Mat. 15.
And when they are driven to look to their doings, any thing more then
commonly they do, they see that it is nothing, well with them. And if ^hey
could be brought to examination of them seriously, they would condemn their
course utterly: whereby let them know that their painting and dissembling with
God) is nothing less then true serving of him, and that in seeking to please
him with the work done, Use. 1.
they displease him most highly. And let this be spoken to the joy of all
upright hearted Christians, for that their reward is great with God, how much a
do soever they have with men, to hold on constantly in their good beginning,
but are diswaded and discouraged. For in this soundnes of heart (constancy in
the same being added) in one condition of life as in another, to endeavor to
obey God, they do cheerfully differ from the other, and are discerned from
them. For the hypocrite, as it is said in Job, Job. 27.
does not serve God always, that is one time as another; in prosperity as
adversity.

And let this warn us, Use. 27.
not to use the holy ordinances of God, only for a color, to stop the Lords
mouth withal, and to satisfy him therewith, that is with a form of worship,
which is odious always, the heart being hollow and false, but especially when
opinion of merit goes with it.

The words cleared. A question How far forth we may converse with offenders?
VERSE. 26. And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou
have rejected the the word of the LORD, and the LORD has rejected thee from
being king over Israel.

We have heard how Saul prayed Samuel, to go with him, that he might worship
God, and beseech him for pardon of his sin, and it is said here that Samuel
refused to go with him: this was a strange answer of Samuel, this sternenes
and techenes of his, (some will be ready to say) is not to be borne, for what
could he have of him more, when he had confessed his sin, desired him to
pray for him, and to go with him, that he might call upon God? I say Samuel
(God revealing it to him) so all this was but dawbing with untempered mortar,
David when the Prophet Nathan came unto him, for he freely confessed his sin
against the Lord, and did not lay it upon any other: therefore the Prophet
answered, the Lord has forgiven thy sin. So durst not Samuel say to Saul,
yea, rather therefore he refused to go with him, seeing he did not repent, but
dealt hollowly, least he should have allowed him in his sin. I grant, that
which Saul said was enough to satisfice men, who look but to outward signs of
repentance, and have not authority to search the heart; but God by his spirit
revealed to Samuel a further thing, which when he saw, namely Saul's hollow
dealing, he might not conceal it, therefore he bewrayed it to him, saying,
for all his confession, thou have cast away the word of the Lord.

A 2. question.
But it will be demanded of us who preach the gospel, and lay forth this and
other scriptures; If Samuel be thus excused and cleared, and his action
against Saul, defended, it will be demanded (I say) whether we dare, or may do
the like, toward any great and honorable person, who asking us counsel from
God, what he is to do, to obtain pardon of his sin, should acknowledge any
disobedience of his against the Lord, as Samuel did to Saul: If they should,
they were worthy (it will be said) to be thrust out from having any access
unto such persons, to teach them more discretion and reverence toward them.

and calling from God to do a message from him to any such, I will declare:
and this I say; if any such should give outward signs of repentance by
confessing his sins, craving pardon of God, and our joining in prayer with him,
and should make promise of amendment, it were our duty to allow of it, so far
as we can see and judge, yea, and be glad of it also, (for where may we find
so much as appeared in Saul, in meaner persons then kings) requiring of the
party in the name of God in all submission, that he look that all truth and
faithfulness be theretoo adjoined, seeing God has an eye to the heart, and so
we are to deal with meaner persons also: but if God should reveal to us, Ier.
5.3.
any apparent signs of counterfaite and double dealing in him, as he did to
Samuel in Saul, and that we may be able to convince him thereof plainly, so
that he cannot deny it; then we are in no wise to justify his estate, but
having a calling thereto, lay out the dangers thereof, clearly and
effectually, and labor that he may see, and so lay it nearer unto heart, and
acknowledge that his hollow and double dealing with God, Leuit. 19.
that he may receive him. For otherwise, we should hate him if we should
flatter him, and not tell him of his sin and the danger thereby.

And by this objection thus Vse*^
answered, I may fitly take occasion to show, and it may easily be gathered,
how we ought to walk with and behave our selves toward them who do amiss,
of which sort, there are especially three. Three sort of offenders, and how we
are to deal with them.
And first toward such as give small hope, that there is any soundnes and true
fear of God in them, but do set a good face upon their doings, that they may
be thought and taken for good professors, although indeed they cast away the
word of the Lord, that it shall not rule them, The 1. sort hollow professors.
And with such we ought so to live, that we offer them all good measure in
neighbourlynes, but not be allowers of, nor bearers with their sin, nor to
have any such near familiarity with them, that thereby they may be emboldened
to remain in it, as they shall easily be, when they shall see us, who
profess the renouncing and abhorring of all sin, to be so merry with them,
whom we know to live in open sin.

And yet, I say not, that we should disdain or contemn them in the least
manner, though their lives be evil, as long as they refuse not to hear; but
be gentle and meek toward them, and give them their due, even the reverence
that belongs to them, in respect of their age, authority, estate, degree, or
gifts, which they have; but diligently taking heed, as I said, that we
tolerate not, neither allow of their evil ways.

And so does S. Paul command: if any that is called a brother, 1 Cor. 6.11.
be a Fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a Rayler, or a Drunkard, or
an Extortioner, with such an one eat not, neither company: but as he
restrains his speech, so do I: that if we know them not, neither live with
them, or be not yet acquainted, though we live with them, we should not make
conscience of using them familiarly: for we must show our selves kind to
strangers, and such we must hope to win to God thereby: for else we must go
out of this world. And this I say of the duties, to the first of the three. 2.
Sort. Such as offend by weakness.


But to go to the second sort: if any of good hope that we live with, do
fall into any fault by occasion, as either by the subtle delusions of the
Devil, or his own flesh, we who have, by the grace of God, any greater
liberty from sin, and have more freedom to follow the direction of Gods
Spirit, Gal. 6. 1.
must labor, and be ready to restore such an one with meekness, considering
our selves, lest we also be tempted in like manner: for, in such a case, we
would be glad of the best advice and counsel, and to be handled kindly, and
faithfully dealt with, to the end we might be recovered again, and comforted.

But to pass to the third sort: 3. Sort. Open sinners.
if ye ask whether we should not also bear with such, as be open offenders,
and cast away the commandment, Quest.
as yet, and profess that they will not be ruled by it, lest if we wink not
at their fault, our own should not be winked at.

Note.
for our hating and disallowing of sin, in other wicked persons. But will
keep us the rather, that such foul blots fall not out in our selves, when we
in a good conscience, do abhor them deadly in others.

And thus I having answered, how we ought to behave our selves, toward these
three sorts; I conclude, that we should follow Samuels practice here, toward
such as Saul was, as knowledge guides, who did not neglect, but take an
opportunity, to admonish and advise Saul, so long as there was hope; but when
he professed to turn from his sin, and yet even then dealt hollowly and
doubly; Samuel would not allow, nor bear him in it, but sought to depart from
him, rather rhen he would go with him to worship God, in the case he was in,
as he would have had him. Even so, when men in their words and deeds, bewray
their treachery against God, tell them of it, as long as they will hear it;
but, if they cast that loving admonition off, and put away the Word of God from
guiding them, leave them in it, rather then have fellowship with them, that
they may see for what cause they be forsaken, and so (if it please God) they
may come to amendment; but yet love and pity them, that when God shall give
further opportunity, we may do them good. As the Apostle to the Thessalonians
exhorts in the like case.

Doct. 26. We must do nothing, of which we cannot yield good reason.
Thus much of Samuels refusing to go with Saul; now of the reason that he
rendered, why he would not go with him, and that was, because he had cast off
the Word of the Lord. For which cause, the Lord had also cast him off, from
being King. In which words, consider two things, the first concerns Samuel,
the other Saul From the first we learn, that we should be able to yield a
reason of our doings always, and show it also, when it is expedient so to do.
For if we cannot render a reason of them, we do them slightly, at least, if
not rashly and dangerously: so that we may be ashamed to men ward, and repent
before God. And that which S. Peter requires concerning our religion and
faith; that we should be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks of us, a reason of the hope that is in us: 1 Pet. 3. 15
that rule, I say, holds with the like equity in our conversation, that we
should be ready to give a reason, why we live thus, or so; and why we do
this, or that.

And the very heathen Cicero advises, that a wise man should do nothing,
whereof he cannot yield a probable reason. All that I have said, is to the
just reproof of such, as have little regard what they do, or how they live:
who therefore are of no credit, nor account with God, or the better sort of
men, seeing they look not to give a reason of their doings. But it is not meat
for wise Christians to hang and depend on men's mouths, for the allowance and
commendation of their doings, whether they be good or no: but to go by a
better rule, to wit, of examining and observing their ways, so that they may
truly say, they having weighed them in the waights of the Sanctuary, I mean,
by the Word of God, that so they may be able to see, that they have done them
in a good conscience. Psalm. 119. 59.
So David considered his ways, and turned his feet into the way of Gods
testimonies. And they that judge themselves in secret before God, shall not be
ashamed of their doings openly before men.

Doct. 28. Nothing should hurt us, if we cast not off Gods yoke.
The next and last thing, that I observe in this verse, is that which
concerns Saul: that Samuel said to Saul, seeing thou have cast away the Word
of the Lord, he has cast away thee, that thou shall not be King over Israel,
so that if he had not done so, neither should he have been cast out of his
Kingdom. Where it is manifest, that if men did not as Saul, reject the Word, so
that it cannot govern them, Mat. 11. 29
and if they did not cast off Gods yoke, Psalm. 50. 16
hating to be reformed, they should have no cause to cry out, as they do, of
the heavy punishments which they meet with, and take hold of them, but rejoice
and praise God, for his many and great blessings. So faith the Psalmist: Psalm.
81. 13.
Oh that my people would have harkned unto me, and that Israel would have
walked in my ways! I would soon have brought low their enemies, and would
have turned my hand against them. But this, even this, that men will lie still
in their sin, and hold it fast, as the child does the sweet sugar in the
mouth, Job 20.
is the cause of all their complaints of sore afflictions, Note.
and loss of their best commodities; and heavy days, which though we shall
never be free from altogether, no not the best, while we carry flesh about us;
yet we might remedy it in great part, if God had any authority, and might
prevail with us. And if his own children will rebel, and break out of
compass to provoke him, he will chastize even them with his smarcy rods and
corrections. Even as the Lord spoke by the Prophet Obadiah, 2 Chronicles. 15. 1.
to Asa King of Judah, saying: O Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin, hear ye
me: The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; if ye seek him, he will be
found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. 1 Pet. 4. 18
If God then will execute punishment upon his own people, provoking him: what
marvel is it, though they be laden with judgments, who are none of his, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.
but his enemies? And further then both the one and the other, do humble
themselves, to walk with the Lord, they shall ever be in danger (as they may
here see in Saul) of losing their best jewels. Of which I speak the less
here, having handled it before in another doctrine.

VERSE 27, 28. And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the
skirt of his mantle, and it rent.

And Samuel said unto him, The LORD has rent the kingdom of Israel from thee
this day, and has given it to a neighbor of thine, that is better then thou.

IN this distress and perplexity of Saul, The text opened.
that he feared the loss of his kingdom, and yet could not hold the Prophet
with him, when he turned to go from him, Saul caught hold of his garment, and
it rent; this he did not in wrath against him, for then he would have used
great cruelty toward him; as Jeroboam in the like action, 1 Kin. 13. 3.
intended against the man of God: neither did he it, as testifying his earnest
desire, to be counseled and directed by him, which he refused all the time
the Prophet was with him (neither did he afterward any otherwise) but he did
it, only to keep him in presence with him; which, if he might have done, he
thought all should have been safe and well with him. For, he imagined there
was no cause of fear, while Samuel was in place and company with him, and by
that means, he thought to quiet himself, and to put away all such thoughts,
as through the message which he received from God, might have held him in
great unquietness, whereby he showed how loath and unwilling he was, to have
him depart from him. Which affection of his had deserved high commendation, if
he had desired Samuels staying with him, for the right end, to wit, that he
might have been to uprightness, and true repentance.

Doct. 28. Hypocrites may ascribe much to the means.
But it is clear, that he was far from it: but yet seeing he went about to
stay him, what may we learn of that, ye will (perhaps) ask, and what use
shall we make of it? I say, we learn thereby this, that though hypocrites have
not a sound and upright heart, yet they will ascribe somewhat to outward
means, as to hearing, and to the prayer of the lips, and to this among the
rest, that they may be well thought of among the godly, and therefore they
will have them sometime in their company.

And why do they so? Note.
verily not to be reformed; no, nor to be soundly informed by them: but they
think, that for their so doing, they are the better, and that God will so
account of them: and they flatter themselves in this, that they are herein
before others: thus measuring themselves, by those which are worse then
themselves, which is a false rule to go by: whereas they should propound to
themselves, the best examples to follow, as they follow Christ, Mat. 11. 29
yea and Christ himself and his doctrine.

But they imagine, that as God will hear them, for their much babbling; so he
will save them, for their accompanying sometime, with better men then
themselves. And thus we may gather, not only by Saul, and many among us; but
by the thoughts of them in the last day; who looking to be received of Christ,
for such duties doing, alleged this [Lord] we did eat and drink in thy
company: but Christ answering them, Depart from me, declared that they should
also have sauoured of his company, and have showed, that they were thereby
reclaimed from their evil ways, or else it was to small purpose to say, they
were in his company. So the Lord, by S. John, Revel. 2 5.
threatening to remove the Candle-sticke out of the place, except they amended,
did not only quicken up the godly thereby, but also awake and admonish the
wicked, that the Gospel should be taken from them, which they could not abide
to hear of.

Doct. 29. More do frequent good company, then profit thereby.
VERSE 27. And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt
of his mantle, and it rent.

BUT to pass to another thing, who sees not that this was extreme folly in a
wise man, that he could not but hold him in his company, and yet never the
better for it? 2 Kin. 3. 15.
So Iehoraem could could be content to serve his turn with Elisha the
Prophet, in his sore distress and danger, that he was in: but otherwise
regarded no whit his doctrine, nor message, to be reformed by it: but rather
hated him. Even as Ahabal, so his father was willing to have good tidings by
Michaiah, 1 Kin. 22.
when he went to war at Ramoth Gilead; but he was so far off, from hearing the
judgment of God, for his idolatry and disobedience at his mouth, or to be
willing to be converted from it, to the true worshipping of God, that he sent
him to prison with hunger and pain. Even so it is, I must needs say, the
heavy hand of God upon many among us, and a point of gross foolishness,
though otherwise they have wit and worldly wisdom with the most: that
notwithstanding, they be no Papists, to contemn and despise the Preachers of
the Word, yet they are not wise enough to make their profit of them: nay,
though they love them, as they do other men; yet do they not seek to know the
end, why they are set among them, and what use for the attaining of happiness,
they should seek to make of them.

It was revealed by God, Corrupt ends of men's conuersing with the Minister.
in ages past, though now more plainly in this latter age of ours, that
Prophets and Preachers, should be received for their office and message sake,
which is, that they bring tidings of blessedness, to be enjoyed both here, as
Luke 11. 28. and hereafter for ever, as Luke 1. 69. but how do people, for the
most part, regard and embrace this message of God, by their ministry? many of
them will, to get a good pennyworth in his tithes, at a good Ministers hands,
hold in and keep in favor with him; and if they obtain that, they will speak
well of him: others for some qualities of his, wherewith they are delighted; as
that he is a fit companion for them at play, a merry conceited person, and can
discourse well and wisely of worldly matters; for these and such like they
affect him.

And another sort, if they have one that bears the name of a learned man,
though he be little conuersing with them, or do them little good, will
perhaps glory of, and commend him, though they care not whether he teach them
or no.

That I say nothing of the ignorant and insufficient Ministers, with whom yet,
many are as well content (if not better) then with the ablest and best. But
what is all this? this is not to receive him for his office sake and Ministry,
as our Savior teaches men, Mat. 10.
to receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, that so they may have the
reward of a Prophet. And thus men suffer themselves, to be grossly bewitched,
that Saul was never more palpably deceived, in laboring to have Samuel with him
(when yet he sought no spiritual counsel, or comfort at his hands) then the
most are in our days, that like and allow of the Ministry, perhaps though many
do not so, and yet shall be found (if any list to examine it) not to look to
be enstructed by them, Acts 26. 18
nor turned from the power and dominion of Satan, to the sincere love and
obedience of God, neither to be called, and brought from darkness to light,
to faith and knowledge, which are the ends, why the Gospel is preached among
them; but only in some such respects, to like and receive them, as I have
before set down.

But is this the manner of accounting the Ministry and Ministers, as Gods holy
ordinance, and his singular gifts? is this to make prophecy and preaching
precious? Is this to account and esteem the tidings of the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 13.
as a pearl? for so the Scripture calls it) is this, to receive Gods holy
Messengers, as Angels; and to show, that their feet, or coming, is beautiful;
because they bring a glad message, and a message of peace unto them? Is it to
love, and esteem them so, as for their sakes, to be ready to pluck their own
eyes out, if need were, for the singular benefit, which they receive at their
hands, and by their means?

It does well appear that the near conjunction of true and christian love
between Gods faithful ministers and their flock, The true ends of this
fellowship much neglected.
which also ought to be betwixt all teachers, and the people committed to their
charge, is either not known, or not greatly in practice: And if the true
shepherd (as Christ teaches) will so love his flock, Job. 10. 5.
as he will loose goods and life for their sake, if occasion should be offered;
and if they be like affected to him, is there not (think we) some great
matter betwixt them, which causes this? And what is it? the natural father,
and son are not so nearely united as they: yea, greater things are enjoined
of one by the other, then betwixt them: for the father is but the mean of his
sons being at all; but the spiritual father is the instrument of his
everlasting welbeing: he can only convey or leave to his son, his temporal
possessions and goods; but this is a mean whereby eternal riches, yea, a
kingdom and that eternal, is enjoyed by them whom he begets by the
gospel: again, their love can be but natural, therefore not ever firm and
stable, but the love of these is spiritual, and therefore endures: and such
loving and living together, should be between the one and the other: which I
say, because the blind and the beastly world, who knows no whit of this,
when they see faithful love betwixt the teacher and people, do to their
further condemnation, reproachfully utter these speeches, that the people make
their minister their God: but while they thus speak, we may see that they see
cause to love them, and that there is another end why the shepherds of souls
ought to be desired and enjoyed, and another manner of benefit to be reaped by
them, then either Saul, or such as I have spoken of, have found: which therefore
ought of all the people of God hereafter to be sought and looked after.

Doct. 30 The hypocrite may alvvay look to hear bad news.
VERSE. 28. And Samuel said unto him, The LORD has rent the kingdom of Israel
from thee this day, and has given it to a neighbor of thine, that is better
then thou.

IN the former verse we have seen how Saul sought to hold Samuel with him,
but not for the end which ought chiefly to have moved him: and in this 28.
verse, Samuel takes occasion by the rending the lap of his garment, to give
signification to him, that God would rend his kingdom from him, that so he
might make no doubt, but that it should come so to pass: And this he did that
he might have driven him to some sounder and hartyer dislike and confession of
his sins, (though we see he prevailed not with him) therefore he thus
speaks to him, as we see fearfully; and as well it teaches all that list to
learn, that while men remain hollow and double, and deal not truly and
plainly with God, they may look to hear no better then heavy tidings from
him, Note.
to sound in their ears, and to check their consciences, whatsoever fair
show they make of any repentance, but to gather more signs then before of
their damnacion, by how much more they rejected Gods offers in calling them: 1
King. 13.
And should not this drive men from all their carnal shifts, Use.
and broken holds, when they see that God hunts them out of their dens, and
pluckes their mufflers from their faces? Chap. 14. 34. 35.
And yet as bad as Saul was, and as little as God set by all the outward shows
that he made either here, or in the former chapter, verse 34. to the 46.
(which were many) yet it is clear and most manifest, Many that make some show,
yet come far short of Saul.
that he went far before many that profess the Gospel at this day: among
whom a man may be a long time, before he shall hear so many holy and
religious speeches, as he vttred there (read the place) besides his upholding
the true worship of God, in the which he declared his zeal in severe punishing
such as should dishonor him, yea, although it fell out to be his own son. I
say there be many found among us, (who have cleerer knowledge of Gods will,
then was revealed to him) who yet neither may be matched with Saul in sundry
commendable points, neither in this one, to attribute so much to Samuel the
Lords Prophet, as he did: who desired his company, and held him with him. Which
though it was not done in faithfulness, with desire to be reformed, yet who
doubts but that it was a good step to take profit by him in time, when he
could yield him such reverence as he did, and give him leave to speak to him
of the matters that were both harsh, toylish and unpleasant? Note well.
And yet we see for all this, God had no pleasure in him, that all who shall
hear or read this story or the laying open of it, may fear and tremble, if
their righteousness and synceritie exceed not his; for no such shall enter into
the Lords kingdom; Mat. 5. 16.
which was one especial end why I lay out this story before the eyes of men,
as I said in the beginning. Neither let any object and say, Object.
that his estate was fearful afterward: but now when this was done, which is
here mentioned, he was not so desperate and past hope: Samuel was forbidden to
pray for him, at his departure from him, at the time here mentioned, as
appears in the next chapter, verse 1. for at his departing from him after he
had done the Lords message to him, which I have now spoken of, he left him no
better, then at his coming to him he found him. 1 King. 13. 34.
But as it was said of Jeroboam (when the man of God had reproved his Idolatry
threatening him sore in the name of the Lord) that for all this he departed not
from his evil way: So it is said of Saul, that when Samuel went away from him,
he was nothing bettred, nor reclaimed by him, ver. 34. after which going from
him, it is said he came no more to see him, unto the day of his death. And as
for that it is said of him in 30. verse of this chap. that he confessed his
sin again, as he had done before, least any should think his latter
confession to have been better then the former, it is branded by the holy
ghost, with a manifest mark of hypocrisy, when he said I have sinned, for
this is added [but honor me before the people] signifying that he looked not
so high as to God, Psalm. 51.
who requires truth in the inward parts, but only his fear was, least men
should have known that God rejected him, and so might thereby have cast him
off, and have refused him for their king. And of Saul thus much, for I have
said the best of him, that the scripture sets down in this chap. or
afterward, and showed that nothing spoken of him, sauoured of true repentance.
The further we proceed in this story, the worst we shall find him. And first
how he, by and by after David's victory over Goliath, began to recompense his
good with evil, hating him without cause, and seeking to kill him secretly, as
in the 18. chap. appears, and then openly, as in the 19. may be seen, and
that many times in both, and so continued to his end, worse and worse.

Conclusion of the whole, with serious application.
And now I have satisfied the desire of such as were earnest to have the chief
points of this chapter opened, concerning Saul, that they may see his sin,
both when he stood in the denial of it, and when he confessed it: I have
showed also in the process of the story, as occasion has been offered, how
fearfully many of the visible Church, do very nearely follow him, and lively
resemble him, (if many of them go not beyond him in their evil actions and
lives, and come short of him in their good parts) to this end, that if they
have any care of their souls welfare, they may more seriously think of their
estate while they have time, and come to true repentance. Rather learning so to
do, by the good teaching, and the examples of godly Ministers and Christians,
then to disgrace them as much as in them lies and discourage them, as it is
too common a thing for many to do. Now I say it remains that we pray
earnestly to God, that this and such other scriptures, being written for our
instruction and edifying, may by his gracious working in us, do us the good,
for which we enjoy them: that as they be lights to our steps, and lanternes to
our feet, so they may guide us into the way of peace, who have believed, and
already embraced the doctrine of them: and such also, as yet sit in darkness,
may see great light to their everlasting comfort.

FINIS.

