THE GLORY AND Happiness of a true CHRISTIAN.

A SERMON PREACHED BY Master Rogers at Needham in Norfolk the 28 of June. 1617.

THOU ^ SHALL ^ LABOR ^ TILL ^ THOU ^ RETVRNE ^ TO ^ DVSTE ^
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by W. I. for T. P. dwelling in Iuie lain. 1618.

THE GLORY AND HAPPINESS of a true Christian.
Revelation: 3. verse: 4. NOtwithstanding thou have a few names yet in Sardis,
which have not defiled then garments, and they shall walk with me in white:
etc.
IN this Book there is a description of the state of the Church, First, as it
was present when John writ this Book of the Revelation: and this is in the
three first Chapters set forth together with a description of Christ that
revealed this. The first is a prophetical prediction or description of the
state of the Church as it should be from that time even unto the end of the
world.

The Lord Jesus appearing unto John in the I Will Pathmos, did command him to
write seven Epistles unto the seven Churches in Asia: and here in the beginning
of this third Chapter he is commanded to write unto the Angel of the Church
of Sardie; and this Epistle being the first in order reaches from the first
verse to the eighth verse. In which observe a commandment given to write: In
the Epistle there be three things to be noted. The preface or entrance into the
same, wherein Christ himself is described by certain roialties. The matter or
substance of the Epistle. The Conclusion thereof. ver. 1. 2. 3.
Verses. 5. 6. In the preface there be two great royalties given to Christ, the
first, that he had the seven spirits of God. The second, that he held the seven
stars, and this was a fit Preface for the matter ensuing, for by having the
seven spirits of God, is to be understood, that he has the manifold graces of
the spirit; and it was meet this drowsy Church of Sardie should take knowdge
thereof; that had formerly so ill husbanded the graces of God which they had
received, that they were in a manner lost, to the end they might know when they
might restore them again. And secondly he is said to have the seven stars
in his hand. as in the first Chapter, 26. 20. verses, which stars are the
Ministers of the Churches, whom Christ uses as his instruments and tools to
work withal, yea he has them so, that he can punnish them if they become
unfaithful.

Touching the matter or substance of the Epistle, it contains a reprehension
of the Minister and people of Sardie; for that having formerly received some
grace and life from God, they were grown to that pass that Christ accounted
them little better then stark dead: First, telling them, I know thy works,
that is, thy deadness in Gods service. Now little joy might they have that
Christ knows this by them, that they were no better

And so now many a man may take little joy to remember that Christ knows his
works; he being a Blasphemer, a Sabboth-breaker, a drunkard, or a worldling
etc. And little joy let them have for me till they be ashamed of these their
works, and til they go to make complaint to God against themselves for their
sins, and seek to have their evil conversation reformed.

As for the Church of Smirna mentioned in the second chapter and verse. 9. that
had a name to be poor, but indeed was rich, it might be a joy to it that
Christ knew their works: for though they were reproched and accounted to be
Hippocrites, yet since they did endeavor to walk Godly though in much
weakness; yet this is their comfort, that Christ knows them, and also
loves and allows of them, though wicked men do both scorn and hate them.

This Church of Sardie is reproved for that they had a name to be alive, but
yet were dead: 1. Cor. 3.
Even as Paul says, That he could not write unto them as spiritual, but as
carnal, for that they were more carnal then spiritual. So as this Church of
Sardie languishing and decaying in grace.

After this reprehension in the second verse, verse. 2.
he showed them the remedy how to recover themselves from this their evil
estate, and that is, by Awaking. Secondly, by watching and provoking themselves
to greater zeal in Gods service. verse. 4.
Otherwise, He will come suddenly as a theife upon them, and that in such a
sort, that they would be loath, and also to their cost unless they repent.

The Second part of the matter or substance of the Epistle is a commendation of
the better sort of Christians in this Church, which is in the fourth verse. For
he says yet thou have a few names in Sardie that had not defiled their
garments, as hard as the world goes. And though he could tell them by name
(they were but few) yet he knew them, and how they had not defiled their
garments, but had held out in a Godly and zealous course of religion answerable
to their profession. Now unto these he makes a promise in the next word, that
they shall walk with him in white, that is, in glory and happiness, for they
are worthy, that is, in his account, in regard of the righteousness of Christ.

Now of this verse I would speak at this time, but yet because I am a man that
peradventure shall speak to you but once in my life time; yet my intent and
desire is to speak unto all sorts of professors here present, for as it was in
Sardie, so I suppose it is in this assembly, that there are some that walk
godly, yet there be many more that have either a name to live, and yet are dead,
or else dying.

Here be then three sorts of persons to be spoken of: and first of those who
only have a name to live, that is, an opinion in themselves, and so may be in
some others, (as ignorant as themselves) that they be alive, yet in truth are
dead, yea stone dead.

The second sort are such as having received and had some graces of the spirit
heretofore, they are now decayed in grace, and those are here called a
company of dead ones: these were not quite dead, for Christ does bid them
afterward to awake and strengthen themselves in the things that were ready to
die; verse. 2.
they had some graces decayed, and some languishing and dying in them.

The Third sort of persons here mentioned were such as hold up their holy
profession with a godly conversation. The first sort were dead Christians. The
second cold Christians; and the third sort were godly and zealous Christians.
And every one of us here present are one of these three sorts of persons. The
first sort be in a damnable state and condition, yet these make the greatest
show, and of it be the greatest multitude. The second sort are entered into a
drowsy course and they be dying, but not dead: and being grown cold in
religion and fallen from their first love, these be in a dangerous case, and
such the Lord will whippe and scourge, and by one means or other to drive home
these straggling Christians.

The third sort are happy and blessed, even such as have not defiled their
garments, such shall be with Christ in white, that is in glory hereafter, for
they are worthy.

Oh that I had an heart and tongue that I might so speak and you so hear;
that such of you that be naught become good, and those that be decayed and
cold, may become better.

Touching the first sort of men to be spoken of; they have a name to live, but
indeed are stark dead, that is, they boast and brag that they have that
which they have not, and are that which they are not, Esa. 58.
such we have now, verse 3.
and such were in the Prophet Esaie his time, verse. 4.
there were many that complained that they had ^asted, and that they had
sacrificed to him, but it was not regarded. But they were told by him that they
had fasted to strife etc. and their sacrifice was as much esteemed of God as if
they had cut of a dogs neck. So likewise in Jeremy they did much boast of
the temple of the Lord, Ier. 7. verse. 58. 9. and 20.
and of their service done there, but yet says the Prophet, will ye lie,
steal, Murder, commit adultery, swear, and yet stand before the Lord in his
house. Also John Baptist, Mat. 3. Ioh. 8. r. 44
he told such as boasted that Abraham was their father, that they were a
generation of Vipers. And our Savior told those that bragged they were free
borne and Abraham his sons, that they were of their father the devil, for
his works they did, and did so much resemble him in their conditions, and were
so like him, as if they had been spued out of his mouth. So likewise the
Church of Laodicea did boast that she was rich and needed nothing, yet they
were wretched, miserable, Reave. 371.
poor, blind and naked. They deceived their own hearts through pride and
ignorance as many others do, saying, they were rich, and did not know indeed
they were poor. Now besides these, the devil he comes and tells such kind
of persons that their state and case is well enough, and would persuade some of
the sorwarder sort, that their condition is stark naught.

But be not deceived for flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
2. Cor. 15.
Again, be not deceived, for no fornicator etc. 2 Cor. 6. 9. Again, Be not
deceived, says James the Apostle, in seeming to be religious, and yet can
not refrain thy tongue, Iam. 1. 16.
this man his religion is in vain. So I say, be not deceived, for though a man
refrain many sins, and yet retain one known sin which he is loath to
forsake, that man cannot be saved, till he has repented of it also.

But now to come to particulars: there be diverse sorts of men that have a name
to live, who in truth are but dead.

The first sort, are ignorant persons that want knowledge of God, and of
religion: and of this kind are many of the poorer sort, but yet you shall
never hear them complain of this their wretched estate, but will rather say
they hope to be saved. But how? even by their good meaning, and good prayers,
and good serving of God etc. These men in their own account are fish whole.

The second sort, are such as live in some gross sins as Swearing, Lying,
Cursing and banning, Drunkenness and Uncleanness, Pride, Usury and
Couetuousnesse, and such like damnable sins: yet they think their estate
good enough, but if they be rebuked for their sins, and told of Gods
condemning of them, then they hope they be not so great sinners but God can
pardon them, and do make account to dispatch all in the end with a Lord have
mercy upon me.

The third sort of dead persons, are the worldlings, and such as d^^ nothing
else but busy the (...) worldly business, not respect^^g ^^^gion: These men are
like vn^^ (...) les that run in the earth, and are cunning to know every muse
in the ground, but if they be taken out of it they are at their wits end: and
they be also like unto fishes when they are taken out of the water.

The fourth sort, be civil men, who having some restraining grace do live in
a civil manner among men, abstaining from common gross sins, which are
breaches of the second table, and can say with the old phrase, I thank God I
am not as there men. But yet these men make no conscience to perform the duties
of the first Table, and yet are taken among their neighbors to be very honest
men, but yet for hearing of the word, praying with their families they care
not. Notwithstanding such men do not think that they have any need of
Christ, and indeed Christ has no need of them. Now such miserable persons
which think a civil life can bring them to heaven although ignorant of the
grounds of religion; these men are in a miserable condition, howsoever their
neighbors have dubbed them to be fair conditioned men, yet they are far of
as yet from the state of salvation, Mat. 21. 31
yea Many Publicans and sinners may go to heaven before them.

The fifth sort of dead Christians, are such as though they do hear the word
of God diligently, and thereby get knowledge, and make much of their ministers,
yea, are able sometime to bear checks for their profession of the Gospel, yet
be like the thorny ground, and do retain some vile sin, as Pride,
Uncleanness, Couetuousnesse etc. They being never truly humbled, and not
having the gift of saving faith, such men may fall away from their former
profession, some sooner and some later, and may be without true saving grace to
do them any good.

All these five sorts before described shall not be severed in their several
estates as sure as the Lord is in heaven, and why, because they are all borne
dead in trespasses and sins, and until they be joined to Christ (who is the
fountain of spiritual life for there is no life but in him) they be stark
dead even as the devil, saving only their possibility to be saved: Thou art
as a Toad, yea, as a rotten carrion, and till thou have true faith, thou art
stark dead. Many have common gifts, others knowledge, which may afterward
prove persecutors and fall away I can tell thee, thou were once dead, now if
thou can tell me when thou were made alive: If thou can truly say thou
live the life of grace, and art dead to sin, and not in sin, then being
dead, alive; take heed this life of grace do not decay in thee, nor go out
like a Candle; then shall thou go to heaven as sure as God is in heaven.

Thou Ignorant man, profane worldling, civil person, or Hyppocrite, thou not
having true faith and the spirit of sanctification, learn to know as yet thou
art in the state of damnation, and if thou dyest in this condition, thou must
go from this first death to the second death, which is endless. Now when you
have taken these five sorts of dead Christians out of your congregations, I can
tell you there will be but a few left behind. But some man may say, why do
you thus search into us of our estates and of the danger of them? Why, because
we must fan the chafe from the wheat: 2 Cor. 13. 5.
And Paul does bid you try and prove your selves whether you be in the faith
or no, and if ye be not in the faith, ye are no better then Reprobates, for
ought as yet ye know, or we either. But we see among men how much the back
and the belly is cared for, as for the poor soul that is little cared for.
We are combred about many things, but few are careful for that one needful
thing, the reason is, for few are elected.

Such as come to hear Gods word should pray that the Lord would raise them
from the death of sin, for man nor Angel cannot do it. In the 5 of John,
Ioh. 5. 25.
The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God and they that hear it
shall live. There be many which live in the visible Church which shall be
damned. Desire that thou which art dead in the grave of sin (even as dead as
Lazarus) that the Lord would speak powerfully by his word, and call thee out
of this grave. Seek for the power of saving grace; for it is possible that
thou which were dead, may become alive, Acts. 26. 14. 34.
and thou that were a Persecutor and as cruel as the Iayler, may beco^e
humble. Lidea and the Iailor.
Thou that were couetuous (as Zacheus) may become liberal. Thou that art an
Hyppocrite and but half a Christian (as Agrippa may become a whole
Christian. And why not, we all of us once were dead, and the best of us drawn
from among such as you be. Let this then be the day of your rising, if ye live
the life of grace ye shall live the life of glory, but if ye go on in that
natural course, ye shall miss of that glorious life.

And I speak it from my heart: I call heaven and earth to witness, ye shall
be surely damned, and the greater shall your condemnation be, because the
Ministers of God do now rowse you up, and woe be to the Ministers that daube
up your consciences: If you go on in your ignorance profane, civil, or
hipocriticall courses, ye shall surely be damned, and this that is spoken this
day shall be for your further condemnation because ye were fairly warned, but
would not take heed, or take a fair warning

Now touching the second sort of Christians, namely such as had received from
the Lord saving grace, but they were much abated of that they were at the first
calling, or else sluggish: these may be said to be of the second sorts also,
whereof the first are such as had been very zealous and forward, but now
decayed. The second sort are those that be drowsy Christians, and were never
much better, but stand at a stay.

Concerning the first sort, there be many men that have been very zealous in
the profession of the Gospel, and careful of good things, which be now fallen
in tempering with the world, and into much worldly business, and follow the
fashions and courses of worldlings, are much decayed in grace, and shamefully
fallen from their first love. yet this, many of these at their first calling
were so forward as they could not tell how to be thankful enough and zealous
enough, but soon after they grew to be cold in zeal, and very careless and
remiss in the practice of godliness: such men in regard of Gods unchangeable
love cannot quite fall away from the grace they have received, yet they do
shamefully dishoner God, and give occasion of scandal and offense to others,
and bring sorrow and smart to their own souls, and great shame and reproach
to themselves and to other Professors* For as a man that has borne skot and
lot (as we say) in a town, if he be brought to such a poor estate, as that
he is constrayed to take alms of his neighbors, it must needs be a great
grief and shame unto him: so is it with these kind of Christians, whereas
they should grow forward in the love of God: as the light does increase after
the Sun newly risen, they on the other side grow backward, and this must
needs be grievous unto God; and it opens the mouth of the wicked to the
reproach of their profession; and they will say, seeing these forward men make
a stay of their forwardness in their course. what need we set forward and be
so hott in the spirit, and they bring a slander upon the land of Canaan. Thus
many men when they were young were very zealous in religion, and being come to
temper and deal in the world, then they make a stay of their forwardness;
like unto a dog that at the first setting forth runs swiftly after the
game or chase till he meet with a piece of carrion, then he stands and goes
no further: And this befalls unto these men, either because they neglect the
means, as prayer, hearing of the word and meditating upon the same, if done,
yet very carelessly, so that their zeal is decayed as fire goes out for want
of tending it, or putting fit matter to it to cherish it. But indeed the chief
cause of all this decaying grace is the love of this vild world which eats up
all, and hinders greatly the growth of godliness: Even as a great high Ash
will suffer nothing to thrive that grows under it: And this comes by reason
of our plenty caused by our long peace. For every man almost now lays about
him how to make or feather his own nest, and to provide store of riches for
him and his posterity. And Christians living among these worldlings, they
learn to do as they do: but if we had wars every three or four years
and put in fear of the enemy, we would then say, what should we gather so
much goods for the enemy to spoil us and them.

But oh what a shame is it for a man once to make heaven his chief treasure,
shall now fall to seeking so greedily after the earth. Can God take this well
at our hands? NO, such as do see* are like unto a man yet having a comely
woman to his wife, shall forsake her, and seek after the company of some vild
blouze or base harlot. Such cold Christians may well be ashamed when they do
seriously consider what they once were, and now what they are fallen into.

Now for the second sort of Christians which need to be awaked they are such as
were evil, dull, and sluggish in the practice of the duties of godliness,
they hang as it were by the eye lids, for they having received of God a little
measure of faith, and of sanctifiing grace, are content to join with others in
good things and company with some of the forwarder sort. But their service to
God is so poor and so cold, as it is little worth, and indeed the vilde love
of the world eats up these two, they hear the word, but use no meditation,
good conference and hearty prayer etc.

Alas, If it were not for the world, many would be far better then they are.
Many Christians are like Vrchings that grow not, they increase not in grace.
We call such Children as do not grow and thrive, Changelings, and so are
many Christians that stand at a stay, and say they hope yet Christ dyed for
them. Do they say so? Why do they not run on chearefully in their race, and
say, what shall they render to God for their redemption? Thou art delivered as
it were from the Red Sea, and see so many behind thee scramling and
scrawling in the same. Does this deserve no better service to God and thanks?
If thou hopest for salvation, is it so little a mercy that thou give him so
cold and lazy service? I would says Christ etc, The Lord loves not the lazy
service of Christians, nor their cold hearing of his word, or cold praying. If
we serve him chearefully here, we shall have some present blessing, and a
far greater hereafter, but otherwise let us be assured we shall find little
comfort in cold service.

Hitherto of the reprehension of the two former sorts of Christians, whereof
the first were stone dead.

The second decayed and drowsy ones.

Be awake or be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are
ready to dye: for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

After the reprehension for their deadnes and sleepines, he comes now to show
them the remedy that they may recover their dangerous estate, which is, by
bidding them Awake, and strengthen the things that are ready to dye. We know
that such as cast behind their company in a Journey, had need ride faster then
others: And they that are cast behind hand in the world had need also rise
earlier and work harder then their neighbors: Even so, these drowsy and dead
hearted Christians had need now awake betimes, and rise sooner then they were
wont, and fall harder to work, and use all good means for their good, and to
recover their estate which once they had, or should have had: And being awaked
in this sort, let them consider what it was that cast them behind hand, and
rowsing up themselves by earnest prayer, let them call to mind what was the
hinderance of their zeal; whether it was the neglect of the means; as Prayer,
hearing of the word, or else this vilde world: and having found the causes
thereof let them ever after shake and cast them off.

Awake, God will not have men that profess religion to lie snorting in sin:
Is this a time for Christians to sleep even in the midday of the Gospel? He
that sleeps in harvest time is the son of confusion. When will men be
zealous for God, if not now when we have so many means to incite us
thereunto, as the preaching of the Gospel, peace in our land etc. Are not they
very lazy that will lie and sleep till ten or a leven of the clock? Is this
a time of sleeping when the Lord does shoot off so many warning pieces by our
ears? As namely, so many strange sicknesses and diseases; fearful fires, and
inundations of waters, unseasonable weather both in winter and summer. The Lord
does not so much look at the prophanes of the world, as at the deadness,
coldness and drowsinesse of Professors. This moves him to anger, that they be
no better, although by the Ministers of his word, and by his Judgments he does
cry aloud unto us, yet most men are still a sleep. Awake for shame thou that
now sleep.

The Lord seeks to rowze us up out of this greedy love of the world, for why
does he else take away so many of our neighbor; goods; some by fire, some by
water. He pincheth us of our former allowance, but not to the end we should
esteem of this world. Our long peace has brought in riches, and that has
eaten up religion. Many have a desire to be doing some good duty, but alas it
is do^e very poorly. They pray, but it is very coldly and faintly. They hear
the word, but without meditation, and so it becomes as it were in a manner
unprofitable.

And strengthen the things that are ready to dye. Here is still more good
counsel. We must strengthen then our selves in graces received, and grow
stronger therein, then when we first received them. Even as children, the
older they grow, the stronger and taller, even so must Christians grow,
stronger and taller in grace. The Apostle Peter wishes us to join Virtue with
Faith, 2 Pet. 1. 5. and 6.
and with Virtue Knowledge: and with Knowledge Temperance. etc. And the Apostle
Paul also says, Covet after spiritual gifts. 1 Corin. 14. 1. We should be
couetuous after grace. As men are not content to have a little poor Cottage to
hide their heads in, and so much as may keep them poorly to keep life and
soul together, but they are more desirous to grow more wealthy, so as they may
well maintain themselves and their family, yea, to have also somewhat more to
relieve and help others (if need be) when they come unto them: So ought
Christians to grow so in graces of the spirit, as they may have not only
sufficient for their own store and necessity, but also so much as may help
to further others in godliness, that they may as it were keep open house for
their friends. If we have much grace, we shall the more glorify God, and
draw on others toward salvation, but he that has little grace, God shall
have little glory by him. Where God vouchsafes the means of attaining to
grace abundantly, God thereby expects that we should grow strong and wealthy
Christians.

But some man may say, they hope they be Gods children? but they cannot very
well tell. There are a number of Christians that are so poor in grace, that if
they had any less; they should have none at all. If thou have been sick, art
thou content that thou art alive, and can only crawle up and down thy
chamber? No but thou would feign be so strong as thou may go abroad about
thy work, So likewise i^ we have got ten a little wealth in our souls, we
should desire to become strongmen, like David's worthies. But there are many
poor Christians who would do some good thing but they know not how to go
about it. They have a little faith, and a little zeal. Now if persecution
shonld arise in the Church these men would be ready to run away for all this.
That being so, let us blow up the fire of our zeal, as a maid servant in the
morning finding but a little fire in the hearth, does put fit matter unto it
and cherish it till it be much increased: So seeing the Lord gives us his
word, which is the means to kindle; to cherish and increase grace in us, as
his word, Sacraments godly company. etc, Let us labor to blow up the fire of
zeal and of godliness which was languishing and decaying in us. Many a one
that comes to a sermon being weak; becomes stronger when he goes from it.
1. Kin. 19. 8.
As Elias being fed from God walked in the strength thereof forty days. Let us
so profit and increase in knowledge and in other graces of the spirit, that
others also may be able to drink of our cup. But alack, alack, after many
years preaching the gospel, there are many that have fat bodies, but lean
souls. They are rich in estate, but very poor in grace.

That are ready to dye.

Christians must labor to recover themselves being fallen, and to cherish the
graces languishing in them, for although they have been truly called, even
these feeble ones, and although we grant they may also get into heaven, yet
surely it will be with them, as it was with those that got with a broken and
crased vessel to the haven, but before they come there, they shall undergo
much shame, disgrace, sorrow, and grief: whereas the Bark that is strong
sayleth with full sail merrily into the haven: and the strong courageous
Christian attaineth to more happiness with more ease. They can on their death
beds speak very co^fortably to their friends about them, the other sort cannot
do so. The strong and zealous Christian shall partake of greater glory then
the other. Now then good languishing soul, that have professed the gospel
twenty years, yea forty, and yet the most thou can do, or say, is, thou
hopest to go to heaven. Fie for shame of this hope, what have thou yet no more
strength of faith and other graces? Oh this vilde world, that has eat up all,
and makes so many to neglect these best things.

It follows: For I have not found thy works perfect before me.

Considering the words, they be as a reason to strengthen the former
exhortation, God looks upon thy works. As for our works, if we have no
faith in us, all that we do is abominable, and if the works we do,
proceed from weak faith, they are but lame. Now the works of this Church
here spoken unto, were not perfect, for they were but faint in truth. God
said, this is the Law, do this and live. But now seeing we are eased of this
yoke of the Law, shall we do as we list? Indeed if the Children of God do
their best endeavor to please him, the Lord will accept of their works and
service, and will pardon their imperfections and infirmities. But yet he cannot
abide that men should do such imperfect works, as to serve him by halfes as
some do, which will perhaps pray at Church, and when they are abroad, but not
at home. They will pray at night, but not in the morning.

Not perfect before God: If our works be not perfect, what do we here? If God
does not accept of our works there is then no comfort: If he does then there is
comfort, and if we strive in our hearts to obey him, he will accept both of
us, and of our works. But he does not accept of the service of such men, as
hearing of the word of God, as soon as they are gone out of the Church, fall
to prating of the world. Such men's works howsoever they seem to be before men
yet are not perfect before God. verse. 3.


Remember therefore how thou have received and heard.

Here in this verse the Lord Jesus does still go on to show them that are
cold and drowsy Christians how to recover themselves. First, he bids them
remember how and what they had heard and received* inferring thereby, they had
merely forgotten the same. From whence we may observe, that the forgetting of
that which Gods word has taught us, is often times a chief cause of our
staggering and going backward in religion and godliness. Examples whereof we
have in Peter. who having forgotten what Christ had told him, Math. 26. 70.
did fall to that fearful denying of him. Also David, Psalm. 73. 13.
who said, He had washed or cleansed his heart in vain, etc. The Prophet had
forgotten himself, till he had entered again into the Sanctuary of the Lord.
Ver. 17. Many hearers are like riuen dishes, which though they hear much and
often, they do hold or receive but little. And why do so many fall back to
the world, is it because they never heard the word against it?

No, but it is because they had forgotten that which they had heard. Be not
(says James) forgetful hearers of the wo^d. Iam. 1. 25. Heb. 2. 1.
Also the Apostle to the Hebrews says, Take heed least at any time the world
that you have heard, be let slip, or run out. Even as Aqua-uitae put into
a cracked bottle, and is to be kept till one be sick, the party may dye for all
this, if the Aquauitae be run out at such time as he has most need of it. The
Apostle Paul wishes us to try all things, and keep that which is good, keep
it ever, as one would do a piece of silver, or gold, or precious Jewel. 1
These. 5. 21.
Now that we may the better keep and retain that we have heard out of Gods
word, we ought first to delight therein: For that which a man delights in,
he will always be talking, and thinking of it; as the Huntsman will be
talking of his sport and game, and he knows all the turns of the Hare.

The second means to keep that we hear, is oftentimes to meditate thereon.
Why do ye remember tales that ye have heard when ye were children? Because
you have told them over a great many times. And why do many forget the Sermon
they heard but yesterday? It is because they did not meditate, nor consider
upon it. Oh, says one, it is because I have an evil memory.

Nay friend, that will not go for payment; this is but to blame God himself
that he gave thee no better memory. Thou have memory good enough for thy
worldly business etc. Besides, many a one do rather destroy and hurt their
memories by talking presently on the world after they have heard the word, and
so on peg does drive out another. There is nothing which we hear at a sermon
but it may stand us in stead at on time or other, either in adversity or in
prosperity; and one sermon well kept does you more good, then ten that have
been ill and negligently heard.

Hold fast, or recover thy self. Here is another duty for the drowsy and
backsliding Christians to perform, even by repentance to labor and recover
themselves from their decaying estate; whereby we may consider what a great
deal of work many a man makes for himself by reason of his sin. For
having taken liberty to fall into any gross sin: as into worldliness,
impatiencie, frowardness, and such like, he must repent of it. But by the
practicing of godliness there comes no such work of it. Particularly, what
a great deal of work did David make for his two sins, Adultery and Murder.
And so likewise Peter by denying his master and a man would not have the like
sorrow, grief and shame, for a kingdom. But of well doing, and faithful
serving of the Lord, there is nothing but joy and thankfulness that does
arise from the same. If men will take liberty to themselves to sin, and run out
after their lusts, it will in the end cost them many tears, much shame and
sorrow, but if it does not make this work in them, why then they have made
work for the devil himself to torment them.

Many a Blasphemer and profane wretch shall be constrained in the end to cry out
against themselves, to roar and to tear their hair, and would feign vomit up
their filthy sins, as ever did Judas desire to be ridd of the thirty pieces
of silver which he had taken of the Priests to betray his Master. Math. 27. 3.
Hold fast and repent.

It is an excellent thing to holdfast, and to keep our selves close unto God.
David prayed, saying, Oh, be merciful unto thy servant, Psalm. 119. 17.
that I may live and keep thy word. It is the way to keep our selves from
much sorrow, afflictions, and other grievous trouble, to keep close to the
Lord, and to keep his word, otherwise if we straggle from him, we shall
find it to be bitterness in the end.

Secondly, observe that it is an excellent point of wisdom to take heed by
our former falls and backslidings. But there are many which for want of care
and circumspection are very often overtaken with one and the self same sin:
And why is this? because they being recovered did not hold fast, neither had
they any resolute purpose quite to forsake that sin, not but Gods Children
may commit the same sins again which they had repented of. Yet surely having
once smarted for it, we should learn to be more careful ever after to avoid
it.

And repent. Text.


This is an other chief means of their recovering themselves being fallen
either asleep or decayed in grace, that they should repent. It was not so much
said woe unto thee Corazin for any sin they had committed, Mat. 11. 21
as for that they having the means of conversion offered them, did not repent.
So now though many do hear the word of God with joy, yet until the same has
drawn them to repentance, all is in vain. Our Preaching and labor is in
vain, and their hearing is in vain, unless (as before is said) men be
thereby brought to faith and repentance, to become new creatures, and turned
from all their sins. But happy are they that have profited so far by the word
preached, and till we have repented we have as yet done nothing to further
our salvation. David no doubt after committing of his two great sins (before
mentioned) went to Church as he did before, and did sacrifice, but yet he
could have no sound peace of conscience till he was rowsed up by Nathan the
Prophet, 2 Samuel
and so brought unto true repentance for those his great offenses. After sins
be committed, nothing does make a mends, till we be penitent, and if grace be
in us, then shall we be forgiven.

But if thou will not watch, I will come upon thee as a Theife, and thou shall
not know what hour, I will come upon thee.

In these words the Lord Jesus does annex a threatening or comination to the
former exhortation unto watchfulnes: so that you hear he urges to be
watchful, or else he will come upon them suddenly, and that to their cost.

This is a very necessary duty even to be watchful over our ways, and to be
careful that we be not overcome either by Satan's temptations, or the worlds
baits, thereby to be drawn either by action or speech to offend the majesty
of God. And this watch must be set and kept even from morning until night, as
well when we are in company, as when we are alone, even all the day long, and
then at night we should call to our selves to know how we have spent the day,
and what has been done amiss therein by us, and thereupon we ought to pinch
our hearts with grief for those sins our conscience does inform us of, and
to confess to the Lord, and seek reconciliation in Christ Jesus, and so to
lie down to our rest in peace.

The Lord Jesus says three times in one Chapter, Watch. And unto Peter, James,
Math. 24. Math. 26. 41.
and John, watch and pray least ye fall into temptation. And the Apostle Peter
bids us be sober and watchful in prayer. 1. Pet. 4. 7.


Many do know what it is to pray, but few how to vvatch. Let us be careful
over our particular actions; and not only in the gross, but to have an eye
also to our lesser slippes and infirmities.

And although some will say, this is to imprison men and to bind their hands
as it were behind them. No, it is not so irksome if we were once acquainted
therewith: but it would be an excellent means to keep and restrain us from
committing of much sin, and so from falling into much sorrow and grief. This
is a piece of good counsel which I would further commend unto you, if time
would have served. Let us then know this, that if we keep Gods watch over our
hearts, we shall find much comfort by it.

I will come upon thee as a theife etc. This is an heavy threatening, to say, I
will come upon thee suddenly as a theife and unexpected upon such as be secure
and careless, to take vengeance upon them. This is to rowse them up the more.
We may consider that the Lord has many voices: for sometime he speaks to us
by his word, at other times by his Judgments. In this Land many are quite
dead, and many are drowsy: he has spoken unto us many ways, and he has as
many, or more ways to come upon us with one Judgment or other, and all justly
for our sins. Therefore let us in time repent and be watchful, least the
Lord come shortly as a theife upon us, and take away our peace, yea, take away
likewise this Candelsticke, that is, the ministry and preaching of the Gospel.

And indeed all this and more we may fear may befall, and that ere it
belong, for we have seen him coming upon us in every year of late by
smaller punishments, and of those we have made little use hitherto, so that
hereafter we may justly fear he will come upon us as a theife, that is, suddenly
and we know a theife never comes but to do hurt. And as this may befall our
kingdom and state in general, so to our selves, it is to be taken in
particular, God may come upon us suddenly, and take us in our sins and in
our security: The drowsy Christian God will awake him by his corrections, and
cast sorrow and shame upon him Let every one then be watchful, least he be
taken unawares, and swept away with the common Judgment which the Lord may
send upon this land for the Common and general sins of the same.

Yet thou have a few names in Sardie, verse 4. Text.
which have not defiled their garments etc. Hitherto of the first part of the
matter or substance of this Epistle; wherein he has spoken to the worser sort
of Christians; there first, rebuking them. secondly, exhorting and threatening
them in the second and third verses.

Now he speaks to them of the better sort in Sardis, even to such as were
neither dead nor drowsy as the former, and those he does first commend for
their integrity. Secondly, he does promise them most excellent things, whereof
the first is, That they walk with him in white, that is, partake with him in
joy and happiness. The second, for they are worthy, that is, in the
righteousness of Christ and not in their merits. Thou have a few names. In
these words observe, that howsoever the greatest number of these professors
were very drovvsie and dead hearted, yet they had some godly and zealous
Christians among them, which might have been as lights unto the rest. And so
he will have some ever to shine in the world, such that the world may take
example by them, or else be condemned by them, and left without excuse.
Examples we have hereof, first in the old world, there was a righteous Noah. In
Sodom, there was a godly Lot: In Achabs time, though Elias thought he was left
alone, yet the Lord said be had seven thou and that did not follow Baall, but
worshipped him. So no doubt the Lord has some among us that do hold their
own, and such If we be such, happy are we; and such as be godly and zealous
christians* does the Lord accept. Even as one that has a great harvest, and
has but few to help him in with it, yet working chearefully, they be very
welcome to the owner of the field, so much the rather, because they be but
few. So does the Lord well esteem of his cheareful servants, though their
name be but few. Again, let other christians, if they see such as be forward,
zealous and godly learn to imitate them, whether they be Preachers or other
professors. If they do not endeavor to follow them, then shall those few
serve one day to condemn them, as Noah did the old world. But we see the world
does laugh, and deride at such as be zealous forward christians, as they go by
their doors to hear sermons, or else, for that they have prayer in their
houses, are least accounted and most in contempt. But let those mockers know,
that those others whom they despise, shall one day be brought forth to condemn
them.

Secondly, observe that Gods number is but few and small, and the multitude
commonly follow the worst course. For when there was a voice to be given, Exodus
32.
whither the golden Calfe should be erected, yea or no; the multitude consented
to it. So when there was a question propounded, Mat. 27. 21
whether the Lord Jesus or Barrabas the theife should be let go from death,
Hosea. 2. 2
the multitude gave their voice to let go Barrabas. Israel was but a handful
of people in respect of other Nations, yet but a few of that handful were
saved. Though Israel were as the sand in the sea, Isay. 10. 2
yet there should be but a remnant saved. God has but a few names, even in the
world now at this time, for the greatest part thereof consists of Idolators,
Gentiles, Turks, and Jews, and as for the Papists they be justly excluded for
their Idolatry and superstition. And then amongst those which be called
christians, they be but a few of them that be alive, that is, are sanctified.
Luke 12. and believing persons. Christ his flock is but small, as he says in
the said chapter verse 32. fear not little flock. verse 32.
Most of those which be even christians in name do go the broad way which
leadeath to destruction. Many find the broad gate that leads to hell. Mat.
7. 13.
Now if thou be one of those that have found the narrow way, and art passing
through the straight gate that leads to heaven and happiness, verse. 14.
how then, what thankefulnes do thou owe unto the Lord? But if thou be as
yet not truly called and converted, oh how greatly should thon desire to
tatayne unto it? The number of them that shall be saved is but small in respect
of the other. For Christ is as it were dividing his own auditors into four
parts, resembling his heirs to four kinds of grounds, he says, there is
but one sort that brings forth fruit to their own comfort. Again, he says,
how hardly shall a rich man be saved. Let us pray that we may be of those small
number that shall be saved. Yet if we look upon the course of the world, and
consider what little pains most men take to attain unto salvation, a man may
think by the^ the way were very easy and ready, but the world is herein
deceived. Labor to be in the number of those few that shall be saved. But if
you shall tell some of their faults, they will answer, they do no otherwise
then their neighbors do. Oh, but if thou will go to heaven, thou must do as
the fewest and the smallest number do, even as those few do, so much
despised. If thou be a Magistrate, thou must not so execute thy calling as
most do, but as the fewest do that be godly and faithful indeed. So Ministers
that will be saved, must not do as the most do in that function, whose
courses are very lamentable for the most part, either not feeding their flocks
at all, or negligently, or very scandolous in their lives. No, thou must boe as
the fewest Ministers do, even as those that are conscionable do, and are
painful, and of a godly conversation, the like to fathers of families, and to
other particular christians.

Christ says, that in Sardis there were but a few names that should walk in
white, yet his partake with him in glory, as they had done in holiness. This
might make many men's hairs to stand upright on their heads; considering
Christ's number even among such as be called Christians, is few. Yet I would
to God that you which hear me this day might be saved. As for those few names,
or persons that be godly and zealous, the world does account of them as a
company of fools, and say, that they be but a few Puritans. Now herein they
do grace them very much to say they be but few: for so indeed the number of
Gods children be but small. Well seeing the way to heaven is so straight, and
the enemies of our souls be so strong and mighty, as namely Satan, the
world, and our own flesh: it is a wonder that any are saved, and it is to be
attributed to Gods exceeding mercy that any of us escape and get to heaven,
having so many lets and hindrances. But yet if a man did look from the
Chancel to the Belfree, there is not one but thinks he shall be saved: but
yet I tell thee, there must be a striving, if ever thou be saved: and lazy
and drowsy Christians shall hardly be saved. Men must take pains to hear Gods
word, and yet their particular callings in the would must not be neglected, so
that the one needful thing be principally followed.

Thirdly, observe from these words, ( but a few names) that God takes
particular note of the godly and zealous Christians by name, and one of them
be better then an hundred drowsy Christians. He knows them by name, Ezec.
9. 4
as he did Noah and Lot. Before the destroyer went, the Lord caused them all to
be marked on the forehead in Jerusalem that mourned for the iniquity of the
time. Now good people labor to be upright in heart: and though thou be never
so poor, yet if thou art godly, the Lord surely has a special care of thee,
and he will in the end take thee unto himself: therefore comfort thy self
in this, that God and his holy Angels do love and respect thee.

What though the world and the profane sort hate thee, scoff and deride thee,
thou need not care for it. If a man be loved and graciously respected of
the King and Nobles of the Court: what need he care for the skullery in the
kitchen though they mock and hate him? Even so thou may acccunt and esteem
of these ungodly mockers of Gods children: though they wear a velvet coat,
yet they are but as the skullians, and in base account before God.

That have kept their garments from defiling etc. In this the Lord commends
these few godly ones in Sardis, namely, for that they had not defiled their
garments, which indeed is a borrowed speech. For here is meant that either
they had not spotted their souls with contagious sins* or else stained and
blotted their profession of the Gospel by an ungodly conversation, and of this
thing also we ought to be very wary and careful to bemering, or polluting of
our garments. We know, we are to blame young children, if they defile their new
clothes.

Let not us then which profess the Gospel, and thereby to be the children of
God: let us not I say, stain and blot our holy profession by a wicked
conversation. But alack, alack, there be many who though they have some
goodness in them, and have received some graces from God, yet now and then
defile their garment: few walk as Zachary did, justly, without reproof. Many
hereby give occasion to the profane to speak evil of the profession of the
gospel. But let us consider this, God has given us new garments which we
should not defile. If a man had the Kings livery, he would keep it well and
clean, if it were but for the Kings sake that gave it unto him. It cannot be
denied, but that a true christian his garments may (as it were) catch lint,
that is be soyled with some infirmity, but let us take heed that our garments
be not defiled, that is, our profession stained with gross sins, as Pride,
Worldliness, Impudency, and such like. It is a comely thing as can be seen
on Gods earth, to see a Christian walk answerably to his calling. I grant
that many have slanderous reports raised against them, but yet let us be
careful to give no just offense, or occasion to the wicked to reproach our
profession; and to say, lo such a one for all his profession, he is as much
given to the world as others, or brings up his children as proudly as others.

And they shall walk with him in white, for they are worthy.

Here now he comes to make an excellent promise to sincere and good
Christians, whom before he had commended, which is this, that they shall walk
with him, that is, live with Christ Jesus in joy and happiness hereafter,
which is to be understood by this borrowed speech of walking with him in
white: a fit promise to those which in their life time had care to keep their
garments from defiling. Such as walk after Christ in holiness, shall walk
with him in glory and happiness. This is an excellent promise to them which
hold out to the end, and an argument to encourage us unto this cheerful
keeping our garments clean in this life, though it be somewhat painful and
troublesome. Who will not be content to endure some crosses and take some
pains here to live godly? Seeing such may be assured they shall one day
reign with Christ in glory. Let not all the profits of the world, or flesh, or
devil, make us loose our white garments in heaven, that is, eternal glory,
holiness, and happiness with Jesus Christ, there we shall be paid for all our
pains.

As for those which are ungodly, they shall not walk in white, but in black,
yea, they shall go to the blackness of darkness, for that they lived here
to commit the works of darkness: they shall partake of the torments in the
lake of utter darkness, where shall be weeping for ever; where as they on the
other side are blessed, that having clean garments do make conscience to
keep them clean still, such shall be sure that their labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord. But let not lazy Christians think to have the like portion
of eternal joy and happiness, as the other sort that be zealous Christiansas,
before said. And as for such as are wholly given to walk after their lusts,
they shall not walk with Christ in white, but with the devil in darkness
and torment.

For they are worthy. This worthiness is in regard that they are clothed with
the righteousness of Christ Jesus. But as for the Papists, here is nothing that
will make for their meriting by works, for no works can merit, unless, first
they be our own, secondly, they must be perfect in themselves. Indeed the
wicked they shall have torments given them, so they are worthy, because their
works are perfectly wicked. As for the godly their worthiness is only in
regard of Christ his righteousness. There be many poor afflicted Christians
which think they be not worthy to walk upon the ground, yet indeed they are
worthy of greater things, because they are joined unto Christ, and accepted in,
and for him. As for the former five sorts of dead ones, they are worthy of all
pains and plagues: yet there is a way for them also to be freed from that
their estate, and to become partakers of mercy: for if either thou art
ignorant, or a liver still in some gross sin, or a worldling, or but a mere
civil person, or an Hyppocrite, can yet bewail thy sins, loath them, and
crave pardon for them in Christ, and by faith apprehend his righteousness,
then thou may be saved. But if the civil man, or any other stand upon his
own righteousness, then will thou be confounded: for such can no more stand
before the flaming fire. Oh, that many men had grace to see into their
vildenesse, and how wretched they are, if they be not clothed with Christ's
righteousness.

First observe, if Gods children be counted worthy of heaven, what then shall
become of this vilde world? that do iustle Gods children up in corners or
against the walls, and hate and scorn them? Psalm. 15. 3.
A good man loves them that fear the Lord, but in the wicked, vilde persons
are most regarded, and the godly d^spised. Such men are of Caine his mind that
hated his brother, or of Chams mind that mocked his father. Genesis 4. 8.
Genesis 9. 22. 2 Samuel 6. 20.
or of Michol her mind that scoffed her husband David for his zeal. Oh say
some, these hypocritical Puritans are worse then the Papists. Indeed this
great and common sin of this land seems not as yet to be revenged, but no
doubt it will be ere it be long with some universal judgment: for now even the
basest servant, and vildest Ruffian can mock and scoff at those that are
professors and zealous Christians. But such do carry even the mark of the
malignant Church. I would never wish a worser sign of a wicked man, then to
be a mocker of professors and of Gods children. The Apostle John says, He
that loves him that does beget, 1 Ioh. 5. 1.
loves them also that are begotten of him. Take, heed of crossing the Lord in
mocking those upon whom he bestows his own image. Mat. 25. 41. 42. and 43.
For if they shall be cursed that did not feed and cloth such as believed in
Christ, what shall become of those which mock and persecute them? They shall
in the day of judgment stand quaking and knocking their knees together like
Belthazar. Dan 5. 6.
Oh nay more, they shall desire that the hills might fall and cover them; and
hide them from the presence of the judge. These men do take a very heavy piece
of work in hand, that do so deride the godly. Acts. 9. 4.
Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? Acts 9, 4.
I never knew but that without speedy repentance the judgments of God did take
hold on such persons even in this life, if not, then after this life they shall
have their reward.

Well then, let us make some repetition of that which has been spoken. Ye
have heard of three sortts of Christians: whereof one sort are stark dead, as
the ignorant person, one living and loving any one sin, worldling, civil
person, Hyppocrite: these are to desire the Lord that they may come out of
their graves.

The second sort were renewed, but yet lazy Christians: let these consider how
God has and does often times cross them, to make them leave their
worldliness, coldness, and security. As for the world let them leave it in
affection, and let those study and look wholly after it, which have and can
look for no other portion but in this world. And I am afraid if sickness or
death should suddenly take these drowsy christians, it would take them even as
a thief unlooked for: whereas the godly zealous Christian that has his loins
girt up, and is waiting for his masters coming, and watchful like the wise
Virgins, Mat. 25. 4
he has but one days sins to reckon for. When death comes he can bid him
welcome, and say, I looked for you before this day: He is not to seek for his
oil to put in his lamp, at that time as were the foolishvirgins spoken of in
the parable. Now for the third sort of Christians which indeed be alive, and
have kept their garments clean and undefiled: to them we say, let them that
are righteous, be righteous still, such shall walk with the Lord Jesus
hereafter in white, that is, in perfect glory and felicity: whereas the
ungodly shall walk with the devil in black torments. God grant we may with
Mary choose the better part, which shall never be taken away from us.

FINIS.

