A COMMENTARY UPON THE WHOLE BOOK OF IVDGES.

PREACHED FIRST AND DELIVERED IN SUNDRY LECTVRES; SINCE collected, and
diligently perused, and now published.

For the benefit generally of all such as desire to grow in faith and
Repentance, and especially of them, who would more clearly understand and make
use of the worthy examples of the Saints, recorded in divine history.

PENNED BY RICHARD ROGERS PREACHER of Gods word at Wethersfield in Essex.

HEBR. 12. 1. Wherefore seeing we are compassed with so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us cast off every thing that presses down, etc.

Whatsoever is written, was written for our instruction, that we through
consolation of the Scriptures might have hope.

BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON for Thomas Man, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paternoster Row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR EDWARD COKE KNIGHT, LORD chief Justice of
England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel: R. R. wishes
all blessing internal, external, and eternal, from God our Father through
Christ Jesus.
RIght Honorable, as it has always befallen the best both Divine and Humane
laws to be perverted by common profanenes and lewd custom: so may it be
verified in all other things of like precious nature, that they could never
escape the taint of humane error and abuse. Witness the institution of the
holy feast of Shiloh mentioned in this book: which though first was chiefly
used as a memorial of Gods benefits, yet in process of time grew to extreme
abuse, and gave occasion to the unlawful stealing of the virgins in their
dances. Nay, witness even this approueable custom of Dedicating books: which
though it has been long taken up and continued for good and respective
reasons: yet has it been of old the practice of heretics, and still is of
unworthy writers to conueigh the poison of their books into the inferior sort,
by stiling and gracing them with the names of remarkable personages.

Religion and Christianity, the ministry of the Word, and the Profession
thereof, are things in name and nature, of the highest value: howbeit, as the
fairest apple to the worm, so are these exposed to the treble corruption of
error, infidelity, and hypocrisy. Semblably, the writings of Divine argument
(whether upon Scripture, as this, or Treatises consonant thereto) are of
singular use in the Church: yet never free from the malignitie of some men.
Especially such as who either out of their curiosity can endure nothing which
claws not their leprous humor: or through their carelesnes, profess either to
meddle with no man's writings at all, or without putting difference to embrace
good and bad with equal affection.

For the two former of these three, (I mean the vngratiously nice, and the
gracelesly sensual:) this I must say, that since the Scriptures themselves
(the most solemn of all other both for matter and style) cannot relish with
them: I despair that my writings should procure their appetite. Yea
peradventure this work of mine will displease their dainty eyes and fingers,
by the very bigness, and so prejudice their further handling. These therefore (if
their disease be incorrigible) I profess not myself a cook, for to dress
their diet; but rather leave them to feed upon the chalk and mortar of their
unsavory Pamphlets, while others nourish their minds with more wholesome
meat: and send them to the trough and akornes, since they refuse Angels food.
For the latter sort, (since there is more hope to correct their error, then the
others vice) I pray to God, that with their general willingness to read, he
would give them an understanding heart, to discern aright of things that
differ: that the holy eye of their judgment may be, like a Musical ear in
the distinguishing of sounds, and like the fining pot of the Goldsmith, in
seuering the gold from dross, or his touchstone in discovering of metals.
Also my hope is, that such as buy new books of all sorts, may happily light
upon this, among others: which if they shall do, I wish them no worse, then
that the gain they reap, and the taste they get from this, may disgrace and
distaste with them, all fruitless and offensive authors.

Pardon me (right Honorable) if I have been over bold, in aduenturing to
publish these poor labors, and thrust them under your patronage. I have not
sinisterly aimed at the Poets mark, who wishes all writers, to set a gloss
upon their work (...). Pind.
by a glorious entrance: But partly to shroud myself in God under your
authority, against the tempest and violence of all unjust censurers (such as I
named before:) and partly (yet chiefly) to commend the diligent perusal of
this book to all religious or indifferent Readers, by your Honors example:
persuading myself, that you will not more willingly become patron to the
writer, then a pattern of the things contained in the writing itself. And, as
by Gods ordinance, the oil of Consecration was first powered upon the head of
Aaron, yet Psalm. 133. 2.
stayed not there, but ran down thence upon his beard, and to the nethermost
skirts of his clothing: so, I judged this order no whit preposterous, if first
I presumed to power this oil (fetched out of the Lords Tabernacle) upon your
Honors head: that so from you (as the sweet showers trickling down from the
hill to the valley) the fragrancie and fruit hereof might descend lower unto
meaner persons.

Among sundry other books of holy writ, which, in the course of my
Ministry, these forty years past, God has assisted me to explane and go
through with my Audience; I have (for some causes) chosen this, to leave as a
poor pledge and memorial to Gods Church of my fidelity, pains, and love.
And, though I respected also the good and request of my own Congregation
herein, into whose hearts I desire doubly to fasten the nail of wholesome
instruction (which soon slippeth out): yet seeing my time is short, and my
voice cannot reach beyond her usual limits, I have endeavored with my pen to
draw a long and a wearisome line, that the other defect might be supplied:
looking up to him for a requital, who has promised not to conceal the labor
of our love. Heb. 6. 10.


I have (Right Honorable) purposely altered the course of my writing, which
formerly I have used in my Treatise. As Elisha the Prophet put his hands upon
the King of Israel his 2 King 13 16.
hand, when he bad him shoot: so, when we undertake the handling of
Scripture, the holy Ghost allows us not to say all we can invent, but
requires us to put our hands in his hands, and to apply our selves more
strictly unto his drift, then in Tractates of our own, wherein generally our
scope and liberty is more large. Yet as the text has led me, I have held
myself to these two marks: The one more general to build up the Christian
Reader in faith and good life: To the which end as I have already written a
large Discourse, (if it have yet come to your Honors hands) containing grounds
and directions for the more easy practicing and growing in them both, so now
in this I have annexed lively examples out of the Scriptures to illustrate
those precepts: the natural repugnancie whereof to flesh and blood might
otherwise break out into gainsaying the Art itself and the practice thereof.
The other, particular: to show to the diligent Reader, what use the historical
examples of the old Testament (especially) do afford us: a matter in this our
contemplative but cold age, little respected, and less understood.

The which (such as it is) I have boldly presented unto your Lordship upon a
threefold consideration. The first this: God who has made you a principal
member in this great body of our land, both in gifts personal and public,
has justly proportioned a principal place of employment for you above others.
Your complements of Nature, Art, Experience, he has (I doubt not) accomplished
with saving grace. Your piety toward God, testified by your reverend hearing
his word, and reflecting itself in love upon his Ministry: your sage and
well menaged government of civil affairs: your learning bewraied by your
judicious and assiduous reading of Scholars books, and favoring their
authors: all these argue strongly, that though Popery, ignorance, injustice
and evil manners could well forgo you, yet the Church, the Commonwealth and
literature could ill want you. And the same God who has thus enriched you,
has crowned his gifts in you, so that while you live, your Name is blessed,
and at the end of this life, you shall not dye undesired* Why has the
Almighty thus graced you? Doubtless not for yourselfe only, but to this end,
that as the Sunbeames drawing up the sweet vapors from the earth, suffer them
to fall upon their thirsty mother again, with a doubly fruitful influence:
so Gods talents measured out largely unto you, might entirely return their
honor unto the giver with overplus. The vessel that is full, and runs
over, has for itself, and bedeweth the earth also which is near it. And
seeing the greatest goodness of the best creature cannot reach so high as God
himself: therefore he expects that you drop it upon this lower region of
Saints who Psalm 16. 2.
excel in virtue; yea upon his Church and Gospel, (whereto he has by letter
of Attorney made over all such debts) to the promoting and advancing whereof,
the advantage of your Honor and authority (besides your other gifts) is
chiefly to be employed. Give me leave then (I beseech) to improve that common
interest, which our Mother the Church claims in you, for the undertaking of
this my writing. You are chief among the sons of wisdom, which is
justified of all her children. Matthew. 11. 19.


Secondly, your Lordship knows well, that the Church and Commonwealth are
friendly neighbors, each bordering upon other, both compast with one wall, and
both yielding Eadem sunt Ecclesiae and Ciuitis moenia.
mutual aids and defenses each to other. As outward peace could hardly be
settled, except humane laws enjoyed the brotherly assistance of the spiritual
sword: (which is a law present when no other is, even to the conscience) So the
ministry of the word should not so much prevail as it does, (little though it
do in comparison) except the pleasant dewes of Hermon did So Moller and others
motralize that in Psalm. 133. 3.
refresh the barren mountains of Zion, I mean, except the civil sword of
justice did back and authorize the same against them, who profanely contemn
the word, as the smartles stroke of a leaden edge. The due observation whereof
(right Honorable) has caused me to offer you this gift, that so I (one of the
meanest) might thankfully acknowledge in the behalf of the (...). Acts 24. 2.
whole Church, that under his Majesty she has obtained much quietness through
you, and that many things are worthily done to this nation by your providence,
(as sometime that evil man but not evil Orator said to a person and in a case
far unlike:) which I have therefore uttered in your ear, not only for that
your Honor is well able to digest your own felicity (...). Pind.
and merit, but that I might exhort you to excel yourselfe in time to come,
and to bring forth most fruit in your age: remembering that it is as hard a
thing to stand to the reparations of some house, as to build it out of the
ground: and it has ever biniustly questionable whether the purchase, or
preserving of virtue be the more difficult. Sure it is that the Prologue and
Scene of your life hitherto worthily carried, promise to the beholders a close
deserving rare applause.

Lastly, your place and name seemed to claim this Dedication. The book I
write upon conteines the most famous history of the renowned Judges of ancient
Israel. And God has set your Honor in the chief seat of justice, even made
you (under his Majesty our highest Judge) the principal Judge in our English
Israel. Besides, the argument of the book (if it please your Honor to take a
view of it) does as peculierly concern you, the presidents of these Worthies
well deserving your imitation. As that Roman Captain beholding the images of
his victorious ancestors, found himself enflamed with earnest zeal of
equalling or surpassing them: so, I doubt not but the laying open of these
Jewish Captains in their lively colors, will ravish your religious spirit,
with the love and emulation of their graces. And here (ere I finish) suffer me
to recommend unto your Honor, two of the most heroical virtues in these
Governors. The one, their invincible courage, (the Epitome of a Christian
Magistrates worthiness) though Josh. 1. 2.
they lived in the most forlorn times, and dissolute, wherein the Idolatries
and iniquities of Israel, seemed to strive with her captiuities and calamities,
and whether man sinning or God revenging should get the upper hand. A manifest
token of the immediate warrantise of these Judges from heaven; enabling and
encouraging them with so incredible fortitude and success. The other (last
named, but in nature first) is their admirable faith: which as the Author to
the Hebrwes could not Heb 11. throughout.
silence in that thick clowd of witnesses, so thereby he imports, that is
generally the life whereby all Christians live; and Heb. 10. 37.
especially the fortress, yea armor of proof for the Magistrate. Not only
the sword of the Lord in the hands of Gedeon, Barak, Jphtah, and Samson
(mentioned in this book) to fight with against their foreign enemies: but
also a singular both offensive and defensive weapon, for your Honor first, and
then for your inferiors in place of government, against the intestine
adversaries (no less hurtful) of God, his Gospel, and our common peace. For
this sword rusteth not, nor loses her edge with time. In the desire of this
happy blessing upon these my poor travels, I most humbly recommend myself and
service to your Lordship, and your Honors person and weighty affairs to the
protection and direction of the Almighty.

From my poor house at Wethersfield in Essex. January 20. 1615. resting Your
Honors most humbly devoted in the Lord, RICHARD ROGERS Minister of the Gospel.

LECTVRES OR SERMONS UPON THE WHOLE BOOK of IVDGES: and first, the entrance
into them.
I Confess, it is no small matter for a man to take upon him to set forth
Lectures or Sermons of any part of the word of God, especially of an whole
book thereof: and the rather for that it is a matter of much greater
difficulty and danger so to do, then to preach them (seeing for mine own
part, I would easilier be brought to preach three Sermons, then to set forth
or pen one:) and besides, we see that learned men (I speak of many) who
might for their excellent gifts profit many, and do the Church much good, are
haraly drawn thereto. I leave their reasons to themselves: perhaps they think
it a needless work to set forth more books. For mine own part, I knowing
that many would read little, if there were not new books set forth, I think
it to good purpose to labor in that kind: especially when the things set
forth are for the quickening up of the present drowsy age. And so I testify
my judgment by my writings, that I am of another mind: not for that I would
dissent from learned men, or seek glory and praise by this my practice, when
(to speak as the truth is) I confess freely, that Reasons of this my attempt.
as I come many degrees behind them in gifts for that purpose: so I would not
take upon me this exercise of writing, unless I were led to it by weighty
reasons: but in the simplicity of my heart I speak it, that I set myself to
this work, as I can have time and leisure from my public employment in my
Ministry, and other private duties, even to keep myself from danger in this
evil world, as idleness, too much tampering in the world, and such like
needless and hurtful besinesse, as well as for the desire I have to benefit
any other hereby: and besides, I think it better to benefit the Church while
we live, being but a short time, (other may rise up after to perfect such
beginnings) then to bury our gifts utterly, and so to deprive it altogether of
the same by death.

Also I see that every age of men has sundry troubles annexed to it (the old
as well as the young) and occasions are offered of sinning and offending God
many ways by one occasion or other, which are not thought of before they come.
In so much as when the danger of youth and of the former years of our life is
passed with inwara peace, and without any gross and just offense to others
(which yet to do is few men's cases, and rarely obtained, and not without much
striving and watching to enter in at the straight gate:) yet the devil so much
the more enuieth our credit in the Church, and the comfort we have from God, in
such an estate, especially the Ministers: and therefore he does the more bend
his force against such, that he may in their latter end disgrace them by
winding them into some reproachful and foul offenses: that so he may (as much
as in him lies) make their former virtues and part of life, to be ridiculous
and of no account.

And therefore, as I am not ashamed to confess, that I have received
wonderful cause of thanksgiving to God, for his so great bounty and favor
toward me (the most unworthy) in my younger years, to keep me from the
infection of the time, and sins of the age wherein I have lived, (yet God be
merciful to my many slips and infirmities) so I am not (I say) ashamed to
confess, that I fear in this my declining age, hasting apace to the grave (as
with grief of heart I have seen in many) that I may possibly, yea and that
full easily, be drawn to an unprofitable, earthly, idle, and dead course of
life, and thereby, to greater offending of God, and blemishing of my profession
and Ministry, unless I should labor to prevent it by some set labor and
study, and so to hold fast that which I have received of the Lord: and that is,
by the occupying and using the gifts which he has given me, as in this kind
of study, namely of writing, I may: and also if I should not endeavor to grow
forward in grace, experience, 2. Pet. 3. 17.
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, (from the which a man may be
easily hindered by the error of the wicked) rather then to look what I have
done heretofore, I might easily flatter myself thereby, and so (at least)
stand at a stay: or (which is worse) go back, and so lose my part of
happiness with them that continue to the end. For I make chief account of
that, having it not in fruition as yet, but by hope only: and I know it may
easily and many waits be hindered and stayed, as Satan can handle the matter,
and as I see many go to work. And for this cause I desire to be occupied
until the Lord come, and in this manner, having more then one foot in the
grave. And to the end I may tie myself to live the freer from dangerous falls
and offenses, while I am here a stranger and absent from home, and therefore I
say, I have set myself to this kind of work, as being not able through
debilitie of body, and lamenes, to travail abroad, and help other neighbors,
more then at home, by preaching, as I have done since I first began (where my
labor was desired:) and by conferring much, as occasion was offered, as I used
in health to do. And if any laugh at this which I have said of my fearing
myself, as thinking it mere folly, I cannot do with it, neither am moved for
their so censuring me: but I tell them this, that while they fear not their
frailty also but count it foolishnes, they have apace to utter misery.

Now for taking this book in hand, to set out my Sermons upon it, which I have
before preached, though I have gone over, in the course of my Ministry, many
other besides this: I take this book in hand, not as making comparison betwixt
it and other books of Scripture: but partly seeing no Lectures or Sermons are
set out upon it, that I know, to give light and help to such as need it: and
partly at the earnest desire of those that heard my Sermons on it: and if I may
know and perceive my labors in this to be thought worth the setting forth, I
would be willing, as much as in me lies, to do the like in some other book.
In this work, beside the people, who are not brought up in learning, who may
see that their whole life may be directed hereby and may much profit by it, so
I intended also in it to benefit Students and Preachers, who are not yet
experienced: nor best furnished with matter for the edifying of the hearers: so
that beside the fruit they may reap hereby in common with the people; so they
may learn how to make use of the historical part of the Bible, and learn to
draw doctrine and instruction out of the examples thereof, fit for the people
(and that out of the bad as well as the good) even as well as out of other
Scripture: which all have not learned to do, neither have attained unto: and
therefore do often times offer violence to the Scriptures, by making allegories
of them, and so wresting them to another sense then the holy Ghost has made of
them; without which manner of handling them, they can draw none or little
matter out of the most examples in the stories of them: and so beside that
their doctrine is not soundly gathered, so they give too fearful suspicion to
the ignorant, that such parts of the Scripture are barraine and dry, while
they do by such shifts, and yet indirect, so hardly draw matter and doctrine
out of them, when yet it is certain and clear, that they are full of sound
instruction.

But to come to my purpose, I will now set down some general things before I
enter into the text, which may give some light to the better understanding of
the whole book: such as I gather partly, by observing and laying together that
which I read in it, (comparing one thing with another:) and partly out of that
learned and reverend Father Master Peter Martyr, whose works neither the most
private men can understand, nor many Ministers, though they may understand
them, can come by, neither if they can, shall they find there, that which
shall be much for their simpler hearers benefit.

And first let the reader mark, how this book agrees with all the former,
from Genesis to the end of Joshua, and what is the sum of them and this.
Concerning the book of Genesis, after mention is made (in the beginning of it)
of the creation of the world, and the generations to the flood: it does
afterward show, how God chose his people out of Abraham and his posterity, and
how they were sent into Egypt to avoid the famine. In Exodus these things are
the principal: how the people of God multiplied and increased in the land of
Egypt, till there rose a King who cruelly oppressed and vexed them sore: and
how they were delivered out of the bondage, which they were in there, by Moses:
and how they had laws given them, to govern them And this last point is the
sum of Leuiticus also. The book of Numbers declares their diverse resting
places in the desert, and their goings forward toward the land of Canaan. In
Deuteronomy, Moses being to depart out of this world, and to leave the people,
does most faithfully repeat the law to the generation which came after the
former, and which then lived, I mean, to the posterity of Abraham. Then came
Joshua and led the people into the promised land, and divided the land of the
Amorites and Canaanites, which partly was subdued and gotten out of their
hands, and partly remained to be conquered: he (I say) divided it amongst the
twelve tribes, according to the commandment of God, after he had brought them
over Jordan, slain many of the Kings of Canaan, and possessed their cities and
grounds in that country. This is the sum and contents of the book of
Joshua. After his death, (to come to our purpose) the Lord governed his people
the Hebrews, being placed in that land, by Judges: whom to that end he endued
with excellent gifts, and by them delivered and kept the people out of the
hands of their enemies, who as yet did all the days of the Judges remain in
great numbers to vex them.

But to understand better the meaning of the word [Iudges] a material point in
this book to be understood, though to judge signify to know the cases of such
as contend, and be at variance, and to give sentence of judgment betwixt men:
yet these Judges mentioned in this book, had not that office, neither were
called Judges in that respect. But (as the word signifies also, to revenge and
to redeem out of bondage) thus did those Judges deliver and redeem the
people, as in this book is at large declared. (I speak^ not of Samuel, who is
said after, to judge them also, by deciding 1. Sam. 7. 6. and 15.
controversies and civil causes) But these Judges had that office assigned
them of God, to deliver the people (as I have said) out of their enemies hands,
and so to judge them: and therefore were called by that name of Judges, and
this book that entreats of them and their acts throughout, is called, The
book of Judges.

And briefly to lay out the state and condition that these people, the
Hebrews, then lived in: whereby the office of the Judges may the better be
understood: they having not yet conquered the land, were occupied (as at their
first entrance into it, and after Ioshuas death a while) in subduing it, and
their enemies: but afterward they suffered them to remain, and become
tributaries to them, and were thereby (as God saw it meet, and as need
required) in great peril and misery by them, and then, because they were his
people, lest they should have been utterly destroyed, these Judges were raised
up by him, without the election of men, to rescue and deliver them. But
afterward when they were at rest, and peace, God governed them not by those
Judges: (therefore Iphtah, when he was desired, would not reign over them)
neither had they authority over them: but he used the help of someother
excellent persons, fit by their virtues and gifts for that purpose, and they
ruled the people: but the Judges (as I said) were stirred up by the Lord, in
great dangers, brought upon them by their enemies, to be helpers and deliuerers
unto them, and to keep them in peace afterward, while they lined. So that
these Judges were not chosen by succession, as Kings: neither by the voices of
the people. but were raised up by God (as we have heard) indifferently, as
well out of one tribe as another: and how mean and unfit soever they were
before, for that purpose: God did furnish them by and by after he had stirred
them up, with most excellent gifts for that end, to the which he appointed
them. And it went far better with the people while they were under them, then
it did afterward, when they would needs have a King to reign over them. For
they did always deliver the people of Israel out of the calamity with which
they were oppressed: whereas their Kings did sometimes waste them, and bring
them into captivity, and were (the most part of them) Idolaters.

And although under the Judges, the people were sometimes oppressed grievously
by strangers, and especially under Samson by the Philistims (for why? we must
know, their horrible sins deserved it, and provoked God to deal with them in
that manner:) yet they were never led into captivity while they lived with
them. Again, there were few of the Kings good men, in Israel, not one: the
Judges (for the most part) were all such. A good testimony whereof, we have in
the Epistle to the Hebrews: where we thus read of the commendation of them:
The time would be too short for me to speak of Gedeon, Barak, Iphtah, and
Samson: these the holy Ghost commends. And though some of them (as men) did
sometime fall, yet we are to think they returned and rose up again: seeing
the Scripture (as I remember) does never condemn them. So that in respect of
them, and by their help, (if the people could have seen it and made benefit
of it) we may say, they lived in a golden age.

Now whereas it is not so apparently to be seen, that this book does set
forth Christ unto us, in all the commendations of these Judges: (who yet is
the end of all books of Scripture) to such as demand about it, I answer:
that Christ is not clearly set forth in any of those books of the old
Testament first written: but darkly, and by types and figures, as God saw it
meet for those ages: and so we are to think of this book, where the
deliverances from so great enemies, as are mentioned herein, are types of that
great deliverance and redemption of men wrought by Christ, out of the jaws of
the devil. And let the commending of sundry of those Judges by the holy Ghost
satisfy us, that they could not have been good men, nor have lived by faith,
as they were said to have done, if they had not believed in Christ, and been
sanctified thereby. Besides, what authority shall we give to the old
Testament, if they who are commended in it, to have been men of God, as diverse
Kings and Prophets, with many other, did not live and walk by faith, (seeing
it is not expressly set down) without which they could not please God?

Now the sum of this book is thus much: first, a declaration generally, of
the estate of the religion and manner of worshipping God, which these
Israelites used in their Common wealth from the death of Joshua to Eli the
Priest, (for the story of Ruth contains things done in the days of the
Judges, Ruth 1. 1.) and more particularly this book lays out their sins,
and Gods calling them out of them by sundry warnings and judgments, unto
repentance, with many fearful examples of their reuolting and turning back
again: whereby may be seen how corrupt they were both in religion and
manners: and this book is a lively glass (if we well consider it) of this our
age.

The parts of the book are three. The first sets down the slothfulness
of the Tribes in executing the commandments of God against their enemies, and
the punishment threatened for it, Chap. 1. and 2. and their slothfulness is
illustrated by the contrary course of Judah and Simeon (who were forward to
go against them) as in Chapter 1. to verse 21. is to be seen. The second part
is from the 2. chapter to the 17. which treats of the Judges, and their great
acts, according to occasions offered, who in their due time were raised up.
The third part is from chapter 17. to the end: and sets forth some odious
and monstrous acts committed in those confused times, when there was no
ordinary Governor: and therewithal, the punishments which followed.

The author of this book is unknown, but yet the book is canonical, and
authorized also by the new Testament. The time of the acts of it, from the
death of Joshua to Eli the high Priest, is gathered to be about 300, years.
The end of this book (as shall better appear in the particular handling of
it) is to instruct and persuade us, in this latter age of the world, to carry
our selves uprightly, and in a straight and well ordered course, both in
prosperity and adversity: I mean, to hold the fear of God in both, and to
keep hope and patience in and through out this our pilgrimage, with prayer and
repentance: which if we do, God will be no less with us, then he was with the
good people mentioned herein.

The order which I purpose to observe in the Lectures upon this book, is first
to give the short sum of the Chapters: then to divide every Chapter into
parts, for the better distinguishing the points thereof, that they may be
better understood, and more clearly seen into: thirdly, I give the sense of
the verses more fully, and lay forth the doctrine with the reasons, and use
thereof, though for the most part, they be not always expressly set down,
which manner of handling the diverse histories of this book (as also I think
the same of our preaching out of all other Scriptures) namely, that after the
meaning and sense, apt and fit instruction should be drawn out, with the
application to the present state, need, and use of the hearers, plainly and
pitbily as may be for their best edifying I hold meetest to be used.

And I weuld to God, that there were consent given thereto of al Preachers, and
that this course were aimed at: I wish that every one did not follow his own
private course who has never learned any good way or order of preaching.
Whereby it comes to pass, that some fill their Sermons with the froth of
their own brains, or the bare authorities of men, and least proof is brought
out of the Scriptures: Also some preach darkely to the little benefiting of the
hearers, not to mention all which were endless. And although for many other
things I leave the consideration thereof to my reverend and learned brethren,
yet in this I hope without ostentation, and arrogating ought to myself, I may
be allowed to speak: in regard of the long time which I have spent in
studying, learning, and practicing (as I have been able) the holy exercise of
preaching. And now to end these my Lectures, this I say: that beside the
variety of much good therein contained, there are some points to good purpose,
occasioned touching faith, and repentance: and sundry directions given how to
seek the Lord when we have slipped, and how to bear trouble aright.

Thus much I thought good to say before I enter into the several Sermons, even
to this end, that some good light may be given, as to him that marketh duly it
may appear. Now I will proceed to the text itself.

THE FIRST SERMON UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
VERSE. 1. And it came to pass after that Joshua was dead, that the children of
Israel asked the Lord, saying: who shall go up for us against the Canaanites,
to fight first against them? VERSE. 2. And the Lord said, Judah shall go up:
behold I have given the land into his hands.
IN this Chapter two things are chiefly contained, The sum and parts of this
Chapter.
(to set down the sum of the Chapter and parts of it together:) The first is
the commendation of the tribe of Judah, to the 21. verse: (the cause we shall
hear afterward.) The second is the setting down of the sin of the tribes
that are mentioned after, in that they slothfully suffered the Canaanites to
live by them, and did not expel them, and that is to the end of the Chapter.
Judah is commended in a double manner: first for the acts they did now at this
time after Iosuahs death, and they are to the eight verse: and then for that
which that tribe had done before his death in the rest of the verses to the 21.

The first part of the Chapter.
To come to the meaning of the first 7. verses, seeing they lie together, after
the death of Joshua, who had bin their guide and had gone before them, The
meaning of the 7 first verses
the children of Israel saw that they must make war with the foreign
nations: for unto that day the whole land though it was promised and divided
amongst them, was not yet won by them, nor conquered, but in the lot and
inheritance of every tribe there were the Canaanites their enemies still
dwelling and remaining. And seeing they knew they must be driven out by force
and strong hand, as God had commanded; therefore they doubted not, whether they
should go out against them to war or no: but which tribe should first begin,
and go before, and govern the rest. And the thing was of such weight, that
they went to the Lord about it, and asked of him by the high Priest before the
propitiatory and Mercy seat, as the manner then was in doubtful cases, which
of their tribes should begin the battle. Exodus 28. 30.
And so they had an answer from him to their satisfaction, who should go up
before them, and in that their attempt, God prospered them, for he had promised
so to do. And Judah sought help of Simeon his brother and neighbor tribe, who
consented readily so to do: and they prospered in that their attempt, and had
victory over the Canaanites, as is set down; together with the destruction of
Adonibezek their King. Thus much for the meaning of these 7. verses in some
general manner.

Now we have the meaning of these verses, it remains that we draw from
thence such instructions as are afoarded us out of them, beginning with these
two former here set down: and first out of the first verse. In that this
people was now constrained to look about them, and (now Joshua was dead) to
do that themselves for their peace and quiet, which he Doct. 1. in verse. 1.
was wont to do for them: we are taught, that when chief and special
persons are taken away, who were wont to bear the burden for many other, then
they who were left behind, must put forth themselves, and take the more pain,
and be put to greater plondges then they were before. Oh it is a great ease, if
men could consider it aright, when they have others to bear the brunt for
them, while they them selves may as it were, sit in peace: while our Savior
Christ was conversant with his disciples on earth, he sheilded Note. Matthew. 9.
11. 12
them, provided for them every way, and bare off the blows from their
shoulders. As when the Pharisees cauilled with them, (whereby they might easily
have bin discouraged) he took their part, they being too weak, and defended
them. So he said to Peter a little before his ascension: When thou Ioh. 21. 18.
wast young thou girdest thyselfe, and wentest whither thou would: but when
thou art old, another shall girde thee, and lead thee whither thou would
not. When Kings govern wisely and conscionably, the people sit under their
vine and 1. King. 4. 25.
figtree, as it was said they did, that lived in the days of Solomon, when he
had about him Nathan the Prophet, Zadok the Priest, Benaiah a most worthy
Counselor, with such like. Also when people are settled under faithful and
able teachers, who watch for their souls, they live (as it were) in a corner
of heaven, (if they can see) who obediently sit at their feet to hear them.
And so I may say of children, who have their provident and godly parents to
regard their welfare, they know not what sorrow and trouble mean: for the
glory of children are their fathers. And of other inferiors, while they have
their good friends and governors about them, who sees not, that they be
privileged and provided for above others: but when all these fail, then
begins the woe and sorrow of all those, whom they leave behind them: which
in the unwelcome parting of couples in marriage, (the husband from the wife, or
she from her husband, where true love was betwixt them, is daily seen and
proved, to the deep sorrow of the longest liver of both.

All this which I have said, should what on such as are so backed by others, to
weigh the great goodness of God in giving them such helps, and to yield them
due reverence, love, and obedience in the Lord, and to be more carefully given
to every good work, while they have so great encouragements. But because the
inioying of such is made so common a matter, and a thing of no great rejoicing
while they live with them: (for according to the proverb, we best know what a
good thing is worth when we feel the want of it) therefore it were good for
them to suppose often times, and to put the case, that such worthy helps and
friends are taken from them, and what they should then do being left without
them; for as the vine wanting his rail to prop it up, runs on the ground
and waxes wild and unfruitful: A simile.
so inferiors being destitute of their godly superiors, wax degenerate, and
grow out of kind, lying open to mischief as Saul did after Samuels death. 1.
Sam. 28. 15.
But to speak the truth (the more is the pity) this is rare and hardly to be
found, that such take any great good by those helps while they enjoy them,
(unless it be in things temporary, for their ease, maintenance, and seeking
Note.
of liberty to the flesh,) neither when they forgo them, have grace to bewail
the loss of them in any other respect then that which is earthly: neither do
they look to stand up as they ought (in the want and room of them) with care
and confidence to become lights and good examples, and to keep themselves
from evil, as they were kept some of them (no doubt) by their good friends
before. Such provide ill for themselves, seeing as it was with this people of
Israel here, when Joshua was dead, that they had a great loss, and were
constrained now to look better about them then they needed to do before, even
so they having now the like befalne them, must now take the burden on
themselves, which was borne by others for them before. The which being so, men
should make this use of such changes, to Use 1.
provide and learn to want their good helps and friends before hand, and arm
themselves as Job did, to look for their change, when they see they must needs
forgo them. They should also acknowledge daily with hearty thanks to God,
what a benefit they have of them, while they enjoy them, Use 2.
and do all good that they may by the help of them. Which they cannot do,
but they must of necessity feel the loss of them, to be very great, and see
that they must now lay their shoulders to the burden, and therefore labor to
be the fitter to bear and undergo it, and to want them, who were wont to
stand them in so great stead. This as it is wholesome direction and advice to
such as have their helpers and friends as yet remaining with them: so it is
easy to see every where, what calamities they sustain, who made no such use
of them, while they comfortably inioyed them. For the which purpose, this I
add, and so I end this point: oh how sweetly and to their good liking have
many lived, when they had others to bear their burdens for them? as husbands,
wives, subjects, children, neighbors, and other by their friends: in which
benefits they who inioyed kindly and aright, there is no doubt, but that
(which is the chiefest of all) they have therewith, that God is their friend
also: but seeing many depend only on them in a carnal manner, and on their
living still with them, and rest not on God; therefore their proppes fail
them, and their desolation comes upon them, as the enemy upon an unarmed man.

More particularly, we are taught hereby their example, who sought to God in
their doubts for counsel and resolution, that in all our doubtful Doct. 2.
cases, (which are not few) partly touching our estate toward God, and partly
particular duties and actions of our special callings and conditions of life:
while we remain here on earth: we should consult with and ask counsel of God
for our resolution, in such manner as he has taught us: and in no wise to
conceal and bury our wants and defects that trouble us, or pass by the sins
that cleave to us, or other difficulties in our dealings and business that
oppress us, for so we provide ill for our selves, even to live in ignorance
and sorrow (with other inconveniences annexed thereunto) for ever after. And
yet when we seek answer and resolution, we must not think, that we are
enjoined of God to do it in the same particular manner that these did, by the
high Priest, for that might be thought a great trouble to us, seeing there is
none in these days to ask counsel for us: but we must know, that we have
Moses, the Prophets and Apostles: and (by the help of them) the Ministers of
God, Pastors and Teachers, to bring us Gods message and mind out of his word,
and thereby to instruct us. And we our selves, as occasion serves, are to
search the Scriptures, and answer our own doubts thereby, and settle our
estate to God ward, as David did in the Act. 17. 11.
Psalms often, and namely where he says: Why art thou heavy (O my soul) and
Psalm. 43. 5.
why art thou so troubled within me? Still trust in God, and praise him which
is the best of all. And again: whereby shall (a man yea) a young man (who does
Psalm. 119. 9.
more hardly overcome his passions) deny his way, that so he may prove
himself blessed? he answers out of the Scripture, even by taking heed thereto
as Gods word teaches. Thus I say, we are to search the Scriptures by hearing
and reading them, which do reveal Gods will unto us, or consult with the men
and brethren whom the holy Ghost has set over us to that end.

But this is the misery of this age, nothing is to be called into question
among Note.
us: we think we have all knowledge, and doubt of nothing, no, not in the
waightiest matters: why so, I pray you? is it because we be diligent and
careful to learn, and daily to search into our selves and into the word to
see what is a miss, that we need no help of other? Nay, that is few men's
care, the most are no such: but they chiefly are desirous to enquire further
what the good will of God is toward them, who have most profited thereby
already, and so ought other to do: who if they were not both careless how
they lived, and so observe no want in themselves: and drowsy or wandering when
they hear, it could not be, but where there is an ordinary ministry, they
should grow much in setlednesse and sound knowledge: whereas we see, strangers
who are not taught at home, but resort where sound teaching is, they I say,
though they know as much as other, are more inquisitiue and desirous to be
answered in their doubts, then such as have the daily means at hand whereby
they might be resolved. It were to be rejoiced for very much, if hearers of the
Gospel did frequent the houses of Preachers, as they do Physicians to enquire
of their bodily health: then there were some hope that they looked to live for
ever, as they desire to live long here in bodily health, though that can be
but for a very short season. But those days are gone, which yet I in my time
have seen, when in the places, which I mean, both men women and servants
would rise early to dispatch their business on the Lecture day, to the end
they might repair thither, and inquire of God in the congregation, and would
be as ready to take good privately also by questions to very good purpose, and
necessary, when they might. About maintenance and bodily provision, how many
questions (I pray you) are moved before one days or weeks work be brought
to an end? and is any so ignorant, that he knows not, that he that minds
his way to eternal life, has many causes in the day and week, to ask of
himself by secret questioning, whether all be well with him concerning his
account making to God? But there are few or no doubts about such matters as do
greatly trouble us now a days, we run on at six and leven as the blind man
casts his staff, not looking before us, that we might be safely guided. But
what comes of such rash proceeding without consulting with God, by that one
example in the book of Numbers may sufficiently Numb. 14. 45.
appear, when certain of the people of Israel would needs go up to fight
with the Amalekites and Canaanites of their own head, not sent by the Lord:
for they came out against them and destroyed them.

There is another fault committed in this kind, though, I am persuaded, not
with so bad a mind: but seeing it is not without great danger, I will give
warning about it. And that is, when men do feel many doubts to arise, by
reason of their sins, and fore trouble of conscience: but yet through fear
lest they should not have an answer to their liking, or for shame, lest they
should bewray their ignorance, and secrets, and so be reproched and mocked for
the same, they do conceal them, till sorrow devour them for not opening their
minds about them, even as water pent in, bursteth out violently Note.
and does much hurt, which in time having been let forth and vented, might
have avoided it. What had become of the people in the book of the Acts of the
Apostles, when they were pricked at their hearts, as with the point of a sword,
if they had not come to the Apostles, and made their complaint, saying: Men and
brethren, what shall we do? and yet they had Act. 2. 37.
strong temptations not to open their grief to them, because they had much
provoked them before, and railed on them. Therefore if any be troubled, as
these were with doubts, especially in their conscience, and be in great
straights and unquietness, through fear of Gods displeasure and wrath, if
they cannot with their own knowledge put away their trouble of mind, let them
inquire of the men and brethren, whom they are well persuaded off, for
resolution and comfort, as they did: who, as they have been instruments of God
to prick and wound them, so are they also to help to ease them: and they need
not fear (God having promised) but that they shall find rest to their souls,
how impossible soever it seemed to them to be so. And this be said of the
first verse.

In this next it is manifest, that God gave them an answer from the
Propitiatory Verse 2.
or Mercy-seate: which they received by the high Priest: for so he used to
do, and it was one of the ordinary means, whereby God spoke to them in those
days. And he did not only so, whereby they were satisfied, (their question
being answered:) but he also encouraged them to go to the work he set them
about, promising them the victory in that war against the Canaanites,
saying: I have given their land into the hands of Judah, who shall go before
the rest in attempting the war against them.

Out of the which words witnessing so gracious an answer to them from God, we
may clearly see, that our seeking to God in our doubts and necessities, is not
in vain, neither is the labor lost in so doing. For we are to know and be
persuaded, that God answers his in their suites and demands, and indeed
otherwise it were a deadly discomfort, and would discourage us much from the
well doing of duty, as it makes (we see) the wicked at their wits end, when
they being in great danger, can have no help from God, as we read it was with
Saul; who, when he sought to God and asked counsel of him, to serve his own
turn thereby against the Philistims, rather then to please him, and he
answered him not; he in depth of sorrow complained and cried out, saying: The
Lord has forsaken me, and answers me no more, neither by Prophets, nor by
dreams. But blessed be his name, he deals not so with his: neither let this
trouble them, (for so they will say) that although God answered this people of
Israel here, when they sought to him, yet he does not so to us now: for they
are to know, that it is his promise to us, in all that we ask of him according
to his will, to grant it, as well as here he answered 1. Ioh. 5. 14.
to them in that they asked. Therefore in the Psalm he says. Call on me in
the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me: which
agrees Psalm. 50. 15.
with the words of our Savior uttered to all his; Ask, and it shall be given
you: seek and ye shall find. Matthew. 7. 7.


So that it is certain, that every child of God, that makes his moan, and
thus pours out his complaint to him, shall be heard, which should not a
little whet us on, and animate us to draw near to God: we having so sure a
word of promise, that he will draw near to us. For in seeking to a mortal man
Iam. 4. 8.
in our distress, though he be little above us, we know how readily and
chearefully we go about it, when we are persuaded of a good answer, and when
we doubt not of his kind and loving affection toward us: and on the contrary,
how hardly we are drawn to sue to one, that is alienated from us. And seeing
the care thus stands betwixt God and us, that the oftener we come to him, the
more welcome we are, (for this is as true as the former speech) seeing such
are most inward with him, and beloved of him, as Abraham, Moses and David, who
of others repaired oftest to him, and received most of him; I say, seeing it is
thus betwixt God and us, how lamentable is it, and to be bewailed, that this is
not more common for men to repair to God? who if they could mark it, may
easily perceive, that while they neglect to do so, they increase their
trouble, and get nothing. But seeing I am entered upon this matter, I think it
not amiss, to show, how three sorts offend about this. The common sort wholly
neglect and omit prayer altogether: the first thinking that though they pray
not, they shall speed as well, and have as good luck (for so they term it (as
others shall: boldly affirming, that they see no good come of it, they: and yet
in their distress they think they should pray: but then they having neither
will nor skill thereto, in stead thereof, do curse and rage for that they are
not helped and delivered: though some of them do utter words in their passion,
the Lord hears them not, as we read, Pro. 1. Pro. 1. 20.
For it is all one as if they uttered none. And though they cannot pray to God,
yet they make their complaints, and moan to every man that they have
acquaintance with, and that will hear them. And for them to break their minds
to them that cannot help them, when yet they would so gladly find help, and
to pass by him in whom there is present and sure help to be found, what
folly? nay, what madness is it? for (to say the truth) God is not sought unto
in any sort of such, no, not when all other shifts fail: (as I have said.) But
to speak of the second sort, who being professors, a forwarder sort in
religion then the former, these should pray, and that in faith, confidence, and
repentance with comfort, as well as in desire of obtaining the things which
they want, with patient waiting Gods leisure, but even they seek not to God in
this manner, which yet is the only right way of praying, that he teaches us,
or allows in us. For prayers made to him without these properties, are but a
bare noise of words, vain repetitions, and idle Matthew. 6. 7.
speeches, which God abhors: neither may such look to receive any thing, as
S. James says: Ye ask and obtain not, because ye ask amiss. Iam. 4. 3.


And when they see they receive not the things they ask, even they as well as
the other who are further off, do gather, and imagine, though falselie and
unjustly, that prayer does no good, and that it is but lost labor, seeing they
are not heard in theirs, when they pray amiss, and so they wax more slack
and negligent therein, as the other omit it altogether. And the less marvel
it is, seeing even good Christians (to come to the third sort) who go far
beyond both, do so forget themselves ofttimes, and are so deluded by the
devil, that even they omit zealous and seruent praying, and fall to pray
coldly, deadly: so many vain deluzions, and alurements stand up in their way
to unsettle them, and misty clouds of trouble to discourage them. And while it
is thus with them, and while the flesh iustleth against all that good is (they
not resisting it in time) it comes to pass, that even they who have Gal. 5.
17.
learned to pray aright, and have often and usually done so: do yet soon
decline, sometime and before they be aware, fall to pray more by custom
Matthew. 6. 57.
and course, then heartily and aright. For we are not to be ignorant of this,
that we are as well undermined and slily deceived by the malice and subtilty of
the devil and our evil hearts, about our prayers to corrupt and hinder Luke
18. 1.
them, as we are in our lives to break out and be offensive therein. And we
ought to mark our declinings and decay in the one, as well as our coldness and
deadnes in the other: for pray well and live well, and contrary. For want of
the which, it goes so ill with us as it does, that we walk often times Note.
heavily, and cannot say that God hears us, as it is here said of this
people, that God answered them: for even after we have prayed, yet we are not
satisfied, neither rest we by faith persuaded that God will hear us: which yet
is one of the chiefest fruits of prayer. And thus much of Gods answer to them.

But yet further we are to mark, that he did not barely answer them, as he
might have done, and have said only, Let Judah go up: that shall be mine
answer to you: but he adds to it a gracious encouragement, which was more
then they demanded, saying: I have given the land into his hands: Commonly men
in their suites to their betters, ask more then they look for: thinking by
that means to obtain somewhat answerable to their expectation. But God gives
more then is asked, or thought needful. The which dealing of his does add yet
greater hartening and encouraging of us to prayer, when we see that he
oftentimes promises and gives more to us then we looked for: as the dear
Saints of God have found in their time. Joseph whose feet were pinned in the
stocks, prayed that he might be delivered Psalm. 109. 18.
out of prison, whereinto he was thrust at the suite of his whorish mistress,
Genesis 39. 19. 20.
for not consenting to her unchaste request: but God not only delivered him,
Genesis 41. 14.
but brought him out with great honor.

Esther prayed against the spiteful attempt of Haman, and that she and her
people, which were also Gods people, might be preserved from the deadly Esther.
7. 10.
snare, which he had laid for their lives. But what did the Lord? He not only
saved them, but utterly destroyed, and cut clean off, in a most shameful and
reproachful manner, both Haman and all his seed. So, the woman of Esther. 9..
10.
Canaan asked of Christ help for her daughter possessed with a devil: but
Mat. 15. 22.
he granted unto her, beside that she asked, even what she would. And we Luke
15. 22.
know, that when the prodigal son, in his penury and misery, being glad to
refresh himself, and fill his belly with swines food, desired that he might
be receuied, but as a servant into his fathers house: and he was entertained,
and taken in as a son, and nothing of the costliest apparel, and daintiest
food was thought too good for him.

And whereto tend all these examples, but to encourage us, to acquaint our
selves with God, by seeking to know his will, and by often and earnest repairing
to him: assuring our selves, that we shall not only obtain of him that which
we come for in our prayers; but often times much more, according to that in the
Epistle to the Hebrews: He that comes to God, let him know Heb. 11. 6.
that he is a plentiful rewarder of them that seek him. And he has no
experience of Gods loving kindness, who knows not, neither has found this
himself: for do we ask all particular benefits every day, which we enjoy?
no, nor one of many. But we should lead a poor life, maimed, as a body
wanting fingers, eyes, tongue, etc. if we received not more often times then we
ask. But to omit other things too long to stand upon, who has not had proof
of this, (a matter of greater weight) that whereas sometime, in the anguish and
heaviness of his soul for fear of the wrath of God, justly provoked by his
sins against him, he would have thought it happiness not to have bin at
all, but especially in living here, to have bin freed from fear of
condemnation: who (I say) has not proof of this in himself, that he has
yet lived to see by good and infallible evidence, beside that which he
desired) himself to be made assured of eternal glory? so true it is that God
gives his, more then they could ask or think: because they ask in the name
and mediation of the son, whose merit and intercession is infinite.

So likewise we have often times bin in the depth of other calamities: and
seeking to God for help therein, we have not only found deliverance, but
therewith blessings unlooked for, to our great admiration and comfort. And if
God has not given us our desire that way, yet, least he should seem any way
to come short of his promise, he has suffered the cross to remain, till he
has made us see, and therefore to say, that it has turned to a far greater
benefit to us, then if he had presently delivered us out of it, or (which is
more) then if he had never laid it upon us at all: so true it is that God
gives his more then they could look for in asking, or think to receive. This
should uphold us against grudging, when at other times we think God deals
too sparingly, and shortens us of our desires. But we are blind in Revel. 3.
18.
observing these things, because we want the eye salve of faith, which only
can make us see it to be thus.

But, before I leave this verse, another thing here is worthy to be marked,
that he does not only encourage us to seek to him earnestly, by the Hebr. 2.
6.
like large offer which he made here to this people: but here withal, he
gives us sufficient encouragement to the work, that he sets us about. As
Psalm. 1. 3.
he does here to the tribe of Judah: Thou (says he) shall fight my battles
against mine enemies, and thou among others shall go about this work: and
though this were enough to harten thee to it, in that I command thee; yet know
this for thy better encouragement, that I will be with thee, assisting and
blessing thee, yea and I will also give thee the victory, by delivering them
into thy hands. And for better certainty to them, he tells them, that he has
done it already, when yet it was to do. To teach us, that if God speak the
word, it should be counted all one of us, as if he had done the deed. Much like
to this is that in Hebrwes 6. Where Hebr. 6. 10.
God is denied to do as ill masters do, that is, to take no knowledge of their
servants work: no, he is not forgetful of his servants labors, nor unjust to
leave them unrewarded, but tells them before; that he will deal liberally
with them. Hebt. 2. 6.


Men promise much and perform little: yea many are so unjust, that they set
other about their work, but they are never willing to pay them their hire, and
to come to a reckoning, because they are well content to defraud them of their
due, and to take their labor, in a manner for nothing. But God is a liberal
play master, he promises before hand more then we can look for: even to make us
able and fit for the work, that so it may not be toilesome nor tedious unto
us: beside the reward that he gives afterward: even as he did to Iosuah
before, when he should lead the people at the first into the land of Canaan:
he not only promised him the Ios. 1. 5.
whole land, but added therewith, I will be with thee, I will not leave nor
forsake thee.

And this being duly considered and believed, were the strongest motive to set
us forward cheerfully, not only in those duties and works of out callings,
which do cause some delight, and are joined with some profit: but also in
other, which require much toil and have nothing to encourage us, but this,
that God commands us, and would have us go to work otherwise, and namely,
both the Magistrate and Minister to do those great works required of them, with
that cheerfulnes and readiness, that I have mentioned: yea the husbandman and
the artificer, after the same manner to set upon John 4. 34.
their works enjoined them, and so likewise even servants, door keepers, and
hewers of wood, and drawers of water, which are the basest services, and
meanest of other callings, as also the keepers of sheep and swine, Psalm. 84.
12.
to be so occupied in their callings, that as long as they know they are in the
condition in which they should live and serve God, and that he will be with
them and bless them therein, they may abide in the same with comfort, resting
upon his providence, and trusting in his promise, that they shall reap the
fruit of it assuredly.

And the same I would say of women, in their places and condition, and the
work that they are occupied about, in bruing, baking, sowing, spinning, and
such like huswifery but that I should stay to long. The which behavior Deutr.
12. 7.
so heavenly in their earthly business, would better become them, (a man would
think) and should be desired and sought for of them, if they were wise: that
so they might live cheerfully and peaceably: it would better become them (I
say) then the life which now they lead, which for the most part, is led
distrustfully, unquietly, in fretting, raging, and earthly mindednes, etc. And
all because they trust not in God for success, neither believe that he will be
with them to direct and help them, as also to give a good end to their
labors, though they do not always attain the outward profit which they
seek: God providing better for them, even in that hardness, (as they count it)
that their contentation and patience, shall be a greater blessing to them, then
if they had inioyed all the commodity that might have bin looked for of them.

Oh woeful people, who like not their labors and work, which God allotteth
and appoints to them: but take in hand what they think good, and therein
promise to themselves, as the worldly men did who are mentioned in Saint James,
namely, what gain they shall have without the promise Iam. 4. 13.
of God: and therefore, if they be disappointed, they could find in their
hearts to contend with God, for not yielding their hope and desire unto them,
for though they will not be directed by him, what and how they should do: yet
they will quarrel and dispute with him, if they fail of that they look for:
for what else are their secret murmurings and frettings; but against him in
their disappointments? Thus we see how ill they provide for themselves, who
take not the work they go about from God, that so they might also prosper
therein: but they are wise, and shall not repent it, who, as Judah here did,
desire God to teach them what his good pleasure is, to have them to do: for
therein they are sure that it shall go well with them, whatsoever they take in
hand. In which respect David wished the Psalm. 84. 12.
meanest place in Gods house, that is to say, where he rules: rather then the
greatest and highest elsewhere. Well showing by his example, that the poor who
in their simplicity can make the like choice, may live far more sweetly Note.
and peaceably, then the mightiest which refuse to learn so to do: and that
Solomon meant, when he said: A dish of green herbs with peace, is better then
a staled ox with strife.

But from this and such like places it is objected, that God dealt far better
Objection.
with that people, then he does in these days with us. For they in a
particular doubt or trouble might go and ask counsel of God, and he gave
them an answer again thereto: which if he did grant to us in like manner;
then (they say) we had good cause in deed why we should serve God, as readily
and joyfully, as they did: but we have no such liberty to ask in that manner:
nor the like prerogative in his answering us again. To the Answer.
which I say, that this liberty was granted them in one respect, (which
diminishes nothing of Gods favor to us) and this it is: That people of Israel
had a promise of God, that their common wealth should in some sort abide unto
Christ's coming. For the which cause, when they were in great ieopardy to be
rooted out by enemies, God gave them leave thus to ask of him what they should
do, and he resolved and satisfied them according to the promise which he had
made them, to wit, that they should not be driven out of the land: whereby they
knew, that those troubles should not be (as they feared) their utter overthrow.
And as for their captivity afterward, it was but for a season, and they were
at the appointed time, restored again, Psalm. 126. 1.
and returned into their own land. Now what great prerogative had they by such
answers from God about that particular, more then an earthly benefit? They had
this temporary blessing which they needed: we as we have it not, so we stand in
no need of it. But we have far greater then they had, as the means of our
salvation far more clearly brought to light, and this is the greatest of all
benefits. And seeing we have many books of holy Scripture which they had not,
especially when these things were done, which now are spoken of: as the
Prophets and the new Testament, we may well allow them somewhat, which we
want. And for praying to God, either about and for things heavenly or earthly,
we have far more easy access to God, then they had, this one thing
excepted, that they had this one liberty granted them, (as I have said.) And it
would as well appear by the fruit of our prayers, if we were zealous, and often,
and constant therein with vprightnes of heart in the use of that liberty of
praying, as God has allowed Romans 1212. compared with Iam. 5. 16.
and taught us to do. But it follows in the third verse.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES. Verse. 3. 4.
VERSE. 3. And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, come up with me into my lot,
that we may fight against the Canaanites, and I will go with thee into thy
lot; and Simeon went with him.
ALthough God had promised to deliver the Canaanites into the hands of Judah,
yet it was not to the end they should sit idle; The sense.
and wait for it: but that they being so well encouraged, should use such
help thereto, as was at hand, and such whereby they might bring it to pass.
And because the tribe of Simeon his brother had his possessions mixed with, and
lying among the fields of Judah; therefore they called him to help them, and
they two mutually assisted one the other. So that there near dwelling and
neighborhood caused them to defend one the other. From their practice and
example, justified by the Scripture, we learn two lessons: First, that
although God has promised any blessing to us of his own free goodness, yet it
is no let to our faith to use Doct. verse. 3.
all good means that he offers us, for the effecting of the same: but rather
we ought to do so, as Judah here did, for as they were to join both Gods
promise and providence together in this action of war; so are we bound to do
in all actions of peace; I mean to believe the one and serve the other, as we
have seen. And we should tempt God if we do otherwise.

And so we are commanded to do: When God promised help in the Psalm, yet he
wills all his to wait for it by means using, fit and like to bring it to
pass: For thus he says; commit thy way to me and be thou doing Psalm. 37. 3. 5.
good, and I will bring it to pass. Therefore David, when God had stablished
the kingdom in his hands by promise, yet in the treason of Absalom his 2. Sam.
15. and 16. 34.
son, he did not only provide for himself to save his life, and keep the
kingdom to himself by flying, but he used also the help of Hushai the
Arkite, and the sons of the Priests Jonathan and Ahimaaz, to frustrate the
attempts of Absalom.

And when Paul had received answer from God by an Angel, that there Act. 27.
30.
should not one of them that were in the ship with him, lose their life in
that dangerous voyage and sore tempest; yet afterward, when the mariners would
have gone out of the ship; Paul said to the Centurion, Except these abide in
the ship, ye cannot be safe. Therefore Solomon says, that the slothful Pro.
20. 4.
who will not work in Summer shall starve in Winter. David, though anointed
King in Saul's stead, yet did so much the more cherefully use means to attain
it, by how much he was secured of the issue by promise: Even so we (except God
should reveal his meaning to be otherwise, that is to help without means)
are bound to do in all actions both spiritual and temporal: neither can we
have peace otherwise, whither we enjoy our desire or not. This doctrine we have
great cause to learn and mark well, for both in matters of this life, and
also concerning our salvation, we must be guided by it. If in sickness, poverty,
or any other bodily distress we feel cause to complain; then with our
prayer of faith use we the help of the Physician; labor we diligently in our
calling, and use we all other good means, as we have occasion, and as godliness
will suffer, to obtain and come by that help which we want, and God has
promised. So in the trouble of mind, wherein we have large promises of Gods
upholding and comforting us, repair we to the men and brethren, who as they
are skillful to wound, so are Act. 2. 37.
they also to heal; and God who has promised, will thereby, and by the like
means, send deliverance.

And here slacknes and negligence are much to be taken heed of, then the which
there is no greater bane, if we by faith wait for the promise: yet there is
another extremity to be avoided, as well as the neglecting of means, and that
is, that we ascribe not so much to them, that we tie God thereto, so that if we
use them, we imagine we cannot fail of the help we desire. In one of these
two extremities, wicked men are continually holden, that either they use no
means, (as they that hearing God has elected to salvation those whom he will
save; conclude, that if they be elected, they shall be saved, howsoever they
live, whereas God has praedestinated the means, as well as decreed the end:)
or if they use means, they attribute all to them, and nothing to God: as they
who glory of their great wealth, which by their wisdom and travail they have
gotten, which is to sacrifice to their nets. And thus much of the first point.

The second thing that we have to learn of these men of Judah, is that as
Doct. 2.
they used the help of their next neighbor Simeon (as they might more
commodiously do then those who were farther off: so it is to instruct us, Romans
12. 10. 20.
that there should be love and a readiness to help one another, as need
requires Luke 10. 34. 35.
among neighbors, and not an unkind refusing mutually to be aiding one
another, as though we could live alone on earth, because sometimes we have no
need one of another; and as though Christ's charge were so little to be
regarded of loving one another. The reasons why we ought to have a great care
of this duty is, (besides Christ's commandment) first, seeing one time or
other all stand in need of the help and gifts one of another. I to day, and
thou to morrow, and God has dealt with the societies of men as with the
members of the body; giving to every member a distinct faculty, that they
might all agree to the good of the whole, seeing that none could well be spared
without blemish. Secondly, neighbors are set near in habitation, to the end
they should be nearly knit together in affection, and be readier to help,
then they who are farther off.

The benefit of this, though it be greatest in trouble; yet it is in all times
amiable and full of comfort. It is preserved by due and daily meeting in the
public assemblies at the preaching of the word, prayer and the use of the
Sacraments: also privately, as they may conveniently, by good communication,
Heb. 10. 24. 25.
and by kind greetings, salutations, and avoiding all wronging one another, and
discourtesies, in word, deed or countenance. Whereto they Note.
who will not be subject, and that readily, knowing that they nourish and
uphold neighborhood and love thereby, they show that they are willing to
break off this knot. It is hindered by self-love, whiles every man regards
himself only, or for the most part: and especially where men are more
frowardly and churlishly disposed, who had need often to remember the words of
our Savior, saying, Hereby shall all men know that ye are my disciples, John
13. 35.
if ye love one another.

But I cannot tell how it comes to pass, that one man is a wolf and lion to
another, (yea, even such as dwell together nearer then in one town,) by his
Nabal-like churlishnes, and blockish, if not mischievous, behavior: who when
they should also the more nearly be linked together, do thereby take occasion
to be sooner weary one of another; to contend also, and fall out for small
trifles, as there shall not want matter sundry ways, if men be not careful to
prevent the same. Wherein yet this is worse; that such as are ever at jar
with one or other that dwell near them, or with them, do cover their sin by
answering, they agree well enough with others who are far from them. Whereas
it were monstrous if we deserved bad report among them who know us not. For who
sees not that it is an easy matter to be at peace with strangers, with whom
a man has no dealings, neither comes often in their company? But the Apostle
teaches, that we should fetch testimony of our Christian behavior and good
conscience, not so much from them that are a far off, where weseldome come;
but from them especially, with whom we dwell and converse usually and deal:
for thus he says to the Corinthians amongst whom he had lived; This is our
rejoicing, 2. Cor. 1. 12.
the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness we
have had our conversation in the world, and most of all toward you.

And to draw to an end in this point also, it should be thoroughly resolved to
every good Christian, not to grieve and offend the meanest that he lives with,
either by private contention, or iniuring them, or by any other reproachful Note.
behavior; but to live peaceably with them, so much as in him lies, and Romans
12. 18.
to look carefully that he do so, and offer them friendly and good measure;
that so he may stop the mouths of the ill disposed, and have interest in the
other: such persons when God shall visit them, to bring them on to Christian
religion, and exhort them, and so to have hope to bring them to repentance, and
thereby to enjoy the fruit of such wise, kind, and peaceable living with them,
in love and inward comfort, which passes understanding. But yet if any will
needs break off from us, because we will not have fellowship Ephesians. 5. 11.
with them in the unfruitful works of darkness, and walk after the same
excess of 1. Pet. 4. 4. Heb. 12. 14.
riot that they do; here we must remember, that we must join speech with
holiness, and no further. And (though it grieve us) forgo that agreement,
which we cannot lawfully hold: and we should be comforted in this, that we
have sought it as much as in us lies.

Thus as I have showed Gods people how to keep neighborhood and love one with
another, that they may beware of strangers, which never does good: so I will
give a watchword to the unruly and disobedient, of their gross and common
contentions and iarres, with such as they live among, wishing them to consider,
how wearisome they make their lives and displeasing, and therefore to study to
live quietly, and not to be companions in evil with them, to think thus, that
if Gods dear servants sometime disagree, and live unkindly, for that they have
no more grace; (though they have some;) then much more they should begin to
avoid and mislike all such their uncharitableness, and other ill parts of
their lives who have no grace; and that speedily; lest if they bite one
another, they be consumed one of another. I Galath. 5. 15.
deny not, but they have show of neighbourly fellowship, among them, but it is
most chiefly in wickedness, wherein many join easily together; but as
concerning friendship, they are inconstant and hollow, and are only friends
while they have that which they would have, and no longer, nor no further. And
this of them briefly and by the way. And now seeing I have said; I will add a
word to another sort, and that is this: that if the nearest in place and
kindred, should be most near in affection, (as the very law of nature
teaches, and all will acknowledge) how much more then the married couples? In
whom to see this band of love broken, it is not only strange, but monstrous.
And let this shame all such to hear this, seeing that which has before been
spoken in reproof of others, who offend this way, shall most of all condemn
them. It follows in the next verse.

Verse. 4. And Judah went up, and the Lord delivered the Canaanites, and the
Perezites into their hands, and they slew of them in Bezek ten thousand men.
Judah, as he was commanded of God, so he did: for so it is said here, he went
up, etc. so that as he counseled with the Lord, what he should do; even so,
when he knew his mind, he was as ready to obey. This condemns the rash zeal
of many, who are as ready to ask and go to the word, and pray in the
congregation after their manner, as the best: but they consider not why they
do so; as though they thought God were pleased with such half service as they
use, much like to Saul who was forward to sacrifice, thinking God to be highly
pleased therewith: but as for the obeying the commandment of God in destroying
the Amalekites, he was far from it, he did it by halues, so that the Prophet
Samuel was feign to say to him, Has God as great 1. Sam. 15. 22.
pleasure in burnt sacrifice, as that his voice should be obeyed? Behold, to
obey is better then sacrifice; and to hearken is better then the fat of rams.
So to make a show of much forwardness, and to have no heart nor readiness to
do as men pretend; and to say, Lord, Lord, and not to be willing to do his
will, is abomination Matthew. 7. 21. Psalm. 50. 16. Psalm. 51. 6. Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
to the Lord. For he loves truth in the inward parts: he says, Oh that there
were an heart in this people, to keep all my commandments always, that it
might go well with them. God cannot abide that men should show more then is in
them; which also his servant Paul abhorred to do, as we read in that place to
the Corinthians, saying: I would have none think otherwise of me 2. Cor. 10. 6.
then they see in me. Thus we see, what use we ought to make of this example of
Judah, that is, to give God this honor, that as we pray and resort to him to
know his will, so we be as ready to endeavor to do it; and to seek to be
faithful and true servants unto him, rather then to be so accounted, for it
shall otherwise be little to our comfort. This of Iudahs obeying, now let us
see what the Lord did to him.

We have heard of the promise made to the^ by God of subduing the Canaanites;
now it is showed how he performed it, in this, that the men of Judah Doct. 2.
slew 10000. men of them, and of another people that joined with them, namely,
the Perezites, which were also of the 7. cursed nations. (And here this
victory is briefly set down, but the manner how it was gotten, is more at large
laid forth in the verses following). The rest of them (seeing their army was
very great) it is to be thought, fled away, out of whom their King was taken
and caught. By this the Lords keeping of promise with Judah, we see it proved,
which was before affirmed, that God having spoke the word once, it is as much
as if he had done the deed, his word and deed are both one. Which, in so great
matters especially as he promises, is worthy to be regarded. For we may say
now of our selves, as the Prophet said of former times; Our fathers hoped in
him, and were not disappointed: they put their trust in Psalm. 22. 5.
him, and were not confounded. This, when we see how hardly it is found in men
to keep their promise, and that they cannot be trusted of their word, though
they promise; yea, and bind it with an oath, no, though they be depended on in
weighty cases; this (I say) should make us to think our estate twice happy,
who may be allowed to rest and put our affiance in God, without fear of being
disappointed in the greatest matters.

For if we can but wait patiently, we may be sure it shall come to pass
which he has promised; yea, till heaven and earth perish, one jot or tittle
Matthew. 5. 17.
of that which he has spoken, shall not fail, but be fulfilled. What comfort
ought this to bring to all believing Christians, who have promises made them by
him of temporary deliverances, and benefits, and of eternal happiness? Oh
what were wanting here, if there were faith to believe them? Note.
Besides, whereas it is one of the greatest griefs of Gods people to see vile
Psalm. 73. 13.
men prosper in their wickedness, and to flourish as the green bay tree, and
to have more pleasure, honor, and wealth, then they could look for, whereby
they seem to men, to be here placed in an immortality; yet seeing it is Psalm.
1. last.
certain they shall come to naught, and to destruction, who abide in that
estate, 2. Pet. 3. 9. Heb. 10.
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, what patience and contentment should
this be to the faithful, to remain constant in their hope and well doing,
though they have many discouragements? and to wait with patience a little
while, seeing he that will come, will come, and not tarry. But this point is
often taught, therefore it shall suffice to have said this of it: only apply
we this truth to the bad in Gods threatenings, as the promise has been applied
to the believers, that if he threaten them, and they stand it out with him, he
will surely pay them home, as he dealt with Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 4. 31. 32.
and others.

Now for Gods delivering the Canaanites into their hands, we must Doct. 3.
know, that this was done without all injustice and severity, (which some will
be ready enough to think otherwise of) though there be no mention here made of
their deserts and transgressions: but it is manifest in the Scriptures, that
they were most grievous. And that appears by the Lords own words in the book
of Genesis: where, when he would show a reason, why he would hold the
posterity of Abraham so long a season in Egypt, before they came into the land
of promise, he makes it to be this, namely, for that the sins of the Canaanites
were not then come to the full, which time then was not, but now Genes. 25. 16.
was fulfilled and come to pass, and therefore they were now justly punished;
Abraham's seed being long before this, brought out of the Egyptian bondage. Now
as the sin of the Canaanites was grown ripe and known to God to be come a
great height, though it be not here set down; (yea, though it be not manifest
to all that read the story) and yet clear enough, as I have said, and
therefore they suffered and were punished most justly: so we that hear this
must be persuaded, that God deals most righteously in all his visitations and
judgments, though men do not always see the cause. Which we have great need
well to learn; seeing we are ready with Cain to Genes. 4. 13.
to charge God with rigor and hard dealing, by the smallest occasion, when
(yet) we neither have argument to uphold us, and we might have learned of Job,
that there is no disputing with God; (and if he gave us nothing at all, yet he
Job 9. 3.
should owe us nothing, we are indebted to him for all that we have.)

This David confessed, when the Lord corrected him: and whereas he Psalm. 51. 6.
might have been thought to have dealt too hardly with him, reproouing him so
sharply, and sending so heavy a message to him, as he did by the Prophet
Nathan, yet David himself confesses his fault to have been so heinous, 2.
Sam. 12. 7. etc.
and his sin so great, that God did show mercy in correcting him, rather
then severity; and added this, that he should always be justified, and
Psalm. 51. 4.
found righteous, howsoever men should judge of him. This, though men dare not
in words deny, if they should be asked what their opinion is, concerning it:
yet when God takes them severally in hand, and that his rods be upon
themselves, rare are they, that shall then be of that mind, and so confess
Note.
to him, or before men, especially if their afflictions be long, or smarty,
that yet the Lord is just, and his dealings are righteous: but rather they cry
out impatiently, that they are handled as no other men be, and that they would
they had any other affliction upon the^ in stead of that which they suffer. And
if they be exhorted to patience, they ask with the wicked king Iehoram, how can
they attend on God any longer, in their so great calamities; whereas he having
2. King. 6. 33.
a merciful respect of us, regards, what we are fit to bear, and
moderateth his chastisements accordingly, and promising that he will lay no
more 1. Cor. 10. 13.
on us then he will make us able to go under; it is (most certainly) our great
sin, when we labor not to contain our selves meekly, and to see so much amiss
(as full easily we may) in our evil hearts and lives, as that we may say
always in his sorest correcting of us, the Lord is righteous, and ever to be
praised.

Secondly, this should teach us, not to take part with the wicked, in moning
and pitying them for that he so pursues them, when we see the hand of God
upon them, but rather justify God, nay, give thanks unto him for his just
dealing with them: and although we wish their salvation, yet we may rejoice in
their punishment, even as mourn for their impunity, when they provoke them.
Especially if we know them enemies to the Church, seeing then we judge not
before the time, and we know it is just with God to render 2. These. 1. 6.
tribulation to all that have troubled his: but when the estate of the
afflicted is unknown to us, although we may be assured that God is just, yet
we must not condemn them, but leave him to God.

Now to speak a little of the Canaanites, because they escaped long, being
Doct. 4.
so great offenders, yet in that they were met withal at last, it teaches us;
that as God will not always suffer his rods to lie on the back of the
righteous, so neither Psalm. 125. 3.
will he suffer the wicked to escape and go unpunished, but he will be
revenged on them in his due time, yea and that quickly, whereas they (yet) Luke
18. 8.
think the clean contrary, and imagine, that if they be not punished as
soon as they have trespassed, they shall never come to any reckoning; and
therefore they merrily promise themselves, and say, Doubtless the bitterness
1. Sam. 15. 32.
of death is passed, and think that God will neither do evil nor good: Nay,
they begin to applaud themselves in their wicked doings, as we may see in the
Psalm: where the Lord himself charge them for it. Psalm. 50. 21.


Therefore this and the like Scripture comes in fit season to be urged upon
all such, that though they cry, peace, peace, and cast the remembrance of 1.
These. 5. 3.
punishment behind their backs, yet God will set it before their faces, yea
and make them smart, as if they were stung with adders and hornets; their sin
will most certainly find them out. Haman, after all his cruelty and Ester. 7.
10.
malice, was powered out against Gods people with great joy, notwithstanding
also the Kings countenancing and backing of him therein, had yet a snare set
for him at a sumptuous banquet, and by the prayers of the faithful, received
just punishment for his doings, when he little looked for any such matter.
Iezabell being suffered to go forward in her murders, and spiritual
whoredoms along time, not sparing the Lords faithful Prophet Elias, but 2.
King. 9. 30. 31. etc.
threatened death to him also, when she was in the midst of her pride, braying
boldly against the Lords auenger Iehu, coming to do execution upon her, was
cast down out at the window by her own Eunuchs in great disgrace; her
brains being squashed against the stones, till she was made dogs meat and
doung, for all her former glory.

The same I might say of infinite other who scorned to hear of any thing, or
judgment to be coming against them; who yet were made as unlike Luke 12. 20.
to the persons they were before in their iollitie, as if they had never bin
they, (as the rich man in the Gospel, and the Epicure) even as if one should
see a Luke 16. 22. 23.
goodly palace with all the rich furniture thereof, to be burned unto ashes. A
Simile.
But alas, what is our speaking of such things to a new generation, risen up
after them, as far gone as they in their iniquities, yea adding to them also
other sins both strange and fearful: Are any made wise by former examples,
though they come not short of them in their abominations? (that I say no more)
but they have one thing or other to wash away the remembrance of such works of
God, or to tush at them who tell them that they shall be like them in their
punishments. And if they be scared at any time with fear of Gods judgments
it is with them, but as it is with thieves, when there is hue and cry after
them, then they give in, but if it be past, they peep out of their holes, and
fall to their trade a fresh, til they be found out and taken: and so do these.

But I will turn away from this kind of people, as fearing that I do but
lose my labor about them, I will bestow my words where I have more hope to
prevail, and do good by them. I am not ignorant that right worthy and good
Christians do sometime fall into this disease; and are rocked a sleep with
them before mentioned, in some particular falls: that when they have found
sweetness in some baits of sin, and have so far forgot themselves, that
they are snared by the deceitfulnes thereof, they have begun to think that it
is good being for them there, and to continue still in so doing, and they are
loath to be diseased, they love not to think for the time (behold to what
point the best may easily be brought) that God will come against them for their
so being disguised. This is more then with the five Matthew. 25. 5.
wise virgins to begin to nodde; nay it is with the Church in the Canticles,
Cant. 5. 1.
to fall a sleep: doubtless, this is as dangerous an estate for godly
Christians, as it is unbeseeming them.

But what of this some (perhaps) will say? what does the punishment of the
Canaanites concern these? I answer, it concerns them very much. For though
they are not seated nor saped in sin as they, and their like, of whom I have
spoken already: and therefore are not in danger to be punished like to them,
yet is their sin great, for that they have bin tenderly regarded of the Lord,
and have set this love more sweet then the honey comb; and have been advanced
to honor, (greater then Princes) to be sons and daughters, to the Lord
almighty, yea and they have sworn with David, and Psalm. 109. 106.
therefore should perform it, to keep his righteous judgments: now then, for
them to look back only to Sodom, and to give place to their evil lusts,
but so far, as to take liking of, and please themselves in any unfruitful
works of darkness, so as they could be content still to solace themselves
therein, it is in them perjury; against God treachery, and in itself, sin,
for such persons to commit, most fearful and horrible.

And if they epsy it not betimes, which they ought to have prevented and
shunned at the first entrance into it, God will rouse them out of it to their
Note.
cost, with terror and abashment, especially if they have fallen so oftentimes,
and have experience, what woe it has brought them in times past before they
could rise up again: and in what a torment and hell they lay, before they
could return. And yet I would have no man take me thus, as though I thought,
that a man truly converted to God, can always be in one, and the same state of
liberty to serve God, or hold the same measure of grace at all times, or as
though he might not possibly, yea easily, through his evil Note. Romans 7. 19.
heart, (which in great part remains lusting after evil, and rebellious
against God) as though he might not (I say) be easily carried after the evil,
Psalm. 30. 6. 7.
which at an other time he wholly abhors, and has victory over. I do not
deny but this may be, and is with the best; but to nourish these ill desires,
and to delight in them, and so to be in danger to commit the sin, which has
drawn the heart to be made drunken with it, whether it be whoredom, revenge;
unjust dealing, etc. (for so it may come to pass) this I say, changes his
sweet life into sowernes, and (to show the danger of such boldness further) it
does utterly disguise him; and make him and his profession rediculus.

And to let him see what this will grow to, he may further understand that God
deals with such, after this manner; that first, he suffers them to be
unsettled in their course, so that they serve God awkly and untowardly, (as he
goes to work, that uses dull edged instruments) they cannot pray, nor walk
roundly and cheerfully in their calling, but are full of unquietness, with much
grudge of conscience, and a very taste of hell, which to continue many hours,
or days, is yet an heavier burden, and greater bondage. Note.
And yet if they relent not, when they be unsettled, and when they see
themselves thus far out of the way of godliness; a greater danger is like to
follow, that is, that they shall be hardened, and so, far from repentance,
and then they fall from evil to worse, till they breaking into other open
offenses be met withal and requited, with sundry open and shameful
punishments. This is the Lords manner of dealing with his own, even as he
deals with the ungodly, first to warn them secretly by the accusation of
their conscience: and if that do them no good to call them back; then he
casts them into bodily or visible judgment. And so the bestende they have of
Romans 6. 21.
their bad doings, is to go back with shame and sorrow, whereas they might
have shunned both, and have lived in peace and with comfort.

Which being duly considered, has made me often to marvel, that men Ier. 31.
18. 19.
whom I know to be very careless, can yet be so quiet. Me thinks where much
sin is committed, and such as the persons cannot be ignorant of it, when they
have done it, they should not put it up so cleanely, and sleep upon it so
easily, but that it ought to trouble them, even as the stomach ouercharged,
seeks to be unburdened. So (I say) I think they should have but Note.
small peace within, when so much may be seen to be amiss without; for let
them set as fair a face on their bad doings, as they can; yet can they not be
the whole men that they go for, and God will not be mocked, they must cast up
their unsavory gorge, and cleanse their hearts and hands from evil before James
4. 8.
God will accept, and take knowledge of them for his. For if the conscience,
being tender, and like the apple of the eye, can suffer no violence; how can
they load it with so great a burden of known sins, but they must needs
cause it to cry out, if they do not with true repentance seek to God for
mercy to ease it? For a penitent soul cannot feel the least violence to be
offered to the conscience by sin committed, but it cries out to be cured;
and therefore, they who give greater cause, cannot be in good case, when they
set it light, having so sore offended. And thus much by occasion of the
Canaanites sin: It follows.

THE THIRD SERMON UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
VERSE. 5. And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: and they fought against him, and
slew the Canaanites and the Perezites. VERSE. 6. And Adonibezek fled, and they
pursued after him, and and caught him, cut off the thumbes of his hands and of
his feet. VERSE. 7. And Adonibezek said, Seventy Kings having the thumbes of
their hands, and of their feet cut off, gathered [bread] under my table: as I
have done, so God has rewarded me. So they brought him to Jerusalem, and there
he died.
TO make entrance into these verses which I have read, ye have The sense.
heard how God gave victory: now it is showed more particularly, how the
victory before mentioned, was gotten, the place being set down where the
battle was fought, that is, in Bezek: and the King of the people is mentioned,
who was Adonibezek, who fled in the battle, as being too weak, but was taken,
and handled, as is set down in the text, to wit, he had the thumbes of his
hands and feet cut off. Whether the men of Judah knew that he had so dealt with
other, or no, or whether the Lord directed them so to do, without knowing any
such thing, it is not expressed, but he himself confessed that he had done so
to others, and that God had requited him with the like. That which was said of
the Canaanites punishment, that it was inflicted upon them when their sin was
grown ripe, may as truly be said of their King, as by his own confession may
be gathered: but having spoken of that point already, I omit to say any more
of it.

But seeing this Adonibezek, being taken as he fled, had his thumbs cut off,
Verse. 5. Doct.
as he had cut off others before; out of these verses let us first note this,
that God measures out to men, even as they measure and mete to others:
according to the words of our Savior, With what measure ye mete, shall be
measured Matthew. 7. 1.
out to you again. So that, as we have done to other, so shall we be dealt
with. The Lord confirms this truth, where he says, He that sheddeth man's
blood, by Genes. 9. 6.
man shall his blood be shed. Which was rightly verified in Haman, and that in
many points: For first, as he accused Gods people unjustly, so he was charged,
and that by the King himself, where yet he was not guilty: and he was Note.
condemned without solemn judgment, seeing he had done so to others; and when
he was handled most reprochfully and adjudged to most shameful punishment, yet
there was none that pitied him: (a wonderful thing to be spoken of one, that
had been in so great favor with the King) and why this? even because he had
been pitilesse toward other, that it might be verified which was then true,
and afterward written, Judgment shall be merciless James 2. 13.
to him that shows no mercy. Why was he hanged, and that upon the gallows,
that he had set up for godly Mordecay? I say still, even that the scripture
might be fulfilled every way, that as he had done, so it might be done to him
again: Ester. 7. 10.
for in that he purposed to do it, it was done already in Gods account.

Now that we may bring this nearer to our selves; many among us complain, how
they be wronged in their dealings with men; they are evil spoken of, slandred,
railed upon, (they say) and many other ways abused. And they think they
receive very hard measure at men's hands hereby; they marvel at it, and
complain, that none are used as they be: but what blindness Note.
is it, that covers there eyes? For do not all that live with them, know, at
least, their own consciences can tell them, that they have dealt even so with
other, and thereby have given cause to be so dealt withal, again? But oh
blind self-love, that cannot see that, which all other do see I mean, which
thinks that tolerable in ones self, which yet he accuses and condemns in
another, and sees not the just judgment of God upon himself by other men's
wronging him, which he himself by his just des^^ts, has brought upon his
own head.

Hereof it is, that if we thus tell them, (which is the very truth) that their
sin has found them out, they have no ears to hear us: and if we waroe the
like offenders, before their punishment comes, that God will after the same
manner be avenged of them, yet they will not believe us, till he visit them in
some such heavy manner indeed, and then (with Joseph's brethren) they begin to
say: We remember our sin this day, that even as other have done Genes. 42. 21.
to us, so we have done to other before: and as this cruel King Adonibezek
said here, Seventy Kings thumbs, have I cut off, etc: as I have done; so God
has Note.
rewarded me. And this men shall come to either in Gods favor, to their
amendment, or in his displeasure to their hardening, and confusion. And therefore
it were wisdom to confess it in time, while we may be taught and told of
it: for all men's consciences will cry out to them that it is true, that they
have by word or deed iniuried other, before they have received such measure
themselves: but if they had not in that kind, and particular manner offended,
yet they are sure, they have done it, some other way; so that they have just
cause, if they well weigh it, and look to Gods hand therein to bear all such
indignities (as they count them) as are offered them, both with meekness and
contentedly. And were it not that God dealt thus with men, they would never
acknowledge nor dislike the sin which they are guilty of: but suffer it to
lie secret in them, and work them a mischief. Whereas yet it being ferreted
out by such judgments of God, they cannot but confess it, especially when
they be in any great fear, and danger of death. And for us who are now
warned, if we have had our part in this sin, that with the common sort we
have smitten others with our tongue, or wronged, or intended evil any way
against them, learn we with great regard, to put a speedy end thereto by
repentance; lest God awake and prevent us by some such like judgment again,
as we have caused to other, and to this end put we these two lessons in
practice, neither in heart, word or deed, offer we any hard or unequal measure
to any man: and if any offer it Romans 12. 21*
to us, if it be possible, that it may be without our great hurt, let us
quietly and meekely pass by it, and make no great matter of it, for the time
shall come wherein we shall wish we had done so, and not have laid that so
near our heart, which might more easily have been passed by of us.

But in saying, God has rewarded him, it is to be noted, that he an heathen
Verse. 7. Doct.
Idolater, could see so far, as to ascribe to God his affliction. Whereby we
may see, that very bad men do acknowledge God to be the striker and punisher
of them. But where should he learn it? for though it did him no good, to
acknowledge it, yet it is that, which many who have been baptized, do not come
to, but curse and ban, rage and fret in their afflictions, crying out of their
ill fortune, as they call it, so far are they from resting in the justice of
God, and to say, he has done righteously. Also as they ascribe to chance and
fortune their calamities, so do they run for help to Witches and Sorcerers,
when they be oppressed with them, which is greatly to the conuicting of them.
For why should not they much more see the hand of God when they are visited: if
Heathens have seen so far, as to ascribe to God their troubles, and to
confess their sin, as this Adonibezek did here. This not only checketh such
as I have mentioned, but lays hard to their Psalm. 95. 20.
charge also, that make some show of goodness, who yet do harden their hearts
under their afflictions, and will not know Gods ways, though they see well
enough that they suffer for their evil deeds, neither will relent, nor fear
his judgments, though they cannot deny, that they are due to them for their
deierts. More particularly, such as this Heathen King was, shall rise in
judgment against such professors, as will not see their cruelty,
unmercifulness, their uncleanness, which they nourish in themselves; their
oppressions also and injuries they do to their neighbors, though they be
most clearly laid before them.

When yet Pharaoh and other such, have (especially when Gods hand was heavy
upon them) acknowledged that the Lord had done it. For even the Exodus 9. 27.
wickedest man's own conscience sometimes accuses him, that he does evil: and
ought not these much more, we have far greater light; to tremble when they
have so grossly offended, and say, Against thee, against thee (O Lord) we have
done this evil? And especially; when they know what danger they be in thereby,
and what heavy plagues hang over their heads for the same. Although such must
go further then so, even to tell it to themselves, that God will not be at one
with them, unless they acknowledge their faults also, and submit themselves to
him, as his word teaches, howsoever it shall please him to correct them; and
withal, to resolve, in all conditions of their lives whatsoever, to endeavor,
and be ready to obey him.

Also this should teach us, when we receive indignities at men's hands, yet
Doct. 2. 2. Sam. 16. 10.
to look to God, who set them a work against us, as David said of Shemei, and
not as the dog does, to catch the stone, and leave the smiter. And though they
have wronged us willingly, yet if we considered, that the Lord did it, we
should the less be moved or offended with the instrument: whereas we on the
other side, beat our brains, and strain our selves, all that we can, to
pursue them, and seek to be revenged on them, whom yet the Lord will
sufficiently punish for the wrong they have done. For example, we are so out
of quiet for a word spoken against us, as if it were treason. when in the mean
while, we do not once think, how we have provoked the Lord, to stir up such
ill persons against us. Adonibezek (we see here) would not asscribe it to the
Israelites, but says, it was God that did thus unto him.

Furthermore here, by this that we hear his cruelty, thus laid out by his
Doct. 3.
own mouth, that he had played the tyrant against many, and those no meaner
persons then Kings, to cut off the thumbs of their hands and feet, and not to
some few of them, but even seventy persons; we see what a raging fury this
vice of cruelty is, and to what depth of evil it carries men, that do not
wisely consider the foulness and shamefulnesse of it. For whereas one man
should be sociable with another, yea with strangers, if occasion be offered,
(seeing every one is our neighbor,) this cruelty cutteth of all fellowship,
Luke 10. 37.
nay all liberty of inioying such benefits of peace, goods, or the like. So
that the cruel man is far worse then the thief, who (yet) is odious, and
driven from habitation with men in their free dwelling houses, into a loathsome
prison among brutish companions. For he, unless he be cruel also, is content
to take a share in his goods, whom he robs; but the cruel man is not
content with a share, but if his might be suitable to his mind, he will have
all, at one time or other, that is his whom he pursues, yea he will thrust him
out of house and home, yea, and out of the world also, before he can be
satisfied. Caine, a little after the corrupt estate of things entered into the
world, was a Genes. 4. 8.
pattern of cruel ones, who when he had no cause given him by Abel his
innocent brother, of hard handling him; yet because he was accepted of God, and
himself not, did not hate him only without a cause, but which was most
unnatural and monstrous in him, rosevp against him, and slew him. Pharaoh,
Exodus 5. 9.
when he had almost tired the poor people of God, who were strangers in his
land, with burdens and toil as much as they could bear; yet was not satisfied
therewith, but made their burden far greater, til their life was more
unwelcome then death itself, that his cruelty might be manifest to all. Haman
so exceeded herein, that it was too little to take the goods of Gods people
Ester. 7. 4.
from them, and to hold them bondmen, unless he might have their lives also.
And what should I speak of Iezabel, who being a woman, exceeded men who were
cruel also? And of Rehoboams cruel handling his subjects, as his story
declares, and of Joseph's brethren, who consented to sell him into a far
country, whence he might never return to trouble them, as they hoped, but
further, the most of them agreed to take away his life also, and yet if they
had killed him, even they themselves had lost their lives also in the famine
that God sent afterward, they being preserved by Joseph among all other men.

These might make cruelty odious to us. But many that hear this of it, desire
to know what manner of thing it is, that rages after this sort, and like the
flaming fire, deuoureth and destroys, where it comes. Their demand is
godly, and I will briefly satisfy it. That they may therefore cease
maruelling, that this fury, cruelty I mean, brings such strange effects
forth, they may know, that it is a vile and vicious habit or custom, whereby
men are carried to do things both harsh and hard, and that beyond all course
and compass of reason. Now where men are thus set upon their will, to deal
with other, and are led to it without reason, much more without religion, there
how can they choose, but to be rigorously handled, and cruelly dealt with, who
fall into their hands? Which makes the cruel man to be hated of all: For
such are barbarous and vnciuell, as if they had sucked the Dragons in the
desert, and their hearts so bound with the sinews of iron, that they spoil
them whom they pursue, as raging rain and tempest rendeth the trees, and
destroys the fruits, and they are no more moved with the life of a man,
then if a dog had fallen before them. And therefore no marvel, that David
having his choice of plagues presented to him, made a present exception to his
own nature and kind, fearing and knowing the cruelty of men; saying: let me
not fall into the hands of man. This the Heathen Seneca saw, when he said; Thou
art deceived, if thou give credit to the looks of those that meet thee. They
have the faces of men, the minds of wild beasts. If he spoke this of man in
general, what would he have said particularly of the cruel man? with whom
this speech is as common; [burne, kill, cut, Poison young, old, men, women,
brethren, kindred,] as to eat their meat. Whosoever do but cross them with
a mistaken word, or wrie countenance, it is but a word and a blow with them,
and though they murder upon light occasions, and have no gain by their death,
they have enough in that they take pleasure in it. But whither might a man go
in this argument? I will give an instance in lower matters of this kind.

Hereof it is, that if one neighbor be trespassed by another, in his corn or
other commodities, by cattle, or any other way, though it be without any
fault of him that has done the trespass, the other is ready in rage and
fury to seek revenge, by laming and hurting the cattle; which he would do
to the owner, (like Lamech) if he durst, or will with spite and railing and
exacting at his hands six times the value of the damage and detriment that he
sustained, though if he annoy the other in a worse manner, he yet makes
nothing of it, but will shift it of. This is a cruel part, in things of so
little value unto a neighbor: What would he do (think we) or he that is
like minded to him, in matters of weight, and to a stranger? and so much the
more, I may call such dealing cruelty, seeing it is offered by such an one as
trespasseth another time in a far worse manner himself. The like may be said
of cruel Landlords, Masters, Guardians, Stepmothers, etc. which measure not
them whom they offend against, by themselves. For though there be diverse
degrees in the many kinds of this foul vice of cruelty, yet we must know,
that the least and lowest is unseemly in a man and odious.

Indeed it is more noisome and furious, if it be accompanied with envy,
therefore Solomon says, Who can stand before envy? for the envious Prou. 27. 4.
are obstinate, and cannot be reconciled. Therefore whatsoever measure be
offered by such, it is certain, that it shall be hard enough, seeing Prou. 12.
10.
their very mercies are cruelty. What remains then for such persons to do,
to the end they may (if it be possible) cast of this cruelty, as a most
filthy and loathsome garment, but this? that they give themselves no rest, til
it become as odious and loathsome to them, as it is to other, which is not hard
for him to obtain, that will be persuaded to look into the odiousness of it:
that when he has found it, he may fall down at the Lords feet for mercy to
cover the foulness of it, and forgive it; and that being believed, embrace
gentleness and mercy, and kindness toward others, in stead of rigor. Like
Act. 16. 30.
the Iaylor in the Acts: who, though he had vsedg reat cruelty against Paul
and Silas, yet when he repented, did wash their wounds most lovingly, which
before scourging of them, he had made in their bodies, and set meat before
them in his house most chearefully, whom he had before thrust hungry into the
inward prison most cruelly. Also let it teach us, both to pray that we be not
given over into the hands of unreasonable and unconscionable men, who are as
absurd as cruel in their malice. As the Apostle wills the people to pray, 2.
These. 3. and to give thanks that we have 2. These 3. 2.
been either kept from being a pray to such deuourers, or mercifully snatched
out of their jaws, as a costly garment out of the fire.

But to pass from this, let us weigh that he had used this cruelty upon
seventy Doct. 4.
Kings: so that he was not satisfied, by ten or twenty times continuing his
cruelty toward so many, no nor three times twenty and more; and would have
done the same many hundred times more, if he had not been cut off, and so
hindered, as God in much mercy provides that such doings shall have an end.
And by it we may learn, that when men have entered into a bad course, it is
never time for them to leave and come out of it, especially, if they have
benefit thereby, and take liking and delight therein; and most of all, if with
profit and delight it be grown into a custom with them. Simon Magus had a
long time bewitched Samaria with his sorceries, even Acts 8. 9. etc.
almost the whole city: and never went about to desist from that practice,
till he was, against his will, broken off by the preaching of Phillip.
Demeirius Acts 19. 24.
the Siluer-Smith had done the like in another kind, in the city of the
Ephesians, deceiving the people along time for his own gain, in making silver
shrines or temples for the Idol Diana.

And this is so true, that if a man do but fall into any particular sin, once
or twice, he is readier to commit it twenty times, then once to be think
himself Note.
about breaking it off. As if it be by making of a lie, and false swearing,
deceiving, breaking the Sabbath, picking and stealing, or the like bad
tempering and needless meddling any other way. In Peter this may be seen, who
never went so far, as to intend and purpose any evil, but being demanded a
question only on the sudden, which he looked not for, whither he were Christ's
disciple, denied the truth, but through fear, against his Mark. 14. 17.
conscience, and having once so done, being asked the same the second time, did
so again; and the third time being provoked so, denied it with an oath and a
cursing of himself, if he knew the man. Iehosophat could not be warned to
forbear fellowship with Ahab and his son Iehoram, having once suffered
himself to take pleasure therein, though he had a sharp warning of it, and
smarted also for the same. And Sampson for the love of a Philistine woman,
suffering her unlawfully to move question to him about that which tended to the
loosing of his life, and the graces of God in him, which were most precious;
because he cut her not off, neither stayed her at the first, but answered her,
which he should not have done, though he meant not to tell her the secret that
she asked, yet he answered and trifled with her so long in needless and
dangerous talk, that at last, through importunity she got that which she
sought, and which he never meant she should obtain, till he found, when it
was to late) what it is to yield and give place to evil, though but once or
twice.

For as the breaking out of waters by cutting the banck that holds A simile.
them in, is the ouerflowing of much ground, and spoileth it: so the making of
a breach in the conscience, and the yielding and giving place to evil but Note.
a little, lays open a man to much bondage and anoyance thereby, so that he
goes on, as on that runs a pace from the top of an high and steep down
hill, who is not able to stay till he come to the bottom. This truth which is
verified in so many things, Solomon has most lively exemplified in Prou. 23.
27.
one: saying, An harlot is a deep grave, and a narrow pit: which he that
falls into, can hardly get out of to escape? And therefore to come to make
use of this which has been said, we are to know, that the counsel and rule
that the Physician gives for the preserving of health, namely, that we should
resist the beginnings of danger; and so we shall be free from the evil that
would follow, the same is meet for all such to be followed, as desire to
enjoy their spiritual health, and that their souls may fear well, and that
is, that they take great heed, when they be first enticed by the deceitfulness
of sin, that they resist strongly before delight be kindled, and dally not
with that which they are tempted with; lest they be also hardened: which if
they do, they shall, by purging out that corruption, find the fruit of that
holy counsel and promise in the Gospel, Watch and pray, so shall ye not fall
into Matthew. 26. 41.
temptation. Oh, if some could have done it, when with Joseph they have been
Genesis 39. 12. Note.
enticed, and could have shaken of the lewdness of their evil hearts; at what
ease, and in what freedom might they have walked, who have, by giving place to
their lusts, and not kurbing them up in due time; brought themselves into a
loathsome state of life, and to a continual bondage? And this confutes them,
who being reproved for sin, excuse themselves like children, that it was the
first time: or, that they went not so far, but they could easily desist. As
they that dally with, women or maidens by vnchase speech, Psalm. 51. 5.
behavior, or evil thoughts, of whom many fall by degrees to commit folly,
nay filthiness, because they resisted not dalliance, and nipt not that cursed
fruit in the blossom.

Now that which remains in this verse is a question to good purpose: and that
is, why the Israelites did not kill this tyrant Adonibezek out of hand, but
reserve him to this bondage, and to die so? The answer is, God giving them
commandment, not to spare the Canaanites, and he having been more cruel then
some other; God (to be sure) inclined their hearts to do so, both that he
might have the measure that he had offered other, and also that it might be
known, that he died not in war, which had been some glory to him; it being
unmeet, that so cruel a person should have so honest a death. Another question
may be this concerning himself why this tyrant, when he had so shamefully
defaced and dismembered so many Kings, yet why he would have them to feed under
his table. There is no doubt, but that he did it, to remember and show the
glory of his victories, and while they were made to feed so basely under his
feet, as dogs to gather that which fell from his board, it was to satisfy his
proud and vainglorious humor therewith, as well pleasing to him, as if his
ears had been filled with music. By the first, namely, that fact of the
Israelites; we may learn that it is meet that monstrous doings and vilanies,
with the persons who wrought them, should be made odious according to the
desert of them. As murderers of Princes, the Lords anointed, to be put to
the extremest torments before their fearful death. As we have been certified
of the exquisit tortures that were lately executed in France upon a popish and
base fellow, which imbrued his hands in the blood of his Sovereign. So wilful
and common murderers to be hanged up in chains to the view of all, for the
unnatural killing of their neighbor or companion. And so it is meet, that
other malefactors should be dealt withal according to their wicked ways, and
according to the commandment of God, that evil may be taken away from the
land, as it was said of Ioab. Our laws have well provided for many 1. King. 2.
31.
such: and if it pleased our Governors to think well of it, that Atheists,
Blasphemers and Adulterers might have their share among the rest according to
their deserts, the case would be much better with us by many degrees at this
day. And this be said by occasion of the first question.

From the second, and the answer of Adonibezek glorying in his cruelty and
subduing so many Kings under him for his pleasure, (as the Philistines when
they listed, called in Sampson out of the prison, his eyes being put out, to
make them pass time;) it gives occasion to us to consider the excessive pride,
lust and other badnesse of people, (this present age not being behind any of
the former therein) that when God has brought them out of their swaddling
cloutes, after they came naked into the world, wherein they were like to have
miscarried a thousand times before they were able to run about, being so
shiftlesse and unable to help themselves, (that I say no more in this place of
their misery besides) yet they are no sooner out of the shell (as we use to
say) nor come to man; estate, but they show themselves to the world as plaiers
on the stage, no less disguised in their stomachs, behavior, and qualities,
then many of them be in their apparel. And especially if they be great and
borne to any thing, it is admirable to see, what profaneness, licentiousness,
riot, gaming, and such like intemperance is every where to be seen in them:
who for their own pleasure, care not how they dominere over their inferiors
who are under them, and ripen them a pace who are about them, in all kind of
evil. For what else, (for the most part,) is to be learned in such service?
and how they seek to match their equals in any Italienate fashions and
disguised carriage of themselves, and to desire to rise up to the higher places
of their betters, chiefly to this end, that they may have more liberty to do
evil: that as this tyrant took pleasure in his kind, in the sins which he
liked, (which yet was no admirable thing in him who was an Heathen Idolater)
even so do men in this age, (who living under the Gospel, should blush to
hear it) not seek what pleases God, who has set them up, but their own
pleasure. And it is so usual and common among many of the greater sort, that
it is taken up among the meaner also; in so much, that many of them degenerate
from their profession thereby, and become little better then brutish: but a
greater number of them (to be sure) do little honor it in their lives, which
I say rather to comfort and encourage them, who have no fellowship with them in
their unfruitful works of darkness, then in hope to do good to many of the
other offenders.

THE FOVRTH SERMON UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
VERSE. 8. Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken
it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and had set the city on fire.
VERSE. 9. Afterward also the children of Judah went down to fight against the
Canaanites that dwelt in the mountain, and toward the South, and in the low
country. VERSE. 10. And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron,
which Hebron before time was called Kiriath-Arbah: and they slew Sheshai, and
Ahiman, and Talmai. VERSE. 11. And from thence he went to the inhabitants of
Debir: and the name of Debir in old time was Kiriath-Sepher.
THese verses and the other that follow to the 17. verse, are repeated The
sense.
out of the book of Joshua, chiefly out of the 15. chapter, and are brought
hither to this end, that we may understand that the Tribe of Judah possessed
Jerusalem, while Joshua was yet alive, and therefore they might the easilier
and better bring Adonibezek thither prisoner. And the things that are here
repeated out of Joshua, are partly these, in the four verses which I have now
read, namely, the taking of Jerusalem, Hebron and Debir, and their fighting
against the Canaanits that dwelt in the mountains; and partly those things
following afterward to the 16. verse, as shall be showed when I come unto them.
And that they are here repeated, is manifest hereby, for that it is declared in
that Chapter of Joshua, that the King of Jerusalem was then taken, and was
brought into the hands of the people of God, and that the children of Judah
dwelt there with the Iebusites. In the 17. verse, the holy story returns to
set down what Judah and Simeon did further at this time, as he began to
declare before from verse 4. to the 8. That which concerns Hebron and Debir
shall be set down in their place.

Now this repetition out of the book of Joshua here brought in, unto the Doct.
generally out of all these verses.
17. verse, (for the 16. is a short interlaced story of the Kenites) this
repetition (I say) is here brought in, lest the Reader should be troubled, as
though the same things which are mentioned here, had been now done after the
death of Joshua, which are set down there to have been in his lifetime. And
this is done that there might be no stumbling nor offense thereat, we may
therefore note out of all these verses in general, the great care that the holy
Ghost had in setting down the Scriptures, freeing them from error, and making
one to agree with the other: so that if men were able to discern, they might
ever see it to be so. It is true indeed, that many things in them are hard to
be understood, which the wicked pervert, as S. Peter says, to their own
destruction: 2. Pet. 3. 16.
but where care is joined with gifts of knowledge, (which gifts some attain
See Pro 30. 5. Psalm. 12. 6.
to,) there may be seen a most sweet agreement betwixt them, and no one
either to jar with another, or any one to be friuelous, or absurd, as some
are bold to affirm, but seven times tried in the fire, and, pure and holy, as
the Psalmist Psalm. 19. 8. 2. Tim. 3. 16. Romans 15. 4.
says: and therefore to all good uses of knowledge, and confuting of error, or
practice in life, and comfort, profitable. For though all Scripture is not
alike, but some plain and some obscure; yet, first, they are plainest which
are more necessary for faith and life; and, they that have obscurity in them,
serve to exercise and sharpen our understanding rather, and to provoke an
appetie, in us to diligence and care for attaining the true meaning of them,
then to drive us from in reading them. To the shame of Popery, this that I have
said is to be marked, for the professors thereof do challenge them for their
difficulty and hardness, so as they are not to be suffered in the hands of
the common people, whom if they withheld not from the true unfolding of them,
they might reap great profit by reading them.

Also to the just reproof of many, both Atheists, and other not much differing
from them, this is to be noted; for they, that is the Atheists, scoff at the
Scriptures, and bouldly iustle against Moses and Christ: these, who are the
profane, as bouldly, and yet blindly, reason, dispute, and quarrel against
some particular Scriptures, which they understand not, as if they were
competent judges, as that in the Psalm, Moab is my washpot, over Edome will I
Psalm. 108. 9.
cast my shoe, which yet is (as they would see and acknowledge, if they were
not more bold and rash then wise and skillful) to very good purposes, as
setting down Gods threatening of judgments against his enemies; as also that
of Samsons tying foxes tails together with firebrands, to spoil the
Philistimes corn; with such like also they rail against the doctrine of
predestination, and the sin against the holy Ghost. But not counting them
worth the answering, I conclude: seeing the Lord has left the Scriptures so
pure and free from all error, (the matters in them being so profitable and
heavenly,) I conclude (I say) that if we desire to live comfortably by the
benefit of them; let them be our treasure, while the world trample them
underfoot, yea, and let our meditation and delight be so much the more in
Psalm. 1. 2.
them, and that continually. And this be noted out of all these verses
generally, to the 17. in that they are a repetition out of Joshua.

Now more particularly, in that so worthy things were done by this Tribe Doct.
verse. 8.
before, and that therefore they were chosen now, rather then any of the other
Tribes to guide the rest, seeing that they were wisest and faithfullest in Gods
matters, as appears by the mentioning of these great acts, done by them; let
it teach us this; that such as are wisest and faithfullest, ought to be used
and placed in the chief rooms of the service of God, above the rest. So Paul
was endued with excellent gifts, and counted faithful, before God put him 1.
Tim. 1. 12.
in his service, and then he employed him in the most weighty business. So
Josh. 2. 14.
Joshua sent faithful spies, to view the land of Canaan. This thing had such
force in the heathen Kings, as in Pharaoh, that he preferred Joseph above all
Genes. 41. 40.
the chief Nobles of the land, though he was but a stranger? saying, where
shall we find a man like this man fitted for this work? and in the Kings of
Babylon, that they committed the great and weighty matters of the Kingdom
Genes. 41.
to Daniel, and the three Children, because they saw, that the spirit of Dan.
3. 30. and 6. 2.
God was in them to do well above others. So Abraham trusted Eliezer his
servant, in that weighty matter of the marriage of his son Isaac, having none
like him: yea, Ahab himself made Obadiah (a worthy man) Steward of his
household, though he had enough of other beside. The holy Ghost makes mention
at large, of those Worthies which David (for their good service 2. Sam. 23.
in the wars against the enemies of the Lord) exalted to the highest rooms
next him. So did Iehoiada. Hence it is, that the Wise man says, Woe to that
land, whose Princes are chilaren, and being not fit for any government, rise
Eccles. 10. 16. etc.
up early to drink strong drink. Yea Solomon being put to his choice, desired
an understanding heart, wisely to go in and out before the people. And such
ought 1. King. 3. 9.
Masters of families, Magistrates and Governors in Towns to be, as well as
Ministers. And this order God has set and taught us, in commending and
commanding faithfulness and diligence (which are excellent virtues,) in
servants, who yet are the meanest persons, thereby teaching us, much more to
prefer these gifts in them who are used and employed in higher callings and
places, and so much the more, if wisdom be joined with them. And these
qualities Iethro required in such magistrates as should be chosen; and the like
Paul required in such as are called to the ministry, besides other like
furniture: Exodus 18. 21. 1. Tim. 3. 2.
which gives us great cause of mourning, when we see the contrary: and of
rejoicing, where these virtues are to be seen and found in them, who are put
in trust. And such should executors of wills, and schoolemasters be, into
whose hands men are constrained to put their children, and goods; and
comprimitters of cases betwixt neighbors, should be like unto them, who are
trusted with much oftentimes. And this honor, honest and 1. Sam. 26. 21.
faithful men have with many, that in judging of matters, they will, if their
case be good, desire to have such to give their sentence, and judgment for
them in their doubtful causes rather then others, though they set not greatly
by religion themselves. And this ought to encourage us all, to labor for Gods
graces, seeing they make a man stand before the honorable: though money,
favor, or other respects are the chief gifts which most obtain great places
by.

Now whereas a doubt may arise here, where it is said, that Judah had taken
Jerusalem, how it appears to have been so, seeing it is not expressly set down
in Joshua, chap. 10. To that I answer, though it be not plainly so
Objection. Answer.
said, yet it may well be understood, by the things that are written there:
namely, that the King of Jerusalem was taken and put to death, and that Judah
dwelt in the city, and could not cast out the Iebusits that dwelt therein. By
which, I say, it appears, that the city was then taken, although it was not
as yet wholly possessed, and so did they slay the inhabitants, and set the city
on fire. Here by the occasion of the destroying of these cities, Jerusalem,
Doct. out of ver. 8. 9. 10.
Hebron, Debir, and others many, let us consider the desolation that God
sends upon goodly places, and the inhabitants thereof, when his hand is
against them, and when he is purposed to blow upon them, and to set them, as
it were, on the stage to the view of the world. Yea doubtless, when he
pleases to take the judgment into his hand, all the beauty and glory of the
world must vanish at his presence, and the gloriousest solemnities and
monuments come to utter decay. And to put us in mind hereof, is this written
and set down, to show us the changeable estate of the flourishingest
prosperity of flesh. The which a man would think, that should behold them in
their beauty and time of their glory, that the enioyers thereof, did live in a
paradise and petty heaven, even here upon earth: whereas, when God has blown
upon them, they are more desolate then the winter, and like to an house waste
and ruinous. When Nabuchadnezzar and the fooler in the Gospel prided
themselves, the one in his great Babell, the other in his abundance, suddenly
comes a voice to both of them: to the one, Thy Kingdom is departed from thee:
and to the other, O fool, this night Dan. 4. 28. Luke 12. 20.
shall they take thy soul from thee. For we must know, that as there is a
time to flourish, so is there a time to fade, a time to be borne, and so to
grow up, and a time also to die. Therefore when the disciples, much like the
foolish people of the world, looking upon the goodly buildings of the Temple,
began to have them in admiration, saying: Behold, Master, what goodly buildings
are Mark. 13. 1.
here; he making small account of their speeches, answered them fitly in this
manner: I say unto you, there shall not a stone remain on a stone of all that
ye see so costly and beautiful. Where are all the great persons become, that
possessed the earth not long agone, with all the glory thereof? They that made
others afraid with their very countenance and look, behold, they may be troad
upon by the meanest, that were abused by them? As David says, I Psalm. 119.
96. Eccles. 1. 1.
have seen an end of all perfection: which Solomon his son proved by
clearer experience, saying of all; Vanity of vanities. Of feasting and
banqueting, to speak a word, how well pleasing and welcome so ever it be, yet
how harshly and fearfully it ends many times, let Balshazzars example teach
Dan. 5. 6.
us. As for favor and beauty, another of the precious things of this world,
whatsoever it promises in outward show, how can the glory thereofbee more
basely spoken of, then we see, and in few years find it to be, and in the
Proverbs, it is said to be in these words: Favor is deceitful, and beauty is
a vain Prou. 31. 30.
thing.

The same may be said of al other things, that are precious under the sun, Note.
as solemn marriages, inheritances, aduancements, with such like, they all
fade, as does the flower. Now was their time come here mentioned, to be
brought to destruction, and the time of those that remain is coming apace,
even as the fall of the leaf in due season. And they that carry their hearts
most high, must remember that this day is not far off, though it shall be a
day of lamentation and woe, to them that have their delight here. For oh death
how unwelcome art thou to a man that has laid up no better treasure then
transitory? And yet what is less thought on? but as the Psalmist Psalm. 49. 14.
says, the children that see all this, approve of their fathers course, and
follow it. The twelve days, as the time of the nativity, commonly passed in
revel rout, a lively picture of this short and painted Paradise, as they count
it, in many great houses, where their play and belly-cheere is soon and
suddenly at an end, with more sorrow then their pleasure was in the midst of
their enjoying of it.

And therefore, who can think of the madness of the world without mourning?
but oh that there were many to bewail it. To see the carking and caring, the
deceiving, the cousonage that is almost every where, and all to clime up to
this hill of promotion and liberty seeking, to live as men list, in whoring,
in drunkenness, in play, and such like passing the time, Note.
and yet when they are come to the top, they must by and by be thrown down
again with greater violence and shame. But if the change itself be so
unwelcome, then much more, when it comes upon them both suddenly and
fearfully. So that the vilest would not change their estate for theirs, See
Psalm. 73. 19.
whom erst they admired. But, say some, ye trouble us with telling us these
things, show us as well, how we may remedy them. I answer to such as fear the
changes, that I have spoken of, and are troubled to hear of them; fear God,
and ye shall not need to fear the coming of these, whenever they Psalm.
112. Note.
shall befall you; else that which you fear, shall come upon you even to utter
desolation. And whereas many demand, if we, who so disgrace the ungodly
practice of the world, and are out of love with it, are not subject to changes
also, as well as others; as from wealthy to want, from health to sickness,
till death do follow. I say this to them who have laid up their treasure in
heaven, it is the welcomest day to think of going hence, whatsoever they leave
behind them, and they have so valued the transitory and momentany pleasures of
this life, that they are willing and desirous to forsake them all, if they were
all theirs, for that which there they hope to enjoy. In which respect, is that
spoken by the Preacher, The day of death is better then the day of birth. But
to proceed. Eccles. 7. 3.


The holy story mentions further both generally in this verse, how Judah had
fought against the Canaanites that dwelt in the mountain, and toward Verse. 9.
10.
the South, and in the low country, and more particularly against them that
dwelt in Hebron, and so, discribeth that city by another name that was given
it in former times, that is, Kiriath-arba, or the city of one Arba, who Josh.
15. 13.
was a Giant, and the father of Anak, which Anak having three sons, Sheshai,
Ahiman, and Talmai, Judah slew them there. These Anakims so called of their
father, were mighty, tall and strong, as appears by many other Scriptures, so
by that which describes Goliath of Gath, by the shaft of his 1. Sam. 17. 7.
spear, that it was like a weauers beam, and that, which speaks of the
spies that went to view the land of Canaan; who returning, feared the people
with the report of their stature, saying, that they themselves were but as
grassehoppers to them. Number. 13. 34.
These giantlike men therefore, and those which were about and under them,
being taken away, what a benefit must it needs be to the children of Israel?
Now though these were properly called Anakims and Giants, and that their kind
and posterity remain not now to vex faithful Christians, as they did then
Gods Church, yet as there have been many kinds of enemies, so there are, and
always shall be, which shall do the same to the people of God, being cruel
and scorneful contemners of the humble and innocent, that they did to the
Israelites: who make their lives unpleasant, with grievous burdens, which they
lay upon them, and deadly fear that they hold them in, and if they take not
their life away from them also, yet they make it wearisome to them, so that
many of them devour themselves, these therefore may well be called Giants.

When therefore God shall weaken such Anakims, and abate their power, or take
them away, when they cannot be reclaimed and brought to repentance, Ester. 8.
16.
it must be counted the singular mercy of God. For the world is full of such,
in whom the proverb is verified, that might overcomes right. When men who
have power, authority, and wealth, so deal and live with others, that they
hold them in continual slavery and fear. Thus Pharaoh was a Giant, and as the
son of Anak to Iosepbs posterity, laying burdens upon them, which they
could not bear, and not thinking he had oppressed them enough by doing so,
added yet more unto them also. And thus they play the parts of giants, which
grind the faces of the poor, to whom sound reason, even the commandment of
God, diswading them from it, is utterly unsavory, and craving of pity at their
hands, is in vain.

This is apparent in suits and controversies, betwixt the mighty and the
mean, the one eating up the other, as if they were bread. So such as are set
in place to chase away wickedness, receiving and devouring gifts out of the
hands of the guilty, and lion-like roaring against the innocent, and so sucking
advantage out of them, and living by the sins of the people, are very Giants,
and no better then Anakims. All such and the like aggricuances, are to be
groned under, by the godly in the ears of the Lord. And they who are delivered
from such burdens, have great cause with rejoicing, to praise God, as the
people did, when they were brought back out of the captivity, saying: Our
mouth was full of laughter, and our tongue filled with joy. But of this Psalm.
126. 2.
enough, because I have spoken of the like point before, in verse. 7.

Now to go forward in the story, it is said, that Judah had not rested in
Verse. 7. Josh. 10. 26.
these destructions of the Canaanites, and of many other mentioned in the book
of Joshua, but proceeded further to take Debir, another city situated by
Hebron, but more of this in the next verse. And in the mean season, here it is
to be considered, how unwearied Judah is said to have been in the work of the
Lord, even in procuring the destruction of his enemies, the Canaanites, with
Joshua while he lived, who was the chief guide of the rest. For this
diligence of theirs, in going from one piece of this work to another, should
be a notable encouragement to all that are servants to God in any work that he
sets them about, that they should not do it negligently, nor stand at a stay
after good beginnings, as though they had done sufficiently already. They must
not repeat their labors and cumbats which are past, as though they had done
enough, but look to those which are to come: as the Apostle teaches in the
Epistle to the Philippians. And this is carefully Philip. 3. 13.
to be regarded, whether it be in performing outward duties, as these men of
Judah did, or inward, as in resisting temptations, patient bearing of
afflictions, and the like; they should always be unwearied in the work of the
Lord. For to this end God has promised strength by the armor of a Christian.

And thus it is meet for all such to grow from strength to strength, and from
faith to faith, (as God has given commandment,) and to verify that which is
written by Solomon; the righteous shines as the light unto the perfect day.
Romans 1. 17. Prou. 4. 18.
As plants when the be rooted in good ground do burnish and spread their
branches, and bring forth fruit plentifully. And such must know, that it is
Note.
a sore discouragement to the weaker Christians, when they shall see dampes and
deadness in the ancienter professors, who have been sometimes prouokers and
stirrers up of others to the duties of godliness. A great blemish, doubtless,
it is in them who may justly be charged to do so. For beside other
inconveniences, this is one, that it beats a strong conceit into the hearts
of the weak, that they find not that liking in Gods service that they are told
of, and promised in the word of God which they hear. As if God were not to be
trusted in setting forth so large offers and privileges therein: or as though
he were weary of weldoing to his: the which to affirm is rank blasphemy.
They should all so know, such I mean, as God has put in his service, that
they ought now after long continuance therein, and in his house, to be as
fathers to procure and seek the good of the weaker sort of their brethren, and
to have great care that none become faint by their example; but therefore to
shine as lights, and grow daily in grace, and in the 2. Pot. 3. 17.
knowledge of our Lord Jesus. Oh it is comely for others to behold, and their
own glory, to see that they follow the Lord still directing and going before
them, as they did at any time past. Like Caleb, who forty and five year after
Josh. 14. 8.
the Lord had set him about his work, as one of the two, who were counted more
faithful then the rest, was as strong and fit for it, as he had been so many
years before. I know it is a rare thing, partly seeing few live so long;
partly seeing many wax soon weary of well doing, and either have not means
to set them forward, or else have no desire to use them with that delight which
once they did; beside their many discouragements; it is therefore (I say) a
rare thing to see men faithful and constant for any long time, Note.
in goodness. But so much the more commendable it is, where it may be found:
oh, it is a good thing always to be constant in a good matter I deny Gal. 4.
18.
not but the best may easily, and do, with the wise virgins begin to nod, and
Matthew. 25. 5.
with the Church in the Canticles fall a sleep; but therefore is it the
needfuller for them to be quickened up by Gods promises, and other
encouragements, Cant. 5. 2.
as where he says, To him that overcomes will I give the tree of life, that
Reu. 2. 7.
is, everlasting life, and such like. And also to quicken up themselves, as I
have Matthew. 26. 41.
said, by diligent, watching and fervent prayer, etc. that they perish not with
the wicked of the world, while they live among them.

For they know that by faithfulness and constancy therein. they grow at last
to perseverance, and to a good end of their conflicting days: and that they
must depart from many ill actions and bad companies, which other make
themselves merry with all. But if such shall begin to think that their reward
here, and in the life to come, will not be answerable to the loss of their
pleasure that they forgo, (which reward (yet) is an hundredth fold more even
Matthew. 19. 29.
in this life, beside happiness afterward) let them cast their account before
they begin: but if they fear nothing but their own weakness, let them not
be discouraged, God will be their strength; let them cast their care on him,
Psalm. 27. 1.
and he will care for them. Thus by this which I have said of this matter, it
may easily be seen, that they take the right course to happiness, who with
these 1. Pet. 5. 7.
men of Judah, hold out constantly and unwearied in well doing, notwithstanding
all discouragements, temptations and opposition to the contrary.

THE FIFTH SERMON UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
VERSE. 12. And Caleb said, he that smites Kirlah. Sepher, and takes it, even
to him will I give Acsah my daughter to wife. VERSE. 13. And Othniel, the son
of Kenaz, Calebs younger brother took it, to whom he gave Acsah his daughter
to wife. VERSE. 14. And when she came to him to ask of her father a field, and
she lighted off her ass, and Caleb said unto her, What will thou? VERSE. 15.
And she answered him, Give me a blessing, for thou have given me a South
country, give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the springs above,
and the springs beneath.
THis city Debir, it is said, was in times past called Kiriah-sepher: The
sense of the verse. 12. 23.
that is, the city of one Sepher, to put a difference betwixt that and some
other of that name. And it is said here, that Caleb seeing more difficulty to
win this city, offered a reward to him that would set upon it. But I must
again put the Reader in mind, that these things mentioned from the 8. verse to
the 17. were done in the days of Joshua, and are but repeated here, to commend
the faithfulness, and care of this Tribe of Judah: and as they were done then, so
the subduing of this city is ascribed to Joshua, in Josh. 10. because he was
their chief guide, and governor in all these wars, though Caleb offered a
reward to him that Joshua 10. 38.
win it, because it was his inheritance, and Othniel here mentioned was the
person that took it, and enjoyed the reward. This be said for the meaning of
these two verses, and for reconciling this place with that which I cited out of
Joshua.

Now for the benefit which we are to reap from hence, it is manifold; first
by this, that there was more difficulty and danger in the winning of this
Doct. 1.
city then other; it gives us to learn and to mark, that in going about the
duties of our particular callings, (as this warring against these cities of the
Canaanites was theirs) we must not think it strange, if some part of our life,
and at sometime, be more encumbered then other parts, and at other times: and
that we should not be discouraged, nor disquieted, when we see it to be Psalm.
30. 6. Psalm. 42. 4. 5.
so, even these good servants of God did find it so in some part of their work,
more then in some other: and yet they did not for all that break it off, but
wisely bethink themselves, how to overcome the difficulty of it, by more then
ordinary pains, and care, when the business required it. The like may be
said of the religious duties of our general callings, both concerning the
first, and second Table, there is not always that confidence, joy,
cheerfulness, diligence, and feruency in the use of private means, or
fruitfulness Note.
in doing good to others: we find these come off with much difficulty
sometime, in respect of others. And this comes not to pass by chance, as
neither it did to them, (as men use to say) but by the providence of God, who
most isely disposes so of it, that it may not oftentimes be so with us, that
we have hard success, lest we should be discouraged, and also lest we should
not bring our work to any good point, but (as they say) our labor should be
lost, and in vain, and nothing should go forward; as if in husbanding the
ground by sowing, reaping, and all other work belonging to it, the weather
should always be dropping.

And although it be not often so, yet he sees it convenient that sometime men
should find it so, I mean hardness, to bring their work to pass, and some
difficulty about it, though they have skill in it, to the end they may have
proof of their patience at such times, and be thankful to God when it
falls not out so oftentimes, but that they have good success for the most
part. And also that they may learn experience against other like times, to be
contented, when it shall so fall out again, that so they may show one even
tener in their life (as much as may be) and in every part of it, Note.
some equality, in care, contentment, cheerfulness, hope, and patience, and
not to to be carried into extremities, as many are, by the occasions that are
offered, and that come to pass daily. And this ought to guide all men in their
callings, and in the actions of their lives, that, as well when things go
against them, as when they go with them, they may in all estates be thankful,
(as we read holy Job was) especially, seeing they know, that God orders Job.
1. 21.
both good success, and also the contrary to the good of his.

The husbandman is hindered sometime by the rainy weather: but yet so, as he
has his seasons free from it, to do his business in. The Artificer is
troubled about putting away his wares, and the falling of the price, so that he
cannot always make his advantage of them, as ordinarily he does, for the
maintaining of himself, and his charge. But God changes those times, so that
they do not always keep at one stay. The good minister is sometime troubled
about the carelessness, and profaneness of his people, and is grieved for the
ill success that he sees on his labors, but God gives him encouragement
again, that some do regard his ministry, and receive the Gospel to their
amendment, and salvation. Besides the diligentest laborers in preaching are
often to seek of necessary helps for this life; and more then their due they
rarely find and seldom meet with, (what need soever they have) if they get
that truly paid them; the ministry being in so little account with men of the
world, of which sort the greatest number is. So women in their places have many
crossings of them by their husbands, servants, and about children and matters
of family, beside other unlooked for accidents and troubles, which we see do
cause many of them, who are not 2. King 6. 33.
seasoned with grace, and saving knowledge, to be exceedingly impatient,
disquiet, and out of order. Therefore if they, who are religious should not
under the like crosses be better governed, though they enjoy many comforts in
the married estate, they should ever, and anon be out of frame, and unquiet,
and in no sort enjoy the benefit of that estate, as God has allowed them to
do, as too many can testify.

In more particular manner I might show the disapointments that al sorts of
people meet with and have. As the laboring man for his part, is not behind the
rest, in finding much hardness, by means of his poor estate, and the great
prices of necessary things at sometimes especially: but I should be too long,
if I should stand upon particulars. To these when we add other disapointments
and crosses, as ill debtors, suits in the law, loss of friends, who were
vpholders of them, while they lived, diseases and sickness, with a thousand
more, which cannot be remembered: all may see there arise many things in all
conditions and dealings, to make some part of men's lives hardlier passed in
peace and quietness to their good liking, though they have, for the most part,
good success, and do usually labor with some ease, as I have said. And why
do I set down all this about the matter in hand? but that we may see the
wisdom and mercy of God herein, who mixeth both together, because if all our
life should be smoothly carried, and easily passed, we should be made thereby
unfit for our change, especially for great trials, when they come; and so
likewise, if it should be for the most part tedious and troublesome, there
should be nothing (in a manner) but weariness and discomfort. And therefore
all sorts should seek to be in Gods favor, that so they may also be under
his government in both estates, and that while they are so, they may daily
keep so; and that above all other things, which estate of life only has the
promise of blessing in every calling and condition, and where it is wanting,
all confusion (for the most part) breaks in amongst men, that they be not
only unquiet in their troubles, and do most uncomfortably, go under
difficulties; but also when they enjoy any more freedom and prosperity, they
be even in their best estate, unprofitable, if not offensive and troublesome.
And if it seem strange to any, that God thus disposes of men's travels and
dealings, that the success be uncertain, let them look to the end why he
does so, before set down; and namely, if they be much troubled, for that many
casualities fall out in their lives, they must know, that if it were otherwise,
they would keep no compass, and therefore God sees 1. Pet. 1. 7.
it meet sometime that it should be so.

But another thing to be noted here in Caleb, is this: that when he saw it
required courage, as well as skill, to adventure and set upon this city, for
the Doct. 2.
destroying of Gods enemies that were in it, as he was commanded, promises
his daughter to him that would set upon it. This was no small matter that he
offered, but mark why? as I have showed, all may see he did show this
forwardness to the rooting out of Gods enemies. And it teaches, that Matthew.
5. 12. 13.
for the Lords sake, we ought to do much, and yet count it no great matter
that we do. To advance his name, and help to setvp his true worship, and the
sincere preaching of the Gospel, the overthrowing of his enemies, and for such
like service of his, every man ought to be ready and willing to be abased Heb.
10 33. Note.
in his countenance, weakened in his wealth, and sustain much hardship, if
need be. David may be brought in here, and set in none of the meanest rooms,
for that which he did in this behalf. For beside that there was none in his
time, that honored God more then he did in the loving, frequenting, and
longing after his being in the Lords house, and the place where his honor
dwells: so he bare reproach as mighty as he was, and that willingly for his
zeal toward God: for when he brought the Ark of God with shouting, and sound
of trumpet into the city of David, dancing before it, Michael, Saul's daughter,
looked out at the window, and despised 2. Sam. 6. 16.
him, as thinking it too base a thing for a King to do so: but he answered, it
was before the Lord, and that he would yet, for his sake, be more vile. So
Ester, Ester. 4. 16.
for bringing the people of God out of desolation, and utter rooting out, put
her life in danger, saying, If I perish, I perish. So Moses and Paul desired
Exodus 32. 32. Romans 9. 3.
rather to perish, then the people of God should be forsaken, and so God his
glory be empeached.

And why should they not, all these, (I mean) and other such, as well as they,
even Kings and Queens lay down their Crowns at his feet, and advance him,
who has honored them above others? And much more we, how are mean and
inferiors, should think our selves happy if we may be employed by him, or if
any thing that we have might do him service. According to that which is
written, Mark. 1. He that loves father or mother, more Mark 1. 31.
then me? is not worthy of me. And it is true indeed, that we should love
nothing so well, but we should forgo it for the Lords cause; therefore when he
says, Give me thine heart (my son,) we should rejoice that he will ask and
Prou. 23. 26.
take any thing that we have, and yield it him with all readiness. But for
ought I see, I may justly complain, and say: we are like those children,
which having gotten what they can at their fathers hand, cast him off, and
flourish boldly with that which they have gotten of him. So to speak what I
think, as I see with mine own eyes, when God has enriched men with his
manifold blessings, there is not one of many that considers it, of whom he
has received all that he inioyeth; but glories of that which is 1. Cor. 4. 7.
not his own, and sets out himself with another goods, as though he owed
nothing to him, of whom he received him.

And yet, to aggrauate our sin, I must needs add one thing, I am persuaded,
(greatly to our shame and conviction) that many in the Papacy, who shall never
have reward for it, are brought (through error) to do many things and give
much, in a superstitious zeal to this end, that they may be saved. But if
they do that which God never required at their hands, and therefore amiss;
ought not we, who have learned better, to do readily that which we are
commanded, especially our reward being certain? If they do it to merit that
which they shall never attain; ought not we much more, to do the duties which
we are commanded, who believe that we have the best things freely promised, I
mean eternal life, which also in due time shall be given us of God, and that
of his mere mercy; and bounty? And if Caleb would give his daughter, should
not we much more give some part of our substance to feed the hungry, and to
help cloth the naked, when we may yet reserve sufficient for our selves
besides? Whereas the truth is, that all is too little that we can do to good
uses, that we might honor God: (as Caleb here could afford him the best
thing that they had) and yet all is of us thought to much (when it is but
little) that we do this way, lest we should hinder our selves.

And to end this verse, this Caleb being a godly man, and as well renowned
Doct. 3.
and approved for his grace, as for his greatness; in saving, that he would
give his daughter to wife, shows, that he had well learned Moses Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
doctrine, in whose days he lived, and namely in this point, (as he had in
many other) that children are not to dispose of their own marriage, but the
father. To whom, though many have lost their honor that way, as being unfitter
to make choice, then their children themselves; yet God has given them this
liberty, that if they do no good with it, they may be convicted by it, who for
their place and years, should be fitter to make the match in good sort, then
the children, who for the most part are carried, not so much by religion, and
good aduisednesse, as by will, and rash beat to make their own choice: and
therefore it is ofttimes justly requited by God, who ought chiefly to be obeyed
in that action, that to make their sin the better appear, their match is as
soon repented of, many times, as it is inioyed.

Moses therefore, who was Gods mouth to the people, was commanded by him to
teach this, that the parents had authority in providing marriages for their
children: for thus he says, Thou shall not give thy daughter to the son of
the Canaanite, nor take his daughter to thy son. And therefore we read that
Sampson gave this honor to his father and mother, for the granting of their
consent in his marriage, (as many other did the like) for thus he says: I saw
a Judges 14. 2.
woman, and she pleases me well, now therefore give me her to wife. And Paul
coming long after Moses, agreed with him, as being both faithful servants to
their Master; he teaches that this duty belongs to the father, saying: He
1. Cor. 7. 38.
that gives his daughter in marriage, does well, signifying who should give
her. Although I speak not this, as though they might force their children to
what marriages they list, but to give their consent, and advice must be had,
with some special and just cause showed (if it be expedient,) when, and why
they may not. So that this being clear, it does the more bewray the boldness,
wilfulnes, and disobedience of many children, who would be thought wise enough
to know their duties, who yet do not meanly grieve their parents, but also
provide ill for themselves, in making their matches at their own pleasures:
who, beside, that they bring in one little better, then a Canaanite ofttimes at
least, a waspe, an hagge, or otherwise, badly qualified into, and amongst a
good kindred, so they themselves seldom agree, and especially if the one
party draw any thing nearer to God, then the other.

Hereof it comes to pass, I will not say only, but doubtless in great
part, that there are so many disordered, and offensive, matches and marriages,
and the persons so wearisome one to the other, that they must either be parted
by other, or they will part themselves; or if they cannot, yet they do little
better: for dwelling both in one house, yet, they may not (many times) meet,
but be parted at bed and board, and they must have them that are of another
house, to set them together; whereby, it may be easily gathered, what manner
of Christian and sociable life they enjoy together; and what fruit they reap
of iustling a side the commandment of God about their coming together. But it
is not my purpose to show the annoiances that be in all unlawful marriages, I
do but point at some, which fall out, yea, and come often, and ordinarily, where
Gods ordinance and commandment is rejected, as when the children make their
own marriages without their parents, or against them.

But seeing occasion may be taken here, of moving a question or two, I Verse.
12. 13.
will stand a little upon these two verses for the satisfying the doubts that
are raised: and make use thereof afterward. It is therefore objected here,
whither Objection 1.
Caleb did advisedly, and whither he was to be commended for this offering of
his daughter to him that should win Debit: for what knew he, whether he might
lawfully keep promise with the party, such an one, as he might have been?
Also it is objected, that he who did win it, was thought 2
to be too near a kind to him, Othniel by name, being said to be his younger
brother, so that he might not lawfully take her to wife. These things therefore
require an answer. To the first, that we are chiefly to look to this,
Answer 1.
namely, the commendation of Caleb, that he would offer so largely for the
destroying of Gods enemies, according to Gods commandment, and this the holy
Ghost intended to declare, and not that we should make question, whether he did
it rightly and lawfully, or no. For as charity is not suspicious, 1. Cor. 13.
5. Josh. 14. 11.
so he being so rarely commended for his piety, and obedience to God, it
becomes not us to judge him for that, which we cannot accuse him of, neither
can any such thing be gathered against him out of the text. It is true, he
offered his daughter upon the condition mentioned, and there is no more set
down in what manner, or with what respects; but he did it so, as he was
commended for it, neither is he charged to have done it rashly: what has any
man therefore to do to challenge him for it? But if they can prove him to have
done rashly (which they shall never be able to do, seeing the holy Ghost
commends him for it) then it is not denied, but that it was his sin.

Now, if any urge this against him, to take liberty thereby for dealing The
use of this answer.
rashly, and without due consideration in weighty cases, or in the case of
marriage, particularly, affirming that they do but as Caleb did, and they
adventure it, either in their own, or in making of their childrens marriages,
with such persons whose conversation they do not know; Let them seek a better
defense for their doings, then the example of Caleb; for besides, that we must
live by rules, and not by examples; so neither can they draw any such liberty
from his practice. But whatsoever may be said to have been done by any good
man concerning this matter, it skilleth not, we have a commandment to marry in
the Lord. And as for them, that seek to defend 1. Cor. 7. 39.
their matches, which have slightly bin made, wherein God has had either small
or no hand: he has sufficiently branded, and set his mark upon them, that as
they have not been gone about, nor finished by his allowance and direction, so
they are not by him allowed, (though marriage otherwise be honorable,) and
therefore not beautified with the sweet sociablenesse and other commodities,
which he has annexed to those marriages, which he approves. But I will speak
more at large of this matter, when I shall have more direct occasion offered.
That which I have said of rash marriages, I may say, and so take me) of all
unadvised and inconsiderate actions and attempts whatsoever, that as men can
have no authority for the taking them in hand, from Calebs example, no neither
have from the Scriptures in any place; even so, and thereafter shall their
gainesayings be by them, who will needs go to work in that manner.

To the next objection, that he gave his daughter through his rash offer to
Answer 2.
one of his own flesh, who could not marry her by the law of God, being his
brother, and therefore uncle to her: to this I say that, he was not his younger
brother, to whom he gave her, I mean Othniel, but his kinseman, and the least
every way among his brethren, the children of his father, both in years,
authority, and wealth. But ye will object, that the text calls him his
brother: I answer, that Christ's kinsmen were called his brethren, and yet were
not so; and all Divines almost grant, that Marie, the mother of our Savior had
no more children then Christ only; and therefore they expound those places, Mat.
13. and 12. of his kinsmen and kinswomen. And that this the Matthew. 13. 55. and
12. 46.
Hebrew word, here used, (...) which properly signifies a natural brother, is
put as usually for a kinseman also, and the posterity of brethren, the
Scripture is clear, and plentiful in showing it. Read for Example, Leuit.
25. Leuit. 25. 46.
where the word brethren signifies the children of brethren: Over your
brethren, Numb. 32. 6.
the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with cruelty. And
numb. 32. shall your brethren the children of Israel go to war, and ye
tarry here? In both places, by brethren, the Scripture means the posterity
and children of the 12. sons of Jacob, and so many other Scriptures do. And
so to return, if this Othniel and Achsah had been within the degrees
forbidden, that he might not have married her, but it had been against the
commandment of God, who doubts, but that he would have been better advised,
and that he meant not in offering her to do any thing that should offend God?
I say therefore if either Othniel, or any other winning the city, could not
lawfully have married her, Caleb would have supplied his offer some other way
to the contentment of the party.

And upon the answer to the question, I say much like as upon the answer of the
former question, as the matter requires, and gives occasion. Let none gather
from this speech of Caleb, that it is lawful to marry within degrees
forbidden, as though Caleb had made such a marriage for his daughter. And
although he were called his kinsman, yet seeing it is not said, he was his
brothers, or sisters son, therefore I have no necessary occasion offered to
answer the question, whether Cousin Germans may marry together: but yet seeing
I have thus spoken of it, I therefore signify my judgment agreeing with such
as I have read and conferred with, and that is this, that although the word of
God do not expressly forbid it, yet seeing it prohibiteth those degrees that
be further off, it is of great probability, that Christishould more then in a
common manner consider and examine for what weighty and special causes they
do embrace, and not abstain from such marriages. And me thinks he has given
some watchword thereof unto us in this, that the life of many couples so
marrying together, has been found tedious, and accompanied with mutual
dislikes betwixt the parties, when no reason could be seen thereof beside
that, and for proof hereof, it has been acknowledged, that to have been the
cause thereof. For my part, when the question has been propounded to me about
such marriages, I have (as I know the practice of many my betters to have been)
I have (I say) dissuaded from them for inconveniences, not as unlawful: and so
I leave this point. But to return to Caleb, although he had married his
daughter within degrees forbidden, yet it had given no liberty to us to do
so, neither to do any thing else, that is unlawful, or forbidden by the word
of God, forasmuch as we have our direction there, what we may do, either in
matters of marriage, or in any thing else whatsoever. And therefore we ought
little to regard examples, that lead any other way. And thus these objections
being answered, I will proceed in th story.

And first that it is said here that Othniel, being a valiant man, took the
city Verse 13. Doct. 1.
Debir, notwithstanding that the difficulties to win it were very great, by
this we see, that besides this verifieth the proverb which is here spoken of
him, that a man's gift prefers him, (as the like may be said of Joseph,
Daniel, and others) and that all men should seek for the gifts of God, which
they may attain, to honor the giver, who prefers them thereby: I say,
besides that, we may learn that Othniel being religious, and his prayers being
most faithfully 1. Cron. 4. 10.
made to God, as we read in the Chronacles, so that God heard them, and yet he
took encouragement by the offer of Caleb to set upon that great work; we may
(I say) learn, that even godly men may take, and use the benefit of such
encouragements, as are lawfully offered them to the going about any work that
God commands them. It is true indeed, that even his bare word alone ought to
put life into us, and quicken us to our duties, and much more, because there is
a promise of blessing annexed to the obeying of every commandment of his, yea
a great promise of reward: but yet, Psalm. 19. 11.
seeing we are weak, because of the flesh that strives against the spirit in
us, Gal. 5. 17.
therefore we have need of all helps and furtherance that may whet us on. And
therefore, though it was the duty of Othniel to set against the enemies of
God, as the rest of the Israelites were bound to do, yet there is no doubt,
but he was much more earnestly set on by this encouragement. So, it is the
duty of every faithful minister of God to preach the Gospel diligently and
willingly, even for the commandment of Christ, If thou love me, feed my
John. 21. 16.
lambs, and my sheep: yet if the Lord bless his labors plentifully, and the
people minister to him, readily, so that he be sufficiently provided for, no
man doubts, but that he shall do his duty much better, as seeing thereby
that he is (as good reason why he should so be) highly and well regarded. So
a Christian man that labors with his hands in the calling God has set him,
ought to be occupied therein willingly, and for conscience sake; but if God
bless him with good success, he shall go about the duties of it far more
chearefully, and in better sort. In all things we find it thus. If the Gospel
be soundly and diligently preached, all ought to be ready to hear it, but if
magistrates themselves be forward that way, and cause others by their
authority to do the same, so that they see the Gospel be had in good account,
shall it not (think we) quicken even the best much more then they should
otherwise be? not that these meaner incourageme^ts should most prevail with
men, but the Lords commandment; yet that shall the better do it, when these
also be added, to help our weakness. But to look to these principally, while
the chief is neglected, that is a thing merely preposterous, and the next way
to pull down al right manner of going about our duties, what shows thereof
soever men will make, and how commonly so ever the the greatest part offend this
way. And yet God seeing the infirmity of his people, and their unto wardnesse
to godly duties, and how hardly they are brought to the well discharging of
them by his bare commandment, has drawn them on by fit rewards, promises,
and encouragements. For who doubts, that the dear servants of God are much
heartned and helped forward thereby? and yet Gods charge (as I have said) ought
most to prevail with them, though hypocrites and time-seruers do make their
greatest account of them, other, little setting by this in the mean while,
till God open their eyes to repent, or till they be hardened. For what one of a
thousand in any calling or condition would labor and travel even for the
necessary helps to this life, by the virtue of the bare commandment [thou
shall labour] if gain and profit came not in thereby?

To proceed, Othniel being the meanest in his fathers house, and yet Caleb
Doct. 2.
keeping promise with him, in giving his daughter to him; it commends his
faithfulness in that he did not wind out dishonestly from making good his word,
as men use to do; even as he is set forth, and praised in many other respects
before. To be praised of men, or to praise a man's self is matter of small
reiovcing, but he, whom the Lord praises is blessed; as Job was, seeing 2.
Cor. 10. 18.
God himself spoke of him thus to Satan, Have thou not considered my servant
Job, that he fears God, and departs from evil. And so he commended
Zachary Job. 1. 8. Luke 1. 6.
and Elizabeth, and Cornelius. But to come more particularly to that which
Acts 10. 2.
he is commended for here, I mean his faithfulness in keeping his promise,
and that in so great a matter; and when he had that which he would at Othniels
hands; how many (think we) shall be found that will do so? but wind out from
standing to their word, dishonestly, and with subtle distinctions, wranglings,
and wrestings of the matter, and other setting down their meanings then they
had, when they promised, especially if it be for their own benefit and
advantages? Oh, it is lamentable every where to behold it, so that the innocent
(who are for the most part of the poorer sort) go commonly by the hardest; and
yet, let us know in the mean while, that God will take part with the wronged
and oppressed, and therefore let us beware of it. But the world is come to
this, that there is no hold of the most men's word: no, nor of their wrighting
neither, if by any means, it may be shifted off, and denied. Which caused
Solomon to cry out, saying: Every man will Prou. 20. 7.
boast of his own goodness, but where shall we find a faithful man? It is a
virtue that God requires to be in him, whom he will put in his service, I
mean faithfulness, as Paul shows of himself, that he was counted
faithful, and 1. Tim. 1. 12.
then put in his service. And we in our earthly dealings, what other good
parts soever we find in our servants, yet we are glad to forgo them all, if we
cannot have them faithful, and trusty to us. And so unfaithfulness on the
contrarv, is so dishked and hated even of those who are faulty in it
themselves, though blind through selfeloue in seeing it, that they who can no
way hide it, but that it breaks forth in the^ to be seen openly, are brought
into utter discredit by it. And even so, if others, who as commonly offend in
Note.
it, but can more cleanely convey, and hide it with setting a fair face on it,
were brought to light, as they are, who cannot so easily cover it, they should
(doubtless) be in little account, how many so ever they be who are tainted
with it. Gehezay, Judas, Ananias, with Saphira his wife, and Simon Magus, who
John 1. 47.
gave show of faithfulness, after he heard Philip preach, these with many
such do testify, how this faithfulness is iustled aside, and rejected. But
happy was Nathaniel, a true Israelite, in whom there was no guide, who then
did rejoice for it, and now does enjoy the fruit of it in heaven, while the
stain, and reproach of the other mentioned, will never be put out. And so (to
conclude) must they all show this faithfulness, who desire to enter into the
Lords Tabernacle, Psalm. 15. 4.
and consequently truly perform that which they have lawfully promised, as in
the Psalm is plainly showed. And but for the avoiding of tediousnes, it might
further be laid out more at large. For, as I have said somewhat to the
disgracing of this sin of unfaithfulness in general, and in deceiving one
another by breaking promise, so it is much more odious when it is practiced
under pretense of religion: I mean, while men shall profess with their
mouths to fear God, and yet deny the power thereof in their lives, as some
of them did, of whom I have spoke before.

Now to show Calebs liberality to Othniel, it is showed, that as he had given
Verse 14. 15.
his daughter to him; so he gave him a liberal and rich dowry with her, which
we understand to have been so by her own words; when she said to her father,
thou have given me a country: and this he did, that it might be seen that he
gave her freely to him, as he had promised to do: for he was a great Prince,
and Othniel was of the same Tribe. Moreover, (to show the the liberty that
children have allowed them of God,) it is said here, that she desired other
ground of her father, (as she had moved her husband before to do, with
springs of water fit for their use, seeing that was dry ground, which he had
given her. And she took the fittest oppertunitie to request it, when she
having gone to abide and dwell with her husband, and they both had (in all
likelihood) viewed the ground, after that, she returning to her father, who
came to meet her, she cast herself from her ass, that she might do reverence,
and her duty to her father, and then she made this petition to him. This be
said for the clearing and better understanding of these two verses. This story,
though brief, does give good light to us both about one duty of parents in
marrying their children, to wit, to provide for them, and as they may
conveniently also of and about the liberties of the children again, when they
are bestowed in marriage, namely, that they may make request for necessaries,
if there have been neglect thereof before.

And first, concerning parents, seeing Caleb gave possessions with his daughter
at her marriage, according to his greatness; even possessions of ground, which
had not bin lawful for him to have done, but that the young couple were both
of the same Tribe, it teaches that parents at the putting of their children
(which have been obedient to them) from their charge, at their marriage, should
as sufficiently provide for them as they may, and as it may stand with other
conueniences. They should not seek and desire to please them in marriage
without their charge, for many inconveniences go therewith: as Abraham gave
portions to Isaac, and Ishmael, and the Lord declared Genes. 25. 5. 6. Joshua
14. and 15. 16. and 17.
to us in the story of dividing the land of Canaan, that he was well pleased
with this, that provision should be made for posterity, one generation after
another. Neither could societies be otherwise maintained among men in good
sort, nor children be bestowed in fit and due time in marriage, whereby very
great hurt and detriment must needs fall out, both to Church and commonwealth.

But herein I mean in parents providing for their children, (as far as my
knowledge reaches) there is for the most part, no great fault to be found:
although indeed, there are some unnatural and hard hearted men, from whom
little or nothing can be wrong, (though ability fail them not) till they must
leave their goods to be scrambled for by their children with much strife and
contention seeing they could never be brought to dispose of them in any
reasonable sort while they lived. But to leave these, and come again to the
other, their fault is twofold otherwise, though the most of them be not to be
charged this way, as I have said. The one is, that they get much of their
wealth by ill means, which they leave richly to their children at their death,
or bestow it as they please upon them in their life. The other is, that they
often put all out of their own hands into their childrens, to prefer them in
marriage, and setting them up so high, they bring themselves as low. These two
evils are very common, and require good looking to, for the amending of them.
For the first, it is a sweet coming in of their goods to them which they wring
from others by oppression, extorsion, violence, or fraud; it is (I say) sweet
in the coming in, but as bitter it shall be, (to the full) at the going out.

The Lord has set us our bounds, that we should in no wise offer others
Matthew. 7. 1. 12.
that measure, which we are unwilling should be offered to us again, which
rule, though I am persuaded that Preachers may tear their tongues to the
stumpes, before they shall bring many to be guided by, yet some (I hope) will
submit themselves unto it. But in all dealings, there are so many ways found
out to uphold men's estates, or to augment them, and the greatest pretense is
for their children, that they will hear nothing, if it be spoken to persuade
to equity, and innocence which make the practisers thereof bold as a Lion,
Prou. 28. 1.
and to the trying of their doings, whither they be good or no.

Such, and so many kinds of deceiuings, and cruel dealings there are
practiced, as by Executors in detaining the goods committed to their fidelity,
to be put to good uses; such rackings of men's rents, that they never regard how
the tenant with all his toil may, in any poor sort, be maintained; but they
are forced by necessity to leave their farms, and some to run clean away.
Such exactions in their loanes, till they fill the prisons with them, who
cannot pay their unreasonable demands, whereas they should look for no benefit
thereby, but that only which might stand with the benefit of them that use and
employ the stock. And to give a taste of the rest by these, who are occupied
in greater dealings, (for who can reckon up all) to come to smaller matters,
who almost deals justly in them? But ioynting there is one of another in two
penny dealings (as pinching in measures and waights to get a groat or a
shilling or in the whole bargain, with the like, so that such gain is more
sweet to them, then all the rest, which they may lawfully take for their
commodities, as it is in the Proverb, stolen things, though they be but Prou.
9. 17.
waters are sweet. But by this, conceive of the rest. This shall suffice to say
of the first sin of parents about providing for their children; that I say
nothing of the great hurt they do themselves hereby: for while they are thus
greedily set to seek commodity for their children, they bereave themselves of
knowledge and grace: yea, and they wax very sloathfull and negligent in using
the means to increase both; and that also beside the omitting the doing of
good to others. By this means leaving no blessing, (as Caleb did) but a curse
to their posterity, who must pay the shot full dearly, for all those commings
in of unrighteous Mammon. Better it is to be the beast, then the child of such
parents.

The second fault of parents follows, that is, to put themselves out of all,
even house and home, (as they say) and that for the preferring of their
children to great marriages, (little else being respected of them) wherein,
though they deal ill in the former to the loading and burdening of their
consciences, yet in this latter, they provide most unwisely for themselves, and
their bodily estate and maintenance, and thereby it must needs go the worse
with their souls. True it is indeed, their children gain well by the bargain,
(if all other things be suitable in their match, as religion in both parties,
and good liking betwixt them, for that very cause, that they be both heirs of
the promise) but what wisdom is that in the parents, to deprive themselves and
many poor neighbors, of the benefit, which they might, and by good right
ought to have inioyed by keeping their estate, especially the greatest part of
it in their own hands, and to thrust their heads under their childrens wings;
to lift up them, and pluck down themselves, when yet, for the most part, their
children are very unfit for it? But be they as they may be, I mean fit enough
to use that estate, yet they having once obtained a right in all, and being put
into possession thereof, how unmeet is it that the parents must be beholding to
them for that which they have to live with all? And yet, that shall be with
grudging enough yielded unto them, especially after a while. For they deal
with them as flatterers do with their benefactors, when they have sucked what
they can, then unthankfully they cast them off, and turn them over perke, nay,
more then that, if their parents have kept any thing in their own hands to
relieve themselves, some children are never well, till they have, under some
colorable show of reason, wound even that from them into their own hands: or
if they cannot, then their death is longed for, that so they may have all. So
that their old age is tedious, and irksome to them, wherein they should look
for most kindness and quietness at their childrens hands, and the greatest
respect and regard to be had of them.

For their occupyings; I deny not, but when age has made them unfit for
labor, or ouerseeing their commodities, it may be convenient to yield them
into their childrens hands, those I mean, which in all respects shall be
thought meetest for the same; but upon good conditions, yet, that their parents
may be well dealt with by them, and keep the chief hold in their own hands
for the time. And these two dangers being wisely avoided by parents, I freely
affirm, that they ought to provide for their children, as I 1. Tim. 5. 8.
have said, when they bestow them in marriage, wherein (yet) this must be
observed of them, that they strain themselves the further to do them good, and
more good, as they have showed themselves most obedient to them in the Lord,
and most humble, and are qualified with other good fruits of religion. And
this be said of the parents providing for their children, at the putting of
them forth to marriage, by occasion of Calebs so doing to his daughter. Now
follows the other point in this short story, that is, the liberty, which the
children have at that time, to make request for themselves to their parents:
But I will here cut off, as having been over long.

THE SIXTH SERMON UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to go forward in the story where I left concerning Caleb Verse. 14. 15.
The opening of them.
and Acsah his daughter, we are here to consider what Acsah, Calebs daughter
said to her father when he met her, as we have heard what he himself her
father did to her, when he gave her to Othniel in marriage. She (it is said
here) when she came first to her husband, moved him to ask of her father a
field; but whither he was loath and refused, or whither he tarried too long,
she lighted off her ass and made the request to her father herself, he giving
her opportunity by asking of her, what she desired; for it seems, he saw,
she came to some such end, then she besought him, that as he had given her
dry ground without water, so he would give her springs of water to it, for her
bounds were great and large; and she requesting this of him, he gave them unto
her contentation. Now from hence we may learn (as I said,) besides the
reverence she showed to her father in lighting from her beast, what the
liberty of children is Doct.
when they are bestowed in marriage, and that is this:

They may desire of their parents, as their ability will give leave, such
things as they see to be needful for them in their place, to the honest supply
of their wants, if their parents have neglected, or not seen, and remembered
it; seeing they are to look to it, and none are fitter nor meeter to help
them. For through want of necessaries, there is much discouragement ofttimes to
young beginners, and the parents are to provide and lay up for the children.
But whilst it is allowed them to desire things needful and meet 2. Cor. 12.
14.
of them, it is not fit for them in a stout and stately manner to require it,
and so to forget themselves, but in humility to request it. Neither is it fit
for them to serve their own turn in what they list, for the setting up their
own countenance, or to pluck from others, who are as well to be regarded as
they; (which yet is too common,) that every one is for himself, and does not
consider another by himself. This, I say, must be taken heed off, lest it
raise disagreement and hard thoughts betwixt them and their brethren. As for
her demand, the text plainly shows, that it was very needful that she asked,
though her father had granted out her portion before; for we know in those
dry and South Countries what need there was of water. And we see that her
request being so reasonable, her father never stood about it, but yielded to
her freely and liberally, even springs in the upper and nether grounds. In like
manner parents should do to their children according to their ability, as I
have said before.

It follows.

VERSE. 16. And the children of Keny, Moses father in law, went up out of the
city of Palm trees with the children of Judah, into the wilderness of Judah,
that lies in the South of Arad, and went and dwelt among the people. WE have
heard of Caleb, Othniel and Acsah. Now to proceed in the The sense.
Chapter, there is added here in this next verse interlaced betwixt the former,
and the next following a brief mention of the Kenites, the posterity of Keni
Moses father in law, how they came down with the Tribe of Judah, at the time
when they destroyed Hebron and Debir, and they dwelt by them in tents. For
Hobab, the son of Keni and his retinue, being persuaded by Moses (when the
children of Israel were in the wilderness going toward Numb. 10. 29.
the land of Canaan) to go with them he promising them, that as the Lord had
said to him, he would do them good; so he (I mean Moses) would likewise make
them partakers thereof. Hereupon some of these Kenites went with him and the
children of Israel, and were guides to them in the wilderness, the way that
they went; and these Kenites came over Jordan with Israel, and abode with the
Tribe of Benjamin at Jericho, the city of Palm Trees, and from thence they
came and abode with the men of Judah, after they had won the forementioned
city, and other thereby. And the story records that these went and lived
with the people of Israel, to be better instructed in the right manner of
worshipping God, as they had by their predecessors made beginnings therein
before. This dwelling of the Kenites with the people Doct.
of God, and in leaving their own country, for the joining themselves to
them, as it highly commends them, so it teaches, that it is behouefull for
us, and our duty, and much to our benefit, to join our selves, (as we may
have opportunity,) to the godly and their fellowship. These Kenites, if they
had done as the most do, they had been ignorant of the law of God, and so had
lain in darkness, and had not known the Lord, their hope and happiness, but
they more regarding to seek true knowledge, and therefore leaving their own
country, and being much kindled and encouraged thereby with the love of Gods
promises, they prospered among the people of God. And so, I say, we ought to
seek and join our selves in acquaintance with Note.
the religious and godly, who live by faith and hope, such as makes not
ashamed. For though we live not among the Heathen, yet we live for the most
part among Papists, Atheists, blind and profane Worldings: whose conversation
and example we are easily infected by, and made like unto them. I wrote to you
(says Saint Paul) that ye company not, that is, that ye have 1. Cor. 6. 11.
no fellowship with fornicators, drunckards, extorsioners, Idolaters, railers,
and such like, for we know, that evil words corrupt good manners. So that,
although 1. Cor. 15. 33.
we cannot but live where such be, as Israel did with the Egyptians: yet we are
bound, even in our civil contracts and dealings with them, (which we cannot
choose but have, and use with them sometime;) to beware, that we be not drawn
to near society with them, lest we learn their manners, or at least wincke
at them, and bear with them, of the which we should show our utter dislike;
seeing we know, that two cannot walk together, but they must be of one mind,
and yet we must not scorn or disdain the worst or meanest of them, but live
among them in all innocence, humility, and good Note.
carriage of our selves, lest we harden them; but rather that we may wait
patiently, to see if God at any time will give them repentance.

And if the company and near acquaintance with the godly be so precious, then
beware lest we forsake our fellowship, as the manner of some is, but make Heb.
10. 25.
we much of such, and let our delight be, (as David said his was,) in the
Saints Psalm. 16. 3.
that are on the earth, and in such as excel in virtue. And such as dwell
among them, and have dealings with them, as neighbors that are near seated
together, must needs in some sort have; let them take heed, that through
commonnesse of living with them, they wax not weary of this blessing, as we
easily are brought to be, and so we be easily alienated from them by testiness
and conceits, as too many are) even by small occasions, and for very trifles;
when we have yet learned, one to bear another burden: and religion teaches
us to make especial account of, and in any wise to seek peace with them, and
ensue and follow after it, though it fly from us, that by so doing, Heb 12.
14. John 3. 35.
all may say, we be the very disciples of Christ indeed, for that we so love
one another. Thus let them do good and take good mutually together every way
as they can. But to whom are good people commonly daintiest? even to such as
dwell a far off from them: God declaring thereby, that they who dwell by them,
are blind in not discerning and seeing what such a benefit is worth, and
therefore that they provoke God to give them their habitation, and to send them
among such as they themselves be, that is, unquiet, and froward people, yea and
worse then so, I mean profane and skorners, that they may thereby the better
know what godly friendship is worth, who, if they had been wise, would have
kept themselves well, while they were well, that is, in better company. I have
seen in my time, some that took a pritch against Note.
such as feared God, and were truly religious, and in their distempered heat,
and ouerhastie dislike and weariness of their fellowship, though they were
far better then themselves, (thus are men carried of their sections rashly,
wilfully, and in passion:) in this their heat (I say) they would needs resolve
to remove their dwelling, and when they had made choice of it to their own
liking, when no persuasions might stay them from it, they were so handled by
strangers that knew not God nor their duties, and so vexed and crossed among
them, that they cried out one to another, Woe is me that I am Psalm. 120. 5.
constrained to dwell in Meshec, meaning, that they were then so troubled with
them that had no pity nor regard of them, that they with shame confess then,
and cry out, that godly neighbors are a treasure, and wished with much loss
to dwell by them again.

This example of the Kenites should further teach us, that though it is both
lawful and meet to regard maintenance, yet we ought to respect chiefly in
Doct. 2.
remoouing our dwellings, the true knowledge of God, which now is to be
attained of us by a sound ministry, and that is seldom without some whose
company is to be desired, and whose acquaintance may make our lives sweet and
joyful. As Ruth the Moabitesse did therefore follow her mother Ruth. 1. 16.
in law Naomi into the holy land, out of her own country, and could not be
plucked from her by all the prerogatives thereof, her kindred, acquaintance and
such like. It was the commendation of strangers, as we often read in the Ester
8. 17. Zach. 8. 23.
Scriptures, that when they saw Gods blessing upon the Jews, they turned to
their religion, and said with Ruth to Naomi, thy God shall be our God: whereas
we see that the most sort are rather content to part with some good commodity,
then they would dwell among Gods people, thinking it a bondage to live with
such as will not run to the same excess of riot with them. Commonly 1. Peter
4. 4.
when men change their dwellings they respect some sinister end thereof, as
profit, or the fulfilling of their lusts, and let religion go where it will.
But, to pass from these, such a mind should they have, as Ruth and the like
had, that travel into far countries to see them, that they might with the
Queen of the South, seek the wisdom of God to guide them, as well 1. King.
101. Matthew. 12. 42.
as to see the countries, or reap commodities and pleasures there, or else it
is out of question, that they shall bring home the vain fashion, with the rude
and heathenish manners thereof, to the tainting of other, and their own utter
undoing, as by too woeful experience we see at this day. To return from
travelers to the other, and though I confess that men in their remoouing
their dwelling may, yea, and must regard their commodity; yet not that only,
but withal they should with Abraham, set up an alter, that is, retain Gods
true worship, and see how it may be vpholden where they shall become.

VERSE. 17. But Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they show the Canaanites,
that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it, and called the name of the
city Hormah.

18. Also Judah took Azzah with the coasts thereof, and Ashkelon with the
coasts thereof, and Ekron with the coasts thereof.

19. And the Lord was with Judah, and he possessed the mountains: for he
could not drive out the Inhabitants of the valleys, because they had chariots
of iron.

NOw this 16. verse of the Kenites being spoken of, we are come to an end The
sense.
of the long repetition of the acts of Judah, done in the time Joshua,
mentioned from the 8. verse to this 16. which was, as we heard interlaced, and
here the holy Ghost returns to Simeon and Judah, and proceeds in these two
verses, to set down other acts of theirs after Ioshuahs death, as he began to
do in the beginning of this chapter unto the 8. verse, and shows how they
destroyed another city of the Canaanites Zephath by name: and that they took
more cities besides which were after, as by their names here set down, we
know, possessed of the Philistines. Now it is to be noted, that they wasted
some of the cities utterly by fire, as Hazor and Jericho, and so they dealt with
this here mentioned. Zephath: whereas they inhabited others of them. Why they
dealt so with this, it is not set down, but they did as they were commanded.
We are sure it was, that God might show his kindness to Israel, when some of
them were utterly subverted, where greatest danger was to be feared: and to
testify his severity and his justice to such of his enemies; and therefore it
is not for any to cry out of it as cruelty, which the righteous God saw meet
to be done.

And by this we must learn, that though we be forbidden to hate the Doct.
verse. 17.
persons of our enemies, yet when we be set by the Lord to execute judgment
upon them, our eye must not spare them, under the color of charity or
compassion, for their propernesse, manhood, or any other foolish respect;
Neither may we do the work of the Lord negligently. Thus Joshua, though he
pitied the state of Achan, yet plainly tells him, In as much as thou have
troubled Joshua 7. 25.
us, the Lord shall trouble thee this, etc. Thus the Lord punished Saul
severely for sparing Agag, and Ahab for so dealing with Benhadad, saying Thy
life 1. Sam. 15 23. 1. King. 20. 42.
shall go for his. And therefore we must be well assured of Gods commandment,
when we go about any such thing, against such persons as beeleaud, stubburne
and wilful. This commandment of God is to be extended not only against all
traitorous enemies of the Church, but also against that ravening and roguish
progeny of spoilers of the peace and government, and havoc makers of the
commonwealth, as murderers, etc. And therefore confuteth the cursed practice
of Jesuits, who, if they be not as yet practizers in that kind themselves, do
yet by all means labor to extenuate the odious facts and treacheries of their
accomplices by false reports: and treducing the just proceedings of Christian
Princes, and the execution of their laws for the restraining of such monsters,
by infamous libels, and the like. But we must here take great heed also, that
we color not our cruel and uncharitable actions with a pretense of zeal to
God, and yet give place to our affections, under a color of seeking the glory
of God: which may easily be done, as the Apostles did, calling for fire from
heaven upon the Sam^^itans, when Luke 9. 54.
they would not receive Christ into their ciue: but we must know, that all men
being our neighbors, we must be enemies to none. For the which cause David
praved for his own enemies as namely for Saul, when yet he Luk 10 20. 30. etc.
prayed against Gods enemies, having also good warrant to do so. And Moses
being the meekest of other in his own case; yet against Corah and his Psalm 69
22 etc. Numb. 16. 30.
company who were the enemies of God, how earnestly did he deal, pronouncing
that the earth should open, and swallow them up alive for their rebellion. And
Paul, who teaches us to overcome evil with good do yet pray Rom 12 last.
fervently against the false teachers, saying to the Galarhians, in great
compassion toward them, I would to God, that they were cut off, which do
disquiet Gal. 5. 12.
you. So that as we hear they did, it behooves us to bear our own injuries
and indignities committed against us withal meekness, and to deal mildly in
our own matters, but in the Lords far otherwise.

And where it is demanded, whether may the godly pray against Tyrants, by whom
the true worship of God is hindered; I answer, that against their tyranny and
cruel doings we ought to pray, but not against their persons, who may possibly
repent. For the Lord not having revealed to us, that for all their wickedness,
they have yet committed the unpardonable sin, therefore what good meaning so
ever we have therein, we are not allowed to pray for their confusion. But if
God once make known his mind to be such as he will have them destroyed, or not
to be prayed for, then we must both approve of it, and execute it accordingly:
and yet so, that as they are men we pity them, as our Savior denouncing
against the people of Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42.
shortly after to be destroyed, yet wept in beholding the misery that was
coming upon them.

In this next verse, it is showed that Judah yet prevailed further, and won The
sense verse 18. 19.
other cities named in the text, which yet, in the 3. chapter of this book,
are said to have been in the hands of the Philistines, as they were also long
after. For the people of Israel often provoked the Lord, and so lost again some
part of that which they had won, even as it was like now to be, that for their
sin they lost these cities which they had before inioyed. In the 19. verse it
is said, that Judah possessed the mountains also; and to the end that nothing
might be ascribed to the men, namely, to them of Judah, and to Simeon, for
Simeon had entered into covenant to join with them their brethren in these
wars, and so did here (though Judah, who was appointed thereto, be only
named) to the end (I say) that nothing may be ascribed to them, it is expressly
added, that the Lord was with them in those their great enterprises. To teach
us by Doct. ver. 18. 19
whose might they prevailed, and what was the cause that they did so, even
this, seeing God was with them. And all men will grant as much, that if God be
with a man he shall prosper, and none shall be against him, to do him hurt, as
the Apostle writes. And there is sufficient reason of it. For who shall resist
him? or if he say the word, who shall call it back? Now we are to know, Romans
8. 31.
that God is not with any man idle or weak, but mighty, as he says himself
to Asa by the Prophet: The Lord looks down from heaven to see who is weak,
2. Cron. 16. 9.
that he may be strong with him. But to the end so worthy a point as this is,
may thoroughly do us good, we must understand that to have God with us, so as
we may rest surely persuaded that he is so, and enjoy his presence constantly
while we live, (which is a treasure invaluable and unknown to the world, it is
required of us by God, that we first have him for our God; and be truly
reconciled to him by our Lord Jesus Christ: for then he will never leave us,
neither forsake us, but safely keep us to the resurrection day: but otherwise,
Josh. 1. 8.
except God be thus made ours, and we united to him by faith, which howsoever
it should be done, cannot here be more set down, what portion of wealth,
wisdom, etc. we have out of that communion with him, it is accursed. And
further we are to know, that God may be with men in some sort, as by his power
and bodily help, and at some time, and yet not be with them to their
effectual comfort and always. These are great matters, and duly to be
considered of us, for he may be with the wicked, so as he was with Ahab, when
he gave the great hoastes of Benhadad into his hands: yea, and that which is
more, he may be, and is present with the unbelievers in the congregation,
when he inlightneth them to understand that which is soundly taught, and to
take liking of the same. But this is by his power only, but not by his
effectual grace and favor; as he was with Mary, who being freely Luke 1. 28.
beloved of God, he was also with her: and his being with her, made her blessed
and joyful: and if he be thus with us, he will both spiritually grace us, and
also bodily bless us, as shall be expedient for us, even as he did Gedeon,
Judges 6. 12.
when he was said to be with him. And this, to the end we may not deceive our
selves, it behooves us to mark, for our singular and continual comfort: and
therefore let men give all their diligence to make their salvation sure, and to
come into the favor of God, that so they may abide therein, then will he be
with them to guide, keep and comfort them: and otherwise, they 2. Pet. 1. 5.
John 15. ^0.
may have God with them (I deny not) sometime, as I have said, though he owe
not even that to them, but so (yet) they may be miserable and unhappy still,
but in a better manner he was here with Judah, both before and at the time here
mentioned; also he declared the same by giving their enemies into their hands.
This confuteth the conceit of such as measure Gods being with them by his
raising them in wealth, or giving them their desires. As Micah an Idolator
applauded himself as beloved by God, because he gave Judges 17. last.
him a Leuite to be his priest, whereas he gives many wicked men their desires
in wrath, when yet he denies to his own, theirs in favor. And this is that,
which we have to make profit of, out of the words before mentioned, that Judah
prospered, seeing God was with him.

We have heard that they overcame the inhabitants of the hill country, Verse.
19. The sense.
seeing God was with them. Now in the same verse it is added, that they did not
overcome the inhabitants of the valleies, seeing they had charriots of iron.
And hereby this unbelief of theirs began their sorrow and miseries, which the
other tribes followed them in, to the end of the Chapter. The common
translation is, they could not drive them out: but it is not so in the Hebrew:
the better translation adds another word, namely, that they went not about
it. Neither of both is out of the original, but that seems to be the sense,
for it is otherwise imperfect. For it is thus there, they did not to drive them
out, which is to be supplied, they went not about to do it. Whither of both
soever it was, that they did not either go about it, it was their fault: or
whither we take it thus, that they could not, even that was their fault also.
For God promised, that although they had chariots of iron, yet he would
deliver them into their hands, then they failed in believing Gods promise;
Joshua 17. 18.
and so they going from God by unbelief; God likewise went from them: so that
God being with them, and they believing him, they overcame them them that dwelt
on the mountains; but they not believing God, as he had promised in Joshua 17.
seeing they had iron chariots, therefore they did not overcome them in the
vallyes. Therefore, howsoever we take it, there was a fault in the men of Judah.
For though it may be objected, that God would not give them victory over the
one as well as over the other; I answer, that is true, but that was through
their fault, that they believe not that his word, as he had promised.

So that the doctrine which we are taught from hence, is this, that though
Doct. 1.
God bestow many good blessings upon us, while we believe in him, having
promised it, even as he did here on Judah, and so long, he shows himself to
be with us: yet if we give in, and withdraw our selves through unbelief, and
believed not his promises, he will fail us in other blessings, and deny us
them. A most worthy truth, and much to be regarded of us. For so it is now with
us, as it was then with the men of Judah. So says our Savior to the man that
brought his son to be healed that had a dumb spirit, If thou can believe,
Mark 9. 23.
all things are possible to him that belieueth, meaning thereby, that all
things that are agreeable to the will of God shall be granted to him that
believes: for faith seeks nothing that is contrary to his will, or not
reueiled in his word. So says Saint James; If any man want wisdom, let him
ask of God, who gives to James 1. 6.
all plentifully, and casts no man in the teeth: but let him ask in faith,
and waver not: and so speaks the Scripture throughout. And to bind this more
sure, the Lord himself says to the Hebrews; If any man withdraw himself, my
Heb. 10. 38.
soul shall have no pleasure in him: that is, if he believe not.

Excellent is that saying of the Lord to this purpose in the Chronicles: 2.
Chro. 16. 7. 9.
The Aethiopians and the Lubims, were they not a great people? yet because thou
did rest upon me, I delivered them into thy hands: but now thou have done
foolishly in relying on the King of Syria, and not on the Lord, therefore he
leaves thee to thyselfe to believe, and so driven and dissuaded from the
contrary. Yet this causes me often to marvel, that we being so encouraged,
neither the unbelievers do have or long and thirst for faith, as though it
were little worth, neither can other who yet should be most ready, be
brought to wait daily and constantly to grow in this grace of believing:
neither do, although they have obtained already to believe; for all that,
nourish faith as they are taught, that so they may abound therein with
thanksgiving. And much it is to be lamented, that seeing God is not with us,
to bless and beautify us otherwise; we should for all that neglect so great
good, as we might get thereby, and rather with others, follow fancy and
reason, sloth and example, and that is, to believe no more then we see. Oh
woeful unbelief, that fillest our lives with so many fretting sorrows and
deadly discomforts! True it is, that many to make their fault small, do
answer, that the people that lived before the coming of Christ, might much
easier believe then we now, because they read in the stories such examples,
not only of Abraham, but also of Joshua Joshua 6.
and many of the people in the destroying of Jericho to have done so. And the
Priests aduenturing to set their feet on the waters, believing that they Joshua
3. 15.
should give place to them to go over them on dry foot, as God had promised;
with many other like. But they are grossly deceived who think so, even as
much as they, who will say that in the dawning morning light a man may see as
clearly, as at noonetide. For who is ignorant of this, that the mystery of
faith is nothing so clearly revealed in the old Testament, no, not by many
degrees, as it is in the new? So that although some of the chief fathers, (who
were to go before the people, and be lights to them, as Moses, Noah, Abraham,
and others, received inlightning of God, more and in greater measure then we
do in these days; yet the Church consisting of the common people at this
time, has cause a great deal more to believe, and far more easily may
embrace the promises,) by the ordinary means they they have, (I say not what
God may do,) and so live by faith more easily, I say, then they did or could
do. But this is our sin, that we search not into our selves so much, as to
see whither it be so; neither if we find it to be otherwise, are we grieved for
it, or seek to amend it. But there will be occasion offered to speak more
largely of this matter in many places of this book, therefore I will here
contain my self.

But one thing more here, by so good occasion, I will note about faith, worthy
our remembrance and regard, and that is this: that though the Tribe of Judah
believed the Lord and his promises in one thing, and did therefore valiantly; I
mean in expelling the Canaanites that dwelt in the hill countries, and the
Lord was with them accordingly: yet in another thing they did not believe,
namely, that God would expel the enemies that dwelt in the valleys, because
they had iron chariots, and therefore they went not about it, neither did they
obtain any such thing of God. Whereby we see, that we may possibly believe one
promise, and yet not another: and (which Doct. 2.
is no great marvel) we may believe when the case is more easy, and the
thing which is promised is of less difficulty to obtain, (as here it was
with Note.
them) then when it is otherwise. Even so, we may believe at one time, and yet
not at another. The reason of both is, seeing we are fickle and inconstant,
therefore we fleet and change in time, and we are also timorous by means
whereof it comes to pass, that although we may be brought to believe a thing
of less moment, or which in former time we have believed; yet at some other
time, and in another thing, where in we have no experience, and which strikes
us with greater fear, there we faint and give over. The use of this is: that
we accustom aquaint, and bend our selves, when we Note.
have given credit in some things to God, that we may do the same in other; and
if we find it otherwise, then that we take knowledge of our weakness, and
think our strength in believing not to be very great. And therefore we thus
seeing our wants therein, are not to please our selves and rest in that which
we have done, but look to that which is yet to be done of us: and as Saint
James speaks of patience, that it should have her perfect work, so faith
James 1. 4.
must have her perfect work also. That thus we may go a degree further, as
the Apostle wills the Colossians, namely, to abound in faith. Colos. 2. 7.
Romans 15. 13.
Which cannot be without thanks giving to God, and much joy to our selves.

VERSE. 20. And they gave Hebron to Caleb, as Moses had said, and he expelled
thence the three sons of Anake. Verse 20.
THis giving Hebron to Caleb is repeated, for it had been given to Caleb by
Moses before; (as it is said in the book of Joshua) and now the wars of the
Tribe of Judah being set down, the chief captain whereof, Caleb was, Josh.
14. 13.
this is again spoken of. And it is said, that to him this city, with the
coasts thereof was given, namely, by Joshua, as God had appointed in
Deutronomie. Deuteronomy. 1. 36.
That which is the chief matter here of giving Hebron to Caleb, as it was
before promised, and he was not holden back, no, nor deferred, nor defeated of
it; teaches, that we ought in no wise to detain any man's due Doct. 1.
from him, though it be in our power to do it; nor to withhold reward from
him that has deserved it. Gods will is, that every man enjoy his own (as we
would ours) which he has bestowed upon him. And this being so sharply
reproved by Saint James, in masters toward their servants, withholding their
due from them, does much more challenge them, who in waightier cases have
wrought unrighteousness against any. Thus he writes, Behold the hire of the
laborers which have reaped your fields James 5. 4.
(which is of you kept back by fraud) cries, and the cries of them that have
reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts. It has been a
policy used by governors, to promise great rewards to such as shall bewray
dangerous practices of traitors, or find out open malefactors, or perform good
service against the enemies of the Church and their country, which if they be
not regarded and rewarded accordingly, how shall the hands of men be
strengthened and they encouraged to do these duties?

Ahashuerosh an Heathen King, when he had been delivered from the treason Ester
6. 10.
that two of his servants intended against him, and that by Mordecay, who
detected it, as soon as he understood (after it had been forgotten a time)
that he had not been rewarded for his faithful service, he did in most ample
manner command, and saw it effected, that he should be rewarded. So Belshazzar
did to Daniel, for his faithful service, and Pharaoh to Joseph in an admirable
Compare Dan. 5. 7. with 2^.
manner. Much more that which is a man's own is to be restored, or pay him at
the due time; as by the executor, the borrower, or any other who by right ought
to do it. But even among Christians the neglect hereof, and the shifting of
many, contrary to covenant, oath, promise and bond, calls their profession
into question among such as would gladly conceive better of Psalm. 15. 4.
them. But God meets with such justly: for neither are they trusted in their
health, nor yet pitied in their distress, but bear a mark of their
vntrustines, and unfaithful dealing unto the day of their repentance, or to
their grave. And therefore they who are put in trust, and defeat the orphan, or
other to who^ it is due; as also those banckrupts, who enrich themselves with
the goods of other men, and then give it out, that they are not able to pay,
though they have it in their power to do it, or disable themselves by their
unthriftiness and carelesnes; and all such as hold from men that due that
belongs to them, shall feel Gods anger as bitter, as masters shall, who detain
and hold back their servants wages. But they do no better who will claim it
before it is due, or else will be displeased, and will provoke to suit,
although they know no just cause: for that which is sought in such a case, I
mean before it be due, is to be obtained either by entreaty (if it may be
yielded) or by agreement and composition: but the rule before mentioned,
binds only to lawful, not irreligious promises.

As for that which is here said in this 20. verse, that Caleb expelled out of
Hebron the three sons of Anak, understand, that they are those three who
Doct. 2.
are mentioned in the 10. verse, Sheshai, Ahiman and Talmai: where the driving
of them out is ascribed to Judah in the general, which in this verse is
particularly said to have been done by Caleb, who was chief in the work. For
the doctrine to be gathered hence, read verse. 10.

THE SEVENTH SERMON UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The second part of the Chapter.
VERSE. 21. But the children of Benjamin did not cast out the Iebuzites, that
inhabited Jerusalem; therefore the Iebuzites dwell with the children of
Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day.
NOw follows the second part of the chapter, which lays The sense of verse.
21.
out the beginning of the calamities of the people of Israel, as to the end of
the chapter may be seen, namely, that all the Tribes suffered the nations,
who were their enemies, to remain among them, contrary to the commandment of
God in the book of Numbers: for thus he says, When ye are come over Jordan,
into the land of Canaan, Number. 33. 52. 55.
ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land before you. And a little
after; If ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land before you, then
those whom ye let remain of them, shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns
in your sides, and shall vex you in the land wherein you dwell. The first of
the Tribes that is said to have suffered the Canaanites to remain in their
coasts (that excepted that we heard of Judah in verse. 19.) and did not cast
them out, was Benjamin, which was near Joshua 15. 63.
to Judah. And although it be said in Joshua, that the Tribe of Judah could not
cast out the Iebuzites that inhabited Jerusalem, but burnt some piece of the
city; yet there it is said they dwelt with them therein: so it is said here of
Benjamin, seeing that city of the Iebusites was a part of it in the lot of
them, and part in the lot of Judah, that they dwelt also with Benjamin still,
and were 2. Sam. 5. 8.
not cast out till the time of David; but they of Benjamin built it again,
after Judah had burnt it.

Now seeing they had a precise commandment from God to expel the Doct. verse.
21.
Iebusites, thence it was their sin that they did it not: the least that they
may be charged with, was sloth and negligence, and the seeking of their own
ease, which to do in things forbiden, is most dangerous.

By this then we see the evil that sloathfulnesse and ease seeking brings, to
wit this: that itself holds a man from obeying God, though there should be
nothing else to do it. And that is when, for the ease and pleasure which is
taken therein, men dull the edge of courage and forewardnesse to good duties,
which was in them before: such an one is the slothful, whose words are these;
A lion is in the way, meaning thereby, that he cannot labor, Prou. 22. 13.
even as a man in a sweet slumber is most unwilling to be awaked. This sloth
is a sweet poison: keep from it he that can, but he that does not, it will
slay him, as Solomon says; As the common sluggard does loath and shun Prou. 1.
last.
labor, and therefore loves to be doing any trifling thing, rather then to
work, and be well occupied, so does he that is slow in the duties of Gods
service; he lets them pass and omits the opportunity of doing them, which
ought much to be regarded. For as a word spoken in season, is much worth, even
like apples of gold and pictures of silver, even so is an act or deed done in
due Prou. 25. 11.
time, as namely among other, that wise and godly courage of Ester showed in
due season in going to the King, for the preserving and saving her own life
and her peoples from the train that Hamon had laid for them in season. Oh,
even so is forewardnes and readiness to go about the work and business that
God inioyneth us in every condition of life. But there are extremities on both
sides: There are some that fall to their work, but look after nothing else,
whereas all should be first sanctified to God themselves first, that then their
works may be accepted of him. Others would seem, and be taken for godly; but
they are careless and slack in following the works of their callings, nay
they condemn the provident and diligent, as worldly and miserable muckwormes.
Both these are extremes to be avoided of Christians, by joining both callings
together, I mean religion and labor. But for this sloth (to say a little
more of it) if we take not great heed, the best of Gods servants may soon be
drawn to it, and no way sooner, then if we begin to wax weary of well doing
in our general or particular calling, 2. Peter 3. 17.
and suffer our selves to be plucked from our steadfastness therein, by the
error of the wicked, and to be caught and snared with the deceitfulnes of sin:
for so we are rocked a sleep ere we be aware, in which case it shall be no
easy Heb. 3. 13.
matter to awake, or bring our selves back again into our former good course.
And so shall we live unprofitable, fit only to consume and wast the good
benefits of God. Oh! what a death it is to a sloathfull person to be urged to
the duty that he has cast off, and has now no pleasure in, nor ability unto?
(as to a Minister to preach in his old age, who looked not after it in his
youth?) to the which estate he has brought himself; eue^ as a ruinous house
falls down altogether; when it is let go to decay for want of repairing in
time. For the remedying of the which mischief, in all that are annoyed with it,
I see no better direction, then that which our Savior has given us in these
words, when he says; occupy till I come. Whereby he means not only the Luke
19. 13.
work of our calling, but also that every one that will prosper, should use
his talent, even such gifts as God has bestowed upon him; as knowledge,
wealth, time, grace, and such like, to the doing of good with them, and not to
bury them unprofitably in the earth. For beside that the fruit of idleness is
poverty, theft, beggary, etc. God also loves and blesses the painful and
diligent; and thus if we be careful, after Gods direction, to be well
occupied, we shall be free as from other evils, so from this danger of
sloth. The like counsel to that which our Savior gives, is that of Saint
Paul to the Ephesians, that they redeem the time: that is, buy it out of the
hands of Ephesians. 5. 16.
idleness, unprofitableness and evil: and then employ it faithfully to
necessary uses and ends. And the rather, because so much precious time is
already spent in vain, let that which remains be better passed to recover
our loss. The life of a Christian can least of all other stand with idleness.
It is without respect of the particular calling, as husbandry, merchandise, or
other trading, full of diligent heed taking, that the conscience may be kept
pure and good: but much more (al may see) when labor in these is adjoined to
the other: therefore the punishment of the sloth is not small, but as the Wise
man teaches. The idle man's back shall be clothed with rags, and his belly
pinched and starued for want of food, and by this we may guess what Prou. 23.
21. and 6 11. and 20. 4.
his souls diet shall be. It follows.

VERSE. 22. They also that were of the house of Joseph went up to Bethel, and
the Lord was with them.

VERSE. 23. And the house of Joseph caused to view Bethel (and the name of the
city before time was Luz.)

VERSE. 24. And the spies saw a man come out of the city, and they said unto
him, show us (we pray thee) the way into the city, and we will show thee mercy.

VERSE. 25. And when he had showed them the way into the city, they smote the
city with the edge of the sword: but they let the man and all house depart.

VERSE. 26. Then the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city,
and called the name of it Luz, which is the name thereof unto this day.

NOw after the mentioning of the Tribe of Judah and Benjamin, and what The sense
of these verses.
they did, it is in order set down what the other Tribes did, to wit, how they
suffered, and did not expel the Canaanites neither. And yet the house of
Joseph is exempted, which comprehends the Tribe of Ephraim and Manasse
together. First therefore it is declared what these two jointly together did,
to verse. 27. in the words of the text here set down, and then, what they did
severally, to verse 30. That which is said of them jointly together, is to
their commendation, that they went against Bethel, which fell to their lot, and
the Lord with them to encourage and strengthen them, so that they feared and
tried which way they might most easily take it. (Now the name of this city had
in times past been called Luz, as we read in Genesis, but Jacob Genes. 28. 19.
as he went to Padan Aram from the wrath of his brother Esau, resting there,
and the Lord appearing to him, and comforting him, called the place Bethel,
that is, the house of the mighty God.) But to go forward, they that were sent
about that business, namely, the Tribe of Joseph, seeing a man to come out of
the city, asked of him in which part of it they might set upon it, and on
which side was their going out and coming into it, (for thereby it appears
that they had shut it up for fear of Israel, and that they had left but some
secret way for their necessary use to go out and in thereby,) and they
promising the man largely, he showed the way to them, and they entered and slew
the inhabitants, and took it, and sent the man away well rewarded, or rather
(as it was indeed) he banished himself from them into another country, and
was so wealthy, that he was able to build another city, and called it by that
name, Luz.

This work of the house of Joseph which they went about; namely, to take this
city Bethel, (which was before in the division of the land of Canaan Joshua
16. 2.
given to them,) as God had enjoined them, does lively set before our eyes,
Doct. out of verse. 22. 23.
as in a glass, the duty of all Gods people, that is to say, readily to go
about and set upon the work that God has appointed them and laid upon them,
yea and this is to be done, whatsoever lets and discouragements may stand up in
the way to hinder them. For has not he commanded them? And is not he able to
remove those impediments, rather then they shall hinder his work in the hands
of his servants? which they believing, are to go forward, and commit the
success to him that has promised to bring them through all difficulties which
might hold them back. For otherwise, if we look Note.
not to God by faith, but what let is in the way, and be hindered thereby; we
shall cast the commandment of God behind our back, and do as they who Eccles.
11. 4.
observe the wind, and therefore sow not; and look too much to the clouds, and
therefore reap not; and so for fear of inconveniences we shall let pass
necessary duties. Again, when we thrive and have good success, we bless
God, and are merry; but if we be crossed, we curse and disguise our selves with
impatience. Whereas it ought to be enough to us, that God has brought it to
pass either thus, or otherwise. And beside the authority he has over us,
his bountiful rewarding of us in his service, ought to encourage us to adresse
our selves to all such work: and not only so, but further, seeing he
commands and would have us do it, as it may be most for our own ease, Deuteronomy.
28. 47.
that is, willingly, readily, chearefully; for the Lord loves that, in all his
service; as he loves a cheerful giver. And we know (for our own parts) that
2. Cor. 9. 7.
men go awkly and untowardly about that work which they take in hand
unwillingly. And we are all to learn of our Savior, who has given us example
John 4. 34.
herein, saying, that his meat and drink was to do his Fathers will.

Besides we are made, redeemed and set here to that very end, to serve the Lord
Luke 1. 75. 75.
in holiness and righteousness without fear all the days of our life, and not
to please our selves, how hard soever the work is, that is to be done of us.
And that is our life, joy, and comfort, no other course of walking is life but
death: no other is sauory, or soundly joyful. And this should be thus in all
callings and conditions, as with Magistrates, Ministers, Husbandmen,
Artificers, Masters of families and others, who do (I deny not) many things
required of them by God, but not one work as another; neither that joyfully
which they do, and as if it were the work that God has set them about; for
then they should do it readily, but for their bellies, and in other carnal
respects. For why? they can indeed do them no otherwise, because they do not
first know themselves to be the Lords redeemed ones, that so they may easily
obtain other things at his hands. But I would that even they who are so, did
go about that which they do by Gods commandment chearefully, and with
delight for the Lords sake; then should there many excrements be cut off from
the infinite actions which are done in our lives, and with so much sin
removed; many plagues and annoiances should be avoided from men's lives also.
But alas, the most professors are not acquainted with going to work in Gods
service after this manner, neither find any savor in this Christian course:
but respect only their own commodity, and that they may be without fear of
want and penury, and the most do worse, that is, spend their precious time in
idleness, play, and vain pleasures at least: and as for seeking first Gods
kingdom to be under his government, and to rest on him for other things by
lawful labor and means using, it is one of the hardest things for them to
fasten on: though God has yet promised that such only shall be blessed. But
of this somewhat has been said before.

It is further added in this verse, that while the house of Joseph went up
against Bethel, the Lord was with them, which seeing it is here added, I will
say somewhat of it, though I have spoken thereof before by another occasion.
Now this house of Joseph, thus going about the work that God had commanded
them, is said to have God with them in their work; for so he had promised.
Which teaches, that this assurance we have from him, that if we attempt ought
by his commandment, he has set his seal to it, that we shall have success
and prosper in our work. So was it said to Joshua in his first going against
the Canaanites, I will be with thee, and he believed and Josh. 1. 5.
prospered even so, these and the like promises of God being believed of us,
are our comfort, and thereby we learn experience how to do the like for the
time to come, in what work soever the Lord shall employ us. This would make men
use their callings not so as they should be burdens to them, but recreation,
going merrily to their work as they may with Gods good allowance, and leaving
it of with fitness to other good duties, as prayer, reading, singing,
meditating, etc. If this were believed, men should be free from the plodding
and distracting cares of the ungodly, who make their lives wearisome by
distrust of Gods providence, fearing they shall beg ere they dye, etc. and
from the moyling and toyling labor of such as tire themselves with their
callings. For God gives rest to his beloved, as David says, Psalm. 127. 2.
Eccles. 5. 18.
And from this temporary rest, he will in due time, translate them to eternal
rest. All which I say, not only to the denouncing sharply and heavily against
the common professors of the Gospel, who will believe God no further then they
see him; but also to the just reproouing of those, who have obtained of him to
believe in deed, that they shall have eternal life, and yet their particular
trials, in which they are taught to depend upon him, and to cleave to his
promises made and granted out unto them to that very end, that they should do
so, they yet stagger and doubt, as if they had never had faith. He that
desires to hear more of Gods being with his, let him read Note.
that which has been said on verse 19.

This place Bethel being so called, that is, the house of the mighty God,
Verse. 23. Genes. 28. 19.
because the Lord appeared to Jacob there, whereas it had in times past been
called by another name, it very well teaches (seeing nothing is set down in
vain in the Scriptures but to good use) that it is commendable, as occasion is
offered, to give convenient and meet names, such as may instruct in some good
thing, drawn from some good example, or putting us in mind of duties either to
God or men. As God gave the name by the Angel unto our Savior, calling him
Jesus. Some care not what name they give to their children, of most notorious
persons, as counting it their credit that they may be like them: resembling
herein the Idolatrous King of Babel his Eunuchs, Dan. 27.
who purposely altered the names of Daniel and his fellows, in token that they
should renounce the true God and his service, and embrace the contrary. Some
give such names to them, as the rehearsing of them, causes laughter.

Which is unseemly, seeing the name is given in the assembly of the
faithful, and in the presence of God, and when they are to be entered into the
Church of God. We do not place religion in names or titles: yet nevertheless
a wise and godly choice in this matter may be had, that the names given, may be
in stead of instructions to the parties named. In the apparrelling of our
bodies in comely manner, we will have care that the very shoe, which is the
least matter, be decently put on, and suitable to other parts of our attire: so
there being required a proportion in all our actions, this one is not to be
neglected. Therefore in the old Testament, the names were given either
according to the event of things, about the time of the birth of the child, as
Moses called one of his sons Gershom, that is, stranger, because he Exodus 2.
22.
was then a stranger in another land: or their names were borrowed from their
holy predecessors, to put them in mind to follow their steps, or some such
like respects they had in giving them. Now let us hear of the spies.

In this verse, where it is said that the spies met this man coming out of
Verse. 24. 25.
the city (for what cause he went it is not expressed; somewhat is to be noted
by occasion of the man, and somewhat from the spies. By the man first, Doct. 1.
going in his simplicity, out of the city, (whither to save his life, or upon
some other necessary occasion,) meeting with these spies, and falling into
such a straight thereby, that either he must loose his life, or betray the
city, (for the spies said to him, show us the way into the city, and we will
show thee mercy.) We may see what streights and difficulties we meet with, be
subject to, and in danger of, in this life: for that peril which we neither
fear nor once think of, may befall us, even to the hazarding of our lives,
much more of our undoing, or the loss of the best of Gods blessings that we
enjoy, as wife, children, goods, etc. In the story of the French Massacres we
read, that by the popish faction, a whole assembly of Protestants were slain
at the Sermon. The Shunamites child went into the field in the morning well,
but 2. King. 4. 20.
died at noone. The widow of one of the children of the Prophets, who lived 2.
King. 4. 1.
in good estate for a great part of her husbands time, yet through the debt he
was in at his death, she was brought into that straight, that her two sons
must be sold to pay the debt, and carried away from her, perhaps to be
brought up by Idolators in an idolatrous land; and she knew no other for a
time, though God provided better for her. Job his children in the midst of
their merry makings, were destroyed by the fall of the house, and he himself
Job 1. 18. 19. and 27.
lost all at once, and his body was filled with scabbes and sores. Samaria was
besieged, and the danger so great, that the king thereof was resolved, and 2.
King. 6. 25.
looked for no other, but that he and all that he had, must be at the pleasure
of another man. And Jerusalem was so overwhelmed with griefs, that she Lam. 1.
12.
was driven to complain, that no sorrow was like her sorrow: when yet before
she had been the beauty of the whole world. These difficulties, as I have said,
with many other both mentioned in Scripture, and seen in experience, may fall
out in our lives, so that we shall be driven to cry out every one of his own
burdens, what shall I do? yea, and it may be an innocent man's case, to be
brought into such straits, and his, who is godly, and he shall not be able to
avoid it till God send help. As for the wicked, such streights come upon them,
as an armed man upon a naked.

Now seeing God has such vantage of us thereby, and that throughout this
present life, and may most justly inflict them upon us, (that I say no more) oh
what cause have we to make precious use hereof? for the which cause in so
necessary a matter, I think good to set down some uses thereof to the Use 1.
Reader: And first this is one, that we should every day (which is a part of
our journey home) as often as we find it so, acknowledge with admiration, Gods
goodness in that he spares and freeth us from such streights, and not only
so, but also from so many great calamities and casualties as we are kept from,
and much more, if our life be freed from smaller afflictions also, but most of
all if we be laden with his benefits. Which I speak to the just reproof of
such as having their part in all these, yet pass over all blockishlie Psalm
68. 19.
and unthankfully, but if some cross befalls them, then they break out against
God impatiently and brutishly. Secondly, make we this use of it, that seeing
Use 2.
we are all subject hereto, and by our just deserts be always in danger and
fear to be thus abased; therefore to be humbled, and prepare our selves daily
for them, and as Job did, to look for our change. Thirdly, we have little need
Use 3. Note. Luke 9. 23.
to trouble our selves with an ill conscience any manner of way, and so to
procure needles sorrow, if we be daily in danger of so great vexations. And
lastly, set we little by the best things here, they being subject to a thousand
Use 4.
changes, but lay we up treasure for our selves, that shall never fade nor be
taken from us. And to them that object upon this, that seeing we may fall into
so many and great streights, what prerogative have the righteous, and what
shall they do, living in such an estate as well as other? I say, let them
trust in God and fear him, that so it may be well with them, as he has
promised Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
it shall, and so doing, he will keep many such calamities from them, and give
them deliverance out of many such difficulties; and turn those that abide upon
them, to their singular benefit and good, or receive them unto glory, when
others in the mean while shall be at their wits end with Psalm. 3. 25.
the strangeness of their plagues, or, which is much worse, be cast into
hell. This we have to learn by occasion of the man: Now of the spies.

The spies offered him kindness, if he would show them the way into the city:
in that they dealt kindly with him, rather then roughly and cruelly, Doct. 2.
seeking such a matter at his hands, they did as became them. But he being one
of the cursed nations, how could they (ye will ask) promise him mercy?
Objection.
for though they did so to Rahab before, yet she turned to their religion: and
so did the Gibeonites serve them as bondmen, and embraced their religion also.
But no such thing can be said of this man, for he went unto the Hittites, out
of the seven cursed nations, and dwelt there. I answer: we must Answer.
interpret the laws of God against the Canaanites, and concerning the rooting
them out, by mitigating them with this equity, that if they made peace with
Israel, they should not root them out. And this appears by that which is
written in Joshua, that these nations were rooted out, seeing none of Josh. 11.
19.
them save the Gibeonites, made peace with the Hebrews.

And this being so, teaches all men to deal even with the bad kindly, and to
be harmless toward them. And though they be of them who have deserved
punishment (as this man of the city Bethel might by as good right have been
put to the sword as the rest in the city, until he yielded himself) yet for
as much as they be in misery they are to be pitied, unless their facts be
horrible and beyond the course of common trespasses, in which case they must be
punished by authority accordingly: for in so dealing with them, there is hope
that their hearts may be mollified, and they in time be brought to repentance:
whereas by rigor and rough handling of them they will (questionless) be
hardened. And if they fall into the Magistrates hand, and must needs for their
fault be put to death; it is enough that they have that inflicted upon them
which is their due, though they be not pursued with cruelty also. Ioshuas
dealing with Achan, who yet for his trespass must be put to death, may be a
pattern for all men, to teach them to avoid cruelty, Josh. 7. 19.
and to show kindness and mercy to such as be in misery. Thus he says,
when his sin was found out against him, My son give glory to the God of
Israel, and make thy confession to him, and show me now what thou have done.
And as Ioshuas example, for his loving dealing toward the offender: Achan, is
to be highly commended: so the contrary is as odious in the Priests and Jews:
for when they had gotten that which they sought at Pilats hands, to have our
Savior, against all law, to be condemned, they were not content with that, but
most cruelly and despitefully handled him with mocks, and taunts, and all
disgrace that might be: But it was as good as might be looked for at their
hands.

But while I am minding this matter of dealing kindly and mercifully with the
afflicted, it comes to my remembrance, among many other things justly to be
wailed, how lamentable the estate of malefactors is in some places at least in
this land: as they are miserable throughout their whole life, so especially at
their death they are most of all, seeing that, after they be condemned, that
they go to execution without any means to bring them to conscience of their
wicked lives, fear of the judgment to come, and to some knowledge and hope of
eternal life: whereas, if it pleased those which are in authority, some fit
Minister of God might be appointed to take them in hand after they be adjudged
to die. I will not say what good might be done to the poor prisoners thereby.
But for mine own part, when I was young, and able to travel, I did that duty
myself ofttimes in compassion of their misery, and saw blessing on my labors;
and the word which I preached to them, in that little time which they had to
prepare themselves, I saw it (I say) to be apparently blessed of God, to my
great contentment and comfort, and good hope of them. I remember well, that at
sundry times, that though I was but a stranger to them, yet after that I had
through Gods blessing brought them to see their damnable and miserable estate
by means of their sin, and had showed them, that even then they were nearest
mercy, I was received of them with great liking, especially after they had
tasted of the glad tidings of the Gospel to quiet and comfort their heavy
hearts. Yea, I may truly say, as I did clearly see, I was to them more then
their own father could have been unto them, for the message brought unto them.

And beside this that I have said of them, the like meditation unto this, I had
of the estate of many people in the land, who run as swiftly to hell as the
other; through ignorance (most falsely called the mother of devotion, but
rather the mother of all mischief and confusion) also profaneness, and other
gross sins, though not so liable to the law of man to be punished as the
other. These are also without a Minister that is able and willing to lead them
a better way: who, if they had such means as might convert them to God, and
that they who are such good instruments, might be encouraged and backed in
their laboring to reclaim them, they should have cause to give God great
thanks, and the persons also, by whom they be so well instructed and comforted.
But if I should here bewail all such also, as being taught yet are little the
better; as I cannot choose but pity them, seeing the Gospel is hidden from
them, and therefore they dying so, shall most certainly perish; I say, if I
should bewail these, how far should my complaint reach? I shut up this point
therefore, co^cluding thus, Oh that there were not so much hardness of heart in
many Ministers and others, who might help this, wishing that they had a little
of the compassion that was in our Savior, as the Evangelist records, when he
saw the people dispersed, as sheep without a shepherd. Matthew. 9. last.
And again, Oh that we could deal pitifully, kindly, and lovingly with the
miserable and the afflicted; and that all the gentlest means were used to
reclaim offenders, of whom there is hope, such as are as this man of Bethel
was, in great distress, which is not done but very rarely, and therefore is
there much hardness of heart, in those to whom it is neglected, and
wilfulness, that carries them to all profaneness and impenitencie.

And thus (to return to the spies again) seeing it has been proved that
Doct. 3. ver. 24.
they did not unlawfully in saving this Bethelite alive, the most that can be
said of their so doing, could be but an inconvenience (seeing he gave no token
that he turned to their religion,) for ought that we can see) and yet this was
a smaller inconvenience then if they had killed him, and so to have been put to
their shifts how to have found the secret way that led into the city: this
also teaches us a good point, that when we see in attempting of our lawful
business and labors, that some inconvenience must needs be borne, that which
is lesser of two, if it be without sin, is to be gone under: that so we may
avoid that which is greater. For want of which consideration, and due regard of
that which I say, while men stand at the smaller, to avoid that, they run
into a greater, if not into sin itself. As in many instances it may be
showed; and this among other, may be one. Many a man will not make others
privy to some of his dealings, being such as may bring him in good commodie:
and this he forbeares to do, only for that he would not have the commodity
and benefit that he reapeth thereby, to be known to any other, which were not
so great an inconvenience, if it were known to some faithful friend. And what
falls out in the mean while thereby? even this, which is much greater: that
for want of skill how to use that dealing or traffic aright, and in the best
manner (which by the help of some wise friend he might have learned) he
loses a great part of his commodity, which he might have inioyed; yea, and
thereby falls to offend God by impatience and murmuring, when he sees that he
comes short of his expectation and hope. So many a man falling upon thieves,
in a desperate mood, refuses to yield his money, though he be unable to
resist, and so loses both money and life too. And so do many refuse, through
stomach, to agree with their obstinate adversary, because they are loath to
lose and forgo any thing. Whereas by standing out with him to the utmost, they
forgo not a little, but ten times the value.

Much like to that which many do about their bodily health. They doubt at
least, if they know not also, that some sore disease is breeding in them, yet
will they not consult with some experienced Physician. And why? I say, to avoid
some inconvenience, as the taking of physic, which is nothing pleasant to
them, or to save charges, or because they would not lose any time in following
their profits. And what falls out thereby in the mean while? even this, that
a greater inconvenience meets them: so that for the avoiding of that which
was but small, they lose both profit, and life also. This thing is the more to
be regarded, because we see by experience that commodities are so mixed with
discommodities, that in things indifferent, the one goes not without the
other. This is true, as in all comforts of this life, so particularly in
marriage: and that as well in going about it, as living in it. For the first,
many to avoid the troubles of the married estate, which is the smaller; are put
to many inconveniences; as to live in unquietness and coffeehouse, and by
unsettledness in a single estate to fall to fornication, (that I say no more)
which will prove to be far greater. Many again resolves by marrying, (if
they can make themselves great thereby) to shun a mean and low estate in
poverty, and think, if they can do so, they shall be void of trouble, and
yet while they look no further, they weary themselves with many more sore and
dangerouser troubles; though marriage be lawful, yet such an attempting of it,
is not good. Again, by this rule among married couples, the one party should
yield to the other without too much rigor and austcritie, or contending in a
thing indifferent: the husband in giving liberty to the wife to speak when
there is cause; to visit friends; to take use of some commodities to her own
behoof and benefit, rather then to deny them, because they fear some
inconvenience may come thereby; when yet it is certain, there shall far
greater be seen to fall out by doing otherwise. And so in all other dealings:
if all inconveniences cannot be shunned, yet let us be sure, by labor, prayer
and godly wisdom, to avoid the hardest. And one special good use of this
doctrine, is, that we take heed, we be not too ready to judge our neighbor
for bearing with some inconveniences, (as we are too forward and too ready to
do) when they must do it to free themselves of greater; and in so doing we
condemn our selves, seeing we our selves are subject to the same doctrine
also. For what have we to do to judge our brother in such a case; who if he
have sustained an inconvenience, we may well think, he has done it, to him a
greater. This also condemns them, who, if they be a little crossed with some
hard accident, do by and by grow desperate, and make the rent greater by their
rashness and impatience, etc. scorning to stoop to the necessity which God
has laid upon them, and not wisely declining extremity. Though they cannot
avoid the inconvenience befalne them, yet they should shun the sin of
murmuring which is greater, for else they bear the burden of both. But I
cannot go through this story at this time; I will therefore here cut off.

THE EIGHTH SERMON UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
IT follows further about this Bethlite, (for it is to good Verse. 25. A
question.
purpose) to enquire here, whether this man did well in betraying the city,
and what is lawful in the like case. For as concerning the spies, no question
is to be made of their drawing the man to it, whether they did well or no; for
it was their work assigned them of God to destroy Answer
those nations, and therefore to use the means in going about it. So was it
also lawful for him to do it, they signifying to him what Gods will was in that
behalf. But whether the man believed that, and therefore whether he did it in
faith, or to save his life, and his friends and goods, it is uncertain. The
first is more possible, then probable, to have been the cause that drew him to
do it; but the last is most likely; yet we may not determine which, except
the Lord went before us: therefore according thereto was his act good and
commendable in him, or otherwise. Now for us, the case stands far
otherwise, then it did with him. For it is Doct. ve. s. 25.
not lawful for us to yield to any such thing as he did, in betraying the
city, but odious and horrible. The Lord Jesus speaking of the like matter, as a
thing most monstrous to attempt or go about. He says, many shall hate and
betray one another: a fearful thing to hear, much more for one to do it to
Matthew. 24. 10.
a whole City.

Nay all bitter violence and cruelty is odious in us one toward another,
simply, and without all respects; much more when it shall be done for gain or
preferment. No, neither is it any way tolerable for the saving of ones own
life. We must in all these cases, have our discharges and warrant from God, for
that which we do; as Rahab had for hiding the spies: which we Josh. 6. 25.
having Scriptures most clearly to direct us in all our actions, no such
thing, from what example soever, is to be followed of us in these days.
Neither is the fact of Joel in killing Sisera, nor the Israelites borrowing and
carrying away Judge. 5. 24. Exodus 12. 35.
of the Egyptians treasures, any thing to imbolden us to do the like: she
doing it against Gods enemies the Canaanites; they doing that which they did by
the Lords appointment. In a word, to do any evil that good may come of it, is
odious.

Lastly, out of these two verses it is good for us to mark, in that this poor
Doct. 2.
Bethlite was the instrument of taking the city; what poor means and helps
God oftentimes ministers, for the effecting of that which he commands to be
done; yea though the work be great, and the means weak and unlikely to bring
such a matter to pass, it skilleth not. Both these things may be seen, both
in stirring up and preparing that silly woman in Ioshuas time, to receive and
lodge the spies, whom he sent to view Jericho before they took it, as also by
blowing trumpets of Rams horns, and Josh 6. 16. etc.
by compassing of the city Jericho seven times, to make the walls of it to
fall down. Who sees not that these were poor engines to batter walls? and
also to give this Bethlite into the hands of these spies, that they might by
his help easily take the city? For when God will have a work to be brought to
pass, he appoints the means also for the same purpose; which being always
known to him, but seldom to us ordinarily, till we meet with them (not by
chance, but by his will and appointment) it does often take heart from us, and
much dismay us from cheerful going about that which we are commanded, so
weak is our faith, when with unbelieving Thomas we do not see and behold
with bodily eyes the means which are yet sufficient and at hand through Gods
promise.

So much the more it behooves us to be well acquainted with that which is
taught us here: for it is a singular encouragement to us, (we being so weak)
when we have an hard labor laid upon us, and we see no means to bring it to
pass, to know (yet) that God will provide help, though we see not how; as he
did provide a sacrifice for Abraham to offer in stead of Isaac. Indeed, if he
should deal with us as Pharaoh did with the Israelites Genesis 22. 8.
(who enjoined them an hard task, and great work, but yet they must make
shift how to effect it, (which was impossible for them to do) then it were no
marvel if we were pensive, and at our wits end what to do. But (God be
thanked) if we can believe him, that he will make it easy, and provide
accordingly; most cheerfully may we be occupied, from day to day, in all that
by Gods Commandment we set our hand unto. This caused the Apostle Paul to be
so diligent and unwearied in bringing so many nations Act. from 13. 10 21. chap.
by his preaching, to embrace the Gospel, and salvation thereby; when yet
there were so many and great discouragements in his way.

This caused those worthy servants of God, Zorobabell, Ezra, and Nehemiah,
Nehem. 2. 17.
not only to return into Judea; but to build both the city up again, being
greatly ruinated; and even the walls thereof, and also the Temple; when having
commandment from God so to do, they believed that he would show them how,
and be with them, to enable them, though we are not ignorant, how many blocks
and maine enemies there were in their way to hinder them. And we have no other
stay to look for the promised salvation, but this, that he that has
commanded us to live by faith, and wait by hope, will find means to bring it
to pass, although we see little how, many times; in so much that we often fear
and doubt, it being the waightiest case of all other; even as Saint Peter also
says, that the righteous are scarcely saved. And even so, the laboring man,
and the Artificer could never be vpholden 1. Pet. 4. 18.
to follow their calling with any peace, if they should look only how hardly
they are like to be maintain, and should not stay themselves by faith, that
God will provide for them, they themselves not being negligent. And be this the
stay of us all, in our hardest condition wherein we be set by God, that he
will bring us through, though we see not how, and that also in good sort,
because he has promised.

Now it remains, that we see how well this man was rewarded that did Verse. 26.
help forward Gods people in their work, to the destroying of his enemies, by
showing them the way into the city, though it be not set down with what mind
he did it. Thus they dealt with him: they did not only set him free, and his
whole family, from the destruction that lighted upon the other citizens, but
they did also suffer him to carry away his wealth: yea and so greatly enriched
him, that he was able to go build a city. And by this we see, that such as
be helpers and friends to Gods people, never loose their reward: as Rahabs
example and the Kenites do most clearly Josh 6 24.
prove and declare. A notable encouragement both to Gods people, to know that
the Lord so cares for them, that he will cause many, even of the wicked, 1.
Sam. 15 6.
to be friends to them, and helpefull: and it is no less comfort to them Prou.
16. 7.
that are so affected to them, they may be sure they shall not lose their
labor, but be well rewarded. And so much the more we ought to be quickened
by this doctrine, seeing Gods people have many and strong enemies in this
world, and they themselves are weak and soon discouraged. And this is a great
refreshing to them, when they have promise of such helps, as whereby their but
then is made easy. And the Lord has said much in his word to the
encouragement of both; and therefore the Psalmist speaking of Jerusalem Gods
people, says. Let them prosper that love thee. Psalm. 122. 6.
And to Abraham the father of believers (which alike is spoken to all that are
believers, as Abraham was) thus he says; I will bless them that bless thee,
and curse them that curse thee. So that as Ahab was spared, insomuch that the
Genesis 11. 35.
plague threatened came not in his days, but in his sons, because he
repented, and yet it was but outwardly, wherein he gave but a bare show of it,
even so, they that do to his people any good, though it be but in an outward
action, as this Bethlite did here to the Lords people, shall not lose their
reward.

It is true indeed, that this but temporary for the most part, which they
receive, as the help that they minister to them is so: but besides that it is
much that God will regard them at all, who are not faithful to him (for they
might fear rather the contrary, that he would pursue them as his enemies)
because they be not repentant: besides this (I say) they get acquaintance with
the godly hereby ofttimes, whereby they be in hope, that they Note.
shall learn their religion, and follow their conversation, which if they so
like and approve of, that they love them the better for it, then do they gain
exceedingly by it indeed, I mean by that friendship that they show them. For
then they come within the compass of a better blessing, and are partakers of a
greater promise, even that in the Gospel; Whosoever receives a Prophet,
Matthew. 10. 41.
in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward: and he that
receives a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, (that is, for his
goodness, and because he is a good man) shall have the reward of a righteous
man also.

This ought for just cause to astonish and terrify them who are professed
enemies to them because they walk uprightly, and hate none more deadly; 1 Ioh
2. 12. Prou. 29 27.
according to the prouer be; The righteous is an abomination to the wicked.

This ought also to draw the hearts of the common sort who profess religion,
better to regard Gods people, and not to be more brutish then the Hest. 8. 17.
heathen nations who feared Israel, seeing they saw God was with them, yea and
let them while they live among them observe their example, and profit by them,
as they in the Acts. 9. 31. If they will say they know not Act. 9. 31.
who they are; I answer, that they speak untruly; for in the time of their
own affliction and misery, they can discern and do know them, and will ask
for them; although at other times they are thought of them to be too precise
and devout, and call them Scripture-men in contempt; yea even such as against
whom they will set themselves: to these therefore, if they will show that they
be wise indeed, let them adioyne themselves, and make much of them, till they
verify the Scripture; the Lamb and the Lion shall feed together: for if God
in their trouble and abasement have given them Esa. 11.
understanding and discretion to know them, and afterward they make no more
reckoning nor account of them; they cannot be ignorant that they have done
wickedly, and are able to see what they do in casting them off. And let them
be sure, that their sin will find them out in time, and the Lord Numb. 30.
will cast off them, for that they have dealt so with them. But much more if
they or others begin to smite them with their tongue, and to kick at them, and
disgrace them. This be said of the house of Joseph jointly. It follows in
the text.

VERSE. 27. Neither did Manasses destroy Bethshean with her towns, nor Taanach
with her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor with her towns, nor the
inhabitants of Ibleam with her towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo with her
towns, but the Canaanites dwelt still in that land.

28. Nevertheless when Israel was strong, they put the Caananites to tribute,
and expelled them not wholly.

29. Likewise Ephraim expelled not the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer, but the
Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.

30. Neither did Zebulon expel the Canaanites that dwelt in Kitron, nor the
inhabitants of Nahalol, but the Canaanites dwelt among them and became
tributaries.

31. Neither did Asher cast out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants
of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Ach zib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of
Rehob.

32. But the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites the inhabitants of the land:
for they did not drive them out.

33. Neither did Napthali drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, nor the
inhabitants of Bethanath, but dwelt among the Canaanites the inhabitants of the
land: nevertheless the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and Bethanah became
tributaries unto them.

IN these verses the holy story lays out the sin of the other Israelites
The sense.
beside Benjamin, for that they cast not out, nor destroyed not those
Canaanites which dwelt in their several lots, according to the commandment of
God, but only made them tributaries to them. And before all the rest the tribe
of Manasse is reckoned to have done so. But whereas it is said in Joshua, that
this tribe did then so, that is, make them tributaries then: it is not Josh.
17. 12.
so to be understood, but that is said there by an anticipation; that is, by
setting down that before, which came to pass afterward. For that was
afterward to come to pass, that is, at this time here mentioned, which was
after Ioshuas death. For in the days of Joshua, and of the Elders that lived
with Josh. 24. 31.
him, the people contained themselves, and did their duties in resisting their
enemies, by his worthy conducting and going before them. And by this their
departing from the commandment of the Lord, which for a time they obeyed, we
see how they declined in a short time and waxed weary of obeying.

The which, and namely in so many of them, teaches, how ready men Doct. Out of
all these verses in general.
are to leave and forsake a good course, although they have hardly, and with
much ado, been brought to embrace and fasten upon it; which much concerns us
to mark. For we are easily deceived about this, and think both of our selves
and others, that if we begin to dislike, and turn away from some gross and
common faults that we were wont to commit; then the worst is past with us, and
that we ought justly to be reckoned among the godly; whereas it is nothing
so, but we be yet, for all that, far off. For a Note.
far greater matter is required to the endeavor effectual calling to
repentance may be approved of God, and be sound indeed, as in other places I
have showed, how we ought to try and search into our selves, and cannot Luke
14. 31. Lam. 3. 40.
now stand about it.

But although we were truly turned to God, and had, as these, obeyed God for a
time with a good heart, yet ought we to fear danger, in respect of our own
frailty, and according to the present occasion, when we see to what point
these tribes came, for all they had followed the Lord commendably for a time,
in beginning to cast out the nations as they were commanded. And the reason of
this, to wit that we should thus carefully look to our selves, is this, that
we are reformed but in part, and that in small part: in which respect yet,
because we have received some grace, we are able thereby to desire and go
about to do God some service, and specially at some time; namely, while we be
watchful to hold under our rebellious passions, assisted by grace: but what
then? For we having a sea of corruption ever flowing in us, and our own
concupiscence beside outward objects enticing us a contrary way; it must be
drained and purged out daily, by little and little, Note.
and not be let alone in us, lest it should choke and drown the grace that
we have received; which if it be, we become impotent by and by, so that we
do not only cease to obey, but we are carried rather as with a stream to
any evil that we be tempted to; and namely, to this one here mentioned that
ouertooke these tribes; that is, to be weary of well doing: and so much the
rather, seeing there are so many allurements and occasions in every place to
provoke us and set us forward.

And although we are not without help, nor naked in the midst of all these
storms, yet if we know not these things; yea and if also we do not resist
carefully such evil as I have mentioned; neither strive to nourish such
sparkles of grace as are kindled in us, our hearts being set wholly hereupon,
as the waightiest thing that we have to deal in; what marvel is it, though
we fall from the goodness that was wrought and begun in us, and so become
Note.
others then we were before? Which I speak not as though we must do nothing
but watch and resist some one or few inticements which would (I grant) soon
wax tedious to us; neither is that imposed upon us by God, but we are to know,
that while we be aiming at one good thing or other, our work goes well
forward, so as we do wisely labor to discern among good things, what the
best is, and most necessary to be done for the time, and what sin and
corruption is most to be resisted. Thus I have stood somewhat long in this
point, to show how easily we may possibly fall from our steadfastness in a good
course, and what care should be in us against the contrary; which I entered
into (as ye may remember) by so good an occasion of the coldness and declining
of the tribes from the known commandment.

Now I will go forward, as my purpose was, to show somewhat more particularly,
how we use to decline, and break off good beginnings; even as these tribes
did, who began well to execute Gods commandment for a season, in rooting out
his enemies, but went not forward. And this let us see in some sort, both in
our selves and also toward others. For the first, we cannot be ignorant that
many of us of good hope have sometimes carefully searched into our selves, to
find out such corruptions of our hearts as have Lam. 3. 40.
brought our whole lives out of frame: and therein we have done God good
service; and when we have found them out, as carelessness, slothfulness,
unclean desires, and worldliness, etc. we have had them in the chase, Note.
and hunted them, with disgracing them, watching and praying heartily against
Matthew. 26. 41.
them for a time. This also has been another piece of good service done unto
the Lord: but our not being always alike forward, but neglecting care (as
through corruption and untowardness it will soon come to pass) and the use
of good means, or our feruency therein. Oh how have we drooped and hanged the
wing; yea and if more speedy heed has not been taken, how near have we been
brought to this bondage, to be well content to let these and such like our
sins to be quiet in us, without any great pursuit, or offering of any great
violence to them, till they have recovered some strength in us again, and
prevailed, and begun in most unseemly manner to master us, and bring forth
noisome fruit, even like themselves; as the Canaanites did grow strong and
mighty against Israel, when they were not held down as God required, but
suffered to live and be let alone?

But to proceed no further in this, if these noisome weeds be not plucked up,
how can good seed bring forth her fruit, (for all may easily see what
follows, seeing the roof must needs totter if the ground-sels be plucked
away) therefore if we slothfully suffer ourselves to grow to this point, who
sees not that we offend God as sore, and as grievously provoke him to
displeasure by such disobedience, as these tribes did by making a league with
the Canaanites, and not expelling them as they began, and should still have
done? For the transgression is alike in both, and that of one and the same
commandments, while they ought to have rooted out persons out of the land, and
we sins out of our hearts and lives. Thus I have showed how like we are to
the Canaanites in suffering sins in ourselves, which should have been rooted
out rather: now let us also see it in some particular manner how we be too like
them in our dealings toward others.

For even as they failed in suffering the Canaanites to remain amongst them,
and did not expel them; so do we suffer them who are little better then
Canaanites in their behavior and manners to abide therein, till they A simile.
corrupt and taint them that dwell among them; as if an infection were
dispersed round about to poison men's bodies. The people of Israel set
themselves to seek their own quietness and ease (though they broke the
commandment of God) in letting the Canaanites live still, and abide in the
land. And to this point things are come in our days, that whatsoever God
command to be done, and good and wholesome laws enjoin against many foul
sins, yet if the executing of them require labor and any cost, and it bring
any toil and trouble, and hinder men's ease and profit; behold, a Lion is in
the way; they will not at all take them in hand; or if they Prou. 22. 13.
have begun, they soon wax weary of the work, and give it over (never
enjoying Gods promise to harten them to the obeying of his commandments, but
yielding to their own corrupt reason) so that there is little rooting out of
grievous disorders and lewdness of life, in town, country, or family: as
whoring, drunkenness, gaming, ill companies, and such like: and as little
pursuing of the persons that disguise themselves therewith, either in Church or
Commonwealth. And this was a greater fault in these tribes to let the
Canaanites remain, and not expel them; because they were strong enough to
have done it; and stronger by much then they on whom they should have executed
Gods charge: for so it is said, verse 28. When Israel waxed strong, yet did
they not expel them wholly, but only put them to tribute. So this aggrauateth
the sin of our time, forasmuch as Note.
God has given authority into men's hands to remove such disorders, and greater
gifts of knowledge and ability to ouermatch such evils as he would have to be
rooted out, and yet there wants zeal, and courage to go about it. And
though things shall never be brought to that perfection that were to be
wished, yet much might be done that is utterly neglected. This be said and
noted out of all the verses in general, and of all the tribes mentioned
therein.

Now more particularly, somewhat is to be said of Manasse and Ephraim: who did
not alike behave themselves when they were severed, as when Verse. 27. 28. 39.
they were joined together: then they went the one with the other roundly to
the work, and prospered: but now they being divided, they were Doct. out of
verse. 27. 28. compared with the former, from verse. 22. to 27.
backward and slothful, and so let the Canaanites grow and multiply. That
which I will observe here is this: That we look heedfully to this, that we
make much of godly society, and labor to enjoy it therefore, and to take all
the good that we may by it. For we have much encouragement thereby, whatsoever
good we go about, wherein it may be used. For as the Wise man says; Two are
better then one; if one lie alone, how should he be warm? And Eccles. 4. 11.
so many good persons being joined together in a good work, (like firebrands
in a chimney, that give a glowing heat when they are laid together, when one
alone soon goes out) one is refreshed, helped, hartened, A simile.
and comforted by the other; according to the kind of work which they take in
hand: and so one alone is much weakened, made heavy, and soon discouraged. As
Moses his hands failed against Amalek, till Aaron and Hur propped them up. But
Moses and Aanon, Caleb and Ioshuah; David and Jonathan, and so much more many
together, as their employment required, who doubts but that they did much
more roundly and readily dispatch the work appointed them of God, then if they
had been disioyned and asunder? Therefore doubtless, where both, if there be
no more, or many are sound hearted in several to God and his worship, and like
minded and upright hearted each to other, the Lord is doubly honored, the
Gospel graced, even in the eyes of the wicked; the adversary stronglier
resisted by their united force; besides the strengthening one the others hands
in the way to happiness.

And therefore the public assemblies of the faithful have great force to
quicken and to comfort the people of God, in the seeing the faces of one
another, all being present together to meet the Lord there; far otherwise
then one alone can find it, though he be well minded also, and enjoys no
such benefit of the ministry at all, unless it can be no otherwise. Even so
Christian fellowship in private betwixt the people of God, for their mutual
edifying and comfort, as they have opportunity to enjoy it, is many ways
gainefull. And though solitariness has also her kind and sweet use; and
though there is a time to be alone, when a man desires it, who is fit to use
it; yet to be tied to it, or (which is worse) to be in bad company every
while, it is such an uncomfortable estate, that if it were not for employment
in their particular calling, wherein they may bestow their chief time, they
Note.
should make their life merely tedious and wearisome. Therefore I marvel, that
godly fellowship and acquaintance is no more sought and made account of; nor
the communion of Saints (which is but one fruit of the Gospel) in no heartier
and greater request, nor no better use made of it where it is enjoined; but
broken off among some, by every light and small conceit, teatch, or sinister
report and slander, and by such like occasions. And seeing I have spoken this
of fellowship, one thing I have thought good to add, and that is: if it be
possible let a wise Christian be never to seek of some one faithful friend
at the least, to whom he may break his mind in Note.
all doubtful cases, and communicate with him about necessary matters, and who
may be to him as an eye to watch over him, and as another himself to comfort
him.

Let this suffice to show what a benefit Christian society and godly fellowship
is many ways, to them that can rightly use it; according to the words of the
Psalmist, Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is, brethren to dwell Psalm.
133.
together in unity: and what danger and discouragements there arise in the
private condition; where no help by Christian communion of neighbors is
enjoined; and therefore what heed is to be taken therein that such a band be not
broken where it is, and where none is, that it be speedily (as may be) sought
and procured: that for want of advice, fellowship and good company, so many
ways requisite, men be not plunged into depth of troubles, both in matters of
soul, and in things of this life; many of the which might easily have been
avoided.

Now it follows, which I will defer to the next Sermon.

THE NINTH SERMON UPON THE FIRST AND SECOND CHAPTERS OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
VERSE. 30. Neither did Zebulon expel, etc. as before to verse. 34. VERSE. 34.
And the Ammorites drove the children of Dan into the mountain, so that they
suffered them not to come down to the valley. VERSE. 35. And the Ammorites
dwelt still in Mount Here Is in Aijlon, and in Shaalbim, and when the hand of
Joseph's family prevailed, they became tributaries. VERSE. 36. And the coast of
the Amorites was from Maaleh-akeabim, even from Selah, and upward.
NOw it follows. From this 30. verse, to the 34. the holy Verse. 30.
Story sets down particularly, how the tribes of Zebulon, Ashur and
Naphtali, did even as the other tribes before mentioned, of Benjamin, Manasse,
and Ephraim; that they let those Canaanites live still among them, and did only
put them to tribute. Wherein to see the agreement that was in this sin
betwixt them and the other, it is worthy the noting, and may be of singular
use unto us. For they did as if they had consented together, one to do as the
other did, (whereas they could (yet) but hear one of an others doing) they did
(I say) even as the other before mentioned, for their ease and quiet, make
leagues with the Canaanites, contrary to that which God commanded them. Which
shows us, that it is the less marvel that we see it so in our age, and that
it has been Doct. 1.
so from age to age, that there is agreement in finne among all estates, yea in
the same sin, as if they did mutually resolve to join therein. For Paul 2.
Tim. 3. 1.
speaking of gross sins which should reign in the world, in the latter age
after Christ, tells us, that the times, that is, the people in the several
ages, should be tainted therewith. And as it was in the days of Lot, so shall
it be in the ages following; they did eat and drink, and marry; that is,
they made them their paradise. And as they have done, and lived in former
times, so they do, and will do, still. And as they sought their Matthew. 24. 37.
felicity and hearts desire here in some transitory things; as in gathering
wealth, hunting after vain pleasures, and seeking of promotion: even so, this
do many at this day, who profess the Gospel, and yet this is the estate of
the ciuiler sort; there are greater abominations then these: the way of truth
they have not known; the fear of God has not been before their eyes; but is
this done in one place as in another, ye will ask, as the sin here spoken
of, was alike spread throughout the tribes? I answer; never more then at this
day. Therefore when the meaner sort received not the word with fruit, I turned
(says the Ppophet Jeremy) to the mighty, to the learned, to the Priest, etc.
as declaring that he looked to find it otherwise Ier. 4.
there; but behold, all were alike.

So is it said by our Savior, as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be
at the coming of the son of man, and (as he says) in the latter age,
whereof this in which we live is a part, they did then eat and drink, marry,
and give in marriage, (these were things what they did then most mind and set
their hearts on, and knew nothing of any danger) till the flood came and took
them all away. And what do men now, or have done in our remembrance in the
former days, but even so, and the same things? What pleasure have men, save in
eating and drinking, and following after their delights? and as the tribes did,
for their ease and pleasure commit sin, every one his own way: so what do
men, but every one that which does best serve his own turn. What effectual
and saving knowledge of God is there to be found, save only here and therein a
few persons? and generally the Gospel is a mystery, Note.
and the pearl in it is hidden from one, as from another, though it be hidden
from none but from them that shall perish. What excessive and insatiable
seeking 2. Cor. 4. 3.
after the worlds good is there, as in other ages? what bold profaning of the
Lords Sabbaths, when yet he has plainly charged us the contrary, saying:
Remember ye keep them holy? And what should I further set down other
agreements betwixt men in their lives and practice, whether we compare our
days with the former, or in the same days one man with another? And yet one
would think that the examples of former times should teach the latter
wisdom. That seeing they who now live may behold, how they have been taken
away, and that often times in the midst of their delights, and could keep
themselves from death no more then others; therefore it ought worthily to cause
them to look further, and to prepare a better, and a more enduring inheritance
against they must go hence. But to grow to an end; seeing it is so that the
world is like itself, and the sins of it have entertainment alike for the
most part, with one as with another, I will show the cause of it why it is so,
and teach the use of it before I end. (For besides the devils malice, who
rules alike in the hearts of the children of darkness, and draws them to the
same evils, in the most places) besides this, I say, all men are corrupted in
their hearts, imaginations, and desires: Gal. 5. 19. Genesis 6. 5.
they all love evil, and loath that which I good. Whereby it comes to pass,
that the sins that one embraces, an other delights in also; having no
ability nor will to resist or turn from them, but drinks them up, as the
fish does water. And there is nothing able to make it otherwise but one: and
that is the grace of regeneration and new birth, which changes a man, and
gives him a new heart and will, whereby he disliketh the former inclination and
disposition that led and carried him amiss before. And hereby the
deceitfulness of his sinful heart being found out, he grows to be out of
love and liking with the desires which came from it, and consequently from the
uill words and actions that proceeded from it; and both minds and does the
contrary things. Thus he is, as we see, turned into an other course of life,
different from the men of the world. But because few light on this change, and
this grace enters not into many; but is resisted rather, and that in a deadly
manner, even when by sound preaching it is offered unto them; Note.
therefore they abide in the same estate wherein they were before, so that they
are not subject to the grace that should guide them, neither indeed can be.
Thus it comes to pass, that few being newborn, the most agree in the same
evil, to the which (the heart being alike disposed unto it) they are carried.

And whereas it will (perhaps) be objected, that the good nature that is in
many, more then in some others, and good education do put difference betwixt
men, as well as sanctification, and the changing of the nature of man; be it
known unto them, that the best nature is poisoned, and inclined Note.
to all sin, and has the seed thereof: and the best education, being not
seasoned with religion, can but work ciuility in a man; or (at the most)
restrain him from some outward and open wickedness; it cannot give him a new
heart, neither therefore make him a new creature. And I conclude with the use
of this doctrine, that all such as desire to be better guided then natural men
can be, must seriously labor to be acquainted with their hearts, searching out
by the Law of God, the depth of falsehood and evil that is in them, which is
great and much: and (as they are taught) bewail Ier. 17. 9.
it, as that which brings forth fruit unto death, till they obtain pardon
thereof, and of their other sins: with the which grace they receive will and
strength, though weakly, to live well, and to please God; yea and for the
obtaining of all these, let them attend to sincere preaching, not by fits, but
ordinarily and constantly as they may, and so God will draw them out of the
puddle in which other lie still, and work that grace in them, whereby they
shall be reformed to the image of Christ their head, and to the similitude of
the members of his body, which are all uniformly governed by the same spirit,
which works alike fruits in all. And this is the only way to come by it.
Gal. 5. 22. Iam. 3. 17.


But another thing is to be noted by these tribes beside, (which I have said
already, and that is, seeing they could not choose but hear one of another
Doct. 2.
what they did) how one was led by the example of the other. For though one
easily agree with another in evil (as I have said before) yet I cannot tell
how it comes to pass, that when we have example also from others of any bad
course, we are much more easily riueted into it thereby. Nay this example so
much prevails, that although we have Gods commandment never so plain to
the contrary, with threats annexed thereto, we boldly break through it, and
not only affect and commit the same, as in the former doctrine I said we do;
but we bear it down before us as it were a stream. It could not easily have
been thought that this people of Israel, one tribe after another, could (there
being so many of them) have sought their own ease, in making peace with the
other nations, having received so strait a commandment that they should
expel them: and yet they did so handle the matter among them, that it was as
it were utterly forgotten among them, and they grew to be confirmed in a
contrary course. But when one tribe had broke the ice to another in breaking
through the commandment, it became as a matter that lay dead, few looked after
it. So it would hardly have been thought, that Saphira could have been brought
to consent to the holding back of that sum of money which was consecrated to
so good and holy an use; which was by making a lie, and standing stiffly in it;
but when she knew her husbands mind, and had him to go before her therein, so
that he made no matter to commit such a trespass, she was emboldened to do
it also by his example.

Likewise, who would have said that well nigh the whole city of Samaria should
have been drawn to receive Simon Magus his sorceries? but after that some had
begun, and there was none to reprove and shame them for it, the rest fell to
it, having such examples before them. And a man would wonder to see how such
clear and straight charges as God has given to men, of departing from
iniquity, and of not following the multitude to do evil, should Exodus 23. 2.
be so trodden under foot, and cast behind men's backs. Ministers are commanded
Ioh. 21. 15.
as they love Christ, they should feed his sheep, and his lambs: the people,
that they should give all diligence to make their calling and election 2. Pet.
1. 10. Eccles. 11. 9.
sure: young men not boldly take their pleasure, and spend their youth
licentiously: old men, that they should be patterns to the young in good life,
etc. But as if God might be mocked, hell agreed withal, and as if the
Scriptures that straitely urge these things, were an old wives fable, so they
are regarded. For what one of many, either Minister makes ever the more
conscience of zealous and diligent preaching; or how many of the other sorts
fear the commandment to depart from evil? It is enough to them that they
have others to go before them in the evils which they do. For even as sheep
and beasts follow the foremost rank, whithersoeuer it lead them, even so these
like beasts do. Thus by the seed of ill example sin increases, and
iniquity abounds in all places, till at length a confusion of all things
follow, in offices, duties, and estates both in Church and Commonwealth. And
the rather, if men see such go before them in evil as seem to have
excellency in any gifts, whereby they can maintain their sins; as by wealth,
learning, authority, or any such like. In which respect the sin of the tribe
of Judah was the greater, in that they believed not that God would enable them
to cast out the inhabitants of the valleys, seeing they had chariots of iron,
and so they becoming examples to their brethren therein; and being the
chiefest, though they had done commendably in expelling many other of them;
therefore the rest of the tribes thought their sin more tolerable, and made
the less of it, though they yet had not so good a pretense for their doings as
Judah had. But to return to our selves, we are to know, that it is great
boldness to follow bad examples, the damnation of such sleeps not. Let not
men be deceived, God has all these things and such like registered and written,
not with ink and paper, (for then there were hope that in time they might be
worn out) but in his remembrance, which never fails. If Paul wish that men
follow not his example (so rare a pattern of piety) further then he follows
Christ; what shall they have to answer, who look no further then to this,
that they see others do so, how odious soever their doings are? Let that serve
us for doctrine concerning examples, forasmuch as they that lead and towle us
on by their example, cannot help us to bear our punishment, when their own
shall be intolerable to them, seeing company shall not ease the torments of the
damned in hell; howsoever here they could join hand in hand to commit their
sin with pleasure and consent. And let us be so far from following others
in their doings, further then they follow the rule that should guide us all,
that our own light may so shine before men, that they may bless God for us,
and learn of us. So shall we show our selves wiser then these tribes, whose
sin we have seen laid open unto us, and be well fenced against all danger
by ill examples. The last verses in this chapter now follow

VERSE. 34. And the Amorites drove the children of Dan into the mountain; so
that they suffered them not to come down to the valley.

35. And the Amorites dwelt still in mount Here Is, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim,
and when the hand of Joseph's family prevailed, they became tributaries.

36. And the coast of the Amorites was from Maale-Akrabbim, even from Selah and
upward.

NOw in the shutting up of the chapter, the holy story brings in the The
sum.
tribe of Dan, showing that these Danites had not the liberty that the other
tribes had: for they yet had strength to expel the Canaanites that were in
their lot, and did not: these were couped up in a narrow room unto the
mountains, and yet were not suffered to possess them neither: but they were
not permitted at all to dwell in the valleys, but their enemies had them out,
and kept a great part of their possessions in their hands by force. So that we
see that the negligence of the other tribes in suffering the forbidden nations
to remain and wax strong; caused these their brethren to be wronged, and to
go without their due which God had allotted them: For if they had kept their
enemies out, they might have been able now to help this tribe of Dan: who if
the house of Joseph had not done more then the rest, they had been left almost
without habitation.

And by this we may see, that men's sins do not only redound to their Doct.
own hurt, but also to the hurt of others. Whereas none are hurt, neither
themselves, by those that fear to offend God, and be careful to do their
duties, but they may receive great benefit thereby. But the other hurt many, as
well as themselves. As we see bad parents, what woe they hoard up for their
unhappy children, as Ahab, and the like. What they do to themselves, this place
gives no occasion to show directly, but by consequent, but how other fear the
worse by them. And the same may be seen in many particulars among us also,
both touching body and soul. As first, how many souls does an ignorant, idle
or scandalous Minister destroy and cause to perish? How many good people does
an ungodly Magistrate grieve, discourage, and make faint in good duties, and
flesh the ungodly? as Solomon says; When the righteous are in authority, the
people rejoice; but when the Prou. 29. 2.
wicked bears rule, the people sigh. The riotous, ill company keepers, and
such as give ill counsel, how many do they spoil? as in the Epistle to the
Corinthians we read; where it is said, Evil words corrupt good manners. And
what discredit to the godly, and to the Gospel it self, hypocrites who
profess 1. Cor. 15. 33.
it, do bring, Saint Paul declares, speaking thus to the Jews; Thou that
teach another, and teach not thy self, causest the name of God to be
evil Romans 2. 21. 24.
spoken of: so that both when the Gospel is truly preached, and also practiced
of some, yet both are ill spoken of by the wicked, because of the offense that
hypocrites give. And generally the wicked are the causes of mischief and
punishment from God, upon the places where they live; causing the earth to
mourn, and be weary of the inhabitants, yea Gods children are of the worse
for their neighborhood, not only while they gather infection by them to their
souls; but they smart bodily also with them, and by them oftentimes in a
public calamity which their wicked lives have caused.

Further to give briefly some instances of this also, in the hurts that wicked
men do to others in things of this life (for it would be too long to show it at
large) what does the gamester, spendthrift, and the slothful person, but bring
all to naught, and undo his family, as well as bring himself to beggerie?
What does the oppressor and the usurer, in exacting that which is agreed upon
(how hardly soever it can be yielded) but fleece the borrower, till he makes
his skin to grow to his bones for want of flesh? How many cormorant-like rich
men do the like in other kinds, imposing rents upon their poor tenants,
which constrain them to labor for them only, in providing their due against
their day, and cannot maintain themselves so well as servants may and ought to
be? whereas God allows them to live, and be well maintained by their labor?
And other defraud the labourer of his wages, or pay what they list; and yet
Saint James says, Their cry is entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts. Oh!
it cannot be expressed, what are the discommodities and annoiances, which the
sins of men, and their wicked lives, do cause and bring upon others as well
as themselves (as the the tribes here wrought woe to their neighbors these
Danites) seeing all the plagues and mischiefs which are every where to be
found, are to be imputed unto them, to verify that which is written; Woe be
to the world, because of her iniquities. Iam 5. 4.
And this be said of the tribe of Dan and of all the rest.

Now there remains a question to be answered, and so I end the whole An
Object. Out of these verses of the second part. The Answ.
chapter. And the question is this; seeing the tribes dwelt with the
Canaanites, and took tribute of them, whether it be lawful for a godly man
to dwell and be conversant with the ungodly, as Papists, etc? I answer, that
seeing Christ kept company with the publicans and great sinners; and seeing
Saint Paul would not give leave to a believing wife to depart from an Matthew. 9.
10. 1. Cor. 7. 13.
unbelieving husband, if he will dwell with her; therefore it is not simply
unlawful to dwell with such: but if the godly be well settled in sound
knowledge, Certain cautions to be observed in companying with Papists, etc.
and strong in faith, so as they be not tied to communicate with them in their
false worship of God, they may: but yet with certain cautions. As first this,
that in companying with them, they intendand endeavor to persuade 1
them to sound religion, and that to this end they show themselves kind and
gentle, the better to draw them on. But if they be in fear and danger to be
drawn themselves, they ought to cut off such fellowship.

The second thing that they must take heed of, is; that they live
vnreproueably 2
and without just blame among them: for otherwise they shall do them hurt, and
harden them, rather then do them the least good. Thirdly, 3
they may not in the least matter under any color of friendship mix
themselves with them, either in their false opinions, or in worshipping God; no
not although they should hope thereby to draw them on the easier to embrace
Christ: as many hypocritical professors do, and thereby cover their
voluptuousness, covetousness, and profaneness; who should rather remember
this, that they may not do evil, that good may come of it. Lastly, they must
take heed that they seek not their own profit at their 4
hands by companying with the^; nor to take their pleasure in gaming and play
with them, whereby they bewraying their weakness (as impatience, greediesse
of gain, wrangling, or being immoderate in spending the time therein) they
should set them further back from embracing the Gospel. Therefore, if these
cautions be not regarded, and also if we have no hope to win them, we must
crave pardon, and leave them to God; having no more to do with them in that
familiar manner, further then of necessity which may possibly be, either on
our part, or on theirs; (as if their need should be great, and they had no
other way to be relieved by, then by us, or if our lives should be preserved
by them: In which case we ought to be very wary, lest we be entangled by them.
Also we may company with them, if we be linked to them by the bond of nature;
as they being our parents, brethren, kinsfolk, or in civil respect, as being
our magistrates, masters, etc. But as for putting children to school with
teachers that be of that religion, it is no way fit nor lawful, seeing by
their gifts of learning, they may so draw an high conceit of them from the
children, that they may the easier distill and drop poison into them by their
corrupt religion. And this for answer to the question, and withal an end of
the whole chapter.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
VERSE. 1. And an Angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I
made you go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land which I had
sworn unto your fathers, and said, I will never break my covenant with you.
2. Ye also shall make no covenant with the inhabitants of this land, but shall
break down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice. Why have ye done
this? 3. Wherefore I said also, I will not cast them out before you, but they
shall be as thorns unto your sides, and their gods shall be your destruction.
4. And when the Angel of the Lord spoke these words unto all the children of
Israel, the people lift up their voice and wept. 5. (Therefore they called that
place Bochim) and offered sacrifices there unto the Lord. The sum of the
Chapter.

WE have heard in the first chapter the notable victories of Israel over the
nations, while they obeyed the word of God; and also the sin of many of them in
suffering the Canaanites to live. Now it follows, how the Lord of his
goodness reproved them for the same, by the messenger that preached to them;
and the fruit that followed thereof. And afterward, unto the end of this
chapter, the holy Story sets down the sum of almost the whole book;
namely to the 17. chapter; taking occasion to do this from the acts of former
times: beginning at the things which were Josh. 24.
done before. Ioshuas death. The sum of all the rest of this chapter from
verse 6. is thus much: I shua a little before his death, having called the
people together, and given them their charge (as appears in chapter 23. and
24. of that book) that they should beware of Idolatry, and fear the Lord,
after that, he sent the people away, and died: in whose days, and in the days
of the elders that lived after him, the people obeyed his charge, as it is to
be seen in this chapter, from the 6. to the 11. verse. But after that, it is
showed how the next generation that arose after them, declined from that good
course: and so did the ages that followed them, one was like another,
throughout this book unto the 17. chap. and here with it is declared, how God
dealt with them. And that in few words was thus; they fell to provoke God by
Idolatry and other sins: then the Lord was displeased with them for it, and
delivered them into their enemies hands: after that they cried to the Lord, and
he raised them up Judges or deliuerers of them; yet they obeyed not even them,
which caused him to be again offended with them, and to threaten them as is to
be seen to the end of this chapter. And this is declared and laid out by the
diverse examples of the people, throughout all this book, unto the 17. chapter,
according to the general division made of the whole book in the beginning.

According to the meaning now set down, the parts of this chapter follow, The
parts two.
which are two: The first, is a calling of the tribes that had offended, to
repentance, to verse. 6. The other, is the setting down of the estate of the
people after Ioshuas death, and Gods dealing with them under the Judges,
throughout these 15. next chapters, unto the 17. and this is to the end of this
chapter.

I will leave the last part to the due place, wherein it is to be considered,
and examine the first as order requires. And here in this first part we may
see these two things: A reproof of the people by the Angel, to verse 4. and
the effect that followed thereon; that is, the peoples repentance, to the sixth
verse: so that in the first part of this chapter is showed, how the people had
provoked God already by not driving the nations out, after their first
entrance, and the death of Joshua: as we have heard in the former chapter: and
that they were brought to repentance. In the second part is declared, how
another generation that knew not the Lord did much worse: for they not only
made covenants with the Canaanites as the other did, who were brought to
repentance; but also served all manner of Idols, and provoked the Lord thereby.
To begin therefore with the former branch of the first part, that is, their
reproof, the messenger that was sent to them, (to make it The sum of the
first 3. verses.
more forcible to prick their consciences) first rehearses the benefits which
God had bestowed upon them, which ought rather to have drawn them to
obedience. And this he does in the first verse, as ye may see: then he sets
down the faults for which he reproves them. One, that they made leagues with
the Canaanites, contrary to Gods commandment; the other, that they had not
cast down their Alters; and he expostulateth with them for the same, saying,
why have ye done this, contrary to the charge which the Lord gave you? in the
2. verse. And lastly, he threateneth them, that their disobedience should be to
their great punishment, saying; I will not drive them out, but they shall be
pricks in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare unto you, and this in
the 3. verse. Now it remains to speak more particularly of these in order.
But before I come to speak of the message, I will say a little of the
messenger.

The word Messenger, or Angel, signifies sometime a created nature Of the
first verse perticularly. Heb. 1. 14.
without a body, (as Hebr. 1. Angels are called ministering spirits) and these
assumed some form at Gods commandment for the time then being, the better to
accomplish their office, as Genes. 18. Sometime this word signifies Genesis 18. 2.
any other messenger that God sends to execute his will: as Revel. 2. and 3.
where by the Angel, is meant the minister that was sent to them, a messenger
from God. And whether of these soever is meant here, it makes no matter, and
it being not particularly expressed in the text, it is sufficient for us, that
we know it was a missenger sent of God; and therefore sufficiently authorized:
and of those to whom he was sent, one who ought to be reverently received and
believed. And let it teach us, that God always used Doct. 1. Out of verse. 1.
the ministry of his servants to reveal, as it has seemed good unto him, and
to declare his will unto men; either about the general covenant of Heb. 1. 1.
grace and promise of salvation, or about any other particular thing as he saw
cause; and this he did whether they were Patriarchs, Angels, Prophets, or
Apostles, by whom he did it in ages past, or (as he does now) other ministers
of the Gospel, as Pastors and Teachers, whom he uses at this day to reveal
his will unto the people. The which declaration of his will by them out of his
word from time to time, as it highly commends his great kindness to these to
whom he sent those his messengers, (seeing we know he has not done it at all
people in any age) so it teaches us (as others that were before us, it did the
like) that we are bound to hear them, in all that Act. 10. 33.
the Lord shall say to us by them.

According to that which our Savior himself says, He that hears you,
Matthew. 10. 40.
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me. And so much more we are
to hear them, and receive their message with all readiness, seeing as it has
1. These. 4. 8.
been glorious in all ages, so it is most of all in this latter age; wherein is
revealed to us, that all things has been performed by our Savior which
appertain to man's happiness, and which were in ages past only foretold; and
therefore they may much more fully and clearly be made known to the hearers
now, if the messenges who should bring the tidings, be faithful and able to
do their message. In which case we must receive them as the Lord himself,
and the word which they preach, not as the word of man, but (as it is in deed)
the word of God; that so it may work in us effectually, as physic Gal. 4. 14.
in a corrupt body, both to make us sick, and to recover and heal us again;
1. These. 2. 13.
God having provided, that in what estate soever the people be, every one
should receive his portion, by the right dividing of the word unto them. And
the ordinarinesse of their message, should not make either their Esa. 50. 4.
ministry the less set by: but rather we should have them in so much the
more estimation, and admire therein the unspeakable providence of God and love
of our Lord Jesus, who (as he sends us not to extraordinary means) so yet
he has promised the ordinary unto his Church, even to the end of the world: as
in the Epistle to the Ephesians is to be seen. Ephesians. 4 11.


Which being duly considered, does bewray the woeful and lamentable estate of
the most hearers (though they are in most fearful estate that hear not) who
even where the word is preached with power and authority, have it in small
account and reverence. And what should the Lord do more unto Hos. 6. 4. Matthew.
11. 17.
them, having thus offered his dainties unto them? and yet they are so full
stomacked, that they find no savor nor pleasure in them. They give themselves
leave, so to wallow in their sensualities, and to take their fill of earthly
Note.
delights, that they find no savor in his heavenly delicates: yea and yet
some of them are such, as heretofore have heard with joy; yea and a man might
have thought, they would have plucked out their eyes for them that brought the
glad tidings unto them, now are waxen full, and count them their enemies for
telling them the truth; and some think themselves within a few weeks, able to
teach their teachers: as other have turned their zeal into luke-warmenesse,
their reverence into contempt, conceitednesse, worldlines, and deprauing of the
Scriptures. And so like fools, while they loath this wholesome and sweet
Manna of the word of life, which is the approved truth of God: they relish
fantasies, and have great taste and delight in dreams and lies: in so much as
that if any would feign himself to come from the dead, and affirm, that he
brings them news from thence for any sound knowledge or faith that they have,
they are ready to receive them. Oh people infatuated and bewitched (as Paul
says to the Galathians) seeking, as one that runs upon a swords point,
their own destruction. Gal. 3. 1.
But of these enough.

THE TENTH SERMON ON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES, on the same
text. verse. 1.
NOw further let us mark, that the Lord sending his messenger to the people
here did (after they had fallen The further laying open of this verse.
from his covenant that he made with them) to move them to repentance (as in
these 3. verses is to be seen.) And here let us mark (I say) how God is
feign to prevent them by this messenger, while they lay in their sins, before
they could accuse themselves, and complain, saying once among themselves, What
have we done? and so to seek recovery. They were fit to be more and more
hardened, and to run on still, yea to cover their sins as Adam, and flee
Genesis 3. 10. Job 31. 33. Genesis 31. 54.
from God as Jonas, and to sit down upon them and hide them, as Rahel upon
Labans Idols; bet to bethink themselves, what they should do to come out of
their sins, and so to help themselves out of danger thereby, they were
utterly to seek, and altogether unfit. They may be likened to David, 2. Sam.
12. 7.
who having lien long in two fearful sins, was so far from repenting of
them, that Nathan was feign to leave off parables, and to speak plainly
before he could conceive him. And to Peter, who having denied his master, Mat.
26. 74. 75.
had no power to rise out of his sin, till the Lord Jesus looked back upon
him, by the which watchword, Peter called to mind, together with the the cocks
crowing, the words which Jesus had spoken to him; to wit, that he should deny
him, and then he went out and wept bitterly.

And by this we may see, what a dangerous thing sin is; I mean not Doct. 2.
only the committing of it, which one would think were fearful enough, but
for that afterward they are not able to rise out of it, but lie still in it
(when yet men think they can repent of it at their pleasure) and when they
list, though it trouble the conscience, as raw flesh does the stomach: but
they are hardened in it for a time, especially soon after the committing of
it, so that they cannot at all humble their hearts, and bewail their sin to
God. And if they come to themselves again after a time, yet it is by Gods
preventing of them, as I have said; and while he renueth his grace in them, as
relenting and remorse for it, and the renouncing of it, and craving of pardon.
Thereby indeed they are enabled to repent, and so to return to their former
works. But this is not (we see) any power in them, for they are not able to
bring their hearts thereto, nor to do any such thing of themselves. And yet I
say more, that many times when they have fallen, they do not attain this
grace neither; before God brings them to hear by preaching, or by affliction
calls them to a deeper consideration, or by some such like means brings
their sin to light, and into disgrace with them; as to these people he did
here at Bochim; and then it may be they stay their course and return.

But now let this be well weighed herein, what a distraction and disquietnesse
it has been to them all this while, to lie bound as it were with the chains
of their sins, as they have been, that they cannot help themselves; and to be
so bereaved of the graces of God, as faith, hope, joy in the holy Ghost, fear
of offending, and such like; that they lie dead in them, as if they had no part
in them, and they having no use of them to strengthen them to Note.
any good doing, although they be in themselves profitable to all holy uses;
whereas in the mean while, who would lose his sweet communion with God, if he
be wise enough to consider what I say; though it should never be brought
against them? no though it were but for an hour or a day, with the comforts
belonging thereto? which yet these whom I have spoken of, when they have sinned
against their knowledge, do deprive themselves of, whole months and years.
And why do they thus? If they sustained all this, as from their trial from
God, their patience were commendable; or if it were possible to honor him
thereby, it were some commendation to them: but when it is for the having of
their own will amiss, and for the enjoying the pleasures of sin for a short
season, oh how lamentable is it to think? So that this wisdom shall well
beseem the servants of God, to Note.
give all diligence to keep well, while they are well, and in no wise to have
their teeth set on edge with the deceivable baits of sin, which the world
so greedily runs after, forasmuch as they shall see how dear it shall cost
them; and yet let them know this, that such shall not be only void of the
forementioned graces, but they shall also smart through many punishments. And
now if it be so hard for them to come to repentance when they have fallen, who
yet before had enjoyed that gift soundly: how much further off are they, who
never have part in it at all? neither are like to have; even as we see by
daily experience (how fearful an estate is that to live in) unless they wait
on God diligently in the ordinance of preaching to attain it.

Now we have heard how God was feign to provoke them to repentance, Doct. 3.
Out of verse. 1.
before they could set themselves toward it: It follows to see by what reason
he urged them to it, after I have said a little of the places here mentioned,
Gilgal was a city in the plain of Jordan, not far from Jericho, from this
Gilgal the messenger is said to have come. And Bochim is a place near
adjoining to it, in which this message was done to the people of Israel, who
had by their sins caused it. It was not called Bochim before, but had the name
given by occasion of that which fell out there, that is, the weeping of the
people, when their sins were brought to their remembrance; for so the word
Bochim signifies, namely, weeping. At this place therefore (to return to the
purpose) the Lord told them of their disobedience, and begins to make it
odious to them by rehearsing his benefits great and many: as if he should say,
what cause have I given you to deal thus unthankfully and disobediently with
me. Has my kindness been thus requited of you, that you return me evil for
my good will?

Here as in sundry other places we may see what effects the benefits of God
do commonly work in men; and that is, forgetfulness of them, and
unthankfulness for them, and a mean account making of them; also boldness in
seeking of carnal liberty thereby (unto the which we are so readily carried,
and to provoke God much more then if they had never enjoyed them; little
remembering that the Lord gives them a watchword, that they should rather look
in all things to be thankful. Justly therefore was this 1. These. 5.
people here challenged for their unthankfulness. This was the cause why they
were warned before, that they should take heed when they were come into the
land of promise, and should there possess great and goodly cities, which they
builded not, and houses full of all manner of goods, which they filled not;
Deuteronomy 6. 10. 11. 12.
and wels which they dug not; vineyards, and Olive trees, which they planted
not; and when they had eaten and should be full, they were warned (I say) that
they should beware, they forgot not the Lord, which brought them out of the
land of Egypt, etc. signifying unto them, that wealth and ease would go nigh
to make them to Deuteronomy. 32 compare from v. 9. onward to verse. 19.
forget Gods mercies, by which they were delivered out of their miseries. By
which we see the perverseness of our depraved nature, which turns the
wholesomest food into poison, as the corrupt stomach does the daintiest
meats. We abhor him who having received freely good turns, and benefits,
forgets his benefactor when he is promoted, etc. yet it is certain that
men are the worse for Gods benefits, and are more bold in sinning against him,
by the abundance of his earthly and common blessings. So David confesses, that
before he was afflicted he went astray: so that his benefits Psalm. 119. 67.
(we see) did him not so much good as his chasetisements. And so Jeremy said,
that he was as an untamed calfe, till God corrected him. Woeful experience
teaches, how rare the man is who may truly say otherwise? to wit, that
benefits knit his heart nearly to God, before he be taught it by affliction.
And yet we must know, that neither that of it own nature draws men to love
and obey God any more then his benefits; but as God works that grace,, of his
especial favor; without which our whole life is mere disobedience, I say,
further then his grace guides us, and keeps us within compass in both
estates. Common blessings and general we think and say, belong to others as
well as to us; and as for special and private, while we reap and feel them,
we say, [Blessed be God] but we are not for the most part, knit to him in
duty ever the more. The ten leapets being Luke 17.
cleansed, returned not to give thanks, save one. And he to whom ten
thousand talents were remitted, shows this fruit of his thankfulness, that
he caught his fellow by the throat who owed him an hundred pence, bidding Mat.
18. 28.
him pay that he owed. And why this? For the heart of man naturally is puffed
up with prosperity, and vain estimation of himself, and he prideth in that
which will be his overthrow and waxes hardened, and is so far off from
humility, and mean thinking of himself, that all may perceive (who can
rightly judge) that it makes him prouder, and more scornful, yea utterly
unlike him he should be, and disguised: and yet to become great and get much in
this vale of misery, while things of greatest price are not asked after, how
eagerly do men run after it, as fish follow the bait with greediness: nay
they laugh all such to scorn that find fault with them for so doing, and who
do not follow them in that excess, and let better things pass by them as
little worth? yea and yet this do they, who lawfully come by wealth and
promotion, and to whom the Lord gives prosperity without any indirect or
unlawful means: even such (I say) do offend in the like manner of excess
and greediness, and fall into the same danger thereby that the others do, who
attain to it by shifting, and against conscience. What then, some (perhaps)
will say, it is lawful for us to enjoy the earthly Object.
benefits of God? And again, are there none that rightly use prosperity and
plenty? I answer, God forbid; for men may, and some do much more good thereby
to others especially, then under the cross, and in adversity. Answ.
But this is rare: for a contrary mischief rather in prosperity befalls men,
and that is, that (for the most part) they suspect not, neither fear any
danger: What makes prosperity to be abused.
no not when they grossly forget themselves, and abuse their prosperity, when
yet it hangs over their heads, and is most hardly avoided. Moreover, neither 1
do they observe themselves, lest they should become drunken with it, 2
neither search into themselves to find out how they offend thereby. Both
which are necessary for a man in prosperity to do, yea and to use to do so
daily, for the cutting off the dangers that may otherwise ensue thereby. And yet
as the best practices against this and other sins, yea though they be never
so conscionably and reverently put in ure, do by little and little grow Note.
common, and lose their strength; so therefore besides both these, a Christian
man must often with Job, tell it seriously to himself, that he must look for 3
his change, and say, it will not always be summer; and thereby crack the Job
14. 14.
pride of life, and abase the excess of carnal delight, which prosperity will
otherwise full soon raise up in him most dangerously. And last of all, if God 4
continue his days of health and welfare, so that smartie crosses be kept from
him, let him cross his naughty and unruly affections, and those especially by
which he is most like to offend, and be in danger, chasing them away by seruent
prayer against them, and grow in fruitfulness thereby, as he who received five
talents, brought five more, which he had gained thereby. And these things being
duly observed, as being those which be most necessary, Luke 19. 18. Mat. 25.
20.
I will not doubt to affirm, that the man who does so, shall use prosperity
well, and be profitable many ways thereby, which yet of another man that does
not so, I cannot warrant: nay, I dare be bold to say he shall not. But seeing
the godly do rarely thus, by this Judge, how the world uses prosperity, if
the godly so hardly use it well.

Another thing is worthy to be marked here, where the Lord moves the people
to repentance, by rehearsing his benefits bestowed upon them, Doct. 4. Out of
verse. 1.
and that is this: that of all reasons, this ought most to prevail with Gods
servants, to dissuade them from their sins which they have fallen into, and
to raise them out of them or to prevent the committing of the like, this (I
say) ought most to prevail with them, even the often remembrance and due
consideration of Gods benefits, though with grief it may be spoken, this
advice preuailes too little. This reason God used here, and the people were
convicted thereby, and yielded, and confessed themselves guilty: For why? the
love of God constrained them, which having been before shead 2. Cor. 5. 14.
Romans 5. 5.
plentifully into their hearts. Now when they heard this sharp and just
reproof, and that from God himself by his messenger, they saw clearly their
sin, and namely their unthankfulness, how they had forgot Gods benefits, and
trod under foot his loving kindness, it being the most precious of all other
things, which went near them, they knowing that he had done so many and great
good things for them; and this, with the remembering of his benefits in some
particular manner, as they heard them repeated, caused them to cast up their
unsavory gorge, and so to return from their deceivable and damnable
offenses, and to embrace again the mercies of the Lord, who was their first
husband. And with this putting the people in remembrance of his many and great
benefits, God does draw them on often in other places to fear him. As when he
says in Deuteronomie, I thy God have blessed thee in all that thy heart could
desire. Thus in another place also he Deuteronomy. 28.
calling the people to repentance, whom he compares to a vine, and laboring
Esa. 5. 2.
to draw them from their ingratitude, puts them in mind, that he had planted
them being his Church, in a place most plentiful and abundant. This caused
David evermore to have Gods mercies in great remembrance, and to set his
benefits before his eyes, that he might shame himself for his sin passed,
and by all means seek to come out of it. And therefore in the psalm 103. he
as though he had not been thankful (when yet he excelled all men therein)
quickens up himself thereto, saying; Praise thou Psalm. 103. 2.
the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within thee praise his holy name. And in
the 51. Psalm; to persuade himself to repentance, he says, that his mercies
Psalm. 51. 1.
are great, and that there were in him multitudes of compassions. Other
reasons, drawn from the dreadful fear of Gods judgments, may (I confess)
terrify for the time the hearts of Gods people and hold them in awe, as it
were by violence: but they work not kindly to bring them to duty with
cheerfulness, though they may stay them from further evil for the time, till
forcibler persuasions come. But when all is said that can be, it is the love of
God that constrains men that they should live to God, not to 2. Cor. 5. 14.
Note. The first benefit bestowed on them.
themselves. And yet I will not say that this reason shall always prevail
with us, although where it does not, we may well conclude, that we are much
out of order, and have grossly forgot our selves.

Now I come to the particular benefits which he bestowed upon them, Doct. 5.
In verse. 1.
forbearing to repeat them every one together, seeing they may be read in the
text, for times sake, but one after another as they lie in order. The first is,
that he had brought them out of Egypt, which was a country which was wholly
infected with superstition and idolatry; and therefore most dangerous to dwell
in. And what a benefit was it then for them to be delivered from thence, even
as from Rome; or in another respect, from Sodom? For Ezok. 20. 7. 8.
there they must have been corrupted with the pestilent contagion of their
idolatry, beside the most heavy burdens and bondage, with which both they
were, and still also they must have been pressed with, if they had remained
there. Hence it is, that almost every where in the Scripture, where mention is
made of Gods goodness to Israel, this their deliverance out of Egypt is most
commonly reckoned as the principal, because without it all other blessings had
been as nothing. Therefore let us also know, that it is a singular mercy of
God, to be freed from the false worship of God, and idolatry, if I should say
no more; but especially when there is joined with that a deliverance from
bodily troubles also. A benefit, whereof many thousands in this land are
partakers, which their fellow brethren in other nations, being as Israel was in
Egypt, Judah in Babylon oppressed with idolatry, would think they obtained an
invaluable benefit, if they might have freedom from it. And so they may well
think: For oh what a liberty is it both to soul and body? and yet we may have
it with far more ease then they had it; that is, without travel or journey.

And although they cannot value it in any sort according to the worth of it,
who have never felt the burden of a troubled conscience, and bodily vexations;
yet we that have, though they be nothing so grievous as they Note.
had; we (I say) are every day (that we rise out of our beds to do our
necessary business) to confess this marvelous work of God for our
deliverance. And yet I deny not, but that other benefits of God are to be
sought for also; as the enjoying of the sincere preaching of the Gospel to the
further welfare of our souls, and things necessary for this present life, that
so there may want no encouragement to Gods service. But howsoever the Lord
should deny us the one, I mean plenty for our bodies, which yet for many
years he has most graciously yielded and granted us: yet we should contend for
the other, I mean sound and saving knowledge by an happy and sound ministry,
by all means, if possibly we may enjoy it. Which I speak to the just
reproof of all such as do only regard their outward estate in the world,
little or nothing looking after the benefit of true happiness by their souls
welfare: forecasting altogether to plant themselves there, whither the hope of
earthly commodities does lead them. And though the towns, families, and
kindreds be never so profane and superstitious, to the which they make have,
yet that they little regard; but so as commodity and honor may be gotten (as
their common question is, may we look for any good there?) they will dwell,
there they will live and dei, Psalm. 4. 7.
and there they will match and leave their children to remain after them. But
as from holding them from the infection of Popery, or laboring to shield them
under a settled good ministry, and so to mind and seek their salvation, it is
no part of their thought. Nay there be thousands in this land that lust after
the servitude of Popish Egypt again; earnestly desiring that day (which God
turn away) the Lord forgive it them, (as our Savior prayed for them that
crucified him) they know not what they do. So far are they from thankfulness
for their freedom, that they are voluntary slaves under that Pharaoh of Rome,
even in their own country.

But to return and so to draw to an end, let it be counted of us a rare and
singular mercy of God, to be free from great calamities, and extremities both
of soul and body, as these Israelites were, who were delivered out of Egypt,
and the bondage thereof. And by occasion of this which I say, this I further
add, that such as live void of grievous pains and diseases, (as well as
Egyptian bondage) which others, yea and those many of Gods dear children are
under, as the stone, collicke, gowts, ulcers, gripings, and such like; also
such as be not in utter penury and want, nor yoked with unquiet, unkind and
supestitious companions in marriage, nor with unmerciful land lords, and
cruel overseers and governors (which do make their life Note.
wearisome to them, and consume all their cheerfulness and comfort, as as the
moth eats up the beauty of a garment) let all such (I say) bear their other
petty and small discommodities, troubles, and visitations, patiently and
contentedly, and be highly thankful for that they are delivered from far
greater: yea and let them acknowledge, that if with freedom from these and the
like, they hold sound peace with God, and be free from the stings of an evil
conscience also, that they enjoy a piece of a paradise, though in a mean
condition: and let them pity those which are in such depths of grief, that
their fervent prays may move the Lord to pity them also: and let them that be
free from them, resolve with themselves and endeavor to use their liberty and
health to all possible good doing. And yet let this be known also, that where
God lays these great burdens upon some of his, he gives them the greater
grace to go meekely under them. And let us beware, lest through our security
and negligence God may justly Note.
vpbraid us with his benefits (as here he does Israel) that having elbowroome
and liberty to serve God in our places and callings, without any to disturb
us, or hold us under, we enbondage our selves by an ill conscience, looseness,
security, earthlinesse, and the like evils, by which our life should be as
irksome as in Egypt, or Babell.

The second benefit here mentioned, that God bestowed upon them, Doc. 6. in
ver. 1 The second benefit.
was, that he brought them into the fruitful land in which they dwelt, which
was a far greater matter then the former; as showing them plainly that he
thought it not enough to deliver them out of bondage, except he filled them
with good things also. He had done much for them if he had only delivered
them out of that fearful bondage, though he had left them in the
wilderness; but to bring them also into that fruitful land, and to give it to
them, oh admirable kindness! Behold then here the great bountifulness of
God, that he can as well and willingly give abundance to his children, as keep
them out of great troubles. He is not thereby wasted nor diminished in his
blessings, by giving them out and liberally bestowing them; being a fountain of
riches never drawn dry. So he said to the posterity of his people: Oh that
Israel would have hearkened to me, and have walked in Psalm. 81. 13.
my ways; I would soon have brought down their enemies: I would have fed
them with the fat of wheat, and with honey out of the rock. Neither need we
think that he stands at it to give us these, whose honor it is to bestow
great things; and has already given us the greatest of all; even his own
son; and therefore can much more afford us these smaller benefits Romans 8. 32.
also. As we know that he did give great riches to Abraham, Isaac, Job, and to
other his faithful servants, whom he loved dearly. And we in this land have
good proof hereof, in that (with deliverance from bondage) we have the
Gospel, peace, government, plenty, and such like. And more particularly, we
in this land have cause to admire the goodness of God, in delivering us from
the cursed practices of those Jesuits and Locusts, whom that beast has sent
forth to destroy us, Prince, Nobles, Magistrates, Ministers: and to root out
Church and policy among us, and bring in darkness and confusion again. We
owe (doubtless) as great thanks to God for these mercies (and specially in
the late Treason) as Israel did for their freedom out of Egypt, and the
overthrow of Pharaoh when he pursued them.

Now then to this common objection, why God does not enrich so his Objection.
faithful ones in this latter age? (which objection many are readier to put
forth questions, then to take any adswere to it) for (say they) though men of
the world have great substance, and swim in wealth and riches; yet Gods people
are seldom so; but are held down with poverty and wants; in so much as one is
hardly able to relieve another; and thereby also (they say) they do the less
good in bringing on, and persuading to religion, seeing they whom they go
about to persuade, do fear that their God loves them not whom they serve,
seeing he bestows not wealth upon them, as he does upon others who are not
for the most part, especially in some places, religious at all: also they fear
that if they themselves should be religious, even they should become poor
also. This (I say) troubles many, them therefore I answer after this manner.

To do them good, he is ready to bestow riches upon them, and better Answer
1.
things also. As he said to Jeroboam, when of a servant he made him a King: If
this had not been enough, I would (says he) have given thee more: If then to
1. King. 14.
him a bad man he would have given more, if he had used that well; then who
doubts but that he would be liberally handed to his dear children, if it
were for their good? But otherwise (indeed) he thinks them better held back
then bestowed; as he answered by Saint James, when they asked, Iam. 4. 2.
they obtained not, because they asked amiss; that is, to bestow the things
they asked, upon their lusts but if they might have bettered by them, he would
have liberally given unto them. And as he answered Paul, when he gave him not
that which he asked (and yet that which he asked was a better thing then
riches) my grace is sufficient for thee: so in denying them to his 2. Cor. 12.
9.
faithful servants, he gives his grace, which works contentment in them,
and thereby though their outward estate be weak, he yet even in that, keeps
them from the noisome evils of the days they live in, that I say no Answ. 2.
more. And further to answer them, they must hold this for a truth, that every
man's estate wherein God sets him (I say not that which he by his sin has
brought upon him) is best for him, as we in the Lords prayer are Petic. 4.
well taught, when we are directed to ask our daily bread; even such success
in our estate, poor or rich, as our heavenly father sees best for us, even
that is our daily bread, with the which we must be contented.

And yet this is further to be added, that he that has meat, drink, and
apparel, he is not to be counted poor, when indeed the wealthiest has no
more, neither is better satisfied with that which he has then such an one
being gracious: and as for the superfluity that he has, which is counted his
glory, how commonly do we see it to become his bane? And where is the man that
is not the worse for his wealth, it being his strong hold, which makes Pro.
18. 11.
him bolder to sin, that way that he is most carried by his sensuality, much
more then the poor man dare do. And though God sets up some, it is for
their trial, and for the maintaining of all estates, and preserving of
fellowship in the Church and Common wealth. And as for the godly, they should
not want wealth, but that it is for the most part, used of many even of them,
to snare and entangle them in this deceivable world; which as the beast that
is caught by the horns in the bushes and briers; and as a man with bolts on
his heels is holden from running: so does it hold them back from running apace
to the heavenly life.

Neither let this trouble any, that while most of the godly want, our fathers
under the law, and before the coming of Christ, had great wealth and
possessions; and yet were godly and saved; and therefore if God loved us, he
would as well bestow them upon us now: for we must know that his outward
service then was more costly then now it is, which required more wealth: and
moreover they had one use of their riches, which we have not that by these
earthly things, God did figure out to them things heavenly; as by the earthly
Canaan, he did the heavenly Jerusalem: for when that earthly country was
promised our fathers, they enjoyed it not, but lived Heb. 11. 13.
strangers in it, but they in those promises looked further, that is, for a
better, which they enjoyed. This that has been said may fully answer the
question. I conclude therefore, that God can freely and willingly bestow
liberal portions upon his faithful servants, as well as keep them out of
great calamities, if he see it to be best for them when their estate is weak:
and seeing it were not like to be good for them to enjoy, which he thinks not
good to give them, let them the more contentedly labor to be without it.

Now follows the third benefit here mentioned, and that he had promised The
third benefit, the laying out of it. Object.
that he would never break covenant with them. Here the Lord may seem to
give them great advantage: for if he bind himself thus to them, they being
such as did often times (as they are charged here to have done) break their
covenant toward him, it may seem that he is tied to them, that he shall never
break his covenant with them, seeing he has promised so unto them whatsoever
they do, or howsoever they break theirs, or behave themselves toward him.
Then the which what is more absurd? For the answering of this therefore, and
for the understanding these words Answ.
of the verse, two things are to be considered: One is, of what covenant he
speaks, when he says, he had granted this unto them, that he would never
break it. The other, whether he spoke this simply; or upon a condition;
namely, if they should obey him. These two being answered, will make the matter
clear.

Now for the first, we are to know, that by the covenant here mentioned, he
neither means the particular covenant which he enters into with the
faithful, to be their God all sufficient for ever (for that he will never
Genesis 17. 1.
go from, but whom he loves, as he loved them ere they loved him, so to the
end he loves them,) neither does he mean the general covenant of sending Ioh
13 1.
Christ to redeem the world: for the unbelief of man could not make that Romans
3. 3.
promise of God frustrate, and of none effect: but he means the covenant of
enjoying the land peaceably, into which he brought them, with all the
commodities therein. Now that covenant was made with them conditionally, if
they should be obedient to him. And this is the other thing, which I said was
one of the two, which serves for the better understanding of this speech;
where he says by his messenger, that he had made a covenant with them, which
he would never break; and that was, if they should endeavor to walk with
him, he would continue them in that good land which he had given them, and
bless them therein; otherwise he would be free from his promise, and he
would cast them out after long bearing their disobedience, and punish them
sundry ways in the mean season. And even so he did to them, seeing they kept
not covenant with him Deuteronomy. 28.
as he required of them, and which he bound them to, as in the next verse is to
be seen. And this for the clearing of the forementioned doubt.

This point being thus determined, does minister this heavenly instruction
Doct. 7. in ver. 1.
to us, that if we did faithfully, and with a good heart set our selves to obey
the Lord, and yet I mean no otherwise, then as may of us be performed, he
would do great things for us even in this world: he would feed us with good
things, even with the bread of wheat, and that the finest, as he says in the
Psalm; and other earthly blessings answerable: and would not suffer Psalm. 81.
16.
the proud to domineere over his inheritance, but soon bring them down. And
yet we must know, that if his own people shall sin against him, he will
correct them with the rod, and often withdraw from them the sweet fruit of his
favor, and the light of his countenance, which was wont to refresh Psalm. 89.
31.
and comfort their souls: so that even the privileges which issue from this
covenant, may in great part, and for a great while lie drowned in them and be
to seek, as joy, peace, confidence in prayer, with such like, and their
temporary benefits utterly lost. Oh therefore notwithstanding many See Doct. on
verse. 5.
large and great and worthy promises be made to us, yet when we do not
labor to be faithful in our covenant, but take our liberty amiss, every one
his way, as he thinks good: behold, our sins deprive us of many blessings
which we might have enjoyed, and hold many good things from us, as Jeremy Ier.
5. 25.
says, and bring many evils upon us: and even so the Prophet Esaias witnesses,
though the Lords hand is not shortened that he cannot save, neither is his ear
Leuit. 26.
heavy, that it cannot hear, yet your iniquities (says he) have separated
betwixt you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he
will not hear. So Esa. 59 1.
that if these things be rightly weighed, it may truly be said, what we will
not Note.
suffer the Lord to do us good, nor to fill us with his blessings, as he is
ready to do; even we our selves, because we will not cease to provoke him.
And this is lively laid out by the Prophet Amos, where he says, that it rained
Amos 4. 7.
upon one piece of ground, and not upon another: and wherefore was it, but for
the sin of those that possess it? contrary to our blind reason, who look
(as Sampson did) that it should always go well with us, howsoever we deal with
God, or defraud him of his due, breaking covenant with Judge. 16.
him.

If this be so, then our Savior agrees well with it; who says, The meek
Matthew. 5. 5.
shall inherit the earth: for that which they have, shall be sweeter to them,
then great riches of the ungodly; and it shall multiply also when God sees
good. So that it might make one to marvel to see them who are counted Gods
people, many times to run so greedily after the world, and the vain
allurements of it, in such wise, that they go back in grace as fast, as though
Gods caring for them were nothing like their own; and as though they had
forgotten that he promises sufficient wealth to a godly life, godliness 1.
Tim. 4. 8.
having the promises of things both earthly and heavenly; and yet so it is with
them, that he who can catch fastest, imagines he shall speed best: when all may
see that they who seek to be guided by God, have best success and blessing,
others going without it. But whereas they object, that they are richest for the
most part who savor no goodness; that ought to trouble no man, for full soon
shall the riches of iniquity, and those riches that cause it, right soon (I
say) shall they betake them to their wings, and leave the reconing behind to
be made, by them who have ill gotten and spent them, which shall be little to
their liking: for know we this, that they are never to be counted blessings,
without the grace of using them aright.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON CONTINVED UPON THE SAME TEXT, Verse. 2. 3.
VERSE. 2. Ye shall make no covenant with the inhabitants of this land, etc.
THe second verse now follows, wherein the covenant in the behalf of the
people, is set down, as it is on Gods behalf Verse. 2. 3. The sense. The
covenant of the people with the Lord.
in the former verse. For a covenant is betwixt two parties at the least. The
points of their covenant are these two; one, that they should make no league
with the inhabitants of the land; the other, that they should break their
altars down. Then he finds fault with them, not for Idolatry we see,
(which as yet they had not fallen to) but for the not keeping of their
covenant. And having clearly convinced them, he expostulateth with them, and
asks them why they had done so, as if he had been ready to hear their
excuse, if they could allege any; if not, their sin must needs be the
greater. After this he proceeds to show the punishments that should be
inflicted on them: and they were three. The first, that he would not expel
these nations for them: and what then? The other two arose from that: for it
followed then, that they should abide still in the land, to the great hurt and
annoyance of the of Israelites who dwelt there. And the two ways, as I have
said: first, that they should be as thorns to prick them, and put them to
pain: the other, they should be as snares, in which they should be taken, and
caught with their sins: and when they should afterward fall to their Idolatry,
they should most grievously be punished.

These things being thus set down, we may observe these four things in these
two verses: first their covenant with God: secondly, the conuicting them by the
Angel, of breaking it: thirdly, the Lords expostulating with them for it:
fourthly, the punishment threatened for it. Concerning Doct. 1.
the first, in this that the people was bound to covenant with God, as he did
with them, learn all of us, that if we will look for benefit by Gods
covenant made with us, we must enter into covenant with him, and look to be
faithful in keeping it with him: which I speak not as though we may claim
any thing by due desert thereby, but that we may know that God has so
appointed, and we ought to perform it accordingly. And though God makes
promise here but of earthly benefits, yet in other places he couenanteth with
his, to give them heavenly also; as pardon of their sins, and Ier. 31. 31.
life eternal, and he will most surely keep promise in both. So although the
godly are bound here only to some particular duties, yet in the general
covenant, they are urged both to believe those things which God promises them,
and also to walk before God continually in their whole course, wherein yet
their failings are not reckoned against them, which by frailty they offend in:
but if any will boldly tempt God, being careless in looking to their covenant;
let such know that God will not be mocked, their sin will find them out.
And so understand it of particular covenants, such as this was that God made
here with this people. If he promise to bless them in their marriage,
earthly affairs and business, with such like, if they be faithful therein,
as they covenant; then if they fail, and be falsehearted, God is free from
his word and promise.

The next thing in the covenant is, that God in forbidding them fellowship
Doct. 2.
with those nations, and commanding them to pull down their altars, on which
they were wont to offer to their false gods, did thereby cut off occasion from
them of committing Idolatry: teaching us thereby, that if we will avoid the
occasions of evil, we shall also be kept from the evils themselves, yea gross
sins; as idolatry, drunkenness, adultery and the like, though we be very
prone to commit them. And yet on the contrary, if we will not shun the
occasions of them, and the means that lead to them, we shall undoubtedly fall
into them. Take one for example, the most common of the rest. If we be
foolishly and unbeseeming our profession snared with some woman, as having been
caught by her eye lids, and taken with that which is precious in her; we must,
to avoid the foul and shameful sin of adultery; first with chaste Job, to make
a firm covenant not to look upon Job 31. 5.
her: secondly, neither talk of her, nor with her, whereby we might easily
nourish wicked lust and desires. And thirdly, come we not in her company if it
may be, as godly Joseph refused to do, or at least look we not after her,
Gen 39. 10.
neither let our thoughts linger nor carry us that way, but by fervent prayer
be chased away far from her, and then there is no fear of committing the
sin, or of falling into any further danger, for the word of the Lord has
spoken it. So I might say, many a man might have eschewed murder, if he could
have withdrawn his heart from wrath and revenge; and so might many have
avoided oppression, and miserlinesse, if they could have snibbed the first
straying concupiscence and their unlawful desires after another man's commodity.

I propound these instances among the rest (not having time to speak of all,
or many,) for that the devil spiteth the servants of God, and seeks more
specially these ways to bring his malice to pass, casting a blindness upon
them, that they shall hardly see, no not when they be in great danger, Note.
till they be fallen into it, by being taken with the bait that he laid for
them. Yea woeful experience has made us to see this to be too true: and they
who have broken out of this snare, know with what difficulty they have escaped;
and as for the common sort, who show no great religion in their lives, there
are few of them but are brought to shame, if opportunity serve, some of these
ways, or be made to hang down their heads by reason of guilty consciences;
and such mischief both the one and the other might have avoided, Note.
and namely uncleanness one of the foulest, if they could have been persuaded
to shun the occasions thereof, in keeping out of the company of such as by
whom they become besotted and impotent; and also if they could walk soberly in
their particular callings by them, as having nothing to do with them. So that
we may see what good they get by their dalying, unseasonable companying, and
loose talking which they use with women, which yet is one of the chief
delights that the civil sort of men do take, and yet they would think they
should have great wrong offered them, if they should be warned of it.

But to come more particulerly to this covenant which the heads of Israel Doct.
3.
must keep toward the Lord, of casting down their alters, and of having no
fellowship with the Canaanites, they afford a several lesson. By the first
that I mentioned, this may be learned, that Christian Magistrates are by their
authority to pull down all Idols, and abolish superstition both Deuteronomy 7. 5.
of the infidels and heretics, and the occasions of Idolatry, and to purge
their dominions and jurisdictions from such dross and abominations. (Hezekiah
brake down the brazen serpent being abused, and called it Nehushton, that is,
a piece of brass.) And so much the rather, seeing Gods worship is 2. King. 18.
4.
simple and uncompounded, and he that adds thereto any superstitious
ceremony, tainteth the substance as much as lies in him. And all Christians
ought to do the same in their private houses, and places subject to them, as
their fields, farms, Chapels, etc. And yet let them take heed, that they
attempt not to do so out of their callings, or in other men's houses, or other
places where they have no authority to meddle, upon any devotion or good intent
(as they call it) either to honor God, or benefit others, or though it were to
win the Idolaters themselves. For that course is not only not ordained of
God, to win the Idolaters to sound religion, but also forbidden: and other
means, as the preaching of the word, conference, etc. are appointed to root
the same out of men's hearts, and to turn them from such blind devotion. The
other may be termed zeal, but unadvised, corrupt and sinful; neither of an
wise Christian to be used. And this be noted by occasion of the one part of
the peoples covenant: namely, that they must pull down their alters.

The other, to wit, that they should have no fellowship with them, I have,
spoken of before, chap 1. verse. last, save only that I spoke not particularly
of Doct. 4.
making marriages with Idolaters; which yet follows by good and necessary
consequent. For if a private Christian fearing God, may have no familiar
conuersing with such, then much less in marriage making with them, which is
the nearest fellowship of all other. And so I briefly conclude with the charge
given by the Lord in Deuteronomie, Ye shall make no marriages Deuteronomy. 7 3.
with them, neither give thy daughter to his son, nor take his daughter to
thy son.

Now the messenger of God having told the people of the covenant Doct. 5.
which they were bound to, he shows them their sin, that they had broke
their covenant; and conuicteth them of it saying: ye have not obeyed. Which
being so spoken to them, they could not deny it. And this Scripture teaches,
that men ought to be convinced of their sin by the word of God, and to have
them so proved to be just prouocations of God, which yet they live in, as that
they may not be able to deny them; and all to the end they may the easilier
be brought to repentance, and not only told in preaching what is sin, which
I grant must be done; but as far as may be, they are to be charged as
guilty who are so: and to be urged as they have given cause, so far as that
they may be pricked in their consciences, unless their hearts be flinty, and
so to say from their hearts, we have sinned. And this is one principal point
in preaching to be aimed at by Gods commandment to Timothy, where it is said,
preach the word, in season and out of season, rebuke, 2. Tim. 4. 2.
convince, and exhort with all lenity: and this conuincing is most available,
(through Gods blessing) among other means to awake the drowsy conscience, and
so to quiet and reform it. This is that which our Savior foretells us in
Saint John's Gospel, that the spirit of God, that is, the power of Act. 2. 37.
Ioh. 16. 8.
the word inspired by the holy Ghost, and preached by his Apostles and
Ministers after his resurrection, should convince the world of sin. So we
read in the second of the Acts, that Peter proved against the Jews, and
convicted them in their consciences that they had crucified the Lord of glory
who consented thereto. And it is said immediately following there, when they
heard it, they were pricked in their hearts. Thus when David could easily yield
to the truth generally set down to him by Nathan, but 2. Sam. 12.
could go no further; namely, to see himself faulty, whose sin reached to
the heavens, the Prophet Nathan convinced him, and told him, saying; thou art
the man that has dealt so cruelly and wickedly; and then he could say, I have
sinned. So in Sam. 24. when God had showed David his sins, in 2. Sam. 24. 16.
17.
numbering the people, he repented and yielded. verse. 17.

Thus Paul dealt with the Romans, when he sought thoroughly to make odious to
them their former ill course, What fruit had ye (says he) in those things
whereof ye are now ashamed? their consciences bare them witness that that they
had none. And as this kind of dealing with the people in our preaching is most
profitable, and like to do most good, so it is one of the hardest matters,
namely, to rouse up the conscience, and to convince it. Profitable I say it is,
for that if it be awaked and pricked, it cannot but acknowledge Note.
the sin in all likelihood, and bleed and so relent for it, and crave pardon,
and abandon it, which is the direct way whereby the holy Ghost guides men to
salvation: but if any be drowsy and sleepy conscienced, so that they be not
moved by hearing any reproves, or do strive against the light of their own
conscience, being convinced which is more, or wax hardened, which is worst of
all, and a most unkind abusing of that gracious work of God in them: I bewail
their case, for they not only receive not any benefit thereby, but do wax
worse, and so depart from God, so as they seldom return to him again (for
the most of them) of which sort Judas was, and some others. And yet these
shifts men will use when they are convicted: for either they are not pricked,
or struggle against it and seek to shift it off; or else they are hardened by
the deceitfulness of sin; all which ought Heb. 3. 12.
most carefully to be taken heed of.

To return therefore, it is profitable for the hearers to be oftentimes
convinced, and otherwise our ministry does them little good, but so it is also
hard to wind in with them, and to pierce their hearts, as I said; I mean to
bring the hearers to this point, that they shall cry out and say, every one for
his own part, I have sinned. For concerning the ministers, who should be one
special means to do it: they, for the most part abstain from this work
altogether; either winding up all in obscurity, that they are not understood,
or at least contenting themselves with the bare propounding of the truth,
without applying it to the conscience, or discovering the corruption of the
heart, that so the hearer may not escape. This work they leave to the peoples
discretion. And alas they are so far from working the word upon themselves,
that they have many starting holes and excuses for their sins, and extenuate
them, and allege their own infirmities, and other Note.
men's examples, so that though they be stricken by our preaching as with an
arrow, yet they be harnessed and bumbaced in such wise, that they will shift
off the blow, and not be wounded thereby, but rather will follow their own
evil courses the more, and harden their hearts still, who may well set the
best side outward (I deny not) and for a while carry a fair show, as though
all were well with them, but God knows their hearts, and let them be sure that
their sin shall find them out, and it shall not go well with them in the
end. The use of this is, that we so look to our selves in the whole Numb. 32.
23.
carriage of our lives, that we fear not what may be said to us, or brought
against us (so verifying the proverb, the righteous is bold as a Lion) and
Prou. 28. 1.
the rather seeing we have judged our selves, that we may not be judged of
the 1. Cor. 11. 31.
Lord; and have kept our consciences pure and good, to the end we may not fear
conuincing of them, (for the word of God can offer no violence to Note.
them who offer it first to themselves) especially for any wilful offending:
but yet if for all this we be found too light, and in somethings worthy to be
blamed, (as who can look so narrowly about himself but he may be justly
charged) or if we break out amiss, then our duty is to desire that the word
may challenge us even for that: and being convinced of it, let us willingly and
readily yield, whereby we shall free our selves from the just blame of blockish,
sleepy, of secure and obstinate hearers.

But now I pass from this conuincing of them by the messenger of God, Doct. 6.
to the expostulating with them for the breach of their covenant, saying: Why
have ye done this? As if he should say in the person of God to them, if ye can
show any reason why yeemay do thus, I give you leave, come forth, and make
your answer: but the people answered not a word, in token that they held
themselves guilty. This teaches that God is equal and righteous in his
proceedings, yea even toward those who have provoked him: as he says in the
like case by his Prophet, to those that were the posterity of this people here
mentioned, come and let us reason together, etc. He Esa. 1. 18.
does not as men do, who will smite them who have done them wrong before Note.
they shall know why; and are never willing to come to good conditions with
them, how tractable soever they might find them. These are indeed cruel and
unmerciful men, who will not offer any indifferency; the Lord (I say) deals
not so; but offers to them who have dealt trecherously and broken covenant with
them; that if they can allege any sound reason for their doings, yea even from
himself, as that he has dealt hardly with them, and has been void of
compassion to them, he will hear them, and give them leave to plead their
own cause. Which advantage he giving them, he does stop all mouths and is
justified himself, in all his words and Ier. 12 1. Psalm. 51.
works.

Which makes greatly for the conuicting of all such as say like them in
Ezechiel, the Lords ways are unequal, and that he could have kept them from
Ezekiel. 18. 25.
such falls and dangerous estates thereby, as come upon them. Where yet who
sees not, that he has set double hedge and ditch betwixt them and their
sins; nay rather brazen walls, to the end they might not come near nor commit
them. He has (to speak plainly) sent his Prophets among Note. Genesis 2. 17.
them, to forbid and threaten them, even as he did to Adam, if he should
reach out his hand, and eat of the forbidden tree. He allureth and seeks to
win them, and persuades them to embrace the good way, and not to Luke 15.
come near the way of death and punishment; even as he seeks them who are
lost, but few of them will hear and come: so that he may say, what shall I do
more for this people: yea he may as well say to them, as he did to the people
by Hosea the Prophet, when he said; O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O
Judah, how shall I entreat thee? So that if any harden their hearts Hos 6. 4.
See Job 39. 37. 38.
in such manner, to charge God for their sins, from which yet by no
persuasions nor reasons they could be reclaimed: nay for the maintaining
whereof they have showed themselves rebellious and obstinate: know they, that
while this Scripture and such other shall remain to witness against them,
they shall never be able to find the smallest ease by such cauiling, whereby
they do but as it were by patching new with old, make the rent worse.

And by this we may see, that we were not best to trust to our own
imaginations, nor to follow our own ways: neither to deal as Adam, to excuse
Job 31. 33.
our selves; nor to be like to them in the Gospel, who when they were bidden
to the marriage, sent their answer as it pleased them, but so as it little
became them; for thereby we wade but the deeper into danger, and Luke 14. 18.
bear away more blows, as it may be said of them that strive against his
Esa. 54. 17.
chastisements. For every tongue that shall contend with him in judgment he
shall condemn. And this we may see if we list, in that fearful example of
him that hid his talent in the earth, which he was commanded to put to use, and
occupy it. He thought he had reason enough to say for his defense, that he
knew him to be an hard man of whom he received it; and therefore would be
sure to return him his own again. But what answer heard he? even this, Take
the unprofitable servant and cast him into utter darkness, Mat. 25. 30.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Therefore we see by this, as
also by our text, in that the people had nothing to answer, when a reason was
demanded of them why they had done so; that when men have followed their own
swinge, in sinning as they have desired, they shall never be able to answer
any thing in their own defense soundly, nor justly; but to the further
increase of their sin, as I have said already, but shall be tongue tied:
whereupon it follows, that which I have proved, that the Lord has so good
right when he deals against sinners, that entering into judgment with them,
he fears not to give them all vantages that they think will serve their
turns: but in the end they shall see that they do but make themselves thereby
the more guilty. For by these means in giving this people liberty to answer
what they could, their sin was the more aggrauated against them, they having
not so much as any color to defend themselves. And this being so, let us
learn hereby not to yield only by silence, but to be humbled also and relent;
and proceed on to true repentance: yea, let us beware that we have no
controversies with the Lord, by being bold to offend and provoke him; thinking
(though foolishly and falsely) to make a good end: for be we sure we shall never
make our part good against him: neither let us sin in hope; for when we are
threatened punishment for the same, or when we shall be arraigned, we shall
easily be found guilty, and the Lord shall be justified, and then all our fair
shows must vanish, leaving us in the briers.

Thus we have heard the people reproved for their sin: now the threatening Verse
3. The sense.
of the punishment follows, which is sharp and sore; and is set down in
three points. The first is, that God would not expel their enemies, as he had
upon condition promised: the second, that their remaining still in the land
should be as thorns in their sides: the third, their gods should be as a
snare to catch them in, to their destruction.

And for the first of these punishments, namely, that God should not expel The
first punishment.
the Canaanites, it is well to be weighed what he meant by it, that we may
the better see what a punishment it was: Now his meaning in thus speaking was
this: for as much as ye have not stood to your covenant to drive the nations
out, but have suffered them to remain there still; neither will I stand to
mine, which was but conditionally made with you: so that whereas I promised to
be with you, and strengthen you, and to expel them for you as I have begun to
do, now I will do so no more. And what will follow of that? even this, that
if I do it not, you shall not be able to do it of your selves; for ye are too
weak, as ye have good proof. And yet if they be not cast out, they shall
remain to your destruction. This the Lord meant by saying that he would not
cast them out.

This first punishment teaches us this; that when we remove not annoiances
Doct. 1.
while we may, we shall not be able afterward, when we would. Now our greatest
annoiances are every man's special sins, even as this one, Note.
their breaking off covenant with the Lord, was theirs. And when we see some
of the speciallest of these our sins, and what eye sores they be to us, while
our hearts go after them, and what trouble and sorrow they bring with them to
us; and yet we cast them not from us, but still retain them; it shall come to
pass afterward, that they shall get such strength in us, that we shall not be
able to depart and come out from them, no not then when we would. For they
shall so wind themselves into us, and so draw our delights after them,
especially through long lying in them uncontrolled, that we shall become
drunken with them, and besotted, so as we shall be utterly impotent, and not
by our prayers or other means (if we use any) be able to prevail against them.

Nay I say more, when God shall visit us with sickness or otherwise, or when
his word has in special manner wounded our consciences, and feared Note.
us with his displeasure for them; yet even then we shall not be able to
break off from them, and come out of love with them; they have so strongly and
forcibly drawn us after them, even as an husband, a natural man upon his
death bed can hardly depart from the wife of his youth, whom he has dearly
loved. And if (as in that case it comes sometimes to pass) if, I say we do
cry out of such sins in the anguish of our consciences, or when we think we
shall die, (as such afflictions will search deep, and (perhaps) constrain us
to utter in our extremity and pain, some confessions of them, and dislikings,
and to make purposes, while God holds us (as it were) on the rack with promise
and protestation, never to return to them Note.
any more; yet it shall appear, that even those promises are but wrung from us
by force and fear, as Saul's confession was, when he heard he should lose his
kingdom. For when Gods heavy hand shall once be off, from wringing and
paining either our minds or bodies, we shall be ready to run to our old
byas again, as Ahab did after his rash and hasty putting on sackcloth, and to
embrace those and the like sins, with as great liking (that I say no more) as
we did before.

Behold therefore what a bondage it is to be deluded by, and overcome of such
base commanders, and what injury we do our selves, when we fall into league
with any special sins; and why do we not thoroughly and heartily dislike and
set against them while they be as it were in the bud, and as yet but newly
sprung up in us, and in their first alluring of us? yea rather why did we not
rather keep the^ out at the first, so that they might have had no such power
over us? For there is hope in the beginning of our acquaintance with them, to
withstand and shake them off, if we would set our selves to the purpose to do
it; namely, as the word of God teaches us, that is, with diligence and
uprightness, knowing that we should not lose our labor. Whereas if we give
place to tentations, and foolish allurements, and do not wisely and seriously
withstand the beginnings thereof, we be not only in danger to become slaves
to them afterward, and unable to chase them away when we would, as I have said;
but also to prostitute our selves to many other which are their companions,
till we find that which this Romans 13. 13.
people found here in expelling the Canaanites, that we cannot possibly be rid
of them; or if some few do, yet it is with exceeding difficulty. So that they
are wise who give not up their members as weapons of sin, but by Romans 6. 13.
faith set themselves to mortify it betimes, after they have attained sound
hope to be saned: knowing that otherwise the strong man Satan will hold and
keep possession, if a stronger then he come not, even the Lord himself by
his power to drive him out.

And yet if this be well begun and attempted of us, I think this caveat or
watch word not unprofitable, but necessary, that although we have got the
upper hand, and cast out the unclean spirit, yet if we shall suffer (by our
carelessness and sloth) this good work to slake and to be broken off, our
enemy will make another assault upon us, and gather strength to recover his
possession again. For though he be once driven out, yet he imbarkes himself
(if he can get in again, as he labors to do) and stronglier keeps the
hold with double force and courage; nay seven fold more then at the first he
did, and then what will the end be, all may see; to wit, though not worse then
in the beginning, as it is with him, who did but go about it, but did it not
in deed, yet with exceeding difficulty and peril, though he had expelled him
before.

From hence it is, that many at this day, and those also of the forwarder sort,
have no courage in them to root out sin in their towns and families, seeing
they entertain the same in themselves. And if they attempt any such thing, yet
they do it but faintly, and soon leave it off. And hereof it is, that numbers
never grow to any great ripeness in religion, I mean the practice of it,
neither do ever come to see the tenth part of the fruit of it in Note.
the comfort that it brings, because they are not wise to chase away those
common sins, to the which they do most lie open, nor do but dally with
them, and never oppose themselves against them any thing heartily, especially
any long time together. So that many live in whoredom, in malice, in
oppression, deceiving, and the rest (for the most part) who are kept from
reproachful evils, yet live but a dead and uncomfortable life, seeing they do
not resist offers to sin, when they have any made to them, as Gedeon did the
kingdom, but seek and hunt after them rather: and such a life has small
force in it to persuade others to repentance. And this of the first punishment.

THE TWELFTH SERMON ON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to proceed. The second punishment threatened, to wit, that they should be
thorns in their sides, is The second punishment.
next to be weighed. Oh how fearful is this? For what is more irksome, then
continually, night and day, lying or going, to have thorns pricking our flesh?
which must needs breed grief upon grief, and sorrow upon sorrow. And this
came to pass afterward unto this people of Israel, who were often brought, as is
manifest in this book, and in the Scriptures following, to sin after sin,
and punishment upon punishment, for suffering the Canaanites and Idolaters to
live amongst them, and the Lord to be provoked, and the land defiled thereby.
And in the large laying out of this punishment upon the people of Israel, let
it teach us, that fellowship and familiarity with such, Doct. 2.
and with profane persons will prick our consciences, as thorns our flesh,
when we must often remember, that we have thereby not only allowed them in
their bad speeches and examples, against our knowledge and conscience, Note.
which will prick and vex us afterward if there be any true fear of God in
us: but also, that we our selves be tainted by their fellowship, and not dulled
only in grace and gifts. But of this before.

This doctrine may also more generally be applied to all sins which we shall
suffer to lurk and lie in us, they are as thorns in our flesh afterward.
Howsoever in the committing of them, they be as sweet and pleasant baits, yet
after, they become as choakes and bitter vomiting unto us. We may not think
that their ending will be as their beginning at the committing of them: when
Adam should eat the fruit forbidden, oh how the Serpent baited it with
pleasantness to the taste, beautifulnes to the eye, but unspeakable Note. Genesis
3. 6.
benefit to his fond persuasion, for that it should bring with it the knowledge
of good and evil, to make them like unto God himself. But when it was tasted
of them, what gall or wormwood was ever like bitter unto it? what thorns, did
prick the heart of David, after that he had been deceived 2. Sam. 11. 2.
and overcome with the bait that the devil had laid to catch him withal? what
thorns, I say, did prick him after, as in that Psalm made by him Psalm. 51. 2.
does lively and plentifully appear, and in some other which lay out his
sorrow, shame, anguish, doubting, and fearing that he had lost all grace, by
having his desire in committing of that sin. And it is the best that can be
said of those, who (having having had warnings and charges given them, to tie
up their unruly affections, and outrageous lusts, and not to dally with the
sins that they have been allured by) have yet been so far from regarding
such instructions, that they have given over themselves unto these defilements.
They have, I say, found them thorns, as David did, though few of them have
ever had the thorn plucked out of their flesh, to disquiet them no more, as he
had; I mean to be brought to sound and kind repentance, as he was.

The third punishment was, that their gods should be snares unto them. 3
A snare we know is set to take and catch the bird or conie unawares, that so
it may be killed at the pleasure of him that set it. And so he shows them,
that they not foreseeing wisely, that their not rooting these nations out,
would prove a joining with them in the worshipping of their gods, and so would
become their destruction; for their so foolithly running into the snare, he
shows them, I say, that they should be taken therein, and fall thereby, and by
other noisome sins, into the hands of the Lord, who would scourge them
grievously, one generation after another, till they should perish out of that
good land. And even so it came to pass, and they found all true that was told
them: for to those enemies to whom they had most wickedly joined themselves in
league; they were often in subjection and bondage, and thereby spoiled of all
their goods, liberties, and blessings, and afterward cast out of the land among
the Babylonians and Assyrians.

And by this we may see, that by idolatrous and wicked company keeping we
have snares set for us, to bring us in fellowship with them in their fowlest
sins. For so the Lord has said, if we will converse and have fellowship
Exodus 23. 32.
with them, by making of marriages, and eating with them, we shall also fall
to their fashions, and partake with them in their sins as this people did.
For great is the force of friendship, to draw us to that which we never
intended; nay against which we resolved to keep our selves. And who is strong
enough among us to withstand all the allurements and persuasions Note.
of carnal friends (we being often in their company) who have so many ways to
draw and allure us, but that one time or other he shall be constrained to
yield, or if he should not, how can he bear all the dislikes, frownings,
displeasures, and hard handlings, with the which he shall be set upon and
pursued? And we see as much: and theremedie is, to refrain their companies 2.
Tim. 3. 5.
and near fellowship with them altogether; and yet although we do so, and
thereby be free from danger on that side, yet we must know, that without as
great care had to keep our lives free from all other offenses, we shall some
other way lie open to some of them, whereby as great danger is like to ensue.
And by this gather, that we should neither be idle nor unprofitable in the
acknowledgement of Christ, if we seek to prosper. But seeing we behold the
practice and unwearied labor of the bad and popish sort, to win men to their
ungodly course, this one thing I must add more particularly: Let us that
profess our selves Christians, be ashamed to be so careless and slothful in
the companies where we come, to draw and move men to faith and repentance, and
to stir up better persons to love and to 1. These. 5. 11.
good works, and through self love so to please our selves in rotten talk as
Heb. 10. 24.
we do. And this be said of the punishments.

Now I have set down the words of Gods messenger, whereby he Object.
sought to turn the people from their sins, unto God by repeating his
benefits, and by reproves and threats. I should here have ended with his
speech, but that I see^ an occasion of propounding an objection and doubt, will
be taken from hence. For which cause I will set it down and answer it, before
I go to any new matter. The objection is this, seeing the messenger of God
moving them to repentance, does with his reproving and conuicting them, make no
mention of faith, it may seem that faith was not of such price then as it is
now, no mention being made of it, or if it were, that the people might be
driven to desperation rather, then brought to repentance, being not encouraged
to believe the pardon of their sin, as well as to forsake it. To the which I
answer; first, that they could not be moved Answ.
to repentance, if they had not had with all encouragement and persuasion to
believe: for though he name not faith expressly, yet seeing repentance and that
cannot be separated, neither could repentance therefore be urged upon them
without it. Secondly, I say, this people did repent, as it is clear by the
text; therefore they also believed. And thirdly, the messenger repeating Gods
promises to them; what does he but find fault with them for not believing the
same before? I conclude therefore, that he moved them to believe, which is the
chief thing in our turning to God. And so let all be persuaded, though it be
not always expressed, even as it was said to the Iaylor, when he asked what
he should do to be saved; believe in the Lord Jesus. And as without faith it
is impossible to please God; so let it be Act. 16. 31. 34. Heb. 11. 6.
looked unto principally, that we rise up, and lie down, and walk accompanied
with that, for so we shall resist the tentations, allurements, and
discouragements, 1. Ioh. 5. 4. Verse. 4. 5.
with other difficulties of this life.

This being thus answered, now I proceed to the second point in this first The
sense.
part of the chapter, and that is the fruit of the sermon that the people
reaped by it, which was repentance, and that is set down in these two verses,
not in express words, but by signs thereof, and those are set down to be
three. The first was, that they lifted up their voice; the second, they wept;
the third, they offered sacrifice. By the lifting up of their voice, we can
conceive no other thing, but that they heartily confessed their sins, and
cried out of them, which they heard to have been reproved by Gods messenger,
and craved pardon of them, accusing themselves. They being guided therein by
God, as the Prophet Hosea in his time taught the people, that in repenting they
should take to them words, as well as to have a good heart. By their weeping,
they signified deep grief conceived for displeasing God, and provoking his
wrath against them. And their weeping was so great, that the place took the
name thereof, and was called Bochim, that is, a place of weepers, and by their
sacrifice they declared their faith, that their sin was pardoned. For the
sacrifices were shadows of Christ's death; and they in offering them, believed
as the fathers of those times did, they constantly believed (I say) that all
their sins were forgiven by the death of Christ, resembled by the offering of
them. To the which also there is no doubt, but that they added thanks, as the
Lord directed the people in Hosea to do in Hos. 14. 3.
the repentance which he required of them; which also was resembled by their
peace offerings.

Now to examine these things more perticularly, this doctrine of repentance
which here occasion is offered to speak of, I will the brieflier pass over,
seeing I have spoken largely of it in other Sermons, though not in this book,
save only so far as the words require somewhat to be said. And first,
seeing the hearing of that sermon did work so good things in the people, I
mean many of them, and bring forth such fruit, we are taught Doc verse. 4. and
5.
not only to pray the Lord of the harvest to send such laborers into the
harvest, as may be able and fit to bring home the Lords harvest; but also what
we should do when we hear such divine sermons, and doctrine as this was
which the messenger of God here preached unto them which do urge our
consciences by laying out our sins: for all doctrine is not of that argument.
I grant we ought by all doctrine to be moved, according to that which we
hear, and as occasion is offered, either to grief or to comfort: but when we
are more specially taught the doctrine of repentance, we should follow the
example of these here mentioned, who cried out of their sins, and mourned
deeply, and craved pardon. And likewise of other that did the same; as the
people that came after these, when they heard Samuel reproving them, lamented
after God; and they who are mentioned 1. Sam. 12. 1.
in the book of the Acts, at Peter's sermon, were pricked in their hearts, and
Act. 2. 37.
sought comfort. So (I say) should we do, I mean, both such as have repented
already, to renew it, and such also as are yet to enter upon it. And it is
fearful when these fruits may be seen in them and others, that so many among
us, hearing the like sermons, can go untouched in their consciences. and with
dry eyes or hearts: for though these be not sufficient, yet with faith they are
commendable.

Secondly, and more principally here, as this people lifted up their voice
Doct. 2.
and wept, when they were reproved for the abse of Gods benefits, and for
breaking of their covenant, by Gods messenger: so among all other good
instructions (which are infinite) we should be greatly moved and sore grieved,
when we shall hear that we are justly charged by preaching, for the like
faults; as for the ill using of the blessings which God has bestowed upon us,
and for breaking the covenant which we have made with him, because these two
ought to be so thoroughly minded of us daily, that we should give no just cause
to be rebuked for the neglecting of either of them. For what Note.
do we in our lives commendably, if these two be wanting, and neglected of
us, I mean if we do not bind our selves by covenant, to be more fruitful in
duty, and more cheerfully to go about the same, while we see Gods benefits
continued to us, whereby he does (as it were) hire us thereunto? And secondly,
if we make not new covenants with him from time to time to walk constantly in
our uprightness, rather then to deserve just rebuke for breaking and looking
loosely to the old? But if we have due regard of both these, from time to
time, we shall both keep all other parts of our lives within compass the
better, and also we shall not need to fear that we can sustain any sharp
reproof justly, (which is ever unwelcome to flesh) for the same.

But yet further, to say somewhat more perticularly of these three signs of
their repentance; we must know, that the inward graces which are testified by
the outward signs thereof here set down, are rather to be sought of us in
our repentance, as relenting and melting of the heart for offending God,
humiliation, faith, and the like; then the outward signs themselves; the last
especially, as the offering of sacrifice, both expiatorie, to seek
forgiveness of sins, and eucharisticall, representing their thanks, which
were merely ceremonial, and proper to the Jews; therefore not now to be used
of us; and yet in them laudable, this ceremony being then in use to express
their faith and believing in Christ, and their thanksgiving, as we do simply
offer to God both, and without them. This be said of their offering sacrifice
first, though mentioned last. The other two, of lifting up their voice, and
weeping, are always to be aimed at in our repentance, but cannot always be
attained, neither are therefore of necessity to be urged, neither Note.
to be rested in if we have them. For the first of them; namely, the lifting
Doct. 3.
up the voice in prayer and confession of sin, and accusing of our selves, it
is required by the Prophet Osea, of such as could show it: for in urging the
people at that time to repent, saying, O Israel, return to the Lord thy God,
he adds: take unto you words, and say unto him, take away all iniquity and
receive Hos. 14. 2.
us graciously, and we will offer the calves of our lips, etc. But all cannot
express their minds in words; as namely, the ignorant, especially some of
them, and some in the bitterness of their hearts power out their prayers without
words at some time, as Anna did. Therefore if it may be, and that also it be
most expedient (as if it may be an help to quicken us in feruency) the voice
is to be 1. Sam. 1. 13.
lifted up, but not always of necessity to be enjoined.

Now concerning weeping, which they also here are said to have adjoined, Doct.
4.
it being a further degree of sorrow then many can attain unto, it is not of
necessity to be imposed upon us, (as I have said) as though repentance could
not be without it: though where it can be, and accompanies repentance, it does
more deeply search into the heart, satisfy the party so moved, and quiet the
mind, which was before troubled and unsettled. This I have thought good to say
of their outward signs of repentance. And seeing they were set down to
testify the same in the people, therefore all may see that this repentance
must be ever found in us, whether any of the signs be present or no. And the
points thereof are these; that the heart be deeply The sum of repentance
briefly.
pricked for sin, that it bewail the same, as purposing never to turn to it
or the like again: which is all that can be for the present time, and that
there be yet for all this aggravating of the sin, a believing according to
the promise of God, that it is all freely remitted by God through Christ, Doct.
5.
which more or less quiteth the heart: and if that believing be there, it will
purge it from dead works also afterward, and keep it from sinning any more,
in such manner as it did in former times, the heart and whole man being
sanctified already through believing. And this is the substance of repentance,
which we are to practice by the example of this people, as also of many other
in the Scripture; as in Jeremy, Hosea, and diverse other. Ier. 31. 18. Hos. 14.
2 3. Object.


But here may a doubt arise about the repentance of the people, that it may
seem not to have been such as it has bin set down to be. For if they
repented at this time, why did they not bring forth fruits of amendment?
whereof this was one, yea a chief one; to wit, that they should after this,
have rooted out the idolatrous Canaanites, they being now so sharply reproved
for that they had not done it before, but rather made leagues with them, when
yet that making of peace with them, was one of the chief sins that was laid to
their charge? and in all sound repentance, the sins bewailed, acknowledged, and
repented of, must needs be amended (we know) in the persons. For answer
hereto, it is to be thought, that the Lord held back Answ.
strength and courage from them, so that they could not fight against them,
prosperously, as they had done in the days of Joshua. And this he did, to the
end they might bear that as a mark of their sin and disobedience. For God,
according to his accustomed manner, did receive them into his favor, when they
repented: but he did not by and by restore again to them the other particular
gifts, which for their just deserts he had taken from them; as strength of
body, and courage of mind, they having both been abused of them before,
neither necessary to salvation.

Which thing is most needful for us to mark for our great benefit: For even
so he deals at this day, as he did in former times, and with that people.
Note.
So he dealt with our first parents after their fall: for though they
repented, and were received again into favor, yet the evils and
discommodities which they brought upon themselves and mankind, did not the Lord
take away; neither was that quiet and sweet abode of theirs in Paradise,
enjoyed of them at any time after. So Sampson lost the gift of his bodily
strength for a time, after he had so greatly displeased God; which I might say
of many other, to wit, that they lost the use of such graces as before they
enjoyed. And so doubtless, such as after a commendable profession of the
Gospel, when they had before been truly converted to God by faith and
repentance, did fall again to their old sins, or to drowsinesse and coldness
in his service; such, I say, have found and received the like measure at his
hands, as most clear experience has been hereof in this late deceased
generation, and in some who still remain of them; whose first zeal and love
which they had at their first receiving the Gospel, being after slaked, has
never after been as it was, recovered. For though they have seen their falls,
and repented, and obtained mercy, yet the Lord has left a mark of Note.
that their sin behind, both to minister and people, so that they have rarely
recovered their former zeal, the one in fervent preaching, and care taking
over the people, the other in cheerful profession, uprightness of heart, and
holy walking; but have limped in some sort afterward, and they do come short
of the grace they had before; the which the Lord has suffered to put them in
remembrance of that their sin; even as a man having fallen from an high beam
or tree, and broken his bones, though he get A simile.
them set together again, so that they may serve the turn in some sort, yet
he never feels them perfectly cured, but ever painful and lame afterward, or
much impaired.

And to add one instance more; such as after they truly repented have fallen
into adultery, or any such heinous crime, though they have risen again out of
it, and given good testimony thereof, although they come to be truly persuaded,
that it is forgiven them, yet what unquietness do they often find within
themselves, what shame and holding down of the head Note.
does it cause outwardly before men, whereby they are much appalled and held
back, in respect of that they might have been, from good doing? besides, how
many of the lovers of the truth are strong enough to receive them as they did
before, (though it be their sin that they do not) and as freely to
communicate with them every way; but are much estranged from them, and hardly
conceive of them, whereby it may be seen, that their credit is much impaired
thereby among men, although they be still in favor with God, as David and
others were. The which the Lord in his providence does to them, and such like,
to keep them in awe, who are so ready to break out again, and that all may
see how God detesteth sin, even in his own, and also that he may thereby
stir up more serious repentance, and constant holding on in that course, and
that they be notled away from it by the error of the wicked, in such as are
brought into the right way already.

That which has been said of this point, (that I may teach a further use of
it) ought to provoke al such as by the grace of God are kept from such
reproachful sins, to yield continual thanks to God for it, (which it is to
be feared, is much neglected) as well as for other benefits, which give them
just cause to do the same. But if any lie in known and offensive crimes, and
yet can cunningly keep them from men's eyes, and look no further; let such
Note.
know they are worse then the worst I have spoken of, whose sins yet have
broken out before men. And seeing the best may fall possibly, and that
dangerously, and so doing are sure that their sin will find them out, and
that they shall smart accordingly; let the other much more think that God will
vnskirt and vnuizor them to their shame, in his good time, and let the best
count it no lost nor needless care to keep themselves well while they are
well, I mean, free from notorious and known sins, and let them endeavor to
give good example without weariness, that so they may be free from such
fearful offenses. And this be said of the peoples repentance.

To all the former instructions out of these two verses, this I add, that if
the Doct. 6.
bitter weeping of the people there, caused the place to take the name from
thence, so that to this day it is retained, and is called a place of weeping:
and further, we see how long the remembrance of it is kept for many years
after: then it does strongly commend to us, what care we should have while we
live, to possess the generations coming after us, of good examples given by
us among them that live with us, which may do good when we are gone: either
Ministers by their diligent and fervent preaching, and godly living; or the
people in more then ordinary receiving the message of the Gospel with
thanksgiving, and other commendable fruits following. The place of such
inhabitants, whether it receive a name from such things done there, as this
Bochim did here, or no, it is not so material. But this is to be thought,
that the remembrance of such good things done them, might harten and encourage
many that shall come after them, not in that place only, but also in many
other, to follow such examples. But whether they do or no, this is too true;
that no vile actions shall be done to lead the people from God and goodness,
no disorder, I mean unruly behavior, and revel rout keeping; but their
example shall be taken up (to be sure) not only of them that have seen them;
but also of them who shall come after them, having heard of them, and be made
customs, if not petty laws among themselves, as the custom of spending the
twelve days at the Nativity, etc. does too truly testify. And thus I end.

THE THIRTEENTH SERMON ON THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The second part of the Chapter.
VERSE. 6. Now when Ioshus had sent the people away, the children of Israel went
every man into his inheritance to possess the land. 7. And the people had
served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that
outliued Joshua; which had seen all the great works of the Lord that he had
done for Israel. 8. But Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord died,
when he was an hundred and ten years old. 9. And they buried him in the
coasts of his inheritance, in Timnah-heres in mount Ephraim, on the north side
of mount Gaash. 10. And so all that generation was gathered unto their fathers,
and another generation arose after them which neither knew the Lord, nor yet
his works which he had done for Israel. 11. Then the children of Israel did
wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim. 12. And forsook the Lord
God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed
other Gods, even the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed
unto them, and provoked the Lord to anger. 13. So they forsook the Lord and
served Baal and Ashteroth.
NOw follows the second part of the chapter to the The sense.
end; which also contains the sum of the rest of the second part of the
book unto the 17. chapter, and sets down the estate of the children of
Israel unto the death of Sampson, and that was after this manner. 1. The people
provoked God by their sins. 2. God punished them for them, and that by other
nations. 3. He raised up Judges to them: and 4. When they cried unto him
delivered them. 5. After that they brake forth and fell to Idolatry again. And
this was their estate all the time that passed till the acts mentioned in the
17. chapter, as is showed by particular examples through all the chapters
before that, beginning in the third. But if any see reason not to consent that
these verses in this second part of this chapter do lay forth the sum of the
second part of the book in general, it makes no great matter. He must yet
grant, that in them is set down the estate of the people generally at the time
after Ioshuas death, who knew not the Lord: and in the chapters following, more
perticularly; unto the seventeenth chapter. The distinct matters in this second
part of the chapter are these five now mentioned. 1. Their sin. 2. Their
punishment. 3. Their crying to God. 4. Deliverance. 5. Their reuolting. The
first of them was their sin, the which is set down from the eleventh verse
to the fourteenth, with the occasion that they took to fall in that manner,
and that is from the sixth verse to the eleventh. And the occasion was the
death of Joshua, and other good governors here mentioned, that outliued him:
for though in their time the people served the Lord, as here it is said, yet
after them arose another generation that knew not the Lord, and then they
forsook him. Of these now as it follows in order.

And first let us consider what is said of Joshua, then of the people, and
lastly of them both. Of Joshua first in his life, and so come to his death;
then of the people after his death. In that it is said of him that he had sent
the people away to their inheritance, before he died; as it is recorded, Josh.
24. it causes a question to be moved, why he had called them together before
his death; that appears in the chapter mentioned now, throughout unto the 28.
verse: and it was to this end, to rehearse Gods benefits to them, and to Josh.
24. 28.
exhort them to serve the Lord, and this was a little before his death, at
which time also he renewed a covenant betwixt the Lord and the people: the like
to which we read that Iehoida did betwixt the Lord, and Ioash the King. And so
did Nehemiah, Josiah and other, whose rare and godly example is 2. King. 11. 17.
set forth most clearly and lively, to be a pattern to all Christian
magistrates, even the highest, how they should count it their greatest honor
to honor Doct. 1. In verse. 6.
the Lord among the people, and cause them to do so likewise; to advance his
true worship also, and therefore to see true and sound doctrine taught and not
to suffer superstition, nor false opinions to be thrust upon the Church: and
to provide, as near as may be, that the people may know, that they do not
require these things of them for fashion, but in sincerity; and that seeing the
Lord is a plentiful rewarder of them that seek him: therefore Heb. 11. 6.
they must not think themselves discharged, in that they provide for the
outward peace of the people only (wherein yet they do very commendably) but
that they may live godly also; because under God they are the maintainers and
preseruers of both tables. And the best that they can yield Custodes vtriusque
tabulae. Psalm. 2. 11.
the Lord for advancing them is, to serve him in fear themselves, and kiss
the son, and provide that others may do so, and that without disturbance, by
them that are corrupt in their religion, and profane. And thus they are to go
before them zealously, and faithfully in their own practice, as this noble man
Joshua here did, professing it openly that he would do so, saying, Josh. 24.
15. Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
whatsoever other do, I and my house will serve the Lord. And that then and
now these things might the better be done, the Lord commands in
Deuteronomie, that the highest in authority should be studious in the book
Deuteronomy. 34. 11.
of God. All the forementioned things did Moses, who gonerned the people before
Joshua: who both are to be followed in their religious course; because
experience has always taught us, that if the chief rulers be zealous and
religious, the inferiors will embrace piety and godliness likewise; at least,
not be against it. And contrariwise: but if they should not, yet the people
must themselves walk with God.

And thus did Joshua send the people away, as it is said in the text, and with
Doct. 2.
gracious words exhorted them, and spoke to them when he was ready to die; as
in the forementioned chapter of Joshua appears, that he might leave his last
words so fruitful among them, that their print might remain in them after his
death, even as it did. And seeing he sent them away in this manner, we should
know, that it becomes meaner persons much more to do so; I mean, to give
exhortation to their children, servants, and neighbors, if they have freedom
from pain, which often times hinders right good men, and this is the best
memorial that they can leave behind them at their death. There should be a
wise putting of the house in order, and a setting of men's estates at a stay
before death come, as Hezechiah was willed by 2. King. 20. 1.
the Lord to do; a chief part whereof is this giving of exhortation: and this
should be; both that the mind of the visited party may be eased and at
quiet, and to prevent all trouble among those that remain behind. For if this
be not done before sickness) as commonly it is neglected, it had need to be
then gone about with all speed. But whiles this duty ought to be performed,
of using good speech to the standers by, how many are there who are scarce able
or willing to take direction themselves, when they lie upon their death bed? so
far are they from bequeathing gracious counsel and exhortation to others,
and all because they sought no such matter in the days of their peace, health,
and liberty, nor desired that their family should. And this be said of Joshua;
now of the people, according to the division made before, in the entering into
this verse. They being now sent away, went Doct. 3.
every man to his inheritance, as it had been before divided to them by Joshua,
and so rested at home in peace, after their many hard battles and troubles.
Thus the Lord deals with his people, that for a time they find hardness,
and afterward deliverance and peace; as after a storm comes fair weather.
Thus heaviness endures for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 30.
5.
We all shun trouble, and it is of it self grievous and unwelcome; but
herein we are much faulty, that as tedious as it is, few of us lay to avoid it
aright, by eschewing the sins that cause it: but rather bring it upon our
selves by our rash attempts, and other wilful, careless, and bad doings;
whereas we might be free from many troubles, if we could take counsel of God
in our matters, and stoop to his government. And for example, it may be said,
we prize not outward peace (to live safely and quietly in our houses) at any
high reckoning, in which estate yet we might do much good; but we trifle out
our precious time at least, if we be not worse occupied; whereby, when we
raise trouble against our selves, we take not the best way commonly to go
through it cheerfully, and meekely committing Psalm. 37. 3.
our way to God wholly, by doing all the good we can, and so wait upon him
patiently, for a good issue.

Now after the people were said to be sent away, it is further said, that
Verse. 7. Doct. 1.
they served God while Joshua and other godly governors lived. Oh therefore
how happy a thing it is to enjoy such? For much help, encouragement See more
of this in chap. 1. ver. 1. Doct. 1.
and ease the inferiors have by them (they bearing the burden off from the
sholders of the other being more weak and unfit thereto) who if they were not
they must bear it themselves. For when the people have by their means the
Gospel purely preached, and live safely under their vine 1. King. 9.
and fig tree, as they did in the days of Solomon, with the liberty to
exchange and utter their commodities and wares, little do they weigh it, for
the most part, what a benefit it is, who do commonly enjoy these blessings by
the kind, wise, and religious care of their governors. So to come lower even
among our selves, they who live under inferior guides, as people of the meaner
sort under godly headburrowes and guides in their towns, who have great
encouragement to Christian duty by them, together with Note.
good example, rather then checkes taunts, and discouragement (which many feel
in bad towns) oh how sweet a liberty do they enjoy that can prize it aright?
what a furtherance to godliness? So to be in a religious and well ordered
family, where God and his true service is chiefly regarded, it is a corner of
heaven in respect of other houses, though there want not in them many bodily
comforts.

And if such a thing be set down here of the people to their commendation
and their governors also, and for us to behold and think upon, that while
such lived together, the one was well guided by the other, and God religiously
served of both; then let all such as enjoy the benefit of good and Christian
government, in house, or out of house, especially in both, fall down before
the Lord, and acknowledge it to his great praise, and the binding of themselves
unto him, and pray earnestly that they may give good testimony of it, by
seeking to be settled in the fear of God, and to grow up in faith, knowledge,
and grace thereby. I know it is no common thing either to find the one or the
other, but where any are under the authority and wing of godly guides, let them
make account that it is their summer season, not like the winter snuffes and
brunts. And as for such as favor not good Note.
dwellings, but rather shun them, as Esau did good marriages, I deny not but
they may hold up their head with the highest, and bear out matters with the
bigest, and shift to get a share in the pleasures of sin for a season; but
they are as far from true happiness as they are from spiritual and sound
comfort, though few have ears to hear it, till they smart by it. Now further,
for people that live under a good ministry, (to say a little of them, Moses his
being among the people, does woefully prognosticate, unto what a pass they are
like to grow, if they had elbow room. For though none might live happilier
then they, yet who (for the most part) do less look after it? for as they in
Moses absence from them but forty days, made themselves a calfe to worship:
even so the people are so brutish in these days, and disordered, even while
their faithful pastors live with them, that the greatest part of them, take no
good by them: what did I say? nay they live most offensiuely under them. A
sign of a woeful condemnation ready to come upon them, all may see it is in
their so doing, for loving darkness, in the clear light of the Gospel more
then it. And though some of them Ioh. 3. 19.
who are more subtle do carry the matter more closely, yet they are
restrained by necessity or shame, not reformed by grace, and the power of the
word. And let others who are not so bad, and yet not brought to true
repentance, let them (I say) make better use of such helps while they enjoy
them, as they did in the Acts of the Apostles, and especially let them see that
all be well betwixt God and them; yea and let them get furniture of grace to
uphold them afterward also, lest too late they lament, that they took no good
by them, and bewail the want of them (as Saul did Samuel) 1. Sam. 28. 11.
when there is no help.

But here in as much as we see these people held out in Gods service but Doct.
2.
for a time, and that was, while they had good governors and overseers living
with them: it avails much therefore to observe in our selves what it is that
makes us embrace religion, and what is the chiefest thing that causes us to
hold on the same. (A worthy point for all to learn, and namely such as
pretend they love the Gospel) it much concerns us (I say) to know and be
assured whether it be favor of men, commodity, credit, example, or other
outward respect, which moves us to profess any thing more zealously then some
other do, or whether for conscience sake, in that God commands us so to do,
and for the savor and sweetness that we find therein and in the Gospel
which we hear. For even thereafter shall our welfare, prosperity, and
perseverance be. For if we have tasted how good Mat. 19. 29.
the Lord is, and have found that hundred fold that is promised, and verefied
in us which is written in the Psalm, that a day in Gods house is better to us
Psalm. 84. 11.
then a thousand else where; then we may know that we have builded upon a
Matthew. 7. 24.
rock, and our building shall stand, and till we meet with a better booty then
that, and may serve a better master then the Lord is (which shall never be) we
will keep close to him, and count his service to be perfect freedom. And to
such as demand of us whether we will continue and hold on in a godly course,
or go back, as Christ demanded of his Disciples, we shall be Ioh. 6. 68.
able to answer with Peter: whither shall we go? we are in the way to
eternal life, and we will not change our Christian course for any other.
Otherwise it is not enough to boast of our love to God, and to say [Lord, Lord]
when yet we will take no pains thoroughly to gage our hearts and to see our
affection well ordered, that so good life may follow.

Now while the holy Ghost speaks of the people, how they followed Doct. 3.
the Lord all the days of Joshua, and the godly elders; he stays a while
about them, giving them this testimony, that they had seen the works of God
which he had done among them: meaning that they had not barely looked Luke 1.
38.
upon them but observed, and (as Mary did the words of the Angel) had laid
Luke 2. 51.
them up in their hearts to consider them. For what profited it then otherwise
to see them? For there is no doubt, but that there were many more alive at that
time, who had seen the miracles and great works which the Lord had wrought in
placing them in Canaan; but they were not worth the naming, seeing they had not
also made use of them; but these had seen them in another manner, so that they
acknowledged the Lords power and goodness toward them thereby; declaring that
to be the cause of their constant serving of God, and cleaning to him, even
because they had seen them. And it is no less (doubtless) then a great cause
of the godliness of them that have any in them; namely, that they are such as
have seen and weighed Gods wonderful acts, as his mercy and gracious working
by the power of the Gospel in themselves or other; as also for that they have
had proof of his mighty upholding of the^ in a good course against all
adversary power of the prince of darkness, and his band. In like manner this
has hartened them to duty not a little, for that as they have seen it always
to go well with them while they feared the Lord, and departed from evil; so
they ^^ue seen the heavy hand of God to have been against others, that Note.
have perverted their ways, and followed a bad course; so that although they
have prospered here for a season, yet when God in his due time has blown
upon their visored felicity, they have wanzed away in his displeasure. This
Solomon commends to us in his example, who professes that it Eccles. 7. 15.
17.
was his practice to behold and consider all things (not impertinent matters as
a busy body, but profitable) and especially the courses and issues of the
righteous and wicked. By which means he attained to great experience and
wisdom, both to guide himself and others. Even as his father David did also;
saying, that he was made wiser then the ancient, because he considered such
things. But this meditating of Gods wonderful works; and namely this one, the
greatest of other, how he has appointed to save some from utter perdition, and
lets others go on in their sins, though it be a strong motive to draw men
to God, yet (with grief it may be spoken) it is utterly wanting among most
men. Their hearts are set on folly and vanity. He that has lived to see many
laid in grave, has scarce a thought that he shall follow, and go the way
that all have gone before him in. As for that they hear, that except they
repent they shall all perish, although they know their Luke 13. 3.
hearts are hardened, so that they neither can repent nor have the least desire
after it; yet they cry peace, peace, as though all were safe. So that it may
now justly be complained of, which Solomon has long ago bewrayed, that the
fools eyes are in every corner of the world; meaning that they are busying
Prou. 17. 24.
themselves any way needlessly, and amiss; but as for things out of the world
or above it, that is (as Saint Peter speaks) a far off, their eyes are 2.
Pet. 1. 9.
sore and pur-blind, they cannot look after them; and as the Prophet speaks,
they are wise to do evil; but to do well, they have no knowledge. Ier. 4. 22.
The Lord himself bewaileth this brutishnes in men, that like unreasonable
creatures they mind only that which is present, and before their eyes; but oh
(says he) that my people were wise, and did consider their end. For that is
Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
wisdom indeed, which seeing the most do want, therefore they never enjoy the
thousand part of sweet living here, as they might do.

Now the holy story having spoken of the works which Joshua and the Verse. 8.
people did in his life, makes mention of his death, as that which follows,
when all the actions of life are ended. And therefore David, when he was
departing hence, said; I go the way of all the world. As we have therefore 1.
King. 22.
heard much of the actions of our life; so let us hear some what of death, as
the text gives us leave and occasion. And in that we hear that he died the
Doct. 1.
servant of the Lord, as he had long lived, and had done so many worthy
things in his life (death and departure hence being so solemn a thing as it
is) we should be much moved, not only to think upon the end of all flesh,
but especially of our own death, and to prepare for it above all things, Psalm.
37. 37.
and to learn to die; that so we might with him, die the servants of God.
Which though to a natural man it be imposible, yet the Lord makes it
tolerable, yea easy, and a welcome thing, to all such as have first learned to
live well here, or at least are fit to die. For perseverance in good life,
meets with a good death, and joyfully embraces it: in which respect Solomon
says, that the day of death is better then the day of birth, as being the
entrance Eccles. 7. 2.
into life. And therefore the text says, Joshua the servant of the Lord died:
noting that his death was not as the death of every common man, but a blessed
death, and a rest from the work of the Lord, in which he had been faithful
in his life; and therefore now looking for his reward, from the Lord Heb. 11. 6.
a bountiful paymaister, death was welcome to him. As it is reported of an
ancient Father of the Church, that being 80. years old, and being then to bid
farewell to his friends, said; Thus long have I served the Lord, and now it
grieueth me not to die; for I have a good master, thereby meaning that death
was far more welcome to him then life; even as that day is to a faithful
servant, wherein he is to receive liberal wages for his long service, then all
the days are that went before. And thus S. Paul speaks of David, that when
he had served his time, he slept: meaning that he rested from his labors
Eccles. 12. 7. Act. 13. 36.
in body, while his soul returned to God who gave it. And when we have
learned, and fitted our selves to die, then the hearing of death, and the
beholding it in other, is a fit mean to quicken us to the looking after it our
selves, and to further and confirm us in readiness to die well; considering
deeply of it and of our own mortality with it. And it much helps to think
upon the infinite thousands mentioned in the Scriptures (who have been taken
hence by death) and namely, the rolls of Kings, such as have been more noble
and memorable persons, who seemed to have an eternity here, by their dignity,
pomp, and prerogatives above other men, as also among our selves more nearly
to hearken after, and think upon the death of such as we have known or lived
with; oh it does not a little help to crack the pride of life in us, and to
prepare for death. All which in fit seasons and upon good consideration, being
set before our eyes, are singular means to fasten this meditation upon us,
that we also may willingly and readily give place to death: and this shall
much easilier and the better be, while by our rejoicing that we have in Christ
Jesus our Lord we die daily 1. Cor. 15. 33.
before death do come. By means whereof, as it is uncertain, when we see any
to die among us, who shall be next; so every one should put forward himself,
as the Apostle did in a case not unlike, being told by their master that one of
them should betray him; every one asked for himself, saying, is it I Matthew.
26. 22.
master? Even so (I say) we ought to resolve, every one for himself, that he
may be the next, that so death may the better be provided for. And let this
serve by this occasion, for a meditation of death.

His old age being an hundred and ten years, are reckoned as an honor to him,
that being so commended for his godliness, he lived so long. To Doct. 2.
whom Moses and Caleb may be added, full of years and grace. Doubtless it is
no less to a man serving God so religiously, so long a time. For it is not an
honor bestowed upon all, to become fathers and worthies, in the Church for
their long continuance in grace, when we see the love of so many to wax cold,
and a far greater number to be reproachful in their age. But gray hairs are
a comely ornament, when they are found in the way of righteousness. Prou. 16.
31.
For although it be happiness for the people of God to die betimes seeing to
be with Christ is best of all, yet to live long here, (if God Phil. 1. 23.
may be honored by us in our life, is an high honor also another way, even by
doing much good. And so David confessed, saying, If I may live to keep thy
word (for thereby God is glorified) I shall count it a great bounty Psalm. 119.
17.
unto me. Which reason David and Hezekiah used, desiring life to this end,
saying; The living, the living shall praise thee, Esa. 38. 19. And in the Psalm.
Esa 38. 19.
None can worship thee in the grave. This, a man would think, should stir
Psalm. 6. 5.
up all that have made good beginnings in Christian life, to long after
perseverance therein, yea though they live unto old age, and that they may be
experienced and well seen in the ways of God, that so they may declare them
to others. Which as it is rare, and few men's cases to do; so it is their 1.
Job. 2. 14.
honor that do it, and their benefit who enjoy it. I speak this to the shame
of such as do by small occasions depart from good beginnings, and in the pride
of their hearts, and contempt of other, take conceits against their brethren,
who hold constantly the profession of their hope, and break off their
fellowship with them, directly contrary to the word of God, or some other way
depart from a good course; so that few such do hold out to the end in their
good beginnings, but lose that honor that Joshua had, who in his Heb. 10. 25.
old age died as he had long lived; to wit, the servant of the Almighty, then
the which title, the Angels had no greater honor. Heb. 1. 7.


It is further added of Joshua, that he was buried in his own inheritance,
Verse. 9.
which was in mount Ephraim, in the place mentioned in the text, and that
without superstition. Now concerning burial we are to know, that God has
appointed that it should be for the honest and decent covering of the body,
until the resurrection day; and that the bodies of the faithful should be as
it were, laid up in the earth, in hope of their honor at the last day; though
many righteous persons have by the cruelty of their enemies especially, been
denied this liberty of burial, which is the comliest manner of bestowing them,
but it hindered not their happiness. Beside, the bodies of God children, for
that they be the temples of the holy Ghost, ought (if it may be) decently to
be buried, and not to be cast forth into the fields. And it was a kind of a
curse to Iehoiakim, to be buried like an ass. But to say no more of this, yet
about burial I add one thing that whereas it goes against the Ier. 22. 19.
edge with men and women, that their bodies should so be abased at that time,
as to be wrapped and wound up, and laid in grave, some of them having lived
sumptuously, and daintily here before, and therefore costly clothed, and in
fine apparel; they must know, that this mortality and corruption must, by Gods
ordinance be put off, before immortality and glory can be put on, and that
this abasement, together with the laying of them by the walls, in the utmost
and meanest rooms, which were wont to have their abode in the costliest and
seemeliest places, as also the homely laying forth of them by mean people,
they themselves in their life time having had company with the wealthier and
better sort: this I say, with all other abasements Note.
and disgrace, serves to this end, even to abate and pull down the pride of
men that is in them, and to cause them to esteem meanly of their bodies, in
their flourishingest estate, which they have too much pampered, and gloried in,
by setting out of them so vainly. It is a fit cooling and check for such as
have so abused them, to see in the usage of other men's, what shall be done to
their own. As for other who have glorified God in their bodies, and used them
as meet instruments of their souls to make them fitter to serve God, they
knowing that their grave is made (by the grave of Christ) a sweet bed for their
bodies to sleep in, till by the power of his resurection, they shall rise to
partake eternal life with their souls; and that it is not as a prison or
dungeon to lock them up in, till the resurrection of condemnation, as whereto
the wicked are reserved: they (I say) knowing this, are not dismayed but
comforted in thinking of this. And further, they having Heb. 9 Iast. 1. Cor 15.
Note.
learned that it is appointed that all shall once die, and that such abasement
of their bodies must be, before they enjoy immortality and glory, they I say,
do both submit themselves willingly thereunto while they live here, rather
then take a pride in their bodies, as too many do (yea even in their hair)
and they bewail the sin rather which has brought such reproach, and far
greater misery then that upon men, and with our Savior, despise the shame that
is set before them, and bear contentedly such reproach, Heb. 12. 2.
in certain hope of the glory which they are going to.

To this which I have said of burial, one thing more let us consider: that
Doct. 2.
seeing Ioshuas burial is only spoken of simply and barely (without any
addition) which also ye shall read of the Kings and great persons burials in
their histories: it is worth the considering, what superstition the Prelates of
Rome have brought into this ceremony of burial, as they have done about all
other pieces of their religion; partly to blind fold poor souls, in making
them to think, that their dead shall fare the better for their trumperv (when
yet they do but deceive and feed them with false comforts) and partly while
they seek their own, and their shauelings gain thereby; but both for the
advancing of their superstitious religion. In particular, some of these abuses
are, that there must be prayers made for their souls, ringing, to help them
the sooner out of Purgatory, burying them near the high alter, with candles
burning upon their toombes; and diverse other such superstitious orders whereby
they persuade the ignorant, that God is as busy in making provision for them
in heaven, as they are in heaping and Note.
using much trumperie about their burial here on earth. And this of burial,
and so of the rest for this time.

THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON ON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
AFter the holy story has spoken of the life and death of Joshua, it
proceeds to show what the people did after his death, Verse. 10. The sense.
and makes two sorts of them. The one were they, who about that time died: the
other they who being another and new generation lived after them, when the good
elders were dead and thereby took occasion to fall to wickedness. Of the
first it is said, that they were gathered to their fathers, meaning they died:
and those were they that were left alive, a young seminary in the wilderness,
and came into the land of Canaan, with Caleb and Joshua; these I say, who then
came lusty and young into the land, were now full of years, and died. The
phrase of speech here used, that they were gathered to their fathers, is often
used in the Scriptures, to signify thereby that they died; and the reason why
they that died were said to be gathered to their fathers was this: seeing both
their bodies were buried in the earth with theirs, and their souls were joined
to theirs, according as they were good or bad.

And in that these were gathered to their fathers, now that they had lived Doct.
out the age of men, which even then was threescore and ten; or at the most
fourscore, and that with much weariness, we see that they who live to the
utmost of their years cannot pass threescore, or a few more, with any
fitness to be employed profitably in any calling (without which, life is but
burthemsome) and so Moses says in his time; therefore how necessary Psalm. 90.
10.
is it that the precious time which is allotted us to live here should be
employed to the best uses by us, who profess that we live to that very end
especially, considering how few attain even to these years; and how much time
is of necessity to be bestowed in eating, and rest taking, that I say nothing
of many other anokements, and beside both how fast and suddenly our end
comes. The which I say, not only for that I see how men lengthen out their
lives endlesly, in their own foolish reckoning; stretching them on the
tenters, and saying, they may live yet 30. 40. 50. years longer: and thereupon,
how vainly and badly the common sort do spend their time (whom I have little
hope to persuade to do better) but for that many of good report do nothing
carefully redeem their precious time from either endless and needless
busying their minds about the commodities of this life, or trifling it out
little better then idly (if not as the other do) so that they can give small
good account of the well passing of it; as that good man Hezekiah did. 2. King.
20. 3. and as the Apostle commands to the Ephesians, 2 King. 20. 3. Ephesians. 5.
16. Luke 19. 24.
without which the so passing of it shall be reckoned among their other sins.

This be said of that generation that died; now of that which lived, and Doct.
2.
took occasion to do wickedly when their forefathers were dead. This people
it is said here, knew not the Lord; that is, effectually; neither therefore
acknowledged him, nor they knew not his works; that is, as we heard before,
made no use of them, neither profited by them, without which the bare knowledge
of them was nothing. A description therefore ye see here set down of an evil
people, to wit, that they were such as neither knew God, nor his works. And no
marvel; for if they who did both, I mean the former generation, of whom I
have spoken, did see that which they did by the means of good teaching and
example, it is no strange thing, that these did neither of both, who had not
these good helps which the other had: It is not possible for such coming out
of darkness, to walk before God in reverence and cheerfulness. For how
should men come to understand mysteries, as the saving knowledge of God in
Christ is, and the effectual knowledge of his great works, to be brought to
his fear by them, and so to do more then they that only say, Lord, Lord, and
do not the will of the Lord; how (I say) should they come to such knowledge,
unless they should be plainly taught, and have some to break the ice to
them, in following and practicing it, and so in giving good example to them?
Therefore in places where both are wanting, such persons as I speak of, are
not to be sought, unless they enjoy both, by the benefit of other places,
being destitute of them in their own habitation: which is sufficient to move
all such of us as enjoy better helps, to mourn for the desolation of those
that want them: as we cannot choose, if we have the spirit of our Savior, who
pitied Mat. 9. 36.
such as they were; and to entreat the Lord to supply their wants. And further,
this bewraies the unhappiness of all such as do not heartily seek after
both, but are content to live without them; I mean the getting of the
knowledge of God, and Christ, to the certainty of salvation, Ioh. 17. and also
Ioh. 17. 3.
to live with such, as near as may be, who may be shining lights to them,
unto sanctification of life.

This last sort of the people affords also an other lesson unto us, that the
Doct. 3.
latter generations are for the most part backwardest in goodness, and more
declining from it, then the former. It was no wonder if it were so in these
that wanted the means, for it is so, even where they are enjoyed. We see how
those plants and flowers that were rare a few years ago, grow now A simile.
in every garden; for one gets them of another; so sin grows by tradition
and example, and daily increases, each age adding some new, till they come to
the full measure. And though commonly old things decay and wax worse, yet old
Adam the older, the stronger. Sin has his ages of growth for as the world
grows older, so sinners multiply who trading in Note.
sin, do still exceed the former age in all kind of lewdness; and one
consenting with the other in exalting folly, whether we consider number of
persons (equal comparison being made) or the foulness, or boldness in
sin, we must look that the latter days will be worser. The pride,
covetousness, and drunkenness of our presentage was not seen in our
forefathers days as now: nay (which is monstrous) not in the midst of
Popery, although this extenuateth not their other sin, for even they in
subtilty and ill conscience exceed their former ages also. There is now more
knowledge indeed where long teaching has been, but because men receive not the
truth in love and sincerity, God accurseth it with barrenness. Honest
simplicity, which is not tainted with craft and subtilty, and therefore fitter
to receive the print of the Gospel, is iusled out, by such as are (for the
most part) risen up more profane and filthy; more scornful also and hardlier
persuaded to goodness then the former generations. And though this may be
found true in the general estate of all (as toward the end of the Mat. 24. 12.
world, and in the latter days our Savior foretold it should be so) that
iniquity should abound, and have the upper hand: yet in particular generations
one after another, it may also be seen to be so; that if the Gospel be
planted in a nation country, or town, and be continued from one age to
another, though the means be like, yet the latter generation shall come
behind the form, in feruencie, diligence, and every way in yielding fruit of
the Gospel commendably in respect of it; they will verify the proverb, New
things are dainty, and old loathsome.

For I cannot tell how it comes to pass, that ye must grow glutted with the
word, and weary and ashamed in some sort of the godly zeal and forwardness
that they have seen in others of former times. They will receive the Gospel,
as other have done, but they think it more then needs, to stoop to the
simplicity of it, and to be zealous patterns to other in practicing the
particular doctrine of it, in one point, as well as in another; but seek to
take more liberty then they are willing to examine upon what good grounds they
do it: neither will they be forward in going one before another in
mercifulness, in justice, and in seeking to punish notorious faults in their
families and towns, and in the like good example giving, and thereby
discourage them, who else were like to come forward, if there were not laid
such blocks in their way. So that we had need to stir up our selves by the
examples of them that have gone before us commendably, rather then to please
our selves in that which we do, and to rest therein without contending, and
striving to do better. For who is ignorant that such an estate cannot be good?
And if we will be advised, let us know that our reward shall be great, if
we honor the Lord with greatest forwardness in religious duties, when
iniquity abounds in the world, and when the Psalm. 19.
love of many shall wax cold.

Now I have showed the occasion of this peoples sin, namely, that their good
governors were dead; their sin it self now follows in these 3. Verse. 11.
The sense.
next verses: and that in this manner: first generally, then perticularly. In
this verse thus; that they did evil in the sight of the Lord, and that they
fell to Idolatry. Here to stay a little, till I pass to the other two verses:
the evil which they did (most certainly) displeased the Lord in a most
grievous manner. As by the same word here used, the like is meant in other
places, where it is said, that the Kings of Israel did that which was evil in
the sight of the Lord. And so on the contrary, those things which were good in
the eyes of the Lord, as the acts of many of the Kings of Judah were; they were
1. King. 16. 2. 27.
said to please him highly. But when God has given us many encouragements 2.
King. 18. 3.
to his service, and yet we regard not to be the better by them, what marvel
if he abhor such doings, and make open exclamation against them, as he does
here, when both he has set hedge and ditch to hold us Doct.
from committing them, and also has given us many causes of doing better, both
by teaching us, and by other his manifold benefits, and also looks for it at
our hands that we should do so?

So that although the sin of this people was manifest to the view of the
world, as well as before God; yet if it had been secret and hid from men, it
had been evil in the sight of the Lord: even so I say of our selves, if we
mind not Gods matters and service chiefly, but walk loosely, and hollowly, we
shall justly be challenged to do that which he cannot abide, howsoever men
find no fault in us. For though there be degrees in sin, and one is more
grievous then another, yet they that set not their hearts wholly to seek the
Lord, with a great care to please him in all things, even they do that which
is evil in his eyes, seeing the eyes of the Lord search narrowly, and spy
that which men see not; Therefore what may be said to the lives of the greatest
number, and yet some of them, such as reprove others, and are not in many of
their doings to be charged justly by any, yet when they be not upright in
heart, and faithful to God in one thing as well as in another, yet (while they
be not so bad as other) they do evil in his sight. For seeing not they whom
man, but whom God approves are praiseworthy; they therefore shall have this
still and ever against them, that they did evil in the Romans 2. last. Luke 1. 6.
eyes of the Lord if he commend them not, as he did Job, saying thus, they are
upright, fear God, and depart from evil; which if it were well thought on,
there should small cause be found, why they who are tender conscienced, Job 2. 3.
and fear to do evil, should be so scornfully and spitefully railed upon,
and disgraced by the men of the world, for that they dare not be so loose in
their lives as other are, showing thereby that they can abide none but such as
do evil in the sight of the Lord. And this of the eleventh verse.

For of the word [Baal] I will speak in the next verse together, with other
Verse 12. The sense.
of like sort. But first in this twelfth verse the holy story says, that they
forsook the Lord, who yet was the God of their fathers, and had brought them
out of the bondage of Egypt. This as it was more then to displease God in some
particular actions (for it was a leaving of the true worshipping of God, which
is the fountain of well doing duty in our life:) so it is aggrauated by the
favor and benefits here mentioned; to wit, what God had done for them: and
further, the greatness of their sin may be laid out more fully by comparing
it with Peter's answer to our Savior. For when he saw some of his hearers to
depart from him, upon no just cause, but only a bare conceit; and he asked
Peter, if they and the rest of his fellow Apostles also would depart from him;
he answered, saying, Lord whither should we go? thou have the words of
eternal life. As if he should say, that they Ioh. 6. 68.
having found them so good and bountiful to them already, and having such hope
still of greater good from him hereafter, as they knew not where to find the
like, it should have been absurd for them to depart from him as the other
Disciples did.

And to speak the truth, who can say any less? And so might this people well
have answered, and so they ought to have said also, even as Peter did. But it
was far from them, because some of them had never cleaued to the Lord in
truth before, nor trusted in him, but walked hollowly and unfaithfully toward
him, though now they did much worse. And by them Doct.
we may see to what a fearful estate they may grow, to what depth of sin
they may fall, who embrace not religion conscionably, even for the worthiness
and excellency thereof, and for the good they have, or ought to have gotten by
it, and for the love they should bear to God, who has loved them first; but
rather began to profess in a passion, or in some other outward and mutable
respects; such (I say) may be like in time to depart from God altogether, and
then in what other state are they, but without God in the world? For when men's
hearts become hardened once by the deceitfulness of sin, they do next after
that grow worse, and so depart from the living God, as it is written in the
Epistle to the Hebrews. Now as I have Heb. 3. 12.
spoke of these who were but outward professors, when they were at the best,
how they did wickedly in the sight of the Lord; so there being some better
among them who did so likewise. We may further note hereby, that though we
begin well as some of these did, in the true renouncing of evil, yet we not
holding on faithfully and carefully, by considering duly Gods goodness toward
us, and zealously embracing good means, we may easily, and by little and
little, yea and shall also together go back, even as these did: but of the
reuolting of such I have spoken a little before.

Now therefore it follows. I will show how this people fell to Idolatry,
Verse. 11. 12 13. The sense.
even to worship Baal and Ashtaroth, and such other Idols as the people and
nations served, who dwelt about them: but first what is meant by these names of
the Idols here named. Baal signifies a patron or helper, as they took the
Idol Baal to be. Ashteroth was the God of the Sidonians, an Idol which in the
form of a sheep was worshipped. And by the word Baalim here, is meant all
manner of Idols, such as were worshipped among them. To this point the people
of Israel were now come, that seeing they would not expel those idolatrous
nations while they might; neither continued to serve the Lord, as they ought to
have done; behold, they themselves now departed from him also, and fell to
idolatry with them. Where, besides that we may learn, that when we avoid not
the occasions of sin, we cannot look to avoid the committing of the sin
it self, of the which Doct. verse. 11. 12. 13. 14.
I have spoke in the former chapter; we may further see, that after men once
forsake the Lord, and his ways that have been made known unto them, they fall
to most loathsome sins, even to most gross and foul Idolatry: yea and there
is no end of such abominations with them, if God restrain them not.

Even so the Lord complains in Jeremy, saying: My people have committed two
evils, for they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and have diged
Ier. 2. 13.
to themselves pits that will hold no water. It would never have been thought,
that people so well provided to live happily, as these were by their manifold
encouragements (even as we have seen our selves in our time many to have been
among us) it would never (I say) have been thought that such could grow to be
so monstrous and profane, that none might seem to go beyond them therein:
Even so it may be said; and to apply this to our selves, oh, if men could see
what God has done for them in these days, when he has granted them to live
in the days wherein the Gospel has showed most clear light, and made
manifest the way to eternal life, to them who sat in darkness, and when
heerewith he has given peace and abundance of earthly commodities also, etc.
Oh (I say) that they could in this their time see these things? how happy might
they have been thereby? but they are hidden from them. Now therefore when for
all these they have yet followed their own hearts desire, and the course of
such as know not God; we may say on the other side, oh how justly may it be
complained of, to their no less shame then misery?

Now if any desire to know what Idolatry is, and what is meant by that they
were said to commit it; let them know this for answer to both: Doct. 2.
Idolatry is a worshipping of Idols; and has two parts, outward and and when
we give that to them which is proper to God, in either of these inward: we
commit idolatry. The inward, when we trust in, pray, give thanks, or subject
our selves unto them, whatsoever in heaven or earth, or in the water under it.
The external is; when we manifest our affections to them by any outward
things, as bowing the knee, vailing the cap, prostrating our selves to them, or
in using any other ceremony appointed by God for his own service. Now whereas
this being urged to the Idolaters of our time, I mean the Popes votaries:
their answer is, that they give not honor or worship to the Image, or that
which they give reverence to; be it stock, or whatsoever, but only to God and
Christ himself in the Image; let them hear to their shame what Saint Paul
says to the Corinths, the Image or Idol is nothing says he: that is to say,
God 1. Cor. 8. 4.
is not in it, or under it, whom they say they serve in them, and that he is
represented in such images: and what do they worship then but the creature?
Whereby we may truly gather, and all that list, may clearly see that their
bowing to them, and prostrating themselves before them, is gross Idolatry,
whatsoever they pretend, as they have been often and learnedly answered. The same
may be said of their offerings, burning of lights, their going on pilgrimage to
the Saints departed, and such like. Now as for their miracles, 2. These. 2. 9.
they are false and wrought by Satan, which God does suffer for two causes: one
to try his, whether they will go from God thereby; the other to punish
themselves and other wicked ones, by believing lies. And as for Cornelius
bowing to Peter, and John to the Angel, they did not take them for God, and
yet because they went too far, they were forbidden by them.

But yet in these verses, let us note a thing or two more. For seeing this
Doct. 3.
people saw and heard that God allowed their fathers worshipping of him; as
Abraham's, Jacobs, Moses and others, and yet they followed nor their example, it
made their sin greater: For our fathers, such as the holy Ghost here
means, are to be followed; namely, Moses and the Prophets; as Paul Act. 24.
in the 24. of the Acts affirmed, that he in serving God, worshipped the God of
Act. 24. 14.
his fathers, and followed them therein. Such fathers if the Papists would
follow, when they boast that they have the fathers on their side, all
controversies about matters in question betwixt them and us: as
transubstantiation, real presence, adoration of Sacraments, and such like;
would soon be at an end. And let us see that we retain the true serving of
God, that those our holy fathers did, seeing with such service we have heard
God to be pleased. And further note, in that the miracles of Egypt are
repeated, and applied here to this generation, which yet were done long
before, as though they Doct. 4.
had been brought out of Egypt themselves, being not yet borne: and this was to
the end that they should profit and be moved by them as well as their fathers;
note (I say) that the miracles and works of God in times past wrought by the
Prophets, our Savior, and the Apostles, ought to serve for our benefit, and we
ought to have use of them, as well as they before us, in whose days they were
wrought, although we saw them not done: whereupon this is set down, that
whatsoouer things are written, are written for our learning, both that we
should, among all other uses of them, be confirmed Romans 15. 4.
in the doctrine of the word, and also look for no more proof of it by other
miracles to be wrought in every age following. And if we be resolved of the
truth of this, let us see that we be guided by it also. And this be said of the
sin of the generation that rose after the death of the good elders: now of
their punishment.

And the wrath of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into
the hands of spoilers, that spoiled them: and he sold them into the hands of
their enemies Verse. 14.
round about them, so that they could no longer stand before their enemies:

Whithersoeuer they went out, the hand of the Lord was sore against them, as
the Verse. 15.
Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them; so he punished them sore.

We have heard of the first point of the four, in this second part of the The
sense.
chapter; namely, of the sin of the people. The next point follows (as I
said before,) of the punishment, with the which the Lord pursued them for it,
which was two fold: the first was, the anger of God conceived against them for
it, the second the fruit of it. And that is set down here to be partly the
spoiling them of their goods, and partly bondage to their enemies; and more
generally, that Gods hand was against them, so that they were not able to stand
before them; by means whereof they were in anguish and straits, not knowing
what to do. Behold how their estate was changed, yea and that so soon, after
they turned away from the Lord: even so shall all find it. But come we to the
particulars.

When therefore it is said here, that God was angry with them, we must not so
take it, as though God were subject to passions as men are, as either anger or
repentance, etc. but such speeches are used, and now this one, of 1. Sam. 15.
30.
Gods anger, to the end our faults may appear the more grievous, in that they
are said to provoke him who is so hardly moved. Again, to our capacity they
are uttered, to give us to understand, that God does and will do the same
things that men, being angry for faults committed against them, will do; that
is, be revenged upon the offenders: and yet he is free from passion. What are
we then to think, when we hear that God is angry? to set light by it, as the
most do; when yet we hear that he is not led by passions? no, but to be
troubled for it, because we cannot but fear that God will do the same to us,
that an angry man, being offended, will do to such as provoke Doct. verse. 14.
him. For why? are we stronger then he? or think we that we shall eschew and
decline danger? when yet in his anger he is compared to a Lion, who seeks his
prey? No doubtless; for his wrath is assisted with power, and with presence.
And therefore it is said in the Psalm, If his anger be kindled, the earth is
moved, and the foundations, of the hills are shaken. And again, If Psalm. 18. 8.
his anger be kindled but a little, happy are they that trust in him. Which
places, Psalm. 2. last.
with many other such, do lively show the danger of them that provoke him; and
that as he is angry justly, so his anger is (without respect of persons) or
parciality declared against all sorts without exception, that provoke him: the
greatest shall as well smart as the meanest, as the text there imports.

But the use of this is, seeing God is provoked by our sins, that we should
beware that we offend him not in the common manner as men do, in the
profaning of his Sabbaths, his word and Sacraments, in slander, lying,
dissembling, incontinency, and unchasteness of body and mind, in deceiving,
oppressing, and a thousand ways more: and especially we must look that we
live not in unbelief, which is disobedience in an high degree, even to the
Gospel; for which Paul says, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven. 1.
These. 1. 8. Ioh. 3. last.
But if we have fallen into any such, the next heed to be taken of us is, not
to sleep upon them, but tremble, for that we know Gods wrath is kindled
against us, and who knows whether vengeance may come forth Ephesians. 5. 6.
and take hold of us, before our hearts relent, and before we meet him with
repentance? When the Lion roreth all the beasts of the forest quake; and is it
not time for us to do the like, when the mighty Lion of the tribe of Judah is
moved? And if it be meet that even the children of God be held in awe, by
considering that he their God is a jealous God, yea a consuming fire; and
again, if they cannot but tremble to behold him in displeasure sometime, with
his enemies, as well as they see him in his smiling countenance toward his own
people; how much more should they tremble, when it is their own case, and when
they themselves are the persons upon whom he frowneth? And if the Princes
wrath be death, as we see it is by Ahashuerosh, Hest. 7. 7.
when he was inflamed against Haman; how dangerous is the estate of them who
most justly have stirred up the Lord against them? For which cause our Savior
says; Fear not him who can but destroy the body: but fear him that Mat. 10.
28.
can cast body and soul into hell: I say fear him? So that the man lying in
known sin, not repenting, is the man of misery, if he could see it,
howsoever he sooth up himself, or be soothed by other, for the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it. And I have wondered often, that so many offending, as are
known daily to do, and that willingly and loosely, yea and with boldness;
and that they being in so great danger thereby of sundry punishments every Note.
day; I have wondered (say) that so few make have to rid themselves out of that
fearful condition; and especially they seeing so many to smart from time to
time for the same and the like sins that swarm in them: and yet further, to
give too apparent tokens by their impenitency, that it will be infinitely worse
with them, when they be gone hence. Thus much for this time.

THE FIFTEENTH SERMON UPON THE BOOK OF IVDGES, THE REST OF THE fourteenth and
the fifteenth verses, a part of the former text, and on these verses following.
VERSE. 15. Whithersoeuer they went out, etc. 16. Notwithstanding the Lord
raised up Judges, which delivered them out of the hands of their oppressors.
17. But yet they would not obey their Judges; for they went a whoring after
other gods, and worshipped them, and turned quickly out of the way wherein
their fathers walked, obeying the Commandments of the Lord, they did not so.
18. And when the Lord raised them up Judges, the Lord was with the Judge, and
delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the Judge (for
the Lord had compassion of their gronings, because of them that oppressed them
and tormented them.)
OF Gods anger and the fear thereof, being the first punishment, we have heard.
Now follows the next, which is the effect of it. For they who are angry,
consult and devise, how they may revenge themselves upon such as have offended
them: the (...) out ^ffect: the effect of whose anger is set down, first to be
the spoiling (...) good, and then the bondage they came in to their enemies,
which was far greater. And these are the sorer because God dealt not with
them himself, but gave them over to men, yea cruel men, such as David desired
he might not fall into their hands, because there was no mercy with them. But
to say some what of the former of these two; to such as be in prosperity, we
know that the loss of wealth is found by experience, and taken of men to be
one of the hardest judgments that do befall them; the reason is, for that
they love their money and goods almost if not altogether as well as their
lives. And yet a great punishment is this which they sustain by them, that
when the Lord has given them as blessings, they lose the right use of the, for
and through their foolishness and sin, and cause that for the most part they
become curses to them. And God in his wisdom does send such penalties often
times among many other unto them, as it is said here, he gave them into the
hands of spoilers. But this was yet far worse, when they must go under it,
and yet never consider by whom, and why they were thus punished. Behold in this
people, the extreme folly of sinners at this day; who though their hearts are
set upon their wealth and commodities, yet never bethink themselves to be
freed from the danger of Gods wrath, which often wastes them to nothing. Know
we therefore, that if we decay in our goods, by barrenness Note.
of the ground, or unseasonableness of the weather, by debt, suretiship,
Pennie-wise. Pound-foolish.
or by any other such like, and especially by mispending them; know we (I say)
we have a warning thereby, sent us of God, for some ill parts of life, as it is
said in Deuteronomie, If thou will not obey the voice of the Deuteronomy. 28. 15. 33
Lord thy God, then the fruit of thy land, and all thy labor shall a people
that thou know not, eat: and the heaven that is over thee shall be brass,
and the earth under thee, iron.

And again, A nation that is of a fierce countenance shall eat the fruit of
thy cattle, Deuteronomy. 28. 51.
and he shall leave thee neither wheat, wine, nor oil, neither shall thou
prosper in thy ways. By all which, and this which is in the text, that they
here were spoiled of their goods, as it should make us careful to prevent
even his Verse. 29.
judgment among many other, by upright walking with God, and harmless living
among men, how foolish and precise soever that course of life seem to many: so
when we have gone out of the good way, and fallen Genesis 17. 1.
from that obedience which we have couenanted to yield unto God, and sustain
such loss thereby, above all things let us seek to find out the cause
thereof, and that speedily, as Jeremy requires, and bear our loss because
Ier 8. 4. Mich. 77. Ioh. 5. 14.
we have sinned; and sin no more lest a worse thing befall us. And let us not
count it our hard fortune, (as foolish men term it, for there is none) when
we are so wasted in our goods, neither please we our selves in condemning and
charging the second cause thereof, whereby we are (...) of them; for whatsoever
be the instrument of our loss or undoing, sure it is, that the Lord is the
effecter and worker of it. And thereof (...) Deuteronomie, of this and all other
his fearful judgments, after that (...) sent them, when it shall be demanded
wherefore has the Lord done this? how fierce is his great wrath? they shall
answer, because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their
fathers, therefore has the Lords Deuteronomy. 29. 25.
wrath waxed hot against this people, to bring upon it every curse that is
written in this book.

And the same doctrine that I have taught of the spoiling of men's goods, that
it is a fruit of the wrath of God for their sin, (this being excepted, that the
Lord may impouerish his people (who fear him) in favor and mercy) The same I
may as fitly and truly say of the bringing or them into servitude and bondage
unto vile and cruel persons: but let the one be understood by the other,
seeing I speak of this in another place. But I will further observe Doct. 3.
another thing here, that seeing it is said that they were led into bondage
after they were spoiled of their goods, and so smarted by both, we may note how
God so deals with the disobedient out times, even as he did here with
these, that as their sins go not alone, so neither do their punishments. So
that God deals with such as offend him not one way, but many; as he did
puinsh Achan, both with shame, and with pain: so Pharaoh was visited with
terrors, and with bodily plagues also: even so now many are Note.
pursued with crosses in their goods, reproach in their name, and in their body
with pain and diseases. And this he does, that men may know they shall pay
dear for their stolen pleasures, how sweet soever they be to them in their
fond account, and that so both together may hold them back from provoking him.
For as Esaias says, one judgment shall not serve the turn, if Esa. 9. last
ver. Joel 1. 3.
men struggle and fight against it, and stand out with God, when he smites
gently, his hand will be stretched out still; and look what the former has
not done, the latter shall make good. As we read in Joel, that fruit which
one plague consumed not, another did, till an utter riddance follow of all. But
men bite upon the bridle, and curse their luck, but look not into themselves:
so when God strippeth men of their goods, and then casts them into bondage,
as he did deal with them here; or when he does the like to us, that one
judgment come in the neck of another to us, I think it may be said truly
without respect of damnation, that we have paid dear for stolen pleasures,
and our bold taking of our liberties amiss. And seeing I have not spoken
particularly of going into servitude, and our nation has not known what it
means, nor how sharp a scourge it is; yet seeing many fall into it by Turk
and Spanyard, who have little feared it; therefore I wish them to read of it
in Deuteronomie: secondly, to consider of it by the estate of the people of
Israel in Egypt: and lastly, to lay it out, and set a Deuteronomy. 28. 48. 49. 50.
view of it before their eyes, by the Popish and cruel tyrannizing over our
souls here in our own land in the days of Queen Mary, when we could enjoy
no liberty of the word and Sacraments, but our brethren who refused their
Idoll-seruice and false worship, were tortured and tormented by the bloody
persecutors: and what may men look for then at the hands of strangers? And
this to be said of bondage.

Now further, in that it is added in general in the text, that they could not
stand before their enemies; for being so weakened by them in goods, number, and
strength, what marvel? Let this be observed, that God uses his Doct. 4.
and our enemies against us his children, when we provoke him by our sins: as
he used Nabuchadnezzar against Jerusalem, and Senacherib and others. Not that
God puts new poison and malice into them, who had nothing else in them
before; but that he justly suffers and lets them alone (without any
bridling or restraining them) to vomit up their venom, and Note.
their cankered hatred, and lets them loose to Satan. Whereby this among
many other things may be learned, how uncertain the comfort is that some take
in this, that the Papists (they hope) shall never prevail against the
Protestants, nor Popery ever yoke them any more. Yes, if God be displeased with
them, he may plague them that way, by raising them up as enemies against them,
as easily as he did here the Canaanites against Israel; and if they were
without fear that way, he may and can meet with them after sundry other
sorts, little to their comfort, as they may see daily if their sins be not
removed out of his sight: so that as the Prophet speaks, it shall be with
them, as if though they escape the Lion, a Bear should Amos 5. 19.
meet them: or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a
serpent bite him.

By this which we have heard of the punishment of this people, it appears
Doct. 5.
that they had load enough upon them, as one would think, and yet, as though
there had not bin enough said of the hand of God against them, the holy Ghost
adds here, that whithersoeuer they went forth, the hand of the Lord was
against them; as if it should be said, whatsoever they took in hand or went
about, it prospered not, but they were crossed therein; whereas of the godly,
we read in the first Psalm, the contrary to be said and set down. Psalm. 1. 3.
The like is spoken by the Prophet Azaria to the people of Judah, in the second
book of Chronicles. This though it be not seen of many, nor marked of 2.
Chron. 15. 6.
the disobedient, and therefore not complained of, yet their misery therefore
is the greater, seeing they go on brutishly, as the fool to the stocks, and
the ox to the slaughter, till a dart pierce through their liver. But some
feel and perceive Pro. 7. 23.
it, when God being angry with them, his hand is against them, as experience
witnesses (though he deal not now so much nor apparently against his enemies
in bodily as spiritual plagues) for do not many laden with sorrow and misery
crieout, that God fights against them, though there be no outward punishments
to be seen upon them? and that they neither prosper nor enjoy any inward
peace, but are wearisome to themselves, cursing their lot, and wishing
themselves out of the world; nay laying violent hands upon themselves, for very
anguish of heart and madness: thinking (falsely) so to escape their misery.
And how heavy a thing is that, (think we) especially when they know not how
to remedy it? And as it is thus with them, even so Gods hand is ever with his
faithful servants in all their ways which God has set them in. They are like
the tree planted by the rivers Psalm 91. 11. Psalm. 1 3.
of waters, that brings forth fruit in due season: and whatsoever they do it
shall prosper. Indeed this is the less seen to be, because they find it so
hard a thing for them, in the midst of so many discouragements, to continue
in their uprightness as we may see who mark it; but they are often unsettled and
broken off by the burden of the flesh from their innocence, or else are forced
with much ado to recover themselves being fallen, and are in great heaviness
thereby. But while God vpholdeth them by his grace, he does also make them
well liking, and to prosper, yea in their weakest estate, in respect of other,
and to recover.

And whereas it is added, that this pursuing of them by the Lord in all Doct. 6.
that they set their hand unto, was as he had sworn to them, it is to teach
us, that it could be no otherwise: seeing God speaks nothing in vain, much
less if he swear to it, according to Samuels words, the strength of Israel
will 1. Sam. 15. 29.
not lie. One jot or tittle of his word cannot fail. It is far more firm
then Mat. 5. 17.
the law of the Medes and Perfians, which yet altered not. So that if the Lord
speak the word or swear (except it be conditionally) whether it be a
threatening to such as provoke him, or a promise of any good things to such as
trust in him, it shall most certainiy come to pass, what attempts soever there
be to the contrary, as is daily to be seen. And therefore it is to be wondered
at, that men are so little moved thereby; but for all his threats, go forward
in their bad course, till the evil threatened do come upon them, and cause
them to cry out; even as Gods servants also do smart, when his promises being
certain, are for all that, not believed of them: But this matter is often
occasioned. And this be said of the peoples sin, and of their punishment. It
follows now in the text.

VERSE. 16. Notwithstanding the Lord raised up Judges, which delivered them out
of the hands of their oppressors.

17 But yet they would not obey their Judges; for they went a whering after
other gods and worshipped them, and turned quickly out of the way wherein their
fathers walked, obeying the Commandments of the Lord, they did not so.

18. And when the Lord had raised them up Judges, the Lord was with the Judges,
and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies, all the days of the
Judge: for the Lord had compassion of their gronings, because of them that
oppressed them and tormented them.

NOw follow the other things which I mentioned before in the sixth The sense.
verse in laying out the points of this second part of the chapter, and that
is, how the Lord raised them up deliuerers in their oppressions when they cried
unto him, who were called Judges. This cannot be understood of any one time,
seeing he sent not many Judges at once among them, in any time of their
affliction. Therefore he shows here to the end of the chapter, what was the
condition of the people of Israel, and the changes and diverse courses that
they were, in the time of the Judges. In few words it was thus: when they cried
to the Lord in their oppressions, he pitied their groans, and raised them up
Judges, which were deliuerers of them, as I said, and he was with them to
bless them, and yet they turned away from him again for all that, and so he
was provoked to go against them afresh as is set down in the latter end of
this chapter, and in some of the verses that follow.

And first, in that it is said in the eighteenth verse (for these three verses
are Verse 18.
to be joined and read together) that they groned to the Lord under their
oppressions, who saw nothing amiffe in themselves before; it must teach us,
Doct.
that calamities will search and stir us up to grief, and to make our moan
Note.
to God for very anguish of heart, how careless and iollie soever we have
been before, when we boldly provoked him, and when we have been so careless
and headstrong, as that nothing could serve to pluck down our stomachs, yet
sore troubles have broken our hearts, as if we never had been otherwise.
Therefore when his word will not prevail, the Lord is feign even to master
men by strong hand, that at least he may tame them by violence, if he cannot
bow them to repentance: even as men handle horses and such beasts as they
cannot rule; they cast them, and keep them under by binding them, that so they
may work their pleasure on them. The wild Ass must be taken in her months,
when she cannot resist: and this course Job 33. 15.
the Lordis driven to take with us, to wit, to make our hearts to smart, and to
load them with sorrows, or else there would be no rule with us: thus I say
he is feign to take us down. According to that which is said in the Psalm. When
he smote them, they sought him, yea they sought him early: Pharaoh himself
Psalm. 78. 34.
when he felt the smart of the plagues of Egypt, sought for Moses to pray for
him to the Lord. Long it is before men are fitted and framed to hear the Lord
speak unto them: but being bitten with sorrow, they are glad to See Hos. 6. 1.
compared with cap. 5. 13. 14.
cling to him. But alas what comes of the most of these his corrections and
sharp dealings with such? Nay, for that I can say no more but this, that the
most of them do but bow for the time, as a bulrush with the wind, their
goodness being as the morning dew, and so it goes away, and they cry out
only while the rod is held over them, and afterward they return again to
their old byas.

And so did these here, and so do many seek the Lord for a time, and yet
turn aside again as a broken bow. But if such as be thus cast down (as these
were) when God afflicts them, so that one would think they would never lift
up their bristles against him any more; if these I say do yet wax bold, and
kick up their heel against him, what shall we think of them who relent not
at all for their evil doings, no nor for Gods heavy hand upon them, but
harden their hearts, as the dog which biteth the staff that beats them? What
then, ye will ask is to be done; if groaning under men's burdens of sin and
punishment have no good effect? All the remedy here is this, that men in such
cases finding out their sins, do also seriously consider of the foulness of
them, and the woe that they bring with them, and so tread them also under their
feet, and believe better things to be coming from God toward them, even mercy
and forgiveness, which only are able to crush their sins in pieces
afterward, as well as to make them kindly and truly acknowledged and cried out
of, while the smart takes hold of them. This be noted of their groaning.

Now behold what the Lord did when they did thus complain and cry Verse. 16. 18.
out; he had compassion on them, and raised them up Judges, that should deliver
them out of the hands of their oppressors and spoilers, and he did so, and was
with them; and it repented him that he had so suffered them to be oppressed. He
does often as he did to Ahab, pity sinners, when they smarting for their faults
cry out of them: but he does not receive them to mercy, except they truly
forsake them; which I say for our instruction, that we may know that the Lord
is easily to be entreated of us, waiting indeed our repentance. And when we do
but give signs of disliking our sins for the time, Note.
he stays his heavy hand from pursuing us: what would he do, think we, if
we came home to him with all our hearts? But so we must know on the other side,
that he in so dealing with us, heapeth hot coals upon our Note.
heads, add makes us vnexcuseable, when we having such fair encouragement at
his hands, shall yet keep a loofe from him, and show unfaithfulness, when we
have made covenants with him of amendment.

But here comes in their misery, as in this verse is to be seen, that
Verse. 17.
when he did all this to them that here is set down, yet for all his pitying
them, and showing so great kindness toward them, yet their Judges, who called
them from Idolatry, were not heard nor regarded of them. They considered not
what a benefit it was to enjoy such, although they cried in the anguish of
heart for help in trouble. Now in that this was a common thing with them after
their deliverances, thus unthankfully to deal with the Lord, in not obeying
their Judges; for so they are charged here to have done: and in the chapters
following is to be seen that they did so: by this briefly let us learn, that
men are rarely the better for their deliverances out of their troubles,
howsoever they cry to God in the midst of them. Whereas a man would think
it should be the thing most regarded of them, and they should be often in
considering both how irksome and uncomfortable it was to them, when they lay
in affliction; as in pain of body, by sickness or disease, or in pursuit by
enemies, or in any other distress: also what a gracious liberty it was, and
what ease to them, when they were delivered yea and with all this they should
yield rare thanksgiving to God for the same; especially seeing it is the end
of all deliverance, even the greatest, and withal this, that we may serve the
Lord ever after without fear. Luke 1. 74.


Again, another thing is not to be omitted in this verse, that in stead of
hearkening to, and obeying God and their Judges, they fell again directly to
Idolatry, and so forsook the God of their fathers; and most brutishly bowed
themselves to their Idols which were but blocks, and could do nothing for
them. A deceivable pleasure they took therein (as man's nature is very prone
to serve God after a gross and false manner) yea and the holy story shows,
that they did quickly fall to this, and turn out of the way; to teach us how
soon a well ordered course, and good things are forgotten and laid aside. This
as it may be observed, in this people, that they soon waxed weary of their
good beginnings; so also it is apparent in others that come after them; who
though they have good example before their eyes, to go before them therein,
yet they are soon carried another way; especially when the chief persons are
gone, who delighted in well doing. And yet further to lay out their sin, it
is set forth by an apt and fit similitude of fornication, even as holiness to
God is in the Scripture often times compared to chastnesse in marriage.

For as the whoremonger is drunken and besotted with his lewd companions, so
that he can regard no counsel, neither can see it to be his discredit, to be
linked in with such an one: neither is moved with the wasting of his goods
which is caused thereby: even so the spiritual whoremonger, which is the
Idolater, is as blind as his Idol, and cannot be dissuaded from it; but an
Image and Crucifix ouerswayeth him, when the worshipping of God in spirit and
truth is tedious, and utterly unsavory to him. The reason of all this which I
have said of him, and of all such at this day, who aggrauate their sin in the
like manner, is this; that men regard nothing but their ease and vain pleasure,
and have no consciences to perform their promises and vows made to God in the
time of their affliction. Again, they being either void of faith utterly; or
having received some small measure of it, and being slow and negligent Note.
in the means using daily and duly, whereby it should be confirmed; they
having also others to join and keep company with them in doing as they do, it
easily comes to pass, that they so soon decline, and their promise which
they made to God of repentance, does vanish like the sparkles.

THE SIXTEENTH SERMON UPON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES. Verse. 19.
20. 21.
VERSE. 19. Yet when the Judge was dead, they returned and did worse then their
fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and worship them; they ceased
not from their own inventions, nor from their rebellious way. 20. Wherefore
the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he said, because this
people has transgressed my covenant, which I commanded their fathers. and has
not obeyed my voice; 21. Therefore will I no more cast out before them any of
the nations which Joshua left when he died. 22. That through them I may prove
Israel, whether they will keep the way of the Lord to walk therein, as their
fathers kept it, or not. 23. So the Lord left those nations, and drove them not
out immediately, neither delivered them into the hand of Joshua.
NOw follows the last branch of this second part of Verse. 19.
the chapter; that is to say, that when the Judge died, the people did worse
then their fathers, (as is set down in this verse,) whereupon the wrath of God
was kindled against them, as appears in the twentieth verse, and then the
fruit of it, namely, Gods punishing of them is set down in verse 21. and the
end why he did so, in the 22. that was, to prove them, and therefore it is said
in the last verse, that God left the enemies in the land still in Ioshuas time,
and did not cast them out. Now of these as they lie in order.

That it should be thus with this people as in this verse it is said, it is no
The clearing of the text.
less lamentable then wonderful. For when God had pitied them, (they groaning
to him) and sent them Judges, who should deliver them out of their oppressions,
and they likewise did deliver them indeed: after that blessing, who would not
have said that they would have proved a rare people in thanks and obedience
unto God? Now therefore, in that they turned another way when the Judge was
dead, who was sent to deliver them, and kept not their covenant which they had
made with God, but rebelled against him, what trercherie was this? And to that
end is their sin aggrauated in this verse, to wit, that they did worse then
their fathers, but following their own inventions and evil ways. By all
which it is to be gathered, Doct. verse. 19.
what light-headednesse and inconstancy is in men, who have sometime made
earnest profession of amendment; also what lewdness accompanies the same, to
set it on work. Hereupon it is, that all good exercises of prayer, and
purposes of good life are soon forgotten, and worn out of memory with many. A
simple minded man would think, that where there has been so much knowledge in
people, and show of good conscience going with it, as that they both do cause
confession of sin, and accusation of themselves, with breaking forth into
solemn protestation and couenan^^ of turning to God with all their heart; he
would think (I say) that if after ten or twelve years absence from them, he
should return again; that he should find rare profiting in the Christian
trade; at least much forwardnes in knowledge and in all good duties, and they
so settled therein, that they could not be removed any more from them.

But as people much to be lamented! they who might look for such a thing,
shall be like rather to find it far otherwise, and much worse, as we see
here it was with these. And in stead of growing in knowledge and grace, at
least of setlednesse and steadfastness in their good beginnings, they shall be
found reuolters from the same rather; as it goes with men now adays, and to
have devised with themselves, or consulted with others about new ways and
courses of life, clean contrary. Some to fall in with Papist and sectaries,
other to be drawn to whoredom and uncleanness; and the greatest part into
depth of worldliness, suits, uncharitable contentions, and the like: which
though it be fearful to hear of, yet it is common, and easy to be found,
even while good exercises of preaching and some good neighborhood continue,
and be enjoyed of them: and therefore how much more shall this be found where
such good means are wanting? Oh if goodness prevail not with them, and have
not the upper hand, yea if it be not loved above all other things, and in price
above them, and diligence used daily in the practice of good duties, all shows
of the best beginnings will soon turn to the contrary. And good reason it is,
that where men profess godliness, which is the greatest riches, and has the
promises of this life 1. Tim. 6. 6. and 4. 8.
and of the life to come, good reason (I say) that there they should not be
ashamed, to seek by all means to advance and honor it, to the end that all
may know the worthiness and price of it; and that it is not without reward
even in this world. Which while few regard to do, they are worthily put to
reproach and shame.

But here, beside that which has been said (a good occasion being offered
Doct. Out of all these verses together.
out of all these verses together) we may gather a good direction for a great
part of our life, and that as well before affliction come, as in the time of
it, and after deliverance out of it. Before it come, and while God gives us 1
leave to serve him with cheerfulness (which is a sweet portion in this life)
we should greatly labor to keep well, while we are well, and not do as this
people did here, to wit, provoke God to punish us for sinning against him as
the world does, negligently or wittingly. Secondly, if we have, for all 2
our heed taking, broken out against conscience, (which without good heed
taking, may full easily be) we should cry to God after our fall, and from under
Note.
our burden, not tarrying till we be driven to it by extremity, as these here
were: and further when we cry to him, we should wait patiently, (and the
rather because we have by our sin provoked him against us) till God deliver
us. Thirdly, seeing he will most certainly help, being thus sought to, let us
believe and be persuaded, that he will hear us graciously, as we see 3 Psalm.
50. 15.
here he did them, who yet were great offenders, and thus let us strengthen
and enable our selves to this patience with confidence. Fourthly, when we 4
be delivered, let us afterward often remember and consider in what an
uncomfortable estate we were before, and how good and gracious the Lord has
been to us, to bring us out of such adversity, and with daily thanks cleave to
him yet more nearly then before; and in no wise provoke him by renewing Psalm.
89. 31.
our sins, as these did here, which were monstrous, and to our own cost (be
we well assured) it shall be. And thus if we be careful to do, it shall go
well with us, and good days shall we see, as may be looked for in so bad 5
a world; and such as have their thousands of gold, shall not be able to buy
and purchase with all their abundance. Deuteronomy. 5. 30. Note.


But to pass to the next verse. I having spoken of the revolt of this people
Verse. 20.
in the former verse, (beside the direction which by occasion I set down
there,) the holy story goes on here to show what the Lord did to this people
thus turning from their good beginnings, after the death of the Judge; He was
sore displeased with them, and his anger was kindled against them. Here to say
the same that I did there of Gods anger, were but a needless thing. That which
I note of it here, is this; that as before has been Doct.
seen, so through the whole book it appears, that it is usual with the Lord
to do thus; namely, when men sin, to be angry; that is, to do as men will,
when they be angry: for otherwise we have heard that neither anger, repenting,
nor any such affection, or change is in the Lord. And is it not meet that God
should thus deal with us think we, when we are so ready by every occasion to
provoke him? For if this held us not in awe, we should, even we who are his
own often times break out as the common sort do (the flesh being weary of
penting in) whereas the love of God (I grant) should be sufficient to
constrain us to our duties. And what a thing were it, that God 2. Cor. 5. 14.
should always be angry with a man? doubtless if any one could be persuaded
that he were so affected to him, not only his whole life should be in daily
and deadly unquietness; but he should also be overwhelmed with the thought of
it, and driven to desperation. And yet we may know by that which has been
said, that God has just cause to do no less, but to let his anger burn as
fire against such as provoke him. But indeed he often deferres the declaration
of his wrath, giving men time and liberty thereby to repent, and does not once
show it many times, when he is often provoked. Hereof it is, that when God
being justly displeased, and yet men do not in in the mean while repent and
turn to him, humbly seeking mercy; that he does afterward declare by his
manifold or sorereuenges, that he was long before provoked to anger, and
justly offended with them. But this is wisely to be marked of us, that though
his own people sin, (as there is none that sins not) to wit, by
oversight, infirmity, unavoidable ignorance, 1. King. 8. 46. Note. Psalm. 130. 3.
and such like; whereas he does not by and by, suffer his anger to break
forth, the reason is this: he has said himself, that he will not look
straightly what is done amiss of them: and beside, when they see that they
have fallen so, they rise again, and this they do daily and ordinarily
returning to him again, and cast themselves down in true humiliation before
him, in the meditation and application of the work of their redeemer Christ,
and so the Lord is pacified with them again. Therefore such as are wise, will
be most careful to keep away occasions of Gods displeasure; seeing the Lords
anger is a consuming fire, and while that is provided against, men may possess
Heb. 12. 29.
their souls with peace, and may go out and in with him daily, with good
liking and comfort, thus much of Gods being angry again, now of the punishment
that followed upon it.

God being thus displeased with them, seeing they had so shamefully Verse. 21.
transgressed and broken the covenant that he made with their fathers;
therefore he will no more (he said) cast out any of the nations that Joshua
left behind. For although Israel was often delivered out of the hands of sundry
of them by their Judges; by whom also many of them were slain, yet they were
not utterly rooted out, but their posterity sprung up again afterward, and
multiplied in the land, to the great disquieting, vexing and annoying of his
people. This I say was the punishment: And how sore it was, may be thought by
this, that these nations were left among them to their destruction; as in verse
3. we have seen, where we heard the same punishment threatened by the Angel
to them at Bochim. But then they repented, and there is no doubt, but God
accepted it, as he promised. But this was more grievous, that afterward their
posterity did worse then they. For they there were reproved, and threatened,
for making covenants with the Canaanites: these for falling flatly to Idolatry
with them. Here, besides that we may see that for the most part, men wax
worse and worse, and the good decline, and the bad decay and wanze away in
their sins, as may be seen by the example of these compared with that we
read in the second verse; we may further learn again, as in verse 3. we
heard, that God will be discharged of his covenant toward men, in and
concerning the outward benefits of this life, if they stand not to their
covenants which they have made with him.

And if they be his own people, he will punish their offenses with the Psalm.
89. 31.
rod, and their iniquity with strokes; though he take not his mercy utterly
from them: and if they be other, he will much more leave them helpelesse, and
to shift for themselves, so as they fall into depth of evil, who might have
thriued and prospered through his blessings. Yea and they might have bin in
good hope to have embraced his covenant of grace and mercy also: as many are
brought by Gods temporary benefits to seek after spiritual, so might these
have done also. Therefore, little do men know, what vexation they they bring
upon themselves, when they wax careless in their covenants keeping which they
have entered into with God; (as the leaving of some gross sin, or the
forsaking of ill company, worldliness, or such like offenses;) and so
forgetting themselves, fall to them again afterward. They shall surely run
on from evil to worse that deal so with God, and from smaller punishments to
greater judgments, so little cause they shall have to rejoice, for glory of
their winnings thereby.

So that beside other manifold punishments which cannot be reckoned up, they
that break covenant with the Lord, shall always have some special eye sores
left to vex them, as these nations were to Israel. And as this worthily lays
forth the forementioned punishment, in verse. 15. that the hand of the Lord was
sore upon this people of his; even so we shall find it who are unfaithful to
him in our covenants, as that either stubborn and disobedient children (none
of the least plagues) shall rise up to make our lives wearisome to us, which
(as Solomon says) shall be as corruption to our bones, and Prou.
that many ways; as in wasting our goods riotously, and with harlots, and
unthriftiness, or by embracing popery, and otherwise by waxing profane. Or we
shall be crossed by unkind, spiteful and unquiet neighbors; who with suits,
brawlings, and sundry disagreements, shall make our best pleasures to be turned
into bitterness and wormwood: or we shall be plagued with servants, who shall
consume us, and bring reproach and vexation unto Note.
us, by defiling our houses, or working us some other annoiance: so likewise
with unfaithful and scandalous Ministers, suits, or controversies, so that by
one or other of these, or such like, we shall have no comfort in any thing;
beside the many diseases, as collicke, stone, burning agues, consumption; for
which we shall be constrained to cry out, and say, we have no pleasure in
our lives. And yet a greater punishment then all these, we shall not know,
when these plagues be upon us, that they are for our unfaithfulness in our
covenant, (though more or less, it is the case of the most that profess the
Gospel, thus to forget our selves) which thing yet (in great grief I utter
it) is to be seen in many, that when Gods hand is sore against them, yet they
know not why it is so, namely for their sins, to the end they might amend.

In this verse the end is set down, why God would not cast out the Canaanites:
Verse. 22. and 23.
to wit, to prove them whether they would keep the way of the Lord; (and
therefore it is said in the next verse, that he left, and did not deliver them
into the hands of Joshua: and if they did obey the Lord in fighting against
them, and making no leagues with them, but follow and do as their good
forefathers had done, then they might reap the fruit thereof, I mean, the
Lords promise; to wit, that he would be with them to assist them, to enjoy the
land to their hearts desire: If they should do otherwise; then they should
declare thereby that their strength was never great, if they fainted being
tried; and beside, they must bear the burden that should light on Prou. 24.
10.
them.

And by this we may learn, that God has this end in afflicting his, that they
may have exercise of his graces in them; as patience, faith, hope, and Doct.
verse. 22.
such like, that being found furnished therewith, they might give God praise,
and they themselves might rejoice: and that they might be humbled, if the
contrary should be. And this we ought to be resolved of in all our troubles,
even when we cannot find out in our selves any particular sin, for which the
Lord afflicts us. So that we be far wide, and offer our selves great Note.
injury, when we do not resolve of this, that in Gods afflicting us, he
tries us, that so we may behave our selves accordingly. The same may be said,
if heresies spring up among us, that God tries us what we will do: as Saint
Paul says, There must be heresies even among you, that they who are approved,
1. Cor. 11. 19.
that is, of sound religion and godliness, through long experience, may be
Revel. 13. 10.
known. It should teach us, seeing God does so, always to have our hearts
carefully set upon it, and to tell it often to our selves, that whatsoever bayts
of sin are set before us (as a cup of pleasant wine well colored, yet mixed
with poison) we should not meddle with, nor reach out our hand Note.
thereto, and how bold and busy soever we behold other to be in snatching
greedily at them, and to devour them; yet we may not be enticed with them,
nor look on them; for why? God does try us thereby what strength of grace is
in us, to resist and turn from them; and as for them that do most readily
embrace them, they shall soon vomit up their sweet morsels with bitterness.

Now to add this last verse with the former 22. whereas it is said, that Verse.
23.
God did not deliver all the nations into the hands of Joshua, as he did some,
and could as well have brought under all the rest; it further teaches us, to
have an eye to Gods works, what things he does, and to resolve our selves,
that he sees always good reason thereof: and follow we his direction, and he
will lead us to see as much. It is a good grace in us, if we can justify him
in all that he does, and to say with the people in the Gospel, he has done
all things well. And yet it is so, whether we affirm it or no. But seeing we
are grauelled and amazed at many of his works, not seeing any reason in them,
but we are rather ready to reason against them, and rebel; [as when he
crosses us in our attempts and doings, and that not once, but often, nor in
one thing, but in many, and that apparently, and more then in ordinary manner,
about our goods and bargains, health, and the like] here therefore I say,
humbly to submit our selves to that which he does, though it be no other then
we pray daily to do [thy will be done of vs] oh it is a thing well beseeming
us, and yet but our duty. And thus we should say; (if that go not with our
liking which God does) he could have done otherwise, as here he could have
cast out the Canaanites in Ioshuas days: but as he left them to try the
people; so he advisedly lets things alone to prove us how wise, confident,
and obedient we will be therein. He could give learning without study, and
deliverance out of trouble by and by, or withhold it altogether, that it should
not take hold of us, but he does not, neither sees it best so to do, to the
end we may frame our selves to his good pleasure, and in every part of our life
be subject to him. And this be said of the second part of the chapter, and of
all the branches drawn out of the same, and so of the whole chapter. It
follows in the next.

THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON ON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
VERSE. 1. These now are the nations which the Lord left, that he might prove
Israel by them, even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of
Canaan. 2. Only to make the generations of the children of Israel, to know,
and to teach them war, which doubtless their predecessors knew not. 3. Five
Princes of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Zidonians, and the
Hiuites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-hermon until one come to
Hamath. 4. And these remained to prove Israel by them, to wit, whether they
would obey the Commandments of the Lord, which he commanded their fathers by
the hand of Moses. 5. And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites,
the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Heuites, and the
Iebusites. 6. And they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their
daughters to their sons, and served their gods.
THe sum and parts in general of this Chapter may The sum of the chapter,
and parts 2.
be fitly set down together: for in the first six verses is showed, why God
left the nations in the land, and which those nations were. In the rest of the
Chapter there are three defections or fallings away from God in the people of
Israel mentioned, and three plagues sent upon them for the same, and a
threefold deliverance by three several Judges. And thus the holy story
begins to set down the state of the people, as was said in the former
Chapter.

The first part of the Chapter.
ANd first why these nations were left still in the land, two reasons are set
The meaning of the four first verses.
down: one in the first and fourth verse, and that was to prove them: the
other in the first and second verse, and that was, to make them know war; not
meaning thereby to make them skillful warriors, (though necessity drove them
to that, when they saw they must trust to their skill) but to let them see what
it was to be put to their shifts, and to fight with weapons, who had never been wont to do so, neither their fathers, seeing the Lord had in the former
wars with their enemies, extraordinarily fought for them without their own
labor and skill.

To come to the first reason generally set down in the first verse, and
particularly Doct. verse. 1. and 4.
in the fourth, I have spoken of it in the former chapter, and the last two
verses: It is here repeated to beat it into them deeply; and to make them
thoroughly persuaded thereof, that they might then, (and so we now) bend all
the force of our hearts to look well about us, how we bear our troubles
meekely and patiently, depending upon God for a good issue: Psalm. 37. 3. Psalm.
50. 15.
which duty he most certainly looks for at our hands, as throughout the
Scripture he teaches and admonishes us to do; and we cannot but be much
disquieted by our afflictions, if we do otherwise, notwithstanding that our
corrupt nature do carry us much to rebel against the same. This is that
which we have to learn by the repeating of those words in this verse, namely
that it is said, God left the nations in the land to try the people of Israel,
and to try them in this, whether they would keep his commandments or no.

Moreover, we must mark that which is set down here in this first verse:
Doct. 2. in verse. 1.
that the Lord is said to have held these nations still in the land, which was
to the exceeding sore vexing of his people: to teach us, that the raizing,
remaining, or removing of troubles, they are all of the Lord, and by his
appointing; even by his will, and of his wise disposing, whether we respect
the whole Church, or any part or member of it: and they come not by chance, or
a man's ill fortune, as the ignorant people speak, (neither is there any such
thing) but as the Lord himself says in the Prophet Amos, there is no evil in
the city, that is, no trouble, but I the Lord have Amos. 3. ^.
sent it. And if it were otherwise, the best people, as the worst are, should
(by their afflictions) be at their wits end. We may not therefore rest our
selves Note.
in the second causes, neither vex our selves about them (as we do too often)
which is a spurning against the Lord, but patiently bear them: seeing that
whatsoever the instrument be, it is certain, the Lord is the ouer-ruling
cause, howsoever it is evident, that often times we cause and bring them our
selves: and therefore we ought to bend our selves in all earnest manner, to
patience: and so much the rather, seeing he further certifieth us, that he
does all for the best to such as fear him: so that we do but increase our
Note.
sorrow, who by impatience increase our sin; and therefore provoke we not
him, from whom all trouble comes, and who through his Almighty power can cast
into hell also, but fear we to do evil in his sight evermore, that we may
avoid both, and ascribe unto him our deliverances also, that seeing all such
deliverances are from the Lord, he may have his due praise from us. Verse. 1.
2. The sense.


In the end of this verse and the second, where it is said, that God left the
nations still in the land, that he might teach this generation of Israel,
war, which neither they, nor their fathers had in times past known: which is
another reason, why those nations were not driven out; this is the more clear
meaning of it. When the Lord by trying them, had found (though he was never
ignorant what they would do) and made manifest the impiety and idolatry of the
people of Israel to themselves: he took away from them their strength in war,
and withheld his aid from them, which he had in times past given to them, and
to their fathers in battle with their enemies, so that now when they went to
war by their own power, the Lord withholding his from them, they knew what
war meant, which before they knew not, when the Lord had fought for them: for
then he gave them strength, and terrified their enemies and weakened them, and
gave good success to the Israelites, but now he left them to shift for
themselves: and therefore we see what is meant by this (that they had not
known war) when as yet they had not broken their covenant with God, for he
had fought for them. They knew not then what it meant to go to war, for the
Lord had fought for them, but now they did begin to learn.

And here we may see, that when by Gods kindness and many comforts Doct. ver.
1. and 2.
ministered by him, we cannot be kept in compass, nor be brought to cleave to
him with all our hearts, he will take another course with us to bring us
thereto: for he will acquaint us with wants, trouble and sorrow, as he did
this people here, to see if they can bring us thereto: and yet such is his
love to us, if they prevail with us, and work kindly upon us to bring us to
repentance, he will return to us again graciously, and continue still his
former bounties toward us. When Joshua, and the good generation in his days
Josh. 6. 16. 17.
truly served the Lord, they were preserved from their enemies, and knew not
what war meant, the Lord himself fought for the^, while they did little more
many times then look on. And in our first parents we may clearly see this to
be exemplified: while they yet lived in innocence, and were vpheld with the
grace of God, they neither knew nor felt any evil: but when they had disobeyed
by eating of the forbidden fruit, they began to know Genesis 3. 7.
what good and evil meant. In like manner, children, while in their younger
years they have been subject and obedient to their parents, they are tenderly
handled, and have all things with ease provided for them: but when they grow up
rude and stout, and for that, are put forth to their shifts, they come to know
what hardness means (who before were not acquainted therewith) by the rough
handling of strangers.

And let it be well thought of by us, for even so God deals with us, if we
can by his mercies be drawn to duty, he is ready to bestow them plentifully
Note.
upon us, he thinks nothing too good for us, so as we need not know the
sorrows and vexations that are in the world, in comparison of that which many
thousands do feel, and smart by them. But if we will follow the common course
of others, to be like to them in evil, we shall soon know that it was no
mean benefit to be so sheltred by the Lord as we were before; and namely, that
shall be, when we begin to feel his heavy hand against us. And we in this
town, and heereabout have seen, while we Note.
have made it our chief delight, to follow the Lord, not regarding the
examples and multitudes of bad and irreligious persons (who dwell among us) to
be withdrawn by them, we that have done so, we have seen, I say, Gods
exceeding goodness toward us (I speak to his praise) and desire I may never
see the contrary. And in comparison of the world, I mean, the ignorant and
profane sort, who desire not to be acquainted with the Lord and his ways, it
may truly be said, that we have seen many good days, when our chief care
has been to live under his government; and when we have failed at some time
more then at others, and through frailty forgotten ourselves, he has
mercifully quickened and brought us back again: so that (for the most part)
we have not known what the sorrows of the world mean. And our worst days
have been, when we have forgot ourselves, and forsaken the good and right way,
and walked or stepped aside into Note.
by-waies, then he has taught us (by woeful experience) what sorrows and
vexations mean. For example: when we have in the simplicity of our hearts
joined in the sweet doctrine of the Gospel preached unto us, and have minded
it chiefly as our best treasure; and when we have as well feared to offend the
Lord in those things which have liked us best, provoking one another to love
and to good works, oh how has he made us to prosper? and when has he
frowned upon us, but when we have perverted our ways.

In this verse the nations are reckoned whom the Lord would have to remain in
the land, among whom his people the Israelites must dwell: Verse. 8. 5.
read them in the text. By this that they must dwell with these wicked
nations, Doct.
we are taught, that it is one of the punishments among many other, which our
diverse kinds of sin draw upon us, that even because of them we must sometime
dwell with the wicked: for though all must have to do with them, (or else they
must go out of the world) yet this that I now speak 1. Cor. 5. 10.
of, is another matter. David dwelt among the haters of peace out of the holy
Psalm. 120. 5. 6.
land: as for the Church of Pergamus, whose habitation was where Satan's throne
was; that was Gods trial to them. But the dwelling of Israel in Babylon, and
their fathers before them among the Egyptians: and the dwelling of these here
mentioned among the Philistims, Canaanites, and Heuites: these habitations (I
say) were Gods punishments and curses, even the fruit of their deserts and
grievous sins: who vexed them many ways, as if Hornets should have stung
them: and because such dwellings are brought upon men by their own prouokings
of God, and that sundry ways; therefore beside the smart that they sustain by
them through outward troubles, they have this added thereunto, that they cannot
meekely and quietly bear them, for the wound that they have made in their
conscience by their known sins, which is most grievous unto them, seeing
they must and cannot but remember, that they justly sustain them. One example
of our time I will allege of two persons, a yeoman and his wife (I might bring
many) These two dwelling among sundry good neighbors and religions, because
they were not like minded to them, because they distasted the Gospel, took a
sore pritch against them, without any just cause given them, and thereupon in
wilfulnes removed their dwelling from them. Their going away was to enjoy
better neighbors, and to bring in the world, and the commodities thereof the
faster. But (to be short) seeing ye will long (no doubt) to hear the end; so
it was, that they enjoyed not that which they sought and went for; for their
wealth wasted, and their neighbors, who had never known what it meant, neither
had learned to use them neighbourly, dealt roughly with them, and sore vexed
and wearied them: upon this, the Lord visited them both, with great sickness,
even both of them together. And then they had leisure to bethink themselves of
the change they had made, and especially with what mind they had done it: and
then the crying out of their doings in this behalf, and that they did (as it
fell out) in the presence of some of them, whom they had first dwelt among,
being sent for by them upon occasion though they dwelt more then twenty miles
distant from them; not sparing to charge themselves deeply, and to show their
great repentance for their rashness and wilfulness in their removing even to
them. So the man died there, the woman in a marvelous manner bewailing her
offense, which was compounded of many, and this from day to day. In which time
it fell out that I was an eye and an ear witness of much more then I say:
She by little recovered so far, as she might be carried from thence, and
so she returned to her first dwelling (no friend could persuade her to the
contrary) but never recovered her health; but within a while after died at her
own house, acknowledging and bewailing her sin to her neighbors that visited
her, bearing the shame of it meekely and with contentment. This example I
thought not to be out of season to make mention of, by so good an occasion; to
admonish some to make better reckoning of good neighborhood, who are too ready
upon a tetch taken, to ease themselves with thinking to recover their
dwellings. Besides, let us not be secure about this, to dwell we care not where,
nor in what places soever, (because some can do no otherwise, but it is laid
upon them to be yielded to of them, by mere necessity) for though it be Gods
trial to some of them, and other have it, as their just punishment, yet make
we account of Christian and peaceable habitation as more then a common
benefit. And yet such must know also, that they must keep themselves unstained
among the wicked and ill disposed, and have no fellowship with their
unfruitful works of darkness, but groan under their burden to God, that
he may ease them of it in time, and seek to supply their want in some other
place by the public means (if they want them) as they may. But let other if
they can, be free from the company and near dwelling of such as are profane,
noisome, and spiteful, enjoy their freedom rather, as Saint Paul says of
servants: if it be their lot to be so, let them be contented, 1. Cor. 7. 21.
but if they can be free, let them use it rather. And that not only for the
hurt that they may easily get there; but let their delight also be in the
saints which are on the earth, and their fellowship with such as excel in
virtue, for the manifold good that they may reap by them. But here an end of
Psalm. 16. 3.
this matter.

Now before I go from the third verse, which I have joined with the Verse. 3.
5. An Object.
fifth; to show that Israel dwelt among the nations, this doubt is to be
answered, namely, how it can be affirmed, that the cities of the Philistims
are said not to have been possessed of the Israelites, I mean Ekron, Askelon,
and Gaza, but to be at the time here mentioned, in the Philistims hands:
seeing in the first chapter of this book, verse. 18. it is said, that they were
taken and enjoyed with their borders, of Judah and Simeon in war made with
them. Answ.
To the which it is answered, that they were indeed at that time taken by them;
but now after that, they were not in the possession of them, but for the sins
of Israel, their strength was abated, and the Philistims power was confirmed.
Whereby without any difficulty it came to pass, that they recovered them
again.

By the which it may be observed, what changes and alterations sin works,
(God in his providence so appointing) for by their sin this came to Doct.
verse. 3. 5.
pass. By eating the forbidden fruit, what an alteration was wrought in the
estate of our first parents, that they lost their honor, their holiness, and
their happiness in one moment of time, and were brought to the contrary, even
to utter misery. And David for that one sin with Bathsheba the wife of Vriah,
what a breach made he of the most sweet peace of conscience, which Psalm. 51* 8.
he before enjoyed, beside the changes that it wrought in this life, by many
punishments, and in his posterity also?

The like is well known of Sampson, Solomon, and many other of the Lords
people. That we may see that he spares not his own, if they provoke him, as
he says in the Psalm; If mine own children break my laws, I will punish
even Psalm. 89. 31.
their sin with the rod, etc. And are they exempt in this age who sin in the
like manner? How are many of them plagued for breaking covenant with God, in
committing some reproachful sin; as adultery, deceit, spite, and revenge,
oppression or wrong, gross worldliness, forsaking their constant course in a
godly life, and their zealous worshipping of him? These, I say, and such like
iniquities (for so cunningly can the devil handle the matter, that they may
all possibly fasten upon them) what changes (think we) do they bring to
pass? as sorrow for joy, fear in stead of godly courage and confidence, shame
for credit and good report, with many such like? Note.
This is foretold in Deuteronomie 28. a chapter to this purpose, worthy to
Deuteronomy. 28. 16. to the end.
be often read over, because it contains a prophecy of all the evils which
were inflicted upon this people in their times, for their apostasy and
backsliding from God. If a man be absent but seven years from his
acquaintance, Oh, how will they say, he is changed? But this is nothing to the
change that sin works. Yea and not only the forementioned sins, which are
gross among men, do work these great changes in their lives; but also those
which are gross in the eyes of the Lord, even they do the like: as the
minding, delighting in, and attempting the forementioned sins, or the like,
though it be but underhand (as they say) and not effected nor committed, Note.
what alterations do these work in a man also? And beside their other
punishments which change and disfigure them, the often buffeting of the
conscience (which is some taste of hell) does also as hornets torment them.
What does idleness of mind work, and the wandering after other loathsome
lusts and desires? also a slight following of men's callings, and much more the
gross neglecting of them (wherein yet faithfully and diligently to be occupied
is a piece of Paradise) what do these (I say) and such Note.
like bring to pass, but unwelcome changes, decay, and wasting of their estate
with bondage, and disguisednesse, which they bring themselves into, in such
wise, that they have not the benefit of the Christian life themselves, and they
are afraid through an evil conscience, to reprove sin in other; and if they
should, yet are they not regarded in that which they say: for they have
dishonored the Lord, and he has taken their honor from them, that their
words shall not be set by: So that I may truly say, their sin has brought
many changes into their lives, and they never almost recover the comfort of
their former days, (for I speak of such as have known better) since they
unhappily lost it. I have but showed in some sort what changes sin works in
Gods people.

And seeing it is less doubted of, that it does much more in the lives of them
who were never well governed: I will not make the like discourse of the effects
that it works in them, but shut up briefly that which I mean to say thereof.
And to speak the truth, as sin swarmeth, rages, and gets the upper hand
in them, so it makes strip and wast where it goes, and hauoke of all that
good is, where any appearance was of it in them, as the unseasonable frost or
East wind does of the tender blossoms in the spring: and Note.
the like it does work in their estates and lives that commit it, by bringing
in punishment and judgments of God thick and threefold. As by whoredom and
riot, the wasting of body and goods; by drunkenness, diseases; by quarrelling
and uncharitableness, suits; and loss of their sweet peace in neighborhood;
by pride, stoutnesse and stateliness a fall; yea ruin and utter misery.
Examples are infinite: as in the destruction of Babel for their insolency
against God; the swallowing up of Chorah for his rebellion Numb. 16. 31. Exodus
14. 28. Eccles. 11. 9. Luke 16.
may be seen: also in the drowning of Pharaoh for mocking of God so often: to
the young man the threatening of judgment for his iollity: the rich man's going
to hell for taking his pleasure here: in all these (I say) with a great number
more, this is to be seen, what woe sin has wrought to the committers of
it: and it would much more in Scripture and experience at this day appear, if
men were not wittingly blind in beholding it; as also but that God has had a
regard to maintain and preserve society among men; for which cause, many
wicked ones are spared for a time. And this be said of the changes that sin
works, which I have said by occasion of the Israelites losing and yielding
again the cities of the Philistims, with the privileges thereto belonging,
into their hands because of their sin.

Whereas it was said before, verse. 1. and 4. that those nations were left to
Verse 6. The sense.
try Israel, whether they would obey the commandments of the Lord; here it is
set down how they carried themselves in the trial: namely, that they made
marriages with them, and served their gods; they had no power to resist and do
otherwise. And by this we may see, with what danger we live among Idolaters
and wicked men: for in that it is said here, that they joined Doct.
in marriage together, which was specially forbidden them in Deuteronomie, it
is that which the Lord did foresay would come to pass thereby. Deuteronomy. 7. 3. 4.
And he forbad them such marriages principally for this cause, seeing he foresaw
and knew that by unequal matching together, his worship would be greatly
impaired, if not turned into the contrary. For godly and religious persons are
often alienated by the parties contrarily minded unto them, from the true God;
as in Salomons example (so wise a man) is to be seen: who was exceedingly
corrupted, and builded places for strange Gods to worship them in, being
enticed thereto by strange women, whom he loved. And our age has sustained
most grievous shipwreck of conscience and goodness, in that many therein have
joined in marriage with Papists, and other profane hellish Atheists: For when
they have by their familiarity together, made marriages with them; what
remains, but that they, as these did here, do turn to their religion also,
and serve in the manner that they do? But of this before, chap. 2. verse. 2.

THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON UPON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The second part of the Chapter.
VERSE. 7. So the children of Israel did wickedly in the fight of the Lord, and
forgot the Lord their God, and served Baalim and Asheroth. 8. Therefore the
wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel; and he sold them into the hand of
Cushan rishathaim King of Aram-nabaraim, and the children of Israel served
Cushan-rishathaim eight years. 9. And when the children of Israel cried unto
the Lord, the Lord stirred up a savior to the children of Israel, and he saved
them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz Calebs younger brother. 10. And the
spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to war;
and the Lord delivered Cushan rishathaim King of Aram into his hand, and his
hand prevailed against Cushan-rishathaim. 11. So the land had rest forty
years, and Othniel the son of Kenaz died.
NOw I having showed how God tried his by people dwelling among the idolatrous
nations, what they would do, and we having seen also what they did, to wit,
that they made marriages with them, and served their gods, both which have bin
set down in the first part of this chapter: I will now proceed to the second
part, and come to the three examples therein set down by the holy Ghost; and
herein I will speak chiefly of these things therein, to wit, of the sin,
punishment, repentance and deliverance of the people, and how they turned away
again from the Lord afterward. The first example is to the twelfth verse: the
second to the 31. verse: the third, to the end. The first has these four
things to be considered; one is the peoples reuolting from God, in this verse:
another, the punishment brought upon them for it in the eighth verse: the
third, the peoples crying to God under it, verse. 9: and the fourth, the Lords
sending help in the rest, unto the 12. verse; with the fruit that followed.

Their sin is set down, first generally, that they did evil in the sight of
the Lord; and then more particularly, that they forgot him, and fell to
Idolatry. Here I give this watchword to the reader, that seeing I shall in
this book often meet with things that I have already spoken of, at least, that
there are diverse things mentioned often and sundry times herein; therefore I
will not go over them again, as often as I meet with them, being the same
specially in the same manner, which were but a wearying of the reader with
repeating one thing often: but I will note and chiefly follow such things, as
beside them are occasioned there. All the things in this verse are such: I will
therefore do as I have said, and refer the reader for the rest, to that
which has been said of them before. Their sin set down in general, that
they durst offend God secretly, and do that which was evil in his sight: and
that they forgot the Lord, and remembered not his kindness, and many benefits;
and their Idolatry and worshipping the gods of the nations, which arose of the
two former: these things (I say) duly considered of us, do teach this worthy
point; to wit, how men break out into gross and foul sins, by the
forgetting of Gods goodness toward them, and the taking of boldness to sin
against him, in doing that which is any way evil in his eyes. And so by the
contrary; the direct way to live godly, and to be free from reproachful
sins, is to fear to do any thing amiss in the sight of the Lord in secret,
and to keep in mind his benefits, by daily recording them with Note.
fervent and hearty thanks. For if the child be drawn to a natural love and
ioying in the parents, and so to be afraid to displease them, seeing they make
much of it, and give it all good things: what marvel is it if the Lords
benefits, which are renewed upon us every morning, being duly recorded of us,
should draw us to delight in him, and make our songs of him; also that we Lam.
3. 23.
being ready to do his will, and afraid to offend him in secret, what marvel
(I say) if we should abhore to dishonor him openly? And if elder children
endued with grace, will be faithful to their parents in their absence, and so
shun boldness in offending them in presence: who doubts, but that if we
fear to offend our God in secret, we shall shun open and greater offenses
also? So by the contrary this is clear, that if we grow to this point, that we
dare do that which is evil in Gods eyes, and to forget him, and his
unspeakable kindness, though we commit not by and by the grosest and most
odius things, yet it will not belong before we break out even grossly, wax
bold also, and work that which is odious in the sight of men.

Whereas we ought ever to have before us Gods bounty and kindness in such
wise, that they may be bars in our ways, to keep us even from small
offenses, that so the groser sins may much more be kept from us. And so
David affirms, that if he had not been bold to sin against God in secret,
he had never broke out shamefully before men. We know the devil is called
Psalm. 51. 4.
a serpent; which word signifies properly a creeper, because his property Genesis
3. 1.
is, by little and little creep and wind into us, to withdraw our hearts Note.
from uprightness and constancy therein; also to cause that Gods benefits
shall be more meanly accounted off of us: and then boldness in sin will
creep upon us easily, and after that we shall not fear the attempting of
great and grievous sins also. It is our wisdom therefore to consider Gods
goodness to be so great, and the same so continued to us daily (as who shall
but meanly observe and weigh the same, but he must needs confess as much)
that we should be afraid and ashamed to offend and displease him, through
negligence much more by forgetting ourselves in both to sin openly and
wilfully. This be said of their sin. The punishment follows.

For this the Lord was sore displeased with them, and what marvel? so Verse. 8.
The sense.
many sins being wrapped up together, as we have heard. And he raised up
against them this King of Aram here named, who held them in bondage eight
years. Here it plainly appears, that when God is provoked, he will be
revenged: (as we have seen in the former chapter) and not Doct.
wink at us, as we are given to think. And this is not a matter that falls
out now and then (as we say) but ordinarily, and that upon countries, towns,
families, as well as persons, accordingly as the occasion is offered. And yet
Psalm. 50. 21.
he shows it not always immediately; as we see in deferring his punishment
to the old world an hundred and twenty years, after he was displeased with
them. So he sent a famine in David's time on the Israelites, for sin Genesis 6. 3.
committed before by Saul, in slaying the Gibeonites. But though he sometime
defer, it is to bring the offenders to repentance, as the Aopstle says to
Romans 2. 4.
the Romans. And if that come not, he will in deferring, do as he that draws
his bow deeply, that the stroke may be the more deadly. And yet oftentimes he
deferreth not, as in Corah, Ananias, and Saphira, and others is to be seen.
And when men commit known sins, they may make their reckoning, that one of
these ways God will meet with them early or late, the least of them both will
be deadly and unwelcome.

Now then the case standing thus, and we knowing how unwelcome and wearisome
his punishments are; we see what we have to do; that is to say, to beware that
we provoke not God, by following the devices and desires of our wicked hearts,
and so grow hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Oh therefore that we
should be so bold and ready to offend, who yet blanke so soon, and are so sore
dismayed, yea when there shall but some small correction be laid upon us! Oh
that neither examples of other, nor our Note.
own experience can make us wise to prevent and avoid so many and great
judgments, as are drawn upon us daily by needless folly, or wilful
offending! And secondly, if we have already falen, what should be more looked
after, then speedily to remember from whence we be fallen, and to cast up our
gorge, and repent, lest the Lord come upon us unprovided. And as for such as at
the hearing of this dare object again, that they believe that no such thing
shall befall them: for they have (they say) done as much as I speak of, and
yet they are safe to this hour, and have escaped punishment: I say of them,
what have I to do with them? I tremble to hear of their brutish and bold
insenciblenesse. They are as one asleep in the mast of a ship in great danger,
but they fear nothing: and as one near death by sickness, but being
senseless, feels no pain; and as Naball a gross sinner, but regarded
nothing that was said to him, till he knew he must die, and then he was as a
stone or or block, only breathing. The punishment of such as boast, that they
are safe for all their sinning, and have escaped all danger, punishment,
(although it be not seen of many, nor of themselves) is yet far more grievous
then if it were seen with eyes, that it is the spirit of slumber, or an
hardened heart, which is of all other the greatest punishment.

Thus we have heard that God was displeased with them; and therefore Another
point in this verse. 8. The sense.
vengeance could not be far off, but must follow, and now it is showed in
what manner that was executed. Gods punishing them at this time, was eight
years embondaging them under an heathen and idolatrous King, who might command
them what he would, and lay upon them burdens at his pleasure. And what the
courtesy of strangers was, we may see in Deuteronomy; namely such, as that
they should not regard the person of the old, Deuteronomy. 28. 50.
nor have compassion on the young: and such courtesy as Benhadad showed to
Ahab, and yet it was before he was in bondage to him, and when he did but
besiege him and his chief city, and had only some likelihood to subdue him,
which hope of his, yet was frustrated also. For this it was, and thus he sent
him word: Thy silver and thy gold is mine, thy women and thy fair children 1.
King. 20. 6.
are mine: Or else I will send my servants to thee by to morrow this time, and
they shall search thy house, and the houses of thy servants, and whatsoever is
pleasant in thine eyes, they shall take it in their hands and bring it away.
This was the courtesy which Benhadad showed, when he was but in besieging
Israel: but these were here subdued to Cushan-rishathaim, and already in his
hands, yea and that for eight years, which time under such bondage was (we may
be sure) thought a long time.

Now we that hear it may judge, whether they paid not dear for their
liberties, that they took in sinning: the chief of the which was Idolatry.
Doct. 2.
There is no doubt, (considering that which here we read) but that the
Idolatry, and other sin which was so pleasant to them in their prosperity,
was as bitter to them now in their bondage which it brought them into, neither
could it pluck them out of it. But by this let us learn, what woe and misery
men sustain and bring upon themselves for a little stolen liberty, and to
speak as the truth is, only for having their will: but let none look to
find sin afterward, to be, as while it is in committing. Eight years sore
bondage, with the discommodities and irksomenesse that accompany it, for a
little liberty to live at their pleasure? And what excellency or
superabounding sweetness (think we) and delight might that be which cost
them so dear, and which they enjoyed so short a time? Alas it was but the
pleasing of their humor in falling down before a stock or astone. And such
are their delights at this day; transitory, vain, and soon flitting away,
Note.
if not filthy also; for which they pay so dear, that they debar themselves
of all sound and true comfort for them here, that I say nothing how they
provide for themselves hereafter, beside other annoyances that they meet
withal. Sodom and Gomer for a whole city, Zimry and Cosby for particular Genesis
19. 24.
persons, the former to be destroyed with fire and brimstone for their filthy
pleasures; the latter to be thrust thorough in their tent, as they were about
Numb. 25. 8.
their uncleanness. What was their gain, if it be laid with their loss? and
for them that have been thought to have sped better in their matches by the
like doings, they cannot be reckoned up, nor found in the Scriptures, nor yet
in experience. So that we might be wise, if we did well weigh it, to avoid the
sin, that so we might avoid the punishment also.

The third thing noted in this first example of this people, is their seeking
Verse. 9.
to God; and that in faith and repentance. For when sorrow pinched them by
reason of their grievous bondage, and they saw all help of man failed them,
they fled to God, acknowledging, that they had now proved by woeful experience,
that the worshipping of strange gods had done them little good, my meaning is,
they had thereby, and by their other sins, brought those calamities upon
themselves. And this their crying to God, was not the action of one man, or
family, but of the body of the people in general: and some among them (no
doubt) did it soundly and unfeignedly: and therefore they repented, though it
be not so expressly set down, as in some places; and so we must understand
this that is said of them here. It is laid out by this word crying, as the
holy Ghost in the first of Samuel, 7. does set down 1. Sam. 7. 1.
the repentance of the people after the like manner; namely, by their lamenting
after God; and in other places the same is done either by some sign, or by
some fruit of it; so here by crying. As if it should be said, that by this
they testified their sorrow for displeasing God, their believing of pardon,
purpose of amendment, and their fervent prayer and confession of their sin, as
all these are required by the Lord in true repentance, in Hosea, 14. And Hos.
14. 2. 3.
this is the fruit of calamity in the elect, or rather of Gods goodness
toward them, whereby he calls them to himself by affliction.

This place, though briefly, yet pithily, teaches all Gods people what to do,
when they have provoked God to afflict them for their sins: and that is this;
they should after the thinking upon both, seriously cry unto God, and call upon
him as soon as they shall be able; and this is to draw near to him, as the
people in James are directed to do. And this I teach by Iam. 4. 7.
so good occasion here offered, because though men be for the most part,
secure and careless; yet if their sins be once brought to mind, and laid
before them in any deep and dreadful manner; they are in another extremity,
as in fear and terror, doubting that God will not hear them though they
pray: for this is their disposition in that time through tentation, when they
have provoked God, to be alienated and turned from him by dreadful fear and
unbelief; to whom they were wont while they walked uprightly to have access
by prayer before. Adam, after his sin, was Genesis 3.
afraid of Gods voice, (wherein yet before he rejoiced) and did hide himself
in the thicket for fear of it. So David cries and complains when Psalm. 119.
25.
he felt his sin, that his soul cleaued to the dust; meaning that for very
grief he was almost brought to the grave; and again, that he was in Psalm.
130. 1.
the depth of trouble, as not seeing for the time how to get out of it. This
anguish he felt in his soul, though he was dear in the eyes of the Lord. And
the 51. Psalm testifies how he was wrapped in sorrow, as if his bones had been
broken, thinking for the time, that he had lost all grace of the spirit. Psalm.
51. 8.
And no less clearly does this appear in Jonas, after that the Lord had
pursued him for his sin, when in the belly of the fish he cried thus: I
said, I Jonas 2. 4.
am cast away out of thy sight, the waters compassed me about unto the soul.
So I may say of Gods best servants, when they have seen the horror of his
wrath against them, for some sin that wounded them, they have been dismayed,
and almost past hope, and brought to fainting for the time. And by this we may
see, that the secure and careless people who (we know are not behind other
in sinning, are in a contrary extremity. But to return to the other, if Gods
servants apprehend his wrath, and then fall into the tentation of the devil,
who can cunningly deceive them, in making it seem greater then it is, to be
kindled against them, they are cast down, as it were with a deadly blow: and
thus (I say do all in that case, till God put away fear from them. And seeing
these two are contrary; to wit, to be turned from God by fear and unbelief,
and to return and come home near unto him again by faith; and seeing they
meet so near together in one person, so that one of them often times immediately
succeeds the other; therefore all possible speed and care is to be used,
that when fear, through the accusation of the conscience takes place, faith
should be at hand to expel and overcome it. But again to object further, it
is said, God hears not Ioh. 9. 31.
sinners, and therefore he will not (they say) hear them crying unto them.
But to this I answer, that when men repent, he hears them, as we see in 2.
Sam. 12. 13.
David, Peter, and other. And such need not be discouraged from coming to him,
but take hope assuredly that he will hear them. Indeed they that dare not
come and humble themselves to him after their offense, and so stand firm in
their hearts; or other that do call upon him, yet for all that do it in show
rather then in faith and repentance, they (I say) do all one, as if they did
not cry to God at all. They therefore who have learned that God will certainly
smite and punish, if they sin; let them also learn, what they must do, and
how they must seek to the Lord when he punishes, as these men did here,
taking heed of the extremities before mentioned. If they desire to turn away
Gods wrath from them; then cry they to him also in seeing their sin, and
laying it near their hearts; and if they relent and turn from it, let them
believe that his anger is also turned away from them, they unfeignedly purposing
amendment of life, and looking duly to it afterward: but more happy are they
who look warily about them, that they provoke him not at all, but dutifully
and constantly hold on their Christian course. And this of their crying to God,
the third point.

The fourth thing in this first example now follows; to wit, of their
deliverance, Doct. 2.
in this and the next two verses: wherein consider these four things: first,
God raised them up Othniel to be their deliverer: then secondly, how he
furnished him thereto: and thirdly, how he gave his adversary into his hands:
and fourthly, what followed thereof. Othniel is described here to be the same
man, of whom we heard in the first chapter, and who won the city Debir. He is
called a savior, because he saved Israel out of the Judge. 1. 18.
hands of their great adversary Cushan, that had held them long in bondage: by
which deliverance they had good testimony, that Gods displeasure was turned
away from them. The Lords thus speedy turning unto them upon their repentance,
is marvelous, but yet agreeable to that which is spoken of him in the
Scripture; namely, that he is slow to wrath, and very ready to forgive. And
it is to teach us that, which we are hardly brought to believe, Joel 2. 12.
namely, that he is most ready to remit and to remove his punishments, yea when
we have provoked him thereto by our sins, if it repent us. When David confessed
his sin, the Prophet Nathan being sent of God to move him to repentance, and
understood by his confession, that he did so; answered him immediately, thy
sins are forgiven thee. So the posterity of this people here 2. Sam. 12.
mentioned, when God had sent upon them a strange judgment in their wheat
harvest, even thunder and rain, that they might thereby perceive 1. Sam. 12.
19. 20.
and see, that their wickedness was great in asking a King, contrary to Gods
commandment, who had forbidden them so to do: and the people had given
testimony of their repentance, in desiring Samuel to pray for them, and
confessing that sin in asking a King, and their other sins; he answered;
Fear not, the Lord will not forsake his people for his great names sake,
because 1. Sam. 12. 22.
it has pleased the Lord to make you his people, and I will not cease to pray
for you, but I will show you the good and right way.

And the whole Scripture throughout is full of examples, that tend to the same
end. So that it may boldly and truly be said, the Lord is gracious, and of
great kindlesse, and repents him of the evil that he had brought upon his.
So that it remains, that this heavenly Scripture lie not by us unoccupied,
Exodus 34. 6.
and without fruit and use. But seeing we do often forget the Lord, and thereby
do that which is evil in his eyes (oh fickle and inconstant people that we
are) we should not sleep in our sin, but repair to this remedy to rend
our hearts rather then our garments, and never to think our selves Joel 2. 13.
well till we have recovered our loss, and by faith, see that we are received
into favor with him again; for he waits for this our humiliation, and it
shall never come before him in vain and be frustrate, but he will most
certainly accept of it, and as for us we ought never to be quiet, till we do
so. And wonderful it is, and to our great detriment, that the way being so
open to Gods mercy, and loving kindness, even to them that stand in need of it
while they smart for their prouocations of him, it is (I say) to be wondered
at, that so few take benefit by it, yea and that as soon as they have offended,
Note.
they have not to return to him again, but wander in unbelief, and hardness
of heart, till they be driven to it by mere necessity to bow and cry unto God.

And the more we bewray our blockishnesse herein, in that we be so hardly
brought upon our knees, when we have sinned against God, we are to know (for I
thought it meet to utter it) that there are no knots nor difficulties in this
doctrine, namely, that God will be found when he is sought unto, and will
hear when he is prayed to. It is a most clear and well approved truth, and
none fail of help, but such as do not either heartily seek it, if they know
how, or else such as are ignorant how to do it. And that which I have said of
repenting and returning to God, when we see some special fault committed,
either by negligence or wilfulness; to wit, that we should in solemn manner
thus cry unto God, as we have been taught, even so we ought to do, though
there be no apparent wilfulness seen, in our daily slips and infirmities, to
offer up to God daily our suitable repentance for the same, that so we may be
no time, or not long in the least manner estranged, no, nor absent from God,
but continually go in and out before him through the day, and so all our life
long, which is our Paradise and felicity in this world. And this be said of the
first, of the three examples, as occasion has been offered, to the tenth verse.

THE NINETEENTH SERMON ON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
WE have heard how God raised up a savior or deliverer to the people of Israel
when they cried to him in Verse. 10.
their oppression, even Othniel: now it is showed, how he fitted and furnished
him for so great a work. And that was thus: Othniel being a private man, and
one of the meanest of his fathers house, only somewhat enriched by his marrying
of Acksah, Calebs daughter, and a man of some courage, was the person whom the
Lord stirred up for this purpose. And he being further off then many other from
ability hereunto, it is said, that the Lord gave him his spirit, meaning the
fruits of his spirit; as knowledge and judgment to understand the matters of
God, and his will; which are things most requisite for a governor, and he gave
him also increase of courage, strength and wisdom for war, and besides them
all, certified him by his spirit that he was called of God to such a service.
Now all things being thus appointed by God, he, as it is said here, judged
Israel, that is, he executed his office, in taking upon him the protection of
his people; wherein the Lord being with him, he rescued them out of bondage to
liberty again, and governed them, and restored the pure worship of God among
them: and more particularly concerning the subduing of the adversary of Israel,
it is said, that the Lord strengthened him against him, that Cushan-rushathaim
I mean, and gave him into his hands.

And this clearly teaches us, that all gifts of the spirit, and all excellent
Doct.
effects thereof, they are none of ours, they are the Lords, he gives and
distributeth them at his pleasure, as we see here, that it was the spirit of
the Lord that came upon Othniel, whereby he brought to pass the great things
that he did. And whatsoever is of any note in man for price and exceliency, it
is all of God, and comes from his mere bounty. Alas there is no bird
stripped Note.
of her feathers more bare and naked, then man in himself, is void of
goodness: for what has he that he has not received? Insomuch as all Iam. 1.
17.
that he has to glory of is his sin. A most holy and approved truth, which
gives God his due, and lays out man in his colors, that he is nothing
else, if her rob not God of his honor, and pranke not up himself in his
gifts, he is nothing else (I say) but naked, poor, and a mirror of misery.
Saul the King of Israel, when he wrought so great a deliverance for Israel
against the Ammonites: Moses and Joshua in the mighty prevailing for them
against the Heathen nations, and that in spite of all their teeth, who were the
proudest of them; yea and Solomon in all his royalties, what had they to
commend and set out themselves withal, but the gifts which God furnished them
with? How do numbers iet up and down, vaunting themselves, who having some
gifts given them of God, but to a far other end then they use them for,
namely to honor him, and not themselves; do never think of any such matter,
but dare more boldly sin against him, then otherwise they durst do, and all
because he has bestowed some gifts upon them, as personage, beauty,
strength, wealth; even as one should strippe a poor body out of his rags,
and put costly and comely apparel upon him.

For though men be but earth and worms meat, yet how do they set up
themselves, some for their high advancement, some for their riches, which yet
are but borrowed; and other for their painted sheath, till they take all honor
(that they can) from God? yea as if they were petty Gods themselves, and he
only to be called God of them. Oh admirable pride, blindness, and
forgetfulness in flesh! and oh as great patience and long suffering in God, that
he can bear it at their hands! And yet for all that I have said I deny not,
but he can afford them these his gifts and far greater, if they could give
him his due thereby, and use them to set forth his goodness by them, as were
meet. The same I might say of learning, and all other gifts of God, they are
the Lords, and bestowed at his pleasure, not to puff them up that have them,
but that in love and humility they should use them for 1. Cor. 13. 1.
the good of others. And much more then his supernatural gifts of the spirit,
as godly zeal, care to please God, and such like ought to be used to the same
ends.

Now to proceed, when God had given his spirit to Othniel, it is said, He
Point 2.
judged Israel; that is, he did as a valiant captain, pull them out of
servitude, and take the yoke of bondage from their necks, and restore to them
the true worship of God, and govern them, and so the land had rest. All this,
with such like befell them, when Gods anger was turned away from them, at the
repentance of the people. In their bondage and misery, who would have said,
that it could easily, or in short time have been removed? especially, that such
a change might have been seen? But this teaches, that when Gods Doct. 2.
anger is removed from a people or person, all things go well there,
punishments are turned into blessings, and great heaviness into joy and
comfort. Even as a cloudie, dark, and tempestuous day is forgotten, when the
clear and fair sunshine ouerspreadeth and beautifieth the earth: and like as
when A simile
two great men who by their strife and contention disquieted all, are again
made friends, and reconciled; for then the people in that town rejoice, and
hold up their countenance. So it is said here of this people, that they having
been brought into such extremity for eight years, God sent this Othniel a
deliverer and a Judge, to whom he gave courage and wisdom, so that he brought
their enemies into subjection, and the people had rest and deliverance. By all
these signs of his favor, God declared that his anger was removed. And even
so, we shall see good days, if we take heed that God be not provoked to anger
by us: and though his anger be kindled, yet if we cry and groan to him under
our burden, lift up our hearts and believe that he will be merciful unto us,
(as most certainly he will) and turn away his wrath and displeasure from us:
for in his favor is life, and when his loving countenance shines upon us, all
other things shall turn to us for the best. And the Lord does either remove
outward punishments from us, or else uphold us so with his grace to bear them
patiently and meekely, that they shall be no burdens, but matter of comfort
unto us. Oh that we should not Note.
be so wise as to prevent this one thing, namely, that the wrath of God might
be kept from our souls, while the body shall want no looking to, that I say no
more, yea and the meanest have both care and skill, when the tempestuous and
unseasonable weather comes, to shroud themselves from it, and beware that it
do not annoy them.

But further here, in that both estates of this people are set down together,
as their bondage with their freedom, their rest with their trouble, the time
of the one, with the time of the other; the holy Ghost (I say) in setting down
both together, does teach us to consider of both, in the like case, the one as
well as the other, and by the grieuousnesse of the calamity to meditate thus:
Oh what should we have done, if we had so long continued in Note.
the estate that they were in; we, I say, who by the mercy of God have enjoyed
much peace, with plenty of commodities: if enemies even strangers had brought
us into subjection to them, how should we have borne the burden? So likewise
by our deliverance from them, we should meditate of Gods goodness to us after
trouble, and from enemies, and to bethink us, (which too seldom is done of
us) what a great favor of God it is unto us, when pain, penury, or the like
are taken from us, and to prize the same at an high reckoning. And he that
desires to stir up himself to true thankfulness to God for such a change
and deliverance will do thus, as he sees good cause, and he shall in best
manner perform it, by supposing in our A Simile.
best estate, that the contrary would be very distasteful, painful, and
irksome unto us, and yet might have oppressed us, which yet being through his
exceeding goodness passed away from us, behold now light and joy is come in
the place of it. For as the light is the more esteemed by our being in the
dark; and fair weather is the more welcome to us, after tempestuous and
unseasonable times: even so is the considering of sore troubles lately
oppressing us, an especial mean to bring prosperity into an high reckoning
with us; which a man would say, we had need to do, who shall observe, how
soon we make it a common thing, and little worth, or rather abuse it to our
own great hurt and detriment.

Concerning the time of the peoples rest under Othniel, even forty years,
Verse. 11.
I take it to be the true meaning of the story, and agreeable to the original,
howsoever the interpreters differ about it, the best translation makes for it.
But in the story of Ehud, verse. 30. more (if God will) shall be said of it,
where the use of it shall be also added. So Othniel having served his time, was
gathered to his fathers, as we are to look and wait for the same, after the
like service in our places. And this of the first example of the three before
mentioned.

Verse. 12. Then the children of Israel again committed wickedness in the
sight of the Lord; and the Lord strengthened Eglon King of Moab against Israel,
because they had committed wickedness before the Lord.

13. And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon, and Amalek, and went and
smote Israel, and they possessed the city of Palm trees

14. So the children of Israel served Eglon King of Moab eighteen years.

Now follows the second: The sum whereof is this, that the people verse. 12.
The sum and parts 4 to the 31. verse.
of Israel provoked God to anger again by their sins, when Othniel was dead.
And God strengthened the King of Moab against them, with other most wicked
confederates; who oppressing them sore a long time, they cried to the Lord as
they had done before, and he stirred up another savior, one Ehud, who
delivered them out of their grievous bondage. According to this brief laying
out of the story, the parts may be discerned to be four, as in the former.
Which being easy to be perceived, I will not stand to set them down, but
speak of them as they lie in order.

The first thing here to be noted, is, that the people again wrought evil
Doct. verse. 12.
in the sight of the Lord, as they had done before. And this shows that they
broke out further then they did, while Othniel lived, or else nothing should
have been said more then before in his days, during whose time though they be
not commended, yet neither are they discommended. Therefore to say nothing of
either, seeing I have no ground for it, let that be observed whereof the text
gives just occasion how prone and ready we are to break out, as soon as we
have any opportunity. Oh the flesh is soon weary of pending in. While we are
well fenced against falls by good teaching and company, I must needs say, all
is much the better with us, and we be the easilier kept from great offenses.
Here in this land especially, where we have the purity of the Gospel, and of
the true worship of God established among us, (for it is gross indeed to fall
from a good course, while that is present) and also while godly Magistrates are
with us to encourage us, as it was with them while Othniel lived. But for all
this, (as gross as it is) when men will Note.
let loose themselves with the times to the sins thereof, and such helps
fail them, as I have spoken of, what care soever has been among them of
honoring God in former times, they are soon carried away, every man as he is
disposed, by his own corruption one to some sin, and another to another. And
yet where all the forementioned outward helps be, we being easily brought to
make common things of them, the false heart will be ready to break out, and
fasten delight in some sinful pleasure or other, if it be not strongly held in
by grace, as by a bridle.

Whereas we should rather grow up steadfast in our hope, curbing up our
unmortified affections, that so we might be vnoffensiue in our Christian
course, and the better be able to help to shelter other weak brethren from
being overcome and led away by strong tentations, rather then our selves (who
have tasted how good and bountiful the Lord is) to be plunged into the depth
of them, by what occasions soever to their great offense. I have often lamented,
and still do, the lamentable case, and woeful estate of such, who are easily
and readily deceived with the baits of sin, when I see to what shameful
shiftings and bondage they bring themselves, by their yielding thereto, who
might have walked at great liberty toward God, and with much comfort in their
life. But we must confess, that this should be much better done on every side,
if diligent teaching were joined with good example in the chief, to give light
and encouragement to the meaner sort, and godly Magistrates, according to their
duties, encouraging the good, and ready to keep under the bad and disobedient.
But oh that many of both sorts were not discouragers. And yet without respect
thereof, every particular person should look to his own ways, not promising
himself such helps in this evil world to be ever at hand. This be said of
the peoples provoking of God again, and of their breaking out, after the death
of Othniel. Of other things which might be noted here, having already been
spoken of, I will forbear to say any more, both in this place, and throughout
the book.

The punishment which God inflicted upon the people for their renewed The second
point in verse. 12. The sense.
sins, which is the second thing in this example, follows in this and the
next two verses: and it was this; that the King of Moab, and other who assisted
him, held them in bondage eighteen years; and took Jericho, which was called
the city of Palm trees, and set aid there, the more to oppress Israel,
seeing it was by the passage over Jordan toward Moab. Where we see again, that
if we shall wax bold to sin against the Lord, he will smite, as we have
heard, come it sooner, or come it later. But in that he is said here to
strengthen Moab, and as it were to furnish him against his own people (the
wicked Idolaters against his true worshippers) only for breaking forth now at
this time here mentioned, to offend the Lord more then commonly; it may seem
somewhat strange. For these Ammonites and Amalekites were most vile enemies of
God, and gross Idolaters. But he will Doct.
have us to know this, that he does often punish his own people, by them that
are worse then they. And as we see he sends these cursed nations upon them,
so we need not doubt but that he can and will send the very Papists, (as
little as many loose Protestants fear it) to vex us, if we provoke him, even
as he has done heretofore, when the sin of men, and their knowledge was
lesser then now it is. And so the Lord speaks in Deuteronomie, Because ye
have provoked me by that which is no God, I will provoke you by Deuteronomy. 32. 21.
them, whom ye have despised as no people. It is as harsh a thing to suffer by
the means of such as be worse then our selves, as it is for the child to be
beaten by the servant. But God will suffer them, partly because he knows that
to be the way to abase men, partly because their enemies will set it on to the
purpose when they are let loose to hurt them, through the malice that is in
them; even as their father the devil does when he can. But God would have his
own learn by the smart which they sustain by their trouble, that their sin
is far more odious then they account it, yea then theirs, who whip them,
because they have been taught to know the Lord, and couenanted to serve him,
but the other are strangers, who are unacquainted with his ways. And all this
is well to be marked, because this error sticks fast and deep in the minds
of some, that we need not fear the Papists, Spaniards, Jesuits, or any such
Heretics, because we profess the true religion that they hate, and worship
Christ Jesus whom they dishonor. And therefore having a good cause, they say,
why should we fear, God will fight for us. I answer, they must have with
their good cause, a good conscience also: for else they may as truly say, that
God will not suffer a good man and true, to be robbed of a thief, or hurt by a
witch, which Scripture and experience does sufficiently confute: but as God
exercised holy Job by the devil, Job 1. 2.
the head: so he does other of his dear ones by witches and other wicked
people, which are his members: and that he suffers (as he sees cause)
worse people then his own to domineere over them: the Egyptians tyranny over
Israel, the Canaanites cruelty, and the examples of other nations in this book
against Gods people after both; with the experience of all ages are sufficient
to testify.

That is clear enough, but let us further see the reason thereof, and Gods
meaning therein. For he does not punish his own people by the wicked, his
enemies, because they are in better account with him then they: neither to put
them in hope that they shall go unpunished in the end, because he uses their
service (as he did Satan against Job, to try him,) but because he will hereby
manifest how great a finne it is to abuse, and live unworthy the Gospel;
therefore he begins first to visit his own people, and often times even by
them. But afterward, as Amos says, he will visit Damascus, Moab, Amos
and Ammon, and make them drink of the dregs: for if he do this to a green
tree, in comparison of them, how much more will he do it to the withered? And
as the Lord will be avenged of his enemies, so after he has corrected his
own he will again return to them. Therefore the Church is brought in by the
Prophet Micha to say thus: Rejoice not over me, O mine enemy, for Mich. 7. 7.
though I fall yet shall I rise again: as the Prophet speaks, meaning that the
Lord would find a time, both to take corrections of them, and yet to be
pitiful to them again; even as the father will burn the rod when the child
relenteth, and promises amendment. And this, if the wicked will not see that
he chastizeth even his own, having sinned against his known truth, but once
(as it were) and therefore he will much more have a day for them, to pay them
to the full for their manifold and long continued rebellions: if they (I say)
will not regard it, let Gods servants profit by it every way, both they who are
justly visited for their sins, and also they who are more free; who know that
he does use to begin judgment with his own house, that they 1. Pet. 4. 17.
may thereby return unto him.

Besides that which has been said of these nations, how the Lord strengthened
Verse. 13.
them against Israel; so we may further note here how they were confederate
together against Gods people: whereby we may further learn, how the wicked who
can seldom agree together betwixt themselves, (for their leagues are soon
broken) can yet easily join together to vex Gods people. And thus these three
nations did consent in one to smite them. Even as we read that Herod and
Pilate, which had been enemies one to the other, were made friends by joining
both against Christ. As two dogs that fight each with other for a bone, yet
both join in biting the passenger. Or A Simile,
as thieves who consent to rob the true man, though they cannot agree in
dividing the spoil: for in that they disagree each from other, it is because
they want the true band of union: but in that they consent, it comes from their
mutual hatred of virtue, and fear lest their own kingdom should be
overthrown. And we find it as true in these our days, that they who cannot
brook one another, but have sharp contentions and broils betwixt themselves,
can yet with free consent, band themselves against Gods servants. Which, (to
leave them to repent for it if God give them grace) one would think should
make us cling and cleave fast unto the Lord, that yet we may have him on our
sides, and to stand with us against them, whenever they shall strengthen one
another to molest and oppress us; and also to maintain our Christian amity
with our brethren the more strongly, by breaking off contentions, which easily
arise, lest the children of this world condemn us.

The punishment is bondage, and as the former generation was to the Verse. 14.
The sense.
King of Aram, so now they were in bondage to the Moabites: the time that it
continued, was more then double in respect of the former, even eighteen
years. The people that now were brought into bondage, though they were neither
all that were in the former calamity, nor they only, yet the rest who were
grown up at this time, had seen the works of God, and received the religion
of their fathers; and therefore they smarted justly with the rest, with whom
they had sinned. By them both we learn, that they Doct.
provide ill for themselves, who make slight use of Gods former corrections for
sin, and that thereby they bring and pull down upon themselves greater
judgments. As Christ said to the man that was healed, Go thy way Ioh. 5. 14.
and sin no more, left a worse thing befall thee. So he threatened in
Leuiticus, Leuit. 26. 18.
that if they did not amend by the former punishments, he would add seven
times more. And did not Pharaoh find it, who for his mocking of God, and
hardening his heart against him, when he confessed that God had been just in
sending upon him so grievous judgments at the first, provoked him to send many
more upon him afterward?

And we at this day, who have had deliverance from trouble, which our sins
procured and brought upon us, have too good proof of this that I say: that we
smart more by the after sins, and those which we renew daily, Note.
then by the former: even as a renewed wound is more smartie and dangerous. And
stands it not with the righteous judgment of God, that it should be so? Is it
meet that we should tempt God in such a manner, and that we should not bear
the mark of it about us in our flesh, or in our consciences? And so we do.
For to say nothing of those who sin more willingly, in whom this is more
clearly verified, it appears in the weaker sort of Gods children evidently,
who sin but of negligence and some carelessness rather then wittingly, that
they smart also for the same. For beside their outward Note.
crosses, their often doubtings also of their salvation, whereof yet they have
had assurance before: and by many great fears they have often times, that all is
not well with them to Godward: the which (for the most part) do come of the
slight and slendervse that they make of their deliverance from their first
fear and trouble of mind which they sustained. And it would much more appear
in many others, that their latter troubles which they bear, and by which they
smart; for their latter and new prouokings of God are far more grievous then
the former, and they far hardlier recover out of them, if they did not bury
the remembrance of them, and willingly forget them, through the hardening of
their hearts: when yet if they could confider aright of it, even that is the
greatest punishment of all. And although they rise out of it again in time
afterward, yet it is done confusedly; or if they see their sin and repent of
it, it is after a good space, and so, much time has at the least been lost, or
unprofitably passed over by them.

And whereas this punishment that was cast upon them, was bondage to a foreign
nation, both cruel and idolatrous; Oh it was a yoke most unwelcome: and so we
are to account of it, whenever, and whomsoever of us it shall fall upon.
Subjection in children to parents; in servants to masters; in subjects to
Prince, is natural and kind. But no such thing is bondage to strangers, but
fearful and tedious, as we have heard often times, when some persons here
among us have been taken by the Turks, yea and Dunkirks, into what woeful
state they have been brought. And although God has mercifully persuaded our
nation it self from it; yet we know in what danger we have been, especially to
the Spaniard; and namely in that year, 1588. And let us not be senseless in
hearing this, or careless: for if these reuoltings in the better sort, and
profaneness (with many particular sins) in the common sort, continue, if
the Lord punish us not, with that one kind, Note.
we may be sure that some one or other shall be in the room of it; yea and if
we be not blind in beholding it, the plague and dearth has already seized upon
many thousands, whatsoever be behind to arrest such as remain.

Verse. 15. But when the chilhren of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord
stirred up a savior to them, Ehud the son of Gera, the son of Iemini, a
man lame of his right hand: and the children of Israel sent a present by him to
Eglon King of Moab.

The third point and fourth in this second example follow, namely, the The
sense.
cry of the people, testifying their repentance, and the Lords mercy, who
pitying them, sent them another like Othniel, who should deliver them. The man
is named and described in the text. He first slew the King of Moab, and after,
ten thousand men of his, strong and good warriors, and so delivered Israel out
of bondage. This follows in the story, but it was necessary for me to mention
it here, seeing otherwise, this sending of a present by him to the King of
Moab, which the people of Israel are in this verse said to have done, should
have been hard to understand, to what end it is set down: whereas the sending
of it to him by the men of Israel, was the mean of killing the King of Moab,
and the pretense that they had to cover their intent. But more of this
afterward, as the words of the text when I come to them, shall offer occasion.
But now let us handle the points that are in this verse, as they lie in order,
and as for this time we shall be able.

First, it is said that the people cried to the Lord from under their sore
Doct. verse. 15.
bondage, wherewith they were oppressed. And had it not been better for them to
have been without it, and to have served the Lord with comfort, as they did
while Othniel lived with them? so should they not have needed to cry. How this
their crying was a sign of their repentance, I have largely showed in the
former example, verse. 9. and that may serve for both. But that which I will
note now from their crying, is this; that the best end of our pleasures of
sin, is howling and crying; which though it did here accompany repentance,
(as seldom it does) yet is it painful, but without it, dreadful Note.
and deadly: neither do many meet with that (as I said) though too many have
their part in this. For the times that follow sin, when it is done and ended,
are not like the time in which it is committed: they full of smart and sorrow,
this taken up in deceivable pleasure.

Consider this all you that are given to your appetite, and will have your
pleasure, where ye can come by it, howsoever the Lord forbids it, and how dear
soever it cost you. If ye may end with crying (which yet they can ill Note.
away with, who hunt after vain pleasure. I mean, that which is companion to
repentance) ye have infinitely to thank God for it: but who can assure you
that ye shall speed so well, and have so good an end thereof? who may justly
fear (an hundred to one) that painful crying, which makes way to perpetual
howling and gnashing of teeth. As your sins have been great, so shall your
cries be great, says the Lord; as namely he does by Abraham to the rich man:
Son, in thy life time thou enioyedst thy pleasure, but now thou art
tormented. Is not this lamentable, when we might live comfortably, Luke 16. 25.
enjoying our health, peace, liberty, and welfare with Gods good liking? But oh
woeful it is, that none of his benefits, how precious soever, are commonly
accounted of us according to their value; to wit, thankfully, nor used soberly
and aright, but so as we are enforced to cry out at the last (at least we have
cause so to do) of our abusing of them. For there cannot a jot or tittle of
Gods word fall to the ground, who says, Rejoice O young man in Eccles. 11. 9.
thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and
walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, but know that
for these things he will bring thee to judgment. But I cannot go through this
whole verse at this time. But thus much of this third point beside that which I
have spoken of it elsewhere.

THE TWENTIETH SERMON ON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw follows the fourth point in this example, and that is; how God had mercy
on the people when they cried unto him, and gave them another deliverer, this
Ehud by name, of the family of Iemini, which pertained to the tribe of
Benjamin, and lame on his right hand. And by this, as Doct. 2. in verse. 15.
it appears that Gods hand is not shortened in raising up one deliverer after
another; so we may see how good and kind the Lord is, in hearing the cries and
groans of his people, and that often times; even again and again, when they
make their complaint unto him. And this he does as well in the daily pardoning
of our infirmities which are innumerable, (for who can reckon them?) as also in
such falls as are more grievous, if it repent us from our heart, as he wills
us to do in Hosea. Which doctrine is warily to be received, for we are ready
to fall into Hos. 14. 1. 2.
extremities on both sides. For some doubt and fear that God will not receive
them again, though they return to him, remembering their former shameful and
wilful transgression: but that error of theirs must be amended. Other are
ready, when they hear of Gods receiving sinners graciously, and that again
and again (they lamenting after him,) they are ready (I Note.
say) to think that they shall easily be forgiven, without any remorse or
prick of conscience for their sin: which is a gross abusing of Gods
patience and his readiness to receive sinners, who have offended: and
differs not much from them, who say, [Let us sin, that grace may abound.]
The middle way betwixt both is safest to go in: to wit, not to cast away their
confidence, when they unfeignedly turn to God, and yet not to take or arrogate
to themselves the believing of pardon, while they continue bold in sinning,
without broken and relenting hearts. Note.


And this lesson being learned of us, as God teaches it, and has himself
given example unto us, is a sound and certain rule to guide us toward our
neighbors who have offended us: that is to say, that as he embraces and
forgiueth sinners returning unto him; so we should not be cruel or
hard-hearted toward them, but readily to receive them, when they submit
themselves. According to that which our Savior answered to Peter, when he
asked him, how often he should forgive his brother, unto seven times? he answered
Mat. 18. 21.
him, I say not unto seven times, but seventy times seven. We ought therefore
to forgive them: but what? not the transgression of Gods law, for we cannot do
that, for none can forgive sin but God. But the wrong and injury Mat. 9. 3.
done unto us, and the evil mind they bear toward us, (I say) that we ought
(as we profess in the fifth petition) to remit. As for satisfaction, if he
have taken away our goods, we may, in the remitting that, do, as the
repentance and ability of the party shall give occasion. and so I say of the
punishment which he has deserved, if he have hurt us in our body, name, or
otherwise; yet if it be expedient, and that we sustain not any great
detriment Note.
thereby, we may remit it. But yet in some case, though we forgive the wrong,
yet we may urge the party that is culpable, to satisfaction and punishment,
according to the law of God, and the nation where we live; left men should be
emboldened to sin thereby: yea and sometime we who are wronged, ought so to
do necessarily: otherwise we should sin against God, and the Commonwealth.
And thus Achan by Joshua, and the thief on Josh. 7. 25.
the cross, were justly punished and put to death, for why? both Gods law and
man's had else been broken. This I have said of this matter, there being Luke
23. 41.
some difficulty about it, that we may see what we are bound to remit unto our
neighbor, and how far.

An other thing in this verse is, that this Ehud, who was given them as a Doct.
3.
deliverer, is said to have bin lame, but in what part of his body? even on his
right hand, that member which might worst be missed, especially in a valiant
captain and man of war, as he was, and now called to show his strength and
skill, wherein we can say no less, but that God does that which is strange and
marvelous in our eyes. For he shows us hereby, that he when it pleases him,
(and that is most commonly) uses weak means to effect and bring great
matters to pass, that his glory may be more easily seen, and given unto him:
yet flesh and carnal reason will not yield easily thereunto. But for proof of
the doctrine, look what base and weak instruments the Lord used to vex a
mighty King (I mean Pharaoh) namely, Frogs, Lice, Locusts, and such like. So
Jonathan and his armor-bearer flew many of the Philistims: David Goliath. In the
Prophet Ioels time, how did the Lord plague the drunkards, and the sinners of
the land, who were so jolly, having the fruits of the earth in plentiful
manner to serve their turn, as though there had been none that could have
resisted them, how did he (I say) plague the the stoutest and the mightiest of
them by the like weak means, spoiling thereby the fruits of the earth,
without the which their iollity must fall to the ground? Thus the Prophet
speaks: Hear ye this, O Elders, and hearken all ye inhabitants of the world;
whether such a thing has been in your days, or in the Joel 1. 3.
days of your fathers: That which is left of the Palmer worm, has the
Grasshopper eaten, and the residue of the Grasshopper, has the Canker worm
eaten, and the residue of the Canker worm, has the Caterpiller eaten. And to
see the mighty hand of God in other matters, which far exceed these, (for
God can and does this often, but this ought not to cause us therefore to be
slight in means using to serve his providence,) How did he by his Apostles,
who were simple men, and of no great account in the world, yet how did he by
their ministry and weak preaching, (as it was accounted) subdue the proud and
stately world to the obedience of the Gospel? Even Paul, but one man, how many
cities, yea countries did he bring from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan, unto God; insomuch as whole Asia was filled with his doctrine, and
both Jews and Grecians heard the word of the Lord. And so Act. 19. 10.
in our days he has persuaded many to become true Christians by the
ministry and labors of them, who are of small reputation in the world.

And why he brings to light such excellent tidings of the kingdom of glory,
by so weak means; Saint Paul shows the reason in these words; We have this
treasure in earthen vessels (says he) that the excellency of that power ^.
Cor. 4. 7.
might be of God, and not of us. Therefore despise not the weak, by whom God
works; neither let such discourage themselves, who by the grace of humility,
meekness, love, and such like, with their small gifts, shall edify and build
up the Church of Christ, when the knowledge in the bare letter, of such as are
thereby puffed up, shall do little good. And as it is in the ministry, 1.
Cor. 13. 1. 2.
so shall it be seen in the people, that true godliness accompanying the
knowledge of Christ, though ridiculous among men, shall do much in persuading
and drawing many to the love of the Gospel, and fellowship therein; which as
it is the greatest, so it is (doubtless) the rarest thing that is to be seen
among the people. As in the example of the woman of Samaria is to be seen, who
brought her neighbors to Christ, being converted her self: yea and this may
be seen still at this day, that even private persons truly religious, shall
with their humility, diligence, and love, do much more good then they who have
variety of knowledge and utterance, being destitute of those graces, though
they be little accounted of. The use of all that I have said of this point is,
that we have the works of God (how meanly soever accounted of) and specially
his work of grace in men, that we have them (I say) in most high reverence,
in comparison of the gloriousest acts of men. And this of the four points in
this story, from the 12. verse; namely, 1. the reuolting of the people from
God: 2. the Lords punishing them: 3. their crying to God: and 4. his sending a
deliverer to them. And thus much of this matter.

But these four things in this second story thus ended, there remains The
sense of that which remains in the 15. verse.
somewhat in this verse, that has not yet been spoken of, and much in the
whole chapter by occasion of the last point, I mean of Ehuds delivering them;
with which I will proceed; and first with that part of this 15. verse that
remains. The words are these: [And the children of Israel sent a present by
him to Eglon King of Moab.] Here, if this trouble any, that the largest part
of this story remains behind unhandled, and wherefore it should be so,
seeing the four material points or parts of the chapter have (as we have
seen) been handled already: I answer; all that is behind to the 31. verse,
does issue and grow out, and by occasion of the last point of the 4. namely, of
the deliverer whom God raised up to the people, I mean Ehud, and is set down
to illustrate and amplify the deliverance of the people, as shall appear,
even how God delivered them from the bondage of the Moabites, and gave them
rest. The person being this Ehud, as has been said, the story shows how he
wrought this their deliverance; and it was thus: first, by slaying the King of
Moab himself, which reaches to the 27. verse: then by killing ten thousand of
the men of Moab, which is to the 30. verse; after the which follows the
subduing of the Moabites, and the deliverance and rest of the people, to the
31. Now of the first of these in the first place; namely, of killing the King.
For the laying forth of the which we are to consider, first, the things that
went before it, namely, by what means he wrought such a great work, and they
are set down to the 21. verse: then the act it self, which is to the 23. and
the things that followed, to the 27. The things that went before it, as the
means to work it by, were the double going or journey of Ehud to the King of
Moab: the first when he delivered the present to him only: to the nineteenth
verse: the last, when he did the act it self, to the 21: In his first journey
to him, note these three things: one, the occasion of it, that was, a carrying
of a present to him: the second, his furnishing himself to do the deed, with a
short and sharp dagger: then the delivering of the present. Thus the story
being set down at large in the text, I have laid it forth in the several
parts of it, so far as in this place is expedient for the better
understanding of the reader. Now let us go through them all in order. And
first, whereas it is said in the latter end of this 15. verse, That the
children of Israel sent a present by Ehud to the King of Moab, for so it was
indeed, as the word in Hebrew (...) signifies, and not tribute: this (as I
said) was the occasion by which he went to him: so by this present, the King of
Moab was blind folded, that he might not suspect any such matter afterward, to
be intended by Ehud, when he attempted and went about the fact in deed. For
though it was lawful for him and the Israelites to go about to kill him, yet
it was nothing meet, that they should by any vndiscreetnesse, give him occasion
to suspect it. And by this which was Doct. 4. in verse. 15.
allowed in them, we may see, that it is lawful and not displeasing to God, for
a good man being in danger or displeasure with another, and namely a superior,
to remove it (if he can) by a gift or present. I know presents may be lawfully
sent in other respects, namely, to show thankfulness for kindness received:
and I know also that a gift sometime is sent to the helping forward of a bad
matter, and for the corrupting of judgment, which is most odious; neither of
both these is meant here. But to get favor, and namely, with our betters, by
such means, when we know no other to be like to prevail, there is nothing
against it, but that we may serve Gods providence that way, for the removing
of displeasure. And so did our father Jacob seek to Genesis 32. 13.
put away the wrath of his brother Esau, and to procure his favor. And
although he who receives it, does oftentimes offend therein, for that he
should yield favor without it, yet for the giver we know what Solomon says;
A gift in secret pacifieth wrath. And it does as well pull down the heart of
him that sends it, as mollify him that receives it, which is far better
then that both, or either of them should ranckle and be inflamed, each against
the other. And this may suffice to have been said of this matter, and so of the
whole 15. verse.

Verse. 16. And Ehud made him a dagger with two edges, of a cubit length, and he
did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh.

17. And he presented the gift unto Eglon King of Moab, and Eglon was a vnry
fat man.

18. And when he had now presented the present, he sent away the people that
bare the present.

19. But he turned again from the quarries that were by Gilgal, and said, I
have a secret errand to thee O King, who said, keep silence, and all that
stood about him went out from him.

20. Then Ehud came to him (and he sat alone in a summer parlor which he had)
and Ehud said, I have a message to thee from God. Then he arose out of his
throne.

EHud, whom God had given to the people for a deliverer, was by the consent of
them, chosen to go with the present to the King of Moab, and he knowing that
he was to deliver the people out of his hands, did thus go about it; namely,
to provide him a sharp dagger for more speedy expedition thereof, and girded
the same under his right thigh, that there might be the less suspicion of that
he intended. For though the danger could not be but very great, and he
notwithstanding be doubted not of good success from God, yet he cast with
himself how many and great the perils were in going about it, that he might
the wiselier avoid them. I confess, that this act that they intended to do,
namely to kill the King of Moab secretly, and thus to provide for it, and to
cover it by the present that he offered him, I confess (I say) that if God
had not called him to it, and set him about it, it had been an action (in many
respects) odious, and highly to be condemned. But God raising him up to such an
end, he was approved of him therein, and that was his encouragement and
emboldening, that God had called him to accomplish that work.

And here note from that which I have now said, that this is that which Doct
in verse. 15. and 16.
must encourage us in the difficultest matters; that we in taking the^ in hand,
are set a work by God, and do know, that he is pleased with the things that we
go about: this (I say) is that which we must be persuaded of, that we have
him with us, to the end we may cheerfully go through with them. Look we
carefully to this, and we shall prosper, and make we it our common practice in
our affairs, and we shall throughout see good days. But if we have no
allowance from him in doubtful cases, and much more in such as have apparent
show of evil, we may not enterprise them any more then Ehud might here
without his warrant. And where we have no commandment for that which we take
in hand, as in a thing that is indifferent, let us know our liberty, and that
we do that which we are persuaded does please God best, and so we shall
have peace in that we go about. But how little this is regarded, and how men
take in hand the things which they do of their own head, and to their own
liking, and how ill success they have in such of their actions, as it is
lamentable to behold it; so I refer the reader that is desirous to know more of
it, to chap. 1. verse. 19 22. where I have said more of it. This be said of the
first thing of the three, in sending the present.

In this second of the three things, in that he went so well appointed; let
Doct. in verse. 16.
us mark, that when Ehud was sure of good success in this great work, and
that God would be with him, he was not idle nor careless, but had greater
regard how to go about in the best manner, furnishing himself, and providing
this weapon for the purpose. Wherein again we must learn, that it behooves
us to use all good means, as diligence, providence, and wisdom, for the well
bringing to pass even of those things wherein God has promised good success,
and to be with us. Yea and further to do them with readiness and
cheerfulness, as we see we have good cause, being so well encouraged. And so
all may see, and we our selves may know that we go not to work as men of the
world do: I mean coldly and deadly, only for the hope of profit, pleasure,
or such like whetting us on, which are the motives and persuasions that earthly
minded and worldly men have in doing their business. And what a grace and
blessing is that, in our earthly business and common works, that we may be
so heavenly minded in them? for much more we may look and hope to be well
assisted, as the works which we go about, are more heavenly. But thou may
read more of this, Chapter 1. verse. 4.

The third thing of the three now follows, which was the presenting verse. 16.
17.
of the gift, in carrying and offering this present to Eglon the King of Moab,
(which seemed, to such as hear of it, no matter commendable, that Ehud should
kill him under pretense of kindness) yet he intending a further Doct. 2.
matter thereby, then he showed, to wit, the delivering of Gods people by
killing him their enemy, it was not only lawful, but also praise worthy in
him. And this act of his teaches, that when we do such things as are not of
best note, nor most commendable in the eyes of men, such as this of Ehud
seemed, yet lawful and allowed of God, we should (if it may be) intend some
further and better thing thereby, as Ehud here did. And although it have no
effect for the present time; I mean, that good which we purpose and aim at,
yet to wait opportunity to bring it so to pass. But this will be better
understood by laying it out in particulars. As for example; if a man be in the
company of a bad person, which in it self is no credit to him, (and yet it is
not unlawful) or if a man give alms to a poor man who has no goodness in
him, (which may be thought of some to be a maintaining of him,) in both these
cases and the like, he that I speak of, ought to have a further reach and
meaning, that is, a desire and endeavor to do the parties good; as to admonish
and reprove as there shall be cause seen, or exhort and seek to draw them (as
he shall see best opportunity) to repentance; and thereby to stay all from
taking offense thereat. And so I say of all such actions: Hester, as we read,
bad Haman, the enemy of Gods people to a banquet. It was like to savor Hest
5. 5.
ill to the godly that should hear of it: but at his first coming thither,
though she spoke nothing against Haman to the King, yet at the second banquet
she obtained deliverance to Gods people, who were appointed by Haman to be
slain: and beside that she procured is overthrow. To both which, she made way
by bidding him to the first banquet, and intended it, though she made no show
then of any such thing. So our Savior did eat Mat. 9. 10. Luke 19. 7.
and drink with the publicans and sinners. It was hardly thought off by the
Pharisees: but he sought their conversion by it. Therefore in such actions as
have not the best show of goodness (to the end we may bring no violence to our
consciences, nor disquiet to the godly, and the better also to stop the mouths
of others) it shall be meet for us to aim at and intend better things then
are seen at the first show. But then it may be truly said on the contrary,
that they who do things in show, scarce honest; as to haunt suspicious places,
and the company of those who are of ill note and name, and yet mean worse then
is seen, namely to practice whoredom, and fall to drunkenness and ill rule,
it may (I say) truly be affirmed, that such are vile Note.
persons, and very bad indeed. And most of all they who will show signs of
goodness, as of love by friendly familiarity, sobriety and religion, and yet
spite us and our holy profession behind our backs, and carry themselves
leaudly, are of all other the worst. But to return, the like we see in Iehu,
who although he seemed cruel to the view of the world in murdering the house
of Ahab, yet having an eye to the calling of God, went through it with courage,
2. King. 10.
which was to be commended. But here must be a caveat observed, that is, that
no man presume by these examples to enterprise such like matters without
warrant from God, alleging for himself that his end is good and profitable:
this is to go to work of our own head, yea to call evil good, and to do
evil, that good may come of it. As in a man's private case to take upon him to
revenge his own wrong, which belongs to the Magistrate. For as the Lord
warrants a man by the sincerity of his intention, to go forward, when the
thing is lawful (as we see in that act of the two tribes and an half building
an altar) so when we have no word to bear us out, we run Josh. 22. 30.
into the lapse and offend against the express prohibition of the Scriptures,
which is, [Thou shall not do thine own will,] whereas that it is written, we
Mat. 6. 10. Petic. 3. 1. These. 5.
should avoid all appearance of evil. It is not unlawful simply for a good
man to be in the company of one that is evil; but this excuses not him, who
observes no circumstances herein, but shall associate himself with such as
are of bad note, in gaming, drinking, or haunting of suspected places (as I
have said) although he abuse the extraordinary fact of Hester, and the example
of our Savior, or pretend (as some will) the good of the party.

But as Ehud was appointed to present the gift to the King of Moab, so it is
said here he did: which we know was a great honor and credit unto him. And
he was worthy of it, who did afterward adventure so great danger with it. So
God allows to them that serve him in high places, and perform great duties
in Church and Commonwealth, he allows them much credit, honor, and
dignity. And for the one as Princes and noble persons, such as David, was,
Solomon, Hezechia, and Iosia, with Moses, Joshua and others, have enjoyed the
same, in respect of some that were as great as they, but not as godly: Even so
it is with us: For they that truly honor and favor learning, and good
ministers, and make much of them that fear the Lord; resisting and opposing
the common adversary; they are highly honored of the Church of God: and so it
is also in the ministry: for (as the Apostle says) they that rule well, are
worthy of double honor: If they 1. Tim. 5.
labor painfully and faithfully in the word, and go before their flock, as
Ioh. 10.
good sheepheards, and so rule and guide them by both, and by other censures,
as occasion shall be offered, they worthily enjoy love and reverence, with the
fruit of both, as credit, and maintenance. And good reason there is why it
should be so with both: for the one labors and watches directly for the
peoples souls: the other, in their kind and place, for the maintenance of
their peace, lives, and goods. And that which I say of these I may say
proportionably of meaner persons, and lower places: that as they do service to
God in their lives, places and employments; so are they of greater account, and
more set by, (and well worthy) then other who do not so. For their care,
faithfulness, and travel for the honor of God is much; and the Lord has
promised to honor them who honor him, and to leave the other without honor.
And so it was here, that Ehud had great honor in that he was appointed to
deliver the Present to Eglon the King of Moab: And who worthier then he? For
beside his other many worthy acts that he did for the peoples peace and
deliverance: who among them all would have adventured their lives for the rest?
Of whom it may be said, as Pharaoh said of Joseph: when he directed him how to
provide in the seven years Genesis 41. 38.
of plenty, for the seven years of famine, a wise man that should be fit for
that business; Pharaoh said to his servants, where shall we find a man of
understanding like this? let him be set over the land of Egypt about this
work.

Here the holy Story setting this down, that Ehud presented the gift to Doct.
2. in verse. 17.
Eglon, adds this, that he was a very fat man, which may seem to be uttered
to no end, seeing it is neither set down to his commendation, nor to his
discommendation; but this is mentioned, that we may see a reason of that which
is in the 22. verse. And as it is not commended or discommended in him; so by
occasion hereof, this I will say, that fatness of body is to be thought of,
as a thing neither with a man nor against him in it self. For some are more
disposed thereto naturally then other, though they have both one diet, and
alike kind of easy life; even as we see how one tree waxes great and tall in
the same soil, where another is both small and low, as one Oak in comparison
of another. But where men are naturally apt thereto, good keeping does set one
forward. And therefore no marvel that it is so with such as live deliciously,
eating and drinking, and using other liberty at their pleasure. But this may
not be spoken without use and profit: this let us learn, that such, either
Ministers or other as give over themselves, and let the bridle loose to excess
in eating, drinking, sleeping, playing, idleness, ease, and such like, and get
fat that way, may little rejoice in it, and shall wish that they had by labor
in their callings, and other good means, taken themselves down, as Paul
chastized his body, or at least have good testimony that they have not grown
to that point through their own sin; Tit. 1. 12.
therefore that proverb is used by Paul against the Cretians, out of
Epimenides, The Cretians are always ^^ers, evil beasts, slow bellies or
Epicures. And their commendation shall be no greater, who in the profession of
the Gospel, fat themselves through idleness, sloth, ease seeking, and
shunning labor in their callings. And this of Ehuds first going to Eglon to
deliver the Present.

The second follows, in which he slew him. Wherein we may observe, The sum
of verse. 18. 19. 20.
first his conueighing home of the men that came with him, and brought the
Present (which he delivered) that they might be out of peril, when he should
do that work of God, so full of difficulty and danger. Secondly, how he came
back again to Eglon, telling him he had a secret errand and message to him,
and this was to remove the company which attended on the King, from the place
of his presence. Thirdly, when he had obtained that, he repeated his words,
adding this, that his message was from God, that so the King might attend to it
with more reverence (as he did, and in token thereof stood up,) and that he
might the less suspect any danger, and Ehud might have advantage thereby, the
more easily to dispatch him. Thus much is in these three verses. Concerning the
first, of sending away the people Verse. 18.
unto the quarries, a place where stones were dug up, near to Gilgal, a
city of the Israelites near Jordan. In that he followed them after the present
was delivered, till they were past danger, he respected many things; and
namely, that he might be freer from care of them, as also lest their tarying
still whiles he went about that work, might have been a means of bewraying
it; and further he was loath to bring any more into danger then he must needs.
All these reasons moved him to send the people away, and tended to the quiet
and peace of his conscience. And his example herein ought to be Doct. verse. 18.
our instruction; that we may learn to go about weighty matters with all
possible deep and due consideration, wisdom, and wariness, as Ehud here
did. And if we be not sufficient of our selves hereunto, then take we advice
of those that be wiser then we. For the which purpose Solomon says, Without
counsel thoughts come to naught, but in the multitude of counselors, there
Prou. 15. 22.
is steadfastness. So we must be sure that special care be used, as I have
said, that when great and weighty business is imposed upon us, all possible
regard be had to see it well brought to pass, and gone about.

This lesson being ill learned of Peter, Christ's beloved Apostle, may warn us,
by the exceeding danger that befell him thereby, to put it better in practice.
For when Christ told him of a most weighty matter; namely, that he should
deny him: Peter most slightly regarded it, answering rashly without
consideration, that he so little feared that which Christ told him of, that
Luke 22. 32.
he was ready to go to prison, and to death with him: and so resting in his
bold answer, and deceivable confidence that he had of his own strength, for
want of advised deliberation, he fell into the sin that his Master foretold
him off, and by a very small occasion, denied him indeed: and so his example is
set down and left to us, to learn wisdom thereby. Moses did otherwise and
far better: for when he was told that he must be sent to Pharaoh by the Lord
to do his message unto him, which seemed to him over Exodus 3. 13.
difficult and weighty, yet considering thereof advisedly, when he saw it was
imposed upon him by the Lord, he stouped to it, fitted himself for it
accordingly, and well discharged it, and prospered. And let these two examples
be duly weighed and regarded of us, though contrary the one to the other: and
the more urge us to practice this doctrine: and otherwise let us not marvel
that we thrive not in our weighty attempts, if God be not reverently harkened
unto in his watchword and warnings, and (as it is most meet) duly attended
upon of us. And this for the general. Now particularly let this teach us, that
in doing those actions, which specially tend to the glory of God, we have an
eye also to the good of our brother. Let us carry our selves so in our zeal
toward God, that in the mean season we neglect not duty toward men, neither
cause our love toward our brethren to be called into question. This is to
build in heaven, and pull down as fast upon earth. Ehud here did far
otherwise. It was highly commendable in Paul, and became him well, that he
desired King Agrippas conversion, without Act. 26. 29.
enioyning him with that benefit, his own bands. And it becomes us to be so
wisely fervent in Gods cause, that yet we would not willingly hazard the
safety, liberty, credit, wealth and welfare of others, by our zeal and
suffering for it: nay rather, (if there because) redeem their freedom by our
own damage and detriment. Many are of this preposterous opinion, that because
they think themselves strong enough to undergo trouble and reproach for the
Gospel, and a good cause; therefore they look that all other zealous persons
should do so too, and are ready to censure them sharply who are not as they
themselves seem to be, not regarding their weakness (who not finding
themselves fit to bear the burden, should be pitied in that behalf: or else
they think that it is a discredit to their good cause, to suffer for it alone:
and thus they wind them into a dangerous snare with themselves by drawing them
to promise and undertake that which they be unfit for. Whereas we read that
some of the ancient, and some of our late Martyrs, who wisely and charitably
tendering the peace and good of their weak brethren, resolved to bear the
brunt themselves, and counseled them to provide for their conscience, by
flight from persecution, if they felt not themselves fit to go under it. For
the rest, look in the next Sermon.

THE ONE AND TWENTIETH SERMON WHICH IS THE FIFTH ON THE THIRD CHAPter of the
book of IVDGES.
OF Ehud it follows still of his conueying away the men when Doct 2. in verse
18.
the Present was delivered, that all inconvenience might be avoided on both
parts: of whom let us learn, not only to be wary that we bewray not
secrets indiscreetly to any (which he wisely prevented by sending them away)
and therefore much more not to many: But also as he did, so let us do; it
agreeing with the rule of charity, namely, that if danger trouble, or sorrow
must needs ensue and follow by doing such things which we go about, and must
needs take in hand, yet let our care be that the trouble be no more to any
then it must needs be, nor the danger or heaviness take hold of no more then
must of necessity have their part therein. As Ehud saw the burden lay upon
him, he might if he would, have laid it upon other beside himself, but that
in no wise he would do, but sent the rest of the company home, that they
might be out of danger. Which thing I well remember our Savior also most
carefully practiced, and that with no less tender love and kindness toward
his weak Disciples. For when the Priests and Jews with their band of
soldiers came to apprehend and take him, they telling him, when he demanded of
them whom they sought, that they sought him: he answered them, If ye seek me,
let these (meaning his Disciples) go their way: Ioh. 18. 8.
and the reason of that speech was, that they might escape danger.

Much like to both these examples, was the doing of the Shunamite in the second
book of the Kings. For when her child was dead, which the Prophet Elisha
obtained of God for her, she having none before, and she knowing and
believing, that it should be restored to life again unto her; 2. King. 4. 21.
22.
when she had talked with the Prophet, and made her move and complaint unto
him, which she saw she might do, and yet return home again the same day:
what did she, think we? Surely this, she locked up the dead child in the
Prophets chamber, (which she had persuaded her husband to build for him in
their own habitation, to rest at, when he passed by) and made his death
known to none, lest trouble and sorrow should thereby have been caused to the
whole family, and neighbors thereabout, and by faith had the child restored
alive unto her again. The grief and care for it must needs light on her, and
she sustained it her self, and would have no other to sorrow for it, or be
troubled about it. But our sin about this thing is great, that when we might
with a little trouble to our selves, free and ease many other, yet we raise
and procure it to other also: yea and we be Note.
not satisfied, unless they smart as well as we. So far are we off from
regarding other, and from seeking their peace, who would live peaceably by us.
As for example, it is commonly to be seen, how many rough and boisterous
husbands grieve and disquiet both wise and family, by their loud and
unbeseeming as well as unseasonable complaints and outcryings, (whereby they
disquiet the whole family) for some oversight which they espy; yea they have
often times no cause at all to do so; or at least if they had any just cause to
be grieved, yet a little patience and bearing with the trespassers (as the
cause requires) and sober and kind telling them of it, might have done far
more good, and have kept the whole family quiet. The same I may say of the
wife, if she be given to waspishnesse, and be shrewish, hot, and wrathful,
who thereby troubles both husband and the whole house: and this accusation
reaches yet further; even to the spiteful and malicious, who are not only
often iarring, and at strife with their neighbors upon small or no occasions,
but are ready to sue them at the law for every trifle, and so trouble both
them, and themselves also. Whereas the virtuous Queen Hester beholding how
she was the only hope and help under God of the Hest. 4. 16.
Churches deliverance from Hamans plot and devising to wast and destroy it
utterly; took upon her the going about it, though it was with most likely
peril of her life, and that without the hurt of any one beside; saying in so
doubtful a case, If I perish, I perish. Yea Saul himself, who yet had no
commendation through the story for uprightness and goodness, would not suffer
any of the murmurers and repiners against his entering in, to be punished at
his first coming to his kingdom, as some would have had it, but 1. Sam. 11.
13.
chose rather to put up the disgrace, saying: there shall no man die this day;
for to day the Lord has saved Israel. And this by occasion of Ehuas sending
the people away that went with him, being the first of the three things
mentioned, to be contained in these 3. verses.

Now follows the second thing, to wit, of Ehuds second going to Eglon, Verse.
19. 20. The sense.
and what he said. He returned in have from the place near Gilgal in the land
of Israel, whither he had conducted the people, which could not be far from
the place where King Eglon lay: for he having brought the Israelites into
subjection to him; it is clear thot he lay near their borders, the better to
see them kept under: and he coming to him, told him he had a message which
was of secrecy to do unto him. Whereat the King required him to stay the
uttering of it, till the company standing by, were commanded out of the place.
For he having so lately received a present at his hand, had no suspicion of
any treachery to be intended by him. The company being gone, Ehud was admitted
to come near unto him. And telling him that his message was from God, he
stood up to do reverence at that name: and so by this means he had the way
made more easy for him, and the better opportunity to do the work he went
about.

And in these two verses we may see, considering that the Lord called Ehud to
this work, for the destroying of that his peoples enemy, and to deliver them
out of his hands, (for else it had been a most bloody and treacherous act) we
may see (I say) the courage and confidence that was in him, to adventure that
great danger that he did, by going about to kill Eglon the King: who, if
before his attempt he had been detected and found out, had been put (who
doubts?) to most extreme tortures among enemies, and no friend of his
standing by or in presence. And what had he to uphold himself by, in that
great difficulty and fearful danger, but his trust in God, and confidence,
that he who laid that work upon him, would bring him well through it? And yet
how hard a thing it was for him, who sees not, if he will rightly consider it,
in that difficulty and great strait that he was in, to believe that God would
make way for him, and enable him to such a work, all likelihoode thereof being
taken away. And this teaches us, what Doct. verse. 19.
the nature of faith and confidence is, whersoeuer, and in whomsoever it is to
be found: that they look not upon things that are seen, which may-work 2.
Cor. 4. 24.
deadly discouragement and anguish: but upon that which is not seen with Note.
mortal eye, and that is Gods power and willingness ready at hand to help us
forward, and to encourage us (to wait for the accomplishing of that which we
believe and look for) in our greatest need.

This it was that animated and strengthened Ehud to attempt this dangerous
work. And this faith and confidence hartened and emboldened the Josh. 3. 13.
14.
Priests, when the Lord by Joshua commanded them for their passing into the
land of Canaan, to set their feet on the water, to go over the river Jordan,
(how unlikely soever it was) their believing (I say) the Lord by the mouth of
Joshua, that a way should be made for them to pass through safely, as on dry
land, even that it was that hartened them to do it, who yet in so doing, must
of necessity have been drowned by man's reason and judgment. And this faith
made Peter bold to pronounce to the lame and diseased, even while they lay
visited, to pronounce (I say) in the hearing of all Act. 3. 6. and 9. 34.
that stood by, when he saw no likelihood thereof appear: Jesus Christ makes
you whole, arise and walk. For he believed Christ who had said to him that he
should work a miracle, whenever it was expedient, and that faith made him
bold to say so: whereas if that had not been immediately done indeed, which he
foresaid should come to pass, that the parties should be healed; he should
have been utterly discredited, and laughed to scorn, and cast out from men's
company, as a deceiuer.

This faith made the holy Martyrs yield their bodies to the fire, for the Note.
defense of Gods truth, while they believed, not only that they should be
received after into glory; but also that God would strengthen them for the
present time to endure the flame. And this it is that inableth us to suffer the
hardness which we willingly sustain throughout our lives, even this, that we
trust and rest persuaded, that God will bring us well through it, and
afterward receive us into his eternal kingdom. Which caused Saint Paul Act.
21. 13.
to utter these words: Why weep ye thus, and rend my heart? for I am resolved
and ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of
the Lord Jesus: and even so he taught, writing to Timothy; Therefore we suffer
because we 1. Tim. 4. 10.
believe in the living God, who is the savior of all, but especially of them
that believe. And this of Ehud in these two verses, and of his words spoken to
the King. and as for such as ask why he deluded the King with a lie, while he
went about to kill him, seeing he uttered no message to him at all; when yet
he told him he had a message from God unto him: to them I answer; the word
which is translated message or errand, does not only signify a word or
message by mouth, but also a thing or deed, such as that was which he did unto
him; for he was sent from God to kill him, even as among the Latins, Verbum
and res. Quid hoc verbi est? Quid hoc rei est? both are one.

Now follows the third thing, and that is in this 20. verse, namely, of Ehuds
The unfolding of the latter part of verse 19. and of the 20.
last words to the King immediately before he killed him, and of Eglons
behavior thereat, as it is here set down, let us consider: of which, this I
say; In that he should so simply hearken to, and believe him, admit him into
his secret parlour, and that Ehud being a stranger, should neither be
suspected, nor searched (as the manner is, and great reason was for it) before
he should have access to the King, and that none of all the Kings attendants
should advise such a matter, that he should not be suffered to stand on his
feet before the King, which was more suspicious,) but rather commanded to be
upon his knees before him, and then that he should cause his own company to
go out of the place, and leave them two only together; but especially to let
Ehud depart, before they saw all to be well: These (I say) and such like, if the
Lord had not blinded, and cast a mist before them, could never have passed as
they did. And we may say, it was much like that which we read of Abner,
captain of Saul's host, and all his men; to wit, that when 1. Sam. 26. 15.
he imagined that David pursued him, and sought his life, and should therefore
have more specially watched and attended the Kings person, then at other times;
yet that even then all the army should be asleep together where they lay; in
so much that David challenged Abner for it; was it not admirable? For it could
not have been so in any reason, except God had cast a sleep upon them, to the
end that David's integrity and innocence toward Saul, might be known, when
there was seen no other way to show it, and all saw (that would) how he might
have killed Saul.

And hereby let us learn, that when God will have any work wrought, Doct in
verse. 19. and 20.
or any thing brought to pass for his glory, the good of his Church, or
destruction of his enemies, he having many ways to bring it to pass, will
effect it through infinite difficulties, without our troubling our selves about
it. For his providence always ministers to, and makes way for his purpose till
it be executed. David was so coped in by Saul at one time, that there seemed no
hope of escape: but then the Lord whistled him away, and set him about other
business. What lets and discouragements (think we) had Noah to hold him from
that great work of building the Arc to the preserving Genesis 6. 13. 14.
of the world, and the Church of God? I will leave it to the consideration of
the reader, rather then spend the time in laying it forth. In the bringing to
pass Gods promise to Joseph in his dream, what a long time was it before it
was effected? even well nigh twenty years: and how unlike, and in the mean
while, how many difficulties were raised and set in the way to the frustrating
of it? as the malice and envy of his brethren, some of them intending and
seeking to kill him, but all the company consenting that he should be sold to
strangers a far off, from whence they thought he Genesis 37. 21. 22.
should never have bin any more seen of them, neither his dreams come to
pass: and then his imprisonment also after all, by the false accusation of his
whorish mistrisse: who would not have said, that by the means of all these, he
should have been utterly deprived of the benefit of the promises which God had
made to him? But could they prevail? was any jot of Gods word Genesis 42. 21.
made void, so that it came not to pass?

And was all the cruel malice of Haman easily avoided in plotting the
destruction of all the Jews Gods people: the day thereof being appointed,
Hest. 7. 50.
the King persuaded by him to let all be as he would have it, and no friend to
them, (but they were as sheep appointed to be slain) but they that were in as
great danger themselves, that is to say, Hester and Mardocai: and when she the
Queen, who was all their hope under God, should go about to help them out of
the danger, she brought her self thereby into the present peril of her life.
And yet because it could not be possible that the Church of God should be
overthrown, did not he most strangely deliver it? But to let pass examples in
Scripture; even thus the Lord has and does uphold his Church here and there
for a time against all enemies and lets, and will do, till he has
accomplished, and made up his number. And when we see that he continues his
favor more specially to any place or people, through many trials, let us say,
the Lord has done great and marvelous things for Note,
them, and they had need to acknowledge his kindness, and profit by it more
then in common manner, lest their account be harder to be made then other men's.
And to come to show it more particularly, and so to conclude this point; if
every private person whom this concerns, could weigh through what
difficulties, (as tentations and discouragements,) God has brought him to hold
and keep faith and a good conscience, both in the beginning, middle part of
his combat and conflicting days, and more specially when he has well nigh
run his race, and finished his course with joy; oh what thanks would he
render to the Lord for it? For all such may well Note.
remember how often they have said within themselves, that they shall never be
stablished and persevere to the end, and that the promise of heaven made to
them, is too good to be true. And yet God has so mixed his power with their
weakness, and so vpheld them beyond their expectation, that he has brought
them safely through all that they feared. Oh I cannot sufficiently magnify and
commend this goodness of the Lord, and withal, the glorious work of faith,
and what wonders they effect! and yet little known or asked after. But seeing
the arm of the Lord is no more shortened now, then in times past, but he does
great things for them that believe at this day; let us also learn David's
lesson: Commit thy way to the Lord (says he) and believe Psalm. 37. 3.
that he will effect it, and he will do it in deed, without any needless and
indirect trouble, or fretting care of thine: but if we believe not, I deny not
but that we may see (as Elisha told the Prince of Israel, and Mordicai Hester)
2 King 7. 2. Hest. 4. 14.
Gods promises performed to others which he made, as the unbelieving Prince
did, but we shall have no part therein our selves, nor cause of sound rejoicing
thereat, in as much as we had no exercise of our faith in believing them.
Therefore this worthily deserves at the hands of all the children of God (to
whom the fruit of this doctrine has in any measure been granted, and who have
any proof of their faith at al, that at least they yield the Lord thus much;
that as they be thankful (yea even with admiration) to consider how he has
brought matters to pass for them beyond hope: so that they arm themselves to
believe still, and that more assuredly that God is able and willing to make way
for them in all their desires, or distresses, without which yet they shall lose
the benefit of this his power and love. But more of this, as occasion shall be
offered.

As for Eglons rising up at the mention of God, as though he had reverenced
Doct. verse. 20.
him, (for this is the next thing that follows in the text) howsoever they
used to do so at that time who were but heathen Kings, as Baalam before, when
Balak then King of Moab, came to him, and his Princes with him, to ask what
Gods answer was to him, Baalam (I say) then spoke thus unto him: Arise Balak
to hear Gods voice, and to give reverence to it. Concerning his rising up (I
say at the naming of God (that we may make some good use of it, we are sure
it serves to convince Atheists, and profane ones, who are far from yielding
any. But if ye will say, what reverence was that which they gave, seeing they
were Idolaters, and did it at the naming of God, whether it were the true God
Jehovah, or any other, I say, sufficient to condemn these. But some make
shows of reverence when in truth they offer disgrace. So we read of the
Pharisees, that when it was proved to them by the blind man, that Christ had
opened his eyes, which they Ioh. 9. 24.
could not abide to hear, they would not take knowledge of it; but as though
they might boldly and freely detract from him whom they hated, (so that they
gave words of honor to God) bewrayed their hypocrisy, who would seem holy,
and therefore said; give glory to God, we know that this man is a sinner: and
so bewrayed that they had no religion, when yet they would seem to go before
others therein: seeing this is true, that he that honors not the son,
neither does he honor the father. Let all this then, both serve to shame all
brutish and profane persons, (who yet are in the visible Church) who ascribe
not so much to the word preached, neither regard the message of God, with so
much reverence as this heathen Eglon did; who in token thereof stood up when
Ehud told him that he had a message for him from God. But to leave these, let
it be a watch word to us that profess the true worship of God, that we please
not our selves in the work wrought; I mean in giving outward and bodily
worship to God, and in Mat. 15. 9.
calling him father; seeing neither they who draw near to him with bodies
only, do please him; neither all that say, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Mat. 7. 21.
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of the father that is in heaven:
2. Tim. 2. 19.
and again, seeing it is written, that all who call on the name of the Lord,
must depart from iniquity: let us regard that duly, without which we shall
have no more to commend us to God, then this Heathen King had. But of this
enough before, cap. 1. verse. 4. It follows.

Verse. 21. And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his
right thigh, and thrust it into his belly.

22. So that the haft went in after the blade, and the fat closed about the
blade, so that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly, but the dirt came
out.

OF Ehuds intent and preparation to kill Eglon King of Moab, we have The sense
and doctrine of these two verses.
heard: now follows the execution of it. For as Iael was strengthened by God,
to destroy and kill Sicera, captain of Iabin King of Canaan; so the Lord
strengthened Ehud here, to bring down Eglon King of Moab, that Israel his
people who cried unto him, might be delivered out of the bondage that he had
brought them into. And thus God in a moment took Doct. in verse. 21.
away the life and honor of him both together, by one deadly blow? wherein he
would show us the woeful estate of those, who have nothing but in this world,
to what end they may come even here, they know not how soon and suddenly,
beside the irksome desolation that shall meet with them when they go hence.
Oh the base and loathsome death that God would have him brought unto, and yet in
his flourishing estate, so far from likelihood of any change or decay at all!
If we regard any thing, we will consider this: examples are infinite. Thus
Belshazzar and Herod were taken down in the midst of their iollity. Add to
these, Nabal for the vncomfortablenesse 1. Sam. 25. 37. 38.
of his death, with Zimri that burned himself, to burn the Kings palace in
Tirza, and so died; and with Ioash the King of Judah, 1. King. 16. 19.
who was slain of his servants, and Iezabel, whose blood was without
compassion 2. King. 12. 20.
dashed against the stones. Even so, do we not daily see the flourishing Luke
21. 6.
estates of men turned to most desolate decay? in so much as they be justly
reproved for making them their Paradise; and that by the words of our Savior
[are these the things ye look after?] and also when he Luke 29. 42.
bewailed them, for that they died without hope. And here by so fit an
occasion as is offered by Ehuds killing of Eglon this King of Moab: I think it
not unfit in this place, (though in a word, and by way of execration) to note
and bring to the remembrance of the Reader, the cursed practice of Jesuits in
murdering, and bringing untimely death upon the Lords anointed, Kings and
Princes, under the color of their heresy (as they call it) or lest they
should incur some way the Popes displeasure for not doing so; as though they
would help the Lord to cut off such as flourish and prosper. And the rather I
mention them, because they defend themselves by this fact of Ehud, and such
like, most impudently and abiurdly, to cover their horrible treasons and
murders. The two last Kings of France were thus handled, and the facts with
the doers highly extolled by these that hartened them on thereto. Oh villain
intolerable! whereby, as by their persecuting the Gospel, they most lively
show themselves to be utter adversaries to Christ, and to be most near akind
to them who commit the sin against which we should not pray, that cannot be
forgiven. But to leave them whom God allows not to be instruments of such
bloody acts and trecheries, let us return to the persons before mentioned, who
lived here in pleasures of sin for a season, and were without God in the
world, and soon perished miserably.

These with many other mentioned in the Scriptures, and in later Chronicles
(for I speak of the chief and greatest persons, seeing they do most move
affection,) so highly advanced in this world, and yet so soon and suddenly
spoiled and bereaved of all their honor and excellency (as I have said) and to
change it with a base death, and a worse estate afterward; do lively set
before our eyes the misery of all such, as look no further, then after
bravery, iollity, vain pleasure, and large possessions, which they can
neither keep, when their deadly blow is given them, and when their dreadful
woe comes, so that they might be any comforts to them; nor lose and part
from them (if they have any time to think thereof) without deadly dislike, and
most bitter vexation. So that it may worthily warn all such as be of high
degree, and much more us that are inferior persons; and therefore ought first
to stoop to consider of, and provide for our end, that when we must
departhence, (which time is most uncertain) we may be prepared to die
happily, and provide to be received into heavenly habitations. For we see what
a pitiful and dangerous thing it is to rest upon that which we enjoy here, as
wealth, pomp, young years, or any other earthly prosperity. The Lord scatters
men in the imaginations of their hearts. He sweepes down their warped
thoughts, as copwebs with beezome. It had been well with Eglon, and such as he
was, (all that hear of him will say) if he had enjoyed nothing; and much
better if he had been nothing. Note.
Even thus the hand of God is against all his enemies, and when the day of
reckoning comes, they perish. It is reported (in the history of that time)
that an Emperor of Rome, Adrian by name, when he should die, and Melanct in
Adriano.
leave all his iollity, being suddenly stricken with great terror, used these
words: Oh my poor wandering silly soul, which have been long a companion and
guest of my body, what shall hereafter become of thee, or whither will thou
go? Thou have been iollie, merry, and full of sporting and pleasures, but now
thou must go where theee is no such matter, forlorn, desolate, and forsaken.
Behold in this great man, the woeful apprehension and fearful presage of the
woe to come, even while he lived: the which doubtless seazing upon the mighty
and glorious (when no outward thing can comfort them) should flaight and
terrifieal sorts and degrees of men from resting upon any earthly props,
wanting Gods favor for their chief stay and refuge.

And here in laying out the fearful manner of killing Eglon, occasion Doct
in verse 22.
being offered to make mention of that which was loathsome to the ear; in that
it was uttered in more seemly terms and words: we may learn how warily we
should speak of things more unseemly, or which are more harsh in the hearing;
and follow the holy Ghost in our terms, namely to utter that (which might else
offend the ears of the most) in more seemly and honest words. So the action
of the marriage bed is usually expressed by the holy Ghost in most chaste and
seemly words. As it is said of David, 1. King. 1. 4.
when Abishag the Shunamite was brought unto him to minister to him, though she
cherished him, and lay in his bosom in his extreme age, that he might get
heat by her, it is said in modest words, that the King knew her not: so Mary,
how can this be, seeing I knew not a man? Such are the terms used Luke 1. 34.
by the holy Ghost, of discovering the shame and covering the nakedness of
Noah our father, as Shem and Iaphei did. And although education and good
manners teach us modesty, yet grace must teach the language of Canaan, whereof
this is a part. The Lord commanded Israel to cover their Deuteronomy. 23. 12. 13. 14.
excrements with their paddle, because he walked among them: and so ought we
to behave our selves, especially Preachers must beware of broad, unseemly, and
offensive speech in this kind, because they are to utter the will of God, in
the most seemly and reverent phrase and manner. And diverse other such might
be brought forth, but that I would not be long in this matter, where fewer
words may serve. Which is to the just reproof of many in our time, who as they
are rude and brutish in their behavior, so have they as beastly and filthy
tongues to utter their minds by, in too unseemly manner, as they know who are
their companions, and like unto them. And this of Ehuds killing Eglon.

THE TWENTY TWO SERMON ON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
VERSE. 23. Then Ehud got him out into the porch, and shut the doors of the
parlour upon him, and locked them. 24. And when he was gone out, his servants
came, who seeing that the doors of the parlour were locked, they said; surely
he does his easement in his summer parlour. 25. And they tarried till they
were ashamed: and seeing he opened not the doors of the parlour, they took
the key and opened them, and behold their Lord was fallen dead on the earth.
26. So Ehud escaped (while they tarried) and was passed the quarries, and
escaped to Seirah.
NOw of the things that followed this action, and pertained to it, according to
the division made in the end of the fifteenth verse: they are set down in
these four verses, and tend all to this end, to show how God made way for
Ehuds safe escaping. And therefore first note we somewhat generally, and then
more particularly afterward. For his coming forth, in that none of the Kings
servants were at hand to go into the Kings parlour presently, or if they were
there attending, yet that they should be so negligent and forgetful to go in
forthwith, but to tarry till Ehud might be gone past all danger, it was as I
said of his going about it, so ordered by God* that all might say, thus he
would have it, and then we know, that none can withstand or resist it. To teach
us the same so that although a man would think, that there might be many ways
to overthrow and frustrate Gods purpose, yet none of them shall stand, for why?
there is no counsel against the Lord. Who would not have thought, but Prou.
that Pharaoh might have kept the people of Israel still in his land, and that
Exodus 12. 41.
none could have brought such a mighty people) even many hundred thousands) out
of it against his will? But yet behold, seeing God would deliver them, it was
not he, nor all his chariots, no nor all the Kings in the world, if they had
joined with him, that could have hindered it.

It might likewise have been thought an easy matter for King Ahab and Iezabel,
full of spite and cruelty, with all their strength, friends, and retinue, 1.
King. 19. 1. 2.
whom they might have commanded and set about it, to root out and take out of
the way, the poor Prophet of God Elias, which they desired most earnestly to
have done: but seeing God would preserve him to honor his name, it was in
vain for them to attempt or go about it. So for Paul, one seely Apostle to
conquer so great a part of the world by the preaching of the Gospel, which it
had utterly rejected, how admirable a thing was it? seeing it is manifest, that
the malicious Jews resisted, and came against him in all places: but who might
withstand God, when he would have it so? For in that one city at Corinth, he
bad him go forward in preaching, and faint not, Act. 18. 9. 10. 11
where he had much people; adding this for encouragement thereto, that none
should be able to hinder it. And let us in these days be wise by so many fair
warnings. It cannot be that one of Gods faithful shall perish, therefore let
us not smite at such, with tongue nor hand as he loves: he will Note.
fight for them, and curse them that curse his, and they shall repent it, if
not too late, that they went about to hurt them. But of this I spoke before in
the Genesis 11. 35.
former Sermon, though not in the same words, nor making the same use thereof:
therefore thus much briefly of these verses in general.

Now that it is said in this verse, that Ehud, when he had done this work
Doct. of verse. 23.
upon Gods enemy, came forth neither in fear, nor any great haste, in any
disguised manner, but as though he had done nothing worthy suspicion, neither
gave any token of a guilty conscience, but as one that had served God in that
work. It lively sets before our eyes the peaceable fruit of an excusing and
quiet conscience. Behold the like in Iael, the wife of Heber, Judge. 4. 22.
who having slain Sisera, whereas any other doing such an act of his own head
with a murdering mind in such a matter, could hardly have avoided it, but he
should have bewrayed himself easily and palpably: as is to be seen in Judas
betraying his master, who cried out of his own fact, saying; I Mat. 27. 4.
have sinned in betraying the innocent blood. And it may teach us how greatly
the quiet and excusing conscience of the innocent and righteous man differs
from the guilty and accusing conscience of the ungodly. And it agrees with the
words of the Wise man, who says; The righteous is bold as Prou. 28. 1.
a Lion, but the wicked flees, when no man pursues him. The ground of this
his peace, was the discharge of that duty which the Lord imposed upon him, in
this extraordinary case, the which otherwise had been abominable parricide. And
although this viperous brood of Jesuits pretend the like dispensation from
their petty god the Pope, and thereupon harden their hearts, and set an
impudent face upon the matter, as if they had no wound or terror of
conscience: yet the truth is, their ground being naught, the cause of this
boldness is shamelessness, impudency, and want of conscience at all, if they
be not wounded. Hell can only terrify these helhounds, for God they fear
not, and they have hardened their faces (as it seems) to regard no man. Where
we may see a double benefit that the godly reap and enjoy by having allowance
and warrant from God for the duties they do: to wit, inward quietness of
mind, and strength and courage thereby to bear any outward danger or trouble,
if need should be, and both the contraries to pursue and take hold of the
other, that is, an hellish mind toward God, and terror and dread though they
bite it in, in regard of the world, or an hardened heart which is worse then
both.

As for those which waited on the King, they did foolishly: they should Verse.
24. 25. The clearing of them.
have cast the hardest, when Ehud came forth of the parlour, and have stayed
him, and not have kept out so long, and have made such delay as they did: for
delays are dangerous where the matter is weighty, in which they are used. And
they being thought so wise that the keeping of their Lord and master was
committed to them: they failed greatly and grossly in their duty; and therefore
they reaped the fruit thereof, when after their long tarying, they came in at
the last and found him slain. This is that which delay breeds Doct. verse.
24. 25.
in all things, (not in their doings only) and the more danger, the greater
the things are, as I have said. Thus Baa^ah and Rechab by the negligence of the
Kings officers, slew him on his bed. And as this teaches every private man to
be diligent and wary about the duties that belong to his function and calling,
to prevent loss and damage; so especially it commends vigilancie and
circumspection in all such, as through whose hands great matters of state and
government do pass, that neither by their carelesnes, conniuence, or other
sinister respects, they suffer that mischief to grow upon Church and Common
wealth, which by their providence might in season be prevented ere it be
helpelesse. The fit season therefore is to be taken, in earthly business and
our common affairs, as this was here by Ehud: we must use the opportunity;
reap the corn when it calls for the sickie, and strike the iron while it is
hot: so our market must be made, while a good peniworth may be had. Do all
thou have to do with diligence, while the day Eccles. 5.
lasts: the night will come, wherein such works cannot be done. Remember the
rich man, who being in hell in torments, was denied a drop of cold water,
because he avoided them not while he enjoyed plenty. So Haman made request for
his life too late And by their slacknesse and delay we may Luk 16. 25.
much more be warned in the weighty affairs that concern our happiness, 2.
Cor. 6. 2.
to take the fit season: that is, to seek the Lord while he may be found, and
not drive off from day to day, but to remember our maker in the days of Esa.
55. 6. Eccles. ^^ 1.
our youth, and to day, while we hear his voice, not to harden our hearts,
Psalm. 95. 8.
but embrace his message both in the Law and promises of God by faith unto
salvation. The servants that kept not Saul, but slipped in great danger, were
accessaries (as David tells Abner in Saul's case) though they betrayed him 1.
Sam. 26. 16.
not: even so the careless delayer to get faith and repentance, shall perish,
as he that hates to be reformed. The five foolish Virgins knocked to be let in,
Luke 13. 3. Psalm 50 16. Mat. 25. 11. 12.
when the door was shut. Even so in all particular actions of our life, look
we before all other things to keep our conscience pure and good. To the like
purpose much might be said. And this by occasion of the servants delay, and
their astonishment, when they saw how it fell out to them thereby.

Ehud reaped the benefit of this their delay, for while they thus drove off
Doct. verse. 26.
and lost the time in which they should have carefully attended upon their
Lord, he escaped out of their hands, and wound out of all danger, he passing
the quarries, which it seems were places betwixt Gilgall of the Israelites,
and the Moabites, which before he could get beyond, he was not past danger: and
so coming to Seirah, a place here mentioned in the borders of Israel, further
off from danger, he was in safety. And thus we see again, that they who are
wise and speedy in their business, do thrive and prosper, when they who delay
the time, do apparently sit in their own light, and work their own sorrow
and annoyance, as we have heard: even as he who having foolishly refused a
good bargain, which might have been for for the benefit and maintenance both
of him and his long after, mourns and dispaireth of the like offer and
opportunity. The diligent hand makes rich, and he that waters shall also
have rain. Cursed is he that does the Lords business negligently. The people
in John Baptists time received the Mat. 11.
word with greediness, happy was he that could enter first into the kingdom
of God, and they that make no have do never come thither. And yet they that
strive to enter in at the strait gate shall be received into glory: when
other shall seek to enter afterward (too late) and shall not be able. And
therefore the Apostle tells us, that such as can redeem the time, are wise men;
the foolish believe every thing, and so drive off, and are taken in the Compare
verse. 16. with the 15. of Ephesians. 5.
snare. Thus we see the wise take the opportunity, and bring their matters
thereby to a good pass. But for all that I have said of speediness, yet
understand me thus: that rashness is as far from commendation, as driving
off the time, and delay. Thus much of Ehuds first work in killing the chief
enemy of Gods people, that Eglon the King; which was a great mean of their
deliverance and rest.

Verse. 27. And when he came home, he blew a trumpet in mount Ephraim, and the
children of Israel went down with him from the mountain, and he went before
them.

28. Then said he unto them, follow me, for the Lord has delivered your
enemies, even Moab, into your hands. So they went down after him, and took
the passages of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not a man to pass over.

29. And they slew of the Moabites the same time about ten thousand men, all
fed men, and all warriors, and there escaped not a man.

30. So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel, and the land had
rest four score years.

THe second mean of Isreal's deliverance follows; and that was, the Verse. 27.
The sense and sum of these 4. verses.
cutting off of ten thousand of the valiant men of Moab, which was the other
good help toward their deliverance beside the killing of the King, which now
follows to the ending and making up of this Story, to verse. 31. But first it
is showed what Ehud did to the bringing of this to pass. The things that Ehud
went about, whereby so many of the Moabites were slain and Israel was
delivered, were these three: first, as he was a valiant man, so he coming to
the place here mentioned, Seirah by name, (it was not Seir in Idumea, but
near to mount Ephraim in the land of Canaan, as was said before) he did not
leave the work imperfect, which he had begun in killing the King of Moab, but
1. with a trumpet he called together the men of Ephraim, and by his authority
stirred them up to war: and 2. to encourage them the better thereto, he
assured them from God of the victory: and 3. with this, they took up and
beset the foords of Jordan, where the Moabites passed over too and fro out of
Israel into the land of Moab: and by this means they stayed such of them as
were on that side the river, that they could not escape and go over, and those
that came out of the land of Moab over the river to rescue their fellows, and
pursue Israel, they slew also, till ten thousand men of good courage were cut
off. And this if they had not done, the Moabites being so enraged against them
for that which was done to their King, they had made spoil and havoc of
them, whereas now they subdued them, and obtained a long time of rest
themselves. Thus much for the clearing of these 4. verses.

Now of that which we are to learn out of them. Ehud did not delay, as The
meaning of verse. 27 particularly.
we see, for that had bin full of danger, but now while the Moabites through
astonishment at that which was befallen them, could not by and by see and
determine what was best to be done, he plied it, and went to work, as we have
heard. It is as hard a matter to use an opportunity wisely, and pursue the
occasion effectually when it is offered, as it is at first to get and take it.
But Ehud lost no time, but followed it hard: and as he had eicaped while the
servants delayed; so now he gathers his army together, while the Moabites
(being amazed with terror) were fit by passing to and fro to be pursued, and
discomfited. And as this does show how unwearied we ought to be in Doct.
those actions that tend to the glory of God, the good of the Church, and the
confusion of the enemies thereof; so, more generally it teaches us, when we
have made a good beginning in any thing, that we should not be slack in going
forward, and following it: but as Ehud here did, wisely and carefully labor
to bring our work unto an end. It is a thing much more common to begin well,
then to go forward so, whether we understand it generally, to make a
beginning in Christianity, or in any particular part thereof, it is most true.
For the foremost, many of us come to profess the Gospel indeed, and embrace it
commendably, by hearing it joyfully, in conuersing with Gods people kindly, and
in forsaking many parts of our former bad lives. But when we should hold on in
this good manner to search Note.
further into our selves, to find out our rank corruptions, and to purge our
selves of them, and to be grounded in our most holy faith, and stablished as
Judge. 19.
we may attain to, we wax soon wear, and begin to stand at a stay, and so
we lose all our labor that we have bestowed already, and frustrate the work
that was well begun.

And so to say the same of particulars, it is well seen, that many attempt
sundry good actions commendably; as the laboring for a good Minister, and the
drawing of the people to godly society and love in a town, and to have an eye
to the unruly: other begin good exercises and orders in their family, and
namely, prayer morning and evening; and some use good means for the well
ordering, and good governing of their lives, and labor to root out particular
abuses out of them, and to entertain grace and good duties, and many such like
I might mention. But I cannot tell how it comes to pass, that as if they
thought these good things should last but for a while, or as though they would
hold in good plight without means (wherein they show that they are not well
grounded, though they did well for a season) so they go to work, and what
with discouragements and crosses on the one side, and allurements and
prouocations on the other side, they faint and break off: whereas that should
not be, till the work were brought to a good end, that so they might go
forward in other duties in like manner. Neither should we look to the things
past, what good we have done more then other, to become less careful thereby
in going forward; Phil. 3. 13. 14.
but what remains yet to be done till we have brought our good attempts to
pass; and one good duty should follow after another, until we have finished
our course with joy. We must remember that the Merchant went and bought the
pearl when he had found it: and the wise Virgins Mat. 13. 42. Mat. 25. 4.
kept oil in their lamps. And here it were to good purpose to think of
Ehuds unwearied care and labor, till he had brought all to a good end, and of
such other as did the like; and to consider with our selves (as he and such
did) how all that has been done of us in such cases, should be but in vain;
and beside, great danger and detriment must needs come upon us, if we should
(as too many do) break off in the mid way. Oh what do men lose hereby: even
beside all their labor, the fruit of it also. But of this we have occasion to
speak often elsewhere.

Further, in that it is said that he hartened them on against the Moabites,
assuring them that the Lord had delivered them into their hands, and that he
drew them after him, and they did as he willed them; we see the worth of a
good guide, what he may do with those which he is set over, and how much,
strong and well grounded persuasions prevail, where they be used in season and
good manner, God blessing them as he has promised. Heathen Captains have
done much with their soldiers, and Princes and lawmakers with their subjects:
who yet (we know) could neither certify them of the things they promised, and
encouraged them to hope for, neither if they could; were the things of any
other fort or kind, then temporary. Now then how much more are they like to
prevail with men, who both Note.
bring infallible promises from God, and also of things which please him (as
Ehud here does) and they do not only glad the hearts of the persons
therewith, in as much as they understand thereby that God will bless them
here abundantly, and also that their reward is great in heaven.

As the Lord spoke to Joshua saying: Be valiant and of good courage, for I
Josh. 1. 3.
have given the whole country of the Canaanites into thy hands: so spoke Ehud
here unto the men of Ephraim in the name of God, and by his authority. And
these are the persuasions that are like to prevail, I say not with the
faithful only: but (if any may be) these are of force to move even other
also. Not that they can be thoroughly persuaded thereof without faith, but for
that they do very much move their minds, and the rather by the example of
better then themselves, and also they do cause them the more to enquire into
such things, and how they should be done, till they grow acquainted with them,
that so they may in time believe and so do them in faith also. And let this
which I say be better considered in two things: the one in the promises of
eternal life, the other in those which belong to this present life.

For the first, when God shall by some faithful messenger of his, assure the
hungring soul, and the man of an afflicted spirit, of pardon of his sins,
and eternal life, and that he shall undoubtedly enjoy them, requiring this
withal that he give credit thereto, and believe the same; how greatly (think
we) do they move and prevail with him, as we see Christ's words did with
Zachee, and Paul's with the Iailor, and with many other? And for the second Luke
19. 8. 9. Act. 16. 33.
likewise, I mean the temporary promises of this present life (as this was
one, that Ehud here offered and set before the people) as the promise of
blessing and good success to such as obey God, by walking diligently in their
particular calling, and the promise of a good end and issue out of trouble to
them which commit their way to God, and are well occupied under Note.
in the mean season: to these, I say, how forcible are such promises, and what
power have they to uphold the hearts of such, in a comfortable expectation of
the things promised? whereas without them, nothing could do the same. Oh
therefore what good may a godly Minister do in both (even as her superiors
also, especially being men endued with the gifts of the spirit) if he continue
in love to put the poor people daily in remembrance of these things, in the
midst of the manifold changes of this life? And therefore as God shall impart
to any man in the ministry or otherwise; more light, wisdom, experience, and
grace, either in believing or obeying, the more must he apply himself to
enlighten, advise, and strengthen those whom God has set him over for that
purpose; knowing that it is not every man's case, to be able to minister unto
himself or other, advice or direction, (though it were much to be desired)
especially in a matter of difficulty, and in a doubt of conscience, or in
tentation, or under the cross. Peter therefore betrusted with this office, to
confirm his brethren, as a man of a thousand, as David, Psalm. 51. undertook
it, who had himself first well learned it, and was the better able to perform
it to other. Neither let any man think it a disgrace to himself thus to see,
and walk, by the eyes, and upon the feet of others. It is a man's wisdom, and
a great portion from God, to receive direction by such means. Here I will
stay.

THE TWENTY THREE SERMON ON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to go forward; the valiant warriors of Ephraim being encouraged thus by
Ehud, and other help being called together therewith, as we have heard, and
they keeping the passages to and fro, betwixt Israel on their own side, and
Moab on the other side of Jordan, they killed all the Moabites that offered
themselves to stir and be helpers in that time of their great calamity and
abasement, wherein they had lost their King: these (I say) whom Ehud drew
together, so bestirred themselves, that ten thousand of the best warriors of
the Moabites were put to the sword. Thus they of Moab were weakened, and Ehud
and the people of Israel did more and more prevail. By all this we see that as
there is a time of affliction and calamity to the people of God (as it had
been here to Israel) and that is, when they have provoked God, and their
sins have made them naked before the Lord, that is to say, destitute and
void of the grace and help of God, (as it is said of their fathers when they
had made a Calfe in Exodus) as I say, there is such a time; so there is a time
again of deliverance and joy, and that is, when the people rise out of their
sin penitently, and seek the Lord with their whole heart, then he most
graciously returns to them again, in whose favor is life.

And this comfortable estate may we enjoy from time to time, to have the Lords
loving countenance to shine upon us, far more delightful to our soul, then
the fairest and sweetest weather can be to the creatures of the earth, i^ we
can like to prefer it, as it is the best before all other: and we having Note.
obtained grace to do so, if we shall go a step further, and can think it
our best wisdom to continue in so doing we shall abide in Gods favor Ioh.
15 10
also, and keep our selves well when we are well, which is the happiness that
can in this life be enjoyed. The Lord does not stint and tie us to times, in
which only we may have peace with him, and see good days; but he would that
we should live in safety under his protection all the day long: and so Deuteronomy.
33. 12
from time to time, that we may have proof how good and bountiful he is. But
we are waily and inconstant, and abuse his lenity and kindness toward us, when
he not only holds many troubles and sorrows from us, but also lodeth us
with the benefits of health, and welfare. inward and outward, Note. Psalm. 68.
19.
and that also while others smart and are in heaviness.

We deal with him, as pampered horses, and children much made of, who right
soon wax loose and wanton. And we cause the Lord to turn our good and
joyful days into glooming and sorrowful times: as through the stories of the
book of God does every where appear, that many after good beginnings did so
though little to their comfort. Oh how soon did this people mentioned in this
book, and their fathers, as we read in Deuteronomy, with sundry other
generations following, as the stories do testify, Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
kick up their heel against the Lord, when he did yet feed them with the
fat of wheat, and make them drink of the sweet? And this reuolting works
such a change in our best states and seasons, as causes to complain and cry.
Let it therefore cause us to be resolved upon this, and that in due and good
consideration, so that we may constantly hold the same: to wit, that if we
desire to see good days here, and enjoy long life with the Lord hereafter:
that (I say) we fly evil, and follow that which is good: and 1. Pet. 3. 11.
herein let us see that we deal not hollowly with the Lord: and if by
occasion we slip or fall, and forget our selves (as this people here did,
verse. 7.) Note.
yet let us take heed that we harden not our hearts, and so lie still, but
bear Mica. 7. 7.
our punishment contentedly, because we have sinned, and make speed to turn
again to the Lord our first husband, who will receive us graciously: and as he
has smitten us, so he will heal us; and as he did before comfort us, so he
will restore joy and gladness to us, as in time past. And this being done
daily in the smaller slips, shall the easilier be gone about in greater falls,
and shall also be a mean to keep us from them. Yea doubtless the Lord will
do great things for us; and as he abased the enemies of this people, the
Moabites here, so will he bring the wicked under us, and leave them afflicted
and scourged in our room. Prou.


Now follows the third and last thing mentioned in this latter part of Verse
30. The unfolding of it.
the story, and that is, rest after, for a good while.

This long time of peace the Lord granted them, and could willingly afford it
them, and it is all one to him to give a long time thereto, as a short. And as
it was a great blessing, so it was more then was promised. Indeed the Lord
said, that he would give Moab into their hands, and the people enjoyed that (as
a fruit of their faith) which laid hold on Gods promise. But hesides, he
lengthened out the time of their rest, further then he promised them. To teach
us that God never comes short or behind hand with us in performing his
promises, but gives us good measure, heaped up, and Doct. verse. 30.
running over; and thereby shows that he is liberal and bountiful toward
us. And this is his usual manner of dealing with his, to give more Luke 6. 38.
then they ask or look to receive; for he gives more then he himself
promises. The prodigal child asked, that he might be received but as an
hired servant, but his father, who resembled the Lord in kindness, received
Luke 15. 19. 22. etc.
him for his son, and declared it by entertaining him gladly, with all things
agreeing thereto. So the woman of Canaan came to Christ for help for her Mat
15. 22. 28.
daughter; but he not only granted her that, but also bad her take what she
would. Even as father Jacob, who feared that he should never see Joseph's face,
thinking he had been devoured of some wild beast, did yet see his childrens Gen
37. 33. 34. compared with 48. 11.
children.

This if it were believed, were able to make our lives comfortable? For to say
the truth, all our welfare is according to our faith, and yet the Lord gives
fartee above that which we can believe. Therefore this ought to encourage Note.
us, to labor to give him credit in all that we seen imposes upon us, and
requires of us, in that we understand and see, and rest persuaded that he
will have us to go about it. For we may know, that our reward shall he
exceeding great in so doing. Let us instance this in two or three particulars,
and we shall find the same that other have done before us. If we mark it, we
may perceive, that when we have sometime in our afflictions besought the Lord
but for some ease and mitigation of the force of them, whether sickness,
pain, disease, or any such like, he has delivered us altogether, and besides,
blessed us abundantly. And so to show it in any other particular, when great
sorrow has been rising toward us, he has often times turned our sorrow into
joy. And even so, as long-continued peace was to this people unlooked for, when
their very deliverance from subjection to the Moabites, would have been full
welcome, though it had been but for a short time, that they might have had but
some breathing from their bondage: so the Lord deals with us, that whereas in
some of our troubles, we have feared as Hezechiah did, that we should never
fee light, nor good days any more; yet Note.
the Lord of his exceeding goodness has restored us to our former sweet Esa.
38. 11.
liberties for a long time after. But oh what might be said of this argument?
Although we must also know, that he sees reason sometime, and that for good
cause, to hold us off and defer us. But more of this in Chap. 1. ver. 2. And
here an end of this story.

Verse. 31. And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the
Philistims six hundred men with an ox goade, and he also delivered Israel*
THis short story of Shamgar, is the third and last story mentioned in this
chapter of the Israelites deliverance, by an other Judge. But who this Shamger
was, or of what tribe he came, the Scripture does not let down. But it
appears, that when they had enjoyed long peace under Ehud, after his death,
the Philistims began to vex and oppress them, and then the Lord stirred up
this Shamgar to defend them, that they might not again be brought into bondage
as they had bin before. And among other of their victories which were many,
this one is brought in, as most admirable, though it be but briefly mentioned.
For a great number, even hundreds to be slain by one man, and he using so
weak an instrument, and the whole nation of the people to be preserved
thereby from so fierce enemies, what is in this whole book spoken of, of the
like kind, to be for strange and admirable? unless it be the like act of
Sampson.

Wherein we may see, that every slight thing may be a weapon or war for Gods
people, when he will say, it shall prevail: and that it is not the number of
men, nor the means, that God regards when he will get the victory.
Therefore David's small and smooth stones to throw in his sling, 1. Sam. 17. 40.
4^. Judge. 15. 15.
were sufficient furniture and armor to sley the Philistims champion Goliath:
and Sampson with the iaw bone of an Ass slew a thousand men: and Iael with a
bare nail, killed Sisera, that valiant captain of Iabin King of Canaan. And
so great an act did this Shamgar, by so weak an instrument, when the Lord
pleased to give the victory. And this truth should we see verified as clearly
as ever they did, if we would hold this sure and constant, that we are his,
and dear unto him: secondly, when we feel our outward oppressions and
discouragements, or our inward infirmities, fears, and tentations, if then (I
say) we did not look how weak we our selves are, and unfit to wade through
them all, and bear them, forgetting Gods power, which serves 1. Sam. 30. 6.
for the use and comfort of his weak servants, and to be made known in their
infirmities: even so we see David did, namely in his sore distress, 2. Chron.
12. 9.
comfort himself in being wearied with Saul's pursuing of him. And yet what a
grace that was in him we may see by this, that he being at an other time, and
forgetting himself, in a sore combat, brake out thus, and in his rashness
said, I shall one time or other fall by Saul: But we should look how 1. Sam.
27. 1.
strong the Lord is who loves us: who also looks down from heaven, to see
who are weak, that he may be strong with them. For indeed when we 2. Chron.
16. 9.
see our own impotency, this should lift up out heart, and cause us to reach
out our hand to Gods mercy, which is in a readiness for us. So that if he be
able to help us, that should be enough for us, how unable soever we be to
bear the burden our selves. So we have learned to believe, and to Psalm. 27.
1.
speak, The Lord is my light and salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is
the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Remember we also what the
Apostle said: I am able to do all things through him that makes me able. And
again, Phil. 4. 13. 2. Cor. 12. 10.
I will rejoice in mine infirmities: for when I am weak, then am I strong:
even so we not fainting in our many troubles, but by faith drawing and deriuing
Gods power unto us, as we have good leave to do, yea as we are commanded by
himself to do, we may rest quiet, for God will not disappoint us, and in that
respect the Apostle James wille^^ us to be greatliest comforted, when we fall
into diverse tentations, that to our faith may be tried to be sound (and that
is better then gold) bringing patience with it. And yet if Iam. 1. 3.
the Lord be not with us, nor we cling not to him by faith, no munition or
warlike furniture when it is needed, nor the strongest nor surest help in time
of peace shall be able to do us any good. Therefore neither could the walls
of Jericho preserve the city when God went against it, nor Goliahs Josh. ^. 2.
sword defend him, but turn against him; not Pharaeohs Chariots get victory
for him, but fail him when the Lord would not go with them. And therefore even
as it is said in the Psalm, that a King is not saved by the multitude Psalm.
33. 16.
of an host, neither is the mighty delivered by his great strength; so an horse
is but a vain help to save a man. And so we may say of all creatures. If the
Lord be at peace with us, they are on our sides, to stand with us; but if he
frown upon us, they shall be against us. Lo such a thing it is to be in
league and favor with him, that all shall turn to the best unto us thereby;
yea even the fierceness of our enemies: the heavens, the earth, the creatures
shall be all at one with them, who are in covenant with him, who is the Lord of
them. But I will proceed in the next chapter.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE book of IVDGES.
Verse. 1. And the children of Israel began again to do wickedly in the sight
of the Lord when Ehud was dead. 2. And the Lord sold them into the hand of
Iabin King of Canaan that reigned in Hazar, whose chief captain was called
Sisera, which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles. 3. Then the children of
Israel cried unto the Lord, for he had nine hundred Chariots of iron, and
twenty years he had vexed the children of Israel very sore. 4. And at that
time Debora a Prophetess, the wise of Lapidothiudged Israel. 5. And this
Debora dwelt under a Palm tree between Rama and mount Ephraim, and the people
of Israel came up to her for indgement.
IN this Chapter is set down another falling of the children of Israel from
The samme and parts of the chapter 4.
God, and Gods correcting of them: their repentance also: and lastly his
delivering of them by Debora, Barak, and Iael. The first of these is in the
first verse, the next in the second verse, their repentance in the third: and
their deliverance in all the rest of the verses, to the end of the chapter.

The first part of the Chapter.
In that this relapse of theirs was said to be after Ehud was dead, as though
Shamgar had not been betwixt both, it was most likely it was for that, he was
but a very short time a deliverer unto them. But yet he was after Ehud a
deliverer of the people, though but for a short time, as appears in the last
verse of the former chapter.

For the first of the four things, I mean the sin of the people of Israel,
Verse. 1.
which again they committed (for so it is said here, that they did again
that which was evil in the sight of the Lord) understand it of them who had
seen the former deliverance, and also of their posterity who enjoyed the
blessing. Of the phrase or manner of speech uttered by the holy Ghost, to wit,
that they did evil in the sight of the Lord; I will not speak any more,
having handled it twice before. But of their sin let us consider. And that
is, that they abused their long enjoyed peace and rest under Ehud. The sum of
it is, that they did leave the right way of serving God, and increased their
sin sundry ways. And this is indeed the disposition and common practice
Doct. verse. 1.
of men, who are not led and governed by Gods grace, that they are not the
better for their prosperity, but much worse: for by adversity they are held
down, and disabled from much sin, and so are restrained at least; so that,
as the way is shut up to them from thence by affliction, so their appetite is
much abated thereby also. But in liberty, peace, and abundance of Gods
benefits, they are more easily led on, and enticed, and so the was is set open
to them, and they do as readily walk in it; and being ungoverned, they are
soon let loose. And we must know, that it is not thus with the wicked only,
but even with such as have been sometime under Gods direction, that even they
are ready to forget themselves, yea and the most do, and waxing bold, break
out by means of their prosperity after the same manner.

And so it fell out with David himself, who when he had subdued his enemies
under him almost on every side, even to his hearts desire, he fell most
dangerously to the great provoking of God. And Iehosaphat, otherwise a 2. Sam.
11. 4.
godly King, when he was lifted up and made drunk as it were, with the
company and fellowship of wicked Ahab, did sore forget himself, so that he was
feign to be reproved for it of the Lord by his Prophet. A lamentable case, that
when they be so sore oppressed either by enemies, or other 2. Chro. 19. 2.
crosses, that their life waxes wearisome to them, and their distressed estate
causes all that look on them to pity them: and when the Lord shall in that
misery of theirs have compassion of them, and set them at large, it is a
lamentable case (I say) that they should become so grossly unthankful, forget
their late adversity, and as soon in a manner as God has enlarged them by his
benefits, that they should thus unnaturally (as I may say) disguise themselves,
even as if they would set themselves to grieve the Lord for his gladding and
comforting of them. This may (I think) be a watchword to us, to take heed how
we use our prosperity, and to teach us to make small have to be made great in
the world by Gods preferments, great wealth and Note.
commodities, unless we lay faster hold of grace whereby we may use them
rightly; that is, to be humble under them, and thereby forward and fruitful
in doing the good that we may. Let us then take heed seriously, that we count
it not happy in it self to live delicately for a season; from whence it
comes through our corrupt nature, that we contemn others, give our selves
to vanity, pleasures, wantonness, and delights, and some of us also to profit
seeking and gain, though never so filthy and gross, as our chief treasure,
whereby godliness decays, and the use, at least the power of all good means.

But what should we do (ye will ask) when God gives us such a wealthy and
a comfortable outward estate? I say we should be rich in good 1. Tim. 6. 12.
Tit. 3. 8.
works, and do works to necessary uses. Oh, men so well provided for, what
good might be done to their own souls, and to the souls and bodies of their
brethren. But to this point (alas) things are now come, that we may say with
grief, that few have any mind to use their liberties aright, or (almost) to
do any good. And this being duly considered, should cause our wondrings to
cease, why so few godly Christians enjoy any great portion of outward blessings
in comparison, (for it is so) even because the Lord provides a better thing
for them, when he gives them a mediocritie in them all, as of maintenance, of
credit, account and favor with their betters, and mixeth each hour of
sunshine with an other of cloudy and unpleasing weather; and all to keep their
affections from growing too rank, and intemperate, and to contain them within
their bounds in that condition, which is best for them, and fittest to serve
the Lord in, without loathing or Note.
weariness. The earth which is too strong and lusty, runs up into weed A
simile.
and stalk, but the well tilled and compassed, brings forth a plentiful
crop. And rare is the man, whose fruits are not more gracious and constant in
a moderate estate, then in a mighty, which caused the wise man to say; Neither
to much, Lord, neither too little, for I shall run into the extreme Pro. 30.
8.
of unthankfulness or coffeehouse. Doubtless, if as prosperity grows, so
piety increased withal, and the love of the giver waxed stronger, as his gifts
are multiplied, and wax greater, and God would not stint men as he does. But
it is clear, men can bear no excess or abundance in this kind, without
notorious defect or decay in godly duties: outward welfare of body (like the
spleen) causes a leanenesse and euil-fauourednesse of soul, as most men use
the matter. But this be said of the first of the four things contained in this
Chapter; namely, of their sin.

THE TWENTY FOUR SERON UPON THE FOVTRH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The second part of the Chapter.
OF the first thing of the four contained in this chapter we have heard. Now
follows the second, and that is their punishment, Verse. 2.
who so provoked the Lord: namely, that he gave them over to an other
adversary, more fierce and furious then the former: that was one Iabin King of
Canaan, that reigned in Hazor: But ye may object, that such an one in all
respects was slain by Joshua, Object.
much above an hundred years ago. For thus we read in the book of Joshua;
At that time Joshua returned and took Hazor, and burnt it, and smote Josh. 11.
10.
the King thereof, to wit, Iabin, with the edge of the sword: for Hazor before
time had been the head city of all those kingdoms. I answer, it was so
indeed, and Answ.
now another of that name and kindred, was risen up, and had builded the city
again, and now being grown strong and populous, prevailed against Israel, and
held them in the greater bondage; and for this cause, even that he might be
revenged upon them for his predecessor, whom their fathers, Joshua and others,
had wasted and slain, and they did therefore oppress them much the sorer.
This I thought good to say for the clearing of this difficulty. Now to proceed:
This Iabin King of Canaan is further described by his chief captain, which
was Sisera, a great warrier, and terrible. Whereby we may know, that the ease
of the Israelites was restless servitude, and the hope of their deliverance
desperate.

Now by this new calamity thus brought upon this people, (to omit that which I
said of the punishment in the former examples) where a man would Doct. verse. 2.
not have looked for it, we may observe and see, that when all things seem
quiet and peaceable to us, and when we think that we are safe on every side, so
that no hurt can befall us, yet if the Lord have a controversy with us, he
does in a marvelous manner raise up some great trouble against us: yea and
that as it were, out of the sparckles of former afflictions, (when we suspect
none) as he did here, which were thought to have been quenchedlong ago, he
brings a fire and flame, as it were, to burn and consume us. So that when
men think all to be sure, God raises up vexations that way where one would
not look for them. The Amalekites, when they had taken Ziclag, lay drunken and
wallowing like beasts, fearing no danger, and were 1. Sam. 30. 16.
suddenly come upon and slain. So the Apostle says, When men cry peace, and
that all things are safe, then shall sudden destruction come upon them, when
they are 1. Ehes. 5. 3.
not aware, like the travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not be
able to avoid it.

Thus God sees it good to tame and raw the licentiousness and pride of men,
and (that which is marvelous to say) if he should not do so, there were no
living for us one by another. The best in town and country, would kick up
their heel; yea and notwithstanding he thus pluck down the Note.
pride of one or other every day, yet such as are spared be never the better.
The long visitation with plague, which has swept away many thousands, what are
the most part the better for it? The irreligious boldness of many in this age,
if they be in favor with their betters (whose breath yet is in their
nostrels) or if they have but wealth above the common sort, nay if it be but
bare health, how do they abuse it? how little does good teaching, or the
diverse examples of Gods judgments upon sundry others, prevail with them? And
why? because (while they feel them not, the day of reckoning is put far off,
and we dream that we have a privilege above all others, till the effect
confute us. The casting down of Babell, the drowning of Pharaoh and his army,
the thrusting through of Zimri and Cosby in their tent, the swallowing up of
Chorah and his company into the earth, with thousands more in ages past, and
now all cut off in fearful manner, for their several rebellions against the
Lord (lamentable to speak) what little abatement of sin (yet) for all this,
do they work in the most? nay are they not worse and worse who live in these
latter days, and have heard or seen the judgments of the former times?
Therefore let such of us as cannot but confess, that God has done much more
for us, watch and beware, lest for the like looseness and bolddesse found in
us, the Lord awake us; and if he seize not upon us with the same plagues, as
he did on these; yet (seeing his quiver is full of arrows of all sorts, that
is with all kinds of judgments) he will reserve some for us, as he has done
to others before us, and come upon us suddenly in the like manner.

Now this Iabin had for the chief captain of his army, Sisera here named,
The opening of the latter part of verse. 2.
who is said to have his abode in Harosheth of the Gentiles, so called, for
that it was a country full of woods: (for so the word signifies) whereto, as
unto a most safe and well fenced place, the Canaanites who were Gentiles, did
fly, and repair, and dwelt safely therein; when so many of them had been
slain in Ioshuas days, and there they remained, grew up, and strengthened
themselves, unto the time that is here mentioned. Thus they growing up, and
not being cut off, as God commanded the people of Israel to do, we see now
what a vexation even this one generation of the Canaanites in that corner of
the land, were unto them, beside many other in diverse other parts of it.

And by this we see what mischief and woe we provide for our selves, Doct. 2.
in verse. 2.
(even such as cannot be known till they come) and all this through our
neglecting duties commended (as this people of Israel here did) and suffering
evil persons and their foul vices, to grow up, in and among us, which we
might easily in time have subdued and brought under. I say, the suffering of
them, which we have been full willing to nourish, and could be brought to
offer no violence unto them, have caused sorrow upon sorrow, and most wearisome
and uncomfortable days unto us: which when they were come, we would have
bought of with much cost, and could not. Thus anger, impatience, wrath,
uncharitableness, revenge, teachines, frowardnes, Note.
lewd lusts, and unclean desires, with many other like, though we have
thought them not worthy of rebuke, neither could be brought to deface, and
disgrace them, no not to our own selves, that so they might have been overcome
and weakened in us;; even these have mastered us, and waxen strong in us, which
is enough to disfigure the godly life in us, and to mar the beauty of our
profession; besides that these engender in us, and bring forth litters of open
and outward sins, (al may easily know what I mean) far more shameful and
monstrous then themselves.

The third part of the Chapter.
NOw follows the third thing in this Story, namely, the repentance of Verse. 3.
the people, set forth as in the former chapter, by crying. The reasons thereof
are added, and they are two; the one, because this Sisera had nine hundred iron
Chariots, wherewith by continual egresse and regresse he had vexed them sore:
the other, that he had done thus to them twenty years. Of this crying,
signifying their repentance, I have spoke before, and also of the repentance
which their fathers offered, when God afflicted them. That which is to be
considered here, not spoken of before by the like occasion, is this:

That where it is said, they were twenty years in bondage, before they Doct.
repented and turned to God; we may behold the monstrous and poisoned
disposition of our nature, which will not stoop nor bow to the Lord in true
humiliation, until it be driven by maine and force, even till we be shut Note.
out every where else. As we see in children of a stubborn nature it is
neither a check, nor a rod will break their stomachs: nay it is not a few
stripes that will make them cry out, and when by rougher handling of them, they
he forced to roar, it is but for very sullennes; til they see there is no
remedy but that they must receive correction for their evil doings, and then
the multitude of strokes and the smart they feel breaks their hearts at
length, and makes them yield: and even so it is with us, who should be much
wiser: whereas if we should but step aside a little from our Christian course,
we ought with the like willingness of mind by which we strayed, return and
rise up again. For so the Prophet Jeremy complains; Does a man fall, Ier. 8.
6.
and not rise again; or go out of the way, and not return? And if this
rebelliousnesse and bad disposition were in the wicked only, it were less to
be marvelled at, but let it be well considered, and it shall be found in such
as have sometime served God in truth; who if they lose the hold that they had,
and have suffered the wicked flesh, that is, their sinful nature, to get the
upper hand in them again; oh how hardly is it put out of possession again? So
that as the devils said to our Savior Christ, thou art come to torment us
before Mat. 8. 29.
the time. So it is ever too soon, and very imprisonment to the wicked flesh,
to be brought under the Lords wing again, and to put on his yoke, though it be
easy as it is said to be.

This is the cause why licentious dissoluteness is in so great account at this
day in all sorts, and so dim light shines out of them who should be lights
to other. And if it should be demanded, how Gods people can keep so long from
under his government, and are so loath to return again under it: I answer,
partly confused knowledge, ignorance and forgetfulness how to return (if they
were ever well grounded at all) is one cause; and partly the lothnesse and
untowardness of the flesh to be pent in, seeking liberty rather amiss, even
that is the other. And thus while men have any shelter how rotten and
helpelesse soever it be, they fly from God. But for as much as when no shifts
will serve, they must return again to the Lord their first husband, as it is
said in Hosea, let all that be wise, with all speed return to Hos. 2. 7. 1.
Tim. 6. 6.
him, and make godliness (as it is indeed) the greatest riches and chief
stay, seeing that is always and only comfortable. As it is the Psalm: A day
is Psalm. 84. 11.
better therein, then a thousand elsewhere. And seeing we in miseries and
troubles do as this people here did, often fall a sighing and sorrowing, yea
murmuring and fretting, and yet turn not to God, nor from our sin; but bite
on the bridle of our punishment, and yet at last we must be brought to it for
all our unwillingness; therefore as we should take heed that we keep the
profession of our hope firmly, while we may; so yet when we have fallen, let
us not despair, no nor yet delay to turn to God with the soonest, as I have
said.

Again, by this people many may learn good. They were held under The
unfolding of the other part of verse. 3.
and pursued by him that had nine hundred Chariots of iron, always going out
and in among them, to vex and oppress them on every side. A plague great
enough one would think, for even the mercies of such are cruel. And Prou. 12.
10.
yet this was not the worst that befell them, for God was also against them,
and had sold them into their hands: and now while it was thus with them in so
great misery, what should they do? and yet which is more, twenty years to be
in this estate, how should they be able to abide it? By the fearful example
of these, and yet some of them belonging to God, it is good for us to take
occasion to consider the estate of them, who are under sundry sore and great
calamities, the Lord sending them for their rebellions and grievous prouokings
of him, and himself frowning upon them, who should have been their comfort in
their troubles. Oh how should it grieve us to behold it? For when they are in
perplexity and vexation, by men or otherwise, and then have God against them
also; this comes near the saying, Woe to him that is alone. Herein David
showed himself wise: for when he Eccles. 4. 10.
heard Gods message from the Lord, concerning the choosing of his punishment; he
answered; Let me fall into the hands of the Lord, and not of men. The 1. Sam.
24. 14.
reason was, because he knew himself to have repented, and therefore that in
judgment the Lord would remember mercy. But oh how terrible a thing is it to
fall into the hands of God being our enemy; or into the hands of men, when he
has given us up to their pleasure, to be handled as we deserve? Every
affliction is sharp and heavy, when God makes it so, by setting an edge upon
it, and by pressing down the conscience under the load of his wrath. Consider
some particulars: for example. The poverty and penury of many thousands, and
the same as poor in knowledge of God, and grace. Others in marriage unquiet,
thrusting one another out of doors, Note.
children crying about them, the neighbors disquieted among them, all going to
havoc in family, and God in the mean time also an enemy to them, what an
heavy calamity is this to behold? Others to be taken captives by foreign
enemies; as Sampson put to grind, or (which is worse) to Judge. 16. 21.
the galleys; and which is worst of all) to have no God to fly to in this
their distress, which yet is the case of many, who have held their heads full
high, and were also far enough in their own conceit, from such an estate, oh
how woeful is it? And if the sore diseased, sick and pained persons should be
added to these, with other miserable ones, and yet without God in the world;
all these thus to be distressed, which I have mentioned, with such like,
almost without number, oh how lamentable is it to think on? And whereas some
of these be Gods children, they must know, that if they will do as his
enemies, he will make them somewhat like them, in bearing the mark of it: so
that as the wicked fly from God, and hate him for smiting them for their sin:
so his own children having likewise provoked him, shall oftentimes make but
slow have to him, through an ill conscience telling them that they are not
welcome, till they come in another manner; to wit, in unfeigned repentance. All
this I have spoken to a double end; one, to persuade all to labor above all
things to make God their friend, that is, by seeking to be reconciled to him,
that thus in their troubles they may have a refuge to fly to for comfort. The
other is, to move such as are free from both kinds of miseries, to pity them
that are under both; and to consider, that seeing they may go in and out
before the Lord without fear, both in their daily course of life, and also in
their suites, etc. therefore they should deadly abhor sin themselves, which
only makes them fear his power and justice, and that as much as ever they
rejoiced in his favor, and so doing, mourn for them whose misery I have
mentioned, that are in an estate both dreadful and damnable. And this be said
of the first three parts of this chapter, out of these three verses, to wit, of
the sin of the people, of their punishment, and of their repentance.

The fourth part of the Chapter.
THe fourth part of this story follows, of Gods deliverance of them out Verse.
4. The sum in general to the end.
of the hands of Sisera: and this unto the end of the chapter; and that
deliverance was wrought, as I said before, by the help and ministry chiefly
of the three persons mentioned afterward in this chapter, Debora, Barak, and
Iael. Debora, though a woman, was stirred up by the Lord to judge Israel, that
is, to declare the will of God, in that time of extreme calamity, unto the
people; to answer their doubts what they should do, and to be the chief
mean of their deliverance, by counsel giving, and encouraging of Barak and
the rest. Barak was he that should lead the army, and pursue the enemies, and
with a small army of the people to overcome and destroy them: and Iael killing
the great captain of their enemies, I mean Sisera, with her own hands, had
her due commendation among the rest, all were diversely employed, and yet each
of them helping forward the execution of Gods justice and charge upon that huge
army of the Canaanites, and for his peoples deliverance. This be said in
general of the whole work that follows, spoken of in this chapter. Now I
will go to the particulars, verse by verse.

And to begin with Debora to verse 14. and to see what she did. First, the holy
Story describes her in this verse and the next. Secondly, it is said the
children of Israel came up to her for judgment, verse. 5. And thirdly, it is
showed what she said to Barak, having sent for him, verse. 6. 7. then how she
answered Barak, when she saw him not forward, verse. 9. and last of all, how she
encouraged him to the battle, after they had prepared themselves on both sides
to it, as is showed to verse 14. She is described, first by the extraordinary
place that she was set in, to wit, that she was a Prophetess: secondly, by
her condition of marriage, that she was the wife of Lapidoth: thirdly, by her
calling, that she judged Israel: and fourthly, by her dwelling, under a
Palmetree, between Ramath and Bethel, in mount Ephraim. And by this woman, and
the other two persons before mentioned (as I have said) God gave a new and
great deliverance unto his people out of their twenty years bondage, under
that Iabin King of Canaan. And this unspeakable Doct. Out of all the verses
following in general.
goodness of the Lord in passing by their so great and foul indignities so often
times wrought and committed against him, does yet better and better confirm us
in that which we have been taught before, that the Lord is so tenderly affected
to his people, that he cannot turn away his ear from their prayers and
groans under their heavy burdens, but pity and deliver them. No, as the
Prophet says, if a mother should forget and be hardhearted to her own child,
yet the Lord cannot be so to his, which does justly lay to Esa. 49. 15.
their charge the wilfulness and stifneckednesse that is in many, and heap
hot coals upon their heads, seeing that when they may have ease and help in
their oppressions and miseries for the asking of it and praying for it, without
their further charge and trouble, they cannot bring their hearts to it, but
choose rather wilfully and frowardly to lie still in their sorrows, then to
humble their hearts, and seek after God for deliverance. And as God is kind
to his, so he sets out himself to be so, to the end he may harten and
embolden us to believe the same, we being in our greatest need most hardly
persuaded so to do, through the great unbelief that is in us. Also he shows
such compassion to us in another respect, even that we should also learn to
show the like goodness and kindness to our brethren in their calamities, that
we may so much the better resemble him. But of this before. Here I will end.

THE TWENTY FIVE SERMON ON THE FOVTRH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to proceed: besides that which we have heard, we may note hereby what
weak and unlikely means God Doct. 1. in verse 4.
delivers, when it pleases him. For as before he raised up Ehud, a man lame
of his right hand, to deliver his people, and after him Shamgar, who had no
other weapon then an an oxes goade thereto; so now he used a woman, (for she
was the wife of one Lapidoth) as his instrument, to the effecting of so great a
work as the overthrow of that Iabin was. To show, that his power is not tied
to valiant and mighty men, lest his glory should be given to them also; nor to
strength and forces, though he allow them to be used, and yet not trusted in,
but to this, that we put confidence in him, who is our strong rock against
our strongest enemies: as Proverbs 18. 10. and to our prayers which avail much
with him, if they be fervent. Iam 5. 16.
And this he requires straitely to be believed of us. And so he uses to do
2. Chron. 20.
also in the deliverance of his peoples souls out of the bondage of Satan and
hell. For by mean men, and those that be of no great note for their wealth or
preferment, he subdueth the hearts of the mighty, piercing and breaking them
with the powerful force of their preaching, (if they will lend their ears to
hear them) that so the excellent gift of faith may be wrought in them, he so
putting heavenly treasure in earthen vessels, to that end and purpose; 1. Cor.
4. 7.
and that all may say to his praise when they see it, that it is he that
works, and whose the power is, though silly man be used by him as his
instruments.

This woman, as God used her to deliver his people, so she was also endued Of
Deboras calling that she was a Prophetess.
with the spirit of prophecy, to reveal the will of God to them, and to
answer their doubts. For which cause it is said in the next verse, that the
people came up to her for counsel and judgment: For it is thought, that Doct.
2. in verse. 4.
their oppression by that Iabin was so great, that the people of Israel could
not have ordinary Judges. Now though it was rare to have women Prophetesses,
vet now and then God stirred up such, as Miriam the sister of Moses, Hanna the
mother of Samuel; and Hulda in the days of Josias the King: and 2. King. 22.
14.
in the new Testament, as Anna the daughter of Phanuel, and the 4. daughters
Luke 2. 36. Act. 21. 9.
of Philip, in the book of the Acts recorded. And it is not unlike, that some
of these women that were endued with the spirit of prophecy, did instruct and
teach the people, declaring to them those things which God had revealed unto
them, seeing the gifts of God are not given to be buried, but to be used for
the edifying of the Church in public and private. And for proof of this which
I say, we are to know, that prophesying is not only taken for the foretelling
of things to come, but for making known the will of God in matters of
salvation, and to both ends God used women sometimes, 1. Cor. 14. 34.
though now he forbid them. (As for those forged, or diabolical she saints
and Prophetesses, of whom the Church of Rome boasts, we ascribe as much
credit to them, as the dreams of Monks deserve.) Therefore we must also
here take heed, that we bring not that into example which the Lord has
wrought extraordinarily, when it has pleased him: For we are tied by Paul's
rule, set down to the Corinthians, to wit, that women keep 1. Cor. 14. 34.
silence in the congregation. He adds a reason, because they must be subject
to their husbands. But the teachers office is to have authority over those
which are taught by them, and to govern them also as well as to instruct them,
which is not permitted to the wife over her husband, neither over other men.
But seeing the Lord in these latter times uses not commonly extraordinary
instruments as he did in former days, especially unless he furnish them also
with extraordinary gifts, but ordinary: therefore we are to admire and
reverence his goodness in both: and the use hereof is, that as it is our
bounden duty to praise God highly, for that he has stirred up some in all
ages to be lights and helps, in and for the good of his Church, yea and 1.
These. 5. 20. Heb. 13. 17.
extraordinary, as we see here, in the want of other, so (to come home to our
selves) while he provides ordinary helps and means for us in these days to
the building up of the same, his Church among us, it behooves us that both we
receive them with all due reverence, making right use of them; and that none
presume to set up themselves extraordinarily, as many of these separatists do
without gifts answerable, although God has done so sometime, and fitted them
for the same, and granted that privilege to his, when it has seemed good unto
him.

Now further to proceed, this which is said of the marriage of Debora, being Of
Deboras married estate. Doct. 2. in verse. 4.
a Prophetess, can teach us no less then this, that they who have attended on
God in the ministry in former times, whether men or women, or such as do it
at this day, are not despised of God for their married estate, but counted of
him faithful, and put in his service, as this Debora was: which though there
is no cause to make question of, (seeing they who teach other the whole
counsel of God, and so by consequent, how to use the married estate aright, a
man would think should much more be fit to use it in the best manner
themselves) yet I say so, for that the Romish prelacie, who snatch at every
occasion to rail on the Ministers of the Gospel, (and so they do because of
their marriage,) do what they can most spitefully and injuriously to bring the
faithful Preachers into an odious account with all men. And they have thought
this a meet matter in them to bark at, under a pretense that the marriage bed,
(for they think better of the whorish bed) can no way stand with such an holy
calling as the ministry is; which being Gods ordinance for all states of men
to enjoy, were shameful in them to Heb. 13. 4.
spurn against, though they themselves lived most chaste, seeing while they go
about to disgrace the persons, they fight against the ordinance of God, yea and
that which is highly commended of him: but much more reproachful and odious it
is in them so to do, seeing the same devout persons, (as they would be
counted) are, and that many of them, as is well known, gross whoremongers
themselves, (that I say no worse) and such as live in filthy uncleanness,
though Priests by their calling. But for further proof of this truth, I mean
the marriage of Ministers to be lawful, seeing I have begun to speak of it,
this I will add: that the examples of the Ministry under the Law, as well as
their practice at the coming of Christ, and after in the Apostles times, do
maintain and justify it: yea and since those times, the Church of God for
many hundred years, (till Gregory's and Siricius times, who were Popes of
Rome) do prove and testify the same. The Prophets first, as 2. Chro. 15. 1.
Obed, Hanany, and other: the 2. Chro. 16 14
Levites, as Mattaina and his predecessors; and Exodus 29. 4.
for Priests, Aaron, Eliazer and their posterity, all under the Law married,
declare that they are by malice blinded who condemn marriage in the Ministry.
And for the latter times in the new Testament, Zachary and Elizabeth so lived
in their marriage, to wit, just before God, and Luke 1. 6.
walking in all his commandments, as had been impossible for them to do, if
their condition of life had bin unlawful. And for the Apostles, Peter himself
was married, to go no further. This by the occasion offered, I have spoken as
briefly as I could. And let them that serve God in the Ministry, preach
Christ Jesus diligently, and endeavor faithfully tobe vnoffensiue in conscience
toward God, and in their lives toward men, and they shall not need to fear
such Scorpions, for their sting is plucked out from doing them any hurt. And if
the uncleanness and lewd lives of some persons in the Ministry, gave no more
occasion to the adversaries of insulting, (which yet is the fact and sin of
some persons, and not any blot in the calling) then that some do take the
benefit of the ordinance of God, in that they are married; many Ministers might
sit without red cheeks and a glowing conscience, and the adversary with shame
hold his peace, without any triumphing And let this also that has been said,
check and control that relic of Popery, that still hangs about many of the
people, in the Ministry, who verily think them worthy and good Ministers who
lead a single life, without any other respect, whereas marriage is nothing, and
singlenes, yea virginity are nothing of themselves, but a pure spirit in a body
vnderfiled in both, which some of these little regard.

The next thing in the describing of Debora, is, the setting down of her Verse
5. Of Deboras dwelling.
dwelling, that it was under a Palm tree in Mount Ephraim, and the naming of
her husband, being (no doubt) a man of good note then, though to us unknown;
these things, I say, seeing nothing is set down in vain in the holy Story,
had (as it may seem) more use in that time, then we now can see: which I may
truly say of many other things therein contained, which should somewhat
satisfy the reader, when he sees not so much in some places, as he does in
another. And yet the holy Ghost sets down many circumstances oftentimes, as
for the fuller credit of the history, especially where it else might seem
questionable, as the time, places, names, etc. so to give more light to the
thing handled. Only let this content us, that, as a dwelling was allowed her,
though she being a Prophetess, was married, and Doct. verse. 5.
perhaps of some note, it being expressly spoken of, and set down: so it may
serve to assure us that God does the same to such at this day as are in the
same condition, serving him with honest and good hearts in the Ministry; I
mean he allows them a place to live in, to their good contentment, even
such as he sees fittest for them: though the Popish Clergy, and some other
also, count them unmeet to live at all, but rather worthy to be rooted out of
the earth. But of this thus much.

Now it is further said here, that the children of Israel went up for judgment
Doct. 2. in verse. 5.
to her, I mean Debora; who by the spirit of prophecy, answered their doubts,
and determined of their controversies, and declared to them the will of God; by
all which, they might the better do the duties that concerned them. Where we
are to consider the loving kindness of the Lord, as to them, that they might
even then in their oppression by the King of Canaan, have one to answer their
doubts that troubled them; so in other ages, and much more in this of ours,
that he has provided, that such as make question of any thing that troubles
them, may be answered and satisfied. If that which she did, being but one
person, and a woman, was to be accounted a singular favor of God (as who can
deny it?) what a mercy of God is this to us, that we have solemn and public
assemblies, not in one place of the land, but in many, (and but for the sin
of some persons, should have them throughout in all places) to teach the will
of God, that all who are not wilful, or negligent, may learn to know the
Lord, from the greatest to the least, and also the things that belong to their
peace? Thus when (I say) we may privately unburden our selves of any doubtful
and dangerous opinions, or trouble of conscience (as we may, God be thanked)
and that many ways; oh what a privilege is it? These things ought so much the
more to move us to be in admiration at the love of God the giver, because in
false religion and worshipping of God, (as in the Papacy) there is no such
thing to be looked for, or enjoyed: for their serving of God, is compact of
fancies, dreams, and lies, the inventions of men, as a dunghill is full of
filthiness and dross. And as for the relieuing the conscience of any such as
are distressed and disquieted, there is as much comfort ministered to them
either out of Parsons Directorie, or out of the Meditations of Friar
Granatensis, (which yet savor most of all the rest, of any piety) as the
poor traitor Judas found at the hand of the Priests, when he complaining and
crying out, that he had sinned in betraying the innocent blood, answered, after
the unmerciful manner of such as they were [looke thou to that] as if they
should have said (though they set him a work) shift for thy self: that is the
comfort thou shall have of us. But to return: Though God has every way
provided well for us to be instructed soundly, and graciously relieved and
comforted, (as I have said) yet it is to be lamented, that many of us are
glutted with the good means that we have, and suffer them to lie by us, as it
were a rusting. And even thereafter is the good fruit that we bring forth in
our lives thereby.

Verse. 6. Then she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedesh of
Naphtali, and said unto him, Has not the Lord God of Israel commanded, saying,
Go and draw toward Mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the
children of Naphtali, and of the children of Zebulon?

Verse. 7. And I will draw unto thee, to the river Kishon, Sisera the Captain
of Iabins army, with his charets and his multitude, and will deliver them into
thine hand.

Verse. 8. And Barak said unto her, If thou will go with me, I will go, but if
thou will not go with me, I will not go.

Verse. 9. Then she answered, I will surely go with thee, but this journey that
thou take, shall not be for thine honor: for the Lord shall sell Sisera into
the hands of a woman. And Debora arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh.

NOw we have heard the description of Debora, and what she was: it follows
The meaning of these four verses.
how she went to work in this great business of the Lord against Iabin. She
therefore as God commanded, sent to Barak, as he is here described in the text,
the son of Abinoam, that he should go and furnish himself with ten
thousand men, and assured him, that God would give him victory over Sisera,
the Captain of Iabins army, and over all his multitude. Barak at first
feared, but after believed, and went forward to the work: and seeing he was
afraid through unbelief, therefore he refused to go without her; for the
which she found fault with him, and told him God would punish it, so that he
should not have that honor, which otherwise he should have had. And after
that, Barak and Debora went to Kedesh together. Thus much for the meaning of
these four verses. Now of both these Debora and Barak in order. First of the
message in the sixth and seventh verses: then of that which followed upon it,
in the other two following.

Of Debora first, the holy Story sets down this, that she sent the message
More particularly of the sixth and seventh verses.
of God to Barak, adding thereto the promise of victory; both which I join
together, seeing we may more clearly see that which we have to learn
thereby. And out of both points of her speech, namely the commandment of God
to Barak, and his promise of good success; this jointly I give the reader to
mark, that these two things are the principal motives and reasons to
persuade, and that are to lead us in the most of our actions, Doct. 1. in
verse. 6. and 7.
(to the end, we may rightly effect and bring them to pass) namely the
commandment of God, and his promise of blessing. I say, in the most of our
What are the principal reasons that are to lead us in the most of our actions.
actions, not all; for as much as some of them are free and indifferent to be
done, or left undone of us, and in them we are thus to be guided; namely, that
we use that part of our liberty in things indifferent, which we shall by due
consideration find to tend most to the glory of God, our own inward peace,
and the edifying or least offense of Gods people. Otherwise (as I have said) in
things forbidden or commanded by God, let us take our direction accordingly, as
we have heard, and harten on our selves to shun that which is forbidden, or
to obey the contrary, being encouraged by the promise of blessing annexed to
both. And this is a most blessed and comfortable direction to all Gods servants
at this day, and shall be likewise to the end of the world.

And it is that which has carried our fathers forth in their most difficult
works and parts of their lives. Moses in going to Pharaoh, to fetch the people
of Israel out of their grievous bondage, which Pharaoh would not agree Exodus 3.
11. 12.
to, what encouragement had he hereto? verily even this, that God said to him,
go, for have not I commanded thee? And again, I will be with thee to bring it
to pass. And the same was Ioshuas authority, and the hartening of him to the
guiding of the same people into the land of promise, and in rooting the
idolatrous nations out of it, even the word of the Lord, he speaking thus unto
him: Arise, go over this Jordan, thou and all this people, unto Josh. 1. 25.
the land which I give them: as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee; I
will not leave thee, neither forsake thee. And this was Paul's upholding and
stay, as throughout all the places whither he went preaching; so at Corinth,
where he was in great danger. For thus the Lord said to him by a vision in the
night; Fear not Paul, but speak, and hold not thy peace; for I am with thee,
and Act. 18. 9.
no man shall lay hands on thee to hurt thee, for I have much people in this
city. And the same I may say of many other.

And by the same commandment and promise of God, we are guided still, who
prosper and like well in our life, and no other ways. And this is that life of
faith, which is so highly commended in the Scriptures, when it Note.
is said, the just shall live by faith. And are not we subject to the same
discouragements, Heb. 10. 38.
and the like that they were in ages past? that so we may see we have the same
need to be strongly vpholden, and soundly encouraged, as they were? But though
it be not to be doubted of, but that many do see this, and have learned thus
to be guided in their actions (for they only live comfortably) so it is as much
to be lamented, how infinite persons know not that there is any such easy and
plain way to guide them; no, neither can they be brought from being led by
their carnal reason, and profane custom, in the actions of their life,
neither can be brought to stoop and Note.
submit themselves to any such government, as God has seen best: by means
whereof they going about them, as it likes them best, not looking what God
requires; if they do a good thing, or what he promises, therefore they do it
not so as he is pleased therewith; to wit, because he commands Note.
it, much less to that end, and with such a mind as it should be done with,
encouraged by his promise. Therefore they have many plagues in their lives by
following their own desires and ways; and when it falls out better with
them, that they prosper in the world, yet have they no sound comfort in any
thing that they do. Apply this to all affairs in men's callings.

Therefore I will say this one thing to thee, whosoever thou art that would
live comfortably. Try the working of this doctrine in thee: look but one week
to thy calling faithfully, to discharge the duties of it conscionably; Note.
and so far as thou have knowledge, endeavor to obey all other commandments
of God; and be firmly persuaded of the promise of God to thee, that thou art
safe in so walking. For he has annexed a promise of blessing to the obeying of
every commandment: yea and that an hundred fold more then thou forgoest
thereby. Thou will ask, how shall thou know that God does reward thee so? I
answer, be thou judge thy self, if he deal not so with thee. For example,
let this be the case: Thou will say, if thou were not tied so strictly to obey
God, thou could take thy pleasure in merry company, or benefit thy self as
other men do, to gain and get commodity, whereas now thou being tied to make
conscience, dare not do so, but must lose and forgo much thereby. I hear
thee; now hear thou me likewise. Thou confessest that the profit and pleasure
thou forgoest by obeying God, is unlawful, and against conscience; for
otherwise, who holds Note.
thee from it? Now put the case, that when thou have so gotten it, God urge and
cause thy conscience to prick thee, and thou be wounded therein, which
stingeth worse then Hornets; for so God does one time or other make men's sin
smart and sting the committers of it, in most painful sort, or (which is
worse) leaves them hardened. If thou know what this means, or beleeuest
that which I say to thee, what would thou not give to be healed of this
intolerable pain? Even all that thou have, how much soever it be. For that is
a sign to thee of losing thy soul utterly, if thou persist therein: and what
shall it profit a man to win the whole world and lose his soul? Mat. 16. 26.
Thou fishest with a golden hook, which being lost, is not recompensed by all
thou catchest therewith. Now answer me, had thou not been void and rid
of this terror and taste of hell, if thou had avoided and resisted thy
sin? Might thou not have been quiet and merry, as other of Gods servants
be, if thou had obeyed the Lord? Then tell me, would not that thy mirth and
quietness have been an hundred fold better, and more welcome to thee then thy
profit and pleasure, which has brought thee this hellish torment of
conscience? this wound and sting which takes away all delight from thee, so
that for deliverance out of it, thou would give all that thou have?
Therefore know, that God will give an hundred fold more profit, ease, and
pleasure to thee, even in this life, if thou obeyest him, or do any thing
for his sake, over thou shall find by making thy best gain of thy sin. But I
must remember my self, for I have bin long in this point. Only Mat. 19. 29.
this I add, that it is to be bewailed, that this heavenly wisdom so little
Note.
enters into men, nor prevails with them. Alas they have no leisure to
think of the reckoning, being in the midst of their iollity.

It is also worthy our noting, that while Sisera was in his flourishing, and
Doct. verse. 7.
iollity, the Lord threatens to take him down, and to bring him low. I will,
says the Lord to Barak, draw unto thee the chief captain of Iabins army, and
his chariots, and whole host, to the river Kishon, and deliver him into thine
hand. Oh! how fearful then is the estate of Gods enemies, even such as are
evil workers, and set against Gods people, that in the midst of their pomp
and pride, the Lord has taken their names (though in another manner, and to
another end then the names of Recusants are taken) to answer it, even that he
may be revenged on them? And has not this been a common use with such? with
Chorah, Naball, Iezabell, and many others; that while they walked here on the
earth at liberty, their destruction was told from heaven to be at hand? and
they summoned to appear to their Eccles. 11. 1.
arraignment? and if some of them then did not, neither now many do know
before it comes, neither once dream of any such thing, nor fear it: yet
seeing it is ever coming, (and having threatened it) and so it hangs as a
sword point continually over their head; oh how uncomfortable is it to think
upon? Oh therefore be we always under his wing and abide we in his love, that
so we may be ever out of horror and fear, that God does not mark us for his
enemies. Which miserable condition the unbelievers are always in, unless they
be hardened, which is far worse, as I said before: for if his anger be kindled
but a little (as it is ever toward them a great deal) Psalm. 2. 12.
happy are they that fear him. I would not therefore be a bad person, if
there were any way to shun it, even for this cause, whereas yet all the terrors
here, are but a glimps of those that follow afterward. And contrarily, why
Note.
should not the godly be content to bear some hardness here, seeing they are
freed from the greatest terrors (if they know their liberties) both here and
hereafter? But somewhat like this I spoke of in Eglons example before.

Now I should proceed to speak of Barak, having begun with Debora, and said of
her that which is occasioned by the text: but I should have no time thereto in
this sermon; therefore an end here.

THE TWENTY SIX SERMON ON THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
WE have heard of Deboras message to Barak, in the two Verse. 8.
former verses. Now follows Baraks answer to her message in this eighth
verse. If (says he) thou will go with me, I will go, else not. This answer
of his seems to yield little to Gods commandment, sent to him by Deboras
ministry, neither to ascribe any thing to Gods promise, and therefore shows
how he profited not by those two strong peswasions to lead to duty, mentioned
before, but proves that he ascribed more to her presence, then to Gods
promise: which, what could it be less, then a great blemish in him, Heb. 11.
32.
as may be seen by his amending his fault afterward? Whose faith is so
highly renouned among the worthies, in the epistle to the Hebrews? Beside, she
was offended with him, for his so answering, and therefore it was (doubtless)
infidelity in him. If it be asked, why then is he afterward so highly
commended for his faith? I answer, that when the message came first to him,
the thing enjoined him from God by Deboras message, seemed to be most full of
difficulty. For he was commanded to make commotion, and to rebel against him
that was King over them, to wit, this Iabin, who was very great and mighty; he
was also charged to gather an army of men together, though he was but a
private man himself. These things therefore for him to take in hand, and that
against such a fierce and strong captain as Sisera was, it made him afraid to
set upon such a work, and especially, while he was unexperienced in so great a
trial and difficulty, and this was the cause why he could not believe, except
she went with him, that God would deliver him with his men of war into his
hand.

But afterward weighing better the commandment of God, and his promise, God by
his spirit assisting him, he believed the words of Debora, and obeyed, and so
obtained the victory by faith, as it is said in the forementioned place to the
Hebrews. And how usually this falls out, and comes to pass, even to the
godly, that at the first they do stagger and doubt, How soon faith is quailed.
and believe not by and by, and that through the strong relics of the old
Adam, there is no man of God but has proof; and yet for all that, afterward
they being strengthened by the spirit of God, recover themselves again, Note.
and believe confidently. This is apparent in David, even after he had
believed, saying, O Lord, wash me thoroughly, cleanse me, for I am wholly
filthy: Psalm. 51. 2. 10.
And again, Create in me a new spirit; as if the old had been utterly lost.
Also in Moses, when he was first commanded to go to Pharaoh, how fearful he
Exodus 3. 11. compared with 10. 26.
was at the hearing of the message, and how he shrunk back: but afterward,
how boldly did he execute the same, and deliver it unto him? Even Note.
so the best of us, when we hear of the death of our dear friends, or of
great losses that are befallen us; also at the beginning of great sickness and
pain arresting us, oh how do we faint, and distrust that we shall never
submit our selves, and yield obediently to them (though God command us straightly
to Psalm. 37. 3.
do so) while we cast both our eyes on the burden and cross; that is, on the
the things that are seen, as the Apostle speaks, and while we are not 1.
Cor. 4. last.
yet come to our selves to look up to God with confidence, and to things not
seen, but eternal. But when we weigh how they come from him that loves us,
and therefore cannot intend our hurt; we then submit our selves to God, and
stay upon him for grace to go under all, and wait patiently for a good issue.
And because our hearts arise often times against our brethren, when we see these
weaknesses in them, and begin to judge and think too hardly of them for the
same, the Lord therefore lets us sometimes see the same or other such in our
selves, that so we may learn to bear with the infirmities of them.

And when we have experience of this, it causes us to bewail tenderly Gal.
6. 1.
the weaknesses that we see in our brethren, and with the spirit of meekness
help to hold them up, rather then by and by to censure them over sharply for
the same. And it is to be deeply bewailed, to see how far off many are from
duty in this behalf, (though otherwise religious, and such as love the truth
from their herts) are overcome with deadly co^ceits against their brethren when
they see they have fallen by infirmity, and are strongly incensed against Note.
them, and leave the^ to themselves, never telling them of it kindly, as if
they see the^ overcome of impatience, teastinesse, anger, or if their zeal and
feruency in serving God be slaked, and abated, or that they be offensiuely
taken up of, and carried away with the world. These and the like (I confess)
are rust causes to raise grief in us, and are much to be disliked of us, when
we espy them in such as be well thought of by us, and they are blemishes in
them not to be borne with or allowed: but yet for all that, when we shall see
such things in them, we must beware that we censure them not too hardly, (for
who has given us authority to judge them?) crying out uncharitably, that there
is no religion in them. For though it cannot be denied, but that the devil
has, by watching his opportunity, got advantage over them; yet they being not
intractable, but only deceived in their so offending, and yet in other parts of
their lives they holding their care to please God, and laboring to keep a
good conscience; we must not for some one such weakness, fall by and by to such
hard judging of them, and to depart from them (which is utterly against
charity and duty) but to think, that there being so many snares to entangle
men, it may easily enough be so with them, as we may see it to be with our
selves (if we be not blinded with selfeloue) in the like trials, for that we
do not, without special grace, and heed taking, avoid the like falls. And
therefore we must hope that they may, yea and shall (no doubt) through Gods
help, arise, and grow in good sort out of them again.

And yet I do not speak this as though I would justify such offenses in the
lives of Gods people, or as though I went about to salve them up with gentle
words, (for I know, that where such breaches are suffered to pass in the lives
of them who are otherwise religious, they do much hurt to other by example,
and to themselves by quenching the spirit in them, specially if they be
defended and continued long in, unconfessed, and renounced, that they may be
forgiven them) but yet we that behold them, must wisely shun extremities in
judging of them, on the one side, as well as on the other; as I have said, and
no more condemn the persons, then we allow the sins. And as for the common
professors, who when they see such, frailties appear in the forwarder sort of
Christians, begin to please themselves therein, and to condemn all other good
parts in them, I say to them, if they stumble thereat, and they themselves
walk on in their grossenes, they shall in time see themselves guilty of far
greater and more horrible sins; or if they still go forward in condemning
and insulting over them, they shall do it to their own confusion. And this by
occasion of Baraks distrust.

More particularly also let Baraks answer in clinging so to Debora, teach Gods
people this wisdom, not overmuch to give place to their affections, Doct. 1.
in verse. 8.
even in things lawful, but to submit themselves to the will of God, and pray
for strength to rest therein. It seemed a very equal and commendable request
in Barak, to desire the company, advice, and direction of Debora: and so it
was in the general: but when he saw it was Gods will he should depend
immediately upon him for success, he saw again that it was his weakness so much
to depend upon her presence. And although it is so commendable a thing for men
to cleave to the Ministry and assistance of their faithful guides, while they
continue among them, yet if any espieth his own weakness and childishnes in
this, that he cleaves too near unto them, as thinking that without them he
shall miscarrie, and cannot be vpholden without them, let him check himself,
and labor for such strength of knowledge and faith, as may enable him to go
upon his own feet, and live by his own faith, depending directly upon Gods
promise of vholding and preserving him in the midst of his discouragements,
fears, and weakness, without such means, if he may not enjoy them. But while
some with Barak ascribe too much to the Minister of God it is too true, that
many despising and nothing regarding the ministry of men, grow shiftles and
shameless, being as far from hope of happiness, as they are void of grace
and goodness.

Now follows the speech of Debora to Barak, when he made the forementioned
answer unto her, to wit, that he would not go, unless she went Verse 9.
with him. And this she said: I will go with thee, but it shall not be for
thine honor. Wherein she finds fault with him, and tells him, that he should
suffer the punishment of his infidelity, while the glory which he might
otherwise have had thereby, should be given to a woman, meaning Iael, and not
in the least part to her self: whereby somewhat may be noted, both generally
and particularly. For the first, we may learn that which may do us much good;
to wit, that God will punish us some way for our unbelief. Doct. verse. 9.
For we see, that God does not put up at men's hands, this and such other
sins, as I named in the former verse; especially, when they come more of
knowledge then of frailty, and when we see that we do amiss, and yet Note.
through blind selfeloue, we will not find fault with our selves for the same,
but extenuate or hide our sin, God therefore spared not Zacharias for his
unbelief, though otherwise a righteous man, but made him dumb for a Luke 1. ^.
season. And he tells us all as much in the Psalm, where he says, If mine
own children break my statutes, and keep not my commandments, I will visit
Psalm. 8^ 31.
their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes; although I
will not take my loving kindness from them. The like is to be seen in Moses,
who because he distrusted the Lord in smiting the rock, bare the scarre
thereof to his death, being denied entrance into the land of Canaan. So Ioash
for distrusting Elishas message, and smiting the earth but thrice, was rebuked
by 2. King. 13.
the Prophet, who would not have found fault with him, if he had not bidden him
smite it oftener. Thou should (says he) have smitten five or six times, and
so thou should utterly have destroyed Aram, but now thou shall soil them
but thrice; and so they shall get strength again to revenge themselves. And
even so do such both feel and find, who regard not what the Lord says unto
them, neither give credit to his word, and much more all such, as give the
bridle more grossly to their unruly passions. And this should (a man would
think) both cause us all to shun such boldness with God, as will provoke him
to make us smart for the same: and also, it should make us bear the more with
the infirmities of our brethren, for as much as we see God corrects them for
the same, and shall we also add sorrow to their sorrow, when we ought rather
to have compassion on them, and pity them? This be noted in general.

Now more particularly, seeing Barak was punished with losing the glory, Doct.
^. in verse. ^.
which he should have had but for his unbelief, this teaches us, that glory,
and good name and report, is reckoned among the good things that a godly person
may desire and be glad to enjoy: nay, it is that which he should ensue,
because it is a token of Gods approbation, if his people report well of us:
seeing they are taught by the same spirit, to discern who are like them.
Therefore John, by a probable argument, proves Demetrius to be a ^. Ioh. 11.
good man, because of his good report. It is to be lamented, that all they
whom God allows, do not desire this also, and deserve it by the fruits of
their love toward his Church: For it is the note of an arrogant and dissolute
person, to scorn the good opinion that his brethren conceive of him. Even as
precious ointments are known by their smell, so is a godly Christian by the
savor of his good name, especially in the place where he dwells, as being
best known there. Indeed, the principal care should be to give the Lord his
due praise, for else we beguile and deceive men in causing them to think well
of us, and much more we do dangerously deceive our selves: but that being well
regarded and looked unto, in the next place let our care be that the Church of
God may give us allowance, and see just cause to report well of us. As it is
said of Zachary and his wife, that both they Luke 1. 6.
were just before God, and toward men unreprovable, and therefore of good
report. So Cornelius had a good name among the Jews. Now glory or Act. 10. 22.
good name, is a certain good opinion and estimation conceived of a man for
his well doing. For those things which good men do virtuously and well, do
purchase commendation and glory unto them. The end to the which which we ought
to use and direct this good report, is this, namely the advancing of the name
of God, and also to give good example to other of following us: and as the ends
are both good, so is that good also, by the which they are procured. Therefore
although a good name be not to be sought for it self, as though that were
the thing we chiefly intended, and rested in, and no other, yet it is not to
be despised, for those ends which I have mentioned, namely, the glorifying of
God, and the edification of our brethren.

Now to end this verse, let this be briefly added, that Debora yielding to,
Doct. 3. in verse. 9.
and helping the weakness of Barak in going with him, teaches us thus to
regard, help, and encourage our weak brethren, by counsel, travail, and
example.

Verse. 10. And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh, and he went up on
his feet with ten thousand men, and Debora went up with him.

Verse. 11. Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab, the father
in law of Moses, was departed from the Kenites, and pitched his tent until the
plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh,

Verse. 12. Then they showed Sisera, that Barak the son of Abinoam, was gone
up to Mount Tabor.

Verse. 13. And Sisera called for all his charets, even nine hundred charets of
iron, and all the people that were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles
unto the river Kishen.

IN these four verses, the holy Ghost shows, how they did on both sides
prepare their armies, both Barak and Sisera. He accompanied with Debora at
Kedesh, gathered together ten thousand men out of the tribes of Naphtali and
Zebulun to Mount Tabor, which of the writers is called also Ithaberins, not
far off from Kedesh, for they went on foot. The place is near to the
borders of Asher, Naphtali and Zebulon. And this mount has near it, the river
Kishon, where the Prophet Elias killed the priests of Baall. And note, for the
better understanding of the story, that all the places mentioned, to wit,
Kedesh, the plain of Zaanaim, mount Tabor, were all near joining together,
and to the river Kishon. This of Barak. Sisera hearing of this preparation of
Bazak, did also make ready his army, which is not mentioned here, save his
nine hundred charets of iron: but Josephus says, he had thirty thousand
footmen, ten thousand horsemen of the Canaanites, and three thousand other
charets. But howsoever it was, sure it is, that he made a mighty preparation,
and therewith he came to this river Kishon. And this of the preparation on both
sides, mentioned in these four verses And with both there is a brief story
put in, of the dwelling of Heber the Kenite, the son of Hobab, Moses father
in law, that he had pitched his Tabernacle, and was by Gods providence come to
dwell nigh the river Kishon, and in a part of the border of Kedesh. But why this
is brought in, shall appear better afterward in verse. 18.

The chief thing in this verse to be noted, is the faith wherein all these
agreed and consented, which are here spoken of and mentioned, I mean Barak and
his army, with Debora. For they took in hand a most hard work against so
fierce a Captain, as Sisera was; so well provided and appointed by Iabin, who
was King over the Canaanites. And who would not have said, that their
preparation against the Israelites, must needs in the reason of man, have
wrought an utter overthrow of them? As sure it is, if they had been overcome,
as they were an handful, and few to many; and weak also, but their enemies
strong; they had bin most cruelly and barbarously handled by them. But
notwithstanding all this, when they were persuaded, that as they were set on
work by God, so in his power they went about it, and took it in hand; not
casting their eyes upon the difficulties and disparagements, that were in the
way against them, for God (they believed) would stand with them, and give them
the victory. And this indeed is the Doct. verse 10.
right property of faith thus to do, to look up to God, who has commanded
that which we take in hand, and promised blessing thereto. By this and Ioh. 14.
1.
by no other means, Abraham the father of believers, forsook his own Heb.
11. 8.
country, and went whither God sent him, from all his kindred, not knowing
what he should find in the place whither he went. And Moses chose rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God in the wilderness, then to Heb. 11.
24.
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season in the house of Phaeraos daughter,
which the Scripture says he did by faith. And thus did the walls of Jericho
Ios 6. 20.
fall down, as God had promised, at the seventh days end, the people
believing it should be so, and compassing them about all that time, with the
blowing trumpets of rams horns, as God had commanded. And this is it, which
we should intend and look to do in all that we go about. This faith, for
which also these worthy persons are by name commended in the A commendation of
says.
eleventh to the Hebrews, is able to carry us, as well as ever it did them,
through all difficulties, while we have an eye to the charge given us, and the
promised reward, although we see nothing with bodily eyes, but that which is
against us, and matter of discouragement. For so the Apostle S. John says,
that this says over comes the world, even all the difficulties that are in
it. This 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
faith, when it is once settled on the great promise of salvation, is afterward
the fitter to apprehend and lay hold on these temporary promises of this life,
about the which (it being a Jewel of inualuable price) if we were occupied and
exercised with so constant a care, as we are about matters of less weight,
(if not needless and unprofitable) we should be able to say much of the
benefit that comes by it, and have near acquaintance with God by the help
of this our faith. But seeing I have spoken of this matter before, I will be
the briefer in it, though we cannot hear too often of it, from good ground of
the word, as occasion is offered.

But whiles I am thus in commending of Bararks faith, me thinks I hear so me
obiecting, that the last thing spoken of him in the ninth verse, was his
unbelief; how is he therefore say they, so suddenly brought to such a change?
I answer, that though Barak had been hindered before by unbelief, yet
afterward he recovered himself, as we see here; and that was when God had
given him better consideration of the charge enjoined him, and promise made
unto him. So if we have failed in believing through the difficulty that we
see, or by rashness, yet let us weigh Gods promise more duly, and so believe
more heartily, and be better stayed by good consideration. And to that end let
none sit down like a tired person, and give over his hold and hope, saying; I
see this is too good and precious for me to enjoy, for I should never be able
to believe it, etc. Not so; but then let thy want increase thy thirst, as
David's did, Psalm. 51. and desire to be enlarged, Psalm. 51. 2. 3.
and pray, Lord help my unbelief. And remember that weakness may be
forgiven, where there is striving against it; but wilfulness, or preposterous
and invincible unbelief is damnable; for God looks to be credited Ioh. 3 1^.
upon his word, promise, and oath, besides the many experiments which we have,
if not of our selves, yet of other men; who of weak became strong. And as God
bare with Baraks infirmity here, in yielding to him, that Debora should go
with him: so he will tender and help our weak faith, and that many more ways
then we can see, and all to encourage us. Thus much be said of this.

THE TWENTY SEVEN SERMON ON THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE book of IVDGES.
NOw further, let us note in this verse by the joint agreement Doct. 2. in
verse. 10.
of all these here mentioned; I mean Debora, Barak, and the ten thousand of
Zebulun and Nephtali, (especially it being so needful that they should so
consent together) how good and worthy a thing it is for the servants of God to
join and be like minded in good things; though it do not directly tend to
their own profit and earthly benefit, or not so much as to the common good and
behoof of all the people, or many, (as here it did,) but to a town or family,
the commendation of this gift of free consent together in many good people is
clearly to be seen in the Apostles, and those that kept company with them; of
whom it is said, that they were altogether of one mind: which caused Saint Paul
to make so earnest a request to the Philippians Act. 2. 10.
to remove from them contention and pride; whereby this consent and agreement
is easily broken. For we know it is no easy matter for many to join and
agree together, and that by reason of so much contrariety as is in men's minds,
and for that one is so ready to cross and withstand an other, especially in
good things, through Satan by his subtle and malicious policy working
therewith, who gains much by their distraction and disagreement, as in Paul
and Barnabas may be seen. It is therefore to be sought and labored for
always, by the love and wisdom of godly teachers, who by their doctrine,
persuasions, and good example, do much help heereto. Thus had Debora and
Barak prevailed with these ten thousand, that they drew them to this work
jointly, as if they had been but two persons. Oh, agreement in good things,
what is like it, either in beauty or delight, as the Psalmist speaks, Behold
how good and pleasant a thing it is, for men to dwell together Psalm. 133. 1.
in godly unity? And experience teaches the same. For there, many uniting
their force of couroge and wisdom in one, they do easily resist the common
enemy, and (which is harder) their own corrupt passions and rebellious nature,
the which to what evil and mischief it carries them, the infinite broils,
suits, quarrels and controversies of almost all places do too truly testify.
Such are they who in loving and kind agreement betwixt themselves, do submit
themselves to the word of God, whereby they become meek and humble, and so
they easily consent to that which is good. The want of this godly agreement,
and the contrary readiness in men to break out one against another, has often
caused me to bewail, (for who sees not great cause so to do) the boisterous
and fierce contentions of many, and those not only of the common sort, who are
for the most part rude and ignorant, but of them also who are to be counted
brethren, and yet do so readily let loose their hearts to bitter contentions
and rash iudgings of their brethren, if they do not worse: and yet (which is
greater madness) this is for a smail cause (as if they do but dissent in
opinion and judgment one from another in things indifferent, wherein both
follow the light of their knowledge,) whereby they give too great testimony,
that they little know themselves aright, and that they have full slightly
searched into themselves, to see their many rank corruptions of self love,
privy pride, frowardness, impatience, uncharitableness and such like, that
swarm and bear sway in them; and that they bestow small cost upon themselves,
nor time to find fault with their own doings, (to wit, how far they are off
from the rule of charity,) that so they may become humble and peaceably minded
toward others. Nay, (which is worse) they hold their unchristian conceits and
iudgings of their brethren, so strongly and wilfully, that they verify the
proverb, making their bitter contentions with them like the bars of a palace,
that cannot be broken: and like cities strong and well fenced, that cannot
easily be beaten down. This is far from godly agreement, Prou. 18. 19.
and consequently from that hearty loving together, which should be like a
threefold cord, that is not easily broken, which our Savior says is a sure
Eccles. 4. 12.
token that they in whom it is, are his very Disciples indeed. As for agreement
in evil, such as theirs was in the Psalm, it is as hurtful and odious, as
Ioh. 13. 35. Psalm. 2. 1. 2.
it is common: but though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not escape
unpunished; Prou. 11. 21.
and so I leave them, adding this; where there is no agreement in evil, there
less is committed. And therefore we had need to pray the Lord to send a
spirit of division among such, as that was betwixt the Pharisees and Sadduces,
that so much mischief may be prevented rather then stablished. And this of the
preparation of that Debora and Barak made.

Now follows, (before I come to Sisera) a short story of Heber the husband
Verse. 11. The unfolding of it.
of Iael, put in by the way, to wit, that he (being of the posterity of Hobab,
Moses father in law, who removed from his kindred and brethren, as we saw in
cap. 1. verse. 16.) was come to this Kedesh to dwell, where Barak assembled his
men of war. To the which place God by his providence directing him, sent him,
as appears afterward in verse. 17. that thereby he might, as he did by Iael
Hebers wife, cut off this great enemy Sisera. By which we may learn a right
profitable lesson. That while we go on here in our simplicity in this earthly
dwelling to serve Gods providence, as his word Doct. verse. 11.
leads us, God will in our most casual actions direct, regard, and bless us
so, that in time we shall see it to be so, though we knew not before what
should come to pass. Heber removed his dwelling from his kindred, not in
hatred to them, but as he saw it most convenient for him, though (it is true)
he intended not thereby the destruction of Sisera, neither came there any such
thing into his mind; but the Lord purposed it, and appointed that by this
means of his coming to dwell there, it should be brought to pass: Heber
only considering, and advisedly bethinking himself what was best for him to
do about the settling of his dwelling, and seeking to live among Gods people,
and looking no further.

So by the selling of Joseph into a strange country, a thing in likelihood
Genesis 45. 8.
tending to his undoing, yet it is manifest, as he told his brethren, that God
sent him before, to preserve them and their posterity alive, and not they. So
when Jacob was sent away by Rebecca, his mother, to Padan Aram, to avoid Genesis
^8. 2^.
the wrath of his brother Esau, the cause was good, but he went, uncertain
what should befall him in a strange land; and therefore he thought, and vowed,
if he might have bread to eat, and clothes to put on, and that God would be
with him, and keep him in his journey, that then he should be his God, meaning
that he should be more strongly confirmed in so counting him. Therefore God,
who guided his journey, blessed him greatly, so that when he returned, he
remembered Gods benefits which he had since that, bestowed on him, saying: I
came over this Jordan with my staff; that is, poor, Genesis 32. 10.
and without all provision, but now have I gotten two bands. So when Moses
married Iethros daughter, living obscurely in the wilderness, and suffering
affliction with the people of God, who would have thought that any good should
have come thereby? And yet beside his admirable delivering of the Israelites
out of Pharaohs bandage, he was also a mean to draw Iethros posterity to
religion, and the true worship of God thereby. Even so, offer we our selves
under Gods government, and all things shall be in time, directed by him to a
good end, though we see it not by and by; yet we shall; so as we may be bold
to say it, for he will bring it so to pass. For it is to be known, that
while we wander here on earth, yet we are not in darkness, as others are;
neither are we cast off as Orphans and left desolate, but God cares for 1.
Pet. 3. 2. 1. Tim. 4. 10.
us his faithful ones, otherwise then he does for the rest of the world.

And it being so with us, though we see not the mind and purpose of God toward
us in particulars at the first, and what will fall out through the course of
our lives, yet we are sure that his special providence watches over us for
our good; so that we need not doubt but that God directs all things to that
end. This is a wonderful stay to all believing people; and without faith,
sound knowledge, and use thereof, all Gods doings are strange to us, both
before we see the issue of them, and sometime afterward also, and namely his
crosses and afflictions: but as they are distasted of us, and utterly
unwelcome, so are his benefits never received of us in good sort, and to the
right end; namely, to make us trust in him more firmly, and cleave to him more
constantly, whereas we should be much more moved hereby, to commit the success
of all unto him, till our experience have brought the Romans 5. 4.
hope that shall not make us ashamed. For there need be no doubt but that he
watches for us thus clinging to him, when we sleep, and vpholdeth us Prou. 6.
22.
while we walk, and proposes good toward us, even then when we see no
likelihood thereof. And while it is thus with us, it is not unprofitable to
consider, how ill it goes with those, who rest upon blind fortune (as they
call it) and go on in the strength of their carnal wisdom, looking for
great matters, but all in vain, they being little or nothing acquainted with
Gods providence. Lamentable it is to see how such are tossed, vexed, and
unsettled with cares and sorrows, and that not only in their most uncertain
and doubtful affairs, but also in those which are more sure and certain, as
they think and imagine.

Besides, it is not unprofitable for us to mark another thing in this short
Doct. 2.
story, and that is this: that seeing this Heber removed, and had his dwelling
apart from the rest of his brethren the Kenites, upon good consideration, (for
otherwise the holy story would have found fault with it,) the rest of them
departing from Jericho, and dwelling with the tribe of Judah in their Judge. 1.
16.
borders, (as we heard in chap. 1.) in that, I say, Heber did thus, who yet, as
is clear by the story, did not offend God therein, we see it is not unlawful
for the people of God to settle their dwellings apart from their neighbors and
kindred, and brethren in profession; but it may fall out to be meet for them to
do so: for God has not appointed that all the faithful should dwell together;
neither can it be sometime for sundry considerations and respects: as we read
that Abraham and Lot, by reason of the great abundance of cattle that they
both had, and for want of pasture, departed one from another: even as before
when their posterity grew and multiplied in one family, they married, and were
dispersed into diverse. And many other things do cause that. Indeed if we may
dwell together with Gods people, in the places of best choice, it is not to be
neglected, but desired heartily (for many shall be hindered from it by necessity)
and if that liberty may be enjoyed of us, let us make a precious reckoning of
it, and set our selves to live together kindly, profitably, and peaceably,
which too many regard not to do, but if it cannot be without great
inconvenience, let us not strive against God, for we gain nothing thereby, and
what know we what God has appointed to be done by us in another place? It may
be we may bring some to God by our removing, and be seated among such as
shall be like our selves, or may by our good conversation which they shall
see, be turned unto us. Which two things we should principally aim at, and
endeavor unto when we must change and remove our dwelling.

Now it follows that after this short degression (as we have heard how Verse.
12. 13.
Barak prepared and furnished himself to war, so it was told Sisera what he
had done) and that he prepared his army likewise when he heard that Barak had
done so. His power what it was, I mean, how great and fearful, I have showed
already. That which we have here principally to note, in addressing himself
to the battle, is the difference betwixt him on the one side, and Debora and
Barak with their few thousands on the other. They both prepared themselves to
war we see, but these went about it by Gods commandment; he in the pride of
his own heart, and without God. They trusted in the promise of God for
victory, he in his own strength, and Note.
great army. They went against Gods enemies, he against Gods friends, yea
against God himself. Whereby we may see that it much avails to have a Doct.
verse. 12. 13.
good cause to maintain, and to have God to go with us therein, as many
examples in Scripture testify of the wars of godly Kings with idolaters. A
good cause is the defense of the Gospel, and the true worship of God by a
Christian Prince, against such as would force him to Popery, or any other
false worship, by open war: also the maintaining of his own dominion,
bounds, or right in great and weighty matters, or recovering them being
unjustly detained from him. A Christian Prince in these and such like cases may
make war, and command his people against the enemy: and so I may say of the
like. But to leave this instance and to lay out this doctrine in another, more
familiar to the common sort; it is manifest where the like is to be found among
us who are in peace, to wit, that we have a good cause, and our controversies
with the bad, it is manifest, I say, that the one sort has great encouragement
by the goodness of his cause, to follow it rather then the other, who has
none at all, but much against him. For where all these encouragements are, or
the most which Barak had, and of which I have spoken; they are to animate men
to their duties; so I will not say, what success and blessing particularly
shall follow them who use them, but they shall most certainly reap great fruit
thereby, and abundantly one way or other: and therefore good reason that such
should do the Lords work diligently: and contrariwise, the other, if they
could be made to consider what they go about, in following a bad matter, they
should never dare be hold to proceed as they do, to wit, as Sisera did to
defend an ill cause, but they would fear to go forward, and desist from their
attempts. Good and bad go to work both alike (as these here did) for outward
preparation, but not in a like manner, nor with the like mind, nor to the like
end. And although Sisera had not wilfully, in the pride of his heart, gone
against Israel because they were Gods people (as Pharaoh did) and although he
be not properly to be charged for not consulting with God, or weighin the
cause in going against Gods people; (for alas he was an Heathen, and therefore
ignorant of such matters) yet to speak the best that may be said of him, he
trusted in chariots, horses, soldiers, and munition; thereby purposing with
maine force to reduce the rebellious Israelites, as he counted them, to the
yoke of obedience, and knew also that they were Gods people. But it was indeed
no wonder that he took this course, being a cursed Canaanite, such an one as
he was. But to leave him, and to come nearer our selves; is it not admirable,
that among us who are of the visible Church, there should be found some, that
in their enterprises, life and dealings, maintain an evil cause one against
the other, as Barak and Sisera did? for what though their actions both civil
in religious exercises be the same, and that in outward respect there appear
little or no difference in some of them? yet so profane and unconscionable
many of them are, that they hold the righteous an abomination, and deface, as
the Pharisees did Christ's, their best actions, and will see no difference
betwixt their own and the others. And to please themselves, thus they say of
them; Tush, as precise as they seem* they do but as we; they follow their
trades, buy, sell, eat, drink, marry, etc. and we do as they, read, pray,
hear the word, receive the Sacrament, etc. what odds therefore betwixt us?
yes: for why? shall not two be in the field, Mat. 24. 40.
or at the mill, and yet the one received, the other forsaken? and the one a
reprobate, the other chosen? Surely as they differ in their ends, so they
differ in the means using that lead thereto: and though they differ not in
dying, for the outward manner) yet they differ in this, that one dies happily,
the other miserably: and so they do in their affections differ, as in their
desires, hope, encouragements, and successes. The one asks, who will show
Psalm. 4, 7. 8.
us any good? The other prays, O Lord lift up the light of thy countenance
upon us, for it is more to us then all abundance. And in this light both of
knowledge for direction, and of grace for assistance thereto. The godly man
walks looking at the promise in all his lawful attempts, knowing also that
the Lord, who is his light to guide him, will be his defense also, to uphold,
prosper Psalm. 84. 13.
and bless him. The other walks in darkness, being led by erroneous
opinion, sense, example, nature, and sometimes shame, fear, and proud
confidence in himself; and therefore goes through many dangers, smarts,
sorrows, whether he be crossed, or whether he have his desire. He reeleth
also and stumbleth, as the Egyptians did, when darkness did ouerspread them,
while the Israelites walked in safety, at liberty. In a word, the one serves
God, the other the devil: the one is cheerful, patient, confident: the other
of a contrary mind and carriage. Therefore let every man who desires to be
approved of God, judge himself, and as for others, both such as I have spoken
of, and they who do the same actions with them, though we know not with what
mind, let us conceive the best, so far as in charity we may, of them; but yet
let us suspend our sentence and allowance of them, till after longer trial,
and further knowledge of, and acquaintance with them. And consider ye that
read this what I say, and the Lord give you understanding. For in that which I
have said of the wicked incensed against the righteous, (their deeds being
good, but their own evil) consists a great difference betwixt a true
Christian and a counterfeit; as to him that will lay both sorts together with
good consideration, shall appear. And of this Scripture here an end.

THE TWENTY EIGHT SERMON ON THE FOVTRH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 14. Then Debora said unto Barak, Up: for this is the day that the Lord
has delivered Sisera into thine hand. is not the Lord gone out before thee? So
Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him. Verse. 15.
And the Lord destroyed Sisera, and all his charets, and all his host with the
edge of the sword before Barak, so that Sisera lighted down of his charet, and
fled away on his feet. Verse. 16. But Barak pursued after the charets, and
after the host unto Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all the host of Sisera fell
on the edge of the sword: there was not a man left.
WE have heard in the former verses how both sides, Barak I The sum of these
three verses.
mean, and Sisera, addressed themselves to battle: in these (to come more
nearly to the intent of this fourth part) is showed, whose the victory was,
namely Baraks: and how? verily Debora encouraging and assuring him, that even
the same day wherein she spoke it should be obtained and gotten; and he
believing it, went down with his men of war, (few though they were) and he
meeting Sisera with his bands at mount Tabor, (no more is said of the matter)
they were destroyed both charets and horsemen, not a man was left, but either
drowned in the river Kishon that was there by, or slain there at mount Tabor,
or pursued (as the charets and horsemen were) and so put to the sword, and
Sisera himself was driven to fly away on his feet, but in vain. Oh the
wonderful deliverance that God gave unto his people that day!

This here set down, is the third speech that Debora used to Barak, and that
Verse 14. The unfolding of verse. 14.
at mount Tabor: and though the last, yet not the least, but mighty,
forceable, and in due season. For it appears by the text, that when Barak saw
Siseras huge army, he was dismayed, and therefore sought the fittest place about
mount Tabor, and the furest, to shroud himself in, from the violence and rage
of Sisera. Which fainting of his, she perceiving, called him back, and stirred
him up to fight, by her words and persuasions, saying, No power of man how
great and fearful soever, shall be able to hinder thee from obtaining the
victory, which the Lord has purposed to give thee this day. At which speech
of hers he was animated, and took heart, and went to the battle, and, as we
have heard, prevailed.

And here is most notably set down one means whereby the power of Doct.
faith is strengthened, and whereby it is wonderfully drawn to contemn and
set light by all discouragements, and break through them, the least whereof
without it, would be ready to set a man at his wits end. And that was here
Deboras heartning persuasion to Barak (as Gods voice) to animate him. And
therefore it much avails to hear Gods promises often times by the public
Ministry, and effectually published and fitly applied unto us in the fittest
manner that may be, and in sickness, temptation, and other times of fainting,
when a man is much weakened and dismayed, to Note.
have, as Barak had here by Debora, such forcible and lively quicknings: but
best of all, if a man be able himself to do that duty to himself, and by
the prayer of faith to strengthen himself in such time of need. Oh! there are
many ebbings and faintings in our lives, even after good strength and
refreshing: we have sometime good patience and hope under our crosses, but
another time we fear the greatness of them, that they will swallow us up,
especially if they be more then common. Again, we sometime pursue a finne,
and have it in the chase, and prevail over it, which has sore laid at us, and
wound in with us very far, to draw liking and consent from us unto it: and
sometime it carries us with maine force after it.

And what is it that has relieved us at such times? Truly even this, if we
have been able to believe that God will strengthen us against it, and that he
has promised so to do, and if also by prayer not fained, we have set our
faith a work, though it has lien as almost dead before; even thus we grow to
weaken the liking of that sin in us: as for fear of danger or shame of the
world, they are but dull edged tools to cut off the head of such a monster.
And although we be brought often times to that point as to doubt, yet we should
also strive by our faith in our prayers against it, and it shall not be in
vain to do so. And the same we should do in our fear before affliction
comes, and in our heaviness for it, when it is come. For they that know any
thing of the estate of a Christian, know this; that he is many times in great
fear of falling into some finne, yea and perhaps, that which is foul and
odious, though it be not usually so: Now if we do not call to mind, that God
has promised strength against all such adversary power, and that by the
weapons of our warfare, (which are not carnal, but spiritual) we shall be
able to beat down such strong holds; and if with the prayer of faith (as need
requires) we set not our selves so to do, we shall soon perceive that we
lose ground, and grow weak, as Barak did for a while; who yet was strengthened
again by Debora, so that he did most valiantly afterward, in so much that he
was renowned among the Worthies, and reported to have obtained the victory by
faith; for at the hearing of Deboras words he went down from mount Tabor with
his men near to the river Kishon against Sisera. This of the encouragement by
Debora, and the fruit of it Barak.

Now it follows that the Lord gave Barak victory, the rare and marvelous
Verse 15. 16.
victory, over his and Gods enemies. For the Lord wasted the huge army of
Sisera, howbeit, by the fighting of Barak and his men against them. And such of
them as hasted in their flight toward Harosheth of the Gentiles for safety,
(from whence they came) they were over taken also and put to the sword, so that
none escaped. And Sisera was driven (so great the slaughter was, and the
battle so sore) to forsake his charet wherein he rode, and to escape on
foot, if it might be, among the common soldiers. Now it is to be considered
by what means this great victory was gotten: ten thousand unexperienced
soldiers going against so many thousands of horsemen, and footmen, and iron
charets. The Lord (it is said) gave Barak the victory; which no man doubts
of, seeing he is all in all: It is an harder question, how Barak obtained it of
God: and that was by faith, after that Barak got strength and courage again by
Deboras persuasions, she her self being constant in faith all the while: for
then, and not before, he went down from mount Tabor with his men to meet
Sisera, being before afraid, looking down from thence upon the huge army that
he saw. This was Barak his armor of proof to defend him, even his faith. And
if this cannot be clearly enough seen in this story, fetch more clear
proof of that which I say, from another scripture. Thus writes the author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, after he had set down the faith of sundry
persons, as Abraham, Moses, and other; he add to: What shall I more say of
Gedcon, Barak, etc. who Heb. 11 32.
waxed valiant in battle, and by faith turned to flight the armies of the
aliants.

And by this we may see again the mighty force and power of faith, Doct.
where it is firm and strong, what great things it brings to pass. It is no
marvel though it be said by the Apostle, that faith over comes the world,
1. Ioh. 5. 4.
even all and the greatest difficulties therein. For what hardness does any man
go through in his whole life like unto this here mentioned, and overcome it
also, unless it be thus, even by the help and power of faith? which Note.
is no more then to give credit to God in that which he speaks, when we see
no such thing, nor likelihood if it, but rather of the contrary many times with
our bodily eyes. Even thus has God magnified his word in all ages, when men
have found every part of it true by faith, and by this it has pleased him to
make men see his unspeakable kindness, while they believe the promise in which
he offers it unto them. By this faith we also at this day have sure hold of
forgiveness and eternal life, even so many as are weary of Note.
sin, and thirst for both, and that because we judge him faithful that has
promised, and by this we are persuaded of a good end of our days, because Phil
1 6. 1. These. ^. 24.
God has said it, to all in whom he has made a good beginning thereof. So
says the Apostle, faithful is he that calls you, who will also do it. So
that all things are possible, how unlikely soever, to him that believes. This
is the cause why some more esteem and price this faith then gold that
perishes: and declare, that they cannot do too much to come by and retain
it, even while they be laughed to scorn of the wicked world, who think it
mere foolishnes to do so, as Noah the preacher of righteousness was in his
time, while he believing that an universal slood should come, prepared the
Arc. But herein I might wade infinitely, and this I confess, that howsoever I
forbear to speak of the most of other things twice; yet of this I profess to
speak as often as I shall have occasion, the thing itself being so excellent,
so necessary, and yet so difficult, to see thoroughly into. I only now require,
that we may weigh the power and truth of Gods word, to the end we may stay our
selves upon it. The word of a man whom we count faithful, does much persuade
us in great difficulties, and quickens is if he bring us good tidings, when
we were before in great heaviness. When Benjamin came with this joyful
tidings to his father Jacob full of heaviness: Joseph thy son is yet alive,
and is ruler over all Egypt; the heart of Jacob revived. Genesis 45. 26.
If it be so by giving credit to a man; what confidence and joy is it like to
work, if we believe a glad tidings which may be of many things sent us from
God? Doubtless, hereby our weak knees are strengthened, and our sorrowful
hearts are comforted more then can be expressed. I wish therefore that unto us
concerning faith, that which S. James did of patience, to wit, that it may have
her perfect work, so should we be sure to want nothing that is good.

The next thing after the victory over Siseras army, is to see the extremity
that he himself, the leader and chief captain of it, was brought unto: for
he was feign to leave his charet which was his defense, and to shift for
himself on foot among the common soldiers, that he might save his life if it
were possible. This, I say, remains in this 15. verse to be added. And here,
as in fittest place, I think good to note this, because of the former doctrine,
(one contrary clearing the other): that as Barak and Debora did by faith so
great things, by so small and weak means: so Sisera wanting this (as being of
the heathen Canaanites, how could he so much as taste of it?) was for all his
wisdom, policy, and power, wasted, put to flight, and al his troop and band
brought to destruction. Here was verified that saying, an horse is but a Psalm.
33 17.
vain thing to save a man: Likewise another scripture that says, Some put
their trust in charets, and some in horses, but we will remember the name of
the Lord our Psalm. 20. 7.
God: They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand upright.
And therefore (to refer the reader to gather the infinite annoyances of
unbelief, and therewith the great benefits of faith out of the former
doctrine) I will conclude that as without faith it is impossible to please God,
so God being Heb. 11. 6.
against all which are destitute of it, and an enemy to them, how can they
look to stand against him, but to fall and be confounded? And this they find
daily one or other of them, though it be little marked, and it is soon
forgotten, (another generation rising up in their room) who know not the
works of God, and yet they have their time also set them, wherein they shall
find the like. For if this be true in the green tree, how much more in the
withered? If through unbelief, even the righteousest find it a matter of such
difficulty to be saved, before they attain it, what shall become of 1. Pet.
4. 18.
him that is an unbeliever altogether? And further, if particular defects in
faith cost Moses and Barak disadvantage and dishonor, what shall the end Numb.
21. 12.
of such be as never had any? Surely the wrath of God abides upon them: and so
shall do for ever, and show it self in a far more terrible manner, if John
3. 36.
they haste not after it, and so, as that they attain it, Ioh. 3.

And here another thing is to be marked, that when God does not bless, Doct. 2.
but blow upon men's furniture and furtherances, and takes part against the^,
even these things which were armor and defense to them before, they cast them
away as burdens and impediments. As Sisera here was driven to leave his charet
now that he was so pursued of his enemies, which yet had been, and was counted,
as his house of defense unto him. For God will have us know, that his favor is
toward all his, as the pleasant sunshine to the earth and the creatures
therein, which makes all pleasant and beautiful, Note.
and if that should cease to shine, the earth with all that is therein, should
stink and come to naught. Even so, if God turn away his loving countenance
from a man, and frown upon him, all that was precious to him before, is
unpleasant, even as the moth consumes the beauty of a garment, as it was said
of Jerusalem, when God was displeased, that all her pleasant Lamen. 1. 10.
things were matters of sighing and sorrow unto her. Whence is it, that many a
man of great possessions, can yet find no savor nor relish in them,
especially if any affliction or trouble be upon him? Why is the heart so locked
up, that it cannot joy in any commodity? in wife, children, wealth, favor?
Will ye know the reason? because first, outward things are so far sweet as
the Lord sweetneth them, and otherwise the enioyers thereof find no taste nor
sweetness in them; no, they have no use of them. If God be not Psalm. 119. 59.
a man's portion, all other portions are enjoined without his love, and so turn
to gall and bitterness. As Nabals wealth, Achitophel his wisdom, Hamans
favor. For when Ahashuerosh abandoned Haman, what stead did his wife, friends,
or former favor stand him in? The wrath of the King blasted all these, as the
frost or East wind does the tender buds. Nabals heart was as ^^^one, when he
presaged the event that followed. Achitophels wisdom was that which brake his
neck. Again, the wicked force themselves to find a deceiuable sweetness in
these transitory things without God: therefore he justly depriues them
thereof, and turns them out of kind, so that although he has suffered them
for a while to flourish, and take their pleasure in them, yet when they have
long surfetted of them, they poison them, yea and in short time also, as he
sees good.

The use of this is, that we account the favor of God all in all to us, and
further then we have that shining upon us, glory not in any earthly
prerogative, as honor, beauty, wealth, or whatsoever else. For many of the
vain people of the world do find to their cost by woeful experience, that
when they have spent their whole life and precious time to get them, (I may
truly say also, they have lost heaven for them) yet they find (I say) with
what vexation they enjoy them, though they would make others believe, that they
are as a paradise unto them: But to be sure they cannot keep them, when God
will pluck them from them, as we see both by the two rich men in the Gospel,
and by daily experience: and that is enough for wise men to Luke 12. 20.
prove how little there is in them. And this by occasion of Siseras losing Luke
16. 23.
all.

Verse. 17. Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet, to the tent of Iael the wife
of Heber the Kenite: (for peace was between Iabin the King of Hazor, and
between the house of Heber the Kenite.)

18. And Iael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, turn in my Lord,
turn in to me, fear not. And when he had turned in unto her tent, she
covered him with a mantell.

19. And he said unto her, give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink, for
I am thirsty: and she opened a bottlell of milk, and gave him drink, and
covered him.

20. Again, he said unto her, stand in the door of the tent, and when any man
does come and enquire of thee, saying; Is any man here? thou shall say, nay.

21. Then Iael Hebers wife took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer in
her hand, and went softly to him, and smote the nail into his temples, and
fastened it into the ground, (for he was fast asleep and weary) and so he
died.

WE have heard how by Debora and Barak the battle was prospered, The opening
of these verses.
as in this fourth part of the chapter has been noted: now it follows how a
full end was put to it by Iael. To whose tent Sisera fled, as the fittest
refuge for shelter, it being near the place where the battle was, and peace
being betwixt Iabin the King of Canaan, and Heber her husband. The things
principal in these 5. verses, are three. One how Sisera fled thither, in the
seventeenth verse. The second, by what means his death was brought on, in the
next three. The third, that it was by her effected, in the 21. And this story
does show, why that is set down in the eleventh verse, where I referred the
Reader to this place, to wit, that Heber the husband of Iael, came and dwelt in
the plain of Zaanaim by Kedesh, apart from his brethren, even to this end,
though he intended it not, yet by Gods appointment and providence, that Sisera
might have his deadly wound and blow there. And by Siseras flying on foot to
Iaels tent for succor and shelter, we see another difficulty that this Sisera
was driven to, beside the ill success that he had in the fight; and withal we
may observe, to what shifts and extremities Doct verse. 17. Note.
wicked men though they be great and mighty persons may be brought: for they
who could command a whole country, may be constrained to hide their head in a
private tent and corner. And they who have gloried as Lords of all store and
plenty may come to this, that they may be glad of a draught of milk or water
to save their lives. To Ahab King of Israel this word was sent by Benhadad who
besieged him, that all his silver and other precious 1. King 20. 3.
things were his, whereto Ahab answered, it is true (O King) thine they are.
And the same Benhadad so boasting and braging over him, was afterward himself
brought to this point, and that by the same Ahab, that he loosing in two
battles, as good as two hundred and fifty thousand men, beside chariots and
horses, he was driven to fly on horseback into a secret chamber, and yet
even there to be in great fear of his life also. And so in other stories it is
reported of Darius the Persian King, that being in flight pursued by his
enemies, and in a great thirst passed by a Lake, out of which he took up
puddle water, and having drunk it out of his hands, protested he never drank
sweeter in his life.

Now if such mighty ones may for their sins be driven to such straites and
shifts, then mean persons much more are easily and soon deprived of all that
they have, and that many ways. Therefore if we be wise who now live, or they
who shall come after us, howsoever we enjoy much, we will learn, as we have
often been, and here are taught, not to put our trust in uncertain 1. Tim. 6.
17.
riches, but in the living God; neither to be high minded, but humble and lowly
(knowing to what changes we be subject) in which estate there is no danger. And
in that we miscarrie not daily, with the silly worm that is trod on, and with
the beast slaughtered, that fed even now at the pasture, it is only Gods
forbearing us.

In that it is said that Heber had peace with Iabin, the Scripture sets not
down how and in what manner it was: therefore by occasion of this their peace,
about which, or the like, seeing some might move a question; for answer and
our instruction this may be said, that if there were conditions betwixt them,
(Iabin and Heber I mean) about limits and bounds of ground, how far they
should reach, or what he should pay for the same, or such like, they were
lawful: but if they had been for the joining with him against his enemies,
without respect, (which was not so) then their peace had not been good, nor to
be allowed. According to this that I say, let our instruction be. For if a
civil league be betwixt the true worshippers of God and Idolaters, about
keeping and enjoying that which is severally their, safely and quietly, that is
not to be disliked: for the godly while they be here, desire not to dwell
alone in the world, neither can they choose (they know) but they must have
dealings with the men that live in it: and again, they are commanded by the
Apostle, that they should, as much as in them lies, have Romans 12. 12.
peace with all men. And so most Christian Emperors have had peace with the
barbarous people that were strangers to true religion, and so did the people of
Israel with the nations which were near adjoined to them, (except the seven
that were accursed) for the Lord did not command them to make war with the
rest that dwelt about them.

But if they should urge the religious people to join their aid with them in
making war with them against other nations which are Gods people, that in no
wise is to be yielded unto. For it went ill with Iehosaphat, for going to war
in league with Ahab against Ramath in Gilead. As also for joining in fellowship
with Iehoram his son, when he sent ships with Compare 1. King. 22. 48 49.
with 2. Chron. 35. 36. 37.
him into Tarsis: for a tempest arising at Ezion Gabar, his ships were broken.
So Asa King of Judah sent silver and gold to Benhadad King of Aram, to help him
against Baasha King of Israel, but he was reproved for it of the Lord. 2.
Chron. 16. 3.
And so (no doubt) it is lawful for Christian Princes to confederate with not
only Christian, but Popish or Heathen in civil cases, as for the better
security of their dominions, maintenance of peace, and those commodities which
follow thereupon, as traffic, etc. but to hold correspondence with 2. Chron.
19. 2.
them in religion, or to profess themselves friends to their friends, whom God
curses; or enemies to their enemies that were to do as they in the Psalm. 2.
1. 2.
Psalm, that banded themselves together, whom God will scatter. Now that which
I have said of leagues made betwixt nations, or one man, (as Heber was) with a
King, namely, Iabin King of Canaan, the same I say of one private person with
another, living together: And that is briefly this: that a godly Christian may
live in peace with the wicked, and use him in civil cases to buy and sell, and
borrow, and lend, as it may conveniently be done betwixt them; but this must
always be provided for, that he join not with Heb. 12. 14.
him in his sin, neither that he have any fellowship with him in false
worship.

Hitherto of Sisera his going on foot to the house of Iael; now it is showed
Verse 18.
how she used means to bring him to his death: first, as is mentioned in this
verse. For she went to meet him, and drew him in by fair and alluring words,
and bids him not fear. Hereby (there is no doubt) he was more thoroughly
persuaded, that he should be safe there. But this was a train to draw him to
further danger, as we see by that which follows, ver. 21. And all this duly
considered, with other things which she did, mentioned in the text, causes
question to be made, whether Iael did well or no, in thus deceiving him. But
that question is easily answered. For she doing it to an enemy, not hers, but
Gods; one that all Gods people ought, by virtue of his commandment to have
rooted out as they were able; in a word, a chief Canaanite, and she blessed
and praised of God for that which she did. By Judge. 5. 24.
all this I think, it is clear she offended not at least in the substance of
the action. But this has been answered before, by the like occasion in Ehuds
example. But for us who have not the like commandment (except the civil
Magistrate, and the lawful executioner,) we have in no wise, liberty to
follow her example, but to stick fast to the rule that teaches us, to walk
toward all men in uprightness, and all good simplicity and innocence, giving
unto the worst their due.

THE TWENTY NINE SERMON ON THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
IT follows of Sisera, who being very dry with traveling Verse. 19. 20. 21.
on foot, and inward grief heating him, desiring somewhat wherewith to quench
his thirst, and she gave him liberally milk to drink, which was fittest to
bring him asleep. But when he had well drunk, he forgets not the danger he
was in, while such as passed by might be ready to ask after him there; and
therefore he diligently instructs her to be careful every way for his
preservation and safety. By the giving him drink that he might fall asleep,
and so she might the more conveniently dispatch him by so good an opportunity,
she showed her readiness to help cut off Gods enemies, and therein as well to
serve him as his Church, which well appears in these three verses: and this
thing in general, we Doct. verse. 19. 20. 21.
all are bound to follow her in, though not in that particular manner.

For as God commended the unjust steward, for that he had done wisely Luke 16.
8.
in making provision for himself, when he was put out of his stewardship;
although he condemned his particular fact, in that he sought it by falsehood and
fraud: so is our godly care to help the members of the Church, and to resist
the enemies of it, both are very commendable in us, though we must beware of
all unlawful means using, which tend thereto. Thus as Debora, Barak, and Iael
wrought a wonderful deliverance for Gods people; so they who have place and
authority put in their hands by God, are bound to do for the safety of the
whole Church, if they will prove themselves faithful and zealous. And private
persons whose power cannot reach far, ought to do the same toward particular
members of the Church, and that part of it where they dwell, so far as they
shall be able.

Of Iaels readiness to cut off Gods enemy Sisera, and of her faithfulness we
have heard: now further in this 19. and 20. verses is showed how God Verse. 19.
20.
did cause him to trust Iael, and to put confidence in her for the hiding and
keeping him from his enemies. And as he did in this; when he purposes evil
against wicked men, he commonly blindfoldeth them, takes away providence and
counsel from them, and suffers them to choose that course to follow in their
lives and actions, which proves the unhappiest to them, even worse often times
then their greatest enemy could take against them; as I may say of Pharaoh in
his wilful ventering on the sea to follow after Israel: what Exodus 14. 28.
enemy could so much have hurt him, as he did himself. So that a wicked man is
never sure of peace and safety when he is at the best; for the Lord is able to
defeat him first and last, even many ways: for why? there is no peace to the
ungodly, as the Prophet faith; neither is there any counsel against Esa. 57.
21.
the Lord Jehovah. Again, as he trusted in her, so the Lord made her deceive
and disappoint him. Both which do confirm us in that which has now been
said, and teach us, that when it pleases him, he leaves the wicked destitute
of all help, and frustrate of their hope of success, or that they put in
their friends, yea and further, he will make all his creatures to work
against them. Which he does, to signify to them, that he is against them
also. Which though he testify to them before by his word, which says, the
wicked are an abomination unto the Lord; and again, the workers of iniquity
Prou 1. 5. 9.
does he abhor; yet he seeing that his word is cast behind their Luk 13. 27.
backs, does therefore as it were, speak to them by his creatures, and that
as sensibly (to such as can judge) as he did to Baalam, in opening the mouth
Note this. Numb. 22. 28.
of the dumb Ass, and causing it to speak to him, when he (seeking the wages
of iniquity) would not have heard the Lord speak to him, nor inclined his
heart to obey him.

Thus does God deal with vile and unconscionable men, that he will set (as I
say) not their friends only, but even the host of heaven, and the creatures of
the earth against them. Thus Saul, when he had forsaked the Lord, 1. Sam. 19.
12. 1. Sam. 28. 15.
could neither have his daughter faithful unto him, to send David his enemy
to him, neither could he have any Prophet of God to speak to him in his
greatest necessity and straits, as his own words do testify, he complaining
thus; I am in distress, for God is departed from me, and speaks no more to
me by Prophets, etc. Neither could Senacherib have his sons trusty to 2.
King. 19. 37.
him, but was slain of them, by whom he ought by nature to have been defended:
yea and they did it in the Temple, while he was worshipping Nishroch his god,
in whom he trusted, and looked always for help from him, and notwithstanding
he preferred him before the true and living God; yet even then he was
disappointed. Thus Ammon also and Iezabel were not secure 2. King 21. 23. 2.
King. 9. 33.
from their own servants. And if it be thus done to the mighty; how much more
then to the mean, who have less help to stand by him? And not only their
best helps fail and deceive them, but, as I said, all things are against
them. Thus hailestones helped Gods people to destroy their enemies the
Canaanites: The Lord (says the holy story) cast down great stones Josh. 10.
11.
from heaven upon them, and there were more that died of the hailestones, then
they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword. So the waters, even the
river Kishon devoured this host of Sisera. So Abimelech was slain with a piece
of a millstone. Absalon by an oak catching hold of his long hair, (his
ornament) Judge 9. 53. 2. Sam. 1^. 9.
Chorah swallowed up of the earth. So a wallfel upon seven and twenty thousand
Numb 16. 31 32. 1. King. 20. 30.
Aramites that escaped the battle.

The Sun also stood still in the midst of the heaven, and hasted not to go
down for a whole day: and this was to the end it might the longer Josh. 10. 12.
give light, and be an help to Joshua and the people to avenge their enemies.
And (to add this one thing to the former,) I affirm, that there are not the
meanest nor basest creatures, but they are harnessed as men of war, to fight in
the Lords cause, and at his commandment, against the wicked, as the many
plagues cast upon Pharaoh, I mean the lice, flies, grasshoppers, Exodus 8. and
9. and 10. chap.
and the like, even they (I say) may testify. So that in this one respect, in
that neither the friends of the wicked shall be faithful to them, when God
will otherwise have it; and namely when they are unfaithful to him, but that
he himself and his creature shall be armed against them, what can be said
less then this, even woe be unto them. But infinite are the other plagues that
hang over them, and do often times meet with, and take hold of them: besides
that they are every hour in danger, when some kind of fearful death or other
shall sweep them away to carry them to their last and uttermost ruin. So
that, as I note some of the woeful judgments that hang over them, or be
already upon them; so if there were many more particulars set down as they
might be, with the intolerable and most terrible pains of the damned, one
would think there were small cause, why any should flock Note.
to their company, or long and desire to be of them, and to taste of their
dainties. And yet they are at this day, (which is so much the more to be
bewailed,) as the sand of the sea, and swarm in all places; that for my part
(I say) when I cannot but know it to be so, and think upon it, and what little
hope there is to reclaim the most of them; Oh that mine eyes were a fountain
of Ier. 9. 1.
tears, that I might weep bitterly for the woe and loss of so many people.
If it seem strange which has been said of the multitudes of them that shall
perish, Romans 9. 27. Mat. 20. 16.
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Though Israel be as the sand of the
sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved. And although I censure not men by the
mischances as they are called, that befall them (but are indeed the just
judgments of God upon them) sithence neither all wicked men are thus punished,
nor all thus handled are wicked men: yet seeing this is the lot of the ungodly,
and the portion of their cup which their wicked life has brought upon them,
let none of them ease their stomachs by charging God, neither wash off all with
crying out of their hard fortune and hap, as they count it; their only hope
(if any be) is to believe and bewail it. Neither let the godly call into
question the provident care of their loving father, because they see that
oftentimes these casualties and calamities betide them, but cleave more firmly
to the promises and the whole truth of the word, believing that (seeing they
are at amity and peace with the Lord) he can make all creatures instruments of
their good; and not only their friends faithful to them, both in heaven and
earth; yea their very enemies to be at one with them, and more trusty to
them, then they are one to another. And if God thus tender their whole person,
then their souls be precious in his eyes, and their bodies (no man doubts)
are also regarded of him, and both are safe under his protection. Mat. 4. 6.


But now to speak a little of Iaels faithfulness, though a like point to this
An Object.
has been handled, yet her action in alluring Sisera into her tent (with
promise that he should be safe there, and bidding him not fear,) and yet
murdering him afterward so cruelly (as it seems) this (I say) beside that I
have said of it, is thought to be so far from the trustiness which should
be in them, who undertake the safety of those whom they receive into their
houses, that it is counted rather barbarous cruelty and treachery. And the more
to urge an answer hereunto, it is objected, that it has always been as well
the care as the credit of such as take strangers into their custody, to see
the^ safely kept in their houses from annoyance and danger. Iure hospitij, as
we say, that Gen 19. 8.
is, by the right due to them by those that receive them. The example of Lot is
alleged, who for the defense of those strangers that turned in unto him,
offered much inconvenience to himself, and his daughters, that he might free
the strangers whom he received, from injury. The like is said of the care
Judge. 19. 23.
of that old man (mentioned hereafter in this book) to the Leuite and his
concubine, whom he had received as strangers into his house. Hereupon and by
the like, it is concluded, that as it were by an universal law, the promises
that are made to strangers for their safety, should be inuiolably kept. The
very Barbarians showed much kindness in a like case, as we read in the Act.
28. 10.
book of the Acts to Paul and his company entertaining them kindly, yea and
did more also then that unto them, for they laded them with necessaries at
their departing.

To all that has been said of faithfulness to be showed to such as it is
Answ.
promised to, as Iael did: I answer, that I am of the same mind, that it ought
to be so; and the Scripture does straitely urge the same. But yet we must
know, that no bands of familiarity and equity are so nearly joined together,
and so just, but that if God for causes best known to him, command otherwise,
they are to be broken. And so it may seem to be of this act of Iael. For
seeing the Lord had now cursed, and commanded to be destroyed, these
Canaanites, and Sisera their captain, therefore neither she nor any other
might here take upon them to save or spare them, but do to them as God
directed them, and so she did. Thus the Levites followed and Exodus 32. 27.
obeyed Moses in killing their friends and kindred, who had committed idolatry
with the Calfe which they had made, and pleased God highly in so doing. In this
respect, and by virtue of this commandment of God, Abraham went about to kill
his son: and they that think foolish pity ought to be showed contrary to
the word of God, let them remember what befell the King of Israel, who when he
had spared Benhadad the King of Aram, 1. King. 20. 42.
contrary to the word of God, was reproved by the Prophet at the commandment
of God, in these words; Because thou have let go out of thy hands a man whom I
appointed to die, thy life shall go for his life. And therefore to return to
Iael, forasmuch as I see, that the Lord was the only governor of this work,
and commended her for it, in the next chapter, by Debora, yea pronounced her
blessed, when the action of killing Sisera is spoken of; therefore I conclude,
that she being certainly persuaded of Gods will in that which she did, and
commanded of God so to do; her deceiving of his hope, was no more since in
her, then Abraham's attempt to kill his son was, or the Levites sleying of
their kindred for their idolatry. And this for answering the question. The
doctrine has been taught already, that we have no authority to The use of the
answer.
follow her example, but the word, whereby our actions must be guided as by a
rule, and by no example without it. Thus we have seen (as I said in the
beginning of the chapter) that the Lord by Barak, Debora, and Iael, subdued
Sisera with his huge army.

It follows:

Verse. 22. And behold, as Barak pursued after Sisera, Iael came out to meet
him, and said, Come, and I will show thee the man whom thou seek, and when
he came into her tent, behold Sisera lay dead, and the nail in his temples.

Verse. 23. So God brought down Iabin the King of Canaan that day before the
children of Israel.

Verse. 24. And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed
against Iabin the King of Canaan, until they had destroyed Iabin King of
Canaan.

NOw it is showed, how Iael came out to meet Barak, who not finding The sense
of these 3. verses.
Sisera among those who were slain, followed after him; and she told him what
she had done unto him, and thus she prevented Barak, lest he should weary
himself with seeking him, and be grieved when he found him not, and he came
into her tent, and found it so. And by Baraks pursuing him, it appears that
Sisera was not deceived in that he feared it, and warned Iael to prevent it.
Likewise it appears here, that the Lord delivered his people out of the hands
of Iabin, and destroyed him. Here let us note two or three things, and so come
to an end of the whole chapter. And first, though Iael must embrace and hold
peace with Iabin, yet we see her heart Doct.
went not with him, neither did she like his cruelty and oppression of Gods
people, but sought to turn it away, and she rejoiced to see the people of God
to prevail, and to help them all that she could, as Nehemiah and Ester did,
using their favor they found with Kings, to this end. It teaches, that the
godly do give good testimony how they dislike it, when the wicked Doct. verse.
22. 23.
rule, and have all in their hands: as Iael did here, by her worthy helping to
beat down Iabins and Siseras power. For (as Solomon says) when they bear
rule, the people sigh. And contrarily, what joy they have, when God gives them
godly guides, and makes them to prosper, such as Moses and Joshua Prou. 29. 2.
were, with other, who did more advance the Lord and his true worship, as it
became them, then they did themselves. And so it is in meaner estates, that we
have great cause to praise God, when he feebleth and disgraceth the ungodly,
and prospers the enterprises of his servants, in any place of superiority
and government, and so in meaner conditions. And let all such as are under
them, glorify God by bringing forth much fruit, when they enjoy such
liberties, and let them fervently entreat (for much good may be John 15. 9.
done in such times) the Lord when it is otherwise, to change it: remembering
that which is written in the Psalm: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they
Psalm. 122. 62.
shall prosper that love thee, I will procure thy peace, etc.

Further we may learn, that as Barak pursuing Sisera, as he was commanded,
Doct. 2. out of all these verses.
obtained a great blessing of God; so shall all that incline their hearts to
follow the commandments of God with a pure heart. For it is the fruit of Gods
promise, and he is not pleased, if we walking wisely and diligently in Psalm.
19. 11.
our calling, do not believe the same. For through vnbeleese, we deprive God
of his honor, and our selves of our own due, which he has freely and
graciously bequeathed us. But contrarily, by giving credit to God, and walking
in a good course, (as frailty will permit) we may in reverence, and yet in
confidence, look surely for blessing, either outward with other, or at the
least, the inward joy of a good conscience, that is as continual feasting,
which is always a companion in such a case. And therefore great pity it is
that we should through our own folly, at any time, deprive our selves of such
a benefit. And especially this blessing we may enjoy by faithful discharging
of our duties, that as Barak here heard by Iael the good tidings concerning
Sisera that she had slain him; even so, much good shall we reap by the
members of the Church to the gladding of our hearts: It is one of the fruits
of well doing, which follows it, as the shadow does the body: as good
report, and success in things, and encouragement to go forward. Whereas if
our ways be crooked, and evil in the sight of the Lord, we may look for no
better in places where we come, but to hear of that which will sting us, as
the coals of Juniper. And from hence are many of the cries and complaints that
we hear: for men's ill doings are rung about their ears, with reproach,
threatenings of them, and such like, as do make them take little joy in their
lives. So on the contrary, many shall be the comforts of them that do well.
And as Iael here did not a little glad the heart of Barak, by telling him of
the death of Sisera the chief enemy of Gods people, while he pursued after
him; so it is the part and duty of all Gods people to bring joy and gladness
to their brethren, as they are able, and to keep sorrow and grief from them
by all means, as occasion shall be offered. And this should be one special
fruit of the communion and fellowship of Gods servants here on earth. But in
as much as for all Barak pursuing of Sisera, yet he slew him not himself, but
Iael. Here Barak saw the Doct. 3.
word of God lively verified, which Debora had spoken of unto him before in the
9. verse, to wit, that the honor of that victory should not go to him, but to
a woman, as we see it did to Iael. And even so, if we mark, we shall as
clearly see the same, when we have offended against the Lord, that one or
other chastisement shall meet with us, and seize upon us, and if it be not
with us after we have sinned, as if an arrow should pearce through our liver,
Prou. 7. 23.
for the sorrow we conceive for it, be we well assured it is behind and to
come, and in the mean while, or one time or other, we shall carry some mark
of our disobedience, as Barak did here, for that was the word of the Lord that
it should be so, as Debora said, I will go with thee, but the honor of the
victory shall not be thine: as has been noted before with the use thereof.

Lastly, we may see by this subduing of Sisera, and destroying his mightie^
Doct. verse. 24.
army, how easily the Lord can break the forces of his enemies, and pull
down, and turn away their wrath and rage from his people, (as a man would
turn the rivers of waters, which way he lists) or cut off their persons from
the earth; and if it were not so, what good man could live by them? And what a
comfort that may be to Gods people, in that the Lord cuts off their enemies in
due season, is not hard to conceive, when we consider what a scourge and plague
one man often times is to another, being enraged and incensed, even a wolf, nay
a devil. But weight a little, and behold, in time, the arrow of Gods
deliverance to his, and shame and confusion upon his impenitent and implacable
enemies, except (as is rather to be desired) he change their hearts. But of
this more largely before verse. 15. Thus much for this chapter: I will end this
Sermon with the beginning of the next.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER ON THE Book of IVDGES.
Verse. 1. Then sang Debora and Barak the son of Abinoam, the same day,
saying; Verse. 2. Praise ye the Lord, for the revenging of Israel, and for the
people that offered themselves willingly. Verse. 3. Hear ye Kings, hearken ye
Princes, I, even I, will sing unto the Lord, I will sing praise to the Lord God
of Israel.
THe sum of this Chapter is a praising of God by Debora and Barak, The sum
and parts of this Chapter.
after the victory.

The parts of it are three: the first is, one point of their song consisting in
offering praises to God, to verse. 14. The second lays out the goodness of
God to Israel sundry ways in this battle, and namely three: first, she
brings in them that did help in it, to verse. 19. by occasion whereof,
mention is made of such as did not help. Secondly, she shows how
vnprosperously it fell out against the Canaanites in the battle, to verse. 23.
Thirdly, the hinderers of the victory from Israel, are cursed, and Iael that
did help to get it them, is pronounced blessed, to verse. 28. The third part of
the chapter shows how in their song they mocked the boasting of Siseras
friends, to verse. 31. and so as an addition thereto, they shut up the song with
a prayer in the 31. verse.

The first part of the Chapter.
NOw to leave the two last parts, to be considered of in their due place, I
come to the first, and that is their song, which contains three things. The
first that is in their song, is this; that they exhort the Israelites to praise
God with them for those that offered themselves willingly to the battle, in
the two first verses; and the Kings and governors, that were strangers, to
hear what they said, and that is in the third verse. In the second part, and
next verses following, they set down the Lords mercies long before powered out
on their fathers, and now lately to them in the deliverance of his people, to
the eighth verse, and exhort them to praise God who inioyed the commodities
that came by the victory, to the twelfth verse. The third thing is, that Debora
stirs up her self again to sing praise to God, and Barak to the triumph,
verse. 12. 13.

Now to begin with the first and second verses, wherein they exhort Israel
Doct. verse. 1.
to praise God with them, before they begin the song: for they enjoyed the
benefit of deliverance, as well as they that got the victory: It teaches,
that all such as receive Gods benefits, do owe this duty of praise to him,
and that the heart and the tongue, if it may be, ought to go together in that
action. The Lord looks for it, and the Church has always practiced it, Luke
17. 17.
though not in a like manner. As Moses and Miriam did full solemnly at the
Exodus 15. 1.
drowning of Pharaoh and his charets: so the women for the many victories that
God granted to Israel, came forth singing in this manner: Saul has killed his
thousand, and David his ten thousand. Likewise Ezechias after his 1. Sam. 18.
6.
recovery, with Anna the mother of Samuel, and many other. And it was Isai.
38. 9. etc.
the use and practice of Gods servants to pen their songs, and often to
repeat them, to quicken the memorial of Gods benefits and his kindness, in
their own and the hearts of other, and to knit themselves more nearly to him
by this part of his service performed in Christ Jesus, according to his will.

Agreeable to this is the exhortation of the Apostle, In all things be
thankful: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
for as Gods mercies are renewed every morning, so good reason, that our Lamen.
3. 23.
thanks should be also. And as it is acceptable to God, so it is no small
benefit that redoundeth thereby to our selves, for it dries up the bitterness
that is ready to rise up in us by occasion of Gods afflicting us, and
crucifieth and scatters such like poisons as lie lurking in our hearts;
thankfulness, I say, Note.
chaseth them away, and suffers them to have no place there. Indeed it is
proper to Gods people to offer to him this duty, even as it is said, in Sion
is God praised, the hypocrites (as the Pharisie, who glosingly uttered these
Psalm 65. 1. Luke 18. 11.
words, Lord I thank thee, that I am not as other men) they cannot praise him,
but the consent of minds and hearts sanctified, as the sweet harmony in Note.
music, this only can do it, and teach others the skill to do it also. As
therefore the thanks of most men (wanting the feeling of Gods love and
blessings) is mere dissimulation and taking Gods name in vain: so it is much
to be lamented, that the better sort (whom it would become so well) stir
themselves up so little and slowly hereto. For thanksgiving, as confession and
supplication, should be seasoned and accompanied with feruencie, as a
companion: which amplifieth and (as Debora here did) makes songs of the
blessings which others pass over in silence: besides the affection it self,
which is enlarged in a more then common manner, especially being quickened (as
she here was) by some new or rare testimony of Gods love, either bodily or
spiritual mercies, or deliverances from evil of both sorts. But here we may
say, Plenty makes us barren: for though we have so much cause of thanks, that
we can look on no side, but we may see many: in so much as we be bound to
show it in things, yet most men know neither how to begin, nor to make an end.
The daily benefit of health, recovery out of diseases, protection from
dangerous casualties, peace of land, and peace in family, posterity, thriuing
in the world, credit, our haruests and commodities, nay our Sabbath and
Communion, in the Gospel and the fruits of it; who (may it be thought) makes
his daily song of these, adding hereto personal benefits, which every one
receives in his own person. Many men's prayers consist of suite and request
making to God, without any thanks either adjoined or following, as in the nine
lepers is to be seen; others give thanks in words, but they want wings to
lift them up to heaven, I mean, faith, feruencie and love. And the best think
it enough to mumble a little inward thanks, and that sometimes, for some
blessings: but who is the man of many, that makes his thanks break out into
songs? Songs are more then common praises. Christians should have two books,
in the one to record their faults and falls; in the other to register Gods
benefits: both should serve to set them a work in confession and thanks. For
thanks never go alone without other graces: A thankful heart is patient
also, humble, faithful, Note.
conscionable, dutiful: by thanksgiving we quicken up our faith, zeal, fear
of God, and renew our covenants daily: for how can we dishonor him, when we
profess our selves to be infinitely beholding to? This, besides that it
iustleth out iangling, contention, and ill spending the time; so it dries up
the froth of our evil hearts, fretting, coffeehouse, impatience, hardness
of heart, and all of the same kind, as I have said. In a word, he that
praises God aright, worships him aright, as we see in the Psalm: and so to
Psalm. 50. 23.
say much in one word, he that is thankful is a good Christian. Oh then let us
look better to this, and make amends for our arrearages herein. For he that
looks we should be thankful for affliction, as that holy man Job was, much
more (a man would think) looks that it should be so for blessings, which most
justly by many degrees do more challenge it. Let every one that of the Israel of
God say, The mercies of the Lord continue for ever. Let it not seem tedious to
recount old mercies, both the greatest of redemption, and the lesser of
preservation: yea help we our selves forward mutually, as Barak and Debora
here did sing in consort. Doubtless an unthankful life, is Note.
a sottish, hellish life, ouergrowne with all that naught is, and therefore
loathsome to a Christian. He that says, I would I could do every duty as well
as this of thanks, is a fool, not knowing what he says, he prates like a
Parrot. Thankfulness is not without godliness. But I cannot well proceed
further as this time.

THE THIRTIETH SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
WE have heard largely of thanksgiving in the former sermon with the causes,
manner and necessity thereof; Doct. 2. in verse. 1.
now beside the action of thanksgiving, which I have spoken of, the
circumstance of time is also to be marked; that is to say, that they did it
the same day: for so it is set down in the holy story: then sang Debora and
Barak the same day. This teaches us not to make delay in any good thing, but
use the opportunity in due season, and so for this duty of giving thanks. And
while the occasion offered of so doing is fresh and in remembrance, the mind
feeds the affection with more plentiful matter, that it may be stirred up
more fervently to perform that duty: whereas in time things grow stale and
are forgotten; yea and that quickly: so that we had need to take the vantage
against our bad memories, and blockish hearts, by such means. And although
ordinarily we should perform this duty, three times a day in solemn manner;
namely in the morning, evening, and at noone tide, yet otherwise beside that,
as Psalm 55 17.
God shall give us occasion by more then common benefits and deliverances, we
should provoke our selves hereunto; and namely, as Saint James says, Note.
when one is merry or disposed to joy let him not suffer that affection to
vanish, but express and utter it to God in singing praises. And so afterward
we ought to continue the memory of his infinite mercies throughout our whole
life, and to this end write them, (we that can) that whereas they grow to a
multitude in time, and all cannot always be remembered, as were to be wished
in some sort; yet at least wise, when we read them over, we may readily
renew (as we shall see cause) our thanks to God for them. But great is men's
blockishnesse, as I have said, and endless wandering by swarms of cogitations
after other things, which hinder this, whereby they see not cause hereof; and
when they do, yet their slothfulness is such, that they delay and defer to
pay this due to God, till their appetite be gone, and afterward lets and
hindrances coming in the way break it off, so that they cannot perform it.
And this be said of thanks.

In the second verse she shows why God should be praised: one cause Verse. 2.
was, for that he had been avenged of his enemies in the behalf of the people,
and for their sakes: for though he had long used them as executioners of wrath
against his disobedient people, yet now their sin was come to the top, and
his peoples sin was repented of; therefore their turn was come about now to be
brought to punishment. Another cause of their thanks for the people Zebulun
and Naphtali, who had willingly offered themselves to follow Barak against
Sisera, although he had no authority over them before. Both these are
expressed in this verse, in these words; Praise ye the Lord, for auenging of
Israel, and for the people that offered themselves willingly. Hereby we
learn, first, that God is the revenger of the Doct verse 2.
injuries and wrongs of his people, even as he himself says; Vengeance is
Romans 12. 19.
mine, and I will repay says the Lord: yea, he will do it in his due time,
and that Luke 18. 7.
right soon: for so he says, and we had need to mark it. If, says he, the
unrighteous Judge will do right to the poor widow, lest she troubling him
with often suing unto him, should at last weary him: shall not God avenge his
elect which cry day and night unto him, yea though it be long? I tell you 2.
These. 1. 6.
he will avenge them quickly, and recompense tribulation to them that trouble
his, as the Apostle speaks. Wait we therefore, he has not forgotten
himself; but as the Wise man says, If thou see the oppression of the
Eccles. 5. 7.
poor, there is a greater then the oppressor. But though there might much more
be said of this point to the like purpose, yet who believes these things?
according to the words of our Savior, When the son of man comes, shall
Luke 18. 8.
he find faith on the earth? teaching us, how hardly men should believe,
though he gave therein a fearful watchword thereof, to all that should come
after, which should make us the better to look to it: so this complaint may as
justly be made still at this day, that we are dull and slow of heart to
believe this and such other truths as were uttered to us by the Prophets and
Luke 24. 25.
Apostles. But that is our woe and misery; for why should we not rest quietly,
while the Lord takes part with us that are his children, and gives us so fair
and strong encouragement?

But let us pass to the next point in this verse. The other thing in Doct. 2.
in verse. 2.
this verse is this, that the people should praise God for those that offered
themselves readily and willingly to pursue Gods enemies, which teaches, that
such as do the work of God, should go about it willingly and cherefully. For
as he loves a cheerful giver, so he does a cheerful doer 2. Cor. 9. 7.
of that which he commands: and contrarily, Cursed is he that does the Lords
business negligently. It is therefore highly to be rejoiced in, and God much
Ier. 49. 2.
to be praised for it, where men are forward in Gods matters, and where the
waightier and more excellent they be, the more courage and delight men Note.
have in the taking of them in hand. Among the which I reckon the preaching of
the Gospel and the profession of it, with the duties of our particular
callings, and such like, wherein to be forward and cheerful, as people be in hay
and harvest, and in going to markets and faires; it honors God highly, and
all such as behold it, ought to praise God heartily for giving such gifts to
men, as are rarely to be seen among them: for they that do so, show plainly
that they look for a reward from God, when they can go roundly and readily
about business, which other men so aukely go about. For the most part men be
too forward and ready to leaud company keeping, and to the sins of the time,
and other works of the flesh; but when they should obey the Lord, or be set
about any good work, especially, whereof no profit is like to redound to them,
they go most aukely and untowardly about it; even as the evil debtor, who is
to do work to his creditour to pay him. And therefore fearful and grievous
is the sin of those loose livers, who if any be forwarder and zealouser in
Gods matters then other, in duty doing to him ward, them they mock and
discourage, who yet sin grievously, in that they be not companions with them.
But of this the less, because I have spoken of it in the former chapter. Thus
much of this verse.

Now in the next, in calling Princes and great persons to harken, as they Verse.
3.
do in this verse; it is to teach them to know from whence their victories and
all greatness come, and to ascribe them to the Lord, according to Christ's words
in the prayer, [thine (O father) is kingdom, power, and glory for ever:] as
for them, there is not the least jot of the praise thereof due to them, God
honors them, in that he will make them his instruments therein, and furnish
them with any gifts to that purpose, I mean, to do him service. And yet as
though they were of absolute power of themselves, forgetting the Lord that
advanced them, they ascribe their great acts and victories to themselves: as
Senacherib against Hezechia, and Benhadad against Ahab; yea 2. King. 19. 36. 1.
King 20. 3.
and this they did both of them, before they had got the victory, and did not
tarry till they had conquered their enemies, and then crow over them, (which
yet had been their great sin) and prided themselves in that they had done, as
Nabuchadnezzar in his Babell; and therefore they were put to shame, both of
them most worthily, being themselves brought under in a manner fit for such
braggers, as would thrust the Lord out from helping them; nay rather they
challenged even him, and opposed themselves against him, as is to be seen in
the story of both. And therefore in one battle Benhadad lost an hundred and
seven and twenty thousand men, so that he and his, even a few that were left
with him, were constrained to fly; and in the other battle, wherein very many
of his men were slain, he was brought to greater shame and abacement, as his
last refuge; to wit, his servants to go to the King of Israel with ropes about
their necks, to entreat for their lives. And as for Senacherib, the Angel of
the Lord flue an hundred four 2. King. 19. 35.
score and five thousand of them in one night: and such success, at least in
the end have all such, as are like to them. Hence it is that the Scripture (for
the further bewraying the pride and vanity of such) uses these phrases; The
Lord smote Benjamin before Israel. The Lord fought for Israel. And again,
stand still and behold the salvation of the Lord, etc. And among other Exodus
14. 13.
names the Lord is called, strong in battle, and the Lord of hosts. And surely
if a sparrow fall not to the ground without his will, neither is the lot without
his disposition; much more do the events and hazards of war depend upon his
providence, being often times matters of as great weight, as the alteration of
kingdoms and estates come to. Now if Princes must know their victories and
honor are given them of God; then much more we inferiors ought to learn it
well, that we are beggars, and have nothing; nay we are worse then naught,
rather then that we have ought to glory of, as it would soon appear, if we
could be brought to consider aright of it, even what infection is in us to
taint and poison all our actions; or if the Lord should but thrust at us for
our evil deeds, but even (as it were) with his little finger.

Besides, in this verse Debora declares that she will, yea (repeating her
Doct. 2.
words) that she will praise the Lord; whereby it appears she called Barak
to it her self, and shows, that she was so lively quickened and stirred up
with the feeling of Gods goodness declared unto them, that she would do that
duty, if no other did. For as the whole Church of God fared the better for
this victory; so she acknowledged her self a part, to have received great
benefit thereby also; and therefore as she was foremost in the onset, so is she
first in thanksgiving, and put not off the duty to the rest of the people, but
rather goes before other therein. And endued so God works in his often times,
that his servants are so ravished with thinking upon his loving kindness, Note.
that they cannot be satisfied with prayer and praise giving to God in public
among other, but they must do it also by themselves alone, as David says; I
will praise God in the congregation, and I will praise him in secret: and they
are so bent unto it, that if other should not, yet they themselves, and as many
as they can provoke, will do it, as the noble man Joshua said; If al run Josh.
24. 15.
to idolatry, I and mine will serve the Lord. And if we consider it well, how
few weigh Gods goodness in public blessings, (as in the late discovery of
the treason) although many praise God openly for fashion, and in ceremony, we
shall find it no more then needs, to practice this duty alone by our selves
apart, as we read of the tribes often times, as well as among others; else would
not our Savior have willed us to go alone, every one by himself into his
chamber to pray, as Isaac also did in the fields, how little soever many Mat
66. Genesis 24. 63.
be acquainted therewith; and therefore find the less benefit by the prayers
and thanksgiving, which they make with others (they being in great likelihood
made but in hypocrisy) or which others make for them. Every man's own soul
best knows what cause he has of thanks, better then others, and accordingly
let him profess it, though there be not many which will be brought to it. And
of Deboras first words in the song wherein she stirred up the Israelites to
praise God, and the reasons why, thus much be said.

Verse. 4. Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou departed out of the
field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens rained, the clouds also
dropped water.

5. The mountains melted before the Lord, as did that Sinai before the Lord
God of Israel.

6. In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Iael, the high
ways were unoccupied, and the travelers walked through by ways.

7 The towns were not inhabited: they decayed, I say, in Israel, till I Debora
came up, who rose up a mother in Israel.

IN the first of these two verses, which also contain the beginning of their
The sum of these verses, and more particularly the fourth and fifth verses.
song, Debora sets down the Lords great mercy in one example to her
forefathers the people of Israel, which had been showed long before: in the
latter two, she makes mention of his goodness toward them at that very time
present. In the great deliverance mentioned in the former chapter, but more
particularly to speak of both, and to begin with the first in the fourth and
fifth verses, we are to know, that this story mentioned by her, contains the
acts that were done by the Lord, after he brought the people of Israel beyond
mount Seir, when Israel (38. years after their going out of Egypt into the
desert) were come near to the land of Canaan: namely, how wonderfully the Lord
took part with his people there, and joined himself unto them against their
enemies. For he going with them in a pillar of fire and a cloud, did terrify
their enemies the Ammorites in such wise, that though the Israelites were
unexperienced in war, and strangers there, and were weak and unfit also for
such work, yet their enemies could not resist them: and not only so, but she
says, that the Lord cast such a fear upon them, as if the earth had trembled,
and great storms and tempests had been cast down from the clouds, and as if
the mountains had melted, and been shaken. By these allegorical speeches she
describes the fear that was smitten into the Amorites at Isreal's coming
near them, when the Lord brought them out of Egypt. And further she adds to
the same end, that even as mount Sinai (for so it must be understood, though
the word (like as) be not expressed) at the Lords coming down upon it, was
shaken and moved; so did the nations at the coming of Israel fear, and were
terrified.

And in laying out Gods kindness thus toward her fathers long before showed
to them, as commonly this is reckoned to be one, that he brought them out of
Egypt through the fearful wilderness to Canaan, in many other Josh. 24. 2
etc. Judge. 2. 1.
places of the Scripture: her meaning is, to declare that he showed not this
favor now of late only to them who lived at that time, but of old and long
ago also to his people in former ages, as they stood in need of his aid Doct.
verse. 4. and 5.
diversely, and that for their sakes also. And if we observe the Scriptures,
(which are a glass of Gods administration and governing of his Church) we
shall see that there is little mention made of other nations of the earth, or
their affairs, but the bent of them is wholly (as it were with a straight
line) directed to the Churches use and benefit, as either to punish or bless
them for his people sake. To this his Church all his works of love, mercy,
justice, wisdom, providence, are referred: for though God be the Savior of
all, yet especially of the faithful in his Church. From whence we are to
learn, that God has in all ages bin bountiful and gracious to his Church, as
well as now; even to our forefathers in their days, and so from age to age as
it is written, his mercy endures for ever. For it has been dear to him, as
the spouse or bride to the Bridegroom. And his love has been more hot then
fire that cannot be quenched with much water. And to this end, he has been so
affected to it, that it might know that he loves it: as he says in Exodus:
If ye will diligently attend to my voice, and keep my covenant, ye shall be my
chief treasure in all the earth, though all the earth be mine. A doctrine most
Exodus 19. 5.
needful to be made use of among us, seeing his people be as dear to him now,
as in any age past, and he did never so clearly testify his love to his
Church in any generation heretofore since Christ, or before, as he has done
to this.

And if it were believed, and we thoroughly persuaded of it, there were nothing
like to draw us more nearly to Christ, nor to set our hearts and delight upon
him, then the often and due meditation and thinking on it: whether we speak of
those who are in Christ already, or of such as lie yet in unbelief, to draw
and persuade them. For these should be better encouraged by many degrees more
then they be now, to labor to taste how good the Lord is: and they who have
already begun, should break through all lets and difficulties (which do much
hold them back) far more easily then now they do, to be united more nearly
unto him their head. Whereas it may be spoken with grief, that in stead
hereof, many professing well, even where Gods love is made known, do cleave
to the pleasures of sin, profits and preferments, howsoever come by, rather
then to strive to enter in at the straight gate: and the best are too backward,
considering that if we have any treasure in heaven, our hearts must needs be
there also set on heavenly things: but they who mind earthly things above
other, which should be all in all with them, and do as seldom think rightly
of either of both, and yet would be thought to do otherwise, are no beauty
but a blemish to the Christian life. Oh how lamentable is it then, that so many
still remain! (as the old world out of the Arc, and the latter world out of
the Commonwealth of Israel) so these even as aliants from the Church. For
though all cry, The Church, The Church, because they hear there is no mercy,
blessing, or salvation out of the Church; yet as if Baptism were sufficient,
they seek not the privileges of the Church; effectual calling, faith,
charity and sanctification, and the fruits thereof; and therefore they are
still little better then the scumme and ofscouring of the common band of the
wicked; who having no title, no promise, no God, no hope, but are out of Gods
precinct and government: and therefore we may say of these, The Church is
wanting in the Church. All Gods mercy, and whatsoever is excellent in him, are
out of their reach; no such privileges appertain unto them, because they are
not separated from the wicked, whom the soul of the Lord abhors. Again, in
that God made the enemies afraid of his Doct. 2.
people at their coming thither, it was his great love toward them to honor
them so highly among those who contemned and hated them: and if he had not so
favored and taken part with them, they had been utterly discouraged, and
overwhelmed by them. And he would teach us thereby, that though his children be
basely esteemed, and contemptible among the profane worldlings, who are busily
set to follow their pleasures and profits, scorning religion as too base for
them, yet he makes them often afraid of them, when it pleases him, and their
consciences do accuse them, that seeing their own ways are evil, and that
the others good, and do please him, that they shall come to judgment, when the
other shall lift up their heads and rejoice. I herefore it is said, that Herod
feared John Baptist, and when he had Mark. 6. 20.
beheaded him, yet hearing that Christ's fame was great a little after, he was
afraid that he had been John, and that he was risen again from the dead, to be
revenged of him. So when the judgment of God fell upon Ananias and Saphira for
their dissembling, and the people saw that God did honor Acts 5. 11. 12.
his Apostles, and magnify their ministry among many, it is said that great
fear came upon the wicked, who knew that they lived not after the Apostles
doctrine, neither liked their course: insomuch, as they durst not through an
accusing conscience, join themselves to them whom God honored, for fear
least they should have been brought forth openly, and bewrayed by some
judgment of God, for their halting, as Ananias was. So Felix though he were
Paul's Judge, yet trembled, and was afraid, when he heard Acts 24. 25.
him boldly to preach of justice and temperance, meet for his place, but far
from him, and of the judgment to come; and yet Paul himself was then without
all fear thereof. Sehon and Og trembled, and were afraid, to see the high hand
and outstretched arm of the Lord, wherewith Israel was carried.

It was not for naught, that the Lord expostulated so with the man who came
among those that were bidden to the feast, not having on his wedding Matthew. 22.
12.
garment: saying unto him, What do thou here without it? for the man was
even speechless, and could not for fear and astonishment utter his words. The
Lord will have all such to know, that the company of his faithful people is
not for the profane, and for scorners; by the which example, and many other
such, he has (as it were) put a bridle in the mouths of many, that though
they despise Gods people, yet they shall not be without fear of them: and
therefore he cast the dread of his people upon them, as here it is said. And
has it not been seen in the late persecution of the Note.
Protestants in this land in the time of Popery, which some yet alive can
testify to be true, that many of the persecutors were more terrified in
hearing their answers to them, and beholding the boldness and courage that was
in them, then the Martyrs themselves were terrified by their sentence of death
read and pronounced against them. And be we no less assured of this, that many
ill disposed people, who would wish that there were neither God, nor judgment,
nor any better livers then themselves, yet they are constrained of times to
say, the godly life is best, and yet fret to see it in the practisers of it,
being void of it themselves. Oh therefore, happy is the people whose God is
the Lord Iehoua, and blessed are they that have him for their King. And let
this uphold, content, and delight all such, though they seem to be the vilest
and most miserable of all other, God will not forget their longing to be
dissolved, and to be with him, and know they, while they do so, their worst
day in the week shall be far better, then the others best in the year. And
howl ye despisers, and tremble and vanish away, for that ye see, great Act.
13. 41.
is their portion, whom ye hate, with the Almighty, and your selves cast out
of his favor and habitation; and even so in your adversity and day of Gods
visiting you (as Dives in hell had sense thereof) ye do acknowledge it. The
old world scoffed at Noah his building the Arc, till the flood came, and then
his former preaching terrified them. In like manner, I say, if we walked in our
innocence with vprightnes and reverence among men, the Lord would work
astonishment in the wicked and reprobates, and the very godliness of his
people should convince and amase the beholders and contemners, as Pharaos
troops were, when they said, The Lord fights against Exodus 14. 25.
us for Israel.

The next verses I refer to be handled in the next Sermon.

THE THIRTY ONE SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw (to go forward) these two next verses are the verse. 6. 7. The more clear
meaning of the^.
sixth and seventh: wherein is set down their late received favor of God, as
in the two former verses, his love of old to their fathers has been spoken of.
In these two, to the end that this their deliverance by the Lord may be seen
to be the greater, and his love to them, she lays out the desolation that
they were in before the victory, that one contrary might the better be seen
by the other. The holy Ghost therefore shows, in what afflicted state the
Church of God was by reason of their sin, and that from the death of Ehud
till Debora got the full victory. For though Shamger and Iael did worthily and
valiantly in their place, yet Israel was sore oppressed after the death of the
one, and before the great act of the other; so as passage by the high ways,
traffic, judgment, and habitation in their villages, were intercepted until
now: and Israel was constrained to keep themselves in strong and well fenced
Cities, unless they would become a prey to the Canaanites. And this oppression
continued by Iabin, till Debora was raised up by God, and till her government
began. Of Iael we read not of any great thing that she did before, neither is
it like that she had done any, because she had peace with Iabin, and Sisera
also fled to her as to a trusty friend, and therefore it is like that she is
named with Shamger for honor sake, because she lived in these troublesome and
dangerous times, and because she did one worthy piece of service afterward.

And here by these calamities of the people of Israel, and the desolation Doct.
that they had been in, when all good liberties and pleasant things were taken
from them, it is right worthy our consideration, to think what a favor of
God it is, that together with the true preaching of the Gospel, all the
forementioned commodities are enjoyed of us; namely, outward peace in the land,
and that we may dwell safely under our vine and fig tree, and may 1. King. 4.
25. Nehem. 8. 10.
eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet, that we may safely travel and
pass throughout all places and countries of this dominion, by the protection
of good laws, and that we have exchange of our commodities with the benefit of
good neighborhood, and husbandry, to the preservation of our lives, and the
maintaining of our families, etc. All these this people had been deprived of;
whereas the want of any of them would soon drive us to complain heavily, and
cry out. Oh we do little consider how deeply, yea how Note.
infinitely we are bound to to the Lord for these liberties, and for the great
good we may reap and enjoy thereby. And yet these many good things which the
Lord has usually bestowed upon us, and daily does, (blessed be his holy name
therefore) we think because all the land enjoys them as well as our selves,
we owe no special duty of acknowledging them, more then we see the most do,
which is not worth the speaking of; nay we look for them by due and good
right; and which is worst of all) many do spend them wastfully, and to the
maintaining and increasing of diverse sins among them, which we durst not do
if wealth and quietness were wanting: so truly the Wise man speaks of one of
them; [the rich man's riches are his Prou. 18. 11.
strong city, and as an high wall in his imagination. And in a word, we have so
little leisure to think of God his goodness, that by abusing his benefits we
have to bring upon our selves the same misery which these were in, under, and
especially after this Shamgar, and before God stirred up this Debora among them.

Oh, how do we provoke our good God to cast us into some fore calamities, as
they here were in, that we might cry to him by feeling the smart thereof, as
some daily do, whom God would have to be examples to the rest, lest many
should taste of their diet? but fearful it is for all this, to see how few are
the better for all the judgments of God that be upon themselves, or that they
behold others for the same sins which they both commit boldly, but run on
till their course come to suffer (yet) worse and heavier things at Gods hands
for them. But while we cannot amend it in others, let us bewail it in them,
which is a right property of true love; praying also for them, and for our own
parts; let this example of these their calamities, so many and grievous as have
been spoken of, cause us to account of Gods goodness so highly, in withholding
them from us, that they may make us fruitful thereby in every good work,
especially seeing we have many other good encouragements thereto: and also for
that when we want them, we say we can do little good without them. But now
in that she adds, Till I, even I Debora arose] we must take it far
otherwise then it sounds; not ascribing her words to a passion of womanish
impotencie The clearing of the next part of the verse.
and boasting, much less to a contempt of Barak, who was the instrument of the
victory, as well as her self; but to the heavenly exaltation of her spirit,
lifted up pathetically to praise the Lord for the great deliverance wrought by
her: as we see the like in David, in the Psalms; Paul, and others. And Doct. 2.
this deliverance being wrought by Debora, teaches, that all the forementioned
calamities, being removed from the people, by her their governor at that time,
it teaches I say, what great things the Lord works by the Magistrate and
governor, as he did by her, she being at that time the same to the people,
even their Judge in Israel. But indeed this is done especially when they are
zealous for Gods matters, and do their duties in their places, and have the
spirit and affection of her, even to be mother like unto the people, who as
she gave counsel to her inferiors, as a mother to her children, being a
Prophetess, and delivered them from their enemies, being their Judge: So they
being set over them, as guides and Magistrates, should be unto them who are
committed to their charge, even like minded to her, to wit, to have care that
they may be taught, though they be themselves no Prophets, by such as are
furnished of God to that purpose: and with a motherly care to protect them from
injury and wrong, and to turn the edge of the sword against their enemies.
And thus much of Gods mercies of old, and lately showed on his people, as in
these 4. verses has been declared. But it follows.

Verse. 8. They chose new gods, then was war in the gates. Was there a shield
or spear seen among the forty thousands of Israel?

9. Mine heart is set on the governors of Israel, and on them that are willing
among the people, praise ye the Lord.

10. Speak ye that ride on white Asses, ye that dwell by Middin, and that
walk by the way.

11. For the wife of the archers appeased among the drawers of water: there
shall they rehearse the righteousness of the Lord, his righteousness toward
his towns: then did the people of the Lord go down to the gates.

THe holy story having set down the peoples deliverance out of their The sense
of the eighth verse.
great calamity and oppression from Siseras army, goes on in this eighth
verse, and shows the cause why they were cast upon them, and that was for
their idolatry, by means whereof (it is said) they had no heart to take up
weapon, no not any of them throughout all the tribes, against their enemies. In
the next three verses, all sorts are stirred up and called to praise God, The
sum in general of the other three.
that took benefit by the victory and deliverance, as shall be particularly
showed, when I shall come unto them by the order of the text. Now to begin with
the eighth verse, Barak and Debora utter this in this part of their song, that
then the war began to oppress the Jews, and the enemies to besiege their
cities and gates, where they held their judgment seats, when they had turned
to idolatry: so that this was the cause of their grievous punishment.

By the which we may see how greatly God is displeased with men, when Doct in
verse. 8.
they will run after the sins that they have been forewarned of, and
commanded to take heed of; (even the sins which his soul abhors) as
Israel had often times been admonished of this Idolatry. The Lord will not put it
up at their hands. And who can deny, but that it stands with most sound
reason, that when men, who are but vile worms, shall thus boldly kick up
their heel against their maker, they should smart for it, and not be suffered
to commit such insolency against him unpunished? And therefore he gave us
examples hereof in the Apostate Angels, which kept not their place Jude 6.
that he set them in, and therefore that he threw them down for their
disobedience: and in our first parents whom he drove out of Paradise, when
Genesis 3. 24. Note.
they having so great liberty, as they might have eaten of any fruit in the
garden except one tree; yet counted all little, in respect of that which was
forbidden them, and stood on thorns, till they had cast behind them the
commandment of God, and eaten of that forbidden fruit also. Now if God spared
not the Angels, and our first parents, who were innocent before that their
fall, what may other offenders look for? whose sins are as the hairs of our
head in number?

And in that he deals not thus with wilful transgressors at this day, it is
not for that he should be unjust or carnal in so doing, but he bears much
with them, as all may easily see, and is patient toward them, to this end that
be may thereby bring them to repentance; which if any abuse, they pay for Romans
2. 4. 2. Pet 39.
all their boldness in the end; in so much that he who speedeth best, shall
have small cause to brag of his winnings. And yet he shoaleth out some one Note.
of an hundred, here and there, (not many indeed in comparison of those who
have offended in that kind) whom he strikes by and by with deadly blows, and
sets him on the stage, to publish, as it were, by his woeful example to all
the rest; (though he bare longer with some other, for the cause before
alleged, what he might do to them, yea and in perfect justice execute upon
them. And therefore let all that are wise take warning, while they hold a good
course, to continue it, and they that are out of it, have speedily unto it: and
let none tempt God boldly, to do that which he forbids, for he will not be
mocked, they shall pay dear for their so doing. And yet though God spare them
from outward war and judgments for a time, yet as the Prophet Esaias speaks,
that there is no peace to the ungodly; so they may be sure they shall have
war with him in their minds. And let all praise God, to whom he gives an
heart to shun the evil and sins of the time in which they live. And for
the idolatry of the Church of Rome, I may say most of the Papists do wilfully
and maliciously err against the truth; and some for their pomp and belly,
and many do it of mere superstition, and blind devotion, and custom, as they
received it of their forefathers; seeing they that least offend therein among
the rest, do put Christ out of office in their service they give him, and
honor him as their King, but with a crown of thorns, and a scepter of a reed
in his hand; be it known unto them, that their damnation sleeps not, their
we is at hand: And that they may partly gather by the uncomfortable, yea
fearful death of many Papists and great masters, and maintainers of popery
who for all the boldness in their life time, whereby they bear out matters; yet
when they must die, some cry out they are undone, other cry out of their
religion: and but for the hardness of their hearts, it would be seen in more
of them. And no marvel, seeing they try not their estate what it is? This
being observed, that the greatest offenders among them shall smart most. But
yet this I will say, that for all their devotion and fast cleaving to the
Church of Rome, if it please God, that if they might be brought to hear the
sermons of learned and religious preachers, and to admit of their conferences,
many of them would renounce that trumpery, as standing upon rotten props, and
embrace the truth of the Gospel stablished so strongly.

And further, in that it is said that they could not take up a weapon against
their enemies; no, they had no heart to handle shield or spear, because of
their sin, as idolatry, and other enormities; it plainly shows, that men's
Doct. 2.
sin turns every thing out of course against them, and contrary to the
nature, use and end, for the which it is created and appointed of God: even as
this people durst not take weapon in hand to fight for their lives, their
consciences accusing them, that God would be against them. Wherefore is the
weapon ordained, but for a man's defense against his enemy? and why has God
given courage to man, but that at such a time, I mean of war, and other
necessity, it might be put to use? But behold here was neither of both
employed or set a work, any more then if they had not been at all. When Achan
had troubled Israel, by taking the execrable thing, the Lord tells Joshua, that
therefore they could not stand before their enemies. How Josh. 7. 12. Note.
much more if they themselves had sinned? Oh men's sins turns plenty into
want, courage into timerousnesse, and fainting of heart; and light into
darkness, and all out of kind. Behold what it did in Jeroboam; when he 1.
King. 13. 4.
stretched out his arm against the Prophet of God, for reproving him for his
idolatry at Bethel, his arm was immediately withered and dried up, that he
could not draw it in again. So Gehazi when he had taken most wickedly 2. King.
5. 25.
both money and raiment of Naaman the Syrian, pretending his masters sending
him for it, and after his return had answered his master Elisha with a lie;
marvelous it is to say, and against nature and any sound reason in man's
judgment, what came upon him, even a leprosy forthwith, so that he went out a
leaper as white as snow. And the band of Priests, Jews, Ioh. 18. 6.
and soldiers, that came into the garden to apprehend and take our Savior
Christ, so boldly and trecherously, yet suddenly they went back like drunken
men, and fell to the ground astonished, and unfitted utterly, for such a
purpose as to lay hold of him, and that at one word spoken by our Savior and
yet not in terrifying manner, as he might have done, saying: he was the man
whom they sought. So that in seeking him, they were both lusty and ready to lay
hold of him, yet when they had found him, they could do nothing to him: for
their sin had taken their power and ability from them. For who is able to
reckon up how many ways God has to visit, astonish, and terrify men for
their sin? Therefore among other punishments in Deuteronomy threatened, this
is one, a trembling heart, a sorrowful mind, Deuteronomy 28. 65.
and fear both day and night. And if the Lord should not handle some thus,
other would not be afraid, but would abuse his Majesty, yea and faithful
people also much more grossly would tempt God, then now they dare do, though
even now many do it too boldly, when they forget themselves. But Hypocrites
go very far in sinning boldly, as other do who are like them; therefore
many are apalled among us, some having their wit and reason taken from them;
some become foolish, some mad men; other Note.
against nature, laying violent hands upon themselves; their several sins
do (though no reason of man sees it) do (I say) drive them to it. This is
another fruit to be joined to the former, which sin brings forth. True it
is indeed, the Lord deals not thus in kind with all sinners: nay we see how
impudent and brazen faced most be in their leaud courses, and set up their
bustles against the ordinance of God. But though their foreheads be of brass,
yet their hearts be glassie, their consciences (if they would yield) are as
water powered forth: they have not the true Lion like courage and boldness
which in their iollity they would have all think that they have, but sin has
infeebled them, they cannot abide the force and sting of their conscience, but
fall down coward-like, when it smites them: neither can their sin abide the
hand of God, which as it is ever ready to be reached forth against them; so
when it is so indeed, they are soon dismayed, as Nabal was, when he heard he
should dye. True it is, they set a good face upon the matter openly, bragging
and bracing, as I have said: but when their conscience and they go to it hand
to hand (as it does but seldom) then in their necessity it is with them, as
if an armed man were upon them; their white liuerd hearts do utterly fail
them. And yet where is he, that by such checkes of the word, and his
conscience, and the fear of many arrestings of him from God, does once
complain and cry out of his estate, and so seeks strength and recovery out
of it, by faith, peace, and confidence, with the true detestation of his sin,
which like a Witch so inchaunteth and disableth him of all courage and
boldness, and turns him into a very coward and weakling? Now in that men do
not perceive this, as they might easily do, their blindfolding of themselves,
and hardening of their hearts, is the cause thereof.

Now Debora turns her self to diverse kinds of men, and distinguishes Verse
9. 10. 11. The laying open of these verses.
them one from another, exhorting them all, as she her self did, to praise and
magnify God. This I will lay open more plainly, it being somewhat hard
otherwise for some readers to understand, and discern the same. And first in
this verse she begins with the chief of the armies, and those that offered
themselves willingly to the battle. In the next verse, she speaks to the
rich Merchants that rode on costly beasts, that were, as he calls them,
white Asses, and such as sat in judgment. And thirdly in this same verse also,
she speaks to all meaner persons that travailed on foot, seeing there was
now liberty for them to pass to and fro in the high ways, she moves these
(I say) to magnify God: Even all sorts of people who went out and in by the
gates of the city for their business, profit, pleasure, or any other
necessary use. In the second verse, she names the very boys and girls, who
could not safely go out to draw water, without danger of the archers, who lay
in wait secretly to shoot at them, and so put them in peril and ieopardie of
their lives, or to be sore wounded; these might now (she says) fetch their
water without fear of hurt. Then she calls to them who dwelt in villages and
unwalled towns (their danger having been very great, so as they were driven
away from their houses) telling them that they might now return home again,
and dwell in them quietly as in times past: and last of all, she speaks to
those who were wont to meet in the gates of the city, that is, in the open
places for judgment. All these she moves to praise the Lord, for that he had
now, by that one deliverance and victory, set them all at liberty, and in
peace.

Now to make our profit of these verses, and more particularly to examine Doct.
verse. 9.
them, and to begin with the ninth; whereas she says in this verse, that her
heart was set on the governors of Israel, or (which is all one) her heart was
toward them to provoke them: meaning, the cause was so great why they should
praise God, that she could not choose but speak to them: as if she should say,
she desired most earnestly that the chief of the army, and the governors and
captains thereof, and great men, should praise God: the reason was, because
they, with her and Barak, were the chief in that business, and they going
before them, the other should the easiler be drawn by their example to follow.
And it lively teaches, and sets before the chief doers in such martial
affairs, also the wealthy, and heads in societies, that they ought to be the
first in giving good example, both of praising God, and in other commendable
parts of Christian duty. For why? The greatest have a greater portion in Gods
blessing and deliverance, then the meaner have: I mean, they enjoy much, and
have much to lose, and therefore they owe much while they enjoy all in peace.
And secondly, it is a goodly sight to behold Captains in war, and Governors
and Magistrates in peace; and more particularly (to descend lower, and to come
nearer the Commons) Headboroughs in towns, and the fathers of families, to be
lights in religion and holy practice, to the rest, and examples in the service
of God: and the inferiors to follow, even as the flock follows the
bell-weather: for they are both soon discouraged by their backwardnes, and
have need of setting forward, as by encouragement and good example they are
easily brought to be.

Therefore the Lord in giving charge to all by their families, that they should
remember to keep holy the Sabbath; begins with the governor Command. 4.
thereof, saying, first thou shall do it; then he goes forward to the son,
daughter, and servant: Even so on the contrary, and much more, when the
greatest persons go before the rest in ill example, we see how readily they
follow. So we read, that the Priests, Levites, and guides of the Ezra. 9. 2.
people were the chief and first in taking to them and their sons, strange
wives of the Amorites and Canaanites, against the commandment of God, and then
many of the people followed them therein, when they were returned out of the
captivity. Even so we might see it throughout, if I should allege many
examples. And so God be thanked, in some sort we see, that where the chief
men in any society, be forward in seeking knowledge, and be zealous in flying
evil, and resisting it, as their places will give leave; and in following a
good course, their care and labor is not in vain, but to good purpose: but
where the guides of other, as their Ministers, masters of families, and chief
in towns, are profane, lewd, ill company keepers, idle, gamesters,
make-bates, contentious and slanderers, there ye may be sure to find them
that are led by them, and that depend upon them, to be suitable. But otherwise,
if they see that the wind blows against them, then they hang down the head,
and are nipt in the blossom, and contain themselves. And here see a note of
difference betwixt the godly and the lewd. The one, with Joshua, undertakes
for himself and his, they will serve Iosu. 24. 15.
the Lord. The other, like those Pharisees, are not only ill disposed
themselves, but do also pull back, and pluck down, with them, as many as
they can, from the best orders and companies. And while men must live with
such, rare is he, who (in such a case) is a law to himself, and can keep his
resolution, rather to serve God alone, then to give over for want of company.
But if any be better disposed then other among them, they must fetch their
light from other places, for the most part, or else be in danger in the
company they come into, to lose that little they have, and to be led into
darkness.

Now Debora having spoken of the chief, does by that occasion descend The
opening of the other part of the verse, and the Doct. 2.
to name and mention the meaner sort of the army, to wit, the two tribes of
Naphtali and Zabulon, who were willing to take that work in hand against the
Canaanites, and were easily drawn to put to their help, as appears chapt.
4. 10. They therefore being so forward in so good a cause, and thereby reaping
so happy a fruit of their labor, that is, victory over their enemies, even
they (I say) lose not their due commendation, but are brought in here by
Debora, as the woman in the Gospel who powered ointment on our Savior, of whom
he said this: Wheresoever the Gospel should be preached, that which she had
done to him, should be spoken of. So the people that honored God in this
work, are praised by her: which was also to their comfort. David says of
seafaring men, that they could best speak of Gods wonders in the deep: so
these being eye witnesses, nay, instruments, and helpers forward of this
deliverance, might best (by experience) speak of the goodness of God therein,
and so (no doubt) did honor him for it, and therefore God would honor them, by
regestring their memory: even so there is nothing lost, that we do at Gods
commandment, and for his sake, he is a plentiful paimaster and rewarder. But
in that both chief and mean, were to praise God for the victory, she calls
the^ to a renouncing of their own strength, or boasting of their own arm,
which possibly they might have done, and to ascribe all to God: as indeed she
might well; for what were a few of two Heb. 26. Doct. 3. in verse. 9.
of the meanest tribes of Zabulon and Naphtali able to do against the entire
forces and mighty army of Iabin? even so, they that are forward in Gods
business, unless they grossly forget themselves, they are ready to honor
and praise him, which cannot be without their own comfort. For these two agree
well together, that where there is readiness to obey God, there is the like in
praising him, and abasing of our selves, and that also accompanied with joy of
heart. And as it was here with Debora, so she sought to have it with them: and
the same we see in David, when he being advised by Ahigail, not to shed
innocent blood, he being easily persuaded by her counsel to forbear, did so,
and after it praised God highly, and arrogated naught to himself for following
her advice, when she had so wisely and in so good season ministered it unto him;
and that (we may be sure) was not without his own rejoicing. Oh it well
becomes us to be forward in Gods matters, and yet not to be proud for our so
doing: and there can come no worse end thereof, then thanks to God, who has
used us as his instruments, and comfort to our selves: as we may truly say,
who do more thankfully and joyfully partake the Word and Sacraments, then they
who have with most profit received the Gospel, and are most zealous welwillers
to religion? whereas the slothful, and they who are untoward thereto, neither
find any taste or savor therein, but are most diligent to promote ill causes,
they shall in stead of the prerogatives of the other, have (as they justly
deserve) reproach, vexation, and other punishments of God, even in this life.
Therefore let all in humility be careful and ready to be employed in Gods
business and service, and not to arrogate ought to themselves; for that is the
only sweet life, and to be desired: and herein is our heavenly father
glorified, if we being forth much fruit.

In this verse she speaks unto the rich and wealthy, who for honor sake, Ioh.
15. 9. Verse. 10.
and the rule they had over the people did ride on costly beasts, as we read
in chapter 10. 4. and 12. verse. 14. These whether they lived by their lands
The meaning of the first part of th^s verse, with the Doct. 1.
and revenues, or by their traffic and merchandise, for as much as they were
hindered by the enemies from enjoying their commodities, and their passage had
been cut off both by sea and land, and now they might freely enjoy the same
again: they therefore were to come forth (she said) and give thanks to God
for that great enlargement and liberty. And thus we see, the Lord will not
have the duty of praise hudled up in gross, as though a word for fashion might
serve the turn; but in particular, he will have all sorts (as they feel his
benefits sweet and comfortable to them diversely) so to make new amplifications,
and hearty repetitions of his goodness, that so all joining in a consort
together, the music may be the sweeter, and his praise may be the fuller. For
no one condition of people could possibly have laid forth the benefit of their
deliverance, and the commodity of this their liberty and peace restored to them
in any manner as all sorts might together: the Merchant could record his own
privilege that he enjoyed thereby, better then the husbandman; and so every
one in his several place more then in another. But what was this in respect
of that which she requires; namely, that all stand forth in it together? And
to take occasion to show in this one work of God, what a goodly thing it was
for all sorts of people to praise God then, jointly together for their
deliverance and victory; who does not conceive what an heavenly sight it were
if the like might be seen throughout in the congregation, for the renewed
benefits of God, whereby we live and are made joyful? I say, if with heart
and voice we did thus praise God, as well for them, as for those that are
past, what a goodly sight were it? As it was by Moses and Miriam, and with the
men and women, for the overthrow of Pharaoh: the like was, for the deliverance
of the Church in Hesters time; and in some of our solemn praising of God, we
may see it so among us. But oh then, what a solemn and triumphant sight shall
that be, when the Lords glory shall be sung and sounded forth in his heavenly
kingdom, by Angels and Archangels, Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
Martyrs, Saints, and all that blessed company; I say, what a solemn sight
shall that be? The very thinking that such a thing shall be, is the greatest
Note.
comfort that can be here enjoyed, and next unto that celestial joy itself:
of the which we would not be deprived, if we were wise, nor lose our part
therein (by musing often on it,) for all that is transitory and vanishing,
what so ever account they make of it who know no better.

But to return now to the rich and great men whom Debora in this verse Doct.
2. in verse. 10.
moves to praise God, by this let all the rich and such as enjoy wealth and
great commodities do the same, and acknowledge what a benefit it is to them,
whether they be great Merchants, to buy and utter their wares, for their
maintenance, and increase of their wealth, which could not be, but must needs
fail, if that lay dead; or liberty of traveling safely, and of free contracts
were hindered, and whether they be otherwise great in riches and revenues; let
them do this likewise; and the greater persons they be in either kind, the
more let them seek to excel themselves in this duty of praising God, and they
being forward in that, they may be enabled to do more good works to necessary
uses. By which we may also see, that God allows wealthy men to occupy and
prosper in their calling; for why? he commands them to walk in their
callings till he come; and teaches, that the diligent hand makes rich: and
there need be no question made of that, for the Lord allows that men should
increase rather then diminish that Prou. 10. 4.
which they have, both to avoid burthensomnesse, and for the supply of others,
so as they practice godliness therewith, as equity, truth, sincerity,
innocence, patience, and such like. The which they have good encouragement to
do, when they have both liberty to follow their courses of dealing, and also
seeing godliness has the promises of this present life, and of that which 1.
Tim. 4. 8.
is to come. And if it were so that men were debarred of traffic, and the use
of their calling, as these rich men here mentioned had been, what an heavy
cross were that, seeing there is no other way, but to spend upon the stock
till all be wasted? and that is soon done, where it is not renewed: alas, how
shall the family be maintained, and all charges defraid, if the freedom of
gathering in men's commodities and dealings be taken from them? Do we not see
that the weather, or a little sickness, disabling a man to work, causes
complaining? how much more when the liberty is wholly interdicted? But yet if
God do sometime bless, men may not look to have always one and the same
course of thriuing and prospering. But howsoever it be, let all be highly
thankful, for that they may use the benefit of traffic, or other improuing
of their commodities, as these now did, and let them be fruitful in
well-doing, as they would readily promise to be, if they were again under the
cross, and joyful in the use of preaching and Sacraments, with other duties;
which is the true praise that God expects. But as for such as deprive
themselves of the benefit thereof by their own default, they have much to
answer for. Such are idle persons, and ill husbands, as we call them, and
such, as, if the Lord somewhat alter the course of their takings and gains,
and they come short thereof, over they did sometime before, they fret and
complain that their trades be naught, and that they shall be undone: and much
like to them are they, who having got by their trades well, conceal their
estates, and feign themselves bankerupts, to defeat others of their goods; or
such other as cast the burden upon their thriftlesnes and improuidence upon
their trades, dealings, or blind-fortune, forgetting how God had sometimes
blessed them therein before. Therefore let us know (whatsoever the bad
practices of men are) that it is a great favor of God, that people may have
free recourse to markets and faires, and other like places of buying and
selling commodities, even as the want thereof is a sore punishment, when people
neither know where they should utter their commodities, nor buy them whereof
they stand in need: in both which consisted their maintenance, as was said
before. And yet lamentable it is to see, what abuse the corrupt custom of our
time has brought this liberty unto. For many do not only steal away Gods
due, I mean the Sabbath, to do their worldly business on; but there are
other, whose common trade and practice it is (in a more profane manner,) to
harbor thieves, to receive stolen wares, to entertain drunkards, to become
bauds to adulterers, and to spend that day leaud, and unseemly meetings and
match-makings, stage plays, and other revel rout; and all under the honest
color of exchanging commodities, and maintaining their charge. So that in
stead thereof, men and women set to sale their good name, chastity, sobriety,
and whatsoever else should be precious to the godly.

Now unto these before mentioned, of greater wealth and place, whereas some
think, that in the next words she speaks to men of meaner state, The
opening of another part of verse. 10. and Doct. 3.
such as is said here [dwelt by Middin] a place they say, where they met more
usually for a Mart or exchange of their wares, which place being before
intercepted by the enemies, and now free for all to have recourse to it, and
pass too and fro by the high ways, she exhorts them that repaired thither to
praise the Lord. This opinion of theirs is gainsaid by the purest translations,
and beside, one thing should be understood in both places, to wit, of
tra^^ique and merchandise, if it were so. But the word [Middin] is not to be
taken here for the proper name of a place where wares were sold; but the words
[dwelling by Middin] are to be translated thus; [sitting in judgment. As if
she should say, let men of authority and rich lawyers, who may now sit in
judgment about civil causes, let such praise the Lord, because they may now
do it safely. It is the honor, credit, peace and benefit of Magistrates and
learned counselors, as also the welfare of the people, that places of
judgment and justice be frequented and vpholden: as we see here in England in
our Term times at Westminster, and out of Term in other places, where equity
and right are maintained, and wrong and injury punished. Oh it is a time full
of desolation, when through famine, plague, or any in^ection, such places must
lie unoccupied in the times when they should be frequented and set a work in
deciding causes, helping the innocent to his right, and weeding out of evil
doers. Whereby we may gather how heavy times those were, when judgment ceased,
and the open places where justice was ministered, were laid wast, and left
void. And therefore we read in the former chapter, that the people could not
enjoy that liberty of public judgment seats, but they were driven to go
privately to Debora for judgment, not dwelling sumptuously in palace or
castle, famous in that respect, Judge. 4. 5.
or honorable, but obscure under a Palm tree. Now therefore as they when they
might again boldly and freely sit in judgment, are here called to praise God
for it: So such persons with us enjoying such privileges, ought to call
themselves duly and daily to zealous thanksgiving, with such other duties as
accompany the same, yea their whole life should savor thereof. And they shall
have much to answer to God who do otherwise. As for the people, what duty they
owe for enjoying this benefit, I will show by a fitter occasion in the next
verse.

But to let these go of whom I have spoke in this verse, because Debora Doct.
4. in verse. 10.
here speaks also to all such as went, and walked by the way; this should
cause all such as go to and fro about their business, pleasure, or other
necessary uses, as travelers, to praise God highly for such liberties, se^ing
a little before that, the high ways lay unoccupied: and to speak of the
benefit thereof one to another to his praise, and not to travel to and fro in
rude, profane, and loose manner, gabling like wild geese in uncivil and rude
sort; as though they enjoyed such liberties to offend God by them. And much
more ought their behavior and communication to be sober and Christian like,
when they go to the house of God, to be edified by the word, prayer, and
Sacraments, and also when they return home again, and in a word, to walk
harmless in all places; which behavior is much out of use in this land, and
yet (God be thanked) not altogether in some places. But here an end for this
time.

THE THIRTY TWO SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to proceed with the rest that I have begun withal, Verse. 11.
heree Debora speaks to the servants, that in going forth to draw water for
their necessary use, were not free from the archers, who shot at them, and put
them to much pain, trouble, and danger, or fear at least thereby 1. Sam. 16.
11.
Where we see, that as they who are in the meanest places of service, are not
to be suffered to enjoy their liberty to live idly, but to be employed and
occupied, (as David, when he was young kept his fathers sheep) and set to
work, that they may be maintained thereby: (and such ought to be thankful
when they may go to it in peace:) so they are to be admitted also, and taken
into the number of them that worship God in the assembly, and therefore ought
duly to be brought thither by their governors, and taught there to know him.
Even such as cut wood and draw water, the very droyles in houses, (as they are
called) who do the most servile works: and therefore in some countries, such
as keep swine, Note.
sheep, and cattle, which is more base then to serve them only, even these I
say, being of them who are redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, as well as
other, should be taught to honor God aright, and to live under his government,
and therefore not suffered to live brutishly, as in some places they do, but
be brought forth by their parents or rulers, into the congregation of the
faithful, to learn those things that concern their happiness and peace:
this being presupposed, that there they shall be taught. Which I speak to the
shame of such masters, and governors, as never regard any such matter, neither
consider that they owe that education to them, for the service they do them,
and the use they make of them, and most of all, that they owe it them, by the
band with which they are tied to it by Gods commandment: whereas the life of
such is as miserable for their soul, as they under the Turks galleys for
their bodies: yea even as asses who spend the day in toil, and then are thrust
at night into empty stables; so are they sent after their tedious and brutish
service, unto their woeful home, and at last to hell, as a heavy recompense of
their labor. Fie therefore upon such tyrants. And yet if some masters in
conscience of the commandment, do (for some it may be do) give them more
liberty to go to the assembly to worship God; yet often times another evil is
in the way, that when they come there, they have nothing taught them, so that
by one means or other, all that list may see they die miserably: of which
sort, oh that the number were not too great. Thus much of these.

The next sort spoken to in this verse, are they, who dwelling in villages The
opening of the next point in verse. 11
and unwalled towns, were left desolate, and driven from their habitations,
and they laid waste, rifled, robbed, and left ruinous by the enemies: this to
be the meaning of the second point in this verse, appears clearly by the
best translation; these she says, might now safely return to their
habitations and towns, and make up their ruins and breaches, and dwell in
them again as before. They were therefore to acknowledge the goodness of God
with the rest, who yet beside the driving them from their own home, were also
much impouerished, and sustained great loss, beside fear and trouble thereby.
And this (besides the duty of thanks for our safe and convenient dwelling and
harbor) should teach us all to be highly contented, Doct. 2. in verse. 11.
and patiently to bear our impaired and decayed estate, when by Gods
providence, without our fault and negligence, it falls out to be so, seeing
we cannot be ignorant, that Gods people have had their part in such adversities
before us: also losses by fire, water, or any other spoiling or wasting of our
goods, when small likelihood could be seen thereof before. For these things
fall out, and the like changes, where and when God will, for the sin of men,
as cousonage, deceit, security, hypocrisy, wilful ignorance, worldliness,
idleness, delicacie, excess, etc. (which God curses sometimes with beggerie)
rash trustings, suretiship, etc. and they should bear their punishments,
because they have sinned: and after their repentance, when God Mich. 7. 7.
has stayed the plague, they should thankfully, and without murmuring, receive
the remnants of their commodities, if any remain to them: as we read the men
of Benjamin did; and not desperately and impatiently to leave Judge 21. 23.
all at six and seven, because they see themselves disabled from ever
recovering their former estate: which is a sign of a proud heart, refusing and
scorning to stoop to the Lords hand and visitation, as Job himself did, whose
loss yet (we know) was exceeding great. But oh the madness of men, who Job 1.
21.
when they being occupied about their commodities, are crossed in them,
contrary to their expectation, they are at their wits end, when the Lord has
taken but that which he lent them. They dream of an eternity here, Note.
and when they have well feathered their nest, (as they say) they think they
are well for many years: oh death how unwelcome art thou to such? nay the
smallest losses do cause them to rage and cry out. The Lord therefore seeing
this, pulls from one here, and from another there, to acquaint all with
changes, and teaches them thereby, that if there remain but somewhat to them,
of the plenty which they sometime enjoyed, so that they have not unthriftily
wasted it themselves, they should be thankful, as these here are willed to be,
who full gladly came again to their ruinous dwellings, from the which they had
been driven by the force of their enemies. And they whose hearts cannot bow to
yield to their afflictions meekely and patiently, but do rebelliously and
brutishly harden them against God for his just corrections, shall gain this
thereby, to have them with Judas broken in pieces with his mallets of terror
and despair, to their utter confusion. Oh, full little do such know
themselves, by spurning against God, to kick (as it were) against pricks. It
is Gods mercy (as the Prophet says) Lamen. 3. 22.
that they are not consumed: much more then, to give them breathing, being, and
living, and therefore they should humbly receive Gods corrections.

The last sort that she calls to praise God, were they that came together in
the gates of their cities, where their judgment seats were appointed to be.
These meetings had ceased, and had been broken off, through the prevailing of
their enemies, and now by their deliverance were frequented again. What a
punishment that was, and how great a calamity to the Common wealth, to have
execution of law and justice left off, and laid down, tending so necessarily
to the safeguard of men's estates, or to the maintaining thereof; by the cutting
off of malefactors, and the doers of injury, as robbers, and such like; how
great a plague that was, I say, they well know, who are not ignorant, that the
whole safety (in a manner) of the Commonwealth, is maintained and vpholden by
such due execution of law and judgment. And for this benefit (that I may come
from them to our selves) Doct. 3. in verse. 11.
all that live in the Church and Commonwealth with peace and welfare, have
cause to magnify Gods exceeding goodness in that one respect. For hereby they
live safe and quiet in their houses, they enjoy their goods and commodities,
and that which is the greatest of all other, they may the better have liberty
and the benefit of true serving of God, which makes all the rest of their
liberties sauourie. And this with the other particular commodities which are
enjoyed of us hereby, is to be acknowledged to be great and bountiful, the
rather for that such common blessings usually enjoyed, are seldom reckoned of
us to be thank worthy. And among those who went out and in at the gates, we
may understand all other, who either passed through, for their profit,
pleasure, or for any other necessary use and cause, which liberty all may
conceive how great it was, and therefore both they then, and we now who enjoy
the same liberty, must hold our selves infinitely bound to praise God in this
behalf.

And now we have heard how Debora has called all sorts to the praising of God,
and that even for such benefits as are in little account with us, no nor
thought of, how great they be, let it warn us of one common fault, that we be
more mindful hereafter of Gods goodness, in his ministering to our use, the
daily benefits which he bestows on us for this present life, then we are wont
to be: as the sunshine and the rain; the peaceable following of our
callings within doors and without; the uttering and exchange of our
commodities; our safe dwelling from danger of enemies, and the benefit of mill
and market. And what shall I say else? as for our freedom from foreign
enemies, and our travel without danger, from place to place, with other that
are innumerable: which though we have the^ in great part in common with the
unreasonable creatures, yet without them we know our life should be deadly
wearisome to us, yea none at al. I say it is certain that these common
blessings, and many other such are not acknowledged of numbers through the
seven years together, which should be remembered (one or other of them, I
mean) often times every day: which if it ought to be in these common benefits
now mentioned, (which yet are but transitory;) then what cause had the Apostle,
in respect of all together, which serve for his life, and that which is to
come, to charge us in all things to be thankful? And 1. These. 5. 19.
by this that all sorts are here spoken to by the Prophetess; it teaches
that all sorts of men, and particular persons among them, are to know that they
must answer to God for themselves about thanks, even as elsewhere every man
is commanded to walk in his particular calling, and the duties thereof. For so
says the Apostle in the first epistle to the Corinthians; Let every man abide
in the same vocation wherein he was called. But it follows 1. Cor. 7. 20.
in the text.

Verse. 12. Up Debora, up, arise and sing a song: arise Barak, and lead thy
captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.

13. For they that remain, have dominion over the mighty of the people: the
Lord has given me dominion over the strong.

NOw that Debora has called all the people of Israel to thanksgiving for The
sense of these two verse. 12. 13.
the victory, in the three former verses, she stirs up her self in this
twelfth verse by an elegant figure, that other might be whetted on by her
example to do the same. And she calls Barak to triumph, and with a certain
pomp to make a show of his enemies captivity and conquest: which was to the
great honor of God, when all might understand, that the Canaanites were for the
most part slain, and they that remained alive, were prisoners to the Hebrews,
who were most like a little before to be chopped to pieces of them and other of
Gods enemies. In the 13. verse she amplifieth the victory by another
comparison of the conquerers, with those who were conquered: these having been
valiant, wise, and well provided: but that they overcame them; namely, the
Israelites were but as a remnant, and yet base and contemptible. This is the
sum of these two verses.

Out of her provoking of her self to praise God, as if she had been much
Doct. 1. out of verse. 12.
behind in that duty, when yet she had been commendable therein, as we have
heard, and had also urged other thereto; we may see that this has been the
manner and course of Gods people, to think they could never do enough in
praising God, when they have entered seriously into consideration of his
goodness, but ever thought themselves cold and backward in respect of that
they ought to have been. Doubtless the due weighing of the cause, made her
still to see more and more into Gods admirable kindness, till she was ashamed of
her unthankfulness. But some will say, all cannot be as Debora was: it is well
if we can be thankful when we be provoked by others, they say, and by good
means, as by the word, etc. To which I answer, It is clear indeed, we come
behind her in the duty; but is there not enough to move us to be equal to
her, yea to excel her therein? She is thus thankful for the victory, we
have no need nor cause to fight: she praises God for peace recovered with the
hazard and danger of ten thousand men, we enjoy ours without putting it into
question: she, for bodily blessing, we have infinite to the maintenance of
health and welfare, then the which what could she have more for this present
life? besides many that are spiritual to season the other, and yet we come
short of her in thankfulness nevertheless. And that which I have said of
Debora, the same we may see in David, Anna, and others. He in the Psalm,
having none equal to him in the performing of that duty, affirming that he
would do it three times, nay seven times a day, and that he would do it
openly in the congregation, and privately by himself; yet as though he had
much forgot himself, and had waxen dull, and been behind other therein, he
quickens up himself to it, saying; O my soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that is within Psalm. 103. 1.
me, praise his holy name. He stirs up himself, we see, to be feruenter,
when yet he was very forward before. Which I speak not, as if both he and
other Gods best servants and most fervent, did not feel oftentimes a kind of
sleepy deadness in them to good duties, and remissness of spirit creeping
upon them, (as it is certain they do, seeing they carry that corruption about
them, which will often cause a weariness in them of well doing for the time,)
but they having a greater power of grace working in them to subdue it, they
gather up and stir themselves again by such occasion, to more earnestness,
and so find themselves refreshed (by a new meditation of their slacknesse)
with double courage to set upon their duties. And to that end they help and
sharpen on themselves, as David and Debora did; and sometime are supported by
other, as we see Moses his weak hands were feign to Exodus 17. 12.
be holden up by Aaron and Hur against Amalek By this we see a manifest
difference betwixt them and the wicked: who though (as they say) they like well
of prayer, and hearing, and of thanksgiving: yet they profess they cannot
endure nor away with such continual service; affirming where that is urged
that men shall never have done. For as they who believe how greatly they are
beholding to God for his goodness, do charge themselves with their
unthankfulness, even when they are forwarder then the most; considering they
are then but unprofitable servants: so the other are ready to post it off to
others, as testifying thereby, that they be more beholding to God then they
hold themselves to be, and think every little to be enough that they are to
do to God, yea and that a word and away may serve the turn; even very froth
it is that they offer to him, a mocking, no sacrifice: the heart never
enclining (for it cannot) to any such thing. Romans 8. 7.


Another thing in this verse is concerning Barak, and that is, that he should
in a show and with solemn pomp set out the conquest and victory The elearing
of the next part of the verse.
which God had given them over their enemies. Which though after the victory in
war, it was used to be done by the Heathens over such as they conquered, to
the priding of themselves, and the uttermost disgrace of them that were
subdued; yet this was (we see) spoken by the Prophetess, to the end that God
might have honor thereby; for one end she propounded, both of his act, and of
her own; and that was, the giving of honor to the Lord. For the seeking of a
man's own glory, is no glory, but a taking it Prou. 25. 27. Doct. 2. in verse.
12.
from God, and a provoking of him thereby. Nay, where men would think that it
as a due desert to them; yet even there let them beware that they take it not;
but let us all acknowledge Gods goodness with thankfulness, for that he will
use our service to the honoring of his name. But to flesh and pride our selves
in the yoking and subduing of our enemies, this were no better then the act of
Adonibezek, who most cruelly cut off the thumbs of the hands and feet of
seventy Kings, and made them as dogs, to eat bread under his table, that he
might glory in their extreme reproach and shame. This act of triumph was common
to the people of God with the Heathen, but not done in so profane and common a
manner. And as it has been in war, so the like in some sort we see at this day
in the time of peace, that tehre are of al sorts who having suits and
controversies depending betwixt them, get the day of their adversary, and do
bring the one the other to a mean and poor estate; I speak of such as
contend lawfully, and having a good cause, and right on their side, they
prevail by order of justice one against the other, and do in a certain
manner triumph thereby. But what then? In all this the one bears as he is
more graciously seasoned then another, a lowly mind, and remembers (though he
have the better hand, and other wealth beside,) whence he came, who set him
up, and why; that is, not to glory foolishly of his welfare over his adversary,
but to be thankful to God, and therefore is moderate and sober in the use of
all such liberties, and more fruitful in doing good. The other uses them to
pride himself, to scorn others, to boast of his success, and to be more
impudent, profane, and lawless. Both these triumph over their adversary; but
the one in good manner as not glorying that he has gotten the victory of
himself, or by his own strength, the other most vnbeseemingly, being a slave,
and pesant to his unbridled lusts, and glorying in the pride of life.

The reason of honoring God by them both, Debora and Barak I mean, Verse. 13.
is set down by her in this verse; and that was, seeing the Lord had wrought
wonderfully for them, and given many men, even an huge army, into the hands of
a few; and valiant and noble warriers he had caused to be subdued by them, that
were but weak and mean. And though she ascribe it in the first part of the
verse, unto the persons; yet that we may know that she meant them to be but the
instruments only appointed by God to get the victory, therefore in the latter
part of the verse, she makes the Lord the cause of it, saying, that he made
them able to obtain, and so to prevail over them.

And so we (dearly beloved) when the like falls out to us, that God by small
means works great things for us, let us learn before to be ready to see and
acknowledge it. For example, when the Lord shall assuage the extremities Note.
of his servants, either in pain, sickness, fear of utter undoing, or in the
cruelty of their enemies, whereas none saw how they might be like to recover
themselves any more; as when all help and hope by manward is past; when he (I
say) shall then show his help, that was not in any likelihood to have been
looked for, is it not time to behold his great goodness and wonder at it with
due praises? His preventing of that notorious Gunpowder treason, with the
remouall of many great enemies of his people, when death only was like to have
done it (God knows when) and that in our remembrance, since the entering in
of our late deceised Queen of blessed memory, and the Kings Majesty, (whom
God enable to tread them under his feet) what thanks do these worthily
require of us?

Moreover, to see the fruit of this Gospel, which is for the most part so
contemptible in the world; what great things it does in subduing the stony
hearts of many unto the power of it, and in changing them, (though for the
great cumpasse of the land, and the long time that it has bin preached, we may
and ought to lament, that it has prevailed with no more, yet that grace that
the sincere preaching of it has wrought in many thousands, is to be remembered,
thought upon, and acknowledged, to Gods eternal praise. Even as in all ages
God has done wonderfully, I mean, great things by small means; as in casting
down the walls of Jericho by seven days compassing it with blowing trumpets
of Rams horns. Also his inabling Gedeon with three hundred men to overthrow
an army of the Midianites, who as grasshoppers covered the face of the earth.
And David with his sling to conquer great Goliath. But I must here cut off,
seeing the verses following are many, and must be handled together.

THE THIRTY THREE SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 14. Of Ephraim their root arose against Amalek: and after thee,
Benjamin, against thy people, O Amalek: of Machir came rulers, and of Zebulon
they that handle the pen of the writer. 15. And the Princes of Issachar were
with Debora, and Ishachar, and also Barak: he was sent on his feet in the
valley: for the divisions of Reuben were great thoughts of heart. 16. Why
abodest thou among the sheepfolds to hear the bleatings of the flocks? for
the divisions of Reuben were great thoughts of heart. 17. Gilead abode beyond
Jordan: and why does Dan remain in ships? Ashur sat on the sea shore, and
tarried in his decayed places 18. But the people of Zebulun and Naphthali have
ieoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field.
THis is the first point of the second part of the chapter, in these The sense
of verse. 14.
words of the text to the 19. verse: which second part was divided into three:
as is to be seen in the first entrance into the chapter. In the first, they
are brought in to the song first, and commended by Debora, that did help in
the war, in the 14. and part of the fifteenth verse, and by occasion of them,
they are mentioned next, and their slothfulness is reproved, who being of the
tribes, did not help in the battle; which is done in part of the fifteenth
verse, the 16. and 17. and after she commends Zebulun and Naphthali, for
that they had ieoparded their lives for their brethren, and this in the
eighteenth verse. This to be the meaning of these verses, all may see that will
thoroughly look into it. But yet it must be acknowledged, that there is
difficulty in some of them.

This therefore I will clear as I am able, and labor to remove the doubts
which may be raised to trouble the Reader. To the which end we must remember
that which was before said, that Debora first speaks of them in this second
part of the chapter, which did help in the war. And she begins with
Ephraim, And whereas some expound it that this root of Ephraim that rose
against Amalek was Joshua; and by Benjamin, in that they understand him that
should fight against them afterward; that is to say, Saul, who did so indeed.
It is true, that both these are said to have gone against Amalek, but what is
that to this purpose? For here in this part of the song, Debora signifies who
they were that fought against the Canaanites at that time. Therefore it is
rather likely, that by the root of Ephraim she could not mean Joshua, who was
dead long before; but she means her self, being one that was a chief person
in that tribe: for it appears, that she was an Ephramite, and it is said
that she judged Israel, dwelling under a Palm tree between Ramath and Bethel
in mount Ephraim. And sure it is, that by her charge and authority the battle
was taken in hand. But then ye will object, that the war here mentioned is
said to have been against Amalek, not the Canaanites: I grant it, but by a
figurative speech; in Amalek we are to understand the Canaanites also. And thus
much for answering this first doubt out of these words, [Of Ephraim their root
arose against Amalek.]

The next is out of the words which follow immediately in the same verse, which
are these; [and after thee, Benjamin fought against thee O Amalek.] Here
understand this word (Amalek) as before. But that by Benjamin here, we should
understand Saul, being of that tribe, there is no sense in it, Saul being yet
unborn; but certain of the tribe of Benjamin: for it appears by these words
in the text, that some of the tribe of Benjamin also adjoined themselves to
Debora, from the first beginning of the battle, though (it is to be thought)
they were but few in comparison. The other words in this 14. verse have this
meaning; as these first [out of Machir came rulers] that is, out of them here
named of Machir, which was a noble family in the half tribe of Manasses, there
came certain worthy men to help in the battle. The last words of the verse,
which are these, [Out of Zebulun there came they that handle the pen of the
writer,] they have this meaning; that the learned and skilful Lawyers, who were
exercised in handling the pen, did help as they might fitliest be employed and
used, whether by weapon or by counsel. The first The meaning of verse. 15. and
16.
part of the fifteenth verse concerning Issachar, has this sense: that this
tribe is highly commended, both for that they that were chief in it consented
to Debora, and also, for that they did in their place, as Barak did in his: for
as he was sent to mount Tabor, so it seems that the Princes of Ishachar were
sent into the valley with their footmen, and in the peril and ieopardy of the
Israelites by their enemies, they did set upon them with great courage, and
behaved themselves valiantly, and therefore they are highly commended.

Thus she having mentioned them that helped in the battle, she turns, by
occasion of them, to those that did not help, beginning in this 15. verse with
the tribe of Ruben. That tribe is reproved, for that it held back to the great
grief of their brethren, from fighting among them, and for that they did not
in so great danger come forth to help them. This tribe dwelt beyond Jorden in
the fat pastures, and as it appears, for their too much minding, and care of
their cattle, and their commodity thereby, they neglected the care of the
Commonwealth. And in that it is said, that there were great thoughts of heart
for the Reubenites dividing themselves from their brethren, whether the meaning
of the words be, that these thoughts were great and lofty in them, that
scorned to go at Deboras commandment, being but a woman; or whether they were
thoughts of wondering and lamenting in their brethren, for that they came not as
well as others, to help them in the battle; the repetition of the words does
give more warrant for to take them in this latter sense, as a lamentation: as
if it should be said, Oh that Reuben should not come over Jorden to help as
the most of the other tribes did: oh, it was wondered at, and much to be
lamented. And besides, to charge that tribe to be proud and insolent, is more
then we may or ought to do upon an uncertain ground, for it requires good
proof for the auouching of that.

Reuben (that is the Reubenites that came of him) is here described by their
calling and trade, that they were keepers of cattle, and the places that they
dwelt in, namely among goodly pastures. And where it is added, Why sattest thou
among the sheepfolds to hear the bleating of the flocks? it is so to be
taken, as if the Reubenites abode and remained still with their cattle, for
all the danger that was: and did declare thereby that they did set more by
them, then they did pity their brethren, by going to help them. In the 17.
verse, Gilead is in like manner complained of, they abode still in their
dwelling The meaning of verse 17.
place beyond Jorden, as the Reubenites did, dwelling near unto them; while
their brethren the Israelites were in great ieopardie, fighting with their
enemies. But here comes another great doubt to be answered, that Object.
seeing Machir, a noble family in the tribe of Manasse, was said before, to
come to help their brethren, and they possessed Gilead: I say if Gilead be
commended before to come, why is it here reproved for not coming? This doubt
is answered thus: Manasse had two sons, Machir and Iair, of Answ.
whom came two great families, both which possessed Gilead. Therefore those
Gileadites which came of Machir, could not be they who are reproved, for they
came to help; but the family of Iair, who also dwelt in Gilead, for they came
not.

The next that are reproved here, are they of the tribe of Dan. Who are not
reproved simply for travailing in ships upon the sea, but they are blamed here
for remaining in ships. Now at that time (whether they did so to shelter
themselves thereby from their enemies on the sea, or for their trafique, and
did not rather go out of them, and help the rest) they were worthy to be
found fault with, for their so doing. For what though they were stricken with
such a fear, when they heard of the armies of their enemies? that was their
sin, that they hasted not to the rest, against their enemies to assist them,
but that they put themselves in ships, that so they might pass and escape from
them, or follow their own private business: which was a thing utterly
unbeseeming them, they were therefore worthily and justly reproved for it, as I
have said.

The last tribe that is found fault with, is the tribe of Asher, who excuse
themselves for being absent from their brethren; partly for that they dwelt
far off, and partly for that their towns and cities were ruinous, and not
well fenced, and therefore they said, they tarried at home, lest their enemies
might have taken occasion by their absence to spoil them, which they saw they
might easily have done. And there is no doubt, but that it was grievous to
these tribes to be thus rebuked; the which the holy Ghost would have to be
done, partly for their own cause that they might see in what great fault they
were by not going to help their brethren, how lightly soever they accounted of
it, and also that they might repent for it: and partly in respect of others,
which I will show when I come to the doctrine. And this be said of the tribes
commended and reproved, except the two tribes of Zebulon and Naphtali, who did
more specially icopard their lives for their brethren, as it follows in the
next verse.

Here she commends them both in an high manner (though some The sense of
verse 18.
chief men in the tribe of Zebulon she had praised before, and that for their
forwardnes against Gods enemies, in so great peril, as we have heard, they
were in. For it was a ridiculous thing in the judgment of men, for such a
small number as they were, to go against such huge armies, and all as valiant
soldiers addressed in warlike furniture, by whom they might have been swept
away in less then an hour; but they preferred God and his word before their
own lives. By the high places mentioned here, the mount Tabor is signified, on
which they were appointed to stand to behold the multitude of the Canaanites,
and yet they not flying away from them, but marching toward them, their faith
appeared to be so much the greater, and therefore they are thus commended.
Thus much for the meaning of these five verses.

Now I have cleared that which was needful to be made plain in this Doct. of
verse 14. 15.
story, there being some difficulty therein; the next thing is, that we seek
a further benefit by it. And first by them who are commended for yielding their
help in that great work of the Lord, as Ephraim, Benjamin and Ishaker,
mentioned in the 14. and 15. verses; we may see, that such as do set
themselves to further Gods people, or his service, shall not be vnrecompensed,
nor forgotten; as these are here regestred to their praise, neither is any to
think, that the labor and travel so bestowed, is in vain. And whereas some
object, That now the Scriptures are finished, and therefore no man Object.
can look for the same particular reward that these enjoyed; I mean, to be
Chronicled in the monuments thereof: yet let them know, that if they be Answ.
faithful and constant to the end, the Lord has written their names in
another book, far more durable, even the book of remembrance, wherein he
writes the works of the Saints, that he may both here, and for ever reward
them, and honor them before men Angels. For though it be usual Matthew. 25. 34.
with men to do as the Butler did to Joseph, I mean to let go unrewarded
many kindnesses and duties done to them by their neighbors, yet God who is
less bound to the best, by any due of desert, but only of his free promise and
gracious favor, he, I say, will not do so: for why? if one offer but a cup of
cold water unto any, in the name of a Disciple, that is, because he is Mich. 1.
42.
so, the Lord will not leave him unrewarded. Therefore when the woman in the
Gospel had powered ointment on the head of our Savior, he said, that Mark. 14.
9.
wheresoever the Gospel should be preached, that act of hers should be
remembered and spoken of. Much more they who shall honor God more fruitfully
and faithfully, may assure themselves, that great is their reward from him: for
he that shall forsake any thing for his sake, shall receive an Matthew. 19. 29.
hundred fold for it, even in this life, besides the happinese that abides him
in the life to come.

Oh therefore the blockishnes and unbelief of the greatest part even of
Christendom, who desiring to enjoy good days while they live here, do in no
careful manner take the way thereto; but shift as the baddest sort do, to take
their part in the sinful pleasures of this life. By means whereof, though
they think themselves on the surer hand, and to play the part of wise men; yet
in truth they never find the quiet and sweet fruit of the Gospel, which yet
many of them profess; nor ever attain the happy life, here or after, that
they look for.

Oh, things present do so dazzle their eyes with their deceivable beauty, and
their hearts are so hollow, inconstant and unfaithful, that if they be tickled
with love and liking of any thing that pleases their humor, how dishonest,
yea and filthy soever it be, they are drawn after it, as the silly fish with
the bait. So that it is no marvel, that few do believe that their labor in
the Lord shall be rewarded; by choosing rather to abide affliction, then to
embrace the short pleasures of sin. Oh the number is great of Malach. 3. 14.
them that follow the devices and desires of their own wicked hearts,
vpbraiding the godly with the small gain they get by their zealous profession
of religion. Indeed it is a thing impossible for an unbeliever, to see either
the unfruitfulness of his own estate, or the gain of the contrary: as we see
by them in Malach. 3. who ask in plain terms, If it be not in vain to serve
God, and what profit comes thereby, etc. But this ought not to trouble the
righteous, as we see in the 16. verse of the same chapter: but if through
frailty they slip into that temptation, as David did, Psalm. 73. let them do
as Psalm. 73. 13.
he did, verse. 17. enter into the Sanctuary of God, and change their opinion.
But as fast as one sees another taken away, and for all the fearful manner
of the death of some of them, who have lived as if they feared neither hell nor
judgment day; yet what one of an hundred remaining behind still, is brought
any thing nearer to a Christian life thereby?

Now more particularly by these of Machir or Manasses, Zebulon, and Doct. 2. in
verse. 14. 15.
Issachar, which were chief men in the tribes, and yet forward and ready to
join with the rest against Gods enemies; we learn, that as the mightiest and
wealthiest should not come behind others in any part of Gods service, but put
forth themselves before them, as these here did: so they that do not so, must
see that they shall have reproach for their negligence and sloth, as the other
shall be renowned of God himself, as we see here these be: which were enough
to put heart and courage into that sort of men particularly, if sin have not
plucked it out. But of this I speak in other places by occasion, and therefore
I say no more now.

Now Debora passes from these whom she commended, and turns to the other
whom she discommendeth, in these verses. Whereby we may see Verse. 15. 16. 17.
how great the reproach of the^ is, who do not help in Gods house, to set
forward his work, and to join with his servants therein. For such do not only
discourage their brethren, and let the work lie raw and imperfect; but they
flesh their adversaries, and God knows whether they would not also turn on
their sides, if they should be tried. Wherein it is not amiss to observe the
plain dealing of the holy Ghost in this narration: for as he ingenuously
yields testimony of praise to the well deserving: so he conceileth not the
shame of the careless and slothful, but rebukes them without respect of
persons. Which dealing, as it shows what course he will take in that solemn
day, wherein he will judge the world with equity: so it should drive all fools
out of these conceits, whereby they beguile themselves saying; rush, God will
do neither good nor evil; and that he will not smite them, but they shall
escape better then others, etc. which was the error of them who (till they
found the contrary) would never be persuaded but their estate was good, saying,
Lord, Lord, etc. as though thereby they should have entered into his kingdom.
And as this is true in the general, so is it in particulars, both bodily and
spiritual. For though in the corrupt practice of this wicked world, we see
every one is for himself, as the proverb speaks; posting off the regard of
the needy to others: yet if we enter into the Lords sanctuary, and look what
is required by his word, we shall find it odious, unnatural, and highly
displeasing in the sight of God, that there is not compassion in one to
another, and care in one over another, as equity and band of duty requires;
that as they should warm the hearts of their brethren with relieuing them
readily in their bodily necessities and dangers; so should they comfort their
souls likewise with holy instruction and spiritual refreshing, as by good
occasion and opportunity they may. And as these should have done it in war,
so ought we as well in peace. This duty owe superiors, either in nature, age,
place or gifts, to the inferiors, to back, encourage and instruct them:
equals, to each other, to admonish, comfort, visit, and support, or restore one
the other in meekness as there shall be cause. This is not the Ministers duty
alone, but of others; which if it were practiced, we might say indeed that
great is the benefit of Christian fellowship; whereas now men look upon one
another, as if they knew them not, and had as lieue have their room as their
company. But what other is to be looked for, while Gods ordinances, (whereby
he has provided that this duty of caring one for another, shall be
nourished) are contemned and set at naught? But yet for all this, I would not
thus be understood, as though men ought to break off and leave their lawful
callings to seek (as some say they do) occasions to be doing of good, by
conference, etc. as some idle and fantastical persons are glad to pretend
such things, to the end they may live idely, and be held within no bounds: but
yet (as it may fall out) when they are called more necessarily to some special
duties of visiting one another in sickness, or eating and drinking together,
for the time, upon some such weighty and just occasion they may. But otherwise
they are, and that with faithfulness and diligence, to attend upon their
lawful vocation, unless with their conference and good communication and such
like doing of God, they may do the duties of their callings also; which in
traveling and iourneying together about their business, they may. And this be
gathered from the reproof of all the tribes in general, mentioned in these
three verses.

But now let us mark somewhat out of them more perticularly. For of 2
Reuben and Gilead it is expressly said, that they neglected this duty for their
own profit, and that they were more bent to the seeking of that, then to lend
their help where they owe it. This was found fault withal in them: even as
our Savior found the like fault with them, who were invited by Luke 14. 18.
him unto another duty, even to the great supper, as these were to fight
against Gods enemies, they excusing their absence for their own private
advantage, every one his way: one had hired a farm, another had bought oxen,
and he must even then go try them; and another had married a wife; to whom may
be added the third sort of hearers mentioned by our Savior, whose sin was
of the same kind, whom the cares of the world, and thorns of riches choke, so
that the seed sown in them brings forth no good fruit. This worldly mind and
sloth in men to prefer their own Mat. 13. 22.
profit before Gods business, far more weighty; God in no wise can abide. And
yet a common sin it is, and not in the worst sort of professors only; (as we
see in Martha, who lost the best part, when Christ was at her house, and that
by cumbring her self needlessly) who for their own private commodity neglect
and pass by duties to God and their brethren, and those very weighty: for
while they puddle for earthly pearls, they forgo the peerlesse pearl of
faith and regeneration, being, (if they could see it) far more gaineful then
their best merchandise, and by infinite degrees excelling them all. And let us
all take heed, seeing commonly it so falls out, that he who is wittingly
careless in some duties, is not very forward in other, how weighty soever,
that it be not so with us, that while we aim at heaven, more then some other,
we be not waighed down, as it were, with bolts upon our heels, to the depth
of earthlinesse, and so make our dwelling under the earth; in perpetual
darkness.

And this by the occasion of the sin in these two tribes, bewailed by Debora,
speaking in her song of one of them thus; for the division of Ruben, in that he
divided himself from his brethren, there were great thoughts of heart, that
is, much maruelling and lamenting for his so doing. Of the other thus: Gilead
remained beyond Jordan; as if she should say, even then, when their brethren
were fighting with their enemies, they of Gilead sat still at home, whom yet
the business concerned as much as themselves that lamented it. And was not
that then very lamentable? And as I have spoken of this one sin, the same may
be said of the rest how much to be bewailed they are, and namely, these more
near akind. Even so it is, when good men to these, as techinesse or conceits,
or any other sinister corruptions to separate men from their brethren, and
thereby to make them backward in helping forward the good things which
otherwise might be, as in keeping the unruly in order, and within compass; or
helping to bring in a sound and good ministry, or any other commendable thing,
by their care and industry. Oh how it should grieve us when we see them
backward in any good thing, who should be forward. Indeed when the devil has
so fare wound in with men, as to divide them from their brethren, they stand
stiffly in defense of their doing (so little does it grieve them) but it
pierces the hearts of the godly, in respect both of the wrong done to
themselves, and the scandal offered to others; as also because they deserve
thereby, that their former forwardness and fruits should be called into
question. Demas made light of his going from Paul: but he writes mournfully of
it to Timothy, in this manner: Demas has forsaken me, and has embraced, that
is to say, he 2. Tim. 4. 10.
rests in this present world. And no marvel; for the truth is, the better a
man's properties be, the more lamentable are his personal blemishes. Even as
when a man comely, and of very good shape in all other parts very personable of
body, has a wooden leg, or some other gross disfiguring of him, all men
observe it with commiseration and pity.

Now of Dan severally she complains, for that they of that tribe fled away
Doct verse. 17.
for fear of the enemies, from their dwelling places, if not also for their
worldly profit, as Reuben and the other did, as we have heard in the exposition
of this verse. So that as these did another way, and in another respect deserve
blame, as we see, namely, for their fear of their enemies, whereas they
should have rather understood, that it behooved them to have taken part with
their brethren: so the ill fauourednesse (if it could be seen with the eye
and the unseemliness of it in them,) teaches what a slavish affection this
fear and timerousnesse is, and what a burden to Gods servants, when their
faith is damped, and hindered by it, that it cannot have the proper work; that
is, to harten and encourage them to be forward and zealous in the work of the
Lord, but shiftingly to provide for themselves. And therefore in the
Revelation, this spiritual fearfulness is threatened as severely Revel. 21.
8.
as adultery and murder; and therefore (doubtless) is no less then a great
blemish. This, I say, is in men a shameful sin, to be content that other
shall bear the brunt, and themselves go free. Such shall smart and be wounded
deeply, when the other shall rejoice. Howbeit this I will add, that as this
fearfulness coming from a false heart, destitute of the love of God and
faith, is damnable disobedience to God, and treachery to men: so yet because it
may through infirmity cleave to a right good servant of God (for we must wisely
discern of the cause from whence it arises,) therefore we must not count
alike of both: as we have good warning by Peter's example, who of mere frailty
feared to confess his master, but by and by he went by himself, and wept
bitterly for it: whereas they whose fear rises of falsehood and mere carnal
respects only seek grossly to avoid danger, but relent not after for their
sin: therefore we must be wail both, but pity them that have been overcome
through frailty, and commend their estate to God, to give them more strength
and courage, and not daring be bold to censure them so far as to say, that
Christ will deny them before his father; for they are as far from falsehood
and malice, as they are from resolution and Christian magnanimity, yea and much
further; and let us rather that think we stand, beware that we fall not.

Now after all these, she speaks of the men of Ashur, who excused their Doct.
2. in verse. 17.
not coming forth to help against their enemies, by means of their weak
defenses at home, and their far distance: but howsoever they thought they had
good reason for their absence, we see that they are also reproved by the spirit
of God in Debora. To teach us, that it shall little boot us to make defenses
for our sin, and that we cannot hide it from God, and that he looks for
another thing at our hands, that we should not refuse to obey his word, no,
though it be with some danger. Which if we refuse to do, as these are here
dispraised, and sharply reproved for not so doing; so we in the day of
judgment shall be not only put to shame and rebuke with in ecouerable loss
for our slight gain by our excuse making; but also we shall be cast from Gods
presence for ever. Thus we have heard how she has commended the tribes that
did fight against the enemies, and dispraised those that refused, and has said
nothing of Judah, Simeon, Leui, and Gad; and therefore neither have I any thing
to say of them, who must have my ground of all that I speak, from the word.
And that which remains in this first point of the second part, is of the two
tribes, Zebulun and Naphtali: who in the midst of the earthlinesse, fear and
pretenses of their brethren, did (as we have heard in the exposition of this
verse) put their lives in danger by fighting with the enemies. Of whom although
I have spoken sufficiently Doct. verse. 18.
before, yet this I add, that if the cause so require, we should be ready to
give our lives for the brethren. Which Saint John meant, when he said, we
ought Ioh. 3. 16.
to lay down our lines for the brethren, even as our savior did, leaving us
an example. And as this case falls out seldom, so yet when it does, we ought
not to be to seek of this readiness, and willing mind to do this service for
them, considering that we are never like to yield our lives in better manner,
unless (...).
it be for the Lords cause and Gospel directly, which is in a manner all one.
And why not? when we see that some will be ready to do so for some benefactor
of theirs, who has been bountiful toward them. As S. Paul says, for a good
or bountiful man, perhaps some will die. Now if we ought to hold Romans 5. 7.
our lives on this condition, that beside the many casualties whereto they are
subject, they ought also to be ready to be offered at the pleasure of God
with all things else that we enjoy with them, we may see, that it is no wise
part to be wedded to that which we have here lent us here below, nor to our
lives themselves, as we are (and the rather, for that our Savior professes,
that he who will save his life, shall lose it) prising them at so high a
reckoning as we do; namely, to count them as our paradise; which is the
chief cause that we do so dote upon them, and also that we do so meanly
esteem and make account of the life to come, as that our hearts do little long
after it. And to conclude, by the opposition of these forementioned tribes, let
us learn wisdom, and judge righteous judgment. Let us mark the repugnant
example of both sorts of men, the zealous according to knowledge on the one
side, and the careless on the other: also their actions their affections, and
their reward, observing how the Lord honors, encourages and recompenseth
the one with the love of his people, and maine blessings: and how he brandeth
the other with a black cole of infancy and shame: that as we like or abhor
their portion) so we may like the grace of the one, and abhor the practice of
the other. It follows.

THE THIRTY FOUR SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 19. The Kings came and fought, then fought the Kings of Canaan in
Taanach by the waters of Megiddo: they received no gain of money. Verse. 20.
They fought from heaven, even the stars in the^^ courses fought against
Sisera. Verse. 21. The river Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the
river Kishon. O my soul thou have marched valiantly. Verse. 22. Then were the
horse hoofes broken with the beating together of their mighty men.
IN these words is contained the second point or branch of The sense of these
four verses.
the second part of the chapter, wherein Debora sets down the manner of the
battle on the behalf of the enemies, namely, that they came solemnly to
fight, and well provided; accompanied with Kings, both of Canaan and other
countries, to furnish and adorn the armies: and yet for all that, they fought
vnprosperously and unhappily, and had very hard success. For the Lord fought
against them from heaven; the rivers and waters swallowed them up, and swept
them away: and their horses were vnhoofed. Now when they were fought against
all these ways, they were scattered and fell before Israel, in wonderful
manner, for all the multitude and show of them. This unprosperous fighting of
theirs, is set down by her, first generally in the 19. verse, and then more
particularly in the next three; as shall appear when we come to them. In the
19. verse thus; by a figure whereby (not without a bitter vpbraiding of them)
she intimates more then she expresses. They received no gain of money: nay,
they iost all, and Israel enjoyed a rich spoil. The like figure is used in the
Psalm: A broken heart thou will not despise, that is, Thou will make Psalm. 51.
17.
great account of it. The phrase it self, as we use it, (for it is a nipping
scoff) is as much, as if she had said, they might put the gains in their
eyes, etc.

In this verse also she shows the pomp and multitude of the enemies, Verse
19.
and how they filled all the plain betwixt mount Tabor, and the towns of
Taanach and Megiddo, even to their rivers running by them, which were called by
the same names; this (I say) Debora does as well declare, as how ill they sped,
namely, that they got not that which they sought and looked for, I mean, the
overthrow and spoil of the Israelites: nay rather, they were miserably spoiled
and distroyed themselves. By the which, two things may be noted: One, that we
may see the glory of wicked men, flourishing like the green bay tree. I say,
of wicked men, (for otherwise, I grant, godly persons may be honorable and
great) and we may see also that this their glory reaches, as it were, to the
very clouds, as we read in the Psalm: yea Psalm. 37 35.
and that in the time of war, as here, which yet can in no wise show it, as
the times of peace may: yea, and that for their glory they may be sholed with
Princes, and be almost companions with Kings: these, I say, and such like, we
may possibly see, as terrors to daunt and grieve us; for the advancement of
them, is heaviness and matter of hanging down the head to the righteous. And
w^^t of this, you may say, when this may be seen? and why shall it be thus*
Surely, that Gods people may not have their eyes dazeled with their pomp and
glory, when they shall see them pulled from it; but that they may hereby be
weaned and estranged the more, from the dangerous and poisoned baits that
would hurt them, as they have done the other, but by faith ^ee their downfall
even in the midst of their glory, and while they to their hearts desire
enjoy all outward things, and all because they are the Lords rank enemies.
Secondly, that they may cleave to God more faithfully, and also wait more
constantly to see the glory of such turned to shame, if they prevent it not by
repentance. And let this be the use of this first thing unto us.

The second that I note here is this, (according to that in the Proverbs) that
the wicked do not always roste that which they get in hunting: that is, they
2 Prou. 12. 27.
do not always attain to that, which they promise themselves in the earnest
desire of their hearts; and whereof they have great likelihood, as well as
hope: but God cutteth them off from it, to their great vexation and
disappointment: yea, and the godly shall see it, and triumph, as Debora did
here, and Israel over Pharao. For though that be true, that they are fatted
here, and have more then they might look for, (which yet they have but to
their destruction) yet, that the righteous may not envy them, but see that the
Lord takes their part against them, and lest the proud themselves should think
there is no God that sees them, they are crossed in their purposes, and many
times when they hope for that which they would most willingly enjoy, the Lord
frustrateth and mocketh them, as he did the King of Aram, 2. King. 6. 12.
when all his secret plots and purposes against the King of Israel, were
bewraied to him by the Prophet Elisha, and he shows them thereby, that they
have him not always at their commandment: as neither can they go about any
of their attempts, without his sufferance. That it may be verified, that (when
none else can) yet even then God resists the proud. And as the Lord thus
matcheth and disappointeth them, when it seems good to him, in their common
dealings, that they attain not that which they aim at, and look for; so
especially when they fight against God, and play the giants against heaven like
Nebuchadnezzar: and when their insolency utters it self against the poor
Church of God, (as many of them choose this as the fittest object to vomit their
poison upon) then the Lord in an answerable manner rises up and scatters them;
looks down from heaven, and laughs them to scorn, and scatters them: for
why? they banded themselves against his anointed.

For example sake, though the Scripture be full of such, let these two at this
time suffice. The one is of them that would build a city that should Genesis 11.
4.
reach up to heaven, to get them a name, the Lord set himself against them,
cast down their building, and called the name thereof Babell, that is,
confusion. For what a pride was in them, and to what had it been like to have
grown, if God had let them alone, and suffered their work to go forward? The
other example is of Haman, who being so inward with the king, Ester 7 10.
and advanced by him, when he looked yet to rise higher, he was, unlooked for,
cast down from all his dignity, when his shame was made suitable to Note.
his glory. And thus (as it fared here with Sisera) in stead of great
successes and increasings of their purposes and dignities, they are not
defeated thereof only, but are feign to lose that which they enjoyed before;
the Lord making their ambition, the next mean of their overthrow. So God
deals with many; of whom, some rising out of the dunghill to great wealth and
honor, not only are ioynted otherwise oftentimes, but when they want nothing
but life and length of days, to enjoy their flourishing estate still; behold,
even that way he meets with them, and by death, sometime reproachful enough,
but to be sure, with pain and woe enough, besides that after their going
hence, he cuts them off from all their iolitie, as it were, at one blow. And
who, fearing God, might have lived by them, if they could have prolonged their
days?

This be said of the 19. verse, and in general of their ill prospering against
Verse 20.
Israel, in their fighting: now more particularly, Debora shows in this
verse, that even from heaven, that is, from the higher region of the air, the
stars and planets raised the rain and the wind in their faces, yea the
hail and tempests to fight against Sisera, so that thereby God showed himself
to be against him, all his preparation and furniture of charets, horses and men
serving him to no purpose, but disappointing him. This teaches us, that when
God will both heaven and earth, and the powers of both, shall fight against
Doct. verse. 20. Leuit 26 19. Exodus 14. 28.
Gods enemies, even as all the plagues written in the book of God, do at his
commandment, seize upon, and torment them. So the hail from above slew Gods
enemies, and the Sun stood still to that end: so frosts Josh. 10. 11. 12.
and floods, plague and tamine, with other such, have in our time fought
against them from God. I have handled this point more largely before, I will
only answer one objection in this place. It is objected, that the godly
Object.
sustain the forementioned judgments and the like, as well as the wicked:
therefore when shall we be able to prove and say, the Lord in lays them upon
his enemies, as if he aimed at that alone? For Job had his sheep and servants
burnt up and devoured by fire from heaven, as if Satan would Job 1. 16.
thereby have persuaded him, that God himself made war with him from thence:
his body was also smitten with sore byles, from the sole of his foot unto the
crown of his head, and he took a potsheard to scrape him. I answer, that God
sends these and the like to his children, as trials, or corrections Answ.
to heal them of some dangerous disease, as pride, loosenes, worldliness,
etc. but to his enemies, as scourges for their wicked lives, to begin their
hellish torments here; and as this ever true, so if their sins be manifest,
we may so judge of the particular offenders that he means no less toward
them, and that without any fear of iniurying them, unless they repent.

The next particular assistant to Israel, that is said to have fought against
Verse 21.
Sisera, was the river Kishon: which though it was not usually deep, yet now
the waters rose higher, and ouerflowed the banks, and was spread out further:
and because both the armies met there by, therefore it is described by her, the
river of mettings, namely of both the armies, for the word is better translated
so, then as some do translate it the anctent river, and by an elegant
repetition of the word, shows that it drowned and carried away many of the
enemies, even as the dust and other filthiness is swept out of an house with a
broo^e. Not that all were slain that way, which could not be, when the men
were many, and the place not large, but that many flying, were there destroyed.
And this being a thing neither feared of the enemies, nor made reckoning of by
Gods people, does worthily teach us, that when we walk uprightly with God, he
causes many things to lend their help to us, which we never thought of, nor
looked for; and not only persons to be kind to us, but also other
commodities, comforts, and encouragements to meet with us: yea the very places
where we dwell, and whither we come. And the very same things which have been
fatal and deadly enemies to others, to be helpful, and as it were, made
friendly unto us.

Jacob thus being faithful to the Lord, he enriched him greatly, over he
ever looked for, or saw likelihood of, but rather of the contrary: and so dealt
he with his father Isaac before him, being among strangers in the land. And so
he provides for many of his dear servants, who coming strangers to Note.
a place, where it was little likely to get, either grace, knowledge, or other
commodities, he has yet by giving them honest and good hearts, blessed them
otherwise, with love and favor of the best, with a sweet life, inward peace,
growing in goodness, fruit of prayers and other holy labors, with
contentment, and such like; that it may for ever worthily persuade all to get
into Gods service, and to be upright hearted toward him, seeing godliness 1.
Tim. 1. 12.
brings so many and great commodities. But of this I spoke somewhat before
also. But on the contrary it may be said, that when men seek not the Lord with
all their heart, neither be careful that their ways may please him; they not
only prosper not long, (which yet they were as like to attain to as the most)
but they lose even that which they had, and are tossed about with many
calamities, and with this, as the greatest of all, that when God frowneth upon
them, they believe it not: the danger whereof may easily be gathered by the
drunkard, in the Proverbs; who was stricken, he said, for his sin and the
fruits of it, whoredom and such like, but he was not sick; Prou. 23. 35.
he was beaten, but he knew not, therefore he would follow his sin yet still.

The speech uttered by Debora, [O my soul thou have marched valiantly or, 2
as it is in the Hebrew, O my soul thou have trod down strength, namely of
the enemies, which we know was very great. If we take it in the first sense,
she triumphs in a general manner through the courage and furtherance that
God gave her: if in the latter it is the same, but more particularly she
speaks to her soul reioycingly, that she had trod under foot might and
strength, seeing God had armed her with power against so great enemies, as if
she should say, that therefore she need to fear the power of none hereafter,
God being still with her. Both afford this worthy instruction, that when we
have seen that God has given us great deliverance while we trusted in him,
as she here did, we should for euerafter promise our selves 2. Chron. 16. 8.
that he will do the like to us still, seeking to him in the like manner,
that so Note. Romans 5. 4.
we may harten our selves to believe it. This agrees with Saint Paul's
doctrine, that experience brings hope: and with his practice, saying, God
has 2. Cor. 1. 10.
delivered us, does deliver us, in whom we trust that yet hereafter also, he
will deliver us. And doublesse this experience is the proper fruit which faith
brings forth, without which what were our life? we are not freed from all
affliction, because we have escaped one: but we remain still subject to the
same, or the like: and what shall it boot us to have been ouercommers in the
one, if we be foiled by another, (as we may easily be, even by a lesser,
without this armor) through unbelief, when before through faith we overcame
a greater. Surely, no more then it should have booted David to have killed the
Bear, if he had been slain by the Lion, or the Philistim. And therefore
learn hence, that though we ought to believe in him for his promise sake; yet
we much better do it (or ought to do) when we have a pawn lying by us, I
mean experience of the truth of it: but hard is the case of them who have
neither of both.

The third thing that made the Canaanites fight vnprosperously against Verse. 22.
Israel, was the breaking of their horse hoofes with the often beating together
of the mighty. The horse hoofes are naturally most sound and strong, so that
they be not easily cleft asunder, nor broken: but they ran here with such
violence in that skirmish to save themselves, and so smote one against another,
that they broke their hoofes. In which case we know, that they could neither
sit their horses to pursue their enemies; neither shift for themselves by
flying. This most lively teaches us, that no man should trust in his own
strength, nor in the strength of an horse, in charrets, or in riches, no not in
Princes power, nor in any earthly thing whatsoever. It is as easy for the Lord
now to leave men, and disappoint them in their vain confidence of young
years, great wealth, hope of long life, or such like, as it was to pluck off
Pharaohs chariot wheels, and here to break the horses hoofes of the
Canaanites, and so to bring upon them destruction thereby. Thus we have heard
in this second branch of this second part of this chapter, how hard and ill
success the Canaanites had in this battle.

Verse. 23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse the inhabitants
thereof; because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the
Lord against the mighty.

24. Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite shall be blessed above other women,
blessed shall she be above women dwelling in tents.

25. He asked water, and she gave him milk, she brought forth butter in a
lordly dish.

26. She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workemans hammer:
with the hammer smote she Sisera, she smote off his head, after she had wounded
and pierced his temples.

27. He bowed him down at her feet, he fell down, and lay still at her
feet, he bowed him down, and fell: and when he had sunk down, he lay there
dead.

IN these verses and this part of the song follows the third and last The
sense of these 5. verses.
branch of the second part of the chapter; wherein Debora first sets down
the wrath of God against such as refused to help in the work of the Lord, as
were the Merozites; and that she does in this 23. verse. And then she
declares the favor of God toward them that helped therein, (besides those who
were in the battle) as Iael, and this she does in the other 4. verses. More
particularly in this 23. verse she calls all in her song to curse this city
with her; for that it being near the place where the battle was, yet the
inhabitants thereof refused to help their brethren, being called thereto, and
requested. The other tribes before mentioned had some kind of excusing
themselves, neither were desired, though they knew of it; but these beheld and
yet would not set hand to help; therefore they are thus dealt with. But seeing
it might be thought to come of stomach and revenge, that she pronounced such
sharp threats against them; therefore she says, the Angel of God bad her
sing so.

And thereafter we are to learn what we may do about cursing: that it Verse 23.
is in no sort lawful for us to curse any man, for to satisfy our own
revenging minds. For when we deal in our own matters, we must love our
enemies; and as our Savior teaches, bless them that curse us: but if God it
Mat 5. 44.
any time show that he will have any to be destroyed, they who know his will,
they are to approve the same. This is the harder to learn, because that
corruption which lurketh in us, and is chained up from notorious breaking out
willingly, seeking the opportunity and pretense of zeal to shrowde it self
under; even as a secret traitor seeing the door open which leads to the
Princes chamber, dare not go in alone, but waits till some of the nobles or
guard passes in, and in that company he cunningly conueyeth himself to work
mischief. Pray we for grace therefore to watch the door of our lips, through
which many good words of blessing pass: and let us beware that no cursed
speech pass by also, under what color soever. And thus did David, directed by
God, and other of the faithful, who cursed Gods Iam. 2. 10. 11.
enemies, as in the Psalm: who yet as they were, did otherwise in kind
affection, and the same not evil, bewail them. As Samuel, and Jeremy, and our
Psalm. 109. 6. etc.
Savior, did bewail and weep for the destruction of wicked men; wherein we
have no doubt but they pleased God. Now to such as demand what they shall do
to them who vex the godly, and rage against the Gospel? the answer is, that
we are to pray God to change their minds, or to weaken their power, that they
may not be able to do the evil they would: and if this be not granted, then
we must crave strength to bear that which we must go under.

And here we must further learn, on the contrary, by the example of these of
Meroz, to obey God, calling us to any duty, as they did, who followed Debora
and Barak; and to help those that are in want and need; especially if they
follow their calling, contrary to that which these men of Meroz, and the people
of Peniel and Succoth, in the seventh chapter did, who denied to refresh Gedeon
and his men, as they pursued his enemies and theirs. But if these were
pitifully handled, and the men of Meroz cursed for not helping their brethren;
what think we shall be done to them, who not only help not the servants of
Christ, but vex, grieve and oppress them? And if no other thing can dissuade
them from such a course, yet let this; that they themselves are ever like daily
to be taken hence by death: then shall Note.
they come to their accounts, as they see on every side many to be, who were as
unlike as they; and while they remain here, they shall have God against them,
who has professed that he will be an enemy to those that are enemies to his.
And this of Meroz briefly, for in so long a work I am unwilling to repeat the
same thing often.

Now she calls all Gods people to bless and wish well to Iael, as one Verse
24.
blessed among other women of her lineage and kindred, who dwelt in tents, as
the Kenites did; and repeateth the words for more force. Thus the Lord would
have her commended unto all posterity, to the rouzing up of other, who are
slack and backward in all good things, that when they shall see that God does
so highly account of the readiness of some in his business, other may be
quickened to the same care in well doing. For were this deeply imprinted in men's
hearts, and thoroughly persuaded to the^, and often thought of, that God knows
their works, and is a plentiful rewarder of all that Heb. 11. 6.
seek to please him, they would be much more forward, every one in the things
which are commanded him. But of this I have spoke also by occasion offered,
before.

Here Debora commends the wisdom of Iael, but such as proceeded Verse 25.
from faith in her, that she called Sisera into her tent, and covered him, and
gave him drink fit to cast him into a sleep. And in that it is said, she gave
him butter also in a lordly dish; it is likely that she offered food to him,
that he might drink the more liberally. By all these she made way the more
easily for that she afterward brought to pass. By this example we are taught
to be wise and circumspect in the things we go about. For though it be
requisite that they be lawful, yet if we be not circumspect, and do not
forecast inconveniences, and to do them in season, and fit time, good manner,
and to the right end, there may much grief, discommodity, and inconvenience
follow, which will much disquiet us: and through rashness and improuidence, we
may bring that to an ill end, which yet was lawfully taken in hand of us. As if
men will embrace religion, yet they walk loosly and lightly. Rebecca when she
saw that Jacob her dear son was deadly hated of his Genesis 27. 43.
brother Esau, and that he sought opportunity to kill him, did not only
keep him out of the way (for so he might one time or other have had his will
of him as Cain had of his brother Abel) but avoided many dangers at once, by
sending him into a far country to her fathers house (from whence she came) to
dwell there (though it was hard for her to forbear the sight of him any long
time) even with her brother Laban in Padam Aram. And why? she knew that in that
space the wrath of his brother would be abated, as she also said. A wise part
therefore it was in her, in that weighty matter. And the wisdom of Abigall
in preserving her house, which the foolishnes 1. Sam. 25. 28.
of Nabal had otherwise destroyed, was as commendable. And such wisdom to
preserve our lives, goods, credit, grace, and inward peace therewith to prevent
dangers, and avoid many needless troubles, is a great furtherance to live
well, and to make our lives more fruitful to other, and comfortable to our
selves. Only take we heed that we ascribe naught to our Note.
wit, and that we perke not above that which is meet: but in all humility
serve we Gods providence, and so we shall find it no small benefit to be free
from carelessness, rashness, and foolishnes, which throughout our life cause
much evil and grief, which are unwelcome. About this see more in chapter 3.
15.

Debora here adds to the wisdom of Iael, her courage and fortitude. Verse
26. The sense.
For was it not a point of courage for a woman to set upon so valiant a
Captain, as Sisera was? and to take the nail in one hand, and the hammer in
the other, (it seems other weapons were not at hand) and to adventure to
strike them into the temples of his head, as he lay? For what though he was
asleep? might he not at the first blow have started and risen up with the
pain, and so have overthrown her in his rage, and that a great deal more
likely then to have received his deadly wound at her hand? The very form
therefore, and being of this fortitude, was no mannishnes, or stoutnes of
courage by nature, (for of that we can say nothing) but only faith.

And in this last verse of this third point, in this second part of the
chapter; The sense of verse 27.
when he was almost slain, Debora sets down certain motions, which
appear in such as have their deadly blow by violent death. For he being so
wounded, his body through extremity of pain, bowed twice or thrice. For he
went about to rise: but having no strength, he fell down again, and lay
miserably at the feet of Iael. And thus God brought proud Sisera to shame, and
to a fearful end, though so valiant a Captain, and that by the hand of a
woman.

Now what shall we say to this? Surely it teaches, that when God will do
some great thing by any, he will also fit and enable them thereunto. Even Saul
himself had an heart given him furnished with gifts for government, when God
had once called him. Moses when he should be sent to 1. Sam. 10. 9. Exodus 3.
11. and 10. 26.
Pharao, to carry the people of Israel out of Egypt, how did he complain and
disable himself? but when God had furnished him, he waxed bold. The Virgin
Mary, when word was brought her, that she should be the mother Luke 1 35.
of our Savior, answered with astonishment; How can this thing be, seeing I
know not a man? But when it was told her by the Angel, the holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall over shadow thee:
therefore also that holy thing that shall be borne of thee, shall be called the
son of God; Then Mary said, Behold the servant of the Lord, be it unto me
according to thy word.

The examples are infinite, that may be brought to this purpose. But I will
contain my self, adding only this one, how should the Apostles, being poor
fishermen, do so great a work, as to subdue the greatest part of the world to
their doctrine? which was as if a man would have undertaken to tame the wild
beasts in the wilderness: But by Christ's sending them the most powerful gifts
of the holy Ghost; as the confirming of their faith, the increase of knowledge,
courage in pains taking and to withstand their enemies, the gift of tongues,
and of working miracles, we see it came so to pass. And though such things be
not wrought in these days, as neither is it necessary that such should now be
wrought; yet many of the ordinary works which God will have to be done by
his, in this latter age, are great and not to be passed over slightly.

For how unlike a thing is it, for a private man or woman, who have no other
outward gifts of God, to speak of, but only this, that they can read the
Scriptures in their own language; how unlike is it, I say, that such living
among people of most profane and bad behavior, should not be Note.
tainted with them, and defiled by them; as he that touches pitch? Nay, that
they being baited, disgraced, and scorned of them, (as they are in many places)
should not faint and be discouraged by them, and driven from their hope, and
profession of it, but that they should walk on in the vprightnes of their
hearts, and innocence of their hands, so far and so long, till their light
so shining, does lighten some of these which hated them, who sat long in
darkness, and cause them to embrace that conversation, to the which they had
been such deadly enemies before; this (I say) is a thing to be wondered at, even
as to see the lamb and the lion to feed together. And yet (God be Esaias 11. 6.
blessed) so it is at this day, in some places, and so it has bin in former
times, that when men's ways have pleased the Lord, he has caused not only
their Prou. 16. 7.
very enemies to be at one with them, but also their very hearts to be entirely
knit to them. Yea many silly persons, so furnished with grace by God, have
forced great ones to wish from their hearts, for all their wealth and power,
that they were like to them.

And yet this is more, that a Minister of the Gospel, who is to challenge them
openly that keep not the commandments of Jesus, and in his name Revel. 12. 17.
to rebuke and threaten the workers of iniquity (though all this is, of the
loving John 16. 8. 1. Tim. 4. 16.
and kind Preacher, done to save their souls, by turning them from their
evil ways;) that such a Minister, I say, who is not only hated for his good
will, and counted their enemy for telling them the truth; but also accused
Gal. 4. 16.
by them, pursued also, and not suffered to be quiet among them; yet should
constantly hold out his labors, with a life vnoffensiue, what a work of God
(think we) is that in him? who were like to continue so gracious a course in
the midst of so many discouragements (whereof I have mentioned but a few;) if
the Lord should not give them faith to believe, that of their love to him, they
should feed his lambs and his sheep, and that in so doing, Ioh. 21 15.
they assure themselves they shall be plentifully rewarded? and to this end
that he will give them shoulders, I mean courage to bear their so great a
Heb. 11. 6.
burden? These are no small things, which yet God works among us, that we
may see he regards us, as he did some in former times.

The other and last thing to be noted in this second part, is of Sisera; that
the Lord pulled him down, and cast him from his so great honor and
valiantnes. Verse. 27.
For as it was a great abasement for such a Nimrod to be driven to so great a
straight, as to lurk in another man's house, not daring to peer forth (as the
silly bird beaten into the bush by the hawke) so it was yet far baser to
fall by the hand and at the feet of a woman. Let us learn, that the Lord
brings to naught the high and haughty, and that to their utter Doct. verse.
3. 27.
shame, who were so great and proud. It is no strange thing in the Scriptures
to find it thus, though fools wonder at it, who will learn no instruction by
it. The Lord casts the mighty from their seat. Witness Abimilech, who in
his desperate mood, being stricken on the head with a millstone by a Judge. 9. 54.
woman, called his page, and bid him to run him through, lest it should be
said, A woman slew him. And yet that which was said of him, was reproachful
enough, to wit, that a base page slew him: and agrees well with the point in
hand. Thus Absolon, who had stomach to rise against his father, so kind to
him, was brought to a base and reprochful death, very fit for such an one, 2 Samuel 18. 15.
being thrust through by Ioabs common soldiers. And Iezabel, scorning God and
his Prophets, was, according to the foretelling of the Lord, made dogs meat,
and dung upon the earth, being thrown out of the window 2. King. 9. 37.
from her royal palace. The proud and stout Jews, who railed on Peter,
calling him despitefully, a drunken man, were so terrified with their sin, that
Acts 2. 37.
they were glad to seek to be comforted even by him, whom they had scorned.
And well is it with them, whose pride the Lord resists in mercy for their
good, as he did Paul's, by appalling him first, and then sending him to poor
Ananias, who being his comforter now, had been a prey for him, if God had not
prevented it. For the rest whom I have mentioned (they excepted also in the
second of the Acts) the other, I say, were resisted to their cost and utter
undoing And so by the foolishnes of preaching (as it pleases 1. Cor. 1. 21.
the world to call it) and an humble submitting of themselves to his holy
doctrine, they that are saved must attain; but as that generation of vipers,
the Pharisees, were glad to come to John's ministry, if so be they took any
good by it. Be we therefore humble and meek, they who are graced, are 1. Pet.
5. 7.
they that find favor with him; but as for the proud, he resists them, and
sets himself against them, till they be confounded (if they so abide) and
be brought to naught. And therefore let the scorners and enemies taunt and
mock the simple professors of the truth, like Edomites, they shall one day
wish they had been like them, and judge them more happy then themselves, as
Dives, for all his superfluity, did wish that he might have had, not the
estate of Lazarus, (which he saw no hope to attain) but the thousand part of
it, even that he might dip his finger in cold water, and quench his thirst;
which yet might not be granted him. And therefore, let us but stay a while, and
contain our selves, and we shall see these boasters and contemners, (if they
will needs hold on their course) we shall see them (I say) swept away, and
they shall be no more: so little cause shall we see of having our teeth water
after their dainties. They are wise, who can in the iolitie and prosperity of
the enemies of the Church, see their overthrow by faith, and count their
flourishing and bragges to be but vain crakes. And thus Psalm. 73. 18, 19.
much be said of the second part of the Chapter.

THE THIRTY FIVE SERMON ON THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The third part of the Chapter.
Verse. 28. The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the
lattesse; Why is his charet so long a coming? why tarry the wheels of his
charets, etc. Verse. 29. Her wise Ladies answered her, yea, she answered her
self with her own words. Verse. 30. Have they not gotten, and they divide the
spoil? every man has a maid or two, Sisera has a prey of diverse colored
garments; a prey of sundry colors made of needle work on both sides, for the
chief of the spoil. Verse. 31. So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord, but
they that love him, shall be as the Sun when he arises in his might. And the
land had rest forty years.
IN these words is contained the third and last part of the The sense of all
these verses.
song of Debora, and so of the Chapter, and has two members: in the first, she
brings in the boastings of the women that were enemies to Gods people, and
Siseras dear friends, and derides them, in the first three verses. In the last
member, she opposes a prophetical prayer against their boastings, wishing
therein to the remainder of Gods enemies, destruction; and to the Israelites,
all increase of good things: and that increase she lays out by a comparison
of the Sun from the rising to the noone tide; even such she wishes it to be.
More particularly, to come to the first point, she says, that Siseras mother
was looking Of the 28. particularly.
out, and longing for her sons retune, with his great spoil and booty,
fearing yet the hardest, because he tarried so long, till she was answered by
her Ladies, and so answered herself; that he was busy in dividing the spoil.

This place lays out the exceeding care that parents have of the welfare
Doct. verse 28.
of their children, and the thought they take for them in any likelihood of
danger, they being betwixt hope and fear about them: and if they be long out
of sight, they are much pensive for them, and troubled within themselves,
especially if they be in any peril. The which (setting apart the odious 1.
Sam. ^. 5. 2. Sam. 18 33.
fact of Sisera) was commendable in his mother, and according to the rule of
nature, to hope and long for his prosperous return, and to fear the
contrary. So Saul, that was after King of Israel, knew his fathers affection
to be so tender over him, that when he was sent to seek his asses, and tarried
long, 1. Sam. 9. 5.
not finding; he hasted home, lest his father should turn the care of
recovering the asses into care for his son. And Job, though in a far better
respect, feared, even when his sons feasted together for increase of love,
lest they should offend God. So David in his charge to Ioab, abounding in this
tender love toward his son Absolon; when he made war against him, did
straightly command him to entreat him gently: And S. Paul teaches, that we
should have care of our own; which well becomes all, and the 1. Tim. 5. 8.
contrary is unnatural: whether we respect their neglect of their bodily
maintenance, and so leaving them to sink or swim, when yet they may relieve
them, or their souls welfare and salvation, by neglecting or denying them holy
instruction and education in the ways of the Lord; by means whereof, they are
left as a prey to the lewd and bad, by their wicked company and example; which
is far worse then bodily penury and misery, though who knows not, that it
is woeful to be brought up idle, and without a lawful trade of life, destitute
of necessaries. Of both understand that of Solomon; Teach a child, etc else he
may teach thee on the gallows. But Prou. 22. 6.
as there is a sin in the defect, that is, unnaturalness in parents to their
children, not to be allowed, no not so much as that of Siseras mother, which I
2. Tim. 3. 3. (...).
last of all mentioned; so there is in the excess, another sin that is far
more common then that; as when parents are too fond over their children, and
cannot abstain from she wing affection toward them, and that without
discretion, to wit, to the unruly, disobedient, and subtle and wilful; as
well as to the simple, timorous, tractable, and religious; whereby they give
them occasion, nay they encourage them to abuse them boldly, saucily, and with
small respect, and to wind them which way they list. Thus David by Adoniah,
and Ely by his sons found it, and smarted for it accordingly. Whereas men
should hold their children in a godly awe, and keep them within compass, by
authority, which God has given them over them; and yet not in rigor, neither
void of parentlike kindness. For want of which regard had by parents toward
their children, on both sides great inconvenience Note.
falls out; that some are handled and oppressed with unseasonable severity,
who deserve it not; and other are cockered with too much indulgence and
lenity, till they be made much the worse for it. And not much unlike to this
last mentioned affection in parents, is this, or rather a branch of it; that
some of them, through a deceiuable humor, deal out their love to their
children unequally, when yet by the carriage of themselves it is equally
deserved, affecting the one for some outward respect, or private conceit; as
Isaac did Esau, and David Absolon, who thought there was not such another to be
found.

There is yet another error in parents toward their children, who are too far
carried in affection to them, and that is, that because it is permitted unto
them, nay commanded, to provided for them; therefore they run into most
troublesome and pensive care to provide for them, and thereby fall into most
noisome temptations and snares of the devil to benefit them, whereas they
ought to have well learned this lesson before, that for all their affection
toward them, they should not offend God for their sakes, nor neglect or lose
any grace, neither leave any work of charity and mercy undone, nor ieopard
their own salvation by wounding their conscience any manner of way for them:
They should consider, that it is ill pity toward their children, which makes
them impious against God, and injurious against man, and most of all against
themselves: nay rather, what torment shall it Note.
not be to their consciences, unless it be worse, to remember that they have
increased their childrens portions with the complaints of the poor, or through
their worldliness, and they must now go and sustain endless woe for it.

But while I thus speak, it ought of children to be marked, that this
affection of the parents, if it were but according to nature rectified, and
sanctified in them toward their children, (though it did not weaken their
estate for their preferment, (as I have noted out of the fact of Calebs
endowing his daughter) ought to be a sufficient motive and persuasion to them
their children, ever to show all reverence, obedience, and thankfulness to them;
though many parents, and mothers especially, who can most hardly be brought to
keep within their bounds toward their children, may after they come to years
of discretion, justly complain, that the more they have showed their love to
them, the less they are set by, and regarded of them. Oh what I have observed
and seen in this which I now speak of, and that not in one or two? but
another occasion may be given to say more of it in another place. And this of
Siseras mothers affection to him.

Of Sisras mothers speech we have heard, much longing for his return: Now it
follows in this verse, how the other Ladies, among whom his Verse 29. 30. The
meaning.
wife was thought to be, answered her, and that in such wise, as appears in
the text, that she being sorrowful, was ready to take comfort by their words;
even as all that be in heaviness (which is unwelcome of it self) would
willingly, and are easily brought to desire comfort, yea though it be not
ministered to them from any good ground, nor aright. And the sum of their
comfort was this; that there was no doubt nor question to be made, but that
Sisera had got the victory over his enemies: and that his tariance was, as in
such cases it falls out, for the distributing of the booty and spoil which
was taken therein, to every one according to his labor, condition, and
worthiness: which (said they) being much and of great value, after so noble a
conquest, it could not in a short time be dispatched. This was the conceit and
false persuasion of the Ladies, wherein they rested, and did comfort themselves
for all that his long tariance. And it sets a worthy instruction before us:
namely, how ready people are to be carried away with vain Doct. verse. 29.
conceits and ungrounded hopes of comfort, and how easily they deceive
themselves therewith: whereas they should look that they have good warrant for
that wherein they take comfort. For else what other thing is it, then as the
common proverb speaks, namely a building of castles in the air? Even as he
that dreameth sleeping, or imagines waking, that the thing which he desires,
shall even so come to pass as he would have it. What is more foolish then to
please ones self in thinking, that he may find such a mass of gold, and be
advanced to such and such honor, and thereupon to take pleasure in promising
himself what a pleasant life he will lead.

And is this foolishnes thus to deceive a man's self? Then how much greater
wisdom is it, or what better ground has it, which the wise men of the world
(as they are called) do make their common practice? who yet do scorn the
fancies and dreams of the other, who have naught? And that is this: They
reckon how long they shall live in the estate they are in, and hope to come to
better. They make account what great bargains they Note.
shall have, and what great gainings and commings in: how plentiful increase
their corn, cattle, and other commodities shall bring forth. Others in
another kind, even about that which best likes their humor, do seriously
beat their brains, how they may be revenged upon them whom they deadly hate,
and what means and ways they will use to bring them low, and have their will
of them. Another sort resolve how merry they will be with their mates and
companions, in drinking, whoring, and in their sundry kinds of play and
pastime: whereas many times they are cut off from their hope before, and when
it is come, it lasts not. All these and such like, as Agag (who merrily
promised himself, that al fear of death was past, when it was at hand) what
warrant have they of these their conceits and fond delusions, and dangerous
dreams? When S. James mocketh one sort of them, saying; Go to ye that say, to
morrow we will go to such a place, etc. And James 4. 13.
again, Solomon challenges all sorts of them, asking them why they boast of
Prou. 27. 1.
to morrow, when they cannot tell what may fall out ere to morrow, in such a
changeable world as this is, and what alterations may come before? as they that
observe may see daily, to the just condemning of all such for mere fools,
that rest upon such bruised reeds, and broken holds, and yet go for the only
wise men.

How many have made their account all these ways that I have mentioned, to
have their will fulfilled? and to vex Gods people at the heart, threatening to
root them out, as Haman did the Jews; who yet have themselves Note.
been, before their reckoning was accomplished and brought to pass,
overthrown and laid in the dust? For do such as are but worms, look to have
the Lord at commandment? and to appoint him how he shall rule the world,
dispose of things, and serve their turns? And yet as absurd a thing as this
is, what one among many is ashamed of his boldness and folly, or as if he were
weary of it, and repented, does take a better course, and seeks to have
warrant and good assurance of that which he comfort himself in? or how many
other take example by them to be any whit the wiser?

But for better sight into the folly of these men: and to make it appear to be
more gross, let us put the case, that these future joys of theirs were not
uncertain, as they are of all seen and found to be, but that they were sure
to enjoy all their pleasures, profits, and iolities that they make account of,
and that also as long as sense and strength would suffer; what had they gotten?
Must they not soon be forced with old Barzillai for very age to give 2. Sam.
19. 35.
over, and to say, Can we discern betwixt good and evil? have we any taste in
that we eat, or in that we drink? can we hear any more the voice of
singing men and women? But although these are dangerous errors (as who can say
less of them?) yet they are but (as we say) particular aberrations in their
actions, whiles many of them have been taught, and do profess to be better
governed: whereas there is another kind of conceitednes, to wit, of erroneous
judgment, no less common, but far more dangerous, because it directly
concerns the hope of eternal life, which they are content to fix on men's
opinions, renouncing the pure word of God for their light and direction; whose
lives cannot possibly please God, when they have no faith to believe in his
promises. Such is the unsavory and damnable doctrine of Rome, whose light is
darkness, and their best comforts are deadly and strong errors, and
blasphemous delusions.

Others there are, who through mere ignorance, suffer themselves to be led
into a fools paradise, conceiving strangely of their good case they are in,
because of their false persuasion, that God is merciful; and that they are
none of the worst sort: God (they trow) never made them to damn them: they
mean well (they say) and hear, pray, receive the Sacrament, love honesty,
with a thousand such worn reasons. And yet error is so strong, (especially in
this kind) that every man cleaves to his conceit, and as the proverb is, we
easily believe that, which we would have so: whereas, God knows, the end of
this hope is shame. The mother of Sisera was never more notably disappointed of
her hope and expectation, then these fools shall be, when they look for the
effect thereof, as the spiders web, which is swept down in a moment.

But to return to that from which I a little digressed, I mean, of men's
putting their confidence in things changeable and transitory, in as much as
all this which I have spoken of, vanish in a short time, so what wisdom is it
to hunt after such things, as children do after a butterflye? and to make them
their felicity, as if God had appointed no better things to be attained and
come by? Nay further, seeing they must give an account of Note.
these their doings, which they shall never be able to do, to their comfort,
of one among a thousand; what wisdom is this to be counted, when they must
for their pleasures of sin, which they enjoyed so little a while, when they
must (I say) hear the sentence pronounced upon them, Depart ye that were
lovers of pleasures more then of God, to endless woe, where weeping Luke 13.
47. 2. Tim. 3. 4.
and gnashing of teeth shall be, who would needs prefer a short and small
folly, before happiness eternal.

Therefore let us learn first, to ground our opinion out of the word, and be
sure we can well justify our hopes and conceits: and rejoice in these things
that will stand by us, and whereof we have good warrant from Gods own mouth:
which cannot deceive us, nor frustrate our hope. And if ye ask, what this
rejoicing is that I mean; I answer, this: to know that our Luke ^0. 20.
names are written in heaven: and to endeavor to have always a good conscience
both before God and men: to have joy in the holy Ghost, and to be Act 23. 1.
persuaded that a crown of glory is laid up for us, when we shall once lay
2. Cor. 1. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
down this tabernacle of our body, and shall have finished this our course in
this manner. In a word, our joy ought to be in the Lord, and in his
alsufficiencie. And let this be to us in stead of the boastings that other make
here, of their vain, uncertain, and deceiuable hope, and joy, as this was of
these heathen and profane Ladies, who might have waited and hoped for Siseras
joyful return, till their eyes had fallen out of their heads, before they
could have enjoyed that which they looked for, but as far from it then, as at
the first.

More particularly in this 30. verse, Debora being a Prophetess, lays out
Verse 30. Doct.
in her song how the Ladies did descant of the dividing of the spoil, in these
two points, that besides their goods, every soldier got a maid or two, but
Sisera had precious things, namely, garments of diverse colors wrought by the
needle, which were very costly. By the first, that they must needs so
immodestly and unchastly break forth, (as Debora says they did) speaking of
the common soldiers, that every one got a maid or two at his pleasure, which
if it were so, was unmeet talk for women to have in their mouths, it
shows, where there is no true knowledge of God and his word, there whoredom
is but a pastime and may game, a matter to laugh at even among women as well as
men; yea even in the aged themselves (who should go before others in
sobriety) we shall behold yet, a delight to speak of, see, and hear unclean
actions and reports, even as other weighty matters are also lightly set by of
them. Which is the less marvel that it was so with them, when even where the
Gospel is preached, it may be seen to be so. In so much, that they may praise
God highly, who have received light and conscience to make difference betwixt
good and evil, and to abhor and have in detestation this ungracious and
rotten kind of speech not beseeming Christians, and all such cursed works of
darkness; which to do, is far off from them who live in darkness, and
walk in unbelief.

But these Ladies ascribe to Sisera the costliest and best things, as we have
heard. Where besides that we see, that they and all such deceived themselves
in their erroneous conceits, as has been showed before; so we may see what
are the things which be in best account with the ignorant and unbelievers, Note.
and they are iolitie, earthly glory, and things costly and precious in the
estimation of men. As for thanks to God, of whom they receive all, and for
making heaven their treasure and portion, it is no such matter as they are
acquainted with, or do (almost) dream of. Which is still to teach Gods
servants how great their portion is, who have not the things of greatest price
in this world, their rest and treasure, but things durable and eternal: but
more of this before.

Now by this acclamation with joy, Debora concludes her song, praying, Verse 31.
that as Sisera triumphed, so might al Gods enemies: meaning, that as he was
destroyed, so all like enemies of God might be: and on the contrary, that all
who love the Lord may not only be preserved, but multiplied and beautified with
all good things, even as the Sun grows in his beauty to the noonetide.
Where first, in that Sisera was shamefully slain, and returned no more home
with victory, as his mother also did fear as much, let us learn, that the
evil which the wicked fear, shall light upon them. Their fears are many, as
both the Scripture testifies, that fear shall be upon them on every side,
even as their sorrows also are many. And whereas I Psalm 32. 10.
noted before, that they do please themselves greatly in their hope of the
Object.
best things, some may think I contradict my self, in saying they are afraid,
and fearful: I answer, they may have both; fear, I mean, and hope, at
diverse Answ.
times, and yet neither of them good, but hope deceiuable, and fear
troublesome. Beside, wicked persons are not all of the same kind, and fear is
seen most in them who are least evil: but boldness is in the worser sort: all
wicked men incline to fear properly and naturally; for it is a companion to
sin, ignorance, and unbelief, but they hope and presume wilfully, 1. Ioh. 4.
18.
and labor to expel fear, which though in great part they do indeed, yet
because no violent thing is continual, therefore often times they mistrust, and
fear, and suspicion of trouble comes in place again. And we may see, that
list to mark it, that it is so, as in Balaam, who wishing that he might Numb.
23. 10.
have died the death of the righteous, feared that he should not do so. The
same I may say of many other: For why? they running deep in debt with God,
their conscience accuses them, that they shall one time or other be called to
their unwelcome account, and so, the thing that they fear, shall 1. Cor. 11.
31.
come upon them. And yet will they not come to agreement with God, by judging
themselves, that so they may not be judged of him, but be free from all fear
(as frailty will permit) of his judgment, and therefore refusing so to do,
their fear justly falls upon them.

The saying of Solomon proves that they have many fears, where he says, the
wicked slieth when no man pursues him: that is, through fear. And Prou. 28. 1.
that may be seen to have possessed the very Pharisees (who yet bare it out
most boldly before men) by the words of Nicodemus, bewraying his fellow
Pharisees ill conscience through fear, saying to Christ, We know that thou art
Ioh. 3. 2.
a teacher sent of God, and acknowledge thy great miracles: as if he should
have added this, though we will not be known of any such thing before men,
yet thus it is with us, when we meet and talk of thee together, and are
afraid. But some will ask, What then shall we do to such? shall we advise
them to shake off their fears, and pluck up their hearts against them?
Doubtless no: this were to fight against their conscience, and to make it
impudent and hardened (which is much worse) whereas it did before but accuse
them: but if they cannot prevent such fear by removing the cause thereof,
which is their sin, let them next to that be persuaded to repent for it. We
read of the third Captain that came to E^as, that beholding 2. King 1. 14.
his two fellows devoured with fire from heaven for doing their message to the
Prophet so imperiously and boldly, he came to him in all submisnes, and
entreated him to come down to the King. Even so, to come to our selves, ask
thy conscience what makes thee fear? If thou find that the Lord has a
controversy with thee, and (that depending) and that thou can not be quiet,
go and seek agreement with him, as the Captain did; it is but a folly to
stand out with the Lord: for if thy conscience accuse 1. Ioh. 3 20.
thee, he is greater, as knowing much more against thee. If thou can come to
the Lord, and say, in the truth of thine heart; O Lord, I fear lest my sin
should bring some sudden destruction upon me: I have no peace within, nor
without, because of it, and thy displeasure for it; I go continually in hazard
of some fruit thereof, besides that which is eternal: therefore, say (O Lord)
humble me, and cause me to fear sin, and not the punishment only: turn my
terror into broken heartedness for sin, and so bring peace and quietness again
into my soul. Do thus, I say, and thy fears shall vanish; otherwise, who
shall pity thee in them, if thou pitiest not thy self, in taking the way to
remove them? And to this purpose, I ask, did not the Priests in the Gospel
meet with that which they feared, when Christ, whom they would needs crucify,
that they might be rid of him, rose again? to bring a greater fear upon them
at the last then at the first? And as they would in no wise fear, when their
sin was at the highest, and yet we see they were constrained to fear; so
there is no doubt, but that there are some hardened, which do what they can, to
put fear away from them, having their consciences seared with an hot iron,
whose damnation (yet) sleeps not, neither shall they escape fear, but it will
seize upon them, when they would not. And whereas it may be said, the godly are
much afraid sometime as well as other; I answer, it is true: but that tends
to a good end; as if they have taken liberty amiss, or rather stolen it, to
break out of the good and righteous way which they had couenanted to walk in,
they cannot but be afraid, when they come again to themselves; but it is for
that they see they have offended their merciful father, therefore they cannot
be quiet, till they be in favor again with him. And let the other know, that
even so and much more must they do, to wit, in their falls, fear; and take no
rest nor peace to themselves before that: else, when their time comes, that
which they fear, shall also fall upon them: but if they consider duly of their
estate, and while they may, and before the time of their trouble come, turn
their feet again into the way of Gods testimonies, God will bury all the
indignities which they have wrought against him, and will receive them
graciously. Hos. 14 3.


In the first branch of her prophetical prayer, that, not her enemies, but 2
Gods, might be as Sisera, she having warrant so to pray, did as became her,
and so shall all we do, who shall do so, upon so good a ground and warrant:
but otherwise take we heed that we pray not against any, what fair pretense
soever we have to do so: for as God has reclaimed very bad ones, so what
know we whom he may call home among us? But of this I have spoken.

For the other part of Deboras prayer, that the lovers of God may prosper 3
in the abundance of all good things, and grow therein, as the Sun does in
his strength to the noonetide, let it be noted, that this is prayed for to
them that love the Lord; and only to them, as the blessing in the second
Commandment is to them that love him, who testify that they do so, by
keeping his commandments. And this prayer being made in faith, obtaines as
much, as is asked in it. And therefore when she prays for it, it is all one,
as if she had affirmed, that it shall be so: namely, that they which love the
Lord shall want nothing that is good. And so David says, who had good
experience of it, that the Lord withholdeth no good thing from such as Psalm.
23. 1. Psalm 84. 13.
keep their hearts pure and good: which none can do, but they that love him.
Yea and mark further that she says, they shall grow therein even from
strength to strength as the Sun does, even to his full beauty. So speaks
Solomon in the Proverbs: The way of the righteous shines as the light, that
shines more and more unto the perfect day: signifying thereby, that Prou 4. 18.
the godly herein resemble the Lord Jesus, who himself increased in strength
Luke 2. 52.
of body with addition of grace, and favor with God and men: and so they also
increase daily in knowledge and grace, until they be joined to Christ their
head, and see the Lord in the Sion of his holiness.

Behold then here a singular privilege, which the lovers of God do enjoy:
that while they look carefully and constantly to preserve and uphold the love
of God in them, even thereby they grow in grace and knowledge of God, and of
Christ; and they come to have more near acquaintance with them, and have
proof of their fatherly kindness toward them, and so have stronger hope, that
it shall yet be better with them afterward: for their obedience passed,
yields them more courage and strength to go forward in their good course. Now
if we did consider the miserable courses of many, who for want of this gracious
government of God, run into all kind of sin, and fearful punishments,
(for the wicked wax worse and worse) and how some even of Gods dear servants
by their very declinings and carelesnes, for a small time, see many ill days;
how should we make account of this precious liberty, bequeathed unto us in
this behalf? For such as look to the maintaining of the love of God in them,
and the nourishing Note.
of it by thankful acknowledging of his ever flowing kindness toward them, (I
speak a great thing) need to fear no worse estate to Godward then they have
enjoyed already: but every day to look for better and better, both greater
faith, and better obedience; which cannot be wanting to Note.
us, but when we are wanting to our selves, and failing in our love to God: and
yet I mean no perfection of it, which cannot be in any, but more use of
sincerity and feruencie in Gods service, even such as has already been in
them. But he that lists to read more of this growing in grace of my setting
down, may read the twelfth chapter of the sixth treatise of my book. In the
mean season, let this speech of Debora, make such to look better about them,
who are far from this thriuing and growth in grace, or the fruit of it, if
they desire to be in honor and favor with God. And if they be void of them,
let them know, that the cause thereof is, that they love not God, whatsoever
they pretend to the contrary; and without that, what welfare can there be to
the soul? It cannot prosper, but rather decaieth as a man that is sick of a
desperate discase, and grows worse and worse, till utter consumption and death
it self do follow. Therefore it is a work of no small weight to try our
selves whether we love God: it will quite the cost abundantly. If we can once
get that, we are on the thriuing hand, no fear but we shall do well: and
then we give good proof thereof, when we love, and desire well to the
brethren, when nothing is too dear for himself, and where there is still an
earnest thirsting after both: (as all things that grow have an appetite of
growth) these (I say) with more then a common care of honoring God in the
place we live in, a daily longing home, with vprightnes and constancy; are
evidences of our love to God that cannot deceive. And this affection (be we
well assured) will break out where it is, by such fruit as I have mentioned,
as Joseph's did unto his brethren. Genesis 45. 1


To this song of Debora, the holy story adds this, that God gave his people
by and after this victory, forty years rest and quietness. A great blessing:
even so we all know what a benefit any great deliverance is, out of pain,
sickness, prison, bondage, penury, or the like misery, especially when it is
for long continuance? But how much more then, the sweet peace of conscience
that passes understanding, and joy in the holy Ghost, and that for long
continuance, after the trouble of mind and fear of damnation, which was
sometime? But of this also elsewhere somewhat has been said.

THE THIRTY SIX SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 1. Afterward the children of Israel committed wickedness in the sight
of the Lord, and the Lord gave them into the hands of Midian seven years.
Verse. 2. And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and because of the
Midianites, the children of Israel made them dens in the mountains, and
caves, and strong holds. Verse. 3. When Israel had sown, then came up the
Midianites, the Amalekites, and they of the East, and came upon them, Verse. 4.
And camped by them, and destroyed the fruit of the earth, even till thou come
unto Azzah, and left no food for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.
Verse. 5. For they went up, and their cattle, and came with their tents, as
Grasshoppers in multitude, so that they and their camels were without number;
and they came into the land to destroy it. Verse. 6. So was Israel exceedingly
impouerished by the Midianites: therefore the children of Israel cried unto the
Lord.
IN this Chapter, it is showed, how Israel again provoked the Lord The sum
and parts of this Chapter are 4.
by their wickedness, verse. 1. And how the Lord punished them by the
Midianites, to verse. 6. Then that they cried unto the Lord, and he reproved
them, to verse. 11. And lastly, how he called Gedeon and prepared him to deliver
them; and this is to the end of the Chapter.

The first part of the Chapter.
TO begin with their sin, it appears that they did grievously provoke The
sum of the first part.
the Lord, as they had sometime before done, as in the third and fourth
Chapters it appears, where their punishment was likewise a long time continued
upon them. But yet after the death of Debora and Barak, the valiant deliuerers
of them out of the hands of the Canaanites, they did again depart from the
good course wherein they had lived before, and fell again to idolatry, and
other sins. This be said of their sin, as may be gathered out of the first
verse, and the 25.

With the which to begin, for our further benefit, the instruction that we are
to take out of from hence, is this; That seeing in all the stories before set
down, as well as this, of the punishing of Israel, they begin thus: The
children of Israel did again that which was evil in the sight of the Lord:
seeing (I say) it is thus, we may learn, that it is naturally ingrafted in the
heart of man, that though there be holy affections kindled in it by some good
means, yet in time they dye, and wane away; and in stead of them, the heart is
carried again to the evil, that it most desires. And it being thus with them
that have some goodness and beginnings of faith in them, what are all the
fair shows of hypocrites, when they be at the best, but a morning dew? So
that though men may (perhaps) serve God for a while, Hos 6. 4.
in a good manner; yet they are gone from it before we be aware, waxing weary
and provoking God afresh; this sicklenes and inconstancy are so deeply rooted
in them, and thereupon it falls out, that they are carried away by the error
of the wicked, and inticements of the world, from a good course; to be
fashioned like other men, though it be very gross and absurd which they fall
to.

A great reason hereof is this, that the best are renewed but in part, and much
corruption remains to be purged out of the^, which requires the taking up of
their thoughts and care; which it is meet they should take knowledge of, that
so they may see that they have work enough, (and have little Note.
cause to be idle and wax weary of it, I mean (beside many other duties) of
crossing and subduing the evil of their hearts; especially, seeing their
reward is so great in so doing. And yet with grief it may be said, that in all
ages, both persons and Churches little considering this, have fallen to this
course that I now complain of. As they in the Psalm, who started aside like a
Psalm. 78. 35.
broken bow. The people in Exodus did the like; who in the absence of Moses
from them, but a few days, fell most shamefully to idolatry. So the people
Exodus 32. 6.
mentioned in S. John, who counted John Baptist a burning light, and for a Ioh.
5. 35.
time rejoiced in him: whereby ye may gather, it was but for a time. These
with many, too long to be stood upon, do show, how soon men decline from a
good course.

And well it were with us in this latter age, if we looked better to our selves
then they did: but as well persons and families, as almost whole towns, wanze
and wax cold in their serving of God; who yet were sometime of the forwarder
sort of professors, a few God reserueth who desire to keep their first love to
the Gospel, and their brethren, that they may be a seed in Note.
every corner of the land almost, to teach the generations to come, (if the
world continue) to fear the Lord aright, he having appointed a remnant to
remain, and a Church, though small, unto the worlds end. Which being so,
teaches the best of us, what need we have to desire to enjoy the best means,
and namely the sincere preaching of the Gospel, whereby we may grow on in
grace and knowledge of Christ, and cleave nearly to him: considering how often
we have been by Gods gracious working in us, revived and refreshed thereby:
and how dead in good duties we are, and unprofitable (our consciences being
Judges) without them. And it is well, if here by this, we wind out of all
poisoned baits that are laid for us.

And this of the first of the four parts of the Chapter I have spoken in this
former part of this verse, and somewhat also before in other Chapters, that is,
of the peoples sin.

The second part of the Chapter.
NOw it follows, the second, that is, of the punishment that followed their
sin, and how they cried to the Lord under it, in these six verses. Their
punishment was seven years oppression by the Midianites, as in this verse is
to be seen, and the manner of their oppressing them, is set down in the five
verses following. And for their oppression by the Midianites, let it Verse 1.
Doct. 2. in verse. 1 Lamen. 3. 40.
teach us, that it was just because they had sinned. For God scourges men
justly, and not without their due desert: Man suffers for his sin, as the
Prophet Jeremy says: So that if any should think they are hardly handled,
being punished of God, let them prove themselves without sin, or else let
them hold their peace. Nay, I will yield more then so to them, let them be able
but to prove this, that they have only offended through infirmity, and not
rather wilfully, and of knowledge, and they shall either be freed altogether
from great vexations in their lives; or else they shall freely and without
constraint confess, that God has dealt justly, yea mercifully, in so visiting
of them, rather then that he has done them any wrong. Thus much for this, and
that God will punish, when men provoke him by their transgressions, as we may
here learn, I have in other places showed.

The manner of the Midianites oppressing the people of Israel, was the Verse 2.
The sense.
spoiling them of their victual, namely corn and cattle, for the space of
seven years, without which they could not live. Their corn they destroyed,
when they had sown their fields. And they were driven to make them cabins in
the hollow places of the earth, under the hills and rocks, where they had holes
and creuises to let in light, to defend themselves from them: and in the fields
and lower parts of the earth they made them dens and dark places, not fit
for habitation, but in which they might safely lay their goods and substance,
to hide them from the Midianites. They made also high towers and strong, from
which they might see a far off, which could not be beaten down easily: and
these shifts they were feign to make. For their enemies were as grasshoppers on
the face of the earth, and their camels and other beasts, to destroy the
fruits of the Israelites, were almost without number. What these Midianites
were, and of what stock they came, it is not necessary to inquire, seeing it
is not set down, though some writers say that they had their beginnings thus:
that one of Abraham's sons which he begat of his wife Ketura, builded a city
beyond Arabia in the South, in the desert of the now called Saracens, and
called the name of it Midian, or Madian, and the people of it were called
Midianites, or Madianites, and were supposed to be they of whom the Kenites
came. These brought with them the Amalakites, and men of the East to help them.

This was a grievous and sore affliction, to be thus driven to extremities
Deuteronomy. 28. 33. Esaias 17. 10. 11.
for want of food. And yet no other then was long before threatened (among many
other) to come upon them for their apostacy and idolatry. For what though we
hear of no consuming of the people of Israel in battle; yet, beside that it
could not be, but that many of them were slain by so long and violent
assaulting them, so what death is more cruel then by living, to be famished?
and what misery in this life greater, then to be to seek of food, where it
can hardly be come by, and yet that which is to be reserved, and had, is
scarcely fit to preserve life? Here therefore by the contrary we may see, what
a benefit of God this is, when in a land, and in cities, towns and villages,
all people may be fed fit for their condition, when there is no invasion of
foreign enemies to spoil and destroy the fruits of the earth, whereby the
inhabitants are preserved: nor any famine, by any other judgment of God: and
when there is no just cause of complaining in our streets. We know in the
great famines that are mentioned in the Scriptures, yea and in smaller famines
in our own remembrance, what crying and lamentations there have been. In the
days of Abraham, Isaac, and chiefly of Jacob, Genesis 42. 2.
when they were forced to send into Egypt for corn. In the time of Elimelek
and Naomi, when they were driven from their dwelling in Bethelem Ruth 1. 1.
Judah, to go and soiourne in the land of Moab, for want of food: and after in
the days of Ioram King of Israel, when the men had no other way 2. King. 6. 25.
to preserve their lives, but by eating that which was against nature, yea and
yet they could hardly come by it; and when the women did eat their own
children, as also in the last besieging of Jerusalem by the Romans.

And to what end speak I this, but that we should lift up our hearts, and more
fervently, and often be thankful to God for this one benefit of plenty?
although who sees not, that it is indeed but one of many, yea of infinite
other, which we receive? And why does God this? Even to the end men Doct.
verse. 2. 3. 4. 5.
may follow their callings, diligently and conscionably, with cheerefulnes; and
with the same mind walk in the fear of the Lord continually. And therefore
the evil example in life, that in the abundance of Gods earthly blessings does
flow every where, in drunkenness, and all lasciuiousnes, does draw upon men
greater plagues, then wants and famine are, and that is, leanenes of soul,
blindness, unbelief, hardness of heart, and impenitencie: which if we had the
spirit of the Prophets, we should deeply bewail. But to leave such, I add
this, that for the quickening up of the best, it were fit for Note.
them, when they grow to a mean and common esteeming of these benefits of God,
to suppose with themselves, and put the case that they were in want and
penury, even in the state of this people of God by the oppression of the
Midianites, or the like: As that when they have sown their seed, it should be
spovled before their faces, so that they should not eat of it, and that the
provision which they have made for their lives, should be carried away by
enemies, or taken from them, and they famished for want of it: it would make
them better to value and prize such benefits, and yield to the Lord a more holy
and fruitful use of them. Whereas commonly men do not so, till they be driven
to it by wants, and decay in their substance, then they can say; Oh what
plenty of Gods benefits we once enjoyed?

Another thing in these verses is to be marked, that we bring double vexation
upon our selves by sinning against the Lord, and by seeking to have Doct. 1.
our will, against the word of God. The one is this, the affliction that is
sent upon us for sin, as here the stirring up of the Midianites against the
people of Israel for their transgression; or any other, as loss of their
goods, diseases, ieopardie of their lives, etc. The other vexation, is that
which proceeds from the former: and that is of many sorts, as may be lively
seen in this present story, and namely in these verses. For what toil, time,
and cost, beside the disquietnes that went therewith, were they driven to
bestow (that I may include much in few words) to defend, or to save themselves
from the utmost hurt and danger, which was wrought and intended against them?
what shifts were they feign to make to preserve their lives, and save their
goods out of their enemies hands? which yet when they had done what they could,
they were not able to do.

If they had been only hurt by them in their cattle, corn, and other
commodities, and had sustained that only for their punishment, it had been a
dear paying for their pleasure, that they took in their sin; but when they
Note.
were in this bondage, that they could do nothing else but watch and ward for
their lives, and to build and botch, dig and delue, and beat their brains
to devise, how to hide their commodities from them, what sorrow upon sorrow,
and one unquietness upon another did they heap upon their heads, till they lost
all the welfare of their lives in a manner, and made them more wearisome and
unwelcome then death it self? Is this the fruit of sin, and the good that
it brings to the committers thereof? And yet if I should lay out the fruit of
the sin of Cain, Esau, Absolon, and other, who could not be stayed from the
committing of it; what better thing could I say of it, or what better fruit
could I prove it yields to the committers of it?

So that as the bait is pleasant which the poor fish biteth at, but it being
caught by the hook, brings pain, torture, and wearying of it self to save
the life: so is it with him that will needs taste of the pleasure of sin, as
I have said. And if this be the great good that it intends against such as
follow one kind or other of it with tooth and nail, who also lie sucking to
draw pleasure out of it, as a child does by the breast, then let them all be
taken and condemned for fools, who are masters in that profession, and are
vpholders of that trade and occupation. Yea let them be reckoned in the number
of them, of whom the proverb speaks, The fool believes every Prou. 14. 15.
thing. And again, O ye fools, how long will ye love foolishness? For why?
they Prou. 1. 22.
have chosen a way that seems pleasant, but the issues thereof are the way of
death. They do most certainly take more pain to go to hell, then the
righteous does to heaven. And as their reuolting brought upon them this
misery, so let all those who have falsified their promise, and broken their
solemn covenant to God of seeking more zeal, greater fruitfulnes, watchfulnes
and care, let them (I say) also fear that their evil conscience will draw upon
them one accusation and trouble after another, and that the further they
decline, the greater sorrow they bring upon themselves. Some have been brought
to that point, that they have made question whether they might lay violent
hands upon themselves, to avoid the terror of mind.

Further also observe here, what shifts they choose to make, rather then they
Doct. 3.
would seek to God by humiliation and repentance, for release. They love their
freedom well, who having their city besieged by the enemy, till extreme
famine compel them to eat dogs, cats, and such vermin, as is noisome to
nature, yet choose to endure such difficulties, rather then yield. And so
doubtless, they love their lusts well, who suffer themselves to be made such
slaves and drudges to them (as these here were) rather then they would abandon
them, and return to the Lord with unfeigned renouncing of them. Alas, they must
leave them with shame and double repentance at length, when they have wearied
themselves as these did: but till their own rod has made them smart, who may
tell them of the unfruitfulness of their toilesome trade? Toilesome I may truly
say; both considering with what great ado they bring their sin to ripenes
and perfection; and then what shifts they undergo to wind themselves out of
the woe and misery, which (in stead of fruit) their sin brings upon them?
It is a good piece of the life of an adulterer, first to compass and fulfill
his unclean lusts: and when he has done, to cover and keep himself from
shame, and to make fair weather of it again. And so the thriftlesse
spend-good, what ado makes he to scrape together somewhat to maintain his
riotous humor? and when he is brought to beggerie, then he must cast about him
afresh, how he may defray that, and avoid the gallows, or a base and wretched
life. In a word, it is true which Solomon says in Ecclesiastes; To the sinner
God gives pain: he Eccles. 2. 20.
gives him sour sauce to his sweet meat, painful service to his sweet
lusts. And yet without Gods special goodness neither of these shall prevail
with a lewd person to pull him from the love and liking of them, though they
cost him so dear, and though he bear and bring forth with pain, and the
sweat of his face. There will be found an Hiel to build Jericho, though he
knew it will cost him and his never so dearly. Therefore they are happy whom
God has entertained into his house, and holds them under his government:
because neither is his word tedious to them, nor his Matthew. 11. last.
commandments grievous while they are doing them: and as for any trouble which
can befall them after for their so doing, first know that it can not sting them
being borne for a good cause, and they shall go under it without disquiet, be
vpholden in it by grace, and after count it great joy in that they suffered.

The people of Israel, we have heard in the former verses, did kindly show
Verse 6.
in their doings, the nature and disposition of sinful and wicked persons, who
little trust to God in their troubles, they forgot him, and did fly for
succor and refuge to earthly helps and stays; as towers, dens, and other
munition and defense, forsaking him; but the holy story shows in this verse,
that none of them all prevailed, neither did they preserve them. And although
by their shifting they saved their lives, and got and saved that food which
with much ado kept them from staruing; yet who sees not the misery, which,
for all that, they endured in extreme poverty, bondage and fear? Even so,
we must know, that it is not enough for wicked persons to beware of their
enemies, and to fence themselves from the common troubles of the world; but
first of all, and chiefly they should preserve themselves from the wrath of
God; which while like fools they do not, they preventing and avoiding the
same, they seldom escape, nor be free from the other. Therefore the Lord in
the prophecy of Habakkuk, laugheth to scorn such made defenses of men. And in
Obedia the Lord says to such; Habak 2. 5. 6. Obediah 3. 4.
Thou that dwell in the clefts of the rocks, whose habitatio^ is high, that
say in thine heart, who shall bring me down to the ground; though thou exalt
thy self as the Eagle, and make thy nest among the stars, yet even thence
will I bring thee down, says the Lord.

They do not see that God has a thousand ways to fight against them: and
that he who plucked off Pharaos charet wheels, and broke the horses Exodus 14.
25. Iud ^5 22. Ester ^. 10. 2. Chro. 20. 22.
hoofes of Sisera; who drew up the great Lord Haman to the gallows; that took
heart from the Ammonites and Moabites, that in stead of fighting against Judah,
they fell upon and slew one another; and weakened Zenacherib so, that he slew
by an Angel in one night, an hundred, four score, and 2. King. 19. 35.
five thousand of his army; they do not see, I say, that he who did thus show
his might against these mighty ones, and many ways beside, has done the
like; can also frustrate their attempts and hope in these days also. The
spirit of slumber is cast upon them, and blindness has taken hold of them,
that they cannot see and believe, that the like judgments shall not meet with
them, till they have felt and smarted by them.

Therefore let men make peace with God first, and turn from their sins, that
he may also turn from his fierce wrath: or else when they make their reckoning
of peace, and prosperity, length of days and deliverance from their enemies,
and other troubles, the contrary evils fall upon them; and if Note.
not presently, yet they are at hand, and always justly to be feared, before
they come. Oh what proof have we seen of that which I say, as former ages
have done also? How many might have done well, and prospered, if they had been
more careful to be reconciled to God, then to lean to their own deceitful
dreams, by a vain hoping, that life should still have been granted them, the
which while it lasted, they were as they thought, in paradise: but for all
their welfare were soon cut off from all. And the reason is, that men go to
work without God, they neither seek his favor, nor direction from him,
either in their actions or afflictions: and therefore their enterprises are
either crossed, or else cursed in the use and enjoying of them: and as for
their troubles, they are to seek either how to abide them, or to get out of
them in a good manner. Thus a wicked man is unhappy both ways, whether he
prosper or no: for either he fears a change, or else his fear comes upon
him, as an armed man. Therefore when I consider this, I think the believing
Christian twice happy, even when he is judged miserable by men of the world,
because he has chose the good part with Mary, and has sought to have God on
his side, who does not only keep fearful judgments from his, being a sure
defense in time of need, but makes that portion which they enjoy, a sweet and
sauourie blessing unto them; and yet they have far greater riches then those.
Thus much of their punishment, in the second part of the Chapter.

The third part of the Chapter.
THe third follows in this sixth verse, namely, that the people repented,
Doct. 2. in verse. 6.
and turned to God: which as was said before, is testified, and declared by a
sign thereof, which is crying. And here, not to insist upon the same things,
which in other places I have done, that which I will note from hence is this,
that seeing they now sought to him at last, who should have been their first
refuge, we may note another point of unthriftiness, and foolish dealing in the
men of this world; That when they will needs go try masteries in their
necessity and calamities, by trusting to broken holds, and vain helps of
their own devising, and smart for it, as I have said; then at last with shame
they must be feign to sue and repair to God. And what if he will not receive
then? as it falls out sometimes to be so, as in the Proverbs, [Because you
would not hear when I called, ye shall cry, and not be Prou. 1. 20.
heard] Whither go they then? But if he do, what a far fetched journey have
they taken before, yea full of vexation and wearisome, besides that Note.
they have lost all their former labor? I conclude therefore, with this advice
and warning to such as have ears to hear; Seek the Lord while he may Esaias
55. 6.
be found, and drive not off from day to day, lest he come suddenly and there
be none to turn away his heavy wrath from you: and in the mean while, happy
are they who do so. For they in so doing shall not do as this people did
here, fly to rocks, hide themselves in caves of the earth, and build towers to
be safe from their enemies, as these did here from the Midianites, which yet
did not safely keep and defend them, but they fly to the safe rock and tower
of defense; as the wise man calls it; I mean, to the name Prou. 18. 10.
of the Lord, even the Lord of hosts, who is a most strong place of refuge,
the righteous fly thither and are saved.

THE THIRTY SEVEN SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 7. And when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, because of the
Midianites, Verse. 8. The Lord sent unto the children of Israel a Prophet, who
said unto them, Thus says the Lord God of Israel; I have brought you up from
Egypt, and have brought you out of the house of bondage, Verse. 9. And I have
delivered you out of the hands of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all
that oppressed you, and have cast them out before you, and given you their
land. Verse. 10. And I said unto you, I am the Lord your God: fear not the Gods
of the Amorites, in whose land you dwell: but you have not obeyed my voice.
NOw whether they cried to the Lord, first through anguish Verse 7. 8 9. 10.
of heart, which was caused in them by the force of their calamities; but was
neither pleasing to God, neither could obtain any thing of him, unless it had
come from faith: (which is very probable) or whether before their crying, the
Lord sent the man of God here mentioned, unto them, it cannot certainly be
said; but sure it is, God of his great mercy to them, sent a Prophet to preach
to them, and to bring them to true repentance, speaking to them much like the
messenger that was sent to their fathers before at Bochim. For he repeates Gods
benefits to Judge. 2. 3.
them, as the other did, and deliverances, and charge them with disobedience
also.

Out of these words we may see, it is a fit time for preaching to work, Verse
7. 8.
when men are inwardly stung with smart of their afflictions, as it appears
these were, when the man of God was sent to preach unto them; for then m^n will
suffer themselves more easily to be reproved for their sins, and will cause
themselves, as they see cause; and the word is received into their Doct. 1.
hearts more readily: whereas they are otherwise most commonly hardened, and
hate to be reproved. And yet further then men come prepared to our daily and
ordinary preaching, it profits them nothing. The danger is this, that they
are like to quench the spirit after, and to dull the edge of such good
beginnings of grace in them, which will most certainly come to pass, if they
be not careful to stir them up daily. Men while they have elbow room,
think that the preacher, yea God himself must be beholding to them for their
hearing: but when God has them cooped in a narrow compass, his rods being
held over them, then the Preacher is welcome, yea sought to earnestly, and God
is plied with confessions and prayers. We see it, though with grief, and have
too great experience of it, in the practice of the secure and irreligious sort,
who though they mind not God all the year long, yet fall to prayer and
devotion when some great thundering, lightning, and tempest does astonish them,
and when the likelihood of death is upon them. His word they hear daily
without any great reverence, but his terrible works, seen and felt, though
but seldom, make them hide themselves in corners for fear. By whose example
we see, what need the Lord has to bore ears into our souls, by terror, and
amasing judgments, as Job speaks, chap. 33. because his word is wound about
men's fingers, and made Job 33. 16.
but as the confused noise of many waters, and as a sound beating the air,
going in at one ear and out as fast at the other. Let not such boast
themselves as are spared, except they apply themselves to the hearing of Gods
voice by the Minister, who can skill to do his message with more regard and
earnestnes: for either the more is behind, if they belong to God, and they must
have somewhat to quicken their appetite thereto, and to make it sink deeply
into their hearts, and work upon them powerfully for their good; or else woe
be unto them, the Lord in all likelihood has cast them off, and takes no
pleasure in them, and greatly it is to be feared that when affliction shall
come upon them, yet by reason of that their former unbelief and contempt of
instruction, they shall do them little good. The thing that they should do is
this: when the Lord lays his hand upon them, let them examine themselves,
touching their affection to the word, and how little they were moved by it in
the time of their health and prosperity, and so they may easily find, that
their blockishnesse, and careless or unprofitable hearing; their deadnes,
fulness of stomach, and such like, with earthlinesse, weariness, wandering,
drowzinesse, etc. have caused the Lord to send such trials upon them (be they
inward or outward) as might grind off their flat Note.
and blunt edge, and set on a sharper and keener upon them: that with desire
and meeknes they may embrace the word, and find it sauourie to their taste,
till it have wrought upon them as it ought, that is, even to cast them into the
mould of it. And this let such know, that if their afflictions tame them not,
nor meeken their spirits under the hand of God, but that they fight against
him, as Pharao did, and will not see and use well this season which is offered
them, that if they be delivered once again out of them, they may have sound
preaching in all high reverence; let them know (I say) that their case is
woeful and desperate. For as the Lord says in the like case by his Prophet; O
people how shall I entreat thee? or what shall I do Hos. 6 4.
unto thee? So he may say unto them: for he has no other physic, then his
word, mercies, and chastisements. If none of all them can break the heart,
there is no help, nor hope, that if he should use extraordinary courses (which
they are not to look for) that he should prevail any more with them, then he
did with the Priests, who going against their consciences in bringing Christ to
his death, were no more moved with his resurrection. Therefore they are wisest,
who put not the Lord to this extremity, but hearken to him when he speaks,
and offers them fair, by the voice of his messengers: and defer not till
affliction, as a second warning, be sent unto them: lest then also, they be
found alike unprovided, and being hardened, lest God should not vouchsafe them
that mercy to mollify and soften them: as (the truth is) they who tempt him
so far by presumption, do not easily recover themselves, though God do
visit them by his corrections, or judgments, but rather (for the most part) go
further from him, and increase their rebellion.

But whether these men cried out being forced thereto by their many Doct. 2.
and sore afflictions or no, this is sure, that when the man of God had
delivered his message to them, and had showed them their unthankfulness to God
for their many deliverances, and had convicted them of their disobedience, they
did then cry out in token of their great grief for their offending God, as
their fathers before had done. Here (not to repeat the same things which I
noted before out of the like words uttered at Bochim) this is to be marked,
that the Lord here sent his messenger, as he did there, to call the people to
consideration of themselves, and their doings, and we see what need they had
thereof. All generations declare what they are, and to what wrack and ruin
they come, who are not helped, and that in due time and season, with this
wholesome instruction from God; that the righteous smiting them they may not
fall into the hands of the ungodly, to be rung about by them Psalm. 341. 5.
to their utter shame and reproach, and so fall into the jaws of the devil, to
be undone without recovery. And when the Lord deals so graciously with any,
as that they may enjoy this benefit of sound teaching, let them beware that
they harden not their hearts at the hearing of it, (the oftener they hear the
happier it is for them) but with meekenes receive it, that it may bring forth
fruit in them plentifully, even to eternal life.

The Prophet, who was sent unto them, puts them first in mind of Gods Verse 8.
9.
benefits, and many deliverances from their enemies. The next thing here to be
considered of us out of these words in the 8. and 9. verses, beside that which
we have heard by the like occasion, is this; that we record and keep a
memorial (as they here should have done, and were reproved for not doing) of
our deliverances out of trouble and calamity, in which we saw, that we might,
yea must have lien overwhelmed and drowned, if the Lord had not in good time
brought us out of them. These deliverances, I say, out of bondage, prison,
sickness, pain of body, and anguish and torment of conscience, and the like;
and how often they have been enjoyed of us, and how comfortable and welcome unto
us; ought to be daily remembered and acknowledged with hearty praises to God,
as well as his benefits. He who marketh them, shall find them many and great,
beside those that are common, so that he may truly say, God has delivered from
many deaths. And because of the peoples forgetfulness, in the former ages, we
see how often they were put in mind of this one deliverance out of the bondage
of Egypt. Therefore the Prophet David, and other holy Penmen of the Psalms, in
the behalf of the people, do so often call to mind, and sometimes with
admiration and astonishment, Gods former deliverances, as the whole 124. Psalm
witnesses thus: If the Lord had not been on our side (may Israel say) when men
rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick, the waters had overwhelmed
us, etc. Oh our forgetfulnesses of the like kindness of God, it is enough to
accuse to Godward, though we had no other sins, seeing we cannot be
ignorant into what dangers, and depths of sorrow we have sometime Note.
been plunged, when we lay crying and complaining, and (perhaps) praying also
under the burden of them, that it would not have bin thought that we could
ever have forgot the Lords kindness, if he should ever have brought us out of
them: and yet when he has done so, yea again and again done so, we have with
Pharaos Butler, and the nine leapers, forgot all. Genesis 40. 23.
Whereas we have learned, that many years after, even as long as we reap the
benefit of such deliverances, yea even till death, we should praise God for the
same, according to that which was taught our fathers in the Psalm: Let Israel
now say (that is, long after their deliverance) that God is gracious, and Psalm
118 2.
that his mercy endures for ever. Now I have spoke but of thanks for
deliverance out of trouble, to the which, if we add his benefits (which are
innumerable) what can be required of us less then this, that in all things,
and always we should be thankful? And this bewraies the blockishnesse of 1 Thessalonians. 19.
such, who being urged to give thanks, ask wherefore? what have we received
more then others? we enjoy but our part, in common blessings, as the most do,
etc. As if thankfulness were some extraordinary duty, lying only upon some
few persons, rarely favored of God. No, the Lord requires no more of thee,
then he does of them who are equal to thee, nay inferior to thee in benefits.
But thou like the swine, take all that comes, not regarding what, or
whence, so thy turn be served: and thus deuourest many blessings, through thy
brutishness, which a godly Christian would make matter of daily praise; and
enlarge the greatness of them, by musing both how unworthy he is of the
least, and how ill it should go with him, if he were but in the case of such
as want them. If the Lord should exercise such unthankful blocks with the
diseases, which many dear servants of his suffer, the pains of Colique,
Strangurie, Burning fevers, the Stone, and give them their portion in penury,
cleanenes of teeth, nakedness, sickness, etc. they would then cease extenuating
Gods benefits, or co^paring themselves with such as are enriched with greater
then themselves: yea, they would then think that freedom from chastisements,
were great cause of thanks, though they wanted many blessings. But to the full
stomach, the honey Prou. 27. 7.
comb is not sweet. Others think this duty discharged, if they have their
tongues tipped with formal words of blessing and thanks; though their hearts,
and love be set upon the blessing, and not on the bestower of it, and therefore
out of the same fountain comes bitter as well as sweet, they curse God as
easily when the least thing crosses them, as they bless him while he
pleases their humor, by seasonable weather, plentiful crops, good success
in their affairs, etc. whereby they bewray that their thanks are but the
froth of profane persons, and coming from their lusts being satisfied, even
as their prayers also did in their troubles and extremities, as Saint James
speaks. And a third sort there are, better then the former, who James 4. 3.
yet cannot be brought to season their whole life with this thanksgiving, as
Paul requires: neither yet think themselves worthy of reproof, for
unthankfulness. They say, they hope it is neither lying nor whoring, nor
wronging, etc. which they suffer for, when they are afflicted: and as for this
that they be not always thankful, what sin will we make it? they cannot
repeat (they say) the same words so often. For answer, I say: unthankfulness
(indeed) is no direct sin against man, but it is far greater; for it is an
high degree of wrong offered to God, and never goes without an heart and life
tainted with many loathsome evils and corruptions. Therefore, let not these
examples be rules for Gods people to follow: let their whole life be an
honoring of God by thanksgiving: and as they only can do it, because they are
beholding to his Majesty for far greater favors, then strangers; so let
them both in their prayers, and otherwise in their usual practice, entertain
this duty also, as a daily companion, as a token that they do not use Gods
blessings to boldness, loosenes, wantonness, or any other licentiousnes, but get
strength against them; so that all their life may fare the better for their
thankfulness, and other such good means, as indeed a thankful man, weigh it
aright, is the only good Christian; and the life that is void of it, goes
with much disobedience, as we shall see in the next doctrine.

In this tenth verse the man of God tells them, that the Lord charged Verse.
10.
them, that they should not serve the gods of the Amorites, and yet they did.
So that their obedience was like their thanks; they neglected that, so they
did this. There shall need no proof, that we are too like them in both. Our
lives witness it: but, O wretched people we, who receiving a charge from him,
who has done us all the good that we could never have desired, and is all in
all to us; yet as though we were tied to him by no bond of duty, we refuse to
be subject and obedient to him in things he commands us. The heathen Centurion
could say, I have soldiers under me, and I say to one, Matthew. 8. 9.
go, and he goes; and to another, come, and be comes: and to my servant,
do this, and he does it: And we, who have solemnly couenanted with the Lord,
and have been (as I may say) hired with blessings to serve him; we turn our
backs upon him, and with his own benefits we strengthen our selves to grieve
him, in the breach of his Sabbaths: in the leaving off, or cold use of our
prayers; in uncharitableness, revenge, and the breach of other particular
commandments, which is not to be suffered.

THE FOVRTH PART OF THE Chapter.
Verse. 11. And the Angel of the Lord came and sat under the oak which was in
Ophrah, that pertained unto Ioash the father of the Ezrites, and his son
Gedeon threshed wheat by the wine press, to hide it from the Midianites.
Verse. 12. Then the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him; The
Lord is with thee, thou valiant man. Verse. 13. To whom Gedeon answered: Ah my
Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all come upon us, and where be all
his miracles which our father told us of, and said, Did not the Lord bring us
out of Egypt? but now the Lord has forsaken us, and delivered us into the
hands of the Midianites. Verse. 14. And the Lord looked upon him, and said; Go
in this thy might, and thou shall save Israel out of the hands of the
Midianites: have not I sent thee? Verse. 15. And he answered him; Ah my Lord,
whereby shall I save Israel? Behold, my father is poor in Manasseth, and I am
the least in my fathers house. Verse. 16. Then the Lord said unto him: I will
therefore be with thee, and thou shall smite the Midianites as one man.
NOw we have heard the third part of the Chapter, that they turned to the Lord
by the reproof of the man of God, which though it be not expressed, appears
by this, that God sent them tidings of deliverance. The fourth part follows,
wherein the victory over the Midianites is promised. This promise is amplified
four ways. First, by naming the person, who should deliver them; that is,
Gedeon, to verse 17. The next, by granting him a sign, whereby he might know
who he was that spoke to him, to verse. 25. The third was a charge of casting
down Idolatry, given to him by the Lord, to verse. 33. Lastly, how Gedeon
attempted war after the Idolatry was destroyed, God granting him a double
sign, whereby he might know that he should have the victory, and this to the
end of the Chapter. Thus much be said in general of this fourth part of the
Chapter.

The particular branches follow: the first is, that Gedeon should deliver The
sense to verse 17.
Israel out of the hands of the Midianites. For the declaration of the which
four points are also to be considered. First, the Angels appearing to Gedeon,
and saluting of him comfortably, to verse 13. The second is, Gedeons sorrowful
answering of him, to verse 14. Thirdly, the Angels words to remove his
heaviness, saying, he should deliver Israel, to the 15. And lastly, when
Gedeon saw not how it could be done by him, the Angel told him, and satisfied
him, to the 17. Now let us look into these verses more nearly. It is said in
this 11. verse, that the Angel of the Lord came after the peoples repentance,
Verse 11. 12.
and sat under an oak in that place Ophrah, where Ioash dwelt, who was of the
family of Abiezer in the tribe of Manasse, and the father of Gedeon. This
Angel was the son of God, (as verse 13 proves) appearing to him in the
shape of a man, and saluting him thus, The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man;
as it shall well appear, by the courage that God will give thee in the
weighty affairs that follow. Now Gedeon was thrashing corn, to hide it from
the Midianites, that he might preserve his life thereby, and the lives of those
that were his. And this speech the Angel had to Gedeon, before he told him that
he should deliver the people out of the hands of the Midianites.

Out of this 11. verse, note diverse things, and first this: that men of wealth
Doct out of verse. 11.
and place, as Gedeon was, in so mean a tribe, though he was spoiled of the
necessary helps of maintaining his life, as the most of the rest also were,
such men (I say) should not refuse labor, as husbandry, or any other of
honest sort. Gedeon had servants and yet he thrashed the corn himself. And it
is a thing which we read to have been not only practiced of him, but of the
old fathers mentioned in the Scriptures; as in all other writers, that what
time they had free either from religious or civil affairs, they employed it
about cattle and corn. For they would not spend the precious time in eating,
drinking, play, or idleness, which they abhorred, even as the religiouser, yea
and the ciuiller sort of our Gentry also do. For they take upon them honest
employments. The one sort, after reading divine books and Chronicles, and
statutes, whereby they may benefit both themselves and others, with the
knowledge of Gods law and man's: the other, after they have read of matters to
help govern and do good in the Commonwealth, (although they little look
after religion) will have recourse to husbandry.

Such, namely of the first sort, were Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and others, as
Gedeon here, whose father Ioash was in some authority among the people, yet
his son contemned not the practice of husbandry, which is and may be spoken
to the just charging of many in our age, who if they be borne worshipfully,
think it too base, how mean soever their wealth be, either to set and appoint
to themselves any times for reading, or to have any skill in that honest state
of husbandry, save only to take their rents and live of them; which yet were
more commendable in them, if they did not consume the rest of their time in
idleness, pastime, or worse. Whereas tillage, keeping of cattle, planting in
their fields, and grafting with such like employments, are both delectable,
gainful, and honest, and such as chase away many needless charges, and much
ill company, (which is a great waster) and the ill spending of the time in such
vain exercises as they delight in. And if it be not allowed to men of worship
to pass their time in such manner, but that even they must occupy their
talent, till the Lord come, and Luke 19. 13.
not pass the time in fleshly ease taking, play, idleness, and other like
profane behavior, much less is it tolerable in meaner persons to be ill
employed. But beside this, seeing by so fit an occasion I am lead to speak, I
will therefore say a little (and that not unprofitable) of this common sort of
people. For the most part, (setting aside the skumme of towns, I mean, the
unthrifty and riotous, and the godless poor, who live upon the sweat of
others) this I may say, that they take pain enough, and a man shall not need
to spend much time in persuading them to work: but this is hardly beaten into
them, to observe the due manner of working, or the end why, or the ground
whereupon. The motive is penury, the end covetousness, and the manner
brutish. They want, and would have to defray the hard world, or to bestow upon
their lusts, and to maintain themselves in pride of life: but neither work
they because they think it is a sin to be idle, nor because they look for any
other fruit of their labor, save the bringing in of the penny. They see not
whose commandment it is, that they should labor, Genes. 3. therefore they go
through it with vexation, coffeehouse, distrust, Genesis 3. 19.
endless carking, and tying God to their girdle, to give what success they
desire: which if they get, they take it for granted, that he loves them: if
not, they storm. To the impure, all things are impure, and so are their
callings: Tit. 1. 15.
they do the works of them commonly, not to shun noisome lusts, temptation,
and the fruits of sloth: nor to serve Gods providence, neither to sharpen and
fit themselves thereby to religious exercises, and to good duties, nor to
avoid offensive burthening of others, nor to do good and relieve them that
want, etc. and so to obey God in all: nay, to speak the truth, when they are
in their shops, at markets, in their fields, they are far from setting God
before their eyes: much less do they believe that God is with them there, to
bless them in their work, as well as when they are occupied in duties merely
religious. Sinister ends and causes do compel the most to yield some
obedience to Gods commandment; but, doubtless, if all were now men of worth,
and might live of themselves, we should have few workers. As we see by their
words, saying, Oh such a man is happy! Why? because he need not work, nor
toil as we do, but live easily, and enjoy the world at will. And by this they
bewray that they could be content to do so too, if necessity urged them not
to do otherwise. Therefore, their labor is as displeasing to God, as their
idleness, in a manner, as they use it. A woeful thing, ans not without the
curse of God upon such as will not learn a better direction: that whereas some
go about their work in faith, believing that because they are Gods beloved,
therefore God will give them rest, blessing and success: others rise early,
sit up late, drudge and Psalm. 127. 1.
droile, eat the bread of care, and drink the water of affliction; yet either
they thrive not, or at least, they are as much to seek of soule-prouision, I
mean grace and hope of salvation, at the end of their wearisome life, as at
the beginning: whereas it shoud have been their first work, after they came to
years of discretion. Which should teach us wisdom, and not to give God a
short and formal pittance of service, when we be at Church on the Sabbath; but
seeing that great work is to seek with the most, therefore to give all their
diligence thereto, that is, to make their salvation sure; that all the six
days we may wholly give up our selves to other affairs, without so much as
minding God, or godliness. For the Lord will have us serve him religiously, as
well in actions civil, not religious, (of their own nature) as holy: and this
is the scope of his third Commandment, which tieth the service of God to every
part of our lives in our common course of living, as well as the second does,
to religious duties: and therefore must be extended to our particular callings,
as being the greatest part of our time, and wherein our lives are most taken
up. But I will proceed in the next Sermon, and here an end. Now to proceed
where I left.

THE THIRTY EIGHT SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
WHile Gedeon was thus hard at work and laboring, the Doct. 2. in verse. 11.
Angel came and spoke comfortably unto him, as if he had bin praying, or in
the like exercise; and not to terrify him. To teach us, that our business and
works of our callings are no lets to us from having communion and fellowship
with God, neither do hinder his presence and comfortable being with us. And
the same may be said of our callings themselves ordained by him, be they mean
and base, or weighty. Therefore the Lord was with Jacob in his Genesis 28. 20.
journey, and in the way when he was going from his brother Esaus wrath and
rage. And so he made the Gospel effectual in Lydia by Paul's preaching, she
being then a seller of purple, and rich, and not yet truly converted to God.
And the Lord blessed the two tribes in their calling, and habitation, saying:
Rejoice Zebulon in thy goings out, [that is, in thy prosperous voiages on the
seas] and thou Ishachar in thy dwelling in tents, meaning in thy quiet keeping
at home about thy traffic and business.

And by this which I have said, let us mark; that if it be not long of our
selves, our lawful callings and business are no hindrances of us from the
serving of God holily and religiously, (as some think they be) but that from
them we may go to prayer or the like exercise, in good manner, even Note.
as we may from these to them. Although I may truly say this, that for not
well learning it, few can join these wisely and rightly together, because
their affections and delights are set too egerly toward that which sauers of
the earth and of gain; which is the cause that measure is not commonly kept
therein. David, saying, that he had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of the
Lord, then to dwell in the tents of the ungodly, (which he would not have said,
if men's attendance upon the basest work in their lawful callings, had been an
hindrance to them from Gods service) may by his words stay and comfort many
weak Christians, who think that they are much let from the duties of
godliness, even by the very using of their callings, because they be not
spiritual, as prayer and the like exercises are. But to end this, let the use
of that which has been said, be thus much unto us, that we Note.
ever labor to be so innocent, and well governed in all our earthly business,
and works of our calling, that we may not drive the Lord from us, but have him
always with us by the spirit of truth, direction, and comfort, as we have
heard he has been with other (and was here with Gedeon) in their earthly
affairs, for that is the using of them aright, and in their kind.

The next thing in this verse is this, that though the Lord sent his Angel to
Gedeon for his own relief and comfort, and also the peoples, yet we see this
was not done, till they were brought near to extremity: all help of man was
past: and they had no other refuge under God, but to provide for themselves by
flying from their dwellings to save their lives. As for example, Gedeon, whose
father was in some authority, and therefore none of the poorest, yet was at
this point, even thrashing a little corn, by the aid and nourishment whereof,
he and his might fly from the Midianites, as far as that lasted to carry
them.

By this we learn, that God sees it expedient in his wisdom, sometime to
leave the godly long under the cross, and not to put an end to their troubles
by and by, as ordinarily he uses to do: according to that which is said in
the Psalm; Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.
Psalm 30. 5.
And again, He that comes, will come, and not tarry. But he knows Heb 10
37. Hos. 6. 4.
well, that when he uses so to do, we commonly conceive hope thereby, that
our affliction (be it sickness, disease, loss, or any such) will not hold us
long; and therefore our devotion is more short and cold; and we in so doing,
neither honor God, nor have any proof of our faith and patience, neither
experience, another time after, how to bear our trouble aright: For Note.
the which cause, the Lord sometime disappointeth our false hope, and puts
us to greater plunges, by holding us longer in our affliction, to the end we
may search our selves deeplier, and we may be more thoroughly touched with the
feeling of our sins, and rebellions; and so turn to him in faith and
amendment.

For this cause the Lord holds us sometime on the rack the longer, as in
pain, sickness, or penury; as also bondage to such as have superiority over
us, and use it to our great disquiet and wearying of us, and we pray and long
to be delivered, but the Lord seems not to hear us pray, but lets the
burden remain still upon us. Wherefore, think we, does he so? when he
professes, that he afflicts not willingly, neither delights therein, and
Lament. 3. 39.
yet we lie in pain and grief. I answer, the Lord sees we be not yet tamed
and humbled sufficiently, great has the pride of our hearts been, our
inconstancy, unfaithfulness, uncharitableness also, with other sins, and our
minds are set on the world excessiuely, and wandering after our diverse lusts.
And we are like to return to these courses again, if we were set at liberty,
as soon as we desire: therefore does he seek to weane us from these and the
like, by continuing such unwelcome crosses upon us.

So we are for the same causes deprived often times of our dear companion in
marriage, which is a great part of death it self; or driven from our own
habitation into the fearful prison, which takes much from the delight of
living; yea, and we are tried with sudden dearth, as often times by excessive
rain and wet; sometime by drouth: as Gedeon here was in as hard a case, being
driven to fly from his own dwelling, in a manner famished. In these and the
like, God leaves his servants, for the causes which I have mentioned: and also
to the end that his deliverance and ease giving after them all, may be the more
precious when it comes, having been so long desired: and thirdly, to this end
he holds his rods the longer over us, that patience may have her perfect
work in us, and himself have the whole praise. An example of this which has
been said, we have in Joshua 7. where Joshua 7. 5.
the people having promise of Gods assistance, went against the men of Al, not
making question but they should speed as well as they had done before at
Jericho. But loc, on the sudden they were smitten before their enemies. This
astonished them, till the Lord tells Joshua the cause: Ye look, says the Lord,
it should be with ye as at other times, but I see cause of the contrary. Look
well into the matter, and ye shall find that there is sacrilege among ye, and
therefore ye cannot stand before your enemies. So that though they were doing
the work of God, yet because there was found in them this infection, it made
the Lord to cross their hopes, that so they might purge out their sin, and
go about the work in a better manner. Many wonder why the Lord says them
long upon their sick beds, whereas if they had their health, they say they
should worship him in public and private with more cheerefulnes. Whereas the
Lord aims at a further matter, and would purge out their coldness, hypocritie,
carelessness, and other sins accompanying them even in their good duties,
that so they may return thereto with more reverence, and conscience. We read
that Paul after his great lifting up into heaven, was buffered with unwelcome
temptations: which though he prayed that he might be rid of, yet the Lord
suspended his help, that Paul might be humbled, and fitted to use his
knowledge the more fruitfully.

Now follows the salutation of the Angel; the Lord is with thee, thou
valiant Verse 12.
man. If we mark the ebb and low estate of Gedeon (as we have heard) it was
wonderful to hear this news brought him, that the Lord was with Note.
him, as it was lamentable to see in what distress he was, when he heard the
words of this message uttered to him. For it was as much as if the Angel had
said, the Lord loves thee, as one of his dear ones, and he is with thee even
now to comfort and preserve thee, even in this thy oppression, and therefore
none shall be against thee to hurt thee. This was much to be said in such a
time of calamity, to such an afflicted person. And yet, we must know, that it
yields to us the like instruction. That even in great outward troubles, and
inward disquietnes of mind, when a body would think that God, and all good
men were our adversaries; yet in all this is God with us whom he has made a
covenant with, yea he loves and cares for us, as dear and precious unto him,
even as Christ Jesus the son of his love was, though without beauty among
men, and as a withered branch, despised, Esaias 53. Esaias 53. 2.
Therefore the spouse in the Canticles says, I am black, but comely O ye
daughters, Cant. 14.
etc. meaning, that the Lord Jesus her husband esteemed no whit less of her,
neither was she any whit less amiable in his eye, being tanned in the sun,
then when she was in her perfect beauty. Indeed, the sin which causes the
Lord to afflict, is odious: but the affliction it self argues, that he makes
much of us, because thereby he would purge out of us that which he misliketh,
which affliction when it has wrought kindly, the Lord can soon change our
hew, and restore our former beauty, as Jobs example witnesses.

The reason is this, he having once testified his love freely unto us before,
at our effectual calling, and shedding it plentifully into our hearts by the
Rom 5. 5.
holy Ghost, saying to our souls, I am your salvation, and your exceeding
great reward, and your God alsufficient: and binding us to believe the Genesis 17.
1.
same; he remains like himself, and changes not; and therefore he
requires that we should do the same, that is, by faith hold it fast in our
persuasion, that he does so And this is more, that the Lord is so affected to
us in the depth of our afflictions, as if we were freed from them all, and were
in the midst of all prosperity, which is hardly believed for the time while
the cross oppresses us. The use of this is, that we labor above all things
to Judge. 19.
be builded up in our most holy faith, that as by it we overcome other
difficulties 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
in the world, so we may thereby overcome this fear and doubt also in the
midst of our calamities; namely, that in our tribulations we may not shrink
back from this persuasion, that for all these, yet God is with us, according
to that which the holy man says in the Psalm; yet God is good to Psalm 73. 1.
Israel, even to all that are of an upright heart, though in outward show it
might seem otherwise. And again, Out of the deep [he meant of sorrowes] he
cried Psalm. 130. 1.
unto the Lord, and he heard, and delivered him. And to make one point of two,
the same use we ought to make of the other words of the Angel, in calling him
valiant man; which was true, because God said it, yet to Gedeon unlikely to be
so, and yet he found it afterward to be so. Let it teach us, to give God his
due, namely, that he be believed in all that he says; yea that he says unto
us, though we be not able to see nor feel so much for the present time, as
neither Gedeon did. A point worthy to be marked, seeing where God gives Note.
good testimony of his favor, or reuealeth his will in any thing, we are not
as ready to join with him, for the most part; but do faint and doubt,
because we see not with bodily eyes (as Thomas desired to do) the thing
promised, as we would. And whereas this troubles many, that the wicked take
occasion hereby to despise them, when they see that God seems not to regard
them, while he so abaseth them: let such know, that their mistaking of the
matter, and their false surmising of Gods good meaning to them, shall not hurt
them, if they fix the eyes of their minds upon this, that God is unchangeable
and constant in all his ways, also if they can learn to esteem of themselves
according to that knowledge and inward feeling they have had of Gods ancient
love and regard of them in times past: and so doing, the more their enemies
scorn them, the nearer the Lord is to them, to take away their reproach.

But this is well and clearly laid out in the next verse, therefore I will
pass Verse. 13.
to that. It appears in this verse, that as near as God was to Gedeon, yet
he saw it not: but concludes, that seeing he and the people of the land were
under such oppression by the Midianites, that it could not be well with them,
neither could he believe that God was with him. And he confirms himself
therein, by a reason, though of no strength, thus: God was indeed with our
fathers (he says) when he brought them out of Egypt, and wrought many miracles
for them, but he did not so now for him and the people, therefore how could he
think, said he, that God was with him now. This spoke Gedeon from an heavy
heart, even then when the Angel was sent directly to him with glad tidings.
But let us further examine his words, and make our benefit of them. In saying,
the Lord could not be with him while Doct.
the Midianites so oppressed them, he showed his great weakness, as I said in
the former verse, affirming that he could not believe, while he saw it to be
so with him. Whereby we may see, how hardly the faithful can be persuaded,
that the Lord is with them in affliction, how ready soever they be to
acknowledge it at other times, which I speak not, as though none were: Dan. 3.
21.
for both the three children cast into the hot burning furnace, and Daniel
into the Lions den, have left most worthy testimony of their invincible Dan.
6. 16.
faith in their great extremity, with many other both in ages past, and now
among us. But yet in time of calamity it must needs be said, especially if it
belong and smartie, that our corrupt nature, which is untoward, and hardly
suffers us to give credit to Gods promises is furthest off then from letting
us see into them, and believe them; and the devil is readiest to work upon
our weakness at such times, and to take the opportunity thereof to fear and
terrify us; and with his fiery darts of unbelief to pierce our hearts,
whereby it is with us, too often and usually, as it was here with Gedeon, in so
much that the Lord being even then near us by his promises of comfort and
encouragements, which were sufficient to content and stay us, yet we see it
not, neither think it to be so, seeing we give not our selves to study and
Note.
consider aright of this point; which distrust of ours is as unbeseeming us, as
it is burdensome to us. The remedy must be that which I spoke of before, and
shall have cause to mention it again, and that is, to rest upon the word and
promise of God, though we see not present help, as Christ said to Martha, Did
I not tell thee, thou should see the glory of God, if thou can believe?
As Ioh. 11. 40.
for profane persons who want faith, what wonder, if they measure Gods love by
their present flourishing, and living in ease, or wealth, and by their enjoying
of these outward things below, whereby their lusts may be satisfied? And what
wonder, if they judge it impossible, in their deep distresses and crosses,
that ever they should wade out of them? As we read of that Prince of Iehoram
in Israel in a fore famine, who hearing the Prophets message from God, touching
sudden plenty that should be on the next day, he said: Though the Lord
would make windows in Heaven, to power down 2. King. 7. 2.
corn and provision, yet this thing could not come to pass. What was this
else, but a bold presuming in great blindness of that which he apprehended
not, and a very derision of the prophecy? And the like we see daily in such
brutish people, who hearing us preach this doctrine of depending upon Gods all
sufficiency by faith, even in affliction, do little better then scoff at it;
Give us wealth, say they, and corn and wine, give us our fill of meat Psalm.
4. 6, 7.
and drink and money, and as for faith, take it whose will. Therefore while
they prosper, they are as merry as Nabal, but if God give them a sudden blow,
it strikes them down flat: they neither have any armor, to bear off the dint
thereof, neither faith to believe that it shall ever be any better with them
but much worse. Their evil conscience makes them fear, that this trouble, or
that disgrace, either sickness or loss, will be their undoing: and as Hamans
friends comforted him, so they do themselves, Hest. 6. and that Hester 6. 13.
was thus, Thou sh^lt surely fall. And yet in their iollitie who have such
appearance of hope, and so great confidence in their estate, that it shall
continue, as they? Better and better they look for, and fear no change till
it come. This I say of them: but how unbeseeming is it, that a believer should
have so much as a tang of this strong unbelief in his deep sorrows? to wit,
not only to wish it were otherwise, which in some sort is not to be disalowed,
and eagerly to desire a redress, and impatiently to bear the burden which
his sin has brought upon him: and not to be little vpholden by this, that
God is the God of the valleys as well as the mountains; that his love is the
same 1. King. 20. 23.
in trials (if it also appear not greater) which it was in prosperity. So
unwelcome is the cross, and so sweet is the contrary to the flesh, that men
have no ears to hear of this doctrine, to believe that God is near unto
them; yea even with them in the midst of their sufferings. For why? They
look only at this, in my prosperity God was with me, but now my estate is
contrary, therefore God is absent. And therefore if any man be at hand to
promise them health, favor, or relief in their sickness, trouble or loss,
they lift up their eyes, and open their ears to that voice, though it come but
from a man like themselves; but to God who has promised, I will be with thee,
I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, they cannot be comforted with that
saying, but still look full heavily, and swearing with Gedeon every one by
himself: Oh Lord, if it be so that thou art with me, how then is this evil
and trouble come upon me? Why? Did I ever promise thee (says Joshua 1. 5.
he) that no adversity should betide thee? Nay rather, have I not sent this
evil, that thou might therein have good proof of my love toward thee, in
upholding thee therein? And learn this lesson yet better, that I am yesterday
and to day, and the same for ever. And this is the more odious in us, Heb 13 8.
that we do not only fail thus in great and searching troubles, such as this
was; but even in smaller also. And yet, which of us will not be ready to accuse
the Israelites (if question be moved of them) for calling for their fleshpots
and garlike, being then in the wilderness, which sometime they had in Egypt,
and for their murmuring, when they had no other food but Manna, and now and
then wanted water: thus our tongues are ready to descant of others, and our
censure to go upon them; which ill becomes those that show by their own
fainting under lighter crosses, that their strength of faith was but small in
the time of their peace, and when they had liberty and freedom from
affliction, though then they could say aloude with open mouth, that they knew
God, believed in him, and loved him.

This be noted of us, out of Gedeons first words in this verse: but now
further, in that he was much occupied in remembering and speaking of his
forefathers, counting them happy for the miracles which God wrought for them,
in respect of himself: hereby we see how common a sin it is amongst us,
that we measure our happy estate to God ward, by our present sense, I mean,
by Gods blessings or corrections upon us, which who sees Ioh. 14. 2.
not how an unequal a rule it is to go by?

But further let us mark, that Gedeon being much occupied about the
prerogatives Doct. 3.
of Israel in Egypt, to wit, how God showed himself present to them, in
working miracles for their deliverance as if there had been no other thing done
there; and as though he should say, they were happy, but we die here for
want of help: but mark we (I say) this that he speaks not a word of their
bondage, and hardness, which they suffered there, and in the wilderness, as
well as that they saw his miracles.

And so do we, if we have not the peace, prosperity, welfare, and other
prerogatives that many of Gods servants have, and namely of our condition: (by
means thereof (I say) we think he is present with them) but we account our
selves to be forgotten and neglected of God in comparison of Note.
them; when yet we little know of the wants and sufferings, both outward and
inward, of such as we judge to be so happy, and God to be present with:
neither do we hear of their sorrowful complaints: and thus we judge and
speak, because of their present prosperity which we see; when yet it is
apparent that we our selves are not destitute of as great blessings some other
way. A great infirmity (doubtless) but much greater it is in us, who have
been taught this oftentimes from many worthy grounds of holy Scripture, that
we should not judge of our selves by others, seeing we know not their estate
as we do our own: for it is certain, that they have many great calamities
upon them, even then when we judge them to be so happy; and there is no doubt,
but that they think the same of us, for some good things they see in us, which
they want, and are void of, we have a surer rule to go by, which cannot
deceive us, that is this: that the Lord once loving us, he does all things for
the best to us. Which if it be so, why forget we that, and measure our estate
by other men's. And because we have not so usually the comfort of our faith by
present sense and feeling thereof, when yet we dare not deny but we have other
graces of God in us, and the works thereof, which are inseparable companions
to it, we do offend much in this, that we will both be ready to judge, and
conclude, that we have no faith, and will count other happy in respect of our
selves, when yet we little know their wants, and complainings thereof, as I
said before.

Besides, this shows what an enemy our corrupt nature is unto us, in the
well bearing of our troubles; and how ingenious and skillful we are, to catch
up that which should hurt us, as children do in handling knives, or such like,
and turn the edge of every thing against our selves, which being with godly
dexterity handled, might singularly benefit us. But oh, how slow and dull are
we in taking hold upon any such thing as might stay us, quiet, resolve, and
comfort us? Rare is that man who has learned this wisdom, and gives not
place to the devil, from whose malice it is, that in temptation all things
seem contrary to that they be, because we look upon them with a troubled
eye, and through a false glass. The instance here used by Gedeon, was meet to
have confirmed his faith, rather then to have weakened it, if he had taken it
aright. For if in their troubles before, and in the wilderness, the
outstretched arm of the Lord saved them, even miraculously, whose worthiness
yet was as little as his to deserve it; then how could it hence follow, that
now it was shortened, and weakened, so that it could not help him, but was as
present to uphold him? Again, let men learn wisdom by this, in the use of
example of other men, that by their sides we strike not through the Lord by our
unthankfulness. Solomon says, Say not that their days past are better then the
present, this is folly. Oh, say men, In the days of Eccles. 7. 12.
our forefathers, what plenty, what seasonable times, what happy living there
was? Why so? And yet if it had been so, they wanted many things of more
precious nature, which we enjoy: and had their part in all our crosses too,
famines, yet the people were but a few, pestilence, sword, and war
especially; also ill seasons of droughts and wet: unless their murmuring be
against God, for multiplying mankind, what cause have they else, to open their
mouths and complain? But our unthankfulness for that we enjoy, causes us to
be discontented in our selves for that we want, and to grudge against God for
partiality; whereas if we compared things equally, we had ten times more cause
of preferring the present condition, taking it with all hardness, as it is not
to be denied but there is much. And so often times do the poor grudge against
the wealthy, or rather against the Lord who made Prou. 22. 2.
both, as Solomon says. One repines that he is rather a tenant, then a
landlord: an underling, rather then a commander; a deformed person, meanly
accounted of, behind hand, diseased, rather then as such or such wealthy men,
great, personable, honorable, before hand, healthful. Consider as well their
wants as their endowments; their grace, as their other parts; the use they
make, and the account they must make of them; their troubles also which
accompany them, as well as their gifts and blessings: and so doing, thou shall
see, if not thy self equal, (for God is the author of such inequality, and
that in great wisdom) yet at least not so much inferior; to be sure, to
have cause to be more thankful.

But this (lastly) is not to be omitted; that Gedeon asking for the miracles
Doct. 4.
which their fathers told them of, does show, that their fathers had according
to the commandment of God, declared to their children the wondrous works
that he had done for them; and it seems also, that he had learned by them, to
know and believe them. So must parents and children do, the one should be able
to tell, as we see in the Psalm; and the other to hearken Psalm. 78. 1.
to the great works of God, and not to fables: neither should tales of vain
things be told, as of Robinhood; nor the dregs and fragments of popery, and
filthy reports of lewd actions, to corrupt their children; as too many parents
do, and hurt them as much this way as any other, who yet are not a few: but
they should cause them to drink in the water of life, by good instructions.
And if parents plead their own inabilitie hereto, let them know, that the
Ministry of the word is a special mean to supply that want: let them be
diligent hearers themselves, and tell the same forth to other, and stir up
their children to do so: that so by liniall descent, the knowledge and fear
of God may be derived to their posterity; that the Lord and his goodness to
them, may be had in perpetual remembrance. And let their children see that
they mind Gods matters with no less cheerefulnes and regard, then they have
done their worldly affairs: and to this let their parents train them; for
else they will see light at a creuise, and we know it quickly pricks that will
be a thorn. As they be framed up and manured at first, so their soil will
after either bear thorns and briars, or good fruits.

THE THIRTY NINE SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw follows the third point in the division of these Verse. 14. The sense.
six verses, and that is, the words of the Angel to Gedeons sorrowful
answer, thus: Whereas thou say, that God showed his power to your fathers in
delivering them by miracles, go thou armed by him with the like power, and
thereby deliver thou Israel out of the hands of the Midianites, and thereby
thou shall know that God is as able to do great things now, as well as before,
yea and that he does in like manner for his people even now, as he did in ages
past. And to make his words of more authority with him, he adds this
interrogation, Have not I sent thee? And we must know, that the calling of the
Judges is so diligently described, that we may understand, that private men
were not able to take in hand such great works without authority from God, as
to gather armies, and to take up weapons against the mighty: it was a matter
of great difficulty and danger, and therefore God authorized them, as here he
did Gedeon, and so he did others; that they giving credit thereto, might be
heartned: and therefore he says, have not I sent thee? And to return to
Gedeon; thus the Angel proved that God was with him, if he made him able to
deliver Israel, which to do was no less then to work a miracle.

By this we all that fear God, are taught; that the times are not so hard, no
not when we are in affliction, as we take them to be. For either help is
nearer to us, then we are aware, (as it was here with Gedeon) or we make our
Note.
trouble seem greater then it is in it self, by aggravating it, when yet we
might see, that it either is not so great as it seems, or might be many ways
greater; or we have greater comforts elsewhere, which were able to assuage our
sorrows, if we did not ouerwhelme our hearts with immoderate heaviness,
which drives away all comfort from us. And therefore when we are sad and
heavy through wants and crosses, this lesson should be well learned before of
us, that for all this the Lord is with us, and he is good to us: for even so
have other our good fathers been before us persuaded in their afflictions; and
though they have now an end of all such languishing fears, doleful doubts,
and troublesome thoughts; yet in their time they had their Note.
part in them as we still have, and we shall have an end of them, and rest from
them, as they now do.

There has no temptations taken us, but such as appertain to man: and 2. Cor.
10. 13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we be able,
but will even give the issue with the temptation, that we may be able to bear
it. And therefore, as our Savior said to his Apostles, when their hearts were
troubled beyond measure for his bodily departing from them; Let not your hearts
be troubled; believe in God, and believe in me, that I can help you Ioh. 14. 1.
still, and will be with you: so should we do, that is, not look with both
eyes upon our afflictions, but with one eye upon his constant love and assured
Note.
promises, yea and settle our hope therein more thoroughly, by saying (as God
commands) has not he bidden us do so? even as the Angel says to Gedeon
about conquering the Midianites, have not I sent thee? So the two Disciples
that went from Jerusalem to Emaus, when our Savior went into their company in
the way, bewraied their unbelief concerning his resurrection that day. This
day, they say, he should have risen again, but because they heard not of it,
they did not think that there was any such thing. Luke 24. 21.
But did not our Savior show them their fault, so as they saw it? for they
knew that it was even he who they said should have risen again that day. Of
Mary and Martha the like may be said: who were both believers in Ioh. 11 39.
Christ, and beloved of him; yet when Christ went about to raise up Lazarus,
and to that end asked them where they laid him, did they not show that they
thought it could not be now done, and therefore answered; Lord, by this time he
stinketh, for he has been dead four days: And yet that they might see their
weakness in believing, Christ raised him up, which they thought impossible In
all these, and in Gedeon, we may clearly see our faces as in a glass. For in
a cross, especially if it be any thing smartie and sharp, although we gave
testimony of our faith before, and that with ioyfulnes; yet now in the trial
of us, how poorly are we armed to go through it, and persuaded of the good
issue of it? Do we not hang down the head and Note.
faint, and say within our selves, this cross will be our undoing? And again,
it cannot turn to our good, neither could any have been so unwelcome to us.
For example, if we be deprived of our dear companion in marriage, or lose some
round sum of money, or be otherwise impaired in our wealth, or under some
strange pain; do we say, as in time of peace, in meeknes of spirit, the Lord
who loves us, has done this for our good? even he that cannot suffer the
wind to blow upon us, has sent it? Do we say, It must be thus, and is
expedient for us? It is long first (I fear) and full faintly done, if we do
it at length, and few attain thereto. And yet, do we not see in these and
the like, the marvelous hand of God, how he sends light in darkness, joy
in heaviness, and as it were, life in death? Does not God bring us through them,
otherwise then we looked for, and does he not make us see, and afterward
acknowledge, that such affliction was good for us? Even as he said to Gedeon
here, does the Midianites oppressing of you seem impossible to be avoided?
Behold then, even thou shall do that which seems impossible, and shall
subdue and overcome them. Thus we see how we should make our profit of this
answer.

Gedeon receiving this answer from the Angel, that he should deliver Israel,
Verse. 15. The sense.
does now in this fourth point ask of the Angel, by what means he shall do
so great a matter. For these words, by diligent considering of them, we find
not to be spoken doubtingly, as before, but as inquiring, and asking a
question: as if he should say, I doubt not but that shall be done which is
promised, but I ask by what means it shall be brought to pass. For he
shows that he is not of ability, seeing, he was but of a poor family in the
half tribe of Manasseh, which was also mean, not mighty as some other, and
also for that he was the least in his fathers house.

His meaning was, that he maruailes that he should deliver Israel, seeing he
wanted all things which were required to so great a work. For war could not
be taken in hand by a poor man, and one of a mean condition, such an one as
he knew himself to be, seeing riches and power, and authority especially, were
required thereto. And if it be asked whither Gedeon offended Esaias 36. 5.
in moving this question, seeing Sarah, and Zachariah were reproved for the
like question asking: I am sure, that so Abraham and the Virgin Mary asked the
like, and were not reproved, as neither Gedeon was here; Neither was it the
moving of the question that was found fault with: but the doubtful mind with
which it was moved, and therefore they two doubting, were found fault with,
that is, Zacharias and Sarah; Abraham and Mary were not; neither therefore
Gedeon, as appears by the answer of the Angel, who reproved him not; but
answered his question.

And by this we may learn, that as questions moved with doubting of Doct.
that which the Scripture resolves us of, is evil, so to move questions where
we are ignorant, of weighty points which we would be resolved of, is
commendable, in all matters that tends to edification, and most of all in and
about those which are most necessary; as Paul himself and the Iailer, before
their conversion, and after they began to look after their salvation, did so;
to wit, asked questions about it. And to be slack and backward in seeking of
resolution, in such cases where we are ignorant, and have cause to inquire and
ask, is in no wise to be liked, but rather threatens great hurt and danger:
[whereof more might be said; but occasion has bin already offered to speak of
this duty (of seeking relation in doubtful cases, both in opinion and
conscience) before.]

The Angel answers him without rebuking him, and satisfies him in Verse 16.
The sense.
that which he demanded, (that is, how he should be able to do such a work:)
saying; howsoever in war ordinarily taken in hand, riches, power and care
requisite, yet in this, my power without them, shall suffice: for thou shall
save Israel, not by them, but by my power, because I will be with thee, and by
the strength that I will give thee. And so God answered Moses when he sent him
to Pharaoh to deliver his people out of Egypt: and to Joshua in like manner,
when he should lead the children of Israel after him, into the land of
promise. And so Gedeon here was satisfied, especially by these Exodus 3. 12.
Josh. 1. 5.
words of the Angel, to wit, that he should smite Midian as if they were but
one man, even as it was all one, for the Lord to destroy one, as it was ten
hundred thousand. And this came to pass when the Midianites slew one an other.
So that in using means to serve Gods providence, we do well, when we see God
his meaning to be, that we should do so: but always with this caveat, that we
take heed of Asa his sin, who is said to have made his Physicians his God, by
seeking to them and trusting in them, not seeking God [in them. But let us ever
beware least we grow to that profanenes which we read of in that cursed
Rabshaketh; I mean, to iustle God out from our enterprises, saying as he did,
Counsel and strength are for the war; and so not to trust in the Lord our
God.]

This speech here uttered by the Angel to Gedeon, [I will be with thee] the
Doct. verse. 16.
Lord uses often times, and not always in the same particular meaning: sometime
it is understood of some outward blessing or deliverance, as he meant to
Joshua, in saying, I will be with thee against thine enemies, and bring thee
into the land of promise: sometime of the inward and special grace of God, to
guide and comfort his withal; as to Mary, Luke 1. 28. and sometime both, as to
Jacob when he dreamed by the way of Aram, God spoke to him, and said to him, I
will be with thee; meaning it both of his grace that he would give him to
uphold him, and also of other help; as in the next words which he adds
there, he does more particulerly declare, saying; I will keep thee whither
soever thou go; whereby he means, that he would be Genesis 28. 15.
with him to deliver him from outward enemies till he should inherit the land
which he promised him. The words are to be understood in this place in the
first sense, namely of delivering the Midianites into the hands of Gedeon:
though I deny not, but Gedeon obtained the latter also, as well as the former.

And this should teach us, that if God have promised to any of his, who believe
unto salvation, his power, protection, and helping hand in any outward
troubles, they may and ought to believe, that he will do, as he has
promised. And as he showed himself to be his, in this manner, so he will
undoubtedly be with us in this age, to help, deliver, and give success to us,
as he has already done greater things for us. But yet, seeing we use to look
too narrowly to Gods outward promises, that if they be not performed to us to
the full, we are ready to complain; therefore know we this, that if he do
fail in any point of that which we look for, his promise being but
conditional, he will supply all such wants by his grace spiritual, so as we
believe: as patience, contentation, and confidence, which are far more worth
then if we enjoyed the outward benefit it self. For the spiritual includes
temporal, as reason in the soul of man contains the inferior powers of
motion, sense, growth, and life. Sunder not those that God has combined
together. If he have given us his Christ, we know he has no Romans 8. 32.
greater things to deny us, and much less he will smaller. And doubtless,
for want of believing the greater, we fail sometimes of the smaller; and that
justly, as a punishment of our dishonouring God by our distrust.

Besides this, we may learn here, that the power of God communicated Doct. 2.
to us, is sufficient to make us do and work great things, far above our
reach and ability, in war or in peace; in persecution, also against sin,
the devil, or whatsoever else: as here, when God promised his power to Gedeon,
he assured him, that even he, a weak man, should be able to subdue a mighty
and great people. And when is this might given to men? even when God calls
and appoints them to any service that shall require and stand in need thereof.
As now Gedeon being called to this ouercomming of the Midianites, he was
furnished with the gifts he had not before; as wisdom, courage, strength, and
faith in particular promise of assistance and victory. And therefore by it he
is said to have been made strong, and of a Heb. 11. 34.
weak man, valiant in battle. Heb. 11. So he enabled Paul to believe the
Act. 26. 11.
promise of standing by him and bearing him out, at sundry times before his
enemies: whereby he wrought such a work, as none but an Apostolical spirit
could work. And even still the like courage, cheerefulnes, hope, gifts, he
gives to such Ministers of his, whom he means to use to the great ends
mentioned, I mean to bring many to Christ, Act. 26. and Ephesians. 4. which Acts
26. 18. Ephesians. 4. 12.
he denies to them whom he calls not, and who believe not in him. So that
they never shall be able to compass that which the other shall.

So had Moses, and the Apostles, as their place and occasions offered, did
require. And so may and ought we to be persuaded, that how unfit and unworthy
soever we are and feel our selves to be, if the Lord call us to any estate or
duty, he will arm us against all difficulties, toil and tediousness
therein. The Lord does not lay heavy burdens upon men, and give them weak
shoulders: but deals out to every member his measure, according to the use
and service which belongs to it: a double spirit to Elisha above Eliah,
according to his double need. Even as we see the gift of strength is given to
the arms and shoulders in man's body, because they serve for the strongest use.
And so, because he knows the difficulties both within and without, which a
godly Christian shall meet with, therefore he leaves him not to sink under
them, but gives him faith, and enables him by that to overcome, not one or a
few, but the world, that is all. And as our Savior 1. Ioh. 5. 4. Matthew. 6. 30.
speaks, Has the Lord so clothed the grass, the creatures, and will he not
much more provide for his people? So by the like argument, has God given every
creature, even the beasts, some one gift or other, according to the need
thereof, to it own preservation, as swiftnes to the small, strength to the
great, to some one kind of armor, to some another; and shall he fail in the
necessary furnishing of his people with that grace, without which they should
not be able to attain the end of their redemption and election? No doubtless.
But here is a twofold objection: First, many who zealously desire to Object.
1. Answ.
do good in the Church, or otherwise, yet want gifts. Answ. It is not every
man's part to judge aright of another man's gifts: for gifts which may seem
mean to us, may be mighty through the blessing of God concurring to effect
great matters. Again, I say, if God give but small sufficiency and gifts, he
requires but a proportioned work and service: for he exacts not that vantage
of him who has but one talent, which he does of another who has five. To the
second objection, that many whose gifts are great, Object. 2. Answ.
do little good. I answer: Their sin is the greater, but that hinders not
that doctrine; for though all whom God sets on work shall be fitted, yet not
contrarily, if he appoint them not to the work, neither call them to it.

Verse. 17. And he answered him, I pray thee, if I have found favor in thy
sight, then show me a sign that thou talkest with me.

Verse. 18. Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee and bring
mine offering, and lay it before thee: and he said, I will tarry until thou
come again.

Verse. 19. Then Gedeon went in, and made ready a Kid, and unleavened bread of
an Ephath of flower, and put the flesh in a basket, and put the broth in a
pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it.

Verse. 20. And the Angel of the Lord said unto him, Take the flesh and the
unleavened bread, and lay them upon this stone, and power out the broth, and
he did so.

Verse. 21. Then the Angel of the Lord put forth the end of the staff that he
held in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened bread, and there
arose fire out of the stone, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened bread;
so the Angel of the Lord departed out of his sight.

Verse. 22. And when Gedeon perceived that it was the Angel of the Lord, Gedeon
then said; Alas my Lord God, for because I have seen an Angel of the Lord
face to face, I shall dye.

Verse. 23. And the Lord said unto him, Peace be unto thee: fear not, thou
shall not dye.

Verse. 24. Then Gedeon made an Alter there unto the Lord, and called it
Iehouahshalem: unto this day it is in Ophrah of the father of the Ezrites.

OF the first of the four things mentioned in the 11. verse, to wit, who Verse.
17. The sense.
should deliver Israel out of the hands of the Midianites (which was Gedeon)
we have heard: now follows the second, namely of the sign which Gedeon
asked, by which he might know who he was who talked with him. To proceed
therefore, Gedeon having a promise of so great a matter as the victory, from
the Angel, who spoke to him; whom he took to be neither Angel nor God, but a
man to utter the words of God unto him; he desires of him a sign, that he
might not be deceived with a fancy, but might know that he was such an one as
could make good his word to him, that is, a man of God, as he took him to be.
Here before I go on further in the story, I will stay a while by occasion of
this speech of Gedeon. And let us know, that which he did, in desiring this of
the messenger, was meet for him to do; for it behooved him to try the spirits,
whether they were of God or no. For an evil spirit can change himself into an
Angel of light. And this 2. Cor. 10. 14.
is especially to be done, when any thing is urged upon us that is doubtful,
and which may seem unlawful to be done. For there a man may not easily
assent, unless he be persuaded that such a thing is from God. Excellent and
commendable are the examples of Manoah, Cornelius, the men of Beroea, Judge 13.
12. Act. 10. 7. Act. 17. 12.
for this wisdom.

And this is to teach us, that we ought to have the like scruple, and make the
like question, when any thing doubtful is urged upon us, that for no Verse. 17.
Doct.
man's pleasure, nor by example of any, we be led; but to prove all things by
the waights of the Sanctuary, which is the word of God: that so we may be
satisfied. And if in the mouth of two or three witnesses that be confirmed
which is brought unto us, we are there to rest: and that should be enough to
us; but as for miracles or signs now, that it is the truth which is taught us,
we are not to seek or ask for any. And the like we are to do in all our
troubles and fears, and not to fetch comfort from conceit, or the spirit
without the word, or from any thing else, which is but a false ground. And this
wise regard in Gedeon, to deal sure in so weighty a case, and not rashly to
depend upon a bare man's word for the effecting of so great a work, as he knew
none but God could enable him unto: lays greatly to our charge, who in
matters of far greater weight, do yet deal far more loosely and slenderly
then he did in this. The wise man says, The fool believes Prou. 14. 15.
every thing* meaning every thing, which he desires and would feign have, he
believes, and is easily persuaded of it that it is so as he would have it,
though he have nothing of moment and good ground to show for it. Among men it
is counted a sign of great folly to deal thus rawly in things only
concerning our temporal estate, and to rest upon every man's word and report,
yea though it be but ambigious and obscurely uttered: and the reason is good,
why it is so: they who do so, give every man advantage to ouerreach, abuse,
deceive, and wrong them, besides the great controversies and contentions,
suites and charge, which they procure to themselves needlessly thereby. But (to
speak of weightier matters) what one among many counts it his folly, to hold
his salvation upon sandy grounds and evidences, as upon his own good meanings
and desires, upon the good opinion that others conceive of him, upon some
slight sorrow for sin, or confessing of it to God, also upon his hearing of
the word, upon a blind hope, or upon some good yet common fruits of hearing;
as good speech, in some places, upon taking liking of good people, liking the
Ministry, or lending, and giving some thing to the poor in their distress:
these things are good indeed, and (I am persuaded) found to be in few, but yet
these are not to be taken for infallible tokens. Nay, concerning this weighty
matter, men are willing to build the hope of their salvation, upon the bare
word of a Minister, though he never saw sound reason for his so speaking, and
assuring them thereof, but for that they have been baptized, and do live in
the visible Church, neither have they any thing out of the word of God to quiet
and resolve themselves: whereas the trial of a man's state to Godward stands in
this, that by the Scripture he can prove himself to be an happy person, because
the word has humbled him, changed him, reformed him, and wrought in him faith
in the promise, an earnest longing after that which is promised, and a waiting
for it, till it be enjoyed without weariness, and an hearty desiring that
other did so likewise, with such other. But of this much is written.

To proceed further, Gedeon now having desired a sign for the confirming Verse
18. 19. The sense.
of his faith, and thinking him to be, as I have said, a man of God, desired
him to stay till he went and prepared for him, as Abraham and other had done
in the like case, and while he should refresh himself, he purposed to talk
further with him about the sign. And the things which he prepared for him,
were both fit to be eaten as nourishment, as also to serve for sacrifice,
though the word signifies both a gift, and an offering: but for proof that
Gedeon brought not these things forth to the man of God, (as he took him to
be) for sacrifice, but that he might be refreshed by them, hereby it may
appear, that he neither set up any altar there, as he did afterward, to offer
peace offerings thereon; (read verse 24.) neither did he take the man to be
God to consume it with fire. I have set down that meaning of the verse, which
by weighing both, I take to be the truest. And yet I deny not, but that the
Angel used that meat, beside the expectation of Gedeon, he used it (I say)
for a sacrifice, as appears in the 21. verse, and thereby gave the sign,
which was before asked of him. Both come to one end, for a sacrifice was the
sign to Gedeon, whether first or last. The things that Gedeon brought are
named in the 19. verse. According to the setting down of these things, to wit,
that Gedeon did, as Manoah did, that is; offer refreshing to the messenger, we
are to know that the men of God were in former times in so great account with
his people, that they were glad that might receive them, and as the manner then
was, to make them stay to eat with them. And Abraham, as I said, did the like:
even so did Lot also, and they lost nothing Gen 18. 3. and 19. 2.
thereby, as we may read in the story of them both. The same did Gedeon here,
who thought him to be an holy man, and therefore desired him to take some
repast with him.

This hospitality was used of the godly to strangers, according to the
commandment Doct verse. 18. and 19. Heb. 13. 1.
of God in the Epistle to the Hebrews, which is this; Be not forgetful to
intertaine strangers. For they are sad in heart, and when they are regarded in
strange places with kind and hearty welcome, as being commended thither by the
Church of God, as it is meet they should, (for how else can they be known for
such) it is a worthy fruit of love in them that receive them, and it makes
glad the hearts of the other, who are received of them. Much more (then) ought
such kindness to be showed to the ^aithfull, that are known to us, and are in
wants. And they that shut up their compassion from such, (when the profane
will be too forward that way, to their companions, yea to their dogs) how
dwells (as the Apostle speaks) the love of God in them? Not that hereby I
approve of their rashness, 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
who to avoid uncharitableness and unmercifulness, put no difference between
such as they harbor, or relieve, which the Apostle precisely warns us of, in
the Galath. 6. 10. that we aim especially at them that be of the Gal. 6. 10.
same household and body, whom it most concerns us to look to, having charge
of such poor given us by Christ. Such as observe not this, light upon good
persons by haphazard, as we say, and for the most part do cast away their
bread upon the waters. For many glozing hypocrites, with counterfeit faces and
letters of testimony, with some pretense of honesty, do abuse good people,
who repent them often of their forwardnes in receiving such rangers and
locusts, both Ministers and others. For besides their gifts, they have drawn
them by cunning flattery, to lend them money, or show them other courtesy
answerable, and yet as deceivers, have left them in the lurch; to teach them
wisdom against afterward. The like may be said of rash Suretiships,
Commendatorie Letters, and the like to such, as of whom we have no pledge, to
use Salomons phrase. Let Christians learn wisdom by this, and not under
color of pity become a prey to such hypocrites, as make benefit to themselves
of that their ranging course, and will be ready to recompense them with naught
but derision and scorn for their simplicity. Though, I confess, it is the
safer extreme of the two, and the nearer to charity, to be credulous, then too
suspicious of them, as being unknown and strangers. But as we learned in the
former point, not to trust our selves without good proof, so (I trow) much
less others, being not approved.

In these two verses is declared, how Gedeon was rewarded for his kindness Verse.
20. 21
showed to the man of God, as he took him to be: and how he seeking carefully
to know the will of God, where it much concerned him, and whereof he doubted,
he was well satisfied and comforted thereby. For the meat which Gedeon
brought him, being as the man commanded, laid on a rock, he by divine power
brought fire out of the rock, and burnt up and consumed the flesh and
unleavened bread. Even as Eliah called fire from heaven, 1. King. 18. 38
and consumed the burnt offering, to the conuicting of the Baalites. And as he
for the cleerer manifesting of the miracle, powered much water upon the burnt
offering before it was consumed; so did the Angel here cause the broth to be
powered on the place, to moisten it, where the meat should be consumed, for the
better manifesting of the miracle. And the like is said of Abel, Heb. 11. that
by faith he obtained of God this real testimony of Gods approbation, that he
received his offering and signified the same, as God used to do, by consuming
it, Genesis 4. By the like miraculous burning of it, Heb. 11. 4. with Genesis 4. 4.
Gedeon was confirmed, that the message which was brought him of his delivering
Israel was true, he being known to be the Lord Jehovah, who brought it.

And here let us learn, first by this earnest seeking of Gedeon to know Gods
Doct. verse. 20. 21.
will, in that he was so answered, and satisfied: that we never seek to the
Lord in vain in desiring heartily to be resolved of our doubts, or eased in
our consciences. For it is true in the praying for these, as for other things,
which the Apostle James says, the prayer of a righteous man avails much, if
it James 5. 16.
be seruent. Oh to depend on God in our difficulties and doubtful cases, and
to use the best means we can with confidence, and with an humble and quiet
spirit, how much it aduantageth us? And contrariwise, we may be troubled long
enough, before we shall find ease, if we either use any indirect or unlawful
means, or if in the use of the best we commit not our way to God, and depend
upon him. David in the 73. Psalm complains greatly of a Psalm. 73. 13, 14.
temptation which grew upon him, and strongly assaulted him, to wit, That
because they who feared not God, prospered outwardly more then himself did,
therefore his estate was not so good as theirs, nor he beloved of God, so much
as they: wherein, if God had not showed him an issue, he being so unable for
the time to stay himself, how had he been wearied and discomforted thereby?
But having with good advice weighed the matter in the balances of the
Sanctuary, laying their and his estates together, what signification gives he
of a satisfied and quiet mind? How clearly saw he his own folly in grudging
at their poor happiness, or rather dainty misery? And so as a man recovered
out of a frantike passion, and new come to himself, how freely does he shame
himself, calling himself fool, ignorant, and a beast for his so judging, and
then descry the dangerous condition of the ungodly, as that they were set in
slipperie places, for all their flourishing? So great is the joy which Gods
people conceive, when they having conflicted Note.
long with doubts of mind, or sorrow of heart, either before forgiveness
enjoyed, or after; they flee to God, either by prayer, as Hezekiah did, or
hearing Esaias 38. 2.
the word, reading, communicating their fears and griefs to such as can quiet
them and pacify their conscience: as the example of Cornelius sending to
Peter, and the Eunuch communicating with Philip, who went away rejoicing, with
sundry others, do witness? which should be sufficient to encourage them who
suffer these sores to fester inwardly through concealing them, and so to
prevail against the^, (through their negligence and fainting under them) to
make their cases known in time: for if they can neither by prayer, fasting,
hearing, etc. find comfort against their heaviness, resolution in their
doubts, strength against sins, direction for particular duties and the like,
their last refuge must be to repair to them that can do the part of an
Ananias to Paul, or this Angel to Gedeon; I mean, bring to mind somewhat
which might speak to the heart of them, and restore them to good health and
comfort again. Which (doubtless) during the temptation, they could not feel.
But the folly of men, or their bashfulnes, or ignorance is great, who deny
themselves the liberty which God allows them, and so procure the more sorrow
to themselves. I speak of such, as may have resolution, for seeking: whereas
thousands cannot, who full gladly would make their benefit thereof. But here it
is time to make an end.

THE FORTIETH SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
HOW Gedeon was answered and satisfied about the Doct. 2. in verse. 20. 21.
sign he asked, we have heard: Now note we further here, what a blessing and
reward he obtained of God for his kindness and courtesy he showed to the man,
as he thought him to be: whereby we see how God rewards the^ that receive
and make account of his true servants and messengers. Gedeon, though he were
driven by the Midianites, even near to famine, and sore oppressed by the^, so
that the forgoing of a little in that time of need and extremity, was more then
a thousand times as much in the time of plenty; yet even then he did not
withhold his liberality from this messenger Heb. 13. 2.
of God. And what lost he by it? Nay, how infinitely did he gain? So, Abraham
doing this duty, received for good men, Angels of God. So, that poor widow
yielding her mite to the Prophet of God, that is somewhat, 1. King. 17. 13.
even of the little that she had, received great abundance for it. So, our
Savior says agreeably to this: Whosoever shall give unto one of these little
ones he Matthew. 10. 42.
meant such as believed in him, and were in the sight of the world, abject to
drink but a cup of cold water only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say
unto you, he shall not lose his reward. But of this duty before: this I add
by way of remembrance thereof.

This intertainment is a part of liberality, and a fruit of the Spirit. So
any refreshing of the hearts of Gods Saints, is a worthy work, and shall be
regarded of God. I acknowledge that men must do in this, as they may continue
other duties which are imposed upon them, about their own flesh Philem 7.
and family, but yet they must not under that color be cold and backward in
this duty of love, neglecting and letting pass such opportunities of doing
good as are offered, for uncertainties to come. As for them that waste much
upon lewd company, play, gaming, whoring, drinking, they shall one day know to
their cost, what it is to lash out, and spend the good blessings of God in such
unprofitable and hurtful manner, whereby so many members of Christ might be
relieved. But for the intertaining and bestowing of a good part of men's goods
in such manner as I here speak of, and commended, as Gedeon did, it is to
receive men for their mutual good and edification, and not to evil and carnal
ends. And therefore that Christians, through selfeloue, or worldliness should
be too fast handed, scantie and nigardly toward other their poor brethren, it
savors of small liking or joy they have in their communion of Saints, or
fruit of their profession, whatsoever love to God they pretend. For the
practice of love and mercy must approve our godliness to be sound, and not
frothie. And yet this is apparent, that many a man saves more by his upright
and conscionable walking and fear of God, (the which before he made no
conscience to mispend upon his lusts, as many other do) then would well serve
them to allot and apply to good uses. But to return, when the Angel had thus
resolved Gedeon, by the sign mentioned, he departed from him; which clearly
shows to what end he came unto him.

Now as it falls out often times to Gods servants, that the end of one trouble
Verse. 22 23 24. The brief meaning of them ad, and a larger unfolding of the
22. verse.
is the beginning of another, there arises a new trouble to Gedeon, after that
he was delivered out of the former doubt and danger. And in the next verse, it
is showed how he was brought out of it, and in the 24. how he gives God
thanks for it. His trouble was this, that he had seen an Angel of God,
therefore he feared he should die. And no marvel: for we shall read in many
places, that the old fathers, when they had seen God (as he might be seen, or
an Angel,) were sore terrified, and afraid that they should die. So in this
imperfect speech, saying, I have seen an Angel of God] he meant, as we also
must supply it thus; I shall die. So Jacob after he awoke, and Genes. 28. 16.
perceived the Lord to be present in the place, where he lay, and had dreamed
that night; was afraid, and said, The Lord was in this place, and I was not
aware: and having wrastled with the Angel, thinking that he had been a man,
marvelled that he lived.

So when Manoah knew that it was an Angel of the Lord, that had spoken Judges
13. 21.
to him, he said to his wife; we shall surely die, seeing we have seen God.
So the people said to Moses on Mount Sinai, when God came Exodus 19. Deuteronomy. 5.
25. 27.
down, they were so afraid, that they desired Moses that he would entreat the
Lord to speak no more to them in that manner, lest they should die. The reason
of this fear in them, was sin, that made them, as Adam, afraid Genesis 4. 10.
of Gods voice after he had sinned, which before he rejoiced above all things,
to hear. And thus through the darkness which came of sin, they not being
able to abide the light of Gods presence, their consciences drove them to fly
from God, who is almighty, and holy and pure, who can abide no uncleanness,
which all mortal men are full of: so that even they who were not tainted with
wilful sinning against God, esteemed it is present death to have God present.
As the good Prophet Esaias testifier^, saying: Woe is me, for I am undone,
because mine eyes have seen the Lord of Hoasts. And though he confessed that
he was a man of poluted lipp^s, for the nearer men come to God, the less
blemishes and smaller they see in Esai 6. 5.
themselves) yet we know that was endued with grace. But this in him and others
came of their justly troubled conscience, unsound and vnpure, seeing that God
of himself by nature, is both the author of life and comfort, and therefore
not to be feared: and so was he now in his appearing to Gedeon in this place
full of mercy and goodness, and in many things decclared the same unto him,
though he, when he knew that it was the Lord, was even (as it were) brought out
of himself, saying alas, because I have seen an Angel of the Lord, face to
face.

This teaches what high reverence we ought to have God in, as often as Doct.
Verse. 22.
we come into his presence, where he has promised more especially to appear
and be present, namely, in the assemblies of his people; and to be no
otherwise affected, when we think of him, and pray unto him (but yet without
terror) and by consequence every where, because we have learned, that he is
every where. And the rather we should follow the examples of the servants of
God in this their reverence before God, (and yet learning to resist immoderate
fear) because of the contrary lightness and boldness of many in this point,
do not think of God in any sort, as his Highness and Majesty does require.
And yet I speak this even of such as are not of the worst sort. But as for the
profaneness and brutishness of some, who are in a contrary extremity to
Gedeon, and to all that walk in reverence before God, it proceeds from a
far worse cause then the most imagine, to wit, mere gross ignorance, or
infidelity: as appears by their behavior both in public place, where God is
more specially present, and in private, whither they resort for their pleasure
and business. In the one, they pass the time in sleeping, prating, laughing,
gazing about, wandering of mind, and the like irreverence: in the other in
drunkenness, wantonness, gaming, rotten and cursed speech and behavior. So
that the cause of this extreamitie in these, and or their so great irreverence,
is no other then I have said, the least of both which, ignorance I mean,
provoke them not (we see) to devotion (though Popery shamelessely calls it
the Mother thereof) but to diuelishnesse, and at length, to desparation. For as
here the contrary excess in Gedeon arose from the beholding of God amiss, and
the too much observing of his glory without his goodness: so the not
reuerencing of God at all, either in his word or works, is the fruit of mere
blindness and darkness and unbelief. But to return, as the servants of
God, ought to carry themselves in all high reverence, in all places, and
specially in his worship by Prayer, the Word and Sacraments; so when we
endeavor to do thus, yet if we deeply think and consider of our own
vileness and wretchedness, and of Gods greatness and glorious majesty, out
of the flesh and humane nature of Christ, and without applying his sufferings
and obedience to us by faith, we cannot be without danger and sense of
swallowing up, as Gedeon and other were. And not only so, but we are often times
overcome and almost overwhelmed, when we do the best we can, and think of
Christ as we are able, we are so easily led and carried by the spirit of
bondage and fear. And therefore what may we think of the superstition in
Popery, which has caused in the people such carnal fear of God and slavish
terrors and servile worship; but that it is the bane and poison of infinite
thousand people? because it is a doctrine that drives to despair, leading men
with horror of Gods wrath, but shows them no way to escape it which will
stand them in any stead, iustling aside unfeigned faith, which only knits us to
God through Christ, and causes us to pray or draw near to him, without
astonishment, yea with much comfort. But to leave them, and to return to the
people of God, I grant that this is through want or weakness of faith, which
I said of them: such want and weakness is often times in the best of us, or at
least may be, so that we are not privileged from it. And this argues our
great sin and corruption, and that our faith is never here perfect, when it
is at the best. The view, sense and experience hereof, and of fear and
frighting, is notably and clearly discerned to be in us, in thunder,
lightning, or some other apparent danger, when the presence of Gods glorious
Majesty presses us more nearly. And though now we in this latter age of the
world, are not to look for such appearances of Christ and Angels in the shape
of men, but are sent to Moses and the Prophets, and to search the Luke 16. 29.
Ioh. 5. 39.
Scriptures to know that, of and concerning God, which we have need of, yet in
the former and first age both of them were; as in the forementioned examples of
Abraham, Jacob: and Manoah is to be seen: and in that Vision of Esaias, when he
saw God sit in a throne, and with him Seraphins crying one Esaias 6. 2. 3.
to another, Holy, holy, holy, etc. The use hereof is, that we daily by faith,
with reverence, approach to the throne of grace for forgiveness, and thereby
take holy confidence to our selves to go out and in before the Lord in all
service, and to view and consider his works of judgment, without corrupt Note.
and terrible fear, and yet without unseemly lightness and boldness; for
this our good God, is a great God and a consuming fire, Heb. 12. And by this
Heb. 12. 29.
temperature, we shall be kept from extreamitie on both sides. For as this
estate drives away lightness, so we may be assured, that we be in best
manner freed from the fear of Gods wrath justly deserved by our sins, (while
we hold fast our confidence and assurance of the pardon thereof, with the
continual keeping them under, being forgiven) whereby we shall be freed also from
superstitious, carnal, and superfluous fear, which, wheresoever it is, does
not a little distemper the mind, and make it unfit for duty. John 14. 1.

Now further besides this, seeing after Gedeons doubt answered by the Doct. 2.
in Verse 22.
Angel, this new trouble arose immediately, that he feared he should have
died by seeing the Angel of God; we see how one trouble and grief comes in
the neck of another to Gods servants; who if they should not have deliverances
accordingly, should faint and not be able to go under them. Even as we read
of Job, that one message being ended of the loss of cattle, Job 1. 18.
another comes to him of the throwing down of his house by the winds, and the
killing of his children. And although there be intermission from trouble, God
providing for his people, that they may not be discouraged, as if all should
come at once, they must needs be; yet their frailty so requiring, 1. Pet. 1.
6. Note.
he sees it best that the rod be held over them every while, and sometime make
them smart; and all little enough, to hold them within their bounds. For we may
all, even the best, say with the Prophet, before we were afflicted, we Psalm.
119. 67.
went astray, but after we kept thy word.

The use hereof first is this, that seeing we are subject, and lie open to
trouble so many ways, we nestle not our selves here below in any earthly
delights, so that we be unwilling to hear of any change, but rather look for
it, and be armed against it; and so the smart that comes thereby, shall not
sting and astonish us, as otherwise it will. And secondly, seeing God sees it
meet in his wisdom to exercise us with many afflictions, he seeing that 1.
Pet. 1. 6.
we have need of them, and all to the end that so he may the better hold us
under; it is most absurd, that we should in any sort seek to fulfill the lusts
of our hearts, whereby we multiply and bring further trouble upon our lives.

The other thing therefore which we may note here by Gedeon, is this, Doct. 3.
how soon our faith is overwhelmed by affliction. For though the Angel
proved it to him, to his good contentment, that he was the man which should
deliver Israel out of the oppression of the Midianites; yet as though no such
thing had been spoken to him, nor believed by him, by and by, as soon as he
perceived that he was an Angel with whom he spoke, he thinking before that he
was but a man of God, behold how he is troubled afresh. Although these two
about which he was troubled, were contraries; to wit, the promise of God in the
first; which he doubted of; and his fear in this last by seeing his Angel.
In the which to stay a while, seeing it is the point now in hand; we know he
could not deliver Israel, as he was told, and believed he should, if he must
die before the time came. And yet not considering what he said; he affirmed
resolutely he should die, when yet Israel was not delivered: even so are we
much dazzled and unsettled by affliction. Much like to Martha, when her brother
Lazarus was dead, and Jesus was come thither, she came mourning to him, and
said, Lord, if thou had been Ioh. 11. 22.
here, my brother had not been dead: but now I know also, said she, that
whatsoever thou ask of God, he will give it thee. Wherein she testified,
that he could, if it pleased him, raise him up again. And yet mark, when
Jesus after that, went to the grave to raise him from death, and bad them take
away the stone, Martha stood by, forgetting what she had said before, and
answered Jesus, as not believing that he could be raised to life, O Lord, it is
too late, he stinketh already, for he has been dead four days.

And who does not find it to be true, which I have said, namely, that faith
which is well grounded, and works now with comfort by love, shall easily be
found to languish and wax faint through doubting and fear, if affliction come
in the way to try us? For why? we are so prone to unbelief, that if we do
not at the first trial, always show and bewray it, which yet often times we
do, yea, before the trouble come, when we see but a likelihood of it, we shall
at least do it, if we be long held under the affliction, and especially if it
be any great matter; as some sore loss, pain, or the like. So that it is not
without especial cause, that we are commanded by the Apostle, not only to be
rooted, but also to be confirmed, and to abound in faith with Col. 2. 7.
thanksgiving. Let us consider, to this end, that it is but the fruit of our
corruption, thus to fear and doubt, when we should believe, and to reason
against Gods promises, affirming that they cannot be performed, when we see
likelihood of the contrary; yea though we do it not with any bad meaning, as
neither Gedeon did here, yet it is our great sin to offer God such dishonor:
let us strive rather to beat down our foolish fears and passions, seeing it
is most like, and we are sure to speed the worst thereby, and in that we give
place to our passions, we shall do it to our cost, although we repent for it.
Our Savior seeing Martha in that sudden fear and distrust, checkes her,
saying; Did I not say unto thee, if thou could believe, thou should see
the glory of God? As if he should say; Look to my word, look not to the
unlikelihood. Manoahs wife was stronger then Gedeon or her husband, in the like
case: If God would have slain us (says she) he would not have said we should
have a son, and so ought Gedeon to have reasoned: God will not kill me now,
seeing I must deliver Israel: for these are contraries, and thus when Manoahs
wife saw that one of them must needs be false, she rather confuteth her husband
then the message of the Angel, and concludes, doubtless we shall live, and
not die, for the word of God is more worth the resting upon, then our own
conceits. And thus it should be with us, that Note.
we be not always off and on, now carried with full sail of faith, and by and
by cast down, as if we had never been the men, this fickleness is unbeseeming
us. Men wish that it were always alike with them, and yet find the contrary;
because they kept not their eye fixed upon the promise, daily renewing their
hold therein steadfastly as at any time before they did; considering, that as
the Sun is always the same, whither it be over cast with clouds, or shine forth
clearly, so is Christ Jesus yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever,
unchangeable in himself, if we change not our persuasion of him through
unbelief.

In this verse it is showed, that while Gedeon was thus perplexed with Verse.
23. The sense.
fear, the Lord comforted him, that he being free from it, might the better
go about that which was appointed him. For we know what a dangerous hindrance
to faith, fear is. And therefore, what heart could he have to believe that he
should work such a deliverance, who feared death every minute of an hour? And
the Angel put away his fear, by promising him good success, and quietness
of mind, and that he should not dye. This is Doct.
the great goodness of God, that he will not long leave his faithful people
in pinching fear, and pensive heaviness: but in good time delivers them,
least they should be too much cast down and discomforted. And so the
Scriptures testify, that God would not have people left in troublesome
passions; as fear or sorrow, which how troublesome they are, our experience
teaches. Joshua was sore troubled, when the people of Israel fell before the
Josh. 7. 7. 10.
men of Ay, but God soon put him out of it. So likewise the good women in the
Gospel were sore afraid, by reason of the earthquake, and the appearing of the
Angel, but he bid them not to be afraid, even as here he says to Matthew. 28. 5.
Gedeon, Peace be to thee. Thus it were meet for all poor troubled
consciences, to mark diligently how comfortably God speaks to them, as that
they should put away their needless ad hurtful fears and griefs; for the
which cause the Lord wills with a doubling his words, Esaias 40. 1. that his
afflicted people should be comforted: for thus he says there, as also in many
other places; comfort ye, comfort ye my people. As if he should say, comfort
them Esaias 40. 1.
even at the heart. And this advice had so much the more need to be received
of them, because when they begin once to be heavy, they forget that they were
ever comforted, and pass their bounds in heaviness. But when such distempered
perturbations arise in us, and disquiet us through an evil conscience, and by
means of some offending God willingly or negligently, which by care we might
have avoided, (in which case we have no warrant to take comfort to our selves,
neither does God at any time use to comfort us therein, here the course that is
to be taken, is, that we solemnly prostrate our selves before him, accusing
our selves, and bewailing our sin, with broken hearts for mercy, as well as
look for other deliverance, and he will return to us most graciously, power
oil and wine into our wounds most sauourily, and ease our grief readily, and
all our fear shall be driven away. For if we do well, who (as Saint Peter
says) shall fear us? Ezekiah 1. Pet. 3. 13.
is a notable example of this, who being in his sickness troubled with the
fear of untimely death, whereby he feared justly that the Church of God might
the sooner be infected with idolatry, being not yet well settled in the true
worship of God, nor thoroughly purged; made an heavy complaint, as appears
Esaias 38. not for that he desired life simply for it self, as for the Esaias
38. 10.
good of the Church. But going to the Lord by prayer in this perplexity for
recovery, the Lord staid his mind, and sent his Prophet to encourage him both
by promise and miracle, and bear him word he should recover, and then he
goes up to the house of the Lord, and makes a solemn thanksgiving for his
recovery. But seeing many, even of Gods dear ones, do either not know how to
repair to God in this manner, or if they do, yet they cannot humble their
hearts, therefore they trouble themselves with suffering the sting of an ill
conscience to prick them, which in continuance of time is forgotten, and being
not kindly healed, they soon break out again, and so they make there life
unprofitable when it is at the best, and till they cast up that unsavory gorge
by some great outward affliction, which searches deep, or by some agony of
mind, whereby they are brought by the help Note.
of some wise and experienced Minister to true repentance, they come to no
better estate.

Now follows Gedeons thanksgiving, which clearly proves that he Verse. 24.
The sense.
received comfort, and was well stayed by the Angels words unto him. For
whether we take it thus translated, as it is by Tremelius [he builded an altar
to the Lord, when he had pronounced peace to him] or whether thus, as in the
Geneua translation it is read, he builded an altar to the Lord, and called it
Iehouahshalom, that is, the Lord of peace; I say, in whether soever of these we
take it, it is a thanks to God, yea and that in solemn manner: for if he
called him the Lord of peace who had given him double peace, to wit, both in
freeing him from his dreadful doubt first, and afterward also from his fear.
And so Gedeon leaving that remembrance of his thankful heart there unto
posterity, all may see that it was a solemn thanking of God. And to the same
end that tends which is said, that he built the altar: it was in token of his
thanks, after God had quieted his mind, both about the deliverance of the
Israelites from the rage of the Midianites, and also from his fear by seeing
the Angel of God.

And therefore out of this action of Gedeons, we learn to take all good
occasions Doct.
of thanks to God, not only ordinarily for daily benefits, and privately by
our selves as well as openly; but also as God shall give us occasion by such
mercies bestowed upon us, which are more then ordinary, as here he did to
Gedeon, and before this, to Moses, Joshua, Debora, and others, and does Note.
often times to us in the year, and in the seven year, by deliverances,
protection, and unlooked for mercies and benefits. And further, as he here did
it in a solemn manner, so ought we, as much as in us lies: for he left
testimony of his thanks, to those who came long after him. But of thanksgiving
I have spoken before.

THE FORTY ONE SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
VERSE. 25. And the same night the Lord said to him, take thy fathers young
bullock, and an other bullock seven years old, and destroy the altar of Baal
that thy father has, and cut down the grove that is by it. 26. And build an
altar unto the Lord thy God upon the top of this rock, in a plain place, and
take the second bullock, and offer a burnt offering with the wood of the grove,
which thou shall cut down. 27. Then Gedeon took ten men of his servants, and
did as the Lord bad him: but because he feared to do it by day for his fathers
household, and the men of the city, he did it by night. 28. And when the men of
the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was broken,
and the grove cut down, that was by it, and the second bullock offered upon
the altar that was made. 29. Therefore they said one unto another, who has done
this thing? and when they inquired, and asked, they said, Gedeon the son of
Ioash has done this thing. 30. Then the men of the city said to Ioash, bring
out thy son that he may die, for he has destroyed the altar of Baal, and
has also cut down the grove that was by it. 31. And Ioash said to all that
stood by him, will ye plead Baals cause? or will ye save him? He that will
contend for him, let him die yer the morning: if he be God, let him plead for
himself against him that with cast down his altar. 32. And in that day was
Gedeon called Ierubaal: that is, let Baalpleade for himself, because he has
broken down his altar.
OF the second branch of the fourth part of the Chapter we have heard; that is,
of Gedeons asking of a sign: Now follows the third, containing the charge
that God gave him to the 33 verse.

For after all this that we have heard, before he begin The general sum of
these verses.
the war, he is commanded to destroy and cast down idolatry, and to set up
true religion, and worship of God. And this is in these words: Cast down the
altar of Baal, and cut down the grove that is by it and erect another, and
offer to God thereon: which Gedeon did accordingly: and this to the 28. verse.
And yet he did this with peril even of his life, as appears verse 30. but
God stirred up Ioash, Gedeons father, against the men of the city, and
delivered him out of their hands, as we see to the 33. verse.

In this verse, and in the 26. more particularly, the Lord for the destroying
Verse 25. 26. The sum of these two verses particular^^.
of Idolatry, bids Gedeon take his fathers young bullock, even the second
bullock which was seven years old, which had been kept to be offered to Baal.
In those which were superstitious, that they spared no cost for the serving of
their lusts: but the Lord hindered, and held that sacrifice from Baal,
commanding the alter to be cast down, and also the grove that was by it, to be
cut down; for in such places for the pleasantness of them, the people used,
and chose to worship, I mean in such places beset with woods and groaues: such
places under trees, and on hills, which they called high places, Deuteronomy. 12. 2.
3. etc.
the fathers also delighted in to offer, before the Lord forbad them, being
moved thereby to the meditation of heavenly things the rather. And the
Idolaters did the like unto their Idols, as these here did in offering to Baal,
through a superstitious opinion that such places were fittest to stir up
devotion. And therefore God commanded them to be cast and cut down, and their
altars to be destroyed. And this did God command Gedeon here to do, and
another to be builded: and that second bullock that was appointed for Baal,
to be offered as a burnt offering to the Lord, with the wood of the grove
which was cut down.

Here for our instruction, out of these two verses, this is worthily to be
Doct. verse. 25. 26. etc.
noted, that when God at that time went about to deliver Israel from the
bondage of the Midianites, he would yet have Idolatry to be first
overthrown, lest they should afterward return to it again. Teaching us
thereby, that nothing goes forward happily in the Commonwealth, except good
order be taken first for the walfare of the Church, namely, by rooting out, and
casting down Idolatry and superstitious worshipping of God, and ignorance; and
a planting and stablishing of the true preaching of the Gospel. Which teaches
both Magistrates what is first to be done of them to the people committed to
their government, and also private men; that in vain they shall look (either
the one or the other) to prosper in their lives, I mean, to enjoy Gods
blessing with cheerefulnes and sound comfort, if God be not with an upright
heart first honored and served. But if this be, is it all? No, but even then
let them look to the manner of their worshipping God also, and namely in
hearing, let them take heed how they hear, as Christ teaches, and that is, by
casting away all guile, maliciousnes, etc. and to receive the word (so as it
may be ingrafted in them) with meeknes and Luke 8 18. Jaws 1. 21.
teachablenes, as becomes believers. But more of that in another place.

In the mean while, as I have said of Idolatry, so I say of their sins; let
us further learn therefore, that as they were commanded to put away Idolatry,
which was their sin, before they could do God true service any other way; so
I say, let us learn, that before we offer to God any acceptable duty, we put
away our sin, whatsoever it be, that rises up in our way, be it never so
liking and well pleasing to us: For it does but choke and smother the graces
of God in us, if there be any, even as the briars and brambles do the corn,
that it cannot spring up and prosper. And this rule is to be observed of us
both of the first time, when God counts us faithful, and 1. Tim. 1. 12.
puts us in his service, and of all times following, when we have stepped
aside. Thus Eliah before he restored the sound worship of God, destroys 1.
King 18. 40.
the Baalites: and the same course took all the good Kings which reformed the
Church, as Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah. And (...) charged the Israelites to
destroy and root out the Canaanites at their first entering upon their
possessions, as we have heard in this book, and before: foretelling them,
that otherwise they would draw them from his true worship. Jacob therefore
before he went up to Bethel to worship God, did by his commandment, Genesis 35. 1.
cause all his household and those that were with him, lately come out of Padan
Aram from Laban, to put away their Idols, and cleanse themselves, that so they
might worship the Lord in good sort and manner. So we must purge out the old
leaven, and become a new lump, as the Apostle speaks: 1. Cor. 5. 8.
For it fares with us herein, as with the stomach: which though it receive
never so good meats, yet the body prospers not by them, if it be A
similitude.
full of corrupt humors: no more do we thrive in any good actions we take in
hand, if we go about them, being fraught and clogged with our sins known, or
such as are suspected to be in us, till as most filthy corruption they be
purged out. Therefore also Saint Peter requires, that men put away all
maliciousnes and guile, with such like annoiance first; and then as newborn
1. Pet. 2. 1. 2.
babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby.

And as a sore or wound in the body, though never so good salues be laid
thereto, is not healed thereby, unless the corruption and hurtful humors A
similitude.
be first drawn out: so is it with us. So that not only this is true in the
general reformation of the Church, but also of each particular member of it,
and person. And it is the order which the Lord uses in the fitting of all his
people for his use: first he mortifieth them, then he quickens them. Neither
could our Lord Jesus have risen again for our justification, if he had not
Romans 4. 25.
first died for our sins and transgression. And let him who would have sound
comfort in his doing of duty, first learn this obedience, to subdue and bring
into subjection, his rebellious and evil heart and lusts, with (...) thereof,
and then the other shall proceed roundly, without impediment. For all the good
doctrine which God has ordained to sweeten and (...) the soul with, and to
furnish the life, also the help and benefit of prayer and the Sacraments, they
all lose their for^^, and leave no fruit in us behind them, if we be laden
(every one) with the foul and loathsome sins, in which he has lived, and
that they be not purged out by true repentance.

And this is easy to be perceived and seen, as in persons, so in every place,
town, Church and house, where the forementioned means are used. And who among
us that have any experience, but they have marked this in many, and need not
be ashamed to say it of themselves, that whatsoever rules and good instruction,
for the well guiding of our lives, have bin given, and learned of us, with the
benefit of the Sabbath, with prayer, public or private, and such like; they
have come to a small reckoning, and they do us little good, if we have not let
out the venom of rancour, spite, desire of revenge, unclean lusts,
worldliness, and the like, that have been seated and spread in our hearts, and
cast up (as filthy vomit) the noisome fruit thereof, out of our lives.

And it is the cause at this day of so little profiting, and so slender fruits
of our preaching, as we complain of justly, and inueigh against it bitterly;
for that people are at a point, they will do as they have done, and retain
Note.
the sins which in times past they have walked and delighted in, when yet we
have daily, in the earnestest manner that we could, disgraced, and made them
odious, with the most fearful and sharp threats of God adjoined thereto. Yea
and contrariwise, if any make right and kind use of our Ministry, who sees
not, that they be those that wax ashamed of themselves, after they have seen
their faces in the glass of Gods law, and with Ephraim bemoned themselves, and
bin confounded, because they did bear the reproach Iere. 31. 18. 19.
of their youth; when the old roots have thus bin decayed, then new sprigs of
grace have sprung out in their room, and then they have begun to lament after
God. Magistrate, Minister, Master of family, and private persons, if they be
well advised, they speak thus, yea, they all find this to be true.

And in this 25. verse, it is further said, as we see, that God appeared here
Doct. verse. 25.
to Gedeon in the night, when it might have seemed that he had been neglected
and forgotten, even then gave he a weighty charge unto him: whereby we are
taught that God watches over his to do them good, when they are sleepie, and
mind nothing: as we read he did to Samuel, Solomon, and 1. Sam. 3. 4. 1.
King. 3. 5. Psalm. 121. 4.
other of his faithful servants. For he that keeps Israel does neither
slumber nor sleep: meaning that he waketh and watches continually to keep
his from danger: for the which cause it is said, by the Apostle Peter, that his
eyes are upon them, as the mothers upon the young child, standing by, to see
that it take no hurt. For, as it is in the Psalm; if the Lord keep not the
city, the watchmen watch but in vain: but if God take part with his, the
strongest enemy shall not be able to hurt them. It is said of Peter, Act. 12.
6. that while he slept between two soldiers in the night, bound with two
chains, the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and smote Peter on the side, so
that his chains fell off, and he was delivered from Herod. See also Psalm. 4. I
will lay Act. 12. 6.
(...) own and take my rest, for thou (O Lord) vpholdest me. But seeing Psalm.
4. 8.
^e keeps the bad also, and there some (perhaps) will say, therefore it might
^^me no great matter, that he keeps and watches over the faithful: but for
answer, I say with the Apostle God is the savior of all men, that is, from 1.
Tim. 4. 10.
outward troubles, but especially of the believers; for he preserves their
souls from evil, unto salvation. As if he said, he keeps and saves his own
with a fatherly care and affection, but the wicked, though he keep them, yet
he does so as a Judge keeps alive evil doers, but unto their destruction.
But of his people that is verified which is written by Solomon: He watches
over them, when they sleep, and communeth with them when they awake, Prou. 6.
22.
and when they walk he does govern and guide them. And hereupon, in that Gods
care is thus over his, in the night season, as well as in other parts of their
lives, hereupon I say it is, that as they rejoice in the Lord always in all
that they set their hand unto through the day; so they have this fruit of it
in the night also, that they meditate and make their songs of his loving
kindness, as David says of himself, that he would praise God in the night
Psalm. 119. 62.
season, when the other have their terrors, for their bad doings, or imagine
evil in their beds to draw upon them greater and speedier judgments.

Now further, out of both these verses together note, that as it was not enough
for Gedeon to overthrow the Altar of Baal, unless he builded another Doct. 2.
in verse. 25. 26.
to the Lord; nor to build one to the Lord, unless he cast down the
Idolatrous Altar: Even so, it is not enough to shun evil, except we do
good. And therefore it is not sufficient to be no covetous person, except a man
be merciful: it is not enough to be innocent, except a man be also fruitful
in doing good; for one God is the commander of both. It is a true speech,
Negatiues conclude nothing: and here it is especially true. Therefore let all
such, as whose goodness and outward actions witness not for them, suspect
that they deceive themselves in the reforming of the heart. For surely an heart
purged, will be fruitful. Again, it is not enough to forsake Popery, etc.
unless the pure Gospel be embraced. Let the one abandon the other, as Dagon
and the Arc could not stand together. They that make an hotch-potch of both,
are an abomination to the Lord. And here we may further learn, that two
religions in a land, though the one tolerated only, two contray or diverse
ways I mean, of worshipping God, can no more stand together then Christ and
Belial. For then the Lord would have spared Gedeon a labor, and only enjoined
him to go about the war and settle sound religion, letting idolatry alone.
The false religion is the canker of Josh. 7. 24.
the true, and as the execrable thing took hold upon the whole substance of
Achan: so does this bring a curse upon the other. Now to return, whereas the
Lord bad the bullock, dedicated to Baal, to be offered as a burnt sacrifice to
himself: I answer, he is Lord of all, he might turn it to what use he
pleased. But it follows not, that we, without his commandment, may take upon
us to iumble together Gods worship, and superstition. For the which cause, as
sometime he commanded that the gold and other things used in idolatry, should
pass through the fire, and so it might be used, so sometime, he commanded, that
they should utterly be destroyed. To return therefore in a word, to the point:
As we see what a blemish it had been in Gedeon, if he had done the one part of
the charge, and not another, like Saul in the 1. Sam. 15. 15. 26.
business of the Amalakites; so by the way, it teaches, that God alowes not
for service, duties done by halues, but that they should be soundly and in one
part and point as another endeavored after: neither does he allow us to be our
own caruers to take what pleases us, and turn the other back again, which
we may see more clearly by the example of one that was guilty of this fault.
Of Iehu it is reported, that when he had slain all the cursed posterity of
Ahab, and destroyed the Priests of Baal (which was the purging out of false
worship in great part) yet whereas the other part of setting up true worship
should have followed it, the text makes a stop, and sets down a manifest
separation betwixt them thus: But from the sins of Jeroboam the son 2.
King. 10. 29.
of Nebat Iehu departed not; nay more, nor from their golden Calves in Bethel
and Dan. Why then did he destroy Baal? Surely he was carried to it, by a common
gift of the holy Ghost, even feruency in that work: which made him an
instrument for that purpose; but that he did it not with a true detestation of
the sin, it is manifest, for then he would have abandoned the other also,
and have restored pure worship in stead of it. This should teach us, that holy
instruction, which is so often in general commended to us, when we have hated to
the pit of hell (for so the word signifies in that place) that which is evil,
then neglect not to do that which is good. Romans 13. nay to cleave to Romans 13.
9.
it as a thing which is cemented as glass windows are, the words are pithy.
So says the Apostle, Let him that stole steal no more: yet it is not
sufficient; Ephesians. 4. 28.
that a man be not a thief; therefore he adds, But work with his hands, and
do the thing that is good, for that is a good token he is reformed. And
commonly in Scripture we shall see this order observed: that unto prohibitions
first set down, there are added commandments of duty: for though of the two
it is the first and hardest, to purge out a corrupt habit and a leaud
quality: yet it is not all, God will have it appear to be so by a new and
contrary practice to the former, that the work may be sound and perfect.
Neither does he command men to cleanse out their evil, and so keep themselves
void, empty and barren of grace: (which were to set up a neutralitie rather
then Christianity) but he will have men seasoned with grace, and stablished Heb.
13. 9.
with it, as it is to the Hebrews. And he who commands us not to sow among
thorns nor weeds, gives us no liberty to neglect planting, when we have
rooted up the other.

For cutting down the groves, it was before this time (that Gedeon was Doct.
2. verse. 25. Deuteronomy. 12. 3.
charged to do it) commanded so by God in Deuteronomy; which argues, that they
were greatly abused, as other ways, so in worshipping strange Gods there. True
it is, that the old fathers did before the forbidding thereof, worship God upon
high hills, from whence, they seeing far off, the variety of Gods creatures,
it was a means of good meditations to them, and of more sequestring of their
minds from earthlinesse. And we our selves being on high places, and beholding
the trees, and other creatures of God a far off, with the situation of the
countries on hills and valleys, what an admiration at the infinite works of
God comes into our minds, thereby? we are brought to heavenly meditations,
and to ponder Gods power, wisdom and love to us. The Idolaters (no doubt)
chose those places for the pleasantness of them, that thereby, and with the
delight they had in the worshipping of their idols, they might be ravished in
their superstitious manner, as the Papists in their false and will worship, when
they be at their fond devotion, in the places beset with Crucifixes and other
Images, sounds and sonne^s, do imagine and dream that they be in a corner
not of paradise, but of heaven itself. Thus can the devil transform himself
into an Angel of 2. Cor. 11. 14.
light.

And here we may see, that howsoever Gedeon was accounted of God for Doct. 3.
in verse 25.
his faithfulness; yet his father maintained idolatry; for his were the wood
or grove, the altar and the bullock, being implements of their idolatry. And
these the Lord commanded Gedeon to remove and take away, to the end we may
learn, that in purging religion, or in the amending of faults, we must
always begin with our own families, and nearest kindred; lest otherwise we
should show our selves ridiculous, in seeming to be very forward in reproouing
and correcting other, while our own be neglected and passed 1. Pet. 4. 17.
by. Thus God begins judgment at his own house. Thus did Joshua Josh. 24.
15.
in his reforming the whole Congregation, profess most worthily, I and my
house will serve the Lord. And Ely, a Judge also, for not governing his house,
and staying the outrage of his sons, is severely threatened. And good reason:
for sithence next to our selves (who must first of all be reformed, or else our
zeal ill becomes us, and argues hypocrisy) the next, I say, are our
kindred and families. Therefore we must without partiality first set upon
them, that so it may appear that we detest sin heartily, in that we cannot
endure it in those whom we love best: and others may be ashamed to stand out in
their own defense, and fear to offend. For if the father first begin with his
children, how shall his servants look to escape?

Now it follows how Gedeon did that which God commanded him, Verse. 27. The
sense.
but seeing he appointed him no time when he should do it, he therefore
dispatched it in the night, for fear, lest if he had done it in the day, he
might have been withstood by his fathers servants, and the men of the city;
yea, and himself have been slain. In that he obeyed the Lord, he testified
his faith: in that he did it at the best advantage, in the night, he showed
his wisdom. And though he feared, yet his fear was not such, as it hindered
his faith.

In both these, Gedeons example is our instruction: his faith first is to be
Doct. verse. 27. Gal. 1. 16.
followed of us, that by means of it, we should not commune with flesh and
blood, when God commands ought unto us, but bear down all lets that stand
up in the way to hinder us from obeying: as friends, and counsel giuers
against it, and count them, as Christ did Peter, when he diswaded him Matthew.
16 23.
from going to Jerusalem to suffer death for his people, he called him an
adversary to him, even Satan. So must all strong rebellion be beaten down,
(that stands up in our way) by this weapon of our warfare, which 2. Cor. 1^.
4.
is not carnal but spiritual, and mighty through God, to cast down strong
holds; it must, I say, by this armor of our faith, be brought into
subjection. And for example: if fear stand up in the way particularly, to
hinder us, let faith strive with it to cast it out, which is best able of any
grace that is in us, to overcome and put it by. And thus did Ester, who had no
stronger weapon then her faith, in as great peril of her own, and her peoples
life, both which with Gedeon are set forth for the example of all that shall
come after, to follow them in believing. But oh, where are such to be found,
who shall be ready, (no, though it be in the hazard of the Church) to do that
which these did, I mean, to fix their faith on God; or if any be so minded,
yet how weaklie and faintly shall it be done, and how long shall it be in
performing? But this has often been spoken of.

And this be said of Gedeons faith: now somewhat be said likewise of his Doct.
2.
wisdom. His wisdom is highly commended in his casting down their
idolatry; that seeing God set not, neither appointed the time when he should
do it, therefore he did it in the night, wherein he might be freest from
resistance and danger. Doue-like innocence and obedience to God, Matthew. 10. 16.
must be joined with the wisdom of Serpents. In many duties doing we must
watch the best opportunity, time and place, unless the Lord prescribe them to
us. So did Sampson in the great destruction of the Philistims, watch Judge. 16.
30.
time and place, and took opportunity, when thousands of them were assembled
to make themselves passe-time by mocking and laughing at him; then he set his
shoulders to the maine posts whereon the house stood, and cast it down upon
the Princes and the rest, and slew thousands of them.

So it was said of David, he did wisely, whither soever he went out, and 1 Samuel 18. 5.
God was with him accordingly. And it is a singular gift of God in his children
to be wise in the things they take in hand, that they give no advantage to the
wicked, nor the devil; but take the best and fittest occasions to be well
occupied, as time and place give leave, both in holding their profession
generally, and also in the doing of other particular duties: that where they
see inconvenience like to come, they may by wise forecasting, prevent the same,
and lay their most care where greatest danger is to be seen and feared. Note.
Wherein though all attain not the same and like measure, yet it is well when
al labor as they are able, to attain it. But some mar their good actions
with the ill and unwise manner in which they do them. As Jobs friends did, in
seeking to comfort him. The particular instances are infinite. But think we of
them by this example. For if Gedeon had gone about the work enjoined him,
rashly or indiscreetly, in the day time, who sees not that even his obeying of
God in such a mnner had marred all? But Iael was blessed Iud. 5. 24.
for her wisdom she showed to pull down Sisera. And thus Abigail by her 1.
Sam. 25. 34. Prou. 14. 1.
wisdom delivered her house, as Solomon says; and the wise woman mentioned in
2. Sam. who saved a whole city. The children of this generation 2. Sam 20. 16.
teach us herein. And therefore pray we all for the spirit of wisdom, that we
not only do that which we are commanded, but that we study to do it in the
best sort we can: and yet always shunning as a rock, carnal shifts and
policies. But of this the less shall serve, being also often enlarged.

THE FORTY TWO SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
WE have heard of Gedeons faith and wisdom about the Verse. 28. 29. 30. The
sense.
casting down of the altar of Baal: and we may see a good reason why he was
feign to use the best and surest means for the effecting of it, and for the
overthrow of their idolatry. First, seeing it was stablished among them, and
had taken root: therefore all that he could do was little enough to throw it
down. And also for that the people were so superstitiously addicted thereto,
and so delighted in it. But let us now see in what outrageous manner the people
inquire after the man that had done it: and when they with consent agreed, that
it was Gedeon, how furiously they sought to have him put to death.

Here many good points may be noted about idolaters, which I will briefly
Doct. 1.
set down. First this, how deeply idolatry, superstition, and false worship
is rooted in peoples hearts, and ground fast; as is to be seen in these, and
through these stories, and those in the book of the Kings; as the Philistims
blind devotion to their Dagon, and the peoples fond and mad zeal in
maintaining the false worship of Baal in Ahabs time, their offerings to them,
their bowing down, and praying to them. So that a man might have as easily
plucked their hearts out of their bellies, as to have dissuaded and alienated
their love from them. The reasons are, first, because as sin, so error is
strong, plausible and deceitful. Secondly, God accurseth all that will not
hearken to the truth, so that they shall believe lies, and be bewitched 2.
These. 2. 10.
therewith. See and consider to this end, Esaias 44. 19. Thirdly, the worst Esaias
44. 19.
weeds have deepest roots, and corrupt customs or opinions, because they agree
with man's bad nature, are not easily rooted out; whereas those which are good
and commendable, are like precious plants or flowers, which hardly take any
root at all, and may be plucked up with two fingers. As at this day the cursed
relics of heathenish and popish fashions, how hardly are they laid down,
look but to some vain and foolish customs, and the ^ond devotion of the
superstitions all the year long, in kneeling before stocks and stones, and ye
may easily guess how hard a thing it is to remove and expel them and the
like. Gamaliel said of the doctrine of the Apostles; If it be not of Acts 5.
34.
God, ye shall not need to oppose it, it will fall of it self. But we must know
that God not working by miracle, as he did then, Satan and his accomplices will
in these days try the uttermost, and use all means ere that come to pass:
yea as we may see, they grow in experience and policy, strength and
resolution also, to uphold their rotten building, until (as at death (to be
sure) it shall) it fall upon their shoulders. Whereas the true and pure worship
of God, what authority, credit, or hearty love does it find or obtain at the
hands of the most of them who profess it? Nay, they have soon enough of it,
many revolt and fall from it, and they that retain it, do it (for the most
part) in a most dead and cold manner. Insomuch, as the diligentest preaching,
and earnestest persuasions, do scarcely prevail so far with men as that
they get so much as a name of a good religion in the places where they dwell:
when yet (if it were so) their zeal is neither grounded upon knowledge, and if
it be in some, yet are they not stablished and settled therein; and yet Note.
further, even of them there are very few that hold constantly in a good
conscience, the profession of their hope with joy unto their end.

And although this good conscience be far from the idolaters of our time,
for it can only come from says in Christ, and assurance of his favor,
(whatsoever blind zeal and devotion be in them) yet therein they do, as I
said before, give and ascribe much to their corrupt religion, and false
worship, in cost, in time spending about the same, and feruencie therein, above
a number of us to ours. So that if they went upon good grounds, and had any
promise from God for their so doing, they might have to rejoice above many of
us. But they and such of our selves, as I compare with them, in coming short
of their zeal, shall speed both alike, while they (I mean the Papists) have
this cast in their teeth, Who required this at your hands? And again, let him
that set you on work, pay you your wages. And to them of our profession, this
shall be said; This people draws near to me with their bodies, but Matthew.
15. 8.
their hearts are far from me, and therefore in vain do such worship me.

And yet this I will add, seeing I have joined these popish worshippers with
the idolaters of ancient time, affirming them to be like to them in zeal, this
I say, I will add concerning them, that this devotion is but in few of them in
these our days, like to that which was in the^ of former ages, though (as they
blindfold men's eyes) it go for current, that they be all zealous that are of
that profession, when yet it is manifest that numbers of them are most subtle
and hollow hearted dissemblers and deceivers. For to grant that some of the
ignoranter sort are fervent in their false religion and blind devotion, yet the
most of the rest deceive the world, and are not so zealous as they are wilful,
spiteful, and malicious, who do that which they do, partly for their belly,
and partly (though against their conscience) to uphold their religion by
tradition, when they cannot by Scripture: and all to this end, that it may, (as
much as in them lies) be received for the truth, rather then that of the
Protestants, whom they deadly hate and abhor. As for that they hope to merit
by their zeal, which does the more set them forward, it is to be granted,
that they are much whetted on thereby, though they be deceived: but should not
the promises of God freely made to us of all good things, much more animate and
harten on us?

Another thing note we here, how soon and earnestly they inquired who 2
should deface their Baal, and strippe him of his ornaments? whereas Gods word
may lie vnpreached by many occasions, long enough, before it be asked where the
fault lies, and complained of, and bewailed; or before the neglect thereof be
sought to be remedied. In Popery, if a man shall speak against the mass, or
their breaden God, or dispraise any, yea the least part of their trash and
trumperie, he shall be more cruelly handled then for blaspheming in the highest
degree. Which appears by such as in the time of persecution in our own land,
attempted zealously to deface that idol, who of all other were put to most
exquisite torments. Even as Gedeon here was pursued, and as a most heretical
and seditious disturbur, was called for to be put to death, for offering that
reproach unto that base idol Baal. Oh, it were an happy time, if men were as
zealously bent against atheism, superstition, idolatry, adultery, and such
like, as many are zealous for them: and that holy and heavenly things were in
that account and request with many, that open and apparent sins are with
them. And thus at this day do the most men storm and rage at the Minister of
God (who is Gods ordinary instrument, as Gedeon was the extraordinary) when
they see that he is not content to dally with them, but in good earnest
strives to pull them from their ignorance, formal, and could worship of God,
uncleanness, or whatsoever other sin they cleave unto; (as these did to
their idol Baal) and serve. The poor man Gedeon here had not more ado to
save himself from this furious and eager multitude, then the Minister has (in
many places where the Gospel has not prevailed) to defend himself from a
swarm of hornets, which fly about his ears, ready to sting him (I might
rather have said wild beasts to devour him) by their cursed reproachful
slanders and virulent tongues for his casting their Baal to the ground.

Also it appears, that there were not many there that were as Gedeon, upright
hearted men, and such as did openly show their dislike of idolatry, because
they could so easily find him out, and light upon him, as the guilty party,
as they counted him, with so slight inquiry. So that he was as eminent for his
piety, as Saul for his stature, who was taler then all the people, and could
not lie hidden. And the odious man of many he was with them, to whom yet if
they could have seen, they were all beholding, and but for whom also they had
all groan to wrack and had perished. And we see, what eie-sores, and how
odious some one or few good professors of the Gospel are to a company of
profane hickescorners, and what a troublesome life they lead amongst them:
being baited and vexed by them at their pleasure, and made their laughing
stock, as Sampson to the Philistims: for whose sake (yet) they are suffered by
the Lord to live, that they may come to repentance, being near enough (by all
likelihood) to be utterly destroyed and to be brought to naught, but for them;
as we may read in the story Genes. 18. 32.
of Genesis, if there had been but ten righteous men in Sodom, the city had
not been consumed. Yet, and though they have such benefit by them, they stick
not to swear, that but for them they might live merrily, and without
disturbance. Therefore where God has provided better for a people, and muzled
the mouths of such tigers and bears as these, so that they may profess the
Gospel without danger, or fear, pursuit, and scorn of their betters) who
commonly are the wings to protect the inferior sort of base and spiteful
persons) let such see and acknowledge a great liberty and release, and use it
wisely while they enjoy it, as the Churches of Samaria and Judea, Acts 9. 31.
and Galilee did in the book of the Acts. lest God take from them their props,
ornaments and protectors of them, and make them to say (as many do full
heavily) we would gladly be zealous and fruitful in our profession, (but
(alas) we cannot so soon peep out of the doors, but we are pelted in again,
and beaten back with the frownings, disgraces, and opppositions of such as are
mightier then our selves. But of this point more anon.

Thus far of the outrage of the people: now of the answer of Ioah to Verse
31. 32. The sense.
them, in the next two verses. For he, as a wise Magistrate, did at the first
suppress and bridle the rage of the people. Now because it was said before,
that the ground with the grove, altar and bullock did pertain to Ioash, and
were his: it is clear, that he had also vpheld the idolatry: how was it then,
that he should thus lightly suffer the act of his son Gedeon to pass
unpunished, (some man perhaps will ask,) and that he should find fault with
the people, for seeking to punish the trespasser against Baal? I answer, that
Ioash was certified of the will of God, very likely by Gedeon his son, as
Sampsons father was by him, that marriage he sought with the Philistion woman
was of the Lord. But howsoever it was, he does show that God stirred him up to
be a favorer of his sons doing, for he does with three reasons drive the
people from their hold, and beats them back from their purpose and attempt.
First, he reprooues them for their boldness, for that they being private men,
did without any calling take upon them to be reuengers of Baals quarrel, and
that contrary to the will of God. And secondly, he threatens them with the
fear of Gods judgment, and that presently. And thirdly, by an Ironicall
speech against Baal (saying, if he be a God, let him plead for himself) he
shameth them, and drives them from their enterprise. And this be said for the
layingout of the 31. verse. In the 32. he gives his some a name according to
the answer he had made to the people, and that name was Ierrubbaal.

And here in general occasion is offered to consider, how strangely God Doct.
in verse. 22.
wrought for Gedeon, and against his enemies, beyond al expectation stirring up
Ioash to assist and oppose the other. Who would not have said, that the people
would have borne down Gedeon, they being backed so strongly, and having an
idolatrous Magistrate on their side? But behold, the Lord turns his heart as
he pleases, and makes him stand out in the defense of his sons act, whose
cruel Judge he had been more like to be, to condemn him to death, as these
mad people required, and looked for. And we must think that it was no small
courage to him, to do thus, though a Magistrate. For this concourse of the
people was not ordinary, in a judicial manner but mutinous, and not unlike to
that of Demetrius in the case of Dianaes worship. But the same God, who (when
he saw it meet) caused Lysias, an Heathen Captain, to become a Protector of
Paul against the Jews: and Paul himself to be a Preacher of the Gospel which
he had before persecuted, did this also, and his hand is not yet shortened from
doing the like for the good of his Church, and encouragement of his people,
according to that saying of the Wise man: When a man's ways please the Lord, he
will make his very enemies Prou. ^6. 7.
his friends: and by consequent, those things which were most feared, as being
like to work most against them, he will make them to work contrarily, even to
their most good and furtherance: and besides, God turns the hearts of men, as
rivers of water. Examples we have in Cyrus the restorer of the Jews, and the
worship of God. Pilates wife, Achisth to David, etc. But this by the way only.

More particularly, we may see in Ioash, who was before an Idolater, but being
instructed about the will of God against that wickedness, how soon he was
able to resist and stand against it. This teaches that it is but ignorance and
unbelief, that causes many to practice and maintain, either a false
worshipping of God, or any like wickedness: though I deny not, but some do
worse, who though they know it to be evil, yet will do so wilfully. The
other are to be better hoped of; who if the Lord vouchsafe them the mercy that
he did Ioash, shall soon be changed from their former ill course, and abhor
and stand against that most deadly, which before they maintained and practiced.
And therefore a detestable state to live in, is Popery, out of the which they
will not so much as seek to be brought, by hearing the Gospel preached, and
therefore they lie still therein to their confusion, with all such as do like
unto them. Whereas many in other kinds of sin, are brought out of it by
preaching, and are turned to God by true repentance. Agreeable whereunto is
that of Paul, I was a persecutor, blasphemer, 1. Tim. 1. 15.
etc. but the Lord had mercy upon me, because I did it ignorantly. Noting that
one cause why few of his sect were converted, because, as our Savior says,
They Ioh. 9. 41.
knew they did evil, therefore their sin remained. This is not to encourage
any to live in ignorance; for the least punishment is condemnation, if men
prefer Ioh. 3. 19.
darkness to light, whatsoever the cause be. But as Christ says, in Matthew
2. The judgment of Tyrus and Zidon shall be easier then of Corazin Matthew. 11.
20.
and Bethsaidah at the day of Gods coming, for they had repented, if they had
been instructed. The use is, to comfort such as affect to be ignorant, hoping
thereby to escape Gods wrath: whereas rather they should consider that their
ignorance will procure it, yea, is a chief cause of other sin which causes
it: yea and because that it is easy and no hard matter for such as are simply
and not wilfully ignorant, to get knowledge and faith, if they would apply
themselves to hearing; therefore seeing they persist in their blindness, they
cause an invincible ignorance to grow upon themselves, which shall be as
severely punished as obstinate disobedience and contempt. But let such as God
has mercifully enlightened, consider and pity the thousands that lie in
darkness, praying God to prevent them with the light, wondering that John 14.
22.
God should reueal himself to them, rather then to the world.

Also we may learn from hence, that when God shows mercy to one Doct. 2.
in a kindred or family, it often redounds to many of the rest, as when one is
raised to promotion, the rest fare the better. So here God revealing himself
to Gedeon; his father, and so his family were brought to the knowledge of the
true God. The reason whereof is double. First, Gods blessing upon the seed and
stock of the righteous. Secondly, because where God has wrought graciously in
some one in a kindred or family, there commonly is wrought a great desire to
do good to the rest, and that in great tenderness and love. As Paul
professes to the Romans, My hearts desire for Israel is, that he may Romans 10.
1.
be saved. And although they do not always prevail (because salvation
follows Gods election, not nature) yet often it does: and where it is
otherwise, the iuster is their condemnation. For proof of this, our Savior
Christ himself may be an example, who brought his disciples, and some of his
kindred to be religious. And he has taught us, that the Gospel is compared to
leuin, which spreaddeth further and further. And thus by some one whom God has
well seasoned with grace, many of the rest have been in like manner made
partakers of the same grace with them. A joyful sight to behold. I would it
were not so in Popery, that one did draw many: and it were to be wished, that
it might be seen to be more common in the receiving of the Gospel
effectually, that the rest of the family and affinity did so. This, I say, is
often seen; though commonly one of a city, and two of a tribe, as the Prophet
says, meaning but a few. Yea, how often is it seen, that a godly Abigail is
coupled with a Nabal, and Job with a foolish woman? How truly is it said of
many good parents, Their children are ungracious, as they tell Samuel to his
face? yea and of how many parents also, who are badly disposed, 1. Sam. 8. 5.
that even their children shall rise up against them, and condemn them, for
that they go before them in knowledge and the fear of God? while they being
wedded to their will, take scorn to learn of them; nay, it were well, if they
would learn of good teachers, and that they abused not their authority to
curb and discourage their children. But as for the third sort, most woeful is
their estate, when like father like child, as the head is so is the foot, all
ignorant, brutish and ungodly, as Esaias says.

Now further by Ioash his answer, let us consider some thing, and then by the
people, as occasion is offered. In him by the speeches he used, note we Doct.
3. Verse. 31.
the properties of a worthy magistrate, to wit, to defend Gods true worship,
and to cast down idolatry, to oppose himself against the seditious and
cauillers, and other wicked men, even unto death. His countenance, courage and
power, beside his affection, ought to be manifested in Magistrates, for the
defense and stablishing of all Gods service; and so should it be also in meaner
men. But the commonnesse of evil, and the strength that it has got in all
places, dulleth the edge of the most of these now a days. And this slacknesse
Matthew. 24. 12.
and coldness, in Magistrates is as truly the cause why iniquity so
abounds, as any other: so that if evil having the upper hand do cause both
public officers of justice, and private persons to be more unable to resist
it, and so the more unwilling to go about to punish it, they may thank
themselves. David professes of himself, that betimes he would cut off from
the Psalm. 101. 8.
house of God, the wicked: that is, all scorners and maligners of the sound
worship and worshippers of God. Oh it were to be wished (and indeed in that we
pray no more earnestly for such, we justly complain) that all governors were
of David his mind, that so the rest might live under their authority, an
honest and quiet life, free from the noisomnes of such goats as by their
horns and stinch pester the sheep, which would feign live peaceably, and
serve the Lord by them. For when the common sort see swearing, blasphemy, the
contempt of the Sabbath, drunkenness, and other abominations to swarm in many
places, who sees not that both they dare more boldly do the same, and that
they who will not, shall be scorned and grieved to see them?

We may further note here that sin ought to be so odious, and in so vile
Doct. 4.
account, that we should be much grieved to behold the maintaining of it, and
them that will stand for it. For now that Ioash was himself armed against
idolatry, he demands if they, the blind people would stand for it, and plead
for Baal. And yet they might have replied, we plead no more for him, then thou
thy self have done, and that very lately, in whose grove Baal was placed. But
now the case was altered with Ioash, even as it was with Paul, when he preached
the Gospel which he had persecuted before. It is a notable token of
repentance, when men's affections and desires are quite changed from the evil
things, which before they could not be drawn from: yea 2 Cor. 7. 11.
and when they break out into holy indignation at themselves and other, for
the sins which they committed against God, although they know them forgiven.
And surely, an upright hearted man would think that all should abhor the sin
that he hates, and it grieueth him to see another deceived and held in the
snare that he himself has bin holden in: and therefore counts it absurd that
any should maintain and delight in it: whereas the contrary now a days may
be seen, that he is diligently marked that will stand against it: and so few
there be so well minded, that they may soon be noted.

Their shameful boldness is likewise to be marked by the words of Ioash here,
saying; Will ye plead for Baal? he that does so, let him die before the
morning. Who although they saw the Magistrate against them, yet they were so
blind, that they stood in the defense of their idolatry. And even so we may
say; Great is the boldness that is grown up in this age, while not only they
do the evils openly, which men and women in former ages have blushed for the
secret doing of the same [be it the sin of Zimri and Cozby or the like]: but
also such dare revile and rail upon those who speak against their lewd
doings. But these truly verify the saying, The wicked men and deceivers 2.
Tim. 3. 13.
wax worse. And how should it be that in the last days should be so perilous
times, if as the day of the world grows nearer to an end, so sin waxed not
more and more out of measure sinful? And that, both for the number of sins,
(for we see new additions and fashions daily) and for the measure also, I mean
the greedines, impudency and pertinacie of sinners, who are not ashamed of
their evils, but with the harlot in the Proverbs, who wipeth her self as
clean of all her filthiness, as if she had been a virgin. We see whores were
grown, by that time, to a degree of boldness: for Tamar was judged an whore by
her father, because she had covered her face. But this Genesis 38. 15.
mask is long ago plucked off, not only from them that be of her occupation,
but the most spiritual adulterers now a days, are so far from being ashamed
to show their faces, that they are not thought masters of their trade, if they
dare not spit in the face of modesty and all reprouers. And what is to be said
of the aged, and men in wealth, (who have somewhat to bear them out) when even
youths (of both sexes) whose honor should be their blushing, (which even
heathens called the Color of virtue) are brazen faced, and inferiors of al
sorts take up that cursed speech, who is Lord Psalm 12. 4.
over us? But oh, who does not see the Lords mark set upon them, while by
shame, and sorrow their belliesful, with other miseries, they come daily every
one in his course, to a woeful end?

Furthermore, it was well answered by Ioash, Let Baal plead for himself: Doct.
5.
meaning, if he can, what need you? if he cannot, it were a shame to plead for
such a god, as could not plead his own cause. As Elias also, in the like 1.
King. 18.
case, said to the blind people: and so it may be said to all maintainers of
Idolatry, and such like abomination; If the Idols be gods, whom they worship,
let them keep themselves from the fire. And they who will needs think their
doings to be good in maintaining and reasoning for such stocks, let them wait
and see what will be the end thereof, and what will come of them. They were
well set a work to plead for him, who was so far from helping them in their
need, that he could not revenge his own cause against such as would deface
him: and so are all that are like them; such a master he is whom they serve.

Lastly, out of this verse 31. and the former, in that Gedeon serving God so
Doct. 6.
commendably, as he was commanded, (for which also he is by name commended as
a worthy person, and a believer) was yet called seditious of Heb. 11. 32.
them that were themselves so indeed, and that therefore he was counted
worthy to die, who yet was the mean whereby the other did live, note that
when the wicked are charged never so justly for their evil doings, yet they
ever return the accusation upon their accusers. For example, the doctrine of
Gods word, and the Preachers thereof, do by Gods blessing, become the means
and outward instruments of much good doing, and some turn from their evil
ways thereby, but what dissenting is there among the rest for this, when they
see it? In such wise, as that they fall commonly to this exclamation, that both
teachers and such as follow their doctrine, are troublers of the people, but as
for themselves, they have done no evil. Even as the Papists cry on the other
side, that they are disturbed and disquieted, for that they may not be suffered
to serve God, as they would be glad to do, nor their Priests to set forth
their pedlary ware to sale, to the ignorant and superstitious, whom they had
sometime deceived, and as their fellows in many places still do, no less
palpably, then Simon Magus did the people of Samaria, whom he had with his
sorceries bewitched.

These will not suffer their Idolatrous worship at any hand to be overthrown,
but say, as the people said to Jeremy, We will worship the Queen Ierem. 44. 19.
of heaven that is, the Moon and other stars: and as the foolish people of
Ephesus, who cried out in a mad mood, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, when
Acts 19. 34.
yet who were more unlike to make tumults and sedition, then they whom they
accused, as Paul and his company? So (to leave these, and to return to them
whom I began with) thus cry the wicked out when their lewd doings be reproved
justly out of pulpits; Preachers are seditious; they make strife and tumults
where they come, and draw people after them, whereas they were quiet and well
enough before: but who are they whom they draw? even those who forsake their
company, whom I speak of, and leave off their cursed manners and behavior,
so that they are now deprived of them, therefore now they make their part good
against them, crying out that they are seditious. Thus Elias was charged to
trouble the land, when he taught the true service of God, and reproved
Idolatry, but he showed who were troublers of the land, to all that list to
know it, even such as be not obedient to the commandments of the Lord. But
that all may see, that such are not to be charged as troublesome persons, whose
preaching bewraieth the bad sort, who are therefore incensed against them,
because their evil deeds are brought to light by them; neither they who obey
their doctrine, though they be hated of the greatest part; that saying of our
Savior teaches: I came not to send peace into the earth, but the sword, and
debate. And again, Matthew. 10. 34.
I am come to set fire on the earth, and what is my desire if it be already
kindled? Luke 12. 49.
So that if civil distension and trouble follow upon our preaching, and
professing, it is the filthy heart of the rebellious sort, out of which that
stinch comes, as out of a dunghill, who can away with no better savor.

Now in that Ioash called his son Ierubbaal, [Baal shall contend against
Doct. verse. 32.
him] not in reproach, but for a memorial he did it; which brought the Idol
into contempt. So he was called Ierubbosheth, 2. Sam. 11. 21. This shows,
that he was so far from being ashamed of his own or his sons fact, that he
rejoiced in it that Idolatry had the foil by his means, as all well minded
people should do the like. But I proceed.

THE FORTY THREE SERMON ON THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 33. Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites, and they of the East,
gathered together, and pitched in the valley of Izreel. 34. But the spirit of
the Lord came upon Gedeon, and he blew a trumpet, and Abiezer was joined with
him. 35. And he sent messengers through all Manasseh, which also was joined
with him: and he sent messengers to Asher, and to Zabulon, and to Naphtali, and
they came up to meet him.
NOw follows the last point of the four in this fourth part of The sum of
these 3. verses.
Chapter, as was noted in the 11. verse. In which is showed, how Gedeon (after
that the Midianites gathered themselves together) prepared for war against
them; he having before destroyed Idolatry, and set up the true worship of God:
that thus all the people might see, when it was done, how ill it might have
been undone again, and how profitable it was for them, which Gedeon had done
so: though we may remember what troubles and stirs were raised against him,
before he could bring it to pass. But oh, what a mercy of God was this to
them, that the Midianites were held in all this while? who bound their hands
and feet till Gedeon had brought so worthy a work to pass, but even he whom
none were able to resist, even the Lord omnipotent? The sum of these three
verses is this: That the Lord gave occasion to Gedeon, by bringing the
Midianites, and other assistants to them, into the land, to prevail against,
and get victory over them. For he trusting to the word of God, by which he had
been, and that lately, so well strengthened; prepared to go against them: and
the Lord armed him, and he drew help together out of the tribes that were
near unto him, as is to be seen in the text, so that Israel was again
restored in great multitudes.

Thus after all the trouble that Gedeon had, both otherwise, and by fear of
Doct. verse. 33.
the Midianites now provoking the Israelites to battle, and the many hurts
that they did the^ before, yet God would (we see) have his true worship set up,
and Idolatry cast down first, as we have heard; which the wise men of the
world though they had allowed, would yet have deferred till after the victory.
And note we hereby, that it much pleases him, yt we should not post off the
great and weighty commandments of his worship and service, for our earthly
affairs and bodily business, though weighty, if there be time enough to
discharge them; no nor lay aside the exercises of prayer, hearing, reading, and
the like, for our own pleasure. And we our selves may see, that it is very
meet and expedient that it should be so: and how cheerfully we may go about
the one, when we have well discharged the other: whereas by deferring, we
leave them undone altogether sometimes, and our appetite is much quailed when
we return to them. As therefore we read, that as great need as there was to
make all possible speed to rescue the Church in the great distress it was in
at that time, yet that Hester sought the Lord by fasting Hester 4. 16.
and prayer, before she went to the King, and went after that with great
courage to him for help, and prevailed. But it is otherwise with us; for we,
for the most part, first serve our selves (what though in doing things that are
lawful?) and seek our own profit and pleasure, which is our great sin: and
yet that is not all, but having so done, we are also by the least occasion
easily brought to omit the Lords due altogether many times (as I have said) or
at least to perform it slackly, coldly, and by halues, so that it were as good
undone.

This appears to be too true in the common courses of men and many of their
dealings, and of theirs who are not the worst. And namely in this one: when we
have set an order for praying in our houses, we will not perhaps, as some do,
omit it altogether afterward: but yet we then, for the most part, meet to
perform this duty to God, when we have served our selves, and filled our
bellies first, in which case we be commonly oppressed Note.
with drowsinesse and sleep, which are (a man would think) utterly unmeet to
accompany Gods service, and therefore little pleasing to him, that it were
far better to dispose of a fitter time for that business, and yet other
things not to be left undone. And we must take heed both in this which I now
speak of, and all the like that we take in hand, lest we give just suspicion
that we think any thing is good enough for the Lord.

In the public worship of God, the Church has given a better example, that we
do our duties to God before we refresh ourselves. Abraham's servant having but
a message of his masters to do, did so diligently follow the doing and
executing of it, that he would not take his own necessary repast, Gen 24. 33.
in his hunger and weariness, till he had faithfully discharged that
business. And Iehosaphat being nearly driven by the Moabits and Ammonits, did
first seek the Lord by fasting and prayer, before he would take weapon in
hand. And let all mark what he lost thereby, or whether he could possibly
have found the like help and so present as he did, by all speedy following
his business, by all policy and power that he could have made. And yet I
add this, because I would lay no burden needlessly on the conscience of any
man, that in necessity, which cannot be avoided, a man may omit the greater
duty for the less, if it could not else be done at all, and so as
opportunity be watched and taken to do it afterward. To conclude about this
matter, let this practice of Gedeon teach us this rule, to wit, to give the
precedencie always to those duties which are of best price, and withal of
greatest necessity. Now I call that necessity, which not only is commanded,
but absolutely and always, so that it is sin to neglect and omit it; as to
watch, believe, repent, etc. they may not be left of, and laid aside for any
cause. So to hear the word in season and out of season, is commanded, as also
to do our earthly business on the six days: yet to omit both, at some time
is no sin, because they be commanded but for some time to be done, and may in
some cases and at other times be dispensed with and omitted but the other are
ever necessary; as to be humbled for sin, to believe in God, also to love and
fear God, and to be patient, and some other, with the like duties of the first
Commandments. Now these are absolute duties, and charged upon us generally and
always: no business may be preferred before these whatsoever: no delay is to
be admitted, no though it be under color of most serious returning thereto
afterward: For where we take liberty to our selves in these cases, God curses
us, Satan gets ground of us, and the work for the which we lay them aside, is
commonly naught worth, when it is done in the best manner. And therefore we
see that Felix pretending that he would hear Paul again at leisure of those
things, which his terrified conscience durst hear no longer for that present;
never had leisure to hear him again at all, seeing he did it not both when he
ought and might. For the second sort of duties: as prayer in family, privately
by our selves, with the like, although they are not duties of so simple
necessity, that no other actions may ever hinder them; yet let them who have
solemnly couenanted with the Lord to use them, and seen great cause thereof,
and fruit thereby, beware how they wind out themselves of this course, upon
unwarranted occasions: for so they shall never want some one or other shift to
salve the matter, till the breach be grown so great, that a slender patch will
not mend it, nay grief and slight repentance scarcely will repair it: as we
see a close and smooth lid of a frame, if it warpe once, is not easily brought
to his leuelnes again. God shall teach wisdom in the cases of lawful
omission, to such as lean not so much and so long, to their own, till they
have laid themselves underfoot. But that the chiefest duties, when all things
are rightly considered, ought to be (as I have said) preferred before other,
the words of our Savior in that pattern of prayer, Matthew. 6. do clearly
show; where before he mentions Matthew. 6. 9. 10.
any petitions tending to the good of soul or body, he commands us to ask
the things which concern the glory of God, which stands in the coming of his
kingdom, and doing of his will. So that if it were possible, that a good might
ask the pardon of sin, deliverance from evil, or necessaries to this life,
without respect had to this, that God might be honored in all these, it were
his great sin so to do. For the very salvation of a man's soul is to be
hazzarded and neglected, (if it might be) rather then that it should stand in
comparison with this, as by Moses and Paul's request for the peoples forgiveness
and conversion may appear.

Secondly, in this that the Midianites banded themselves against Israel, very
Doct. 2.
like to have spoiled them both of their lives and goods, as they had almost
done before, we should consider to what changes in our estate we be subject;
and that is, even unto the loosing of all the good things that God has
enriched us with, to make our lives comfortable. Oh, when we are in health,
peace, abundance, and well married, with the fear of God accompanying them, it
is (doubtless) a little paradise that we live in, as here on earth we Note.
may look for, and in comparison of that we may see the most to enjoy that we
live among) and they are wise who can acknowledge it, to give God the praise by
bringing forth much fruit. And yet God can afford us this and more too, if we
could use it well, and do good with it. But seeing men nestle John 15. 9.
themselves upon these uncertain things, (which is little wisdom in them to
do so, but a bold tempting of God;) we see what strange alterations fall out
in their lives, that their estate changes from that it was, I say not as other
men's, by age, sicknesses, diseases only, (for to them we are all subject) but
from towardness, hope and likelihood of goodness, which they had sometime,
and therefore they should have been rooted, and grown forward therein: and
such as never had any, wax much worse and worse, and by their afflictions they
be much disguized.

For by that time that cruel enemies, domestical or foreign, (I mean in
the world) have oppressed them, as both may easily be: or suites, debt, Note.
suretiship, or prison have molested them (which commonly fall out to be) or
the unruliness and disobedience in children, the unfaithfulness and
lewdness of servants, and the vnpeaceablenesse and vnappeasablenesse in
neighbors and landlords, with great injuries offered by them, shall vex them;
together with sickness and other calamities which meet with them; I say, when
some of these, as mothes in a garment, have eaten into them, the beauty of
their estate is decayed, and consumed: in these cases, I say, they are altered
and changed, as if they had never been the persons. So that as Elimelech by
famine was constrained to change his dwelling, and good David by his own son
was almost driven from his kingdom; even so, and much more, when sundry of the
forementioned ways shall afflict bad men, do they not show the uncertain
hold that they have (and yet they have no hold of any better) of the things
which are in greatest price here among men, together with the reproaches and
disgraces that befall them? that I say nothing of sundry kinds of death to cut
them off from all: and are sufficient proofs of that which I say. So that we
have good cause to bear a low sail, Note.
even when we be at the highest, and to think we have little, when we have the
most. And to look for our change in our prosperity, and to make heaven our
habitation against we go hence, and the earth with the pomp and beauty of it,
but as small and uncertain riches. Indeed all the glory of these things must
have his end: yet commonly where God is not provoked much, there is no
unseasonable change of men's prosperity into misery: but a kindly inioying it
with Gods good liking: though sometime God afflict thus for other ends, as Job,
etc. And because many of Gods dear ones provoke him to turn their blessings
and delight temporal, as in wife, children, goods, beauty, strength, etc.
into sorrows, and punishments, which must be so, or else it would be worse
with them: let them also beware that they break not out further against him,
least by any sin wilfully committed and not repented of speedily, they cause
and procure this to themselves, that they be roughly handled of him, more then
commonly, even like other men, and that particularly by the gross abuse of
these outward things themselves, where to they are subject, they be not
deformed and disguized by strange and rare afflictions. God has all good
things in store for his, but he can also soon strip them thereof, as Jeremy
says, in the person of the Jews, Lam. 1. 12.
even as he withholdeth them altogether from some other. And this I thought
good to say, though somewhat of this argument has been said before.

It follows how God furnished Gedeon with gifts of the spirit, both wisdom
and courage, whereby, according to that which he had said to him before [Goe
in this thy power, and thou shall save Israel out of the hands of Midian] he
was new fitted for it. Which teaches, that when God appoints his servants to
any charge or business of his, he inableth them to go through it, and
ministers help to them accordingly. So Paul says in a far greater 1. Tim.
1. 12.
work then this of Gedeons, that God counted him faithful, and put him in his
service, after he had appointed him thereunto. So Saul when he was chosen King,
had gifts given him to govern, God making him thereby, as the text says,
another man. So the Lord deals with those whom he makes Ministers of the
Gospel, that they shall do his message to the people faithfully and
diligently, and plainly and powerfully; to the just challenging of them, who
boldly take upon them so weighty a calling as does concern the saving or
destroying the souls of men, having no furniture of preaching the Gospel
soundly and clearly, neither any care to look that way, nor other grace
bestowed upon them. Now Gods work is not only some great service, as Gedeons
to fight, and Paul's to preach, and Moses to deliver Israel from Egypt: but even
to live in the married estate, to walk in a calling public or private, and
much more to profess the name of Christ, in what condition soever. And when we
speak of Gods calling a man to this work, (I mean not any sensible calling
by voice,) as here Gedeon extraordinarily was: but when a man enters into
these estates, functions, or actions by direction and warrant of the
lawfulness or necessity thereof, from the word and ordination of the Church.
Using also the holiest and best means to obtain faith, knowledge, wisdom and
conscience to discharge them well: to such I say, God will not be wanting,
although they may think that their case is not as Gedeons, (and yet they had
need be no weaker in faith, nor lower brought then he was) and that they are
but seely private persons; yes, God will so bless them, and prosper their
lawful enterprises, yea though they deem themselves unfit to undertake such
works, or unable to go through them: that so as they shall have cause to
bless the Lord, and wonder at his love and faithfulness to them, when they
who go about the same, to observe how he assisteth and blesses them, and on
the other side, how they who rely upon their own head and policy, shall
wanze, come to nothing, and be resisted by him; as we read of such as being
commanded to go against the Canaanites See and read Number. 14. from verse. 40.
to 45.
refused; but, would needs go fight against them being forbidden, and
therefore they were sore discomfited. But of this I have spoken before.

Gedeon being thus furnished, was in couraged to go against Gods enemies, Verse
34 35.
and so much the more, seeing he had such success before by the promise of the
Angel. Where note, how well things prosper with us, and go forward, when we
are certain, that we be set a work by the Lord: and more particularly, when
we are furnished with faith in his promises for the present, and time to come,
and heartned by the experience of Gods help in the time past. For it was not
for nothing, that the Lord meaning to set him a work about a greater service,
gave him good proof first, as of his own weakness, so of his assistance in
the lesser, I mean in the destroying of Baal; of which point more hereafter,
if God will. Now both these did work upon him mightily, and so we then
especially, when with both, our consciences can witness to us, that we have
cast off, and purged out such sins wherein we lived before, oh then, I say,
we go on roundly and readily in the duties we take in hand. And so on the
contrary, if we do but crop them off by a present and slight dislike of them,
we shall sensibly and easily feel how awkelie and untowardly we go to work,
as the Israelites against the Beniamites. Judge. 20.
Cap. 20. But of this point often by occasion before.

In blowing the trumpet, to draw and call together the company that Doct. 2.
should assist him, mark who were said to follow him to the battle: even
Abiezer, meaning the people in his tribe, and of the family that he was of,
that had been so furiously bent and set against him for the overthrowing of
Baal: who also would have had him put to death for the same; which may be
marvelled at to see them so turned unto him. But the Lord (no doubt) changed
their hearts; and again, they saw no hurt fell out to Gedeon by Baal, as the
Barbarians to Paul by the viper, which they verily looked for. Acts. 28. 5.
For many do judge of the professors of Gods worship, according to the outward
blessing and success, and especially beginners: who yet in time Note.
grow to see into the matter better, as they did, Ioh. 4. who told the woman,
Ioh. 4 42.
that though they were drawn by her to hear, yet they believed then upon a
better ground, as their own knowledge. But to return again; If men that
run after vain idols, and all other that serve God amiss, and not after his
word, would consider, what they get thereby, even less then nothing; and how
they are deceived in that wherein they put their trust; they would seek
further, and serve the Lord only, and him also according to his word, with an
upright heart, as knowing him to be a bountiful rewarder and Heb. 11. 6.
pay master. Yea and the godly would take more heart to themselves in Gods
business, if they considered how the Lord causes many resisters and enemies
of them and their goodness, to turn to their practice, and cleave unto Revel.
3. 9.
their profession, to worship at their feet, and to serve God with them. A
worthy fruit of their innocence, though it procured them but only a good
report, and some general allowance: but when it draws others to the hearty
intertainment of the truth with them, in the love thereof, it is much more. But
I noted somewhat of this point in Ioash, upon the entrance into the story, or
else where.

The rest of the Tribes about him, as Zebulon, Asher and Naphtali, followed
Verse. 35.
him. For though the Lord called Gedeon only, yet he could not alone fight
against the enemies. For our faith in God does not exclude the help of men,
nor the second means which may lawfully and conveniently be inioyed. For Gods
servants are not led by faith to tempt God, but to serve his providence, as in
wisdom they learn to do. And this is one especial cause why God will
furnish him whom he calls, because he gives him grace to seek assistance
from him in all his enterprises, and to serve his providence. And so is one
bound to help another, where need requires, as the Tribes here did Gedeon.
Read more of this Chap. 2. verse. 3.

THE FORTY FOUR SERMON ON THE SIXTH AND SEVENTH CHAPTERS OF THE BOOK OF
IVDGES.
VERSE. 36. Then Gedeon said unto God, If thou will save Israel by mine hand as
thou have said. 37. Behold, I put a fleece of wool in the threshing place: if
the dew come on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the earth, then shall
I be sure that thou will save Israel by mine hand, as thou have said. 38. And
so it was: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the fleece together,
and wringed the dew out of the fleece, and filled a bowl of water. 39. Again,
Gedeon said unto God, be not angry with me, that I may speak once more: let me
prove once again, I pray thee, with the fleece: let it now be dry only upon
the fleece, and let dew be upon all the ground. 40. And God did so that same
night: for it was dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all the
ground.
HOw Gedeon prepared to go to the war against Midian we have The sense of
these verses.
heard in the former 3. verses, in which began the 4. point in the 4. part of
the Chapter, according to the division made in the eleventh verse, whereto we
may remember was adjoined his asking of a double sign. And in these words the
holy story shows, that he being now furnished of the Lord with gifts, as we
have heard, and having gathered his army together, and being gone to meet the
enemies, where they had pitched; in these verses (I say) it follows how he
desired of God the first sign; by the which he might be confirmed of, and
concerning the victory. The sign he asked was this: that he putting a fleece
of wool on the threashing flore, the dew might come on the fleece only, and
it might be dry upon all the earth. Wherein he is marvelled at, that for all
the promise of God, and confirming of him before, he should doubt, and ask a
sign. I answer upon the due consideration of the thing, that though it may be
like enough, that he was not altogether void of blame, yet he did not herein
tempt God, (as some did who asked a sign of Christ's authority) but desired
only to have his faith confirmed thereby, which would otherwise have wauered.
As the man in the Gospel, who believed, and yet prayed, Lord help mine
unbelief, so did Gedeon. Besides, the Lord granted Mar. 9. 24.
him his request, without any reproouing of him, which it is not like he would
have done, if Gedeon had doubted. Last of all, I am the rather thus persuaded,
because he is reckoned in the Epistle to the Hebrews, among them Heb. 11. 32.
that were commended for their faith.

Herein we are to consider of our weakness in believing by occasion of Doct.
in verse. 36. 37. 38.
Gedeons asking a double sign: and of the loving kindness of the Lord in
pitying us therein, and bringing us out of it, even as he yielded to him in
both. For our selves this may be said, that though we believe Gods promise,
yet there arises naturally in us daily and continual weakness of faith;
partly by yielding too much to carnal reason, partly through inevitable
frailty, the Note.
flesh fighting against the spirit in us. And hereof it is, that we are feign
to wrestle, and to be in the battle as it were, and in the cumbat daily to
uphold and preserve our weak faith, which otherwise would soon fail and give
over, as by experience we have often found in other, and our selves. As in the
examples of Peter coming on the water to Christ, Martha in raising Lazarus,
David complaining of his sadness and heaviness of heart, the Disciples in their
too much ascribing to Christ's bodily presence, and an hundred more in
Scriptures do testify.

And much more may the same be said of our selves: yet while we fear our
frailty against such assaults, as we have cause daily to do, and learn to
rest on God, as those dear servants of God did, we are much stayed, and our
hearts well eased thereby, in respect of former times. As to say a little in
particular by the contrary: when we have obtained of God the gift of believing
that we are freed from condemnation, and that we shall have eternal life: if
we rest there, and look not daily to revive our hearts by hearing the word
often, whereby the feeling of Gods favor is more revived and quickened, and
also by remembering and applying Gods promises from day to day, and from time to
time, and with both, if we labor not also to rejoice therein, that so we may
be kept in holy compass thereby: we shall be ever flitting; off and on, and
stand at an uncertain stay: And this shall not only be at our first
believing, (which there is least doubt of) but even after we have been
stablished and settled therein. For at first, assurance is not easily obtained
ordinarily, till we have had some experience of Gods loving Note.
kindness toward us, and of our own vprightnes.

And even so I may say the same of believing Gods promises in other temporary
things: how we shall faint therein, without the forementioned exercise: and
more hardly bear our crosses, or go under some pain and sickness, or have
victory over some special sin, and mortify some corruption that has much
prevailed in us. But if these be pursued earnestly, and the other promises of
grace be often and usually recorded, with fervent prayer to God for strength; it
is not to be denied, but much fruit shall follow, and we shall sensibly
perceive, that we get ground of our selves in that behalf, and grow more
nearly acquainted with the mind and will of God, that he will grant us
further to prevail against such difficulties: and yet if we grow to think
that we shall never obtain grace against our corruptions, nor outgrow
discouragements, nor well bear our crosses, or find blessing in our callings,
notwithstanding the use of public and private means; yea further if we do
mind and look after these things but now and then, and that slightly also; we
may well know, that there is no fruit to be expected to come thereof: which is
the cause why some, who are not destitute of true faith, are often times (as it
were) new to begin in these things, after long going about them.

Now this standing at a stay, and small profiting in the subduing and striving
against unbelief, comes not barely* and altogether of frailty, when we
would gladly prevail and cannot: but in great part of yielding to temptation,
and occasions drawing us violently* to sin against our conscience, (which
causes a man's hold upon the promises to fail exceedingly) or too much giving
place to carnal reason, which persuades that we need not Note.
give such attendance to these things; but in the mean while, we see that we
are greatly set back thereby. So that it is manifest, that without diligent
heed taking to the strengthening of our faith, we easily grow to distrust God
and his promises. And much more, if we will hearken to such voices as we shall
too often hear sounding in our ears, that we need not take such pain, nor
have our heads beaten and occupied about it: whereas all diligence is to be
given thereto for attaining so excellent a gift, as that is. And most of all,
when by willing offendings of God we weaken our selves; which how small need we
have of, we may easily see, when we consider that we fall to doubting through
the untowardness of our hearts, without adding further sin, our faith being
fitly compared to fire, which may as well go out by negligence in adding
thereto, as wilfulnes in quenching thereof.

This our sin in so hardly giving credit to God, is aggrauated hereby, that
if we are to deal with men, about great matters, we are easily satisfied, and
believe them, if we have their word and writing: which manifests too plainly
our distrust toward God, from whom nothing is enough to stay us, unless with
Thomas we may grossly feel and see that which we desire. Nay I say more, if
we be to compass any matter for our own pleasure, profit, or preferment, oh
how bold and full of courage we be, although we must go under peril, loss,
or any such like thing, for obtaining the same: but to suffer any difficulty
or danger, so much as to stretch out our faith to believe, or our hope to wait
for that which God has promised, though he give us never so great cause and
encouragement, by good evidence and testimony, Note.
and by former experience, of others, and our selves, yet we have no heart to
it. Therefore if we be wise, let us be much stronglier built up in the
confidence of Gods favor, and of his promises, take more pains to abide
therein, pray and watch against the occasions of vnsetling it, and chain up
our so great ascribing (as we have done) to sense and reason. And so doing, we
shall see our selves well propped up and vpholden, though we have no promise of
miracles to do it, as Gedeon had.

Of one of the signs that Gedeon asked, we have heard: now follows the
other.

When Gedeon had desired one sign, that the fleece might be moistened with
dew, and the ground dry, now he desired, that when dew was on the Verse. 38.
39. 40.
earth the fleece might be dry; and to both the signs asking, God yielded;
which he would not have easily done, if he had not approved it. To teach, that
if in our weakness and timourousnes we had this wisdom, to repair to God,
and make our moan to him, in feeling our burden, and to say with confidence,
Lord strengthen our faith; we should be stayed and eased: and so in all
distempers whatsoever, we should not be left to our selves, nor forsaken. Which
many (as I said) have not learned to do, and therefore their whole life is but
a conflicting with doubts and fears, rising anew in their minds, and that
endlesly, by the malice of the devil disquieting and molesting them: and
hindering them from that resolution and holy boldness which God allows and
commands to be in them. And whereas the enemy buzzeth into them, that it
were presumption to hold the promise of forgiveness and life, otherwise then
doubtingly: this fact of Gedeon in so earnest and doubled requesting of
strength and confirmation from God, should dash and quench it. And so by our
proof of Gods answering our prayers at one time, we should learn to use the
same means again in a like manner, and as often as need shall require at
another time: knowing, that as it is Gods honor to be believed in his
promises; so it stands with his good liking, that we often sue to him, to give
us some clear insight into them, how they belong to us, (though we tie him to
no certain measure) that so we may be stayed.

Neither is it to be omitted, that Gedeon in this second suit, comes with a
deprecation of his own boldness and importunity with God, which must be warily
understood. For hereby it follows not, that God was angry, or Gedeon was bold
in making this request: (for then Gedeon had sinned highly in doing that which
he knew would anger God) but rather out of a most inward feeling of that
vnbleefe which he desired to be forgiven, and supplied with confidence: as
also in deep humility, considering how great a liberty he had (being but a
silly worm) that he might speak so freely to the Almighty, and be admitted
into such familiarity with his Majesty; he utters this speech full of
reverence, Be not angry with thy servant; as if he should say, It is just
with thee to be displeased with my weakness in believing: but (O Lord) pardon
that (be not angry) and seeing I crave strength against it, (as thou give
me leave to do) let my desire be granted, and my infirmity covered. And in
both the respects named, the Saints of God in Scripture have ever used
themselves thus reverently and humbly, and the Lord so respectively, as Gedeon
here does. As the example of Abraham shows, praying for Gedeon. So wise, and
able to use such a privilege, should we al seek to be, that we knowing how
base mettle we are, even dust and worms, privilege, (that I say no more) and
yet admitted into the presence of God of glory, we should admire it with
humility, that he gives us access to him; oh how should it affect us, yea
what reverence should it draw from us? Even as when a poor man comes often to
the same friend to borrow money: he comes not saucily and loosely, as if it
were a common matter, and for the which he were little beholding to him, but
caries thanks and reverence in his countenance and behauior. But of this story
of Gedeon before.

And this is that which I purposed to say of, and concerning our selves. 3
Now that which I have to say of the Lord is this: namely, how respective he is
to his children, and what a ready ear he gives to our prayers, yea and that
particularly in this point, of strengthening our faith. Gedeon twice desired a
sign to confirm him, and God granted it to him. To show, that if (as I have
said) we could pray for it, and long for that grace (as precious as it is) it
should be granted us. But we would be glad to enjoy it, but in our weakness
and fainting, we do not plie God with fervent requests, that we may Note.
be settled in believing either that power over our special sin shall be given
us, or hope and patience to bear some trouble. If we were often with God in this
behalf, and earnest; we should find, that God would furnish us accordingly,
above that which we could look for. Thus Abraham, David, Paul with others,
grew strong in faith. And this of the whole chapter.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE Book of IVDGES.
Verse. 1. Then Ierubbaal (who is Gedeon) rose up early and all the people that
were with him, and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the host of the
Midianites, was on the North side of them, in the valley by the hill Moreh. 2.
And the Lord said unto Gedeon, The people that are with thee are to many for me
to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel make their vaunt against
me, and say, My hand has saved me. 3. Now therefore proclaim in the audience
of the people, and say, Whosoever is timorous or fearful, let him return,
and depart early from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people, that
were at mount Giliad, two and twenty thousand, so that ten thousand remained.
4. And the Lord said unto Gedeon, The people are yet too many, bring them down
unto the water and I will try them for thee there: and of whom I say to thee,
this man shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee: and of whomsoever I
say unto thee, this man shall not go with thee, the same shall not go. 5. So
he brought down the people unto the water. And the Lord said unto Gedeon. As
many as lap the water with their tongues, as a dog lappeth, them put by
themselves: and every one that shall bow down his knees to drink, put apart.
6. And the number of them that lapped, by putting their hands to their mouths,
were three hundred men: but all the remnant of the people kneeled down upon
their knees to drink water. 7. And the Lord said unto Gedeon, By these three
hundred men that lapped, will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine
hand: and let all the other people, go every man unto his place. 8. So the
people took victuals with them, and their trumpets, and he sent all the rest
of ^srael, every man to his tent, and retained the three hundred men: and the
host of Midian was beneath him in a valley.
THe sum in general, and parts of the Chapter are first to be considered,
The sum and parts of the Chapter.
and then a more particular view to be taken of it afterward: and the sum
may be laid out in the parts, which are three. The first, how God made Gedeon
send all the people, save three hundred, back again, as being too many for
the battle, to verse 9. The second, how God assured him again of the
victory, by a dream, which one of the enemies had, and by the interpreting of
it by another of them in Gedeons hearing, and this to the 16. verse. The third
is the victory it self over them, which God gave him: and this to the end of
the Chapter.

The first part of the Chapter.
TO come to the first part, there is no difficulty in it, for when he had The
sense of the first part.
pitched his army, ready to go meet the enemies, the Lord caused him to send
them all away (excepting three hundred) lest they should give out, that they
had overcome the Midianites by their own strength. And those three hundred he
also appointed to him, taking them out of the ten thousand, that remained after
the sending of the other two and twenty thousand away. In Gedeons drawing near
the enemies with his army, we may see The sense of the first verse, and the
doctrine. Note.
how he was confirmed in his faith that he should obtain the victory,
whereabout he had doubted so much before. And although I grant, that it was
meet he should be stayed by so great means as God used for that purpose, yet
we see that faith commonly fails most, when the trial is greatest, and the
danger nearest. Therefore in that he was now heartned and encouraged, when he
saw the great number of the Midianites, and he himself was now with his small
army in comparison of theirs, to meet and fight with them: it is clear, that
he was well persuaded of the truth of Gods promise, and that he did cast
himself confidently thereupon. Thus his faith grew and Doct. verse. 1.
showed it self apparently.

So should we, when we have been much labored with, to believe by the
preaching of the Gospel, and have our selves also much been occupied in
attaining thereto; we should, I say, then look for the fruit thereof. And
namely, to have proof of our faith indeed, in and about the common
difficulties, wherein in times past we have be foiled, and found it almost
impossible sometime, or at least very unlike that we should prevail by faith,
even there I say, we should look to have some strength thereof otherwise then
in former times. As for example, when a man sees his sins and the guilt of
them, though he be truly humbled for them: even then to lift up the hand of
faith to heaven, and lay hold on the mercy of God in Christ. Also in time of
temptation, to resist temptation, by believing, that God will give us victory.
Again, when a man must lose goods, and life, and all that he has for the
Gospel, or else to forsake it, then to cleave fast unto it, believing that we
shall be great gainers thereby. And so, when a man wants meat, drink, and
apparel, yet even then, to acknowledge Gods providence, though by weak
means, and rest in it peaceably. In like manner, having long heard the word,
and how we should make it profitable to our selves by believing it, we should
grow to this point, that we should be weary of our rouing and wandering, of
our sleeping, of our discoursing and disputing against that which we like not,
being unpleasant to our flesh, and say with Samuel: Speak Lord, for now thy
servant hears, and is ready to rest in thy will, whither reproouing,
commanding, or encouraging: yea and to be vpholden, guided, reformed, or kept
within compass, whither by the terrors, commandments, or promises of it. So
ought we in all other parts of duty to be ready to say every one for
himself, Lord, now have I learned how I should work in my Note.
calling, use my peace and prosperity, behave my self in secret, and with
others, and walk throughout my life innocently and fruitfully, believing that
I shall not lose the fruit of my labor. And further, I bless thy name, I am
ready to be put the trial, and am not altogether as in times past, each
occasion offered by thy Majesty is welcome, I am the more encouraged to stoop
meekely under mine affliction, when I see thou have sent it, for then I believe
thou art readier to assist me in bearing it, and that thou will give a good
issue out of it: and therefore far be it from me to be so plunged Note.
and amazed at trials, as I have been, for that were to be ever learning, and
never come to knowledge, yea it were always to be a child, going by the help of
others, and never alone, which is the property of a changeling. And thus
doing, we shall find that which the good Martyr found; that when God called
him to the stake he endured the fire, though before he could not endure the
flame of a candle to singe so much as his finger. In these, and such like, to
have proof of our faith, is a thing much to be rejoiced in, and a good sign
that our faith grows, and is strengthened otherwise then it has been in
times past, according to the saying of the Apostle to the Colossians: Be rooted
and grow in Coloss 2. 7.
faith, that ye may abound therein.

And so I might say of many things particularly, as of impatience, anger,
wrath, unclean and unchaste desires, excessive fear of trouble, conceits,
terchinesse, rash judging, and many other more: when we have pursued, and had
them in the chase, disliking, condemning, and long time and often praying against
them, we should look for some victory over them, and by the faith in which we
prayed, to rest persuaded, that such means shall not be used of us in vain:
but look that the roots of them, which were fast settled in our hearts before,
be now loosened in us, and more and more daily, and that it shall so appear
even then, when any new occasion shall be offered, and when we shall be
provoked to offend by any. This will lively show, (though we shall never be
utterly void of the relics and ex^crements of our corrupt and rebellious
heart,) that our faith is better confirmed in the word that commands us, to
purge them out. And this a man would think were more to the honor of
Christians, then to boast and iangle of their faith, and fail in the trial
ridiculously: which is an easy religion to learn, if it might go for
payment. To whom a man might say, Where is now that tongue of thine, which so
lustily bragged of faith? as Zebul said to Gaal, cap. 9.

Also we further see here, that though Gedeon had the promise of God that Doct.
2.
he should overcome the Midianites, yet he lies not still, but serves Gods
providence by furnishing himself with a army good as he could conveniently to
go against them. And so we ought to use ordinary means to bring any work to
pass appointed us of God, though we have the promise of good success from
him, and yet again on the other side, we should not attribute any thing to
them, for that were to detract from God his due. But of this before at large.

THE FORTY FIVE SERMON ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to goeforward where I left, in this verse, God tells Verse. 2.
Gedeon, that the people of his army were too many to give the victory unto,
lest they should ascribe it to themselves. This speech of the Lord shows, how
unfit we be, to have any great matter committed to us, or to our trust and
government, for we are most Note. Lam. 1. 1.
prone to abuse it: and therefore he is feign oft-times to take away many good
things from us, lest they should much hurt us, though they might (if we could
rightly use them) turn to our great good, and the benefit of others. This
people of Israel, if they had gone altogether to the battle, and got the
victory, they would not have acknowledged God to have given it them, but their
own power and skill, and yet we know how miserable they were a little before,
when Gedeon himself complained in what distress they were, and how low they
were brought: so that one would think, they were unfit inongh to ascribe ought
to themselves, and that they ought rather (having been brought from such
bondage as they had been in before) yea and they might also easily have seen
cause to give glory to God for it, if they with two and thirty thousand
(especially so many thousands of them being faint-hearted soldiers) had
subdued more then an hundred thousand persons. And this is the more odious in
this people, because they would have abhorred such a leaud conceit or quality
in themselves while they remained under bandage, yea, if they had been asked:
What if by you (being but feeble and few in respect of your enemies:) the Lord
would destroy the Midianites, would you not think God had fought mightily for
you? Oh they would have confessed no less, but seen that it had been cause of
great thanks. True; till the victory had been gotten: and then who but
themselves had foiled the Midianites? So it may be Saul and Jeroboam while they
were underlings, would have counted it a greater privilege, and themselves
highly indebted to God, if he would have bestowed a less matter then a
kingdom upon them, but when they had got it, they showed they were unable to
be made partakers of so great a felicity: and we see, that they were not fit
to have so weighty and glorious matters as kingdoms committed unto them. Even
as we see, mean and beggarly persons, that never knew what belonged to wealth
or dignity, yet if they be raised unto it, cannot bear it, nay the ground
cannot bear them: if they be set on horseback, they ride out of reason, even
till they break their own necks: whereas ingenuous and wel-bred natures can
as well carry themselves in such a condition, (especially if education and grace
meet together) as the poorest can in a bace and simple. And surely many of us
can as hardly bear a little wealth, small revenues, a few hundreds, nay Note.
scores, as Saul and the other could their kingdoms: though (ere we had them)
we were as lowly and mean in our own eyes, as our fellows.

Therefore, as I said, we may see, how soon we abuse Gods benefits, and all
such good liberties, as he bestows upon us, as riches, health, promotion,
credit (I would I might not say spiritual gifts also) even as Pharaoh his
princely estate and greatness: the rich man in the Gospel, his wealth: Herod,
Luke 12. 19. Acts 12. 23.
the very praise and commendation that was given him by the people. So we that
can challenge nothing at Gods hands as due debt to us, but trouble and sorrow,
which is the fruit of our sin; what a lamentable case is it, that the Lord
sparing us much from sundry calamities, and furnishing us with benefits of
diverse kinds, to draw us to know, love, believe in him and honor him, that we
cannot for all this, so soon enjoy any thing that is ought worth, but by and by
we set up our brustles, we forget from what a cursed estate, and whence we
came, and kick up our heels against the Lord: and yet this is easy to be
seen in all estates of men, and kinds of Gods benefits.

So that the Lord if he love us, sees that there is no better way to be taken
with us for our good, then to take away such liberties again from us, and to
let out our humors, seeing they breed but a pleurisy in us, or to cross us
in them, lest they should steal away our hearts from him, and so we drive him
to say of his benefits, as he did of this people: There be too many of them, I
must make them fewer, or else they will glory of their multitude and greatness.
Even so we cause the Lord to say of us, as to Saul (a bad person) they have to
much Note.
wealth, I must pluck some of it from them: they have had health too long, I
must abridge them of it: they have had too many of my benefits, as ease,
credit, countenance, etc. unless they could use them better, I must, says the
Lord, of necessity take them from them. And this is the cause why the Lord
holds many of his under, that commonly they have no great matters put into
their hands, and are much crossed in those earthly commodities that they love
best, lest they should be the worse for them. And it is rarely seen, that even
they are better by them, then if they had them not. Therefore except God shall
bestow upon us an humble and wise heart, and well balanced with grace, to
account of these things as they are, to wit, transitory, and soon flitting
away, and to value the heavenly treasure of faith, and a godly life above all
earthly riches: let us know that the Lord deals wiselier with us, then we are
aware, in dieting and shortning of us: and we our selves shall see it as
clearly in time (if we mark it) as these Israelites did, that God has done
us no wrong in taking somewhat away which we had, or denying us somewhat which
we desire. And as for such as seek above all things to flourish and have the
world at will, they are not so happy, as they be counted, especially in their
own reckoning, neither will show themselves the wisest men in the end: as by
this and the like, may be seen of them that will weigh it.

But to come yet more near to that which is noted in the text, not only men
abuse Gods benefits other ways, but this one way also, that is, to
vaineglorie, as it is said, that this people here mentioned would have done:
and therefore the holy story adds it as a reason why the Lord would not have
so many go to the battle, least they should say, that they had prevailed by
their own might, and so should have taken Gods honor to themselves. And by
this we learn, why God denies, and does not give us in our attempts, many,
great, or any means at all sometime, and if he do, yet not with any good
success, or at least, not as he is wont to do, (although to man's reason
there be likelihood enough, yea very great) because if he should, man would
snatch the glory from him to himself. As Nabuchadnezzar did when he said:
This is great Babel that I have built: Zenacherib that Dan 4 30. E^^. 35 15. 1.
King. 20. 11.
blasphemed the Lord by his Captain Rabshakeh: So Benhadad so grossly for got
himself in boasting what he would do, that he was answered wisely in this
manner, [Let not him that girdeth on his harness, boast himself, as he that
puts it off] And they to whom S. James wrote, how foolishly concluded they
before the success, and bragged of their gain, before they James 4. 13.
knew they should have it? What would they have done (think we) if they had
already enjoyed it also? And is not this strange, that whereas we pretend,
(if we might partake such and such blessings) we would be much more
thankful and serviceable for them, the Lord should convict us of dissimulation
and falsehood, telling us that we know not our own hearts, for we would be
more proud, bold, and vainglorious? So that if the Lord should not bewray to
us, what poison lurkes in us, we should think that he did himself great wrong
in cutting many short of their desires, who might be like to do him service by
enjoying them: whereas (alas) he knows that in so doing, he loses no honor
himself in so dealing with men, nay he has much ado by such means to keep
men from destruction, at least from deep dishonouring of him. But to return,
it is most true, that if God did not deny much to vainglorious persons which
they desire, they would never give him his due, but take it to themselves:
insomuch as we see that such do not only vaunt of their wealth, birth,
strength, and such like, but if they have only some good quality, as that
they be provident husbands, or will keep their promise, and pay their due,
where it is owing, they glory thereof, and disgrace other that fail therein,
though the most of their other doings may be cast as dung in their faces, to
their shame. But give we unto God his due: promise we to our selves nothing,
but upon condition if God will: and acknowledge we him as the giver, and as
one that has right to dispose of that which he has given us: and when we are
denied success in that which we hope to bring to pass, let us in token that
we confess the Lord may justly joint us, not fume and fret, rail and curse,
and much less utter we so much in words to others, that we think we are
accursed, when we see ourselves crossed, but bear we it meekly and
patiently: and the greater our gifts are, which we have received, in more
humble, fruitful, and dutiful manner let us show our selves to use them.

That Gedeon was bidden to send away many of the people, and why; we Verse. 3.
have heard: now let us see who they are that be exempted from the war, and
sent back, (of which sort there were two and twenty thousand) the text notes
them to be those that were faint-hearted and timorous, and so had God
commanded in Deuteronomy that such should be sent back, lest Deuteronomy. 20. 8.
they should discourage other. Here this is to be considered; when Gedeon their
Captain thought them meet for war, and God had called them also to that
place, and duty, and given them gifts for that purpose, though they waxed
timorous: in that they through faint-heartednes, and sloth, did not use and
employ their gifts, the shame and sin was theirs, though God sent back: I
speak it for our own edification and benefit; for if many here were exempted
by God from the battle, and yet thought fit and meet by men, do not well
bestow and use these common gifts of the Spirit, as skill and knowledge in
manuary things pertaining to the body, and this present life: how much more
may we think, that about the more excellent gifts of the Spirit, as
illumination, and matters belonging to the life to come, men do deceive the
expectation of those with whom they live, and be other, I mean far worse
then they go for? Oh it is true, that there are many Note.
persons, who go in the sight of men for good: yet the Lord does not account
so of them, but exempt them from his militant Church, even as he shoaleth out a
great many of these soldiers, as faint and unfit for war, when they should
come to fight with their enemies: whom yet Gedeon thought meet persons for it,
and yet we know, we are much easilier deceived in judging about them, then
these. Look we therefore to it, in a thing by infinite degrees more precious,
how God judges of us: and hang we not upon the opinion of men. For he is not
allowed whom men or ones 2. Cor. 10. 18.
self praises, but whom God praises. And therefore we are not to account of
all that are among us professing the Gospel, no, though they be not branded
with notorious sins, to be sound hearted and good Christians, though we know no
other by them, till God make them manifest, as he did these in their kind: Is
it for us to judge before the time? but howsoever men judge, such as fear God,
and depart from evil (as he himself commended Job for such an one) it is sure
that they only are accepted of him.

More specially to apply this: As the odds between the faint-hearted and
valiant soldiers was great, even three to one: and yet all went about the
service of God in outward show: so great disproportion there is (among such as
worship God) between the lukewarm or indifferent sort of Christians, and the
fervent, hearty, and zealous worshippers. Indeed God Rom 2. 28. compared with
Reu. 3. 16.
does not enable nor allow us to sever the one from the other (so that we may
determine how far the number of the one exceedes the other) as here he did
Gedeon: but woeful proof bewraieth no less then I have said. And yet he that
dismissed these white-liuered soldiers from the army of Gedeon, and only
accepted the service of these three hundred, whom he fitted for the purpose
with faith and resolution; will also exclude all hollow-hearted, lukewarm, and
temporizing Christians from having a part among such as he will honor, so
far as that he will not be honored by them. I mean not that all Christians
should be martial men, and fit for the field: but as Gods work is diverse, so
a diverse kind of spirit he requires in them that do it: in Gedeons men,
courage and might; in Christians, feruencie and resolution to walk with God.
For though we have no Midianites to fight withal: yet we have worse enemies,
both within us and without: and therefore have need of spiritual magnanimity
to use spiritual weapons against them. And though we were not warre-faring
men, yet in that we be but waifaring, (as all Christians are both) we had need
of feruencie and spirit. For he that in general commands, Romans 12. Be fervent,
or hot in spirit; commands Romans 12. 11. James 5. 16. James. 1. 19. Matthew. 11.
12.
the same in prayer, Iam. 5. saying, be fervent therein; likewise in hearing,
Be swift to hear: telling us that the violent snatch the kingdom to them,
etc. and the like affection also we must have in all duties. Though in deed
when dangers and troubles befall men for their profession, then is a special
occasion offered of expressing what courage is in them: but if we nourish not
that grace daily in other duties, how shall it be at hand when we have greatest
need of it? And this I speak, because I see that the ancient and heavenly fire
which once appeared most worthily in many, both in their entrance and progress
of their good course of piety and a good conscience, is turned to ashes and
extinct, or burns so close and feeble, that it can hardly be discerned: and in
stead thereof, either a blockishnes and deadnes Note.
is come upon men, or a faint-hearted remissness and indifferency, as if men
cared not greatly whether they professed or no, and (save for names sake) many
could be content to be without it well enough. And as for such, their disgrace
is as far above these soldiers of Gedeon, as their sin: for these were
only sent back: but the other the Lord vomits out of his mouth. Some there
are (through Gods goodness even as Gedeons three hundred) who look to the
Spirit, (and good cause, for it is the temper of a Christian) but alas how few?
Besides that, the devil in stead of this grace, brought in a frantic sort of
furious persons, whose zeal is to depart from the Church.

Now (to return to the story) we have heard how two and twenty thousand
were sent back, and that there were but ten thousand left to go Doct. 2.
against more then an hundred thousand: and yet that the Lord said, that even
they were too many: this teaches, that he would have us to learn, to depend
on him without means, (if he see it to be expedient to be so, but not
otherwise) and by those which are very weak: and yet he would have us to be
persuaded, that he regards and seeks our good, even when he does so. But
of this before.

He said moreover to Gedeon, that he would try these ten thousand for Verse 4.
him, and show him who were fit, that he himself might see it. For men are
dull and dim eyed to behold Gods secret power and will to do them good, if
he give them not eyes of faith to behold them. And why should it seem strange
that the Lord should do more then we can see? and if we shall see no
likelihood thereof, his power and goodness is the more to be admired and
magnified, who shows it so manifestly in our weakness, even when men see
not how. As who saw, that mighty Pharaoh, Sisera, and the Midianites here
spoken of, were like to be brought to such a downfall as they were? but it was
enough that God had said it. And therefore our Savior, Matthew. 4. tells us, Man
lives not by bread only, but by the word of God: Matthew. 4. 4.
and in like manner, man thriues not by his wit, providence, care only, but by
the blessing of God: No, his rising early, and his late going to bed, and Psalm
127. 2.
eating the bread of sorrow shall not avail to maintain him, if God pluck
back his hand from blessing it. His apparel heates him not of it self, but
by the power of the word and promise. Indeed the outward means men see,
taste, and handle, and therefore in a gross manner rest in them, and discern
no superior power of God in them, much less believe, that it can work
without them: so that if means fail of health, safety, and success, they
give over hope: especially if they see that some great outward bar and let
stops their way: whereas yet the three children tell the King of Babel, That
they believe the God whom they serve can deliver them, not only without
means, but contrary to means. Doubtless in the Scripture we have a
watchword given us of this sin, even in the matters of salvation it self.
For although none but the seed of Abraham ordinarily were elected and saved
(though extraordinarily some were) before the coming of Christ: yet they who
only relied upon these outward means, heard this spoken to them: Say not
within your selves, we have Abraham to our father: for God is Matthew. 3. 9.
able of stones to raise up children unto Abraham. But because men separate (in
the matter of happiness) the true means appointed by God from the end they
desire: I mean faith, repentance, humiliation, from election and salvation: it
is just with God also to meet with them in kind, and to separate their
carnal ends: I mean wealth, prosperity and the like, from the means which
they use unlawfully, and to his dishonor.

And further in that Gedeon was told, that he must take none but those Doct. 2.
whom God appointed, and those he must take: it teaches us that Gods word
must direct us in all our actions both for peace and war, be the same never
so mean and base: and that whatsoever face we set on matters, yet if that be
not the light to our steps, we walk but in darkness. Now then, we who take in
hand so many things in the day, and so throughout our life, how can we choose
but serve him after our own fantasies, if we have not Col 3. 16.
that light plentifully dwelling in us to guide us? Wherein it is no hard thing
to see, that God has much against us, and that often times, when we be at the
best, seeing no man call tell the errors of his actions and life, or how often
he Psalm. 130. 3. Psalm. 19. 12.
offends. So that if he should look straightly what is done amiss, who
should be able to stand before him? Here I will stay for this time.

THE FORTY SIX SERMON ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Here the Lord shows Gedeon who they were that Verse 5. 6.
should go with him to the war, when they were led to the waters, and those
were three hundred which lapped water out of their hands: for these were
industrious and fit for their business more then the other that drunk kneeling
down, who were like to have been an unprofitable burden to the rest by their
multitude, and might have given advantage to their enemies by their
unreadiness and delay, if occasion should have been offered. And the thing
that the Lord teaches us hereby is this: that although he will have none to
trust in themselves, yet he would have them ingenuous and industrious men, fit
for that which they are employed about, which thing is requisite in all
callings and business for men to be willing, diligent, and skillful about
that they profess, and take in hand, that with good conscience all may be
performed: so the contrary of Christians is to be avoided, whether minister,
magistrate, or private person, the husband diligent handed, the wife huswifely:
none lazy, idle, careless. But of this I spoke more in the story of Othoniel
and Caleb, before chap. 1.

Here the Lord says, that by those three hundred men, he would deliver Verse
7.
Israel: which was another strong confirmation of Gedeons faith: for by this he
was persuaded to obtain that which he had already begun to believe. And this
ought to be well marked of us, as the thing which we have great Note.
need off. For who can so steadfastly believe, as he ought, and hold constant
therein? but by daily and continual means, the Lord does much revive and
quicken our faith, to hold on our hope and confidence: which two graces we
must have well settled in us, and as faith is strengthened in us, so are these
two. The excellency of hope is seen in the epistle to the Corinths in these
words: God who has delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver 2.
Cor. 1. 10.
us, in him we hope also, that he will deliver us.

The Price and worthiness of the other, is to be seen clearly in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, thus: Cast not away your confidence, for it has great
recompense Heb. 10. 32. Note.
of reward: these two (faith and confidence) make their whole life sweet and
joyful, who had them both, as David who said of confidence (which is the fruit
of faith, My heart is fixed, I will sing and give thanks. The use hereof, is
this, that we look well to it, that we find our part in these by often
hearing, and all manner of repetitions and experience of Gods promises,
concerning his favor from time to time toward us, and therewith to mark our
often faintings, doubts and fears, yea, and that about one and the same
action, that we may see cause the better to fortify our selves against them.
But alas few mark any such thing, I mean even of those, who may take good
thereby, (for all are not capable of it) but shrink at the hearing of any
hardness coming toward them, and so gather no experience of their faith, hope
and confidence against new trials to come: or of their weakness, but impatiently
Note.
go under their afflictions, and so are more ready to faint under their
burdens afterward.

It was Gods great mercy, that these three hundred did so willingly and Verse.
8. The sense.
readily follow and obey Gedeon, according to the word of God to him, which
they also heard, I grant: but yet had not God persuaded them inwardly besides,
they would have departed with the rest 31700. and would have both grudged at
the liberty of the other, who were dismissed, and have refused to bear the
burden alone, yea they would have forsaken him, if they had not looked unto
God. Where we should note, that in doing our duties Doct.
required by God, we must not regard the forwardness or backwardness of
others so much, nor what they do: but what it is that God looks for at our
hands. Thus Caleb and Iosuah encouraged the people to go forward against the
Canaanites, not looking at the backwardness of the other spies. For as Gods
word and authority have enough in them to persuade us, so if Numb. 13. 28. 29.
33.
we look any other way, as to men's example, or to the issue, or our own
conceits and discouragements, we may be sure they will easily cool and
dismay Note.
us. Therefore (I say) the practice of these, discouers a great sin in many:
who if they have a burden laid upon them, grudge that any other should be free:
but in matters of privilege and honor, grudge that any should be their
partners. Both these we see exemplified in the Apostles of Christ and the
disciples of John. The Apostles seeing one casting out of devils, who was none
of their Masters followers: had indignation and complained to our Savior. They
thought none but Christ and themselves worthy of such an office. So John's
disciples grudged at Christ's, because they fasted often, but Christ's fasted
not. They thought they had wrong in that others were Note.
not held to it, as hardly as they. The cause of the former is especially pride
and unthankfulness: of the latter either ignorance, or that which is worse,
even boldness therewith. And we see that he is a rare person, who can with
equanimitie endure that any should excel him in gifts of body, mind, estate,
or grace, with the blessings accompanying them. Nay many, of a melancholic and
foolish nature, because themselves are given to pensiuenes, sadness, etc. envy
and censure such as take more liberty in mirth, recreation, company or diet:
though (as Paul says) they may both please God, without condemning on another.

This disease of looking narrowly to other what they do, and not to God what
he requires of our selves, (for it is a mixture of many humors, selfeloue,
curiosity, distrust and others) this disease (I say) we may see to have been
in Peter, who looking to John, (to whom Christ said nothing when he had laid
an heavy burden upon Peter himself, asked Christ, saying: Master, John 21. 21.
what shall this man do? The like is to be seen in them, mentioned in the
Gospel, when they saw other more favorably dealt with, then themselves said
grudgingly, We have borne the burden of the day, etc. So the elder brother of
the prodigal repined to see him so well entertained. So that there being many
as by these we may see, so ill minded this way, we may boldly say, that it is a
singular grace of God in all our duties throughout our life, to show forth
indifferency and charity: as also to regard what God says to us, and not to
look to men what they do.

But where is this to be seen? in a very few: as for example in the Ministers,
when Christ says to them (in speaking to Peter) If thou love me feed my John
21. 15.
sheep and my lambs, and be diligent therein. If here and there one or a few
regard it, yet how do the most cast their charge behind them, and look at them
that take their ease, whatsoever their words be that they love him? So that the
force of the word is not so much to draw them, as example to withdraw:
magistrates, householders, husbands, wives, and all that profess the Gospel,
should follow the example of these three hundred in their several estates and
callings. But it is so far off from that, with the most, that if any other,
(and specially if he be of their own condition and degree) shall make
conscience of this duty more then other, he shall be ready to be shaken up
and reviled, as one that cannot be content to do as other do, when yet all
may see in these three hundred how their example is set forth to their
perpetual commendation, in that they went not after the other their brethren,
but obeyed the commandment of the Lord, in following after Gedeon. And
whatsoever become of such as are led by the examples of men, and follow their
own devices, leaving the plain way, wherein God has set them, (whose sin
in due time shall find them out) the other shall be known by this mark, to be
the Lords, that they forsake all by-waies, and depart from evil with Job, to,
testify that they fear him. The example of Joshua is worthy Job 2. 3.
our imitation in this point, who professed for himself and his, that they
would serve the Lord, let the rest do as they listed. As if he had said, It
should Joshua 24. 15.
be their best way to serve the Lord as himself did, if they regarded their
own prosperity and welfare: but if they were so wilful, as to forsake their
own mercy, he and his had learned to follow a better Master, and was resolved
Iona 2. 8.
to consult neither with flesh nor blood, neither cleave to lying vanities, but
make straight steps to the commandment of God. Indeed if we Exodus 23. 2.
see others readier then we, in duty doing, willinger to bear reproof,
forwarder in well doing, in mercy, love, meekness, zeal, stronger then we,
to endure affliction, or any burden which is unwelcome to flesh: then do we
as they do: yet look we not so much at them, as at Gods will in their
obedience. But in evil follow not the multitude: for the most are always
worst: and the best differ and vary among themselves: so that except men will
go by a leaden rule, the word of God must be the eternal and unchangeable
canon of duty. Which canon when it shall judge the actions of men either
approouing or condemning them, it shall be but folly for them to run into the
crowd (as we say) and shroud themselves under the cover of others: whose
company shall aggrauate rather then extenuate their punishment. But of
following examples, I have said before.

The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 9. And the same night the Lord said to him, Arise, get thee down unto
the host: for I have delivered it into thy hand. 10. But if thou fear to go
down, then go thou and Phurah thy servant down to the host. 11. And thou
shall hearken what they say, and so shall thy hands be strong to go down unto
the host. Then went he down, and Phurach his servant unto the outside of the
soldiers that were in the host. 12. And the Midianites and the Amalekites,
and all they of the East lay in the valley like grasshoppers in multitude, and
their Camels were without number, as the sand which is by the sea side for
multitude. 13. And when Gedeon was come, behold a man told a dream unto his
neighbor, and said: Behold I dreamed a dream, and lo, a cake of barley bread
tumbled from above into the host of Midian, and came unto a tent, and smote it
that it fell, and ouerturned it, that the tent fell down. 14. And his fellow
answered, and said, this is nothing else save the sword of Gedeon the son of
Ioash a man of Israel: for into his hand has God delivered Midian and all the
host. 15. When Gedeon heard the dream told, and the interpretation of the
same, he worshipped, and returned unto the host of Israel, and said, Up: for
the Lord has delivered into your hand the host of Midian.
NOw when the Lord had taken away the strength and power of Gedeon The sum of
these verses.
from him, I mean, his whole army well nigh, he knew full well that this
would work mightily upon his weakness, to dismay him: and therefore in this
second part of the Chapter it is showed, how God after this, encouraged him,
and provided to remedy that his weakness. And that was in a strange manner
done, even by his enemies. For God bidding him go down to the Midianites
tents, did there, by a dream of one of them, and the interpreting of it by
another, show Gedeon, that he should have the victory over them. Which when
he heard, he was anew confirmed in his faith concerning the victory,
notwithstanding the small number of men which he had with him.

And first here let us see how God brings Gedeon nearer and nearer to The
sense and doctrine of verse. 9.
the brunt and trial: for now he will have him go to the very camp of his
enemies, which to do, was to come nearer to danger, then all that had gone
before. But so did the Lord also add new comfort unto him, as his trial Note.
was greater. For he says: I will deliver them into thy hands, though the
danger and fear that might be like to arise to thee thereby, may seem greater
now, then it was before. And it may appear by the next verse, that Gedeons
fear was greater, and increased: for the Lord says, If thou fear to go
down, etc. And this shows us, that ordinarily the nearer a trial in any
sore affliction that we feel, does come toward the issue, the more it works
upon us. The reason is, because while affliction is a far off, the sense is not
provoked by the imagination of it so much, as when it draws near, and
threatens us. But then commonly the mind multiplieth the greatness of it, by
fear. As the Disciples were not greatly troubled for their Masters departure,
John 14. 1.
till they saw there was no remedy, but they must needs forgo him. Which
teaches, that when any such fear hangs over us, we should not only from
the first hearing of it, frame and settle our hearts against sudden distemper,
and aggravating of it by our foolish conceits, to be patient and willingly
subject to the hand of God therein, and to weigh our own weakness, that as we
may wisely beware of fainting, so we may pray to God for strength: but also
daily, and often continue such exercise, and the nearer the issue, the more
fervently, (like to our Savior in his agony and fear, before the coming of
Judas and the rest to take him) as fear indeed will then be ready most of all
to assault us.

And if we faint then, we may know our strength was never great. For as Prou
24. 10. James 1. 4.
patience should have her perfect work to help us bear affliction unto the
end, when it is come upon us: so we ought to give patience the perfect work
before it come, in keeping down painful fear of it, till it come. And Note.
by all that has been said of this matter here, and in the former process of
the history, we may see, that we must often and much be strengthened both
against the fear that rises before the trouble come, and the smart that it
causes when it is come, till the danger be past and over. And it is a good
sign that affliction when it comes, shall not much disguise and astonish us,
when we weaken the terror of it after that manner, and by often meditating of
the certainty of our deliverance there from, and preparing for our affliction
accordingly, before it come: otherwise it will come upon us as an armed man,
against whom there is no resistance.

And seeing God fortified Gedeon with a new promise of his help, even when he
should go down to the army of his enemies, as he came nearer Doct. 2. in
verse. 9.
the peril: so we may learn, that as trouble shall arise to Gods people, even
so shall their comforts also increase. According to that of the Apostle, God 1.
Cor. 10. 13.
is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye be able, but
as your troubles increase, so shall your consolations, and he will give the
issue with the temptation, that ye may be able to bear it. And though it be
one and the same word and promise, yet it has force at one time as well as at
another, to strengthen us, if we have faith to lay hold on it. Such is the
Lords dealing with us, to minse our meat for us, when our diet likes us not:
this cost he is willing to be at: So that we need not complain in such
manner: Oh this trouble is intolerable; it will draw forth the heart blood, I
shall sink Note.
under it, etc. For it is not required of us to stand by our own strength, but
to derive it from Christ our head, in whom all the promises of God are
ratified. And this in the loss of friends, goods, or life, or in the
likelihood thereof, or in any other affliction, is ever a fit remedy to stay
us up and comfort us. So that I cannot tell what we would look for at Gods
hands more, unless we would desire Angels from heaven to certify us of his
mind, which he allows us not in this age to look for. But because this has
been often entreated of before, I spare needless repetitions.

THE FORTY SEVENTH SERMON ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
THere is yet (as the text shows us) another trial of Gedeons Verse 10.
faith before the victory: namely to send him to the Midianites only with his
boy. Oh how many had there been before? But God will have us to know, that the
trial of our faith, is much more precious, then the 1. Pet. 1. 7.
gold that perishes, and therefore sends us many trials, as he did to him,
that although there seem to be no great matter in them, yet indeed to him
that weighs it aright, it is found to be far otherwise. For both we see
thereby, our weakness, which Note.
we should not otherwise think to be such as it is, and by little and little
we grow out of it, and gather experience, and hope against it, which in time
are Romans 5. 4.
greatly to our comfort. And surely if Gedeon had so many trials in one duty
doing, let not us plead for exemption from many, though we have already
endured some, and although we can say, others are free, or have but few in
comparison of us. But to proceed to another point. It is happy for us, that
the Lord, who diets us with this ordinary, undertakes as well to bring us
safely through our trials, ministering as much grace, as affliction, as he did
Verse 11. Doct.
here to Gedeon: so that we rather should say; Since thou give shoulders
Lord, lay on what burden thou please, thy will be done: Rather, I say, then
to compare the irksomnes of the trouble, with the pleasure and ease of the
contrary: which will make us weary of trials, and like the Israelites in the
wilderness, to long and linger after daintines and Quails.

We see the covetous man is never satisfied with gold: but trial serves to
bring in a commodity of greater price, as I said before. Gold can serve but to
feed and apparel us, except we abuse it to the pride of life, to make us
think our selves in a fools paradise by enjoying it: but this serves to
increase our spiritual treasure, (if we be wise to use it in kind) both to
purge the dross away which cleaves to our faith, meeknes, and patience: and
to add to the measure of it also, so that whatsoever good thing we enjoy, we
should neither have it in the kind, nor in abundance and store, but through
much trial. Therefore rather let us learn to count it great joy, (as S. James
says) when many trials fall upon us: then snuff against God, as if we cared
James 1. 2. Note.
not how little grace we had, so we might have ease therewith: as the sluggard
in Ecclesiastes, who says; A morsel with idleness is better then plenty
Eccles. 4. 6.
with labor. I confess indeed, this is an high degree to joy in affliction,
which is so grievous in it self, and not joyous: a greater matter then to joy,
(I say not in health, riches and prosperity, which every fool can do) but
even in hearing the word, or obeying it in many particular duties thereof.
Howbeit we want not examples of such as have found joy in their trials, I Romans
5. 3.
say in them (for he that looks for joy after them, must also find some in
them) I mean by hope: as Paul by name, who professes no less of himself: 2.
Cor. 121
and David with many others. Yea and we also must learn to say; Lord thou
teach me an hard lesson to account affliction matter of great joy: but
seeing thou say there is sweetness to be gotten out of this bitterness, (as
honey out of the carrion of a lion) therefore I will strive to believe it: and
that I am as precious in thine eyes, and as dear to thee, even in affliction,
Note.
as in peace and freedom, and that I shall gain more by it, then by all my
iollitie and ease, in which I should have lien stinking, if by trials thou
had not kept my faith occupied and lively. For though faith wa^ts not matter
enough to work upon, even when we are at the best, and freest from trials, yet
such is our sottishnes, that promises seem not sweet or sauourie to us,
except we be driven to seek after them by trials and troubles, but then oh how
welcome?

The sending him to the camp of the Midianites so nakedly and unfurnished,
what could it promise in likelihood and outward show, but deadly danger? But
hear the rest of Gods words to him; Thou shall (says he) hear what they
say, and thou shall be confirmed thereby, and after thou shall go into the
host of the Midianites and fear and dismay them, till they be vanquished. By
this we see, that we have great cause to beware, Doct 2.
that we take not some part of Gods word, and leave the other, lest we deprive
our selves utterly of the whole, and all benefit thereof: as Gedeon (we see)
had done, if he had taken one part of Gods speech to him, and left the other.
And this thing is too commonly offended in, not only by subtle Sophisters,
whose sin is the greater, because they sin of knowledge, but also by weak
Christians: who through fear and want of experience, do draw against
themselves the threats and commandments to wound them, but the promises of God
(which by his own appointment are set down to their comfort properly) those
(they say) belong not to them. So what a corrasiue were it to a Christian, if
hearing this, that, All who will live holily in Christ Jesus, must suffer
affliction, etc. he should go away (as he in the Gospel) heavy and sad,
saying: This is an hard saying, who then shall be saved? 2 Timothy 3. 12.
But God be thanked if the promises be added to the charge, the heart will be
well eased, and the burden in great partalaied. And doubtless the devil
himself would wish a Christian no greater mischief, then he causes to
himself by this separating of those things which God has joined together. But
of this point read more in the former chapter in Gedeons reply to the Angel.
And there is as great cause that we take heed of separating the word of
judgment and punishment from the word of precept and commandment, as the
promise: for as this causes men to stumble where they need not, and plungeth
them into fear and deadly despair, so the other strengthens them as much in
their boldness to offend. As we see Eve, by disioyning the punishment
threatened upon her eating the fruit, was the more provoked to attempt the
sin. Genes. 3. Genes. 3. 6.


More particularly we may here see, that God does so order things according to
his own good pleasure and purpose, that he makes his to find Doct. 3.
matter of joy, where (in sense and reason) sorrow only and terror can be
found. He fetches light out of darkness, sweetness out of bitterness, and out
of trouble peace. For what might Gedeon look for by going to the camp of his
enemies so nakedly, but discomfort and hazard of his life at least, if he had
not been slain also, and cut in a thousand pieces? Yet God intended (and so
brought to pass) that he and all the people should live and be comforted, by
hearing there that which did cause it. For example, what might Abraham have
looked for when the Lord bad him go from his friends and Genes. 12. 1.
country to a place that he knew not, neither had any thing in it, but was a
mere stranger therein? was not that speech of the Lord full of discomfort at
the hearing of it? And yet we know, that he obeying him, was not only
furnished there, to be able to maintain a mighty family, even three hundred
and eighteen persons, but also his seed grew and was multiplied as the dust
of the earth, and he was made the father of all believers that should come
after, and of whom, after the flesh, Christ should come.

The like may be said of Moses sending away from the house of Pharaohs Heb. 11.
24.
daughter, where he had been brought up so daintily, to go suffer affliction
with the people of God in the wilderness. And yet what a rare instrument did
he make him, to work the greatest deliverance for his people that ever was
heard off to be wrought by a mere man? Even so, learn and know we, that the
Lord does often turn the greatest troubles of his, to their greatest benefit
Note.
and good, if they wait patiently upon him, yea he gives them far above
that which they look for, insomuch as if it were possible for them to be
brought even to hell, this were but to raise them up unto heaven, as they who
have any experience can tell: and Iona out of the fishes belly testified in
the midst of extremities and anguish; who out of his greatest fears and
sorrows was exalted to greatest hope and rejoicing, as his heavenly and
admirable zeal in promising to praise God does abundantly show. It is said
also here, that he and Phurah his servant went to the side of the camp: Jonas
2. 9.
wherein his faith does lively show it self, and that he minded and believed
what God said, rather then that he feared the danger that he went in. And
this, indeed, is that which I have so much beat upon in this story, and in a
Doct. 4. in verse. 11.
word, which we should all do: that is, trust God whom we see not, and not
eye, and look too narrowly to the lets that are in our way, to fear and draw
Note.
us to unbelief: as we read how Iehosophat did, not only himself belieeue,
as he was willed to do, but with great courage exhorted also his people to 2.
Chron. 20. 15.
do the same in the sore danger they were in by the Moabites and Ammonites,
and was thereby delivered: and so did our Savior to his disciples John 24. 1.
when they were greatly grieved for his departure, saying: let not your hearts
be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me.

Now in that it is said that the Midianites, and their helpers lay as
grassehoppers Verse 12.
on the face of the earth, the meaning is, they were far and wide spread, for
so the word signifies, Genes. 25. meaning that they occupied a great space of
ground, and that they were a mighty number. In which sense Genes. 25. 8.
it is said in Joshua, that Iabin got an army, as the sand of the sea. And how
could this but astonish Gedeon yet again, when he beheld the multitude of
them, but that his faith vpheld him still as before? Where we are again, much
like as in the former point, to learn, that such troubles and trials must Doct.
we suffer and look for, from which, we can in sense and reason look for
nothing but discomfort and utter undoing: and out of the which in the iudgemen
of man, we see no way or help to get out and be delivered.

And who of Gods dear children have not so felt and found it, in one trouble
or trial and other, and at one time or other? When God had promised the land
of Canaan to his people, yet before they possessed it, when they sent thither
to search the land, and to see what it was, and whether the people therein were
strong or weak, many or few, they received such discouragement by the answer
that was brought back to them, that they had neither help nor hope, ever to
enjoy it. Again, what was David to Goliath? or Sampson Numb. 13. 28. 1. Sam.
17. 50. Judge. 16. 30.
to so many Philistines? Or what was our English Island to the Spanish forces,
and to so many nations as have risen against it in times past, the Pope
himself being the chief setter on? and yet God fought for us against our
enemies.

And to show it in another instance, Oh how many thrice happy people, have yet
often feared and almost said, there is no hope nor help for them in God? but
resolved with themselves for the time, in their fear and weakness, that they
could not escape condemnation and utter abiection from God? yea and they would
have yielded themselves willingly to the pain of the damned some hundreds of
years (such was their desperate estate) so as they might have been recovered,
and saved afterward: as I my self have heard some of them say little less in
their despair, who yet (God have the glory) have well outgrowne the same, and
have been restored to comfort. Other of Gods dear children after such plunges
and deliverances out of them, have after met with other trials, which have been
to their sight as the sea, bottomless: and have constrained them for the time,
to break out, and Note.
say, that all good days were gone from them, who yet have lived to see better
then they had ever seen before. What should I speak of particulars, which
were infinite? And all such God has seen good to exercise us withal, to
appall and pull down the pride of our hearts, (who do so soon forget our
selves) but not to dismay us, seeing, if it be not long of our selves, we may
still find redress of all such fears from above.

Now follows the dream, that one of the Midianites dreamed, and told Verse.
13. 14. The opening of them.
his fellow, namely, that a barley loaf tumbled into the host, and came into
a tent, and smote it, that it fell: and the answer of the other, as the
interpretation of it, that it was the sword of Gedeon, and that God had given
the Midianites into his hands. This was that dream and interpretation, which
the Lord sent Gedeon thither to hear, (for such means it pleased him to use
to confirm him yet still:) where first we see, that God gave divine dreams to
Doct. out of verse 13. 14.
those which were enemies of godliness, and to a nation which afflicted his
people: as he did to Pharaoh, of seven lean, and seven fat kine, that were well
Genes. 41. 1.
liking, and so he did to his Butler and Baker: and after that to
Nebuchadnezzar, who had led away Judah captive, as well as to Joseph, Jacob, and
other holy Genes. 40. 5.
men. But this was here more strange, that neither Joseph nor Daniel, no
Prophet of God, I mean, interpreted the dream, but a common soldier. He
Dan. 2. 1.
gave then we see, a true dream, and the interpretation thereof unto the
wicked. But as the Lord gave Saul a new heart, viz. of courage and government,
1. Sam. 19. 23.
and to Iehu of zeal, for certain ends and actions concerning his own glory,
and the good of others only, and those ends being accomplished, the 2. King.
10. 11.
gifts ceased, because they were but common gifts: even so these two soldiers
were made Gods instruments to confirm Gedeons faith, and consequently fitted
for the purpose: which being performed, they ceased to dream divine dreams,
or to interpret them divinely.

By this we see, that he bestows excellent gifts and graces upon the bad,
as well as upon the good, which gifts either are merely natural and ordinary,
or supernatural and extraordinary. Natural and ordinary, as
industriousnesse, wit, policy, strength, for the attaining of learning, skill,
wealth, credit, and the well governing and defending of families, subjects and
commonwealths. Supernatural, as enlightening and knowledge by the word, and
specially of the law terrifying, and the Gospel generally working a confused
joy and vanishing faith in them. Extraordinary, as the gift of miracles,
tongues, and the like in the infancy of the Church were. These he gives to
many more then he gives faith unto or regeneration, even as the visible
means leading thereto, as Baptism and the Ministry, are common to both. And
why? because the subordinate ends for which these gifts serve, are more
general, then those which the special gifts serve for. Therefore we see, that
many are well fitted for natural, civil, moral, and (ministerially)
spiritual and divine ends, who yet are no more fit for the maine end of all, I
mean for godliness and salvation, then if they wanted the other: because the
special end is not so large and universal, as the common end is. Yea
doubtless, the wicked are often times endowed with common gifts in a far
ampler and more glorious manner and measure, then the godly: the Lord heaping
hot coals upon their heads, and clearing himself from the blame of their
condemnation: seeing that he who bestowed upon them so liberally in the one
kind, would not have denied them the other which accompany salvation, if they
had humbled themselves to the seeking after them, and not rested in the outward
privileges, as they who boasted of the Temple, the Temple, whereas in the
mean while. There came from the Luke 10. 20.
North, East, and all quarters, and sat down with Abraham in the kingdom of
heaven, and themselves, who boasted of the Temple, and were the children of the
kingdom, Christ says plainly, were cast out, and excluded. But of all such
gifts, we may say, that seeing they are not the peculiar gifts which are proper
to Gods own children, but those that are common to one and other: it may be
said to them, as Christ said to the disciples, when they rejoiced so greatly
that the devils were subject to them, and cast out of men by them: Rejoice not,
that the devils are subject unto you, but for that your names are written in
heaven: so they who have but knowledge of the Scripture, in the letter only,
with memory and speech to carry away and utter it, hearing the same joyfully
sometime, and are but restrained from some outward evils, let them not glory,
and rest themselves therein, without sanctification and faith unfeigned, that so
their rejoicing may be sound, and not to be taken from them, else let them
fear, lest it be answered them, as it was to them that pleaded their great
works of preaching and miracles: Depart from me, ye are workers of iniquity,
I know you not.

And therefore it follows, that the benefit of that dream redounded to 2
the people of God, and not to them that dreamed and interpreted the same. Even
as the excellent gifts of an unsanctified person public or private, may
possibly do. Neither can any gifts of God that the unrighteous have, profit
them to salvation. They have no use of their knowledge, they are not the better
for their hearing, and prayers, they lose all their cost and tr^^ell that they
bestow in serving God: howsoever like dumb pillars they may direct others in
the way, not stirring themselves. For they delight not therein, but draw near
him with their bodies, and serve him with lip-lab^^r Matthew. 15. 3.
but their hearts are far from him; and therefore in vain do all (...)
worship him. Which should make them look about more seriously, till they can
prove, that they do more then say, Lord, Lord, but that they endeavor above
all things to do the will of the Lord. How much more vain Matthew. 7. 21.
is it then to trust in riches, which of all common gifts are commonest, and
therefore furthest from commending the possessors of them to God.

Lastly, let us mark, that God does his people good by things which are 3
of no reckoning nor account, (when yet the best things that the ungodly have,
cannot profit them) as the dream and interpretation of it, which indeed was an
excellent gift: yet in men's account a mean thing, and for all that, as mean
as it was, by that did God quicken Gedeon, and comfort him. Even as we see
here, God uses the meanest things (as men judge of them) and things that are
nothing worth for the welfare of his servants. So God did by the Manna, (an
unlike thing, and of mean account) Exodus 16 35.
nourish and preserve the lives of his people: so by four leprous persons,
that were shunned and loathed of al, he saved all the people; and so he saved 2
King. 7. 6. 1 King. 7. 6.
the Prophet alive and fed him by Ravens: these were great matters by base and
weak means.

And why this? because, as Job says, even the stones of the field shall be in
Job ^. 3.
league with thee, and the beasts thereof at peace with thee. This doctrine
seems after a sort contrary to the former: to (...) that the wicked may not
take comfort in the gloriousest things concerning this present life, and yet
the meanest things in this world through Gods goodness, shall serve for the
benefit of the godly, but both may stand well together. And to say a word or
two more of this, what is meaner in the account of the Heathen; then water,
bread, and wine, being of their own nature, common creatures, and yet what
great matters are wrought by them in Gods people?

So to behold and view the creatures and works of God, which all may do, what
great matter is it thought to be? and yet what sweet meditation have Gods
servants thereby to their comfort? Lo then, how they are blessed in all parts
of their lives who fear God; and that they may find in all things; if they
sift and fearch them thoroughly, and mark what God promises accordingly. And
when all this is so, yet in the mean while, there is no peace to the ungodly,
neither is any creature at league with them, but Esa. 48. 22.
may and shall (when God will) annoy them.

This was manifest in Iezabel, whose near attending servants and eunuehes 2
King. 9. 33.
cast her down headlong on the stones out of the window. This is the secret
hand of God, but not perceived. And as for that which has been said before of
the dream, it is not said to the end we should attribute any thing unto
dreams, now common with us and natural, although God had said of that dream,
that Gedeon should be comforted by it.

THE FORTY EIGHT SERMON ON THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw follows the fruit of all this, namely, Gedeons thanks to God with
reverence, and how he was hereby much revived Verse. 15.
himself, and surred up his soldiers to be so likewise. Herein we may
(notwithstanding the imperfections that we have heard of him,) clearly see
his faith, both in that he went to the host when God willed him, believing
that he should be comforted thereby, and now the more when he had surer hope
thereof by the interpretation of the dream, as God had told him before: for
he was now cheered, and believed further. Thus it behooves us to grow to
believe and Note.
rejoice in that which sometime we could not: and that faith in one promise
may bring and breed it in another, that so it may be confirmed in us, as it was
in him, that so we being rooted in faith, we may, as the Apostle wills,
grow and abound therein with thanksgiving. Colos. 2. 7.


And besides, we may learn, that our thanks ought to be renewed for benefits
as they are daily bestowed upon us, (even as we made prayers for 2
them before) as well as benefits past. And this is not to be neglected as a
thing little worth, but to be duly and speedily regarded: even as all other
duties are to be done in their time and season, and not posted off and omitted
for every trifle: for herein Gedeon has given us an example. As soon as he
received the promise of victory made him of God by the interpretation of the
dream, he returned believing it, and gave praise to God for it, and that by
and by, and delayed not. But herein we come far short of him, and also in
taking the opportunity to do all other duties speedily and in season. What
time is fitter to record Gods mercies then in the morning, after we be
perfectly awake, both in considering our preservation in the night past from
the dangers thereof, and that his goodness is renewed upon us still for the
Lam. 3. 23.
time to come, to guard and bless us as in former times: now therefore what
time I say is fitter then it, to stir us up both to thanks, and also to
renew our suites to the Lord for continuance of his favor? But who watches to
take this opportunity hereunto, but lets it pass rather through sloth,
worldliness, frowardness, etc? And the same I may say of our carelessness in
other Note.
things; when we have both leisure and opportunity to renew our covenants with
the Lord, and to be armed and resolute throughout the day, against every evil
and provocation to sin through the day, that so we might walk at liberty
and in peace: yet who regards it, but rather trifleth out the time any way,
or else does worse, rather then to set his heart the best way? But of this duty
I have elsewhere spoken more largely.

So we may note the property and force of faith, to wit, to cheer the heart,
and to quicken and strengthen it, so far as in the measure of it, it lays
hold of that which it receives, and is promised, as I said before. And lastly,
how experience imboldeneth us, and causes us to provoke others to believe, and
serve the Lord together with our selves, and to make them strong, cheerful,
and comfortable also: and this is the end of our experience, and the use that
we should make of it toward others, and it pleases the Lord well, that we
should do so, as we see Gedeon did to his few soldiers.

The third part of the Chapter.
Verse. 16. And he divided the three hundred men into three bands, and gave
every man a trumpet in his hand with empty pitchers, and lamps within the
pitchers. 17. And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise, when I come
to the side of the host: even as I do, so do you. 18. When I blow with a
trumpet and all that are with me, blow ye with trumpets also, on every side of
the host, and say, for the Lord, and for Gedeon. 19. So Gedeon and the hundred
men that were with him, came unto the outside of the host in the beginning of
the middle watch, and they raised up the watchmen, and they blew with their
trumpets, and brake the pitchers that were in their hands. 20. And the three
companies blew with the trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held their lamps
in their left hands, and their trumpets in their right hands to blow withal,
and they cried, The sword of the Lord and of Gedeon. 21. And they stood every
man in his place round about the host: and all the host ran, and cried, and
fled. 22. And the three hundred blew with trumpets, and the Lord set every man's
sword upon his neighbor, and upon all the host: so the host fled to
Beth-b^shittah in Zererah, and to the border of Abel-meholah unto Tabbah. 23.
Then the men of Israel being gathered together out of Nephtali, and out of
Ashur, and out of all Manasseth pursued after the Midianites.
NOw after these many trials follows the issue, and that in manner here The
sense of these verses.
set down. For first Gedeon made have, and by that means came upon the
Midianites, ere they were aware, and deferred not the time, in the middle
watch, which was a little after midnight: for so it much behooved him to do, to
come upon them in the fearful time of the night, and in the deep dark, when
Gedeon and his men could not be seen, how few they were. In which his so
coming, he willed his men whom he divided into three bands, to take empty
pitchers with lamps in them, and trumpets in their hands: that after the
blowing of them, and flighting and frighting of the enemies with the strange
and unlooked for noise thereof, they might break the pitchers also, by the
hearing of the which, it might seem to them that their spears were broken
with fighting, and then the lamps suddenly appeared, astonishing the
Midianites, and giving light to themselves. Thus did he, and his soldiers did
likewise, though that all this which they did, might have been thought to be
to small purpose. But the effect thereof, by the only wise and wonderful
government of the Lord, was this, that one of the Midianites slew another,
broke their array and fled away, crying, much like that which was done, chap. 3.
And they that were Chap. 3. 27.
scattered, and not slain, were pursued by the Israelites, and taken. Now as
there are in these verses three things in general, to wit, the direction that
Gedeon gave his men; then their following it; and lastly, the effect that
ensued, so let us consider them in particular.

And first to begin with these three verses together, let us note, that Gedeons
Doct. verse. 15. 16. 17.
speed that he made in taking the opportunity and fit season, to do the things
that we have heard, teaches all Christians to do the same: namely, that they
take time in every thing that they go about, while it is seasonable, for
afterward it will be too late. In time reap and sow, and do thy business,
eat in time, sleep and travel while it is light, as our Savior directs,
Eccles. 9. 10.
saying: Are there not twelve hours in the day? So in all duties of
Christianity, Ioh. 11. 9.
in giving to the poor, do it in his need, in seeking the Lord, go about it
while he may be found, so in avoiding and forsaking sin, resist it in Esa.
55. 6.
the beginning; and helping to punish wickedness, and preventing Gods wrath,
do all accordingly, in fit and due season. There was a time, when the rich man
might have succored Lazarus, and that was, while he lay at his gates: but
when Lazarus was dead, the time was gone. Luke 16. 25.


So there was a time wherein the five foolish Virgins might have provided oil
for their lamps: that was, before the bridegroom came: but Matthew 25. 12.
when he was come, and the door was shun, the time was past. So there is a
time in which men may repent, that they may be saved: that is, while God
sends his messengers to call them; but when they let the season pass in the
days of their youth: after, when the time of age, sickness, and death Eccles.
12. 1.
comes: a thousand to one if the time be not gone, and that it be not then
too late. For beside that there are many things in the way to hinder: this is
none of the least, that late repentance is dangerous. Oh what has been lost by
passing by the fit time and season, the lamenting it deeply by our Savior in
the people of Jerusalem does show, when he said: O if thou had est Luke 19. 42.
even known at least in this thy day, those things which belong to thy peace,
but now are they hid from thine eyes.

Therefore Saint Paul told the Corinthians, This is the acceptable time, (that
is, while they might hear him) this is the day of salvation. Suitable here unto
2. Cor. 6. 2.
is that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. Redeem the season: by which exhortation he
Ephesians. 5. 16.
teaches, that although no time should be spent unprofitably, yet seasons,
(which are times having some special fitness in them above others, to do or
receive good in) must more carefully be observed; yea redeemed, that is,
dedicated to holy use, by forgoing something pleasing to the flesh, to purchase
them. For not only works unlawful and needless, but even lawful and in
their time, necessary, must give place to fit seasons: because then God
offers occasion of some spiritual gain, which at other times cannot be
obtained. As the Sabbath is a season for instruction and edification, one day
of seven: the other six have not, but by occasion, the opportunity which that
has So when God sends public or private judgments upon the land, or any
persons, that is a season of fasting, humiliation, renewing our covenant: and
contrariwise special blessings and deliverances are opportunities of
thanksgiving, and rejoicing. In which and all others S. James teaches Iam. 5.
13.
us what to do: Is any man afflicted? let him pray: so, is any merry, let him
sing: for these are occasions worth the taking, and not always occurrent:
therefore as God disposes of us, so let us apply our selves, and improve the
season to the best use, and suffer not our selves to vanish away, and abuse it,
through our folly and unseasonableness: which sione is more common, even
among the better sort, then they suspect, to suffer themselves to pass over
the best occasions unfruitfully. Whereas alas, how shall they spend their whole
time well, who spend their best seasons badly? As we know, in the morning,
both body and mind is in best time for meditation, or any fruitful exercise:
if that perish without fruit, how can the whole day after for the most part, be
otherwise then barrenly and wearisomely passed? Men work upon their trades
ordinarily we see: but if their trades be up, that is, the wares which they
make do take a great price, and are quicker of sale then at other times: how
will they bestirre themselves, and set every one on work whom they can come
by, rising early, going late to bed, and in a word, how unwearied are they? It
is their season they say. What business will not the householder lay aside on
the market day? why? that he may use that season to furnish himself for the
whole week with provision? what think we? will the Merchant game, play,
drink, sleep, or trifle out the season Matthew. 13. 45.
of his merchandise, when he is come to the place of traffic beyond sea? No,
all must yield to the season, he neglects his pleasure to redeem that. And if
we fail in well using the seasons which offer themselves, what likelihood is
there, we will show our selves wise in procuring seasons to our selves? As the
truth is, an easy thing it were to do, if we were not unsavory, and
unwilling to hear of any thing more then ordinary. But somewhat to this effect
i noted before in Gedeons destroying Idolatry.

Also this carrying of pitchers in their hands, as Gedeon willed them to do:
Doct. 2.
a few unarmed men, (even three hundred) against some hundred thousand, well
prepared soldiers, what an unlikely matter was it, that they should effect any
thing thereby? But we see what a wonderful victory it brought. The like may
be said of Ioshuas compassing the walls of Jericho, Josh. 6. 20.
seven days, with blowing trumpets of Rams horns: and yet seeing the Lord
promised, and he believed it, the walls of the city at the appointed time fell
down. By both we learn, that though the means be never so weak, to effect
any good at all, yet if God direct us to them, and promise to work bv them, it
behooves us to look up to him, as Gedeon here did, and we shall see the
power of God in using them though they be weak: for though they serve not for
one use, which carnal reason does only look to, yet they shall serve for
another, which God ever intends by them.

Even as here we see, that although these means here used by Gedeon and his
soldiers, served not to beat down and destroy their enemies: yet we see that
they served to terrify, affright, and scatter them, and to set one of them
against another. And yet our carnal reason, if we trust not to weapons in
war, scoffs at our fasting and prayer, by which Iehosaphat got great 2.
Chro. 20. 3. 17.
victory, and Hester the Queen prevailed against that wicked Haman in a most
great difficulty. So preaching is foolish to reason, and humane wisdom Hest.
4. 16. compared with 7. 10.
for bringing men to Christ. But read 1. Cor. 1. what the Apostle there says,
to wit, That we must become fools that we may bewise: while yet the 1. Cor. 1.
26.
wit of man deuiseth another way, and most fit to deceive himself: as for
example, if he be predestinate to salvation, he says he shall be saved, though
he never hear sermon. And even so men speak of watching over their lives,
praying, and the worshipping of God in their family, and the like; that they
are more then need to be used. So they persuade themselves that policy, toil
and labor are all in all, to bring Gods blessing upon them, in all that they
set their hands unto, though the Prophet in the Psalm have taught the
contrary, saying: Except the Lord build the city, the laborers toil Psalm.
127. 1.
themselves but in vain. But of this has often been spoken.

And here we are further to mark the benefit of good example, and how Doct. 3.
it prevails often times with inferiors: Gedeon here bids his soldiers do,
as they saw him do, so that he went before them. As all heads and superiors
should likewise do, that they may propound their own example in all good
duties. Hence it was, that our Savior Christ washing his Disciples feet,
propounded the same to them to be followed, and that so they might in humility
serve one another, (as they saw him their Master to serve them) and not to set
up themselves aloft, as they began to do, and ask, which of them should be
greatest. And when the inferior cannot object that the superior Ioh. 13. 14.
does not so himself as he requires of the other, in a duty common to both,
it is a worthy thing.

This is to be applied to the reformation of faults, and the doing of duty, by
word or deed, either in family or otherwise. And therefore it is a
soreaccusation against such as being to give light to others, take no heed or
care themselves, or very slight care, how they walk, among and in the midst of
those, whom they are to give light unto. Parents and guides in families, beside
that they do for the most part little reprove the faults and sins of those who
are under them, unless it be for and about their own advantage, have small
care commonly, of their own behavior in their sight, but will braule and
scold, contend, and rail, and live in other ill courses among them. And Note.
it were heartily to be wished, that some who are in greater place, and whose
authority reaches further then private men's, did not commit the same faults,
which they are sued unto to punish in others. Oh how much it were to be desired
that the elder and younger might join and accord together in the work of the
Lord: as we see and approve this mutual consent and sweet harmony in Gedeon
and his soldiers: I say oh that the ancienter in years, gifts, profession and
authority, (whom it best becomes and concerns most) would encourage and
hearten forward the younger sort, to hear the word, to be zealous against
sin, to be innocent, humble, dutiful, Tit. 24.
sober, companions of the good, abstainers from ill company, and in a word to
believe in the Lord, to cleave to his promises, to submit themselves to his
government in the whole course of their life: saying to them as Gedeon here
says, As ye have seen me do, so do you. Thus David calls upon the people,
Come, hearken unto me, my children, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord
Psalm. 34. 11.
by mine own experience. For thus and thus long have I served him, and I
repent me not, that I have spent my life in the work of so good a Master. Oh
how the experience, confidence, cheerefulnes and courage of one aged servant in
Gods house, animates and puts life into many young beginners and hearers, who
(alas) though they be zealous, yet are raw and rude, ignorant and inexpert, and
know not what belongs to such a trade and profession: Note.
as how many discouragements, fears, baits, offenses, prouocations to
weariness and apostacy they are to meet with, ere their course be finished.
And what a commendable thing is it, that the younger nouices will yield
themselves to their ancients, learn by their instructions, be persuaded by
their exhortations, and follow their examples (so far as they tread in the
steps of Christ) with all meeknes and teachablenes, without prefidence 2. Cor.
11. 1.
and conceitednes? Oh if it were thus in towns and places, what an heavenly
order should we see in stead of boldness, prophanenes, and loosenes in all ages
and estates? For though there be examples given, and followed, yet it is by
such as are the devils trumpeters, who lead others after them to inordinate
courses, uncleanness, riot, lying, scorning them that be better then themselves,
which indeed are liker Abimilecks troop, then Gedeons. But as for good
examples, where shall we find them? who looks to this, to live Note.
so in the former part of his life, that he may be a president in the latter?
And if some one odd man be found among an hundred, how do the multitude of
inferiors disdain him, and wind him about their fingers? But of examples I
have also said somewhat before.

We have heard what Gedeon bad his men do: now follows what he Doct. verse.
18.
bad them say, that was this: [For the Lord, and Gedeon] his meaning was, that
he would have them boldly and without fear proclaim and say one to the
heartning and encouraging of another: that the victory should be the Lords as
the author, and Gedeons as the instrument. Thus teaching us, that as we should
be examples in our lives to other, so we should in our words exhort and
persuade, as occasion shall be offered, to believe the promises of God before
they be fulfilled, as Gedeon did here his soldiers, to believe that God would
give them the victory. Thus did that worthy King Iehosaphat stir up and
encourage his people, the men of Judah, to believe 2. Chro. 20. 20.
the words of Gods Prophet, which had brought tidings to him of deliverance
from the Ammonites, Moabites, and them of mount Seir.

And this hope we should have our selves, by long proof of Gods promise
keeping, that we may thereupon resolve them (so far as we can prevail with
them) that there shall not a jot of all that God has spoken, fall to the
ground: but as our fathers trusted in him, and were not confounded, so neither
shall they be disappointed nor ashamed, who trust in him to the end of the
world. And when we have the like encouragement our selves from other, we
should no less be confirmed and strengthened, that when they Matthew. 5. 17.
can say to us, heaven and earth shall perish, but one title of Gods promise
shall not fail, we may rest and be satisfied. Oh happy are the people, whom
the Lord when he comes, shall find to have been thus exercised.

THE FORTY NINTH SERMON ON THE SEVENTH AND EIGHTH CHAPTERS OF the book of
IVDGES.
NOw further are laid out, after Gedeons advice to his soldiers, and the
propounding of his own example unto Verse. 12. 20.
them, his industrious attempt in his going forward to the Midianites camp,
and what he and his men did together in the way thither, and what success the
Lord gave thereto. The first of these two is set down in this 19. Verse. 19. 20.
and 20. verses, the last in the 21. and 22. His company was divided into
bands, to the end that they might come upon their enemies on every side, and
amaze the whole camp with sudden fear. Then he chose for his purpose the
fittest time of the night, the middle part thereof, when the enemies being in a
dead sleep, were, with that sudden fear, the more thoroughly astonished. For
the noise of the trumpets, with the mighty cry, made by the men, and the
breaking of the pitchers, with the light appearing, did not only astonish
them, but likewise so troubled them, they being scarcely awaked out of their
sleep, that they could not conceive what it should mean, but thought that
many and great hoasts were rushing into their camp, as the Aramites did, into
whose camp the lepers came. 2. King. 7. 6. 7.
And the Lord with all this striking them with a kind of madness, they took
their own fellow soldiers for their enemies, and so most miserably slew one
another, the Ammonites and Moabites stood up against them of mount Seir to
destroy them, though they were their fellow soldiers: as we see also in the
camp of the Aramites, into which the lepers came. 2. Chro. 20. 23.


This kind of astonishing the enemies by Gedeon, who was directed by God
therein is worthy to be noted of us: to teach us, what kinds of terrors and
vexings of a rebellious people the Lord has in a readiness to fear them, yea
and that when men think themselves best fensed against them, out of fear of
them, and furthest off from falling into them. Zimri and Cosbi were slain
suddenly and fearfully: Chorah and his company were Number. b. 25. 8.
swallowed up of the earth, when no likelihood could be seen thereof, till it
Number. 16. 32.
came. The men of Ziklag wallowing like beasts on the ground drunken, were
slain by David when they looked not for it. Abimilek by a piece of 1. Sam. 30.
17.
a millstone received his deadly wound, and Absolon hanged by the hair of Judge
9 53. 2. Sam. 13. 14.
his head on an oak. Thus I might go on infinitely. God has many ways to
scourge his enemies, as he has to deliver and comfort his people, There is no
peace to the ungodly, says God. Oh then how fearful is it to be a wicked
man? for if Gods anger be kindled but a little, how happy are all they that
Esaias. 48. 22.
fear him? for if he have a controversy with men, and be against them, oh
Psalm. 2. 12.
what terrors are every while like to fall on them, till they be confounded of
them? Some will object, that for all this, many wicked persons walk securely,
and are as merry and void of fears, as the best of them all. I answer, first
although God meets them not with such bodily fears as here he amazed these
heathens withal, yet there is that within them commonly, which even in the
midst of their merriments causes their hearts to be heavy, and presage no
good unto them at length. This I say of such as are not hardened. And who can
express the bitter sorrows and checks and fears which they feel, who carry
an ill conscience about them? which pursues them both sleeping and waking, and
not at Church only, but even in their callings, companies, feastings,
pleasures, when others think full little of it, and themselves wish they could
make truce for the while therewith, that it might then be furthest off. So that
a poor Christian would not willingly change states with them, to have their
greatest glory, except he might be free from their troubled conscience: which
is like to the handwriting upon the wall of that woeful Belshazzar. And this
is their portion, even tempest, Dan. 5. 6.
fire, snares, as the Psalmist says, even a savor of hell, before they come
there. As for those that have learned how to strangle their conscience, and
smother it, or who are waxen hardened: let them know, that there is no peace
belonging to them, though they stop their ear from hearing of terror. And when
God shall quicken, and rouse up their conscience, woe be to them, for it shall
roar upon them as a lion, and yet God is greater. Therefore if any such shall
seek how to be freed from this horror, let them make 1. Ioh. 3. 20.
their peace with God, and so their conscience shall turn to be their friend:
but the rest may hear this doctrine, as Nabal heard Abigails news, to their
confusion.

It further appears by the effect what these fearful means wrought, Verse.
21. 22.
which the holy story sets down in this verse, that the whole camp was
astonished, feared, cried out, and fled. In which case let no man think that
these means alone, and apart from Gods work, had any great force to fear,
especially to hurt the enemies: for what was there in the blowing of the
trumpets, the breaking of the pitches, or in their lamps, to the getting of
the victory? But the Lord put to his hand, and help, whereby the enemies were
daunted, and set beside themselves, or else, all that was done, had been but
ridiculous. And he that made Goliahs head to be cut off with his own sword, he
will still bless the unlikely means (as the world accounts them, yea and
foolish also (of our prayers, sincerity, patience, hope and the like, to bring
great things to pass, yea and faith to overcome the world, without the which,
what are all other things whatsoever? Still I say therefore, as I said before,
blessed is the people whose God is the Lord Jehovah. But of this, occasion has
been offered to speak almost in every Chapter.

In the 20. verse, in that the people of Israel in their cry and noise that
they made, uttered these words [The sword of the Lord, and of Gedeon] therein
they Doct. 2. in verse 20. that was omitted in due place.
testify, that God was the chief cause, and Gedeon as the instrument
appointed to bring that work to pass. Not as if they would divide the victory
betwixt God and him, (between whom there was no comparison) but to signify,
that as God was the chief and principal worker, so it pleased him to use
Gedeon as his instrument to effect it. The same it behooves us to do: ascribe
we to God the glory of all the good we do, yea and of our salvation
especially, which we seek, but know we that as Gods instruments, we are to
work it on in fear and trembling, and to give all our diligence, as the
Apostle Phil. 2 12. 2. Pet. 1. 10.
exhorts, to make our calling and election sure. And so in all duties of
faith that we perform; acknowledge we, that we receive all gifts and ability
to think and to do, that which is good, and our selves to be Gods workmen
and laborers, unworthy to be employed by him, even as we see it to be an
honor to be in a Kings service. And further by this, let all captious
cauillers take their answer, who say, that the people who depend upon their
Ministers, make them their God. Be it known to all such, that as they detest
such blasphemy, so yet to the shame of all such scorners, they honor them
under God, as the instruments of their salvation, and acknowledge them, as here
Gedeons soldiers do him, to be the hand which God puts the sword of his
spirit into, for the conquering not of men's bodies, but their souls, and the
bringing into subjection the thoughts of their hearts, yea the whole powers of
soul and body, to the obedience of Christ. In which respect Solomon 2. Cor.
10. 4.
prays that Gods Priests may be clothed with salvation. And Paul doubts not
to say unto Timothy, He should save himself, and others. For more particular
application of this doctrine, read verse 2. of this Chapter. 1 Timothy 4. 16.


This victory is remembered and made mention of in the Psalm, where Doct. out
of all these 4. verses. Psalm. 83. 9.
it is said: Do to them, as unto Midian, and as unto Oreb and Zeeb. Which
teaches, that this story, and so other in the books of canonical Scripture,
is diligently to be remembered, that we may have use of the diverse good things
that are in it, that through the Scriptures we might get knowledge,
experience, consolation and hope: as to pray as Gedeon did in danger and Rom
15. 4.
distress, to hope, and wait for the like success, in our several
necessities, which God will as surely do and perform to us, as he did here to
his people, having made the like promises thereof unto us, as unto them. And
through the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, we shall meet with
quotations of Scripture out of the old testament, as it were setting a second
edge upon them, and teaching the reader with what regard and observation he is
to read them. As our Savior does in recording the history of Lots wife; and
in speaking of the prophecy of Daniel touching the pollution of Luk 17 32.
the Temple by the abomination of desolation, and diverse such like places:
besides the fulfilling of the prophesies of the Messiah, and other things to
come to pass in the Church ere the second coming of Christ. For to this
Matthew. 24. 15.
end, the holy stories are written, as well as the other books of the
Scripture, I mean for our instruction, edification and comfort. As David
mentions Rom 15. 4.
this story, so does Esaias, speaking of Zenacherib, God shall (says he) raise
up a Esaias 10. 26.
scourge, like that of Midian. And so it came to pass, as he prophesied, for
the whole army of that King was slain by God, even as this of the Midianites.

Now follows another thing mentioned in this verse, that is, when the Verse.
23.
most of them were slain, the Israelites with Gedeon pursued and followed
after the rest: where note his wisdom in foreseeing and preventing danger to
come. When he had scattered them, they might have gotten strength again
afterward, and so have troubled them as before, (as another Iabin King of
Canaan arose) which he prevented. And in war this is meet to be Judge. 4. 2.
done against the enemies both bodily and spiritual. Satan being thrown out,
labors, as our Savior says, to enter in again. This is also necessary
Matthew 12. 45.
in every calling, to be provident to keep away danger by wants and oppression
concerning both body and soul.

It is great wisdom, to follow herein the unjust Steward, namely in providing
Luke 16. 8.
for the time that should come after: and to follow the example of the five
wise virgins, who so provided oil for their lamps, that when the other
foolish, for want thereof, were shut out at the bridegroomes coming, Matthew. 25.
10.
they entered in with him to the wedding. So we should deal surely to prevent
devil and world, and al offenses, that might break out from us through our own
corruption, and not to be so foolish, as to bring needless sorrow upon our
own heads by neglecting any means that might remove it. Yea and one Christian
with another must be feign, and is forced to deal circumspectly, there be so
many weaknesses in us, and shifts to deceive, lest they break off their
fellowship. We see daily to what perfection men have brought their trades, and
how easily they thrive, through careful marking and remoouing the several
inconveniences thereof, and using the best providence, Note.
and all opportunities making for their gain, which their predecessors knew
not. But alas how raw and rude, yea what bunglers are men in the trade of all
trades? who beats his brains to attain to a gift, readiness and dexterity
therein?

Who seeks to bring the excellency thereof into the view of the world, or
upon their own proof and experience to teach others, the next and directest
way both of being and walking as a Christian? And why? because men are not wise
to follow this trade without breakings off, and many onsets and turne-againes:
they neither will search out and use the best means which may make them
expert, and bring in gain, nor will learn wisdom to prevent disaduantages,
annoyances, temptations, and therefore their work goes not forward, their
skill in this trade comes not to ripeness. For behold, while they think they
serve God commendably in some duties which they apply their mind too, there
grows in them noisome lusts, unseen, unrepented off, and these make them new
to begin, and set them so much behind hand again, that they almost despair of
ever recovering their forwardness neglected.

The Beniamites we read in the 20. of this book, met their brethren in Judges
20. 40.
the field stoutly: but lo, the evil was behind them, and that they were not
aware off, till the flame and smoke ascended, and then all their courage was
cooled. To teach us (if we will prosper) to make clean work before us, and
leave not something undone, through sloth, which will cost us double and
trebble afterward. And if we be wise, let us learn with Gedeon how to use and
keep the victory as well as how to get it: how to cleanse out that evil which
we are prone to, as do some duties which we like; lest according to the
proverb: He that flies and escapes, will return and fight again; whereas
we might have slain him right down at the first, and been past all danger.

Furthermore, it is to be noted as commendable in Gedeon, that when he Doct. 2.
had gotten the victory, he was willing that other should have part of the
glory thereof: to wit, these other tribes, Nephtali, Ashur, and Manasse, who
yet could help but little, coming after Gedeon had gotten the victory with
great danger. Which example of his, should teach us to use the gifts of God,
not so that we should seek glory by them, but to desire that other also might
exercise and have use of their gifts to the benefit of the Church: we of the
Ministry especially should do this; that we may be able to say as Moses
said, Would to God that all his people could prophecy: yea and to this end
Numb. 11. 29.
let us rather in giving honor, even strive to go before each other, yea the
meanest, who may soonest and easiliest think themselves neglected and
despised. Excellent therefore is the practice of Christ and John Baptist, who
though they were both admired by diverse sorts of people, and that in such wise,
that there was carnal emulation between the Disciples of both; yet always they
so carried themselves, that the one honored the other, and both fulfilled all
righteousness.

Yea John in the midst of his flourishing, yet still acknowledged himself
Ioh. 3. 30.
but the shadow, and Christ the substance; himself the herold, and Christ the
Prince: I must decrease (says he) and Christ increase. Which example of his,
if his successors had as well regarded, Satan had not so soon corrupted the
ministry of the Church with schisms and factions, which are but the fruits of
pride and arrogance.

And if we can grow, or cause by our example and gifts, other to grow in grace,
let us not with the Disciples, contend who shall be chief and greatest. But
we though we have these gifts and the like to glorify the giver, and to
restrain and hold our selves from this vaineglory, yet we gape for that by
Satan's deluding of us (lamentable to behold) so that when we have not praise
of men, (who should look for that from God) if (I say) we cannot get that, we
leave off laboring and sit still: and for this very cause, some, as well in
the ministry, as the people, do part and break off their fellowship one with
another. But of this see somewhat before, in the eighth verse of this Chapter.

Verse. 24. And Gedeon sent messengers to all mount Ephraim, saying, Come down
against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto Bethbarah, and
Jordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered together, and took the waters
unto Bethbarah and Jordan.

25. And they took two Princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb, and slew Oreb
upon the rock Oreb, and slew Zeeb at the winepresse of Zeeb, and pursued the
Midianites, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gedeon beyond Jordan.

IN this verse the holy story shows, how Gedeon sent to all the inhabitants
Verse. 24.
of mount Ephraim to meet with the Midianites, and take up the passages, where
they went over the waters, even to Bethbara or Bethabora, and Jordan. And the
men of Ephraim did so. And so he made them partakers also of the honor of the
victory, as he did the other tribes. This is the sum of this verse. And to
make our use of it, it were to be wished, that we in this our age did as these
did: that in all civil actions religion did guide us, that where help is
needed, and required by one of another, that it were likewise willingly and
readily performed; as namely in aiding the widows and fatherless, the poor,
and the oppressed

And much more it were to be wished, that we were so joined together in the
Church, that if there were any excellent and profitable matter begun, that we
were willing to have other coadiutors and fellow laborers to the finishing and
perfiting of the same: but we rather often times (which is greatly to be
lamented) and our sins justly deserving the same, do hinder one another:
whereas both they ought to be regarded, who have a good mind to the work of
God, and do labor in it, (though they be not equal with some other,) even
for that which God has enabled them, and which they are fit to do: and also
they in humility should reverence their elders in gifts and years, and be
readier to learn of them, then to pearke over them.

Which sin in the forwarder sort both of Ministers and people, and in the
ancienter and younger sort of both, being suffered to grow for want of love, so
that the one does not his duty toward the other, has caused the Lord severely
to punish it in both, that being divided, they are thereby seebled, and the
good which they did is hindered and crossed; and not only so, but also that is
verified which Saint Paul writes to the Galathians, that one Galat. 5. 15.
biting and devouring another, they be consumed one of another, at least, by a
third sort, but yet through their fault and procuring. But of this I have
spoken in the first chapter.

Ephraim took two Princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: whose punishment Verse. 25.
by the just judgment of God was agreeable to their sin. The one, namely
Oreb, was slain on a rock and mountain, called by the same name, Oreb: where
they had constrained the people of God to hide themselves, and where they had
sought them to kill them The other, that is, Zeeb, was slain at the threshing
place or winepresse called Zeeb: for those places they spoiled of their
victuals and famished them. Where it is manifest, that God forgets not,
neither winketh at the cruelty of his enemies, but in due time and place will
pay them home, so that all that will, may see, that God has not left them
unrecompensed.

And that either with the same punishment as he did Adonibezek, or at the same
time, as he did Judas, who betraying his master to death, died first himself:
or as here he did to Oreb and Zeeb, even in the same place where they did the
mischief: and as among us the wilful murderers suffer, and are made
spectacles by hanging in chains, to all that pass by, near the place where
they committed the murders: or if none of these ways he punish them, yet
some other such, that may be as a sign to all, that God will be revenged on
such as they be. For why, as the blood of Abell, so does theirs Genesis 4. 10.
cry for vengeance: woe therefore to bloody persecutors, and cruel persons,
for God and their sin shall find them out. Therefore let them know this that
fall into the hands of such, lest they should be discouraged. And lest we
should think that these Princes did but fight for themselves against the
Israelites, as in war men do, read of their malice and cruelty, in the
Psalm. 83. 9. 11. 12.
Psalm 83. But for Gods just punishing of his enemies, according to their sin,
I have said enough in chapter 1. of this book.

THE FIFTIETH SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 1. Then the men of Ephraim said unto him: why have thou served us thus?
that thou calledst us not when thou wentest to fight with the Midianites: and
they chode with him sharply. 2. To whom he said: what have I now done, in
comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of grapes of Ephraim better then the
vintage of Abiezer? 3. God has delivered into your hands the Princes of
Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to do in comparison of you? and
when he had thus spoken their spirits abated toward him.
AFter the admirable victory that God gave to Gedeon, as has been largely
showed in the former Chapter, now in this follows The sum of the chap. and
parts 3.
the pursuit of the rest of the Midianites by Gedeon; but first another thing
by occasion of that victory, is here set down; and that is, the Ephraemites
quarrelling with him. The sum and parts of this Chapter (to join them
together as they may well and conveniently be) are these: The first is, the
contention of the Ephramites with Gedeon, for not calling them to the war, to
verse 4. The second point in this Chapter is, that the men of Succoth and
Penuel denied victual to Gedeon when he pursued and followed after the rest
of the enemies, and their punishment, together with the putting to death of the
two Princes of the Midianites, Zeba and Zalmunna, to the 22. verse. The third
contains certain perticulers concerning Gedeon, as the offering of the
kingdom to him and his sons by the Israelites, and his refusing it: and of
Gedeons Ephod, and the danger that came thereby: whereto is to be added the
sin of Israel, to the end of the chapter.

The first part of the Chapter.
TO begin with the first part, it is said, that the men of Ephraim contended
The sum of the 3. first verses.
sore with Gedeon, and fell out with him, for that he called them not to the
battle against the Midianites, as appears in the first verse: whereto the
mild answer of Gedeon is to be marked, which is set down in the second
verse. And thirdly, how they were appeased by it, as we read in the third. Of
these let us hear more perticularly as they lie in order.

And here first, some man might think it an unseasonable accident that Verse.
1. the unfolding of it.
befell Gedeon even in the chief spring of his glory; I mean, that in the
very neck of the victory should come upon him such a cross blow, as to turn
the solemnity and honor of his great acts, in subduing the Midianites into
reproach and abasement. But the most wise God who best knows how to keep his
own children in compass, and sees what corruption they carry about them, by
means whereof they cannot bear any great blessing, or prosperity, without
swelling, and pride; he (I say) does commonly so dispose Note.
of them, that with rare and special liftings us, and heightenings of Doct out
of verse. 1.
them, either in grace, wealth, honor, and success, or the like, he matcheth
and mixeth some great coolings and buffetings of them, to keep them from
falling dangerously, in so slppery a place as they stand in. Of Gedeon we
cannot certainly say any thing to his just reproof in any gross manner, but
of great infirmities of his we have heard; and therefore doubtless he being
a man) he had that in him which might have puffed him up upon so great
success, if God had not by this great and unwelcome cross, prevented it. So
Iphta coming fresh from a great conquest, was suddenly quailed Judge. 11. 35.
by his only daughter. And Job in the midst of his flourishing and
prosperous estate, hears all at once, of his children and substance destroyed
and spoiled. Likewise David had few victories, but the Lord sent him a cooler
upon them, the rebellion of Absolon, the cursing of Shemei, the insurrection of
Sheba, the death of Ammon, the slaughter of Absolon; which (doubtless) were
enough to purge out any superfluous humor which might rise up in him, and so
to keep him sober, temperate, and within holy compass. It is not so strange
that the Lord should thus physic his servants, being already Note.
surfeted with excessive and sinful abuse of their prosperity: but it is his
great mercy that he should so diet them with these potions, that they may
prevent surfeting. The reason is, because first it is the wisdom of the same
Physician to give preservatives, as well as purgations. And again, sin is
easilier kept out from entering, then thrust out of doors being once gotten in:
which the Lord foreseeing, rather chooses with a little hardship to the
patient, then by violent and extreme courses, to prevent matter of disease
rather then to heal the disease. And the truth is, it is easier for a man to
be dieted then purged: I mean to bear an affliction which comes before the
spirit and conscience is wounded by a sin, then which follows sin, as the
deserved punishment of it. But for the point in hand, let us by this first
learn, what a leaud nature there is in us, that we cannot have a little
health and welfare, but presently we distemper our selves, so that we must be
feign to be physickt, lest we should endanger our life: I mean, we can enjoy
no good blessing, but we forget our selves, and cause the Lord to allay the
sweetness of it with some bitterness, except he will suffer us to be turned
quite over with it. Again, when we enjoy any blessing, let us not measure the
same by the pleasure and content which it gives our nature, (for even in that
is a sting which will secretly hurt us) but by the sober, humble, Note.
and thankful affection wherewith we embrace the blessing. And let us know
that then only we enjoy it in kind, and entier, otherwise by halues, and
scarce that. And when we see that God sauceth our dainties with sour herbs,
let us be thankful to him, and say, Lord I had else fed too much of this dish,
till I had ouerlaid my stomach, even as children, who finding honey, eat too
much of it; therefore blessed be thy name, who suffered me not to be sick of
it, rather then if thou should let me alone, then I should be provoked to
vomiting, which were worse. And this be noted of the Lords ordering the action
of these Ephramites, for Gedeons good.

Now yet these Ephramites show many foul faults in this action of contending
The faults of the Ephramites in this first verse, and first their unthankfulness.
with their governor and deliverer of them, as unthankfulness, expostulating
with him without a cause and then their dissimulation, who feign themselves to
have been willing to have gone to war with him, and yet would not, when they
might have done: and when did they this? even when they saw the danger of the
war to be past and over, and that now honor was given to Gedeon for that
which he had done: whereas they had been as ready (if he had lost the victory)
to have (much more) cast that in his teeth.

To prosecute these a little more particularly: their unthankfulness first
Doct. 2. verse. 1.
was great, and the injury which he sustained thereby, who ought to have been
much honored of them for his industry and labor, and highly accounted off by
them for the same: but if so be their unthankfulness was so great toward him
in this, what manner of behavior (think we) would they have used if they had
sustained any wrong or violence at his hands, who deal thus undutifully, nay
rudely, and rebelliously with them, and yet having received so great a
deliverance by his means? and so picking matter of quarrel out of a good
turn and benefit? But as we may note the unthankfulness of men when yet they
have just cause to show the contrary duty, (as may be seen in many, and namely
in Absolon to his father, whom when he had delivered from death justly
deserved, he sought his fathers life, and to get away his kingdom also from
him:) so we may by this unkind recompense they gave to Gedeon for the famous
act that he wrought for their ease and peace; we, I say, who shall gratify
men, may learn our duty thereby, and that is this, that we were not best,
neither ought we to look for our reward and commendation for well doing any
manner of way from men, but to rest in this, that God knows our works, and
it is enough, that we are sure, that from him we shall receive our reward:
according Revel. 2. 2.
to the words of the Apostle, Be ye steadfast (my beloved brethren) and 1. Cor.
15. 58.
immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

But as for men, they often times disgrace that which is well done of us, and
revile, yea and hate us for it: as Eliab did David, for showing himself
forward 1. Sam. 17. 28.
against Gods enemies the Philistims, and by name their great champion Goliath,
for the which he ought to have been encouraged rather, and highly commended of
him. So Joseph, who had preserved the land of Egypt both for the time of the
famine, and long afterward: yet of that King Pharaoh, who rose up in the land
some years after; of him, I say, Joseph was not Exodus 1. 8.
known nor regarded: for so the text says, There came another Pharaoh, who
knew not Joseph, though his welfare arose by and from him under God, as well as
his predecessors that lived before him did. But especially this was verified in
our Savior Christ, who being the light of the Gentiles, and the glory Luke 2.
32.
of his people Israel, was for the unthankfulness of the people, and their
spiteful dealing against him, was feign, I say, to answer them thus: Many
good works have I done among you, for which of them do you stone me? In
Heathen Ioh. 10. 32.
stories we read of the strange ingratitude of people to their victorious
governors, especially Grecian and Roman: one of whom being dead, had this
vpbraiding epitaph engraven, O unthankful country, thou shall not so much as
have the honor of my bones. But that men living in the Church should show such
brutish ingratitude, who should believe it that sees it not? Moses, the
conducter of the people out of Egypt, was never quiet from the conspiracy and
murmurings of them against him. The Prophets and Apostles Matthew. 23. 37.
for their painful prophesyings and travels in preaching, what reward found
they? So these Ephramites, how recompensed they Gedeon for his labor and
pains? And the other Israelites also, look in the end of his story. And so,
if the worthy servants of Christ in the magistracy and ministry, find the like
greetings, courtesy, thankfulness, at their hands who should be their best
favorers and encouragers against their adversaries, yea if they find the
people whom they govern and teach and upon whom they bestow their lives and
strength (as the candle that gives light till it die and go out,) to requite
them with small reverence, less countenance Note.
or maintenance, and least of all with any fruit in true piety of their godly
care and labor, in season, and out of season bestowed among them: what use
shall they make hereof? Shall they desist from their good beginnings, and give
them over to such as may be like to teach them by fearing them, who would not
learn it by love, to make more account of them? No: but first let them look
up to God, and acknowledge his justice in so trying them, and punishing some
sin in them; and then answer themselves as the Prophet Esaias: I have labored
in vain (to manward) but my reward is with Esa. 40. 10. 62. 11.
God: and therefore I must not forsake my standing, nor leave my calling, but
hold out with courage and constancy unto the end, but more fully of this in
the story of Iephta.

Now then the use of this is, and so let us take it, that we be not
discouraged from conscience and constancy in the service of God for the
discourtesies, and ill dealing of men, for of God we are to look for our
reward. And yet I must say, that without especial grace, it is hard to do
thus, and to rest contented with this, that God is a plentiful rewarder of all
that seek, and come to him; and withal to bear the indignities that are
offered us of men. Secondly seeing the world deals thus unkindly with Gods
servants, Heb. 2. 6.
let their brethren that fear God, be encouragers and comforters of them,
that they may hold on in their good course: for they are but men, and therefore
they have need of encouragement, and their weakness requires that they
should be so dealt with. And let all such as live in their places of Ministers
or professors with any freedom this way, much more with a Note.
good liking and mutual consent or encouragement, be highly thankful to God
for such unwonted favors, and friendly dealings of men with them, as knowing
that it is not the portion which the most in the world find or enjoy, but a
peculiar indulgence and favor from God, which ought to stir up in them
astonishment at Gods kindness to them therein, and not pride and insolency.
And for the sin I now speak of, let us count this unthankfulness, and the
taking in ill part the good actions of Gods people, let us (I say) count it for
a bitter fruit of a naughty, proud, and cancred heart, wheresoever we meet
with it or behold it, and thereafter let them think of themselves, who show
and offer it.

Now further note another of the faults of these Ephramites against Gedeon: A
2. fault of the Ephramites, to wit, envy.
and that is, that they envied him for the honor he got by the victory.
Whereby though they sustained no hurt, neither were the worse but the better,
yet they could not bear it, that Gedeon should have the glory of it: where we
may see a foul property of envy, and what it is. It is a grief and Envy,
what?
sadness for the prosperity of other: and namely, of such as be our equals.
For the poor man enuieth not the King; he may be grieved that he himself
wants such good things as the King has, but that is not envy. And by this
we may note the difference between hatred and malice on the one side, and this
envy on the other: to this end, as we have heard of the one, so we may in a
word of the other. Hatred therefore is a grief conceived against one for some
cause, at least, as we think; as Ahab hated Micaiah, because 1. King. 22. 8.
he did not prophecy good to him, but evil, as he took it, and the same
appears also by the contrary, out of these words in holy Scripture: They
hated me without a cause.

And when I say, envy is a grief at our equals for any eminency, or
prosperity that they have above us; I mean such as are in kindred, estate,
years, dignity, or in gifts like us. And the cause of this envy is not for
that we are troubled as though any hurt or danger were coming toward us,
from them whom we envy, (for that is another affection, to wit, fear,) but
for that through a cankred stomach we cannot bear it, that such an one as is
Note.
no better then our selves, should be lifted up so high, and commended so
far above us. And is not this a cursed mind in us, that we cannot be
willing that another should fare well, we being never the worse, and that we
should have an evil eye at that, for the which we should rejoice? for so Mary
Luke 1. 41. 42.
and Elizabeth did mutually rejoice one for the welfare and blessing of God to
the other.

And so much the more detestable is this affection, that whereas some other,
being partly natural, nay be taken in the good part, this is ever evil: for
it is a mere corruption, and contrary to love, for love enuieth not: and 1.
Cor. 13 4.
Paul more plainly forbids it to the Galathians, where he also shows the
cause of it; namely, [Desire of vainglory.] For so he says; be not desirous
Galat. 5. last.
of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another. Which here is to
be seen in the Ephramites, who desiring the glory of the victory themselves,
did envy Gedeon for it. This affection shows it self in all such things, as
we desire to excel in: yea in the best, even the gifts of the spirit, for
therein, we would have none to be in account above us: as appears in them
that preached Christ of envy: and him that repined at his fellow, for Philip.
1. 15.
that coming at the eleventh hour, he had his penny as well as himself.
Matthew. 20. 12.


Now though we are not the worse for the prosperity of other, neither does it
diminish any thing from the good of our estate; yet the envious man thinks,
that the gifts that are in himself are darkened and blemished thereby, unless
he have especial grace to abate and mortify such thoughts. Therefore to
aggrauate this sin, know we, that as the envious is sad by the prosperity of
another, so (which is worse) he is made joyful by his disgrace and abasement:
as the Pharisees were, in and for the crucifying of our Savior, and Joseph's
brethren, when they had sold him. Yea so cursed an humor is envy, and so
opposite to love, that whereas he who loves unfeignedly would part even with
the most precious jewel for the sake of that which it loves: the envious
person would willingly pull out one of his own eyes, upon condition he might
lose both his, at whom he grudgeth. So that not unfitly Paul's speech of
fornication may be applied to envy: Other sins are without a man: but the
envious sins against his own body, and the health and prosperity thereof: God
justly plaguing it in the kind, in that whiles it pines at the eminency of
another, it reflecteth and beats back the hurt upon it self, and feeds
upon the most precious spirits of the soul and life, and consumes them:
seldom doing any harm to the other, while it fretteth out the very heart
blood and bowels of it self. This envy is remedied by shaming our selves for
that we cannot abide that our brethren should have and do good with Gods
gifts to other: considering also that thereby we hinder Gods glory. Also we
shall loosen the roots of this envy, if we think meanly of our selves, and
that God is only wise, who denies for just cause, that unto us, wherewith he
blesses others. And thirdly, this shall help to weaken it, if we consider
that God has rather deserved infinite thanks of us, for granting us other
blessings, which those (perhaps) may want, whom in other respects we envy,
(for it is his great mercy that Lam. 3. 22.
we be not consumed) the one we will not see, the other we behold too much.
Whereas our eye sees not the worse, because another sees better: how much
less if in another kind we see as well? Does the foot envy the eye because
it sees, or the eye the foot because it goes? But of the contrary virtue I
spoke before twice, in Gedeons soldiers, and Gedeons communicating with
Nephtali and Ephraim the victory.

And because I now speak of the Ephramites, I think it not amiss to A third
sin in them, the sin of their fathers. Doct. 4.
add this of them, that their father Ephraim the younger being preferred by
Jacob before the elder brother Manasse, the stock and offspring of them exalted
themselves since from age to age, and are noted for it often times in the
history of the old Testament. As in Iosuah we read: they among other, were
discontented with their portion. So in the twelfth of this book, the
posterity of them contended with Iphia for not calling them with him to
battle against the Ammonites after he had overcome them: even as these
Ephramites did here with Gedeon. So Esau himself deadly hating his brother,
derived this sin to his posterity the Edomites, so Ahab did Idolatry to the
generations that came after him.

And hereby we may learn, what force some blemishes and corruptions in a
stock or kindred have to infect almost the whole posterity: God justly thus
punishing the sins of the fathers upon the children to many generations,
punishing (I say) sin with sin. As for example, if a kindred be proud,
haughty, stomackful, boasters, given to adultery, hollownes of heart,
flattery, lying, mocking, stealing; the rest of the same stock, that are not
guided by grace, are for the most part, such. Even as bodily diseases run in
the blood to the posterity. And as we see that a noble stock stained with
treason, may easiler be restored in blood ciuilly by the indulgence of the
Prince, then reformed naturally and reduced to loyalty and fidelity: so the
truth is, the most forcible mean of all outward means is scarce able to
expel this ^eint: only grace can do it: although even grace it self often
times can scarce root it out so, but that some sprigs or other of the old
stock will appear, when it is grafted in another stock.

And yet one thing more note in these Ephramites, namely, the slights, Their
fourth sin, sl^ghtnes and subtlety. Doct. 5.
subtilties, doublenes and hollownes that lie hidden in men's hearts, till they
have occasion to show them, or grace to repent of them. These would now seem
to have had great injury that they were not called to the battle, whereas it
was their own sin that they went not, for they did forbear for fear of
danger, and were willing to stand by (as it were) lying in the wind to wait
for the issue. So that if Gedeon and their brethren the Israelites that joined
with him, had lost the day, then all the blame should have bin laid upon them
by these Ephramites: but now they had got the victory by Gods direction and
blessing, they complain on the other side, that they had injury themselves,
for that they were not (as they said) bidden to help in the battle.

Wherein we may behold deep subtlety and hypocrisy, and how far all such
are from simplicity and plain dealing, that according to the proverb,
howsoever the world go, they will save one, and howsoever it fall out, they
will provide for themselves. Such a one was the harlot that pleaded before
Solomon against her fellow: and they in the twelfth of this book, 1. King. 3
22. Judge. 12. 1, 2.
where Iphta being set upon by the Ammonites, he sought aid at the hands of
the men of Ephraim, and they would not help him: and afterward, when he
fighting against the Ammonites prevailed over them, the Ephramites came to make
war with him, because he called them not to go with him against them. A
sin now adays in common practice, namely in bargains, where gain is not so
certain, there they play on both hands cunningly: for they will so covenant in
general and doubtful manner, that if it hit and fall out well, it shall be a
bargain, and they will be ready to challenge and make claim of it, how
slightly soever the covenant was made: but if it fall out ill, and against
them, then they pick a quarrel, and say, they meant not so as the other
takes it.

And therefore such will not make their bargains plain, nor their covenants
sure and certain, but slightly conclude, as though they agreed in one; and
depart one from another, breaking off with such like words: (we shall agree)
upon which uncertain terms, let no man that loves his peace, buy, Note.
sell, or deal (as this world goes) except he be willing to stand to the
hardest, and to take all measure that shall be offered him, willingly. In
partnership also, there are many secret and subtle deceiuings one of another,
when yet all good shows of equity shall be seen, and it self to the full
pretended.

Like unto these are all such as promise great friendship to a man, but if they
perceive their betters brook not the person, but frown upon them that show
any kindness to him, then they must, in a dishonest manner, find some fault
with him also, and allege: that they cannot therefore show him the kindness,
nor do that for him, that they had promised. Is this to provide things honest
before men? Is not such dealing apparent dishonestie? So in adversity and
disgrace, right good men shall be iustled to the wall, who yet if they be
again restored to their former estate, and accounted of, and in favor with
their betters, they shall be sought unto and regarded, as Iphta was. In all
these and the like, there is this dissembling to be seen, which was in these
Ephramites: a manner of dealing contrary to simplicity and plainness, and
from good Christians, as a maine blemish, nay as a stain, utterly to be
removed and abandoned. And this is bad enough even in civil dealings; but when
it appears in matter of religion, far worse, and by infinite degrees to be
detested, whether it be showed toward God or men. I mean, when as in a subtle
and politic manner, (not of fear and frailty, for then it is not so gross,
though evil) men will abstain, and conceal their affection to the Gospel,
till they see whether the time be like to favor or Note.
frown upon them: in the mean while carrying such a dark and ambiguous
countenance, that no man can tell what to make of them. And yet he that cannot
carry the matter thus, but plainly bewray his opinion and judgment, is
counted a fool, and shiftlesse person: as indeed he is to the world-ward, if
there were nothing else to be regarded. It is as possible to make a true
cognizance for these temporizers, as a coat for the Moon: for they serve
their belly, their ambition, their purse, and as these lead them, so they
follow: God they serve none, for their religion is only a stalking horse for
them, to play their part the more cunningly till their turn be served. The
same I say of the committing this sin toward men: what is more odious in a man,
then when he shall promise, and pretend all love and faithfulness to his
neighbor, and yet mean and intend no such thing, but practice the contrary.

Now Gedeons mild answer follows to be considered which he makes Verse 2.
to this quarrel and expostulating of the Ephramites with him: who if he had
answered their foolishnes with the like, and had given them as good as they
brought, what a broile (think we) would there have been between them? But in
that he did not defend his doing by answering that he was strong enough of
himself, and had no need of their help, which had been like to provoke them
the more against him, neither commended his own labor, care, and industry,
which they could not willingly have heard, neither yet did vnuizer them, by
telling them, that they quarrelled without a cause against him, who had sought
their help, nor any way exasperated them; but contrariwise, yielded as much to
them as with truth and good conscience he might: neither did he interpret
their contentious words to come of bitter envy, as they gave him cause, but
rather he has left a most commendable example of a meek and patient servant
of God, and respects all these of honest and lawful emulation; it teaches
right worthy matter and doctrine unto us.

Namely, how we should deal with such as are insolent, contentious, fiery,
and such as think, though never so untruly, that they have wrong at our hands.
And that is, that in such cases we must be well stayed: and see, that we give
men their full due, to wit, not to cross, provoke, and exasperate the^, Doct.
but rather to seem not to see the root of bitterness that breaks out of
them, but to contain our selves till a fitter time, (seeing they are not then
in case to be told of it) and we are to make the best of every thing, asswaging
them with gentle answers, especially if we be but their equals or inferiors,
and in one word, not to answer a fool according to his foolishnes, that is,
Prou. 26. 2.
to give as ill measure as he brings; lest we be like him, but to remember
that which we are taught in another place of the Proverbs, namely, that it is a
man's glory to cease from strife, and to consider and always bearing this in
mind, that he is better that can rule his own heart, then he that subdueth
Prou. 16. 32.
a city.

For except we thus give place to such, many evils are like to follow, and fall
out against us, in Church and Commonwealth, in family, and in the course of
our life, which yet hereby may, and will (no doubt) for the most part, be
avoided, or at least wise be smaller and fewer. Therefore let the younger sort
herein learn to yield to their elders, and the inferiors to their betters,
though they deal not with them as they ought and should, seeing we see here
that Gedeon and afterward Iphta being superiors, did forbear to deal with
their inferiors, as they might have done, and were justly provoked to do.
Yea, and let one learn and take out this lesson toward another, after the
manner that I have set down, as husbands, wives, masters, servants, and other,
that peace with holiness may be preserved among them. Heb. 12. 14.
And yet who is he that shows forth this meekness and wisdom? But (as is
to be seen in the common iarrings and quarrels of men) the most count it
their glory (and boast of it afterward) when their words be fierce and more
stinging then their fellows, and come out of a furnace seven times hotter then
his? What (says he) did he think I would turn my face for him, or be put
down with words? No, I trow I gave him the full measure that he brought, yea
ten for one, I spared him not a whit. Lo, how fools some out the froth of
their own shame. Whereas Solomon shows them their faces in a glass who do
so, when he says: An angry man stirs Prou. 19. 22.
up strife, and multiplieth transgression, Prou. 29. It were indeed an honor
for a man to depart, and say, I see he was not in frame to be answered with
angry words, I therefore durst not strive to outshoote the devil (as it were)
in his own bow. That which he thinks be comes him, I count it my reproach,
who profess to fight against my corrupt nature. Therefore let the dead bury
the dead, I mean, they that be fit for nothing else, let them give taunt for
taunt, and scorn for scorn, (they are free from righteousness, and bondmen
to their own lusts) but I have learned rather to repay good for evil, then
evil. But yet this is not so to be taken, as though in all things we ought to
yield to froward and peevish persons, but in our own private cases only, and
when we lawfully may, but in no cases or matters that are contrary to Gods
will, or preiuditiall to his honor. As for example, if these Ephramites would
have set up Baals altar again, it had in no sort been tolerable that Gedeon
should have borne it at their hands, much less have yielded to them, or we in
any such thing. And this be noted by his answer. A worthy example whereof we
have in Paul, who resisted Peter and gave Galat. 2. 11.
him no place in the point of collusion with the Jews.

Now follows the fruit of that his meek and mild answer unto Verse. 3.
them, to wit, that their anger was thereby alaied, which agrees well with
that of Solomon in the Proverbs: A mild answer puts away anger: and
again, A meek tongue breaks bands. The second blow makes the fray, as Prou.
15. 1. and 25.
the proverb says. The reason thereof is double: First, because wrath wants
matter to work upon, if it be not opposed. Secondly, meekness shameth anger,
even as humility makes pride to hang down the head. And he must be some odd
man for rage and fiercenes, who is otherwise. Thus David by Abigails mildnes,
was stayed from the bloody attempt which Nabals boisterous roughnes provoked
him unto. Such a grace is this meeknes and mildnes, that Christ pronounces
them blessed that have them. He Matthew. 5. 5. Matthew. 11. 29. Philip 2. 7. Acts
8. 32. Numb. 12. 3.
wills us to learn of him to be meek: who, as the lamb before the shearer, so
opened he not his mouth. Thereby Abraham prevailed with Lot: and Moses so
excelled in this virtue, that he was said to be the meekest man upon earth.
Contraries are cured by contraries, as we know, and Physicians cure not hot
agues by inflaming, but by asswaging: the skillful Fencer does escape many a
blow, and foil his adversary by declining and giving back, and not by
opposing his body or weapon unto it. Cannon shot batters Note.
down castles and walls, which yield not: but rebound from the soft pack of
wool, that gives place and resists not. The lightning passes by slight and
slender objects, but consumes and deuoures the solid and well compact
substances.

And so all that have experience may see, what fruit we might reap of this
yielding, and what a good name and report (which is better then silver) it
would bring to us, as by the scripture now cited, appears, beside many Prou.
15. 1.
other worthy fruits, if we did regard to practice it. Yea doubtless, and by
this means we might even open the mouth of our hottest adversary, (when his
heat is over) to commend us, and confess his own folly, and our great
wisdom, in stopping much sin thereby, and so he might learn meeknes of us,
as David blessed Abigaile. But now mean and inferior persons 1. Sam. 25. 32.
will not stoop an inch, no not to that equanimitie, wherewith great and
worthy personages have been furnished. The wife often times shall be found
justly convicted of the crontrary fault of shrewishnes and snappishnes: the
servant stout and sturdie will give no place to his master, few will learn
this meeknes. Which causes them to find the like that they offer to other:
even rough, currish, and unkind dealing, which fills the world with
contention and unquietness. Whereto I grant there are many prouocations, but we
must obey the Lord in this, that we should show all meeknes Tit. 3. 2.
unto all men. But some will say, That it booteth them not to use meeknes
either in words or deeds toward such as are unreasonable persons, who Object.
the gentlier they be entreated, the more they play upon the advantage, and
insult over others: yea the yielding to their fury, is the incencing of them,
and adds oil to the flame. I answer: Roughnes toward such bad and Answ.
base natures is more meet, then kindness: so a man keep his measure, and
under color of resisting sin in another, disobey not God. Thus Elisha wills
the elders to answer Iehorams servant. But if the persons be such as we 2.
King. 6. 32.
cannot safely so control (though lawfully) let us say with that good Prophet:
The Lord see it and judge, and the Lord rebuke them. Assure we our selves, God
has ways enough to hamper and tame such wolves and tigers. Julian used to
scoff at the Christians thus, Oh your Master Jesus of Galilie bids you turn
the other cheek to him that smites you, etc. but God made him yield, and say:
Thou art too hard for me, and have gotten the upper hand, O thou Galilean. And
what was the end of him who plucked his fellow by the throat, and Matthew. 18. 28.
would not hear his meek plea? Such is the end of all rough, boisterous, and
proud spirits. But so much shall suffice for this time.

THE FIFTY ONE SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 4. And Gedeon came to Jordan to pass over, he and the three hundred
men that were with him wearte, yet pursuing them. 5. And he said to the men of
Succoth: Give I pray you morsels of bread unto the people that follow me (for
they be weary) that I may follow after Zebah and Zalmunna Kings of Midian. 6.
And the Princes of Succoth said: Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna, now in
thine hands, that we should give bread unto thine army? 7 Gedeon then said:
Therefore when the Lord has delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into mine hand, I
will tear your flesh with thorns of the wilderness, and with briers. 8. And
he went up from thence to Penuel, and spoke unto them likewise, and the men of
Penuel answered him, as the men of Succoth answered. 9. And he said also to the
men of Penuel, when I come again in peace, I will break down this tower. 10.
Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them, about
fifteen thousand, all that were left of all the hosts of them of the East: for
there were slain an hundred and twenty thousand men that drew swords. 11. And
Gedeon went through them that dwelt in Tabernacles on the East side of Nobah
and Iogbehah, and smote the host; for the host was careless. 12. And when
Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he followed after them, and took the two Kings of
Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the host. 13. So Gedeon the
son of Ioash returned from battle, the sun being yet hie.
IN this second part of the Chapter, the holy story, (after the former
digression of the Ephramites contending with Gedeon) The sense to verse. 8.
proceeds orderly to set down the end of the battle what it was, namely
this: that when the Midianites and they of the East, had slain one another,
the rest that remained fled away, that is, fifteen thousand men: and Gedeon
pursued them over Jordan. And his three hundred men being weary and faint,
having labored all night, he coming to Succoth, the city of Succoth, I mean
which was in the tribe of Gad, (for there was another place called Succoth in
the desert, mentioned in the 6. of Numbers,) and of them he asked somewhat to
refresh his soldiers. The men of Succoth who should have helped, and gone with
him to pursue the Midianites, being Israelites and neighbors, most unkindly
denied to give them their brethren so much as bread, but answered Gedeon
contemptuously. For the which cause he threatened them, when he should return
with the victory, which he nothing doubted of, (and so he tells them) to deal
with them thereafter, even to tear their flesh with the briers of the
wilderness.

Here in that Gedeon followed after these fifteen thousand of the Midianites
Doct. verse. 4.
that escaped, when the greatest number of them were slain already, he showed
his wisdom and godly care that he had in preventing evil and danger, that
might have come upon the people afterward. For those fifteen thousand, if they
had been suffered to run away without his pursuing of them, they might, and
(no doubt) would have renewed their power, and have come against them again
afresh, which yet now Gedeon wisely prevented. Which teaches us a singular
good lesson, that when we have well discharged a duty enjoined us, as Gedeon
had done; yet that this is not all; but we ought to labor to hold that which
we have received, and wisely as we may, to prevent whatsoever might stand up in
our way to frustrate the same, (and so cause us to lose all our former labor,
and the fruit of our hope:) even as Gedeon did here in pursuing them that were
fled of the Midianites.

The instances wherein this might be laid out, are innumerable: I will only
allege two or three briefly. As if a man should enter league of sound
friendship with another never so strongly and entirely, and in most solemn
manner, (as David and Jonathan did betwixt themselves) whereby one 1. Sam. 18.
3.
does repose himself and rest upon the other: yet if they do not renew their
covenant of love oftentimes, as they two did, and confirm and strengthen it,
against all that might annoy or break it off, there will fall out so many
occasions as will weaken, yea and make it utterly void. Also such reports will
be carried to and fro betwixt them, through absence one from another, and such
strangeness will arise thereby, but especially such conceits, tetchines,
taking things in ill part, and rash iudgings: that the former kindness will be
forgotten, and the league which was so soundly made, as if it had never been,
will be broken off. And let this which I say be understood of the covenant
that is made in marriage it self, so far as these things now mentioned, may
fall out therein; so that testimonies of true love mutually declared, even
betwixt couples, had need to be daily showed in stead of renewing of their
covenant, or else their love will fall to the ground.

Also to pass to another instance, if a man (yea let him be a good man)
entering into the affairs of this world, and disliking the bad courses which
are taken by men commonly to get wealth, do purpose against them all, and that
heartily, and dislike the same, yet let him not look daily to perform that
which he has purposed, and stand firm therein, let him not watch and pray
against all prouocations to the contrary, and disgrace in his own eyes Note.
all unlawful courses and dealings which may bring in commodity, and contemn
filthy gain, and fear danger to his soul by his usual and many dealings in
the world, (yea though they be lawful) let him not (I say) thus go to work,
and look to himself, he is (without question) like to grow to the same point
that the most are at, to wit, to become a worldly minded man, as the most are,
and drown his religion in earthlinesse.

And the same I say of him, who in his sickness has made many great promises to
amend his life, (if he recover) and never to live so badly afterward, as he had
done before: I say, if he renew not his covenant with the Lord from day to
day, remembering and considering to whom he made that promise, Note.
and in what earnest manner: this man shall revolt from his good mind, and fall
to his old byas again. For though he has purposed with David, Psalm. 119. 106.
A sonilitude.
yea and sworn; yet shall he not with him keep his righteous judgments: for
he has neglected his care, and therefore he fails of his purpose. For as he
who keeps not an house in reparation, when there is a small breach, must be
at a pounds charge, where a shilling would have served, if it had bin taken in
hand in time: so wrack and ruin shall befall him in his good purposes, who
do not look daily and carefully to the maintaining of them. And by this that
has been said of the point in hand, we may judge of all other instances, that
when we have done our duties well, as Gedeon did here, yet if we do not with
him prevent after dangers, we lose the fruit and hope of our former labors.
All this that I have said of this matter is the better to be marked, because
such care from thing to thing in our lives, is the upholding of the practice of
Christianity. More of this point I have said upon the like occasion before in
chap 7. verse. 23.

Another thing here in Gedeon is worth the marking, that he followed after the
rest of the Midianites, whereas he might have bin like to have neglected Doct.
2.
that work, as needful as it was, and to have been revenged upon the
Ephramites, who had so unjustly provoked him, (and so he would have done, no
doubt, if he had been an hot and hasty man, given to his appetite) and to
follow private affection, as most men are given to do. But he counted it a
smaller matter to cross his own corrupt nature, then to leave the pursuing of
the common enemy. Where we are taught, that if we may have peace in the
land, (as Gedeon sought by vanquishing them that remained of the Midianites and
were fled;) for the obtaining of it, we ought by all means to maintain peace
privately at home with our neighbors, yea and gladly take all occasions to the
procuring thereof, as Gedeon did with the Ephramites. The reason is, for that
the maintaining of peace and agreement at home in private, requires neither
loss of our lives, goods, or religion, but Note.
only of our will and corrupt affections, (or the forgoing of some small thing
for peace sake, which we may lawfully yield unto:) and we are not debtors to
our rebellious nature, but ought to be professed enemies against the same. Romans
8. 12.


Again, while we have peace abroad, from civil and foreign dissension, Oh
what a benefit it is, as we may see by that which we read of in the first
book of the Kings, that in the days of Solomon, every one lived safe under
his vine, and under his figtree? As on the contrary, when there is war or 1
King. 4 25.
persecution, Oh what fear and danger is there? what spoil of men and goods
is there? yea, what havoc of all things? Therefore I must needs say unto
you, that cannot love your enemies, but boil and swell one against another,
and to you that may live quietly every day in the week, who yet Note.
scarcely do it one: that you haste war upon your selves, yea you long and
groan for it, or for some other plague, and if the Lord would (as it were)
winck to allure you nearer to him, ye your selves tempt him to lay load on
you: and to such I say with grief, you cannot tell what it is to enjoy peace,
and make use of it.

Whereas if you did well consider it, ye would seek, yea and ensue after
peace, so far as ye might attain it with holiness, and by no means suffer it
to go from you: and ye would not so yield to your lusts and carnal affections,
Heb. 12. 14.
in favoring, nourishing, and satisfying whereof, ye deprive your selves of
the sweet and infinite fruits of common peace. But if this distemper and
unruliness be found in a family, betwixt husband and wife, or other parts of
the family, it is more to be bewailed; what did I say? nay monstrous. Oh what
good might be done in this time of peace, as the Churches did find in Act. 9.
31.
the Acts? And this should we do, if we were wise: for so God commands: As
much as in you lies, have peace with all men. Yea though it cost us Romans 12.
18.
somewhat, as Abraham with loss procured it betwixt Lot and himself. And
Genes. 13. 8.
if any such be vexed by strangers, and disquieted by them, let them consider,
that it is just with God to punish them so, who have broken peace, yea and
despised it with neighbors, kindred, and wife at their own home.

And in that it is said here, that they labored til they were faint and
weary, Doct. 2.
we see that the earnest following of our duties will make us often times neglect
and forget our selves, and out bodily ease, as they did. So the woman of
Samaria was so ravished with Christ's sweet communication, as ignorant as she
was, (when he first met her at the well) yea saucie and scornful, John 428.
that for the great defire she had to hear him, she forgot her self, and
neglected the care of her bodily business. And Abraham's servant so minded
Genes. 24. 23.
the duty which was enjoined him of his master, that although he had need,
having traveled far, yet he would not eat, till he had dispatched that
which he went about. Thus Peter, Acts 10. through the heavenly intention Act.
19. 10.
of his mind, overcame his hunger, so that before any thing could be made
ready, he was in a trance. And so Paul, whose watchings and fastings are in
other places set down to have been so many, did neglect his sleep and repast
at Troas, through that feruency of spirit, which caused him to preach till
midnight, and at Ephesus did usually for three years exhort them in the night,
as well as in the day. But above all our Savior Christ, who through his
earnestness and zeal, did many times, as in that holy speech and
communication with the woman, Ioh. 4. forbear his meat, and forget to eat:
alleging that he had meat to eat which they knew not of. John 4 31.
verse. 34.

Even so our minds being set seriously upon our duties, as prayer, reading,
good company, the following of our calling, etc. we do not at all many times,
or very little mind other things belonging to our bodily welfare; and it is our
crown so far as we can by good occasions remember that with Gedeon we have
done so. Indeed in and about play, pleasure, and seeking after the commodities
of the world, the case is clear, that too too many have swet, and do
continually forget and disguise themselves, so that neither cold, hunger,
heat, or unseasonableness can hold them back, or hinder them. But in Gods
matters, as his worship, and in things which tend to our own salvation, and
the hunting and purging out of some special sins, also in furthering and
bringing on one another to faith and good duties, Note.
and so seeking how to do most good to the poor members of Christ, Oh how few
are to be found to do thus? who yet neither spare labor, time, cost, or any
thing else about their own matters: whereas we should be so taken up with
Gods matters, that our own, even lawful, might be moderated at least. Thus
Marie sat at the feet of Christ, and through her attention to his preaching
neglected the less necessary work of preparing for him. Now though every
example be not a law to bind every man to the like: yet where we see it so
agree with the doctrine of the word, as here; such examples must be our
instruction, and we may well gather, that there is a singular affection of love
to God, and joy in his service where it is so, which concerns us much to
follow. And much more we may conclude, that when men (in hearing the word, or
prayer, etc.) do so wander, and are so weary, that every minute is an hour
unto them, and every hour ten, till al be done, and some will not endure out
the whole time, but depart, to serve their appetite, or follow their work,
these (we may be sure) are little affected with the action: since other things
are predominant with them, which will not give place, even when the most
religious duties are in hand.

The man of trade must look to this, yea the worshipful, and all estates that
fear God, to the end that of mere conscience they may obey God in their
several callings and places. Thus Joshua went all night long to help Joshua
10. 9.
the Gibeonites: and Gedeon was neither by hunger nor weariness held back
from pursuing after the Midianites. The use hereof is, to warrant our selves
that our greatest delight be in serving the Lord in one part of our life as in
another, as in the chiefest to God, so next in the particular duties of our
callings painefully in every estate and degree, and faithfully, and so to take
our rest, refreshing, and recreation, which yet should follow and come after
these, and not go before them.

Gedeon being weary, and his men; asks but bread of his own country Verse.
5.
men, for whose peace he pursued the Midianites, as well as for his own: his
reason was twofold, one because they were weary; the other, because they
pursued their enemies, for the safety of Israel Gods people. In this necessity
and distress of theirs, though otherwise they wanted not, we may note, that it
may possibly be the case of any of Gods people to be destitute of necessaries
for this life, and to be brought into streights both by want of food, Doct.
and also by other calamities. David in his fleeing from Saul, was so
distressed (he and his men) for victual, that he was feign to eat of the
Shewbread, which (out of the case of necessity) was unlawful for any save
the Priest to eat of, as appears in Sam. 21. Jonathan and the people with
him, were even 1. Sem. 21. 3.
ready to faint, and yet might not without peril of their life taste so much
as a little honey with the top of his spear to save and preserve life. And if
it were but even so with us as it was with him and Gedeon, that but a whole day
or two we wanted food and relief, we should find it (as small a matter as it
is thought to be) as much as life is worth. Daily experience shows us the
same, that it falls out both by sea and by land to be the case of many, who
yet were of good wealth, and not likely to come into such need and want: and
yet so we see it to come to pass. One reason is, because all things in this
present world are changeable, and besides God will correct some this way, and
try others, as he did Job.

The use hereof is, that we should not please our selves in any thing of what
account soever it be, neither rest, depend, or take too much comfort in our
outward present estate, of health, wealth, wit, learning, worship, credit, etc.
And further, that we should be ready to help such as stand in need, (and
seek it at our hands) with these transitory comforts which God has given us.
As our Savior says: Make ye friends of the unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16. 10.
that when ye shall want, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.
And not to grudge at it, (as many do) but to be merciful and ready thereto
Phile 7. Matthew 7. 1. sam 2 13.
with cheerfulness: for with what measure we meat, shall be measured to us
again, and judgment shall be without mercy to them that show none. And this
chiefly should be done, when the poor want work, and corn, and such like
necessaries: remembering how Nabal sped for his churlishnes. But of this point
by the way, seeing I shall meet with the like again.

Out of their reason in that they were faint with following the Midianites The
1 reason. Doct. 2.
all night, we may note, that the need that comes of faintness or labor in
any of our brethren, is an honest cause for them to seek, and ask, and for us
to relieve them, even as other necessity is, that God lays upon them, as
sickness, age, etc. But yet for all this, the want that comes of idleness and
of living without labor, is not so to be counted of, as shall be further
showed in the next point. But the relieuing of them that are poor indeed, is
laid upon us by the Lord, telling us, that we shall have them always among
us, Deuteronomy 15 11.
that we may do good unto them: and that if we have this worlds good, 1. John
3. 17.
and see our brother has need, and shut up our compassion from them, the love
of God dwells not in us. Which words of his, with such like, should be as a
mallet to break our hard hearts, who in so great need as is to be seen in our
towns, are little moved to compassion toward the needy. And as God
furnishes us every year with new store, so we should hold on in mercy still,
as long as we remain among them. Me thinks we should readily and willingly
give at Gods commanding, seeing he makes us able so to do, in whose hand and
at whose pleasure it is, to take from us, and give to them, that so we might
be driven to seek to them for relief, that before sought it of us. To the
just reproof of such I speak it, who think all too little for a few bellies,
not feeling other men's wants, for getting the fearful sentence pronounced
against them that omitted this mercy and compassion, as well as to them that
wrought iniquity: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, Matthew 25. 42.
for I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, I was naked, etc.

Out of the other reason, that they fought for the safety of Israel, we are
The second. Doct. 3.
further taught, that they ought to have relief also, (even as I said before,
it is lawful and honest for them to ask it) who have been employed against
Gods enemies and ours, to defend us from their rage and tyranny. Considering
that they carry their life in their hands, and are in danger of spending their
blood in the cause of God, and the peace of the land, whilst we may sit quiet
at home, and live free from such fear. So that although the persons themselves
be leaud, yet in regard of their service, we should see them provided for: as
Paul teaches saying: Does any man go on warfare at his own 1. Cor. 9. 7. 2.
Sam. 17. 27.
cost? 1. Corinthians. 9. And it is our sin if they have it not, or if they
should be driven to go about to beg, and so to become rogues, for that is
contrary to Gods commandment, who says: There shall be no beggar in Israel.
And as good order is taken to cut off rogueing from place to place, without any
certain habitation, by setting the poor on work, and ministering to their
necessities that which they want, not being able to maintain their charge by
their labor, (which good order of all faithful Christians is to be vpholden)
so it is a great sin in many, who in stead thereof, do nourish them that are
rogues indeed, notwithstanding it be straightly commanded, that he who will
not labor should not eat: and who will sooner be moved 2. These. 310.
with compassion toward them, then toward their pooe neighbors, whose need
they behold daily with their eyes. But more of this in the men of Succoths
answer.

The answer of the Princes of Succoth here follows, with Gedeons Verse. 6.
words to them again. And it is like that his suite was carried to them, and
their answer returned to Gedeon by messengers, which shows that it was the
fault of them, and not the peoples, to answer Gedeon after that manner, not
only to deny them very bread, but to give them also rough and scornful
words. And therefore Gedeon, not upon any private revenge, but as one that had
authority to do it, (seeing the fault redounded to the hurt of the
Commonwealth, and was not committed only against Gedeon and his men)
answered, that he would be avenged of them. If they had been wise they would
both have relieved them, and also in so good a cause, if need had been, have
gone with them. But let us examine the words: Are Zeba and Zalmunna in thy
hands already? As if they should have said, if they were, they would have
given them: but that was no thank to them, but their own benefit, credit and
honor: but seeing they were not in his hands, they discourteously and
barbarously denied it to them being their brethren, Doct. verse. 6.
and in subtlety they did it, lest they being overcome of the Midianites, they
should have been hardlier dealt withal by the Princes of Midian, hearing that
they had relieved their enemies.

And this subtilty joined with self-love, are the two strings to men's bow by
the which they shoot out the most of their actions as arrows. For the good
the most do, it is not done for the commandment nor for conscience Note.
sake, but of self-love for their own private benefit, hoping to be gainers
thereby, which may be done by the heathens for any religion or fear of God
that is in it: or when they hold back the good, which in conscience they ought
to do, of an evil mind they hold it back: as these men of Succoth did; for
fear, lest if they should do it to some, they should fare the worse at the
hands of other, as these men of Succoth here did. A like point whereunto, I
observed in the men of Ephraim.

And hereby we may see, what barbarous rudeness was in these, who 2
yet were brethren and countrymen to the Israelites: that to Gedeon their
governor, by whom they were vpholden in peace, and who now was in the midst
of this last work of pursuing the Midianites, and rescuing of Israel, they
should show themselves so barbarous and void of all humanity. Which was as if
when the house top is on fire, they in the nether part should lie still, as
though the fire could not hurt them: or as if a man standing upon the only
bough of an high tree, and thereby only kept from danger of falling, should
with his hatchet cut it down, and by the fall of it break his neck. This
rudeness and irreligiousnes is in many brutish people at this day, who are not
only no helpers in the wants and necessities of Gods people, either for soul
or body, but hinderers, yea and gripers of them. Senseless bloks they are,
who can neither hear, see, nor savor any good toward any: but as Nabal, who
not only gave not any thing to David's men, but rated them, and railed on them,
thereby casting a mist (as it were) upon his unmercifulness, that it might seem
the more tolerable.

And this we may further note here, in that they by their falsehood, subtlety,
3
and dastardlinesse sought to save their lives, that we might not marvel,
when we see, that some are ready to betray, forsake, yea and lend their
helping hand to persecute their native Prince, country, and brethren, yea and
religion it self, and all for the broken and shiuered hope of a transitory
life and safety, which yet they miss also often times, as is to be seen in
that speech of Mordecai to Hester: If we remain in this danger, do thou
look to besafe? For why, God reuengeth such falsehood and cowardlinesse, as
our Savior says: He that will save his life shall lose it. The use here of
is, that though Matthew. 10. 39.
life be sweet, yet it is not to be preserved by subtlety, falsehood, and
preposterous fear, when the Lord will have it to be brought into trial, and
requires Note.
it at our hands. Even so in all other things, subteltie and dastardlinesse is
to be avoided, and simplicity and courage is to be practiced. Of this more
(God willing) after, in the conspiracy of the men of Schechem with Abimilek.

Now Gedeon threatens the men of Succoth for their barbarousnes and Verse. 7.
boldness toward him their deliverer, (as they had justly deserved) even to
tear their flesh with the thorns of the desert. The which he justly did,
being their Magistrate: for our Savior teaches, that he who scorneth but his
brother or neighbor, is worthy of the highest degree of punishment. And much
more this which was committed against the governor, might be thus met with,
and requited, he not threatening them in wrath, but upon good consideration. I
will defer speaking of the punishment, till the inflicting of it be
mentioned: but let this be marked, that Gedeon did even then speak of
prevailing against Zeba and Zalmunna without fear, as if he had already
subdued them: therefore he says, When the Lord has delivered them into my
hands, (as not doubting but that he would) then I will tear their flesh with
briers.

In the mean time here let us mark, that he left not off the greatest and
most necessary duty which must of necessity presently be done, to wit, the
pursuing of the Midianites: for the other, namely, the punishing of the men of
Succoth, which was to be done also, but might better be deferred. This
wisdom and discretion is to be learned of us, that of duties to be done of
us, or evils to be avoided, with the danger and punishment that follows Doct
them, that be first done in both, which of necessity must be first, and yet
the other not neglected nor omitted, but in due season regarded also.

Instances may be these, as there be many other: to visit parents in great
sickness, which requires present duty without delay, is to be preferred and
performed, rather then to journey about profit, though lawful also, which may
as well be done another time. Also to prefer hearing of a Sermon before
common business, if it be not to our greater hurt, etc. And this I say
further, that not only common actions must give place to seasons, but even one
season to another. In which our best rule is, that we prefer that season,
which occasioneth a work of presentest use: although some other duty of an
higher nature offer it self. Yea and here observe, that even a civil season
may sometime be preferred before a religious. As for example, It falls out
that a man is offered some favor, and hope of release out of some trouble
which he is in, or reconciliation with his adversary, (mightier then himself)
if he will use some present help, which else he cannot enjoy: or it may be he
has a sum of money to pay upon a set day, and that upon a great forfeiture:
or he is sent upon an errand of life and death: say it be to fetch the
Chirurgian to let his master or parent blood, being in a desperate case
otherwise: or is commanded to serve the Prince, etc. Against these comes some
other opportunity, as of hearing the word, of prayer in family. These be all
necessary in their kinds, and due times, but in no wise ought to iustle aside
the other, more needful to be done at that time, and these may be attended
unto, when leisure from the other will give leave: the other are as the tide,
which staieth for no man. Therefore we must beware, lest through our ignorance)
though cloaked with honesty) or neglect, especially wilful contempt, we leave
the greater for the lesser. Which causes to the party so offending, shame and
sorrow often times. As, how shall he answer his folly, who neglecting the
Physician in the case before said, shall thereby find his wife, father, or
master, dead, or past recovery? Such cases may be: and by one we should
measure the rest. Paul, upon this ground, omitted the opportunity of doing
good in Asia, Act. 20. and 21. that he Act. 20. 16. and 21. 13.
might go to Jerusalem. Let us not be over much just, Eccles. 7. He that
wringeth the nose, forces blood, Prou. 30. Now to this I will join a caveat,
and that is, Prou. 30. 33.
That under color of preferring the greater duty, we take not occasion to
neglect the smaller afterward; which if we do, we shall bewray our selves
rather to be subtle shifters and dispensers with our duties, boldly and
loosely, then wise redeemers of the time. As for example: If the public
worship of God fall out upon the time of our ordinary private worship; let
this yield this to the other: howbeit so, that we readily return to the
private again in his due place and time, and not pretend our diligence one
way, to color our negligence another way. A feast is better then an ordinary:
but the feast may better be spared, then a man should be deprived of his
ordinary, and so starve, all the week after. This I add, because so
preposterous is our nature, that whereas one duty should make us fitter for
another, we rather neglect the one for the other; as hearing for conference,
meditation, or prayer. We suck poison out of sweetness, and wax the more auke
and untoward, yea weary of private, because we think we have sufficiently
quit our selves in the public duty, either of preaching or hearing. In like
manner, it is not unlawful for a man to prefer the company of the choice
servant of God either one or more (when we may have the benefit of the^) before
our callings, or attending to our families: but to be carried so after this,
that we should grow to distaste and neglect our callings, or the duties of Gods
private service, is most inconvenient, yea argues that ye devil has blinded
us with delusion strongly, either through our ignorance and simplicity, or
(which is worse) because we are weary of the most necessary duty for
continuance, under color of our zeal for those which fall out seldom.

Now as he preferred not the less needful duty before that which was more
needful, so he did not leave it off (I mean the pursuing of the rest of the
Midianites) though he might easily have been discouraged by the
unthankfulness of his brethren, and their scoffing at him, as many would have
done in such a case. For men's unthankfulness and discouraging of us with
scoffs, does cause us many times to break off good beginnings, whereas he was
neither by the men of Ephraim, nor by these of Succoth, put out of his course.
It should teach us, when we have our warrant from God, for that which we go
about, or avoid, then not to regard, or so to regard temptations and
discouragements, that we be hindered and broken off from our good course by
them. As neither Elisha was by mocking, Note.
2. King. 2. nor our Savior, or his Apostles by the opposition they found. 2.
King 2. 25.
Nay rather they were encouraged. For so Paul was by the disswasiues of others,
Acts 21. and David by Michols scorn: and we ought likewise so to Act. 21.
13. 2. Sam. 6. 22.
be, when we see fewest countenance or assist us; saying as he did, I will yet
be more vile for the Lords sake, and then our reward shall be more then common.
And as for this that we shall be counted medlers, and busi-bodies, I answer:
let God be more with us then men by whose commandment we do meddle, (as they
call it,) and be we advised and persuaded before, what ground we have, that so
we may reap the good and comfortable use thereof, and receive the fruit of
the promise. And this of the men of Succoth.

THE FIFTY TWO SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw I will go forward with the rest of the text that remains, Verse. 8.
from the eight verse in these words: [And he went thence to Penuel] and so
forth, as they are to be read before the last Sermon. Here we may see another
discouragement and repulse that Gedeon sustained by the men of Penuel: for he
being with his soldiers faint and weary, was denied bread not only by the^ of
Succoth, as we have seen, but by the men of Penuel also, as appears in this
verse. For to them he went in the faintnes and wearines of himself and his
soldiers, and had the repulse: whereby he might easily have been tempted, and
brought to think and fear, that God did not approve of his journey, but did
set himself against him. For so Note.
we are wont to conclude by the ill success we have even in good attempts,
especially when the lets be forcible, many and diverse, and one in the neck of
another: as Iobes afflictions were, when among hard messages brought to him of
other calamities that were befalne him, this was one that the fire of God was
fallen from heaven, and had burnt up the sheep and the servants, as if God had
been against him. So that we may learn by this, that things sometime may go
so contrary to our desire, liking, and expectation, and that in duties which
God requires, and will have to be done of us, as if he were not with us, but
against us, yea as if he would cross us in them of set purpose. Our duty
here is to look what God bids us do, as the man of God sent from Judah should
have done, who was drawn by the old Prophet of Bethel contrary to Gods
commandment, to eat there. But indeed the case is not always alike, when such
difficulties befall us: for sometime we 1. King. 13. 19.
may more clearly see cause thereof, then at other. For it may be the same
man's case, at one time to do a good action, yet in an evil and inconvenient
manner: and at another time to be well occupied, and take a good thing in hand,
and do it in a good manner: in both kinds it may fall out, that he has many
discouragements. If things succeed not with him, when he goes about them in
the best manner, that is, the latter of these two; What then? may not the Lord
try his faith and patience, by so crossing him? And in the first kind, much
more I may say, what marvel, if the Lord cross him, when he has done a good
thing in a bad manner, to the end he may call himself to a more due
examination of himself, and amend that which was amiss, ere he take in hand
such holy duties? It was Gods will that the eleven Tribes should fight against
Benjamin: but were they persons for their true repentance Judge. 20.
fit for that business? yea and for all their zeal they wanting the
principal; to wit, faith; that God would be with them, did they not go to
work amiss? was there not great cause therefore why the Lord should fight as
fast against them (to drive them to repentance for their reuoltings from him)
as they fought against Benjamin? And to teach them that they wanted meekness,
love and discretion to temper their fervent revenge withal, that so they might
do the holy work of God in an holy manner? Therefore in such a case let men
be contented, nay glad, if God cross them, that they may the better spy out
what poysoneth their best duties and desires, as pride, rashness, boldness, and
learn hereby, meekness, humility, repentance, fear, etc. for God does
justly suffer many discouragements to be upon such, (as he did also often times
deal so with the Israelites going up to Canaan out of Egypt, Exodus 3.) that
they may stay their course, in any evil Exodus 3. 19.
attempts, and proceed more advisedly and commendably in their doings. But it
falls out sometime, as I said before, that sore and great difficulties stand
up in men's way, not unlike to Gedeons: wherein the Lord deals with his, as if
he sending them on a journey, would make heaven and earth to be against them in
their travels, which is greatly to their admiration and astonishment. As who
would have said that David had been chosen of God to be king, when yet the
promise thereof, was often renewed and confirmed to him, seeing his
discouragements were so many and strong that he met with? whereas Saul came to
his kingdom easily and without trouble? And in such cases, wherein we have so
much to dismay us, yet Satan is ever at hand also, to work upon our weakness,
and to set us much more backward; especially when we shall be brought to
think, Gods deeds seem contrary to his words and promise, as the death of the
Shunamites child, which yet had bin given her as an unlooked for blessing.

Now when it pleases God to try us, by seeming to set such bars in our
ways, few of us are wise enough to see, or at least, rightly to consider, why
it is thus with us, and why God suffers things so to trouble us: but as
though we had thereby just cause to complain of his doing, and to expostulate
Note.
with him; we begin to doubt how he will make good his promise to us, and
whether we may go forward in the good course in which we have begun: yea, and
we are impatient (perhaps) or much disquieted at the least, (if we do not also
fret and fume) and so are discouraged from our good beginnings. Whereby we may
see our froth rather then faith, which seemed before to be good substance, and
feel the stinch of our unsavory hearts, which upon small occasion cast out
such evil smelles. And yet herein we differ from Gedeon, that, as he was
found in his discouragements and crosses to be of far greater courage and
confidence then we; so his trial was in great matters, and ours but in
trifles for the most part.

And not only when we be crossed and hindered in good actions we do thus, but
if we have but some one let in our way, as even in our common business, such
distemperature, as I have spoken of, shall possess us: or if we have lost
something, though of small value, yea though it be but only missing and out of
the way: or if we be hindered by the weather which is ordinary, or (as often it
falls out) through our own rashness only, as when we Note.
(...) stumble and hurt our foot against a stone, what should we then be like
to do, if in going about any duty, we should have so many and great lets in the
way, and crossings of us, as may easily meet with us, and those also as it were
sent from God to resist us? It is therefore the singular and only grace of God
to enable us to believe and be persuaded, that he does often times such things
to try us, and that we may show forth the grace of faith and patience that is
in us; and therefore we are to hold our peace, seeing he has done it. And such
hindrances and crossings fall out sometimes, when we are going to prayer
privately, or in our family, or to the hearing of the word preached, or to
receive the sacrament, etc. from which no wise body will say, we should be
withdrawn by any pretense, as though we pleased not God therein, seeing even
in them some lets do rise up in the way to hinder us. And the like we may
observe in those discouragements which are from within our selves. For example,
when a Minister in his course of preaching, shall find ill measure at the hands
of others, whose good he most seeks, while they see not the purpose of God
toward them; (as Moses did by the Israelites when he was first sent unto them,
Exodus 6.) or if they shall Exodus 6. 9.
but despise Gods providence toward them, as the Pharisees are said to have
Luke 15. 12.
done, how (think we) is this like to work upon him? or (which is more) if he
shall feel within himself great unfitness, as Moses did, Exodus 3. and Exodus
3. 10.
some unwillingness, deadness, drowsiness, or want of assistance from God in
discharge of the work of his ministry, (all which are great dampings to a
man, who has used the best means to furnish himself both with knowledge and
conscience) and yet even the best sometimes have the proof hereof in
themselves. What thoughts (think we) are like to arise in him in such a case?
Therefore if a man look not for these, and if he be not resolved before hand,
that such quailings of him may fall out, and also if he be not armed against
the temptations which may arise therefrom, it is wonderful, how the devil may
weaken his faith, and zeal, and slacken his purpose of diligence in the Lords
work. But on the other side, if in such a case he be able to stay himself by
considering that such trials are usual (more or less) to the best servants and
Ministers of God, (and always have been) who have their ebbings as well as their
flowings, (as Eliah, Paul, yea our Savior himself had strong
discouragements,) what a singular benefit is this? Much more, if he having
overcome the first onset, shall in the second place meditate of the end which
the Lord has in abasing him thus, (he being occupied in Gods own work) and
that is, that he may teach him humility, yea how to flee out of himself and
depend immediately upon the Lord for sufficiency and assistance; and not trust
to his own wit, study, memory, tongue, or gifts, (which others make their only
refuge, and therefore are often disappointed) oh what gain shall he reap
thereby, and say with Paul, I am never fitter for Gods service then when I am
lowest in mine own opinion: hereafter therefore if I boast, I will boast of
mine own infirmities, as the Apostle speaks, in which the glory of God is
most perfected and advanced. 2. Cor. 12. 9. Verse 9.


Gedeon receiving the like discourtesie and rude answer of the men of Penuel,
as he had before of the men of Succoth, does in like manner threaten them the
throwing down of their tower in which they so much gloried. And this
threatening, seeing it was afterward put in execution, was a cross and
discommoditie: which they did needlessly and by their own sin bring upon
themselves. By which we may see, that many are authors and causers of their
own sorrow and trouble, which need not have been, and that by their sin, as
stoutnesse, wilfulness, stiffeneckednesse, and other undutifulness, and rude
behavior, they do (I say) bring unseasonable affliction upon themselves, even
as these men of Succoth and Penuel here did. We know that peace with men, to
live without fear by them, is a great benefit, and soon lost, and hardly
recovered, men being wolves and lionlike one to another, especially if they be
provoked, and most of all, when they have authority and superiority one over
another, and so may justly vex them who shall fall into their hands, by their
wicked deserts and leaud behavior. Therefore all should take heed how they
provoke one another in the least manner, Gal. 5. last.
as these did here.

But lamentable it is, that the most men make breaches of their peace, and
loss of their commodities, by rigor, cruelty, and by an high mind, and proud
heart, not bearing the least injury, but bending themselves by and by to
revenge, looking for all good measure to be offered them by others, but
yielding little or no kindness again: which perverseness is also even
betwixt many couples in the married estate, which causes continual iarring
and unquietness, whereas peace (a man would think) were fitter to be seen
both betwixt them and all other, whom I speak of. Which they are commanded to
seek with all men, as much as in them lies, yea and to pursue and follow it,
though it flee from them, yea and to buy peace, though it Heb. 12. 14.
cost them somewhat, but not to sell it at any hand, much less for trifles.
Thus Abraham bought his peace of Lot. And let men learn to this end to know
and consider what they are; to the pulling down of their pecocks feathers,
Genes. 13. 9.
even earth, earth, earth, and if they be weighed in an equal balance, far
worse then nothing. But of this I spoke in verse 4. of this Chapter.

Gedeon goes forward after the rest of the Midianites, and finds them Verse.
10. 11. 12. 13. The clearing of these verses.
resting themselves in Carkor which was in the precinct of the Israelites, from
whence they hoped to pass after that night, and so to escape. But Gedeon came
upon them on the backside of these two cities, Iogbeah in the Tribe of Gad,
Numb. 32. and Nobah in the half Tribe of Manasseh being Numb. 32. 35. and 32.
42.
hard by, Number 22. And so the two Princes were suddenly stricken with
astonishment and fear, and flying were taken, and the host smitten and
slain: with whom were many hangbies, as scullions and such like that followed
the army. And in that it is said, that he returned back with the two Princes
when the Sun was risen, it appears that the war betwixt them was begun in
the night, and in the same night was ended.

By this latter victory of Gedeon, it is manifest, what great things through
Gods blessing are brought to pass by faith, and the diligence, and
vnweariednesse of men in their callings. This is the maine point contained in
these Doct. out of all these verses.
verses. Whereas delay and sloth (for I put them together to show what delays
I mean) are always dangerous, even as here if Gedeon had tarried to rest
himself but one night by the way, he had lost all his labor, and the fruit
of it, to wit, the destroying of these Midianites. So God to the diligent has
promised his blessing, and good success as Gedeon here found it. The men of
Succoth and Penuel laughed him to scorn, but he looked to God, and had an eye
to his promise, which was, that he would give them into his hands: and yet (as
we se^) he was never awhit the bolder to presume thereof, without diligent using
of the means. It was as unlike, (nay much more unlikely) that David should
have smitten down Goliath, that Noah should 1. Sam. 17. 51. Heb. 11. 7.
have saved the world by the Arc: and many other such things to have bin
brought to pass, as the conquering of the Nations by Joshua: but they all,
Joshua 10. etc.
when they believed God, that he would do that which he promised, went to
work with great care and diligence to serve Gods providence, seeing he wrought
by means (as he does still) and so they prevailed, and obtained that which
they sought.

And this was the power of God through faith, they trusting and resting in him
through the Mediator to come, so it is no less in us, (for I will briefly
apply it again, though I have stood largely on this point before, a new
occasion being offered) that we outgrow many lets and discouragements by the
same our faith, though we be privy that there is otherwise nothing in us,
and that (when sometimes it has seemed to us almost impossible) the Lord has
done much for us, and wrought great things by us, while we have, although but
weakly and poorly gone to work, whether we respect our faith, or our labor,
which is the fruit of it. And we having been diligent to approve our selves in
both; we have found the truth of that Scripture 1. John 5. 4.
verified in us, which says, that faith overcomes the difficulties that are
in the world; and have grown to the contempt of many sins, and the subduing
of them, in great measure, which had sometime prevailed against us; and to be
better heartned against afflictions, and to get strength of hope Note. Romans 5.
4.
by experience for the time to come. But to see how soon Moses, Joshua, and
Gedeon here grew strong in faith, as in a few days, which we are going about
many years, this ought as to humble us, for that we are so far behind them,
so to encourage us, looking duly unto this, how graciously God assisted them.
And so (to apply this to the Sacrament) we have communion with God and with
Christ therein, and are much confirmed thereby in the covenant he has made
with us, by our diligence and faithfulness in preparing our selves thereto,
which they that believe not think absurd, and more then needs, to look after.
And to conclude this point (seeing I have showed the necessity of it, and the
evil and hurt that falls out on the contrary, I mean by loosenes,
idleness, and unbelief, in Christians, by many occasions heretofore) this I
add, that the cause of so great difference in the degree and measure of grace
and goodness, which we observe in many professors, is this, that some are
painful in hearing, using good company, marking, with their hearts deeply set
upon the same, remembering, and making use of their knowledge, watching
thereunto with prayer, etc. whereas others Note.
comber themselves so much with other matters, that there is no room or
leisure left for these. They look to thrive spiritually, whether they take
pains or no, sleeping or working. It is a true saying of a Father, fit to be
urged upon such: He that made thee without thee, will not save thee without
thee. He will not save thee for thy labors sake, but by thy labor. They that
gathered more Manna then their fellows, got nothing thereby: but it fares
otherwise here: gather much and have much, labor little and have little, even
as the Apostle speaks of another thing on the contrary, he that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly. As we mete to the Lord, so will he measure
out to us again. He that labors not, eate^^ not: but he that labors
much, enjoys the fruit thereof: some thirty, some sixty, some an hundred
fold: even as his diligence is. Oh it is strange to see how men set themselves
to work in earthly business, wherein yet they have no absolute Note.
promise of thriuing, because faith the chief help is wanting, but here where
the Lord has tied himself to bless their labor with abundance, men have no
list to stir. A mediocritie of wealth contenteth few, and that makes them so
endless and restless in their desires and traulles: but the commonnest
measure of grace pleases them best, because that is gotten with least trouble.
It is fearful that men should do so much for the fulfilling of their lusts:
and so little that they might excel in goodness. But their reward is
thereafter. And in the mean season God puts as great difference betwix such,
as there is between Alexander, Caesar or the like Captains (who were
unwearied also in their conquests) and Gedeon, or others like, who fought the
Lords battles, and labored therein by faith in his promises. Now it follows.

14 And took a servant of the men of Succoth, and enquired of him, and he
wrote to him the Princes of Succoth, and the Elders thereof, even seventy and
seven men.

15 And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zeba and Zalmunna, by
whom ye vpbrayed me, saying, Are the hands of Zeba and Zalmunna already in thy
hands, that we should give bread unto thy weary men?

16 Then he took the Elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness, and
briers, and did tear the men of Succoth with them.

17 Also he brake down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the city.

NOw in these verses following it is showed that when Gedeon had taken Verse.
14. 15. 16. 17.
the Princes of Midian, and was returned to Succoth, he seeks diligently to
know the names of the chief men and Elders thereof: and he brought and showed
the Princes Zeba and Zalmunna unto them: for he kept them alive, not to make
his boast of them, but that he might show them that God had delivered them into
his hands, as he made no doubt thereof before, that so they might be the more
ashamed and accused for that which they had done to him and his men, in denying
them bread. And thereupon he did unto them as he had threatened, for he tare
their flesh, to wit, of them of Succoth, with the thorns and briers of the
wilderness: and then overthrew the tower of the men of Penuel, and slew the
citizens, either because they insulted more arrogantly then the men of Succoth
did, or else because they resisted Gedeon, trusting in their tower, and so were
slain. Whether they of Succoth died by the pain and punishment, (as it is
most like) or whether their flesh was only torn, and yet life remaining in
them, though the story does not declare; yet we cannot be ignorant, how sore
and extreme the pain was. What kind of execution was done upon the men of
Penuel themselves in putting them to death, the story sets not down, but
as it is sure they were slain, so it is (not without good probability) that
the other were torn to death also.

Gedeon meeting this young man, causes him to set down the names of The
clearing of verse 14.
the chief Elders and governors of Succoth in writing, (as it might be the
names of the Aldermen and citizens) for he would not trust his own memory in
so weighty a matter. And this he did, because he would not fly upon any in
rashness and anger, and would be sure by that his advised deliberation, to
punish only those who were guilty, and those were the ancients of the city.
As Solomon also was very attentive in hearing the cause of 1. King. 3. 23. Doct.
the harlots. To teach us our duty in this point, that when any fall into our
hands to be corrected by us, we do not at any time hastily in an angry mood,
and without due consideration, use correction, but weigh the cause rightly, and
not revenge our selves, by satisfying our brutish affections upon the persons:
yea and to let them also see just cause why they be corrected. And in this we
resemble the Lord himself, of whom Abraham says, It is far from the Judge
of the whole world to destroy the righteous with the wicked. Genes. 18. 25.
Genes. 18.

It is an hard thing to be ruled by the word of God in correcting others,
whereas flesh looks to nothing, but to the will and revenge of it self, and
not to the bettering of the party, and the good example of other, and
discharge of a good conscience before God. Therefore S. Paul has given a Col.
3. 21.
good rule to all by teaching one kind of correcters, namely fathers, that they
should not be bitter to their children: even as Achan in a weighty case was
wisely handled, and kindly dealt with by Joshua in a matter of life and death,
Iosu. 7. 19.
and was regarded in, and concerning his soul, when sore punishment was
inflicted upon his body. Sundry ways do men shroud this cursed humor,
under the false habit of zeal or lawful severity: sometime to cover their
ambition, as Iehu in killing Ahabs posterity; sometime covetousness, as Saul in
slaying some of the Amalekites: sometime pride and revenge, as the Israelites
in warring upon the Beniamites. All of them failed of the ground, end, manner
or measure in executing the correction: all which being neglected, and not
observed, does mar the action, be it never so lawful in it self and
necessary. As when the offending party sees not the cause of his correction,
or is cruelly handled by the correcter, who makes nor the end of his
correction or punishment to be the saving of the party, and to make the sin
odious that he is punished for, and the same an example to other. And here is
justly condemned the doing of them who say, they cannot correct Note.
but in anger, and while their hearts are exasperated against the party, is if
they should say, they can never do it rightly or without sin, whereas God
says, Be angry, but sin not: for anger does nothing well. Although Ephesians.
4. 26.
what need the word of God or the examples of the Saints be used to shame
them, whom heathens may shame? Of whom some prescribe rules to such as are
angry, how they may bridle anger from r^sh outrage: and one among the rest
told his servant, I had surely beaten thee, but that I was angry. This
doctrine is to be applied to Magistrates, Parents, Schoolemasters, and other
superiors, namely step-mothers, and such as have rule over poor orphans, or
any other, whom it little becomes to excuse their own corruption by the fault
or desert of the party guilty: who though he have but his due, yet the
punisher being no fit person to revenge by his intemperate heat, may deserve a
greater punishment at Gods hand, even of a murderer (in heart) of his brother.
And we see the effect of such severity, is to make the party corrected to
contemn it, and wax desperate, not penitent, which is the perverting of the
right end of correction.

By Gedeons showing of these Princes to the men of Succoth and Penuel, Verse. 15.
to their shame and astonishment (who thought they had been far enough out of
their hands, and therefore scoffed at his pursuing and following after them) I
say, by this, we may note how God often times turns the taunts, flouts,
threatenings, curses, and injuries which the wicked do vex Gods children
withal, he turns them to their own shame and evil, and to the comfort of
his own people so abused and wronged by them: as here these mocked Gedeon,
living and walking according to the life of faith, and going about the Lords
work carefully: who now having overcome the Midianites thereby, these wicked
mockers are put to shame and pain, yea and to death also. And in like manner
it fell out to Shemei when he had cursed David, to Zenacherib scorning at
Ezechia, for trusting in his God, yea and for blaspheming God himself, also to
the Pharisees who scorned Christ upon the Cross, but after his resurrection
were abashed, and to Haman deadly hating Mordecai the faithful servant of God.
Now if this appear thus often times even here in this world, how much more at
the coming of the solemn and great day, when God shall judge them? For when
they see the Lord with draw himself from his people never so little, (wherein
he does no more then he did to his only son in whom he was well pleased) o^
behold them in some disgrace and abasement in the world: then they insult and
crow over them, as the Babylonians and cursed Edomites did over the Jews in
captivity: but when as beyond expectation, they see them delivered, Psalm. 137.
3, 7.
yea and that the Lord graceth them, gives them favor, restores them to
liberty, and blesses them with many benefits; then I say, they turn their
scorns into admiration, and are ashamed of their unreasonable disgracing Note.
them. But further, if (besides this) the Lord shall pluck themselves down,
and humble them by the like afflictions, then they wish themselves in their
case even with the hardest and worst conditions.

So that we have good cause abundantly to be contented to seek to live by
faith in the son of God, trusting in, and cleaving to him and his word above
all other things, esteeming our selves far more rich thereby (even when we
are counted most foolish and vile of the scornful world) then they in their
florishingest estate and condition: for why? we rest on God, and wait by hope,
having him on our side, and are not disappointed: they Psalm. 20. 7.
cast all (as the desperate Dicer) on blind hope, likelihoods, and haphazard,
and so are deceived of their expectation. They have a time of boasting and Note.
glorying, which deceives them, and makes them think, that their iollitie
and prosperity will last always, when yet it changes as the weather, and
continues not in one estate, and they have no wisdom to consider it, or
their end which shall be worst of all. Gods people have a time of mourning,
Psalm. 126. 6.
but the end shall be rejoicing: as here Gedeon brings before his vpbraiders
Zeba and Zalmunna with triumph and glory.

And with this we may also see, that the evil which they either do not once
dream of, or which they think to be far off from them, and make a mock of
it, is near unto them. According to that which the Apostle says to the
Thessalonians, When men cry peace, peace, then comes sudden destruction 1.
These. 5. 3.
upon them, even as the sorrow of a woman at her travel. Chorah and his
company, Benadad with many other are examples hereof. So that there is no heed
to be taken how iocond they be, when they be aloft, or have their hearts
desire, neither need any to be afraid at the beholding of their greatness, for
why even while it abides, it is departing, and while it stands, it is
Eccles. 5. 8.
in falling, for when they be at their best and greatest, there is a greater
then they, who is working their overthrow. But who is warned by others woe? But
of this briefly, because often.

Gedeon having well shamed these men of Succoth and Penuel, does to Verse 16. 17.
them now as he had threatened, verse 7. and 9. that is: he to^e the flesh of
the men of Succoth with thorns, and cast down the tower of the men of Penuel
(even their strong hold that they gloried in) he cast it down (I say) to the
ground and slew them. And might not both these punishments have been avoided,
think we? Yes, and so had been but for their own sin: I mean their
undutifulness, boldness, stout and sturdie stomachs, and their slinesse, hoping
if Midian had prevailed, to have gained by their unnatural dealing with their
brethren, denying bread unto them.

Oh therefore how lamentable is it to see, how men bring shame, sorrow, Doct.
and destruction upon themselves by their wicked qualities, and bad behavior,
as wilfulnes, proud stomachs, cruelty, currish and unkind dealings, and such
other, without the which they might have enjoyed their peace and welfare even
to their hearts desire, and good contentment, yea and the Note.
favor of God also: for it is nothing but men's sin that keeps many good
things from them, and heapeth many contrary evils upon them. As Achan by
stealing, Dathan by rebelling against Gods faithful servant Moses, and Israel
by often reuolting from God, and falling from their covenant, whereof this book
is too plain a proof against them.

So some among us, are undone by their idleness, unthriftiness, and needless
spending, some by their unfaithfulness, and deceitful dealing, lose their
credit, and being no more trusted, come to naught: some by their oppression
sundry ways, are on their death bed so terrified, that whereas by making
restitution of a shilling, noble, or a pounds value, while it should have been
done, it might have brought great ease to them: they would now in Note.
their terror restore ten for one, and yet cannot be quieted neither. So some
for adultrie are brought to shame, and to worse should be, if they had their
due: and other by spiteful, malicious, and revenging spirits, make themselves
odious to all, and they procure small joy to themselves. And to add something
touching the particular sin of these men, which was politic shifting and
subtelty in playing the Newters, while the battle depended in an uncertainty
of issue: this I say, that of all other kind of offenders, these sly and wily
companions are least pitied of men, when the Lord entrappeth them in their own
snare. Sooner would a man let loose a Lion (if he durst) out of the pit, or the
danger wherein it is, then the Fox: because (besides the hurtfulnesse) it has
so many shifts to conueigh it self from danger, and is so hardly caught. Who
pitieth these men of Succoth and Penuel? because they in seeking by subteltie
to preserve their lives, justly were beaten with their own rod, and lost
them. Whereas he who falls into danger either in a good quarrel, or in his
simplicity, is either saved by God, or pitied in his ruin by men. And is not
this a double misery, when men are in distress, to hear others say of them,
they are well served? Heathens have observed this cowardly subteltie (for who
is more subtle, then he that is most fearful) to be ever unprosperous: and
seldom even in foreign dissentions of Kings and States, have they sped well,
who have held off, and played the spectators of other men's success. For
whosoever has got the upper hand, they have smarted: if they whom they denied
to succor, they are made the prey of them whom they forsook: if the other,
yet they smart also, in that they did only forbear for their sakes, and not
actually help. So unnatural is it counted, in a common calamity, to betray
one enemy to another, or not to help when we are able. Which I speak not to
excite men to parts taking always, in other men's iarres: but to show how justly
these were handled for their craftiness, in denying help, not to strangers,
but their own captain. And even so, how odious does God make Newters and
Temporisers in religion? they are hated of Papist and Protestant, and are as
cursed, as he that is hanged betwixt heaven and earth. Touching the use of
this, and how to abhor this sin, read before in the 2. doct. of the 6.
verse.

And these with like punishments for the like iniquities, do not light upon
other that are plain, upright, merciful, and in a word, religiously
circumspect in their carriage, and who make conscience of their ways. I do
not deny, but that the best do often meet with sharp persecutions, but they
are for good causes: or else their troubles be but fatherly trials and
corrections, for their good: so S. Peter says, If ye suffer for righteousness
sake, blessed are ye: 1. Pet. 3. 14. 17.
And again, If the will of God be that ye suffer, it is better that ye suffer
for well-doing then for evil. So that we see, such have to bear off the
sharpenes and painfulness of their sufferings, by their rejoicing in the
Lord, and by the blessed estate that they are in: whereas the other have their
punishments, as forerunners of greater, even here before hand, as the Apostle
says. Indeed full often (I confess) they shelter themselves to men-ward by
their greatness, and shift well enough when mean persons go to wrack.
According to the proverb, Great men dote, and poor men smart. But when God
(who is higher then they, as Solomon says) calls the^ to account, (as being
their only competent Judge, when they have broken through other judgments, by
favor, fear or bribes, as great flies break through cop-webbes) then they
meet with their match. As alas who sees not what ways there are to bring
this about? As displeasure of prince, factions and partakings, treacheries
challenges, and highness of spirits. As our own English Chronicles for these
2. or 300 years, plentifully witness. Now if the Lord spare not great ones;
let all fawning flatterers who seek to such, and willingly offer themselves as
instruments of oppression, cruelty and wrong, because they look to be safe
under their wings from punishment (as Ziba and such like) let such fear I say:
for their patrons shall not shelter themselves, howsoever they (no doubt)
think otherwise. And this be said of this point, for the fuller handling of
that which I noted upon the 9. verse to the same purpose.

And here we may more particularly mark by the executing of punishment upon
these chief men of the city, rather then upon the common citizens, that as
the greatest in place and authority have many privileges above Doct. 2. in
verse. 16. 17.
the meaner persons, both in credit, wealth, estimation, and commanding others:
so the Lord brings them forth to the terror of inferiors, and they lie open
to greater danger, hurt and loss thereby, then others do, and in time it
breaks out and appears, if they do ill behave themselves in their places.
This is a great cause why men who are above other, should carry themselves
humbly and not proudly, as too many of them do: and also look well to
themselves in every part of their duty: for a time will Note.
come when they shall pay for all, and when their estate shall be such, as the
meanest under them, would be full loath to be in their room. And to such I say
as David in Psalm. 2. Be wise now therefore, serve the Lord in fear: and kiss
Psalm 2. 10.
the son, ye mighty ones, lest he crush you in pieces: Happy then are all
they that trust in him, if his wrath be kindled. Also the inferiors should here
learn, not to murmr against them, because they are so far above them, for
they sometime go under more sore and heavy punishments, then they themselves
do: yea and though they behave themselves commendably in their places, yet God
often corrects them more then some others, lest they should kick up their heel
against him by means of their wealth and greatness: as it is too common a
thing for such to do. So that as God has his number among all estates both
high and low; so he nurtureth them all by afflictions according to his heavenly
wisdom, that they may safely in their appointed time be gathered to their
fathers. But here being a fit place to make an end, I will stay for this time.

THE FIFTY THREE SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 18. Then said he to Zeba and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they whom
ye slew as Tabor? And they answered, As thou art so were they: every one was
like the children of a King. 19. And he said, They were my brethren, even my
mothers children: As the Lord lives, if ye had saved their lives, I would not
slay you. 20. Then he said to Iether his first borne son, Up, and slay them:
but the boy drew not his sword, for he feared; because he was yet but young.
21. Then Zeba and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as the man
is, so is his strength: And Gedeon arose, and slew Zeba and Zalmunna, and took
away the ornaments that were on their Camels necks.
NOw after all this was done, it follows, (according to the The sense.
division of the Chapter in the beginning of it) how Gedeon executed punishment
upon the two Kings of Midian: whom after he had showed them to the Princes of
Succoth and Penuel, he purposed to punish. And first, seeing they were great
men, he showed courtesy to them, in entering speech with them, though he
needed not so to have done. And he asked what manner of men they were, whom
they slew at mount Tabor: they answered, they were like him, and so goodly and
well favored, as if they had been a Kings sons. Whereby it appears, that
Gedeon was a man of singular favor and person. When those men were slain the
story sets not down, but seeing the Midianites invaded the land of Israel
in the harvest time every year, it was like that then they did it. He
answered, if they had not killed them, he would have saved them alive. And he
commanded his eldest son to fall upon them, but he durst not, being yet
young: and they likewise scorned that, and bad him do it himself. So Gedeon
did it.

This enquiring into the act before mentioned by Gedeon, was, that they might
see, that they justly suffered. For, notwithstanding this, he might and ought
to have put them to death, for that God had appointed them thereto, being
grievous enemies of the Church: and the killing of the other two princes Oreb
and Zeb (who yet slew not his brethren) is commended in the Psalm; therefore
he ought to have slain them even for that cause. This Psalm 83. 2.
speech of his therefore, that he would not have killed them, but for that they
slew his brethren, though pitiful, yet was sudden and passionate, and cannot
be justified. So that howsoever they might have pleaded for themselves
otherwise: sure it is their mouths were stopped that they could ask no
favor, in this respect seeing they had slain his brethren: and his enquiring
into that action was commendable in him, if he had proceeded no further, nor so
diepely engaged himself by oath.

This is one thing that is here to be noted, that as Gedeon did it is meet,
Doct. verse. 18.
that all who are to be punished, should see just cause thereof, by examining
them, and to clear other, who have been suspected: as was done by Joshua at
the commandment of God to Achan, and so the innocent shall have no cause to
complain. It is good therefore in respect of them, that they may not fear,
they shall be pursued without cause: and also let the guilty see, how they
shall be dealt with, to wit, that they shall be brought to shame and punishment
openly. But here partiality must be far off, and anger, and al evil
affection removed.

And this is to be specially considered of all such as shall execute punishment
upon malefactors, or use correction toward servants, children, or such like.
And as for such, whose sins are manifest to themselves or other, and yet not
punishable by man's law, God will meet with them, and come against them in his
good time, their own consciences giving them to understand, that they do that
which is wicked in his sight, and that they shall be judged for it, if they
speedily repent not. But of this I have spoken more largely in his enquiring of
the Elders of Succoth, as touching their fact in slaying them at Tabor in their
iollitie, more (God willing) shall be said in the next reply of Gedeon.

Their answer, that they were goodly men, as if they had been the sons Doct.
2.
of a King, does teach us, that many for all their outward prerogatives that
they have above other men, in favor, birth, manhood, or honor and wealth, yet
have no hold of them, yea rather, they are deprived of them in an hour, though
they hoped and pleased themselves in looking for the continuance of them for
many years, as may be seen in these that slew and were slain. So was Sisera
soon cut off, and Eglon, Iezabel and many others. For they lie open to many
more dangers, then meaner persons, especially being wicked, as I have said. All
that are wise therefore, will beware how they please themselves, or rest in any
earthly thing here below, but use it soberly for their own and the good of
others; being like in this changeable world, to change also, and that daily,
and their pomp and glory to turn to vanity: and in the midst of all
painted felicity of this world, happy is he only, who glories and rejoices
in the Lord. Which doctrine (I confess) is often iterated, but when I consider
the great necessity thereof, and how contrary the most men's practice is
thereto: I conclude, that it is the wisdom of the Spirit of God to give
occasion of the same almost in every sentence, sometime and often in some
chapter, to the end that the commonnesse of the sin might be somewhat checked
by the often repeating and reproouing thereof. And so it becomes them that are
wise to judge, and prepare their appetite where the holy Ghost has provided
sauoury meat and instruction, and not to be weary of hearing, where he is not
weary of teaching.

And here (as the fittest place) let us behold these desperate Princes, how
they are brought forth to their answer for a fact which they little dreamt
they should ever hear of again, or answer too: namely, for killing of those
men whom they slew at mount Tabor. Tush, they in their iollitie had put them to
the sword, with the rest of the company, no respect had of persons (nay it is
like the rather, because they seemed to be of note and worth) and all to make
boast of their gallant spirits, victorious, brave, and proud stomachs: not
unlike to him, whose glory it was to cut off the thumbes of seventy Judge. 1. 7.
Princes, and put them like dogs under his board to gather crummes. As
touching the abuse of men's prosperity I have often spoken, and of the right use
thereof: but here one word (more particularly) let me add to warn men, how
they ought to demean themselves in their places, when by reason either of
their great success, unlooked for preferment, or what other occasion soever
their corrupt flesh might take to forget themselves: I say, let men beware what
they do in their jolly, lusty, or merry moodes, when they 3. Doct. ver. 18.
think they have the world in a sling, and none may control them: even then,
I say, let them control themselves, and take heed lest any insolent,
disdainefull, cruel, injurious, words or deeds, break out of the superfluity
of Note.
their pride and bravery: which hereafter either God or man might bring forth
against them, when they shall be abased and in meaner condition. Which
counsel I give not to them who are in these pangs, (for I know it little
boots to tell a drunken man, You have done that in your drunkenness which you
will repent of being sober) but to arm men both against all such unlawful
occasions, as the most seek after, to the end they may utter this stomach of
theirs, as gaming, drinking, challenges, quarrels, contentions and suites of
law, etc. as also against the corrupt abuse even of lawful blessings, which
(if a man be not very wary) will tickle and prick him forward at one time or
other, to some odious carriage of himself, which afterward may be remembered
against him to his reproach, loss and shame, yea ruin, as here we see in
these. Even Heathens have prudently observed this, That a wise man will carry
himself no otherwise being prosperous, then as one who considers, that one
day he may be miserable. And indeed such jolly fellows had need of this
warrant even to man-ward, that they shall never fall nor decay in their estate;
seeing that else, who sees not what fruit they reap of their scorn and
pride, to wit, that being underfoot all men rejoice in their ruin, and make
them their pastime, few or none pitying them, or taking their part: whereas
others are lamented and reliued in their misery. Who pitieth Herod eaten up
with worms, because he would so proudly exceed the bounds of man* and be
counted a God? Haman was hanged upon the gallows: who reads it not with joy,
rather then is grieved at it? because (while he was aloft) he made himself
the terror of the Church for his cruelty? How should Job have answered it in
his affliction, if he had usurped over his underlings, Job 31. 13. 14.
being in prosperity? When David sent messengers to Hanun to 2. Sam. 10. 4.
comfort him, he cuts off their garments by the middle, and shaues them, and so
sends them back to their Master. But the time came, when he repented him of
that jolly defiance. Tush, says Sheba, who is David, and who is the 2. Sam.
20. 1. Judge. 9. 28.
son of Ishai? Who is Abimelech said Gaal? A base fellow, I defy and scorn
him and his: but soon after, he wished that unsaid again, and so did the
other. And thus of these now mentioned, together with Adonibezek, and them of
Succoth and Penuel, let this suffice that has been said. Therefore as for all
desperate and profane wretches (whom nothing but the halter, or stabbing, or
such like deserved plague of God befalling them, will persuade the truth
hereof) let them go as they are. But let all Gods people (who are to look at
God as well as men) beware especially, that they forget not themselves this way:
but walk humbly, with due weighing their own vileness, and the
changeableness of all things here below; else even Esaias 39. 6.
they may fall, as Ezechia did.

As Gedeon did here, so it is lawful for us to prosecute our brethrens Doct.
verse. 19.
wrongs, as murder, yea it is meet so to do, as in the book of Numbers
appears, and this, not only in a private respect for that we are their flesh
(in Numb. 35. 31.
which kindness is to be showed to them) but also, (and much more) in the
public behalf of Church and Commonwealth: both which it much concerns, that
sin be not unpunished. This the Lord requires, as by Salomons 1. Kings 2. 31.
words may be gathered, which he spoke of Ioab, saying: let him be slain,
that evil may be removed, and we may not be guilty of the innocent blood,
which he has shed. But to return to the point in hand, as it is good to
rejoice with out friends, and live together with them for our mutual good: so
is it also a token of our unfeigned love toward them, to pursue their wrongs
being dead. And this were highly commendable if it were done according to Gods
law. But as it is commonly gone about, I mean, so that flesh and blood with
carnal reason do rule, as it highly displeases God, so likewise it marres
the action, as in the next point shall appear. And namely to pursue any for
them, when they suffer for their deserts, as the most do: or when they be hurt
by them, with whom they were companions in evil: and therefore justly suffer at
the hands of one another: although the Magistrate is to punish the offender
even in that case also: as when drunkards or quarrellers shed the blood of each
other. And as the Lord himself has put a difference betwixt casual or
unwilling killing, and wilful murder: Joshua 20. 2.
as appears by his appointing in each Tribe, cities of refuge, for the
safeguard of the innocent: so he is far from justifying any such cruel pity,
as this, to spare the guilty murderer: but will himself as well plague them,
that shall seek to stop the due course of justice against such, as also find
out the murderer himself, (notwithstanding the secrefie wherewith much
villainy is cloaked) at one time or other. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth, and Exodus 21. 24.
he who sheddeth blood, his blood shall be shed. For the blood of the slain
cries strongly in the ears of the Lord, as that of Abel, and as the widow,
who Luke 18. 5.
by her importunity compelled the Judge to hear, and do her justice of her
adversary. And this further condemns the deadly revenge which is between
many, not persons only, but families and kindreds also, who upon such
murders, band themselves, and take parts each against other irreconciliably,
more fit for Pagans indeed then Christians, who should be joined together in
love, rather then divide themselves into sworn brotherhoods in mischief, like
those two, Simeon and Leui. Lastly, it bewraieth the lewdness of the Romish
pretended pity and mercifulness (not in protecting the guiltless,) but in
saving the vilest malefactors from the hand of the lawful Magistrate, whom God
has appointed to be the terror of ill doers, and not the mock and may game of
such shauelings. For if they being pursued, can get into those Temples (or
rather dens) of thieves, they are rescued (as in Sanctuaries) for fear of
law and punishment.

Again, in that Gedeon says, and swears to it, that he would not have
killed them, if they had saved his brethren alive, who ought to have done it,
for pursuing the people of God, (neither had he authority to save them, though
he had to destroy them:) and the Holy Ghost commends the act: it teaches,
that it is a very hard matter to do good actions aright, but that they will
one way or other be blemished and obscured: even as Iephtahs courage and
constancy in warring against the Ammonites was much dashed Judge 11. 30.
by his unseasonable and rash vow. And so particularly through our hastines,
boldness, blindness, or the like corrupt humors, many good actions do lose their
beauty. Which thing as it is with great regard to be looked to of us, so it
teaches, that we must not cleave to all the examples of Gods servants, without
respect and difference, nor follow them, because they did them, but examine
their grounds, and how they did them, following them only so far 1. Cor. 11. 1.
as they have obeyed the Lord: for therein only they are presidents for us to
follow, where their doings are examples agreeable to the rule that should guide
us: for that is to be looked unto which is Gods, not men's. And further it
should teach us more specially, to examine our actions, the manner, end,
affections and mind wherewith they be done; which is the thing that I do here
aim at to lay forth: for those things which we do in ignorance and
darkness, we have not only no comfort in them, neither learn any experience
by them to be better directed afterward; but contrariwise we have much to
grieve our hearts and to accuse us thereby. And this I add the rather, because
we see that Gedeon ouer-shot himself in this, who yet most worthily tempered
wisdom and equity with severity in the punishing of the men of Succoth and
Penuel. Now because few of Gods children will believe this, therefore they see
not, that the most offenses that they commit, are abuses of good duties. They
dare not sin grossly, and so long they think all is well: but when they are
about good actions, they are soon ouer-shot: and why? They are there where
they should be (being so occupied) Note.
they presume and suspect no danger: even as the traveler riding in a most
straight path or rode, hedged in on both sides, so that he cannot go amiss.
But oh silly man consider, thou bear about thee a body of sin, an evil
heart, even in a good heart: what wonder then if much evil cleave to thy best
actions, when no other thing is looked at, but the good? when the hypocrisy,
ignorance, boldness, pride, and other corruptions thereof lies unseen,
unpurged: nay when a corrupt humor sets a man on work to do a good duty,
that it may lurk under the vizor thereof: as anger and malice, under zeal and
holy revenge, which is as odious as Nadab and Abihu Leuit. 10. 1.
their offering Incense with strange or common fire. Is not hearing, prayer, a
good action? Yet our Savior says: Take heed how ye hear: Paul says, Luke
8. 18. Ephesians. 6. 18.
Watch your selves in prayer, Ephesians. 6. For if ye look not narrowly to your
selves in these, keeping your selves attentive, reverent, confident, humble,
fervent, throughout them; the devil will watch you so, that as good never a
whit, as never the better when all is done. And if this be so, even in things
religious, how much more in those which are indifferent? For under this
pretense, That to be angry, merry in company, to eat, drink, recreate the
body, etc. are things neither good nor evil in nature; who forgets not this,
That these all, change their nature when they come into action, and cannot be
indifferently done? They are good or bad according to the manner of doing.
Therefore though anger be not evil of it self, yet the Lord justly
challenges Jonah, saying, Do thou well to be angry? meaning, so corruptly
Jonah. 4. 4.
and carnally. Therefore, as easy a work as men think it, to carry
themselves aright in all these: yet let them know, that if in any of them they
transgress the rule either of piety, love, or sobernes; the goodness, or
indifferency of the work, shall not save them harmless. For instance, if in
their zeal, they neither aim at Gods glory, nor the reformation of the
party, nor the moderation of the affection: their zeal is folly, rage, error,
or any thing rather then holy zeal. But of this point I have spoken in this
book often, and shall speak afterward, if God will. Let me add this caveat
to the Ministers, that in all their teaching, especially in the doctrine of
these duties, they beware lest they teach men their liberty (which they learn
too soon of themselves, and catch greedily from them) and be large therein:
but slight and short in teaching the rules before named, to restrain the abuse
thereof: rather be they short in the former, and wary and large in the latter,
to cut off all lewd pretenses. As we see Paul does, for having said, Be
angry: fearing he should have disciples too many: he straight way Ephesians 4. 26.
adds, [but sin not] and this cuts the comb of the Libertine. So does the
wise Preacher, Eccles. 11. Rejoice young man, and take thy pleasure, etc. But
know that for all this thou shall come to judgment. Now if the best be subject
Eccles. 11. 9.
to these failings, what shall be said of the worst? Surely no wonder, if they
regard not at all, whether it be good or bad they do, but run to their
object, as the fish to the bait? Or if they do enquire, then they do it
after the fact done, as Salemon says of the sacrilegious, which bewraies a
vile mind. Prou. 20. 25.
For if they desire to hear it be well, what a prophanenes is this to desire
that Gods rule were crooked, so their doings be straight? But if they think
otherwise, they make the Minister of God a stale, and as for God himself, they
make him a God of cloutes, who must take their frothie repentance and
satisfaction in good part, be it what and when they please: but for themselves,
they will be on the surest hand with him, first to satisfy their desire, and
to inquire aftewards, whether they did well or no. Again for good duties, they
cannot do them well, themselves being evil: as for indifferent: Luke 6. 46.
though they say, Let us alone, if we know we may do them, we will take order
good enough for the manner and end. For like fools they run into the
contrary extremity, or else into monstrous excess in the use of the
liberty. So that truly it is said of such, They are set in slipperie places:
for they delight most of all to set their foot on the brinke of the ditch or
river, who sees not with what danger? but they love not to walk upon plain
ground, which they might do safely: and so they slide suddenly, and in the end
perish remedilesly.

Gedeons moving his son to fall upon the two Princes, was to train him Doct.
verse. 20.
to be acquainted with pursuing ill causes and persons as soon as he grew fit
for it, and not to teach him from his vouth to be cruel. For that quickly
pricks which will be a thorn, of it self, and needs no sharpning: either this
or any other sin. By this example (well approved by the best rule) Christians
should frame their children betimes, and as their years will permit, to
discern good from bad: and beware how they use their tongues, or behave
themselves in the sight or hearing of their children, even when they are most
tender: seeing they are apprehensiue enough of that which is Note.
lewd, and especially when their parents shall strengthen their inward
pronenesse to evil by their authority: as (God willing) shall better appear
after in chap. 17. 2. As for this action of his, howsoever it may seem
cruelty to such as cannot judge, yet it was piety and obedience to Gods
commandment. And youth in this age, had need in all wise manner to be moved,
and (if it may be) persuaded, to the embracing and following of good
instruction, and religious walking, they being so soon possessed by ill
education and company, of the sins of the time, as never more in any age or
memory then in this.

Although the act was good, that he was urged to, yet fear and modesty 2
in him being so young, was commendable: for there must be time to settle youth
even in that which is good, which takes not root easily, much less grows to
bring forth fruit, especially when there is some show and appearance of evil
in it. As in Gedeons son unexperienced in these kinds of manhood and
courage, the falling upon two valiant Princes by him a boy, it was to be
commended that he feared to do it. His father did well in urging, but
tenderness excused him, in not obeying. His example may worthily set to school
too many youths too bold of their own accord, without instigation, to attempt
and set upon not doubtful but vile actions of theft, whoredom, drunkenness,
swearing, ribaldrie and the like, odious both to God and man, as breaking all
bounds of modesty, fear, and bashfulnes: the enjoying of the which are comely
ornaments in youth; and do stand them instead, while yet religion is to seek
with them, to keep and hold them back from great and shameful evils, as
bold fellowship with lewd huswiues and companions. And here justly may we take
up a lamentation over our times, for the want of civil and godly education of
youth: whereby sin has now so got the upper hand, that the boldness which we
have seen in grown sinners, men of ripe years, with astonishment, we behold
now with execration, even in children and youth, new come out of the shell. And
while parents (guilty of the same, or at least irreligious) do in particular
neglect the care of such their children, by dissuading, and discouraging them
from the sins of the time, and by good education keep them from them, behold
the disease grows, ere they be aware, common and desperate: and those
parents are so few that show their care this way, that it were well if
religious parents often times did not nourish and wink at such evil qualities
in their children.

Now when these two Princes see the youth fearful, they (as men impatient of
further delay) provoke Gedeon himself to fall upon and slay them, and so rid
them out of the way. And they descant upon the youths tenderness, as if Gedeon
had not been well advised what he did. The child (say they) does according to
his age: he is not fit for such a work. The like discourse they make before,
in their answer to Gedeon; They were like thee (say they) like the children of
a King. Of both these together, because they bewray the same spirit and nature
in them. First then in the 18. verse they deny not the fact, but describe the
persons whom they slew, that they were Princes fellows, as I have said, and
all to declare the greatness of their courage and stomach: but they abase not
themselves so low as to ask pardon, neither to crave any favor. And by this
we may see, what are the props whereby wicked and desperate men stay up and
hearten themselves in their miseries and extremities: their props are profane
and devilish magnanimity, and a desperate lofty stomach, which they call a
brave mind, which will yield itself for no fault, neither blush, or seek any
favor, through a senselesnes of Gods wrath. And to join therewith this second
reply of theirs in this verse, they bewray the same here also, when they say,
Fall thou on us, or, dispatch us with thine own hands. And this I note of them
not so much to their shame (who being Heathens, what wonder though they were no
better reformed) as to the shame of such as come after them, who being in the
Church, should be better, but yet are led by their spirit: who are so blinded
and hardened by the devil, that they think it an ornament to them, and a
chief point of manhood, to shrink for nothing, but to bear off all by the
head and shoulders, as they say, and to seem to men to set light by a violent
death, as appears in them who desperately cast themselves off the ladder into
hell, if God be not merciful: which contempt of death is yet contrary to
their own nature, and feeling within them. And this sin rests not in these
only of the worst and most proiected sort, but reaches to many professors: who
if they have done evil, yet set a good face, I mean, a bold, on it; but
relent not in any wise, nor will be known to be such as they are, and know
themselves to be: of which sort we find Gehezas the servant of Elisha the
Prophet to have been, who when his sin was covertly bewrayed by his master,
(saying, From whence come thou Gehezai) answered boldly, and 2. King. 5. 25.
that with a lie, Thy servant has been no where, meaning but where he should
be, to wit, about his business. This devilish shamelesnes and hardening of
heart is ever by the servants of God to be turned into relenting, melting, and
meeknes of spirit, or else they may be sure, with the wicked to meet with
much sorrow. Of which point more has bin said elsewhere, chap. 2. and
therefore I touch it here but by the way.

As touching Gedeon, he (as became him) dispatched them, wherein (setting aside
the fault before mentioned) he executed the vengeance of God upon them being
the ring leaders, as before he had done upon the other multitude of the
Midianites. And thus we see a goodly end to the people of God of this sore
affliction, if we view the whole, both misery and deliverance out of it, and
the overthrow of their enemies, as it has been set down from the beginning of
the sixth chapter unto this place. Let it teach us thus to view and consider
Gods great works both in his visitation and chastizing his people, and also
their behavior under them, with his restoring them to their liberties again,
and his blessing of them. These are the treasures and riches that we should
store not our books only, but our memories also with, that out of them all we
may learn the better to mark and observe throughout our lives Gods dealing
with us, and how we in faith, Note.
hope, and patience, may be like the best of Gods servants, and enjoy the
things promised, as they did, til we may with Paul learn by our experience,
that hope shall not make us ashamed: but believe for all times to come, that
God who has, and does, he also will deliver us unto the end.

Now lastly in this scripture it is added, that Gedeon took of the ornaments,
which were in form and show goodly to look upon, and costly, as was fitting
for Princes, which were the furniture of their Camels: these ornaments (I say)
with whatsoever else was of price, Gedeon took away: which could not be of
small price and value. Whereby, as we may see that God plucketh the prey out of
the teeth of the wicked, (when he pleases) and gives it to the righteous, as
Dauia speaks in the Psalm, and as is to be seen in the Psalm. 3. 6. 2.
King. 7. 16.
2. book of Kings, chap. 7. how he relieved his people in their famine and
distress, with the spoil and goods of his enemies the Aramites: so by this
which God did here to Gedeon, that scripture is verified, which says: First
seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and other things shall be
added to Matthew. 6. 33.
you. For while Gedeon in the simplicity of heart, and desire of obeying God,
did pursue the enemies of his people, intending that business wholly, and not
minding earthly profit at all, behold, even that also befell him, and was
brought to his hands. And it is as easy to see and behold at this day, as it
shall be always found true, that while Gods servants in all conditions and
degrees, seek the Lord with all their heart, he provides other necessary
Genes. 28. 21.
helps for this present life, which they do not so much seek after. As
Jacob, when he had renewed his covenant with the Lord in his journey to Aram,
Genes. 32. 10.
confesses at his returning home how liberally God had provided for him. Oh
how many may witness the same? For why? as the Lord is true of his promise, so
he is a plentiful rewarder of them that seek him. And as he regards Hebr.
11. 6.
such not meanly; so he deals justly with those that are unfaithful and
worldly minded; that whereas they might seem by their greedines and their
unwearied following their commodities (with the casting of care of things
heavenly) to get all wealth into their hands, they often times attain not that
which they pursue, and those that do attain it, have got but the wind in
their fist, even nothing, who see they cannot hold it, when Prou. 23. 5.
they most desire it. And this is to teach us contentment in a godly estate,
yea thankfulness, and not to have our teeth watering after the dainties of the
other. A dish of green herbs is better in such a case, then a stalled ox.
Prou. 15. 16. 17. and 16. 8.


Verse. 22. Then the men of Israel said unto Gedeon, Reign thou over us, both
thou, and thy son, and thy sons son, for thou have aeliuered us out of
the hand of Midian.

23. And Gedeon said unto them, I will not reign over you, neither shall my
child reign over you, but the Lord shall reign over you.

The third part of the Chapter.
IN this last part of the Chapter follow certain particulars concerning The
sense and doct. of verse 22.
Gedeon, and the first that is set down, is the offering of the kingdom to
Gedeon and his posterity, by the men of Israel, and the reason which they
render of their so doing: with his refusing it, in these two verses. The
general act of the people was good, in that they showed themselves thankful
to him, for the great deliverance which they had obtained by him (as Gods
instrument) out of all the oppression of the Midianites, their enemies. And it
binds all to the like duty, when they have received kindness. So both
kindred, town and country ought to show kindness to him and his, by whom
they have received some great good and benefit. Thus did Pharaoh advance
Joseph, and his brethren, and father, for that he had preserved his land in
the famine, and it was complained of, that there arose another Pharaoh Exodus 1.
8.
afterward, who did not know him. And David remembered Ionathans Genes. 47. 6.
kindness to him after he was dead, in doing good to his. 2. Sam. 9 7.


This caused Solomon to utter this proverb: Thine own friend, and thy fathers
Prou. 27. 10.
friend for sake thou not. And so, (to descend to smaller kindness betwixt one
neighbor and another) this thankfulness ought to be showed, that while both
it and the fruit of it be continued betwixt them, there may be peace and good
will, which otherwise (for the most part) is banished from men, unless it be
covered with dissimulation. For while the one scorneth to owe any thing to the
other, professing that he can live without him, and the other is backward in
love, whereby he might win his neighbor: what is nourished between both, but
strangeness, suspicion, uncharitableness, discord, and such cursed effects
and fruits thereof? And now last of all in this matter, if thankfulness be
due for outward favors and good turns, how much more should it be showed for
the greatest of all, as when one man has by his industry, labor, and love,
bin the instrument and mean, of the salvation of many? In which respect Paul
wrote to Philemon thus: I will Philem. 19.
not say (though he might) that thou owe to me even thine own self. And so
other such may say, who have received the like kindness by any of us, as to be
delivered from the wrath to come by our teaching, though it little appear by
the requital of love and kindness again, I mean to procure their joy who
reclaimed them; by being shining lights afterward. But this has been showed at
large verse. 1. before.

Now as I have spoken of the general act of the Israelites toward Gedeon, 2.
Doct. ver. 22.
which all may see to have been commendable, in that they were thankful,
(though not without some weakness) so yet their particular act in offering the
kingdom to him, as far of from allowance in them, that it was utterly
unlawful: for it was not in their power, and therefore they offered that which
was not theirs, as shall better appear by Gedeons answer in the next verse. We
ought by this to beware, that we be not liberal of another man's right and
good, in giving that which belongs not to us. As many love for name and credit
to be liberal, but it shall be of stolen, or (which is all one) of other men's
goods. Even so, (to show it in another kind) neither may any man give his soul
to the devil, as witches and coniurers, and many other though not so
apparently do; for they are bought with a price: nor our bodies to be defiled,
for they are redeemed, and made the Temples of the holy Ghost. This needs no
long standing upon: but by this we are taught, that as their sin is great, as
oppressors, gripers and gamesters, who enjoy to their own benefitill gotten
goods, and restore them not; so neither ought we to receive of any man that
which is not his own, but ill come by, if we certainly know it. Otherwise the
receiver is excused, who in his simplicity does presume charitably, that to be
of the giuers proper goods, which he knows not certainly to have been badly
gotten. Neither shall the simple affection of the receiver, acquit the ill
conscience of the giver, whose sin herein is double, both that he has
attained his wealth unconscionably: and then played the part of Achan, in
covering his stealth, what though it be under the fair pretense of religious
and devout liberality? Doubtless if Ananias were guilty of sacrilege, for
detaining to himself a part of that which he Acts 5. 3.
had alienated from himself, and consecrated to the Lords use: how much more
they who first rob others, and then feed the Lord with the spoil, as Lions do
their Whelps of that which they have ill gotten? It is the cast of many
caterpillars, when they have sucked and drawn the blood of others all their
life, like horsleaches ready to burst, they will satisfy for their villainy, by
paying the tithe or some shred of their unrighteous Mammon to the use of the
Lord, or the Church: whereas this sanctifies not the rest, that is behind, but
makes all their goods execrable to them and theirs, till restitution be made
either in kind, or to the poor (the true heirs of such goods) if it cannot
otherwise be, to the pleasing of God, as a fruit of their unfeigned repentance
So no man ought to buy or hire that which is passed over to another before, nor
covet wife, servant, goods, of another man's (for that is nothing else but a
taking of his right from him) nor to receive stolen goods for their advantage.
So neither should the Pope usurp dominion: S. Peter 1. Pet. 5. 3.
(whose successor he says he is) forbidding dominion over the flock, for he
has no such authority, as neither has the best minister of Christ.

Gedeon answers, God shall reign over them, (an holy speech) for where Verse.
23.
shall they be found that will refuse a thing much less then a kingdom being
offered? nay, how greedily would many have fastened upon a matter of small
value, being offered them, as the kingdom here was to him? But some will ask,
Might not God reign over them though he had also? I say, Yes. Neither was he
of the Anabaptists opinion, who think that such civil government and
subjection of people to Kings repugneth to Christian liberty. And God reigned
over his people, when yet Saul, and after him David reigned over them also: but
his meaning was, that the order that God had set (of governing by such as had
no continued government,) should stand, and not be perverted by or for him or
his: but contrariwise, to his power he would hinder it. And God reigned indeed
in the Commonwealth of the Israelites, which flourished in Gedeons time, wherein
the Elders were chosen by common consent, some ecclesiastical to give the
meaning of the law, and others civil and temporal, as men call it, to rule
the people thereby: in which office if they did not well carry themselves,
they were both punished and put from their places. And if any war fell out,
the Lord himself stirred up Guides and Judges, and they were not chosen by
men, as appears both by Chapter 1. 1. and after neither did their children
succeed them: and thus the Lord both in peace and war ruled over them, and so
Gedeon meant, that the office of the Judge was no ordinary magistracy, such as
the King is: but a temporary and occasional, much like to the Dictatorship of
the Romans, in respect of the use whereto it served: although otherwise of
divine election, immediately, not by men. By this answer, the singular
modesty, and the religious staidness and good government of Gedeon
appears: who having occasion so fairly offered of possessing and inioying
the kingdom, refuses it as resolutely, as they offered it earnestly. He is
indeed the strong man, who stands out stoutly, when the brunt comes: now
Gedeous sincerity and courage is tried: and now he plaieth the part of a truly
heroical captain, in rejecting the tentation that was set before him. Which
of how great force it was to batter and beat him down flat, although mean
persons cannot easily conceive, whose thoughts reach not so high, yet by the
comparing of great things with small, may well seem to be forcible, seeing that
a little preferment, favor, commendation or reward Doct. verse. 23.
does so bleare the eye, and choke the conscience of many professors, as if it
were a petty Paradise. In one instance consider of that which I say: Gedeon
refused a whole kingdom, when it was offered him: and the most desire
unlawfully a small commodity of their neighbors in comparison of a kingdom,
as his house and ground, wife and servant, when they be denied them. And yet
many a bold person would be ready to say even of Gedeon, He was a fool to
refuse and neglect such an advantage. Doubtless Note.
he did it not for any fear, or conscience of his own insufficiency: he had
been a man fir for the place, if the office had been lawful for him. But the
respect he had to Gods commandment, was the mere cause that moved him to
deny and refuse. A worthy pattern indeed of a man truly fearing God, and
making conscience of offending. And so it be comes us, both in sins of the
grossest kind, as adultery, murder, oppression, (from which the fear of God
does best and most safely keep us, as Joseph says) and also Genes. 39. 9.
in the matter of a man's private gain, yea and that in the highest degree of a
kingdom: it becomes us (I say) to keep our consciences pure and good. And
yet for the smallest of these many a man, otherwise virtuous, would (as the
common speech is) strain a joint, and think, that for a kingdom he might
venture to dispense with equity and conscience. And doubtless it is a great
trial of a man what grace is in him, when a matter of commodity, promotion,
honor, or the like, of the greatest value, cannot surprise the conscience; so
near is every man to himself; and indeed (when these temptations assail)
utterly unlike himself at other times. This example of Gedeon most properly
taxes ambitious and aspiring spirits, as well Popish as other, such as Absolons
was, not of immodesty only, but of insolency also, and intemperance, the
cause of all confusion in every state, especially being joined with
coffeehouse and emulation. But it were to be wished, that men of greater
hope, had but a little measure of Gedeons grace, and were not rather led by the
spirit of these whom I have mentioned, to wit, that in meaner matters, and of
less value they did not hardly contain and keep themselves within compass
from coveting and laying claim to other men's commodities, for the supplying of
their own wants, and to seek increase of that which they have, and not to
look after any thing which tends to the loss or hurt of other, but that they
lived contentedly with that which is theirs, who ought in so lively a glass as
this, to behold how honorable a grace this was in Gedeon to rest satisfied in
his estate, as thinking that best befitting him, which he might enjoy with
Gods good liking, and the quietness of his own mind: and as for other
endless wishing or coveting, to inhaunse himself, (which is most men's sin)
he had got the victory over himself in that behalf, which I think was a
greater honor to him then all his conquest over the Midianites: it being an
ouerruling of himself, and of his vaineglorious affection. But to the shame of
many Protestants, I will add one example, even an Heathen might set us to
school in this duty: who having subdued his enemies in battle, and returned
home with triumph, was presented by some with a great mass of gold: but he
repelled the^ with this answer; I had rather rule them that owe the gold, then
be Lord and owner of the gold only, or rather to be a servant, ruled and
possessed by it. Oh well were it for us, if the holy government of our hearts
and affections were so precious to us Christians, as it was to many of them,
who were Heathen: whereas they were drawn by a pride and ambition of praise,
or at least bare love of virtue, to contemn such offers, but we by religion,
and hope of a far greater matter, then the greatest earthly kingdom.

And this also more particularly teaches, that all must endeavor in their
Doct. 2.
callings and places, that God may reign, as in all his heavenly ordinances,
so especially in this of government in Church, land, city, town, house; for
that (I say) only must stand, and all that is opposite must fall, Psalm. 2.
Religious Psalm. 2. 1.
government is to be sought for, yielded unto, and embraced, and not the
contrary: but the limits and bounds of Gods holy word kept and preserved,
which never repugneth to civil government of the lawful Magistrate, but
confirms it rather: so that God may be obeyed, and equity and justice
maintained, for the preservation of outward peace and order in all things. And
so I might say particularly of every condition. But alas, what care is there
had of this? but it is rather iustled aside at men's pleasure. For though we
pray daily, that God may be glorified by the coming of his kingdom, and the
guiding us to the doing of his will: which if it might Note.
take place, what a blessed thing were it to see the superiors and inferiors,
in all degrees and estates, live together under the government of one God, and
mutually commanding and obeying each other in the Lord: yet we see the quite
contrary in men's practice. True it is, that the law of man stops much
disorder: and how could men enjoy any safe and peaceable dwelling without it?
but while the Lord is shut out of the conscience, the word and faithful
Minister of God despised, and in many places none at all to awake and prepare
the people for the life to come, and the ordinance of God in Magistracy, which
serves to back and authorize the Word, and to uphold other good order, little
to be regarded, and also little put in practice to restrain evil, but
Atheism, profaneness, and other great sins slightly punished, etc. behold,
every man runs his own course, and being wedded to his own wilful humor,
without fear of punishment, walks in his frowardness, atheism,
profaneness, scorn of religion, cruelty, oppression, contempt of the
Sabbath, ignorance, etc. saying as they in the Psalm, Our tongues are our
own, we will do as we list, who shall control Psalm 12. 4.
us? Surely none, but sin and the devil, rule and reign at their pleasure,
where the Lord by his word does not, but is iustled aside: but let us mourn
for those things, till the Lord amend them: but in the mean season, let us be
sure that we be guided by him ourselves in our whole course, or else hold our
peace of and concerning others. But I pass now to the second thing concerning
Gedeon.

THE FIFTY FOUR SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 24. And Gedeon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that you
would give me every man the earings of his pray; for they had golden earings
because they were Isma^lites. 25. And they answered, We will give them. And
they spread a garment, and did cast therein every man the earings of his pray.
26. And the weight of the golden earings that he required, was a thousand and
seven hundred shekels of gold, beside, collors and jewels and purple raiment
that was on the Kings of Midian, and besides the chains that were on their
cammels necks. 27. And Gedeon made an Ephod thereof, and put it in Ophrah his
city, all Israel went a whoring there after it, which became a snare unto
Gedeon, and to his house.
NOw after this victory over the Midianites, Gedeon desires The sense.
to leave a monument and memorial of is thanks to God for the same, and for
the great deliverance of Israel. And thought it meet, that it should be of some
value and price; and therefore he seeing the people so affected to him, that
they could willingly have agreed to make him their king, he thought they would
not stick at a smaller matter, but yield it to him: especially, seeing it was
not for his own private, but for their common benefit: and the thing that he
asked of them, was their eareings, which were costly, which he obtaining of the
people, made of them a Priests upper garment, of great value and richly set
forth, called an Ephod, which was to be worn upon their other apparel: and
this was the monument which he would have remain as a token of his thankful
heart. But it being set up in a place of his city Ophrah, because of the
form, and costlinesse of it, and for that it pertained to the Priests in the
service of God, and to religious use, it grew to be worshipped, which (through
Gods just judgment justly punishing Idolatry in the posterity following, was
the destruction of Gedeon and his house; so easily and soon did idolatry and
superstition arise up among them again.

Here first his thankful mind is to be commended, and imitated of us: Doct.
verse. 24.
thus ought our hearts in all benefits which we enjoy, lead us unto God the
fountain of each good giving, as Saint James says. But this point has been
James 1. 17.
largely handled: read notes upon the 5. chapter, and else where by occasion
of the like Scripture.

Again, we may learn here, that when we are willing to pleasure one another
Doct. verse. 24. 25. 26.
without taking any gratuitie again, (which few will do) we may be the
bolder to sue for somewhat to be put to good uses, as Gedeon intended here to
do, (though he was deceived) asking their earings to make a monument of
thanks to God: especially, I say, when we have refused to take to our own
private use, the commodity which has been offered us, (when it has been
thought we have deserved it) as Gedeon here did: in such a case we may desire
somewhat to be employed of the service and glory of God by them that offer it
us: as to the relieuing of the poor, or other good ends. And in this also he
deserved commendation, and was, and is to be followed of us. And as the people
yielded to him to a good use and end, so all good Christians ought with all
readiness to do the like toward the relieuing and helping of the needy, by
lending, giving, or any other friendship yielding, considering that Saint Paul
says, that free giving and liberality has great force to work on men: for a
bountiful person (says he) it may be some man will die; and so if one did
much good by bodily help in Romans 5. 7.
comforting the needy and poor, he might be like to do good by exhortation
also: both which duties of love it were to be wished might go together, for
thereby most good were like to be done. And so doing, we should move such as
think themselves beholding to us, to show themselves thankful to God also, so
bountiful to them that were in penury and want. And doubtless if the
honoring of our God were all in all with us, and predominant in us, this we
should mind and aim at in all our actions, to purchase this glory to him, to
whom we are so infinitely beholding for all that we enjoy. The Angel that
appeared to Manoah, though he refused to eat, yet willed Judge. 13. 16. Ester
7. 2. 3.
him to convert the gift, into an holy present, or sacrifice to God. Assuerus,
to declare his love to Hester, promised to give her what she requested, even to
the half of the kingdom: but she was content to resign her hope and
advantage that way, and turned the favor she found with the King, to the
advancing of Gods worship in and by the deliverance of the Jews from the
mischief of Haman. Good Nehemia, Butler to another King, finding Nehem. 2. 5.
him enclinable and favorable to himself, and pitying him in his heaviness:
presently offers to him the cause of the Church of God, to consider of, and
desires that he may by his means be comforted in the relief of his countrymen
the people of God. So Daniel having sundry rewards offered Dan. 5. 17. 20.
him for his good service by Nebuchadnezzar and Darius is content to to part
with them all, so that the King will acknowledge the Lord Iehoua, the author of
those gifts which he so admired. And reason there is hereof: for Exodus 32.
if Paul and Moses engaged their salvation, for the procuring of honor to Romans
9. 3.
God in the salvation of the Church: how much more are we bound to seek it by
the forgoing of such a favor as we may well be without, and need not accept
of? Besides, this wisdom should be in all Christians, to use every opportunity
they may to the poor Church of God, especially seeing such occasions befall
not often, nor to all sorts of men, in this kind. And further they had need of
good discretion who should persuade men to convert that civil kindness which
they offer them as friends, to a religious use, as Christians: sithence they
may think it either unseasonable, or merely lost which they are drawn to
bestow upon such matters, except themselves be first persuaded to the love of
religion, and delight in the Saints of God, Psalm. 16. 2.
as Psalm. 16. Therefore to knit the next verse and the sum thereof, with
this which belongs to the same end, let both sorts learn their duty. They
who benefit others without hope of requital, let them not do it to make
others obliged and bound to them, as servants and underlings; but use all the
interest, credit, and love they have in and with them, (if they have
opportunity) to persuade them to love and good works, and to draw them to
God, if they be strangers; as the truth is, at the first, ignorant folk are
more drawn by such inducements, then otherwise: or if they be already
Christians, let them labor to draw them nearer, as I have said: saying thus
every man to the other: If I may prevail with you any thing, or ye would
gratify me, prefer God and his favor yourselues, and exhort other to do so,
and commend godliness also to them, and the poor members of Christ, to make
much of them, and to be their delight, who excel in virtue, before all earthly
commodities: as for your gratuitie, let the needy and distressed be partakers
of it, and let them take my part, who shall bless God for your pity and
bounty to them, and they shall yield you a ten fold better requital then I,
being but one, can do. And this be said of them who pleasure other without
looking for any requital again. The other who receive benefit, and
acknowledge that they have been pleasured by them, and that they owe a duty
again: if their offer be not accepted by the party, let them not then
foolishly draw back their hand altogether from every good use, saying; Seeing
he will not receive this of me, I am discharged, and free from unthankfulness:
as for others, I regard them not. For this savors of a sinister meaning, not
of a cheerful and hearty thanksgiuer, such an one as that good Naaman was,
2. King. 5. and these here mentioned, who readily 2. King. 5. 15.
answer to Gedeon, asking of them their earings to a good end, as he intended
it, we are willing to give that to thee, which thou ask to a good end and
purpose: for it is like he told them, that he asked them not to his own
behoof.

Gedeon did well to set up a remembrance of Gods kindness, as Jacob left a
Verse. 27. Genes. 28. 18.
memorial of Gods appearing to him, when he went into Mesopotamia, changing
the name of the place, and calling it the house of God: for there the Lord had
promised him safe deliverance from the wrath of his brother Esau, and to be
with him whither he went, and to bring him safely back again: even the like
mind did Gedeon show here, desiring to keep a remembrance of Gods deliverance
there. But in making the Ephod, which was the sign thereof, Gedeon was very
unadvised, and dealt without due and good consideration. For in so weighty a
case as that, and of so dangerous consequence, it had been meet that he had
first consulted with the Lord about it, and so (according to the resolution he
should have received from him) to have done: to wit, to have abstained from
such a work: as undoubtedly he must and would have done, if God had bin
consulted with, and might have ouer-ruled. And this is the fruit of rashness
and carelesnes, whereas a small matter might have prevented all. It was, I say,
no better in Gedeon then inconsiderate, though his meaning were good. For God
ordained not the Ephod to such an end, but only for the Priests to wear in
the Tabernacle when they offered sacrifice: and permitted it not to men to
follow him therein, neither to make one for civil uses. It is charitably to be
thought that Gedeon committed not Idolatry himself, who had thrown down the
Altar of Baal before with detestation, and cut down his grove: but howsoever
it was, as it is not certain to us; yet seeing he did otherwise in setting up
the Ephod, then God had commanded, he fell into a kind of Idolatry, or was
at least a great occasion thereof, and so the Lord being offended, punished his
issue and posterity, rewarding them both with the unthankfulness of the people,
and also with the cruelty of Abimelech.

So that though Gedeons meaning was otherwise, yet this displeased the Doct.
verse. 27.
Lord which he did, for that he consulted not with him in that strange work
which he took in hand. Therefore we see that it is not enough to have a good
intent (as they call it) in that which we do to serve God in, but knowledge
must go before out of the word, to warrant and uphold us in our attempts and
doings. For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: and we are happy Romans 14.
23.
when we do good things, but so, that we first know them to be such indeed, and
not otherwise: for Israel had a zeal, but not according to knowledge. Romans 10.
2. 1. Sam. ^ 5.
David would have builded God an house, then the which who could have gone
about a better thing in all men's account and judgment? But God reproved him by
Nathan, and yet he himself consented to him at first, upon the like good
intent.

So, many have since the days of Queen Mary, and some still do of a good
intent, enter into the Ministry, though many other intend nothing but to
enrich themselves with living: whom the Lord allows not by his word, they
being not able to feed his people with the food of life. So we read that
Saul saved the fattest of the cattle (as he said) to sacrifice, contrary 1.
Sam. 15. 22.
to the word of the Lord; which if it had been so, had been bad: but that was
only a false pretense to cover his covetousness, and disobedience to the
commandment.

Then Samuel reproving him, was feign to answer him: Has the Lord as great
pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifice, as that his law should be obeyea?
Therefore good intentions (corruptly so called) cannot be accepted of him,
except they be directed by knowledge.

Of such intents arose most parts and points of Popery: the orders of Monks,
the worshipping of the Sacrament, canonical hours, free will, relics,
prayers to Saints, etc. Of all the which, and the like, the Lord says, as he
did by the Prophet Esaias in the like case, Who required these things at your
Esaias 1. 12.
hands? And in another place, In vain does this people worship me, teaching
for Esaias 29. 13.
doctrines, the precepts of men. So that by all which has been said, it is
manifest how prone and ready we are to Idolatry and superstition. And what
other thing does this teach us, but that it is a mystery to serve God aright
1. Tim. 3. 16.
and religiously: and that cannot stand with the common practice of men in the
worshipping of God, who receive not the word in the power thereof, to work upon
them effectually, and so as they may be cast into the mould thereof, but for
fashion and orders sake.

Again, Gedeons setting up the Ephod, was the occasion of the peoples 2
falling to commit spiritual fornication with it, through his letting it
alone, and they worshipped it, as their fathers did the brazen Serpent: which
therefore Ezechia commanded to be taken down. Gedeon had done well therefore,
if he had so served the Ephod also, when he saw superstition to arise by
occasion of it. And this is the best fruit and success of blind and ignorant
devotion, that it draws some mischief always with it, as the gross
absurdities in Popery, of which I spoke, arose at the first upon such
beginnings. So that the thing which in these cases is to be done, is, that all
superstition and implements thereof be held out of the Church of Christ: but if
any of them have been suffered to remain, the next is, that as soon as may
be, they be removed. And as for Gods ordinances, they ought not to be turned
from their kind and right use of serving him in civil cases, (as the Ephod
was appointed by Gedeon) as to make plays of them, or offer them any such
abuse: as the Word and Sacraments. But I pass to another thing concerning the
people.

Lastly, in that sundry of the people fell to Idolatry with the Ephod, who had
before worshipped God aright, with an upright heart; and a plague of 3
God fell upon them for it, note we, that they who after they have received the
knowledge of the truth, do fall to Idolatry, do never escape destruction, if
they lie still therein, or some fearful plague, although they rise out of it
again, and depart from it. Solomon was a witness hereof, both in himself,
and in his posterity, whose punishment is famous for harkning to his
idolatrous wives. And the Lord professes himself in that case to be jealous,
as a man that takes his wife in spouse-breach, who (most certainly) will not
spare the offender. Prou. 6. 34.


Verse. 28. Thus was Midian brought low before the children of Israel, so that
they lift up their heads no more: and the country was in quietness forty
years, in the days of Gedeon.

29. Then Ierubbaal the son of Ioash went and dwelt in his own house.

30. And Gedeon had seventy sons, begotten of his body: for he had many
wives.

31. And his Concubine that was in Shechem bare him a son also, whose name he
called Abimelech.

IN these four verses another thing concerning Gedeon is set down: and first
it is showed, how Midian for a^h ^he multitude and glory thereof was The sense
of these four verses.
brought low: whereby may be noted the sorrow of such of them as lived, and the
shame and confusion both of the living and the dead, with the fruit thereof, to
wit, a final suppression of that enemy, and a long peace of forty years
restored, all the life of Gedeon. Secondly, three more particulars concerning
Gedeon are added: The first to his commendation: that having done the service
for which the Lord extraordinarily called him, he willingly yielded himself to
a private life again, as he professed against the contrary, verse 22. The two
latter were to his blame. First his polygamie in verse. 30. Secondly, his
yielding to the unlawful desire of his Concubine of Shechem, and making way
thereby to the mischief that insued.

For the first of these, the text says, Midian was subdued and brought low,
Doct. verse. 28.
etc. which being understood of the multitude of them, teaches, and proves,
that we ought to look always to the end of things, and not to the beginnings,
and flourishing estate of them, and this to do, the Scripture calls sound
wisdom. Think we of the godliest, and things of greatest account, pleasure,
pomp, dignity, wealth, buildings, purchases, solemn marriages, or such like,
I grant that the most men rejoice and please themselves in them vainly and
foolishly for the time, as if they had gotten a paradise; but when all may see
them to fade daily with the enioyers thereof, and change to corruption, no wise
man can or dare please himself or rest in them, as if they could make him
happy; but as he sees the end will be thereof, so he will enjoy the^ from God,
as things decaying and transitory. What then? ye will (perhaps) say, shall he
not be glad of, nor delight in them till he do forgo them, and till an end of
them come? I answer, that I say not so. But he shall know what the end of
them all will be before it come, by the manner Note.
of using them. For he that seeks by all these, to be more fruitful in duty
doing to God, and in works of love to men, and not to take boldness to sin the
rather by occasion of them, this man may know that the end shall be good, and
in respect thereof, he may use them all comfortably, seeing he uses them
warily and aright, as God directs him, for in that he does so, God also
blesses him exceedingly, which blessing few attain thereto.

The Lord is brought in by Moses in Deuteronomy bemoning the want Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
of practicing this point of wisdom in men, saying, Oh that my people were
wise, and would consider their end. And the Apostle asks this question of the
Romans, what fruit or pleasure they ever had in that, which in the end Romans
6. 21.
brought shame to them? The wise and the foolish virgins give clear proof
Mat. 25. 3. 4. etc.
unto this: the foolish contenting themselves to be without oil in their
lamps, that is, to walk securely, were therefore shut out: the wise waiting
with oil in their lamps, till the Bridegroom came, and therefore thus
watching to the end, were taken in, and received readily. Look upon Absolon
for all the advancing of himself, and on Adonia: look upon Baltazar 2. Sam.
18. 17. 1. King. 2. 25. Dan. 5. 6.
for all his iunketting with his choice company in the holy vessels of the
Temple; and upon Haman though he only was bidden to the banquet with the King
by Queen Hester, and for all his other honor that he had, Hester 5. 11.
compared with 7. 9.
(which yet he himself did not a little boast of) was not the end of it
greater shame, then the best of it was glory?

Look upon the young man to whom Solomon speaks, who rejoiced, Eccles. 11. 9.
as if he should never be old, nor mee^e with worse cheer, then iollitie and
mirth: was it not told him, he should come to judgment? And what better end of
his delicious life found the rich man in the Gospel, then torments? And Luke
16. 25.
thus I might heap up examples infinitely, both out of the Scripture, and out
of our own experience, of them who had gotten much here, and they were many in
number in all ages that did thus, as the Midianites (of whom I now speak) and
were for their greatness, and in their time, the talk of the world, yet having
no sure hold of heaven, nor part in other happiness then transitory, came to
naught, and were worse then nothing; so as one may say of them, as Christ said
of Judas, It had been good for them that they had never been borne. Therefore I
conclude: blessed is the man that has an eye to the end of his actions, and of
all things which he beholds here under the sun: and so deals, that he
may find and enjoy thereby a good end of his life: therefore when the holy
Ghost to the Hebrews commended the faith of some, he wills the reader to
consider what has bin the end of the conversation Hebr. 13. 8.
of such. And the Psalmist sends us to the end of the godly; Mark (says he)
the end of the righteous, for the end of him is peace. But for these that Psalm.
37. 37.
will be merry otherwise, howsoever they go to work, their end will be in
Note.
heaviness, according to the words of our Savior, Woe be to you that now Luke
6. 25.
laugh, fow ye shall howl and weep.

Now that it is said here, they had forty years peace after this subduing
Doct. 2.
of the Midianites, it was a great benefit that God bestowed upon them: and so
all that enjoy it, or a great part of it, shall see cause to say, if they read
and consider the bondage and woe that men are in to enemies and strangers.
Deuteronomy. 28. 48.
Therefore we should carefully look what good may be done in such times Note.
of liberty and freedom from great disturbance, especially that when we have
generally peace in the land, there be no private breaches with neighbors at
home, nor in family; but a quiet life with both; and the peace of a good
conscience to Godward, chiefly and above all things procured. Look of this at
large in chap. 5. and elsewhere.

Now that which follows concerning Gedeon, in this verse is this: that Verse.
29.
it is said, after this victory, Gedeon lived (after a sort) a private life,
to prove and make it manifest that he desired not, as he had told them before,
the empire, contrary to Gods ordinance. So it is with some offices among us
annual, or temporary. If he had in this priuacie lived idly, or wickedly,
as one that had done enough before, and now waxt weary, it would have been set
down as other faults be. That which we have to learn by this, is; that we so
use authority, countenance, preferment, or any such liberty which is Doct.
more then common, that we remember it must be laid down again, and have an
end, and that also (perhaps) in this life: and therefore, that we swell not,
neither be puffed up thereby, neither forget what we have been: for that, and
such like promotion or advancement is but borrowed. And nothing is more common
then to see age abased and in little regard: so that, The mind (as the saying
is) is all in all: yea such as the mind is, such is the man. For else, what
should be the privilege of a godly man in respect of other, both in life and
at death? Some may better have thousands (and use them more soberly) then some
can hundreds. He that makes his prosperity his heaven, cannot but think the
contrary to be his misery and undoing. But he that never ioyed too much in
that he had, never laid it too near his heart, when he lost or for-went it. It
is the speech of a fool to say, It is most miserable to have bin happy. A
wise man is neither so lifted up with inioying that which he knows is
vanishing and mutable, as if it were happiness: nor so dejected in the forgoing
it, as if he had lost it, and as if his hope were past. The immoderate desire
of the mind is like to him who having used his body to a plenteous and
delicate fare, being afterward compelled to streighter allowance, pineth: and
by the alteration of a full, fat, comely and strong body, into a thin,
meager, pale, and decayed; shows that the change of his diet has made him
unlike himself. Whereas the sober minded resembles him, who tieth himself to
an ordinary, as most agreeable to health and soundnes: and although he come
to an extraordinary diet, yet he is a law to himself, he eats no more of
many, then he did before of a few dishes: So that as the one mendeth him not,
so the other appaireth him not. Thus says the Christian with the Apostle, I
have learned to abound, Philip. 4. 12.
I have learned also to want: in diverse estates to be the same, even contented
and thankful. A rare portion above al earthly treasure: and such as he needed
not be ashamed to confess, he had learnd, for he was borne to no such
privilege, as he was to be a free citizen of Rome, as he told Lysias, but was
taught it by the Spirit of God only.

We have great need to note this: for many by office, place, authority and
superiority in Ministry and Magistracy, have, and do daily forget
themselves, and especially if great wealth accompany the same, yea sometime
where there is no great matter in the persons to cause it. And therefore when
God shall blow upon their estate, and cast it down, and they be constrained to
come to abasement, and to their old condition again, wherein they once lived,
they scorn and cast it off, and shift by unlawful means to wind themselves
out of it, by running into debt with other men, never meaning to pay, as both
appears in many Seruingmen and Soldiers that have been of any place, and
other better borne then the common sort, and many more, who say with the
Steward; Dig I cannot and to beg I am ashamed, Luke 16. 3.
and live I must some way or other, but they will never fall to work, or to
the doing of any thing beseeming them for their maintenance, but hunt after
pleasure, harlots, dice, cards, robbing, and cousening the simple, and
beguiling silly maids or matrons, to enrich themselves, etc.

And again, this shows the folly of such great persons, as trusting to
their greatness and wealth, as to a strong hold, provide as little for their
own changes, as for the hardness which may befall their children: but bring
them up in all softness and delicacie, not so much as inuring them to any
labor, or exercizing their bodies or wits to industry and action: whereby it
comes to pass, that if their estate decline, they are left destitute and
shiftlesse: and urged by an unhappy necessity of their own procuring to use
indirect means for maintenance.

Another thing concerning Gedeon follows, and that is, the setting verse 30.
^1.
down of his many wives, which was his great blemish. And it teaches us, that
as well the faults and blemishes of Gods servants are set before us in the
Scriptures, as their virtues: in which respect the Scriptures are unlike to
other stories or writings of men, carried partially through hatred or flattery
to obscure the truth. So are David's, Sampsons, and Peter's; and the faults and
infirmities of sundry other approved servants of God: which (yet) is not done
by the holy Ghost, that we should seek liberty to follow them, for many
sorrows shall be to such, but to teach, that we, even the best, should
suspect Psalm 32. 10.
our selves, being full of self-love, to hide and winck at our corruptions and
bad qualities, and therefore to keep with all diligence our hearts, which we
are hardly brought to do, though they be out of measure deceitful, neither can
we abide to be reproved and shamed for the same.

But seeing God has for sundry causes, and in diverse respects left the
infirmities Why the blemishes of Gods servants are set down in Scripture. And
they are three. The first.
and blemishes of his servants in scripture to be known of us, I will briefly
note and set down some of them, having so good and fit occasion offered, that
so we may profit by them accordingly. He has done it partly for our benefit,
and partly to teach us our duty. Our benefit thereby is twofold. One, that if
at any time we should fall into some grievous sin, and despair of Gods mercy
thereby, yet that we may stay and uphold our selves by the examples of Gedeon
and other such, who fearing God, did yet fall dangerously, and recovered
themselves again: that we, knowing that, may in the like case receive hope of
pardon likewise, if we call our selves home again by repentance.

For in such cases when we are exhorted by Gods faithful ministers not to cast
away our confidence though we have so offended, we are ready to object thus:
Oh there were never any of Gods children that fell so, and offended as we have
done, so that we may justly fear, there is no remission nor pardon for us to
be hoped for. Therefore when we shall hear of the Note.
infirmities of the godly, the clear knowledge of this, much avails to stay
us from dispairing. This is not therefore to imbolden us by their example to
sin, though we do yet stand by the grace of God, free from reproachful evils,
but to uphold us, if we have already fallen dangerousl^^ that we faint not
altogether. I say, it serves for prevention of deadly ^eare after sin, not
to cause presumption in sinning. For if any will abuse this knowledge to
licentiousness, hoping for pardon as they hear that others have obtained it,
when they had sinned in like manner as they themselves have done, let them know
that God will meet with them, as their boldness requires, with terrors
within, and shame without, till they shall wish that they had bin better
advised. And as they may justly complain that they sinned more wilfully and
purposely, then the Saints of God did, (to speak of many of them) so they may
fear that they shall not so easily find mercy and forgiveness, as they found.
And this is one cause that concerns us much, why the Lord has left the
faults of the godly manifested in Scripture, as well as their virtues. Another
is, that we hearing how some rare people in ages past The second cause.
have fallen, we should be more suspicious of our selves, and more wary that we
slip not into the common evils of the time we live in, seeing we are Note.
much weaker in faith and grace then they were, and therefore are like more
easily to forget our selves, and to fall grievously, unless we count it our
happiness (and often tell it to our selves) to labor and endeavor by all means
to persevere in vprightnes unto our end: and therefore we are like to find it
as hard to recover our selves again. And indeed the bitterness which they
tasted in their falls, were enough to deter us from following them, though
we were sure to speed at length as well as they. But few look at the bitter,
but at the sweet only, and so are deceived.

Another cause why God has made known the blemishes of the faithful The
third.
that lived in former times, is, to teach us our duty toward our brethren,
that if we hear any of them to have fallen into any grievous offense, and
afterward when it comes to their remembrance, that they take such a deep
conceit for so displeasing God, and lay it so near their heart, that they
fear it cannot be forgiven them, I say, when it thus falls out, we are
taught by this our duty; and that is, to encourage and help to uphold them in
meekness, and with our exhortings of them, and persuasions to rise up and
return again, to comfort them also when we see them repent, and to bear
with their infirmities, and not to condemn and forsake them, good things being
found in them, remembering our selves who would be glad to be helped up, when we
have fallen, rather then to be shamed, forsaken, and left to our selves. To this
end is that of the Apostle, Brethren, if any be fallen by infirmity, Gal. 6. 1.
you that are spiritual, that is, endued with more grace, and seasoned with
more fruits of Gods spirit, restore such an one, that is, do your endeavor
with meekness to raise him, considering your selves.

The use, in general, of this whole discourse, is, to be afraid to offend,
seeing we be so unwilling to hear of any rebuke for the same, and not to be
bold to sin by authority of the fathers, seeing we are not willing to take
Note.
part with them in their punishments, but as shame and sorrow are unwelcome to
us, so let the sins be also that bring them. For they quench faith, weaken
grace, and loose our good name, beside the hindering of many duties. The Lord
speaking of his faithful ones, says: If they sin, I will correct Psalm 89.
31.
them, etc. but my loving kindness I will never take from them. If then he
mean not to forsake them, good cause why he should punish and correct them,
that so they may be stopped in their bad course, and driven back again. As
Saint Paul to Timothy says, I am persuaded that the Lord had mercy upon 1.
Tim. 1. 15.
me, as well for other men's example and benefit as mine own. And thus by such
examples duly considered, and by the Scripture, we have consolation and hope.
So that far be it from us to say: [Nay, if he be fallen, let him shift for
himself, I had better opinion of him then he deserved, now I see, he is an
hypocrite, a Demas, a reuolter.] But oh man, is this the way for thee to
procure to thy self compassion from others, if thou should fall so, and
had the like need? If thou say; God forbid I should stand in such need. I
answer thee: Thou shall do wisely in preventing such an occasion: but that is
not done by an high-minded conceit that such a thing shall not befall thee, but
rather by fear of thy self, and thy frailty. Neither by thy tenderness to
others shall thou be made the more subject to fall, but the more watchful
against falling. But lest thou should say, I shall not fall, hear the
Apostle saying, Lest thou thy self be preoccupated, and do the like.

That Gedeon had fallen we have heard: now it follows, that we see how. One
of his particular blemishes was, that he had many wives: as for Doct. 2.
the mentioning of his sons, it was of it self, neither with him, nor
against him, but is spoken of, to make way to the next chapter. But poligamie,
that is, the having of many wives, was against the first institution. For
though the Jews did use it, yet our Savior rebukes it, and says, it was not
so from Genes. 2. 24. Matthew. 19. 8. Deuteronomy. 17. 17.
the beginning: and God forbad it the Kings themselves, (who might enjoy the
greatest liberties) and why did he so? even because it turned their hearts from
God. For such hunt after pleasure, and forsake the Lord, which may be done also
in single marriages, (I confess,) but much more in poligamie 1. Cor. 7. 33.
being unlawful. For they who are given over to such licentiousness, or to
any other like course, it besotteth them, and makes them drunken therewith, in
such sort as they become impotent to all that good is. Besides the
inconveniences which have accompanied Polygamy, disagreement, jealousy,
hatred. So that God is displeased highly at the having of many 1. Sam. 1. 6.
wives.

But some will object: What is this to us, who abstain from many wives and are
prohibited by law such licentiousness? I answer, yes very much: For this is
not only true in Polygamie, that men's hearts be stolen from God, but in single
and lawful marriage also, the same may be, (as I have said before) yea and
most certainly will be, if men give themselves the bridle, and consider not one
end thereof to be the restraining of them from strange lusts, and to live
holily, so as they be made more fit by their marriage to their several duties,
which the most do not regard. For they who by their unseemly speeches and
offensive behavior toward other women, do too apparently testify, that they
live unchastly in marriage, and offend God grievously thereby, much more would
bewray their lewdness and badnes that way, uncleanness of body also, but
that either they are restrained by law and shame, or else their married estate
is mixed with many fearful and great troubles, which do any their lusts, in
so much as many who would give over themselves as far as the worst; dare not,
seeing they are so cooled and held down by afflictions. They are wise that use
their marriage as an help, whereby they hold nearer to God, and become more
dutiful and they that do otherwise, if they be the servants of God, shall
easily see their abusing of it by awknesse in Gods service, and untowardness
to all good duties: but if they be wicked and unconscionable, they make that
estate of marriage suitable to their other parts of life, that is to say, all
naught.

In that it is said further of Gedeon, that he had a concubine in Sechem,
Verse. 31.
that was another of his blemishes. Whereby as by other we may know, that they
were used of men then, as well as wives. They were inferior to their wives,
and had no superiority in the family, but were as servants. Which was evil
also even as Poligamy. In Malachie we read, that they who after Mal. 2. 15.
the captivity had put away their wives, and married strange ones, who also
objected, that a man of God did so, namely Abraham, we read (I say) that they
were answered thus: that he sought a godly seed, and did it not of lightness,
or wilfulness, so that although it was not according to the first institution
that he did, yet in as much as it was not revealed so clearly to be sin in
those former times in which he lived, as it was since, it was no just defense
for those, who coming after them, did it to satisfy their lusts when they had
more light about the will of God, and knowledge of the sin it self, and also
what an evil end did follow it. And the same teaches us, who Doct.
have a rule to guide our actions by, that we may in no wise follow examples,
no not of the good who have done against those rules, but to try them by the
rules, as Paul requires it of the Thessalonians, Try all things, and hold 1.
These. 5. 1. Cor. 11. 1.
that which is good. And he wills the Corinthians, that no man follow him,
but as he followed Christ: as has been noted largely before.

We are also here to consider one fruit of his taking of that concubine, 2
even by the name that she caused Gedeon to give the son that he had by her,
to wit, Abimelech; which is as much as to say [My father is a king,] who
kindled in him thereby the flame of bearing rule, to play the Tyrant, and to
challenge the kingdom as due to his father, which yet he refused both
himself, and also that it should be given to his sons. But what better fruit
might be looked for, when Gods ordinance was broken? (See the like in Solomon,
1. King. 11.) And yet this she did who might worst have done it, 1. King. 11.
3. 4.
causing Gedeon to give him the name of the Philistime Kings, who played the
right part of a Philistime when he grew up, and rose to place. For as it is
clear by the next chapter, that she was a wicked woman, and of bad kindred,
and had induced and trained Gedeon to her desire before, so there was none
found like to that Abimelek her son, that we read of in his time, neither
could be much worse then he, either before or after him.

Let this be a watchword about names giving: for they that are naught, will
take every occasion to increase their sin, even by occasion thereof, that if
any of their name have been noted above other for some bad quality, as
stoutnesse and stomach, bragging and boasting, pot-companionship, or such
like, oh they must uphold the name, (though it be but a shadow, as Absoloms
pillar,) and so be suitable to their name, if it occasion them evil, and to
keep alive the bad practizes and course of them that bare that name before
them. Even so names more advisedly and wisely given to children (as I have
taught in another place) are good occasions to provoke them to their duties.

Besides, we may see what men get, who are of any good note, by entering 3.
Doct. verse. 31.
into so near a league, and having so inward acquaintance with such dames and
mates, which though it were in single and lawful marriage, yet it threatens as
far as man may judge, an extinguishing of the good sparkles of grace in them
that are so matched. Which should cause the servants of God to link themselves
in marriage with women, more like to themselves in religion and good behavior.
And for them for whom it is too late to give this warning unto, (who are too
many) let them yet receive and embrace this instruction that is given them in
the second place: that is to say, how they take counsel of such wives or ill
companions (in cases doubtful and and dangerous,) as are malicious,
high-minded, quarrellers, contentions, waspish, covetous and gripers, or in a
word, void of true religion. Sampson may be an example to all, both of
harkening too far to such, and so Gedeon may be also, and likewise of opening
and telling that secret which is not meet to be imparted unto them, which
Sampson did to his great reproach and abasement. But here an end of this seeing
of both these last points I have entreated purposely before, out of the former
histories.

THE FIFTY FIVE SERMON ON THE EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse 32. So Gedeon the son of Ioash died in a good age, and was buried in
the sepulcher of Ioash his father in Ophrah, of the father of the Ezrites. 33.
But when Gedeon was dead, the children of Israel turned away, and went a
whoring after Baalim, and made Baal berith their God. 34 And the children of
Israel remembered not the Lord their God, which delivered them out of the hands
of all their enemies on every side. 35. Neither showed they mercy on the house
of Ierubbaal or Gedeon, according to all the goodness which he had showed unto
Israel.
NOw together with the Chapter, the holy story makes an end of The general
sum.
Gedeons acts: and makes mention of his death and burial, and shows what
the people of Israel did afterward. In this verse it is said, he died in a
good age. For seeing some of his faults have been spoken of, to leave them so,
would have bred some doubts, he having done many good things, therefore his end
is here set down, to show, that both he had the blessing of old age granted
him, and also that it was blessed with many good things by God unto him. The
same that is said of him, is Genes. 15. 15. Genes. 25. 8.
said of Abraham: that he should die in a good old age. Which speech here
applied to Gedeon, and affirmed of him, though it be not to be drawn so far
as to prove he died godly, but only notes fullness of days, and 1. Chro.
29. 28.
prosperity in this life, yet it is clear that he died so, and obtained
eternal life after, in that he is reckoned among the faithful in the Epistle
to the Hebrews. Heb. 11. 32.
Which is to good purpose to be set down, he being (though a godly man, yet)
blemished, that thereby we may know he repented.

By this we are taught that we must stablish our faith, hope and other graces
Doct. verse. 32.
of God begun in us at our first conversion, that we may be rooted, grounded,
and settled therein, as the Apostle wills the Colossians, and that Colos. 27.
so the nearer we are the grave, the more glorious and fruitful our profession
may be, and in our age we may more flourish then in our youth: which is a Note.
thing not easily found nor obtained. Therefore the Apostle Saint Peter also 2.
Pet. 3. 17.
exhorts, saying: Take heed, that ye be not led away from your steadfastness;
and shows how that may be like to be, even by the error of the wicked. For by
beholding how they walk, who have no fear of God at all, and by harkning to
their subtle counsel, and poisoned persuasions, we shall find to our cost,
that there is no small force to draw us after their cursed example, whereas we
were in a good course before. If Gedeon so mightily and often assisted and
helped, did yet fall in such manner as we have heard, what may we look for in so
many and so variable cases through out our whole lives? It is well seen in
this age, what need they have to profit by this doctrine, who ran well
sometime, as the Galathians did, but yet have suffered themselves to Gal. 5. 7.
be let, so that they obey not the truth, which they began and professed
commendably to do.

Many faults both to the wounding of the conscience, and the offense of men,
provoke God daily in his own children, and make faith to seek, and hope to
wax faint, for that we do not labor carefully to bring forth fruit
plentifully thereof, and to hold out with all possible endeavor the profession
of our hope with joy. And if we have trod awry, and begun with the wise
virgins to slumber, yet through due and continual attending upon Matthew. 25. 5.
God, and daily and often repairing and drawing near to him, we should not
sleep therein, but make haste speedily to come home again under the Lords wing
and protection, where only true safety and good being is to be ^ound: and that
the rather, seeing the poor chicken and bird void of reason, after the least
straying, longs by and by after the damme, and to be under her wing: and say
we therefore every one with the Prophet to the Lord, O forsake me not over
long: and ever and anon look we that all be well with our soul, Psalm. 119.
8.
that there be peace betwixt God and us, and that our faith and repentance wax
not stale, nor loathsome to us. And make we no haste to rush into Note.
shameful and reproachful sins, for neither is the burden and shame of them
easily borne, nor the getting out of them; and the recovering of our selves
again from under such bondage, easily obtained, when we be once fallen into
them; whereof, by many occasions much has been before spoken.

And hereafter the long mentioning of Gedeons acts follows his death: 2
To teach us, that to be the end of all flesh, whether the life be short or
long, as David also witnessed in other words, saying; I go the way of all the
world. 1. King. 2. 2.
And great encouragement we have to prepare and haste for death, if we have
learned aright to dye, seeing with our being with Christ, which is best of all,
there are with infinite other unutterable prerogatives, so many excellent and
holy servants of God gone before us thither, to welcome us. Of which point, see
more by the like occasion of Joshua and others, in the former process of this
book.

Now the last of the things that followed after the death of Gedeon, is this,
Verse. 33. 34.
to wit, that the people of Israel (for all that we have heard God did for
them) fell again to Idolatry, and that most shamefully. And by this we see
Doct.
what fearful things follow the taking away of good governors which
maintain true religion. For they by their authority have contained and held
the people within compass, who being dead, they fall away. Pray therefore
earnestly for them, and make we use of their lives, that we may lead 1. Tim 2.
2.
a godly and peaceable life under them. For contrariwise when other that know
not the Lord, rise up in their rooms, the people shall have sorrow their
bellies full. The like may be said of godly preachers and parents, what a loss
it shall be to the people of God, whom they shall leave behind, to forgo
them. But of this at large in the second Chapter.

Their sins were these two: One, that they took Baal-berith, as they called 2
him, for their God: the other, that they forgot the Lord their God. This Idol
they called the Lord of league, whose Image they set up. Herein consisted their
worshipping of him, that they acknowledged the good things that they received,
to be given them of him, and the removing of their troubles to be from him
also. And to ascribe these to a stock, what was it but to go a whoring after
it, as here it is said they did, from the true and living God? And having
joined themselves to him, they forsook and forgot the Lord God, who had done
all good things for them. And this and no better is the worship and service
which our deuoutest votaries in popery do give unto the Lord at this day, as
to him that will compare the religion of the one with the other will easily and
soon appear. See somewhat of this their sin in Chapter 2. 11. 13.

Furthermore, this example teaches how inconstant we are in all good
beginnings and courses, and how ready we are to decline and turn away from
thence, every one to that whereto his false and deceitful heart carries him:
whether to Popery or any other loose and unfaithful serving of God in
hypocrisy: as to say, Lord, Lord; and to draw near to him with the body, the
heart being far from him: while no conscience is made of duty Matthew. 7. 21.
Matthew. 15. 8.
toward him. Whereas the only forgetting of the kindness of the Lord our God,
who only has fed, preserved, delivered and enlightened us unto the life to
come, and who (in one word) has been all in all unto us, I say, this only
forgetting him, and the suffering of his benefits to slip out of our minds, is
sin of it self most grievous and great, without the other, as we Note.
have seen chap. 2. 2, 3. and in this chapter also I have said the like of
this point, verse. 27.

The unthankfulness of the people toward Gedeons posterity is set down Verse.
35.
in this verse, which is further expressed in the next chapter: as in this,
that they suffered his sons to be slain: their sin is aggrauated hereby,
that he had done so great things for them, as to deliver them out of so
fearful bondage, as we have heard they were in to the Midianites. But in this
they did like themselves. For (not to repeat that which I have said hereof
twice in this chapter, verse. 18. 22.) we may be sure of this, (as we see here
in these) that they who are unfaithful and unthankful to God, are not to be
trusted that they will deal better with men. This both the heavenly order of
the law of God teaches, and many examples also. As Abraham said; I saw that
the fear of God was not in this place, and therefore what trustiness is to
be Genes. 20. 11.
looked for to me of men? And likewise that example of the unrighteous Judge
shows as much, that neither feared God, nor reverenced man. This measure Luke
18. 2.
our Savior found among his own country men, when he had done many great
good works among them, yet they would have stoned him Ioh. 10. 32.
for them. And why? for they were not faithful to God. Do we our duties
therefore of conscience to God, that so we may not fail toward men. For
otherwise from us nothing is to be looked for, but unfaithfulness to men, and
evil example, utterly unbeseeming us, when time shall serve to bewray and sift
us: which (as the proverb says) is the mother of truth, and reuealeth that
which was long hidden.

Now to end the chapter with the answer of an objection. It is marueiled
Object.
at, that God suffered this Idolatry and superstition so long unpunished. For
such as object thus, think that it fell out a little after the victory, as it
is sure Gedeon asked of the people the earings that made the Ephod, by and by
after the victory, whereas yet Gedeon continued forty years after this. But
it is answered by S. Austine, who in such a case, being no article of our
faith, Answ.
may have his judgment approved, and received, being likely; and not being
answered by the Scripture. He says, that though the gold was gathered soon
after the victory, yet the Ephod was not made by and by, but long after, to
wit, about the end of Gedeons life. Or if it were made sooner, yet it was not
abused till toward his death. But of uncertainties we are not to ground any
instruction, and therefore here an end.

THE FIFTY FIVE SERMON IS CONtinued on the ninth Chapter of Judges.
Verse 1. Then Abimelech, the son of Ierubbaal, went to Shechem to his
mothers brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family and house of
his mothers father, saying, 2. Say, I pray you, in the audience of all the men
of Shechem, Whether is better for you that all the sons of Ierubbaal, which
are seventy persons reign over you, either that one reign our you? Remember
also that I am your bone and your flesh. 3. Then his mothers brethren spoke of
him in the audience of all the men of Shechem all these words: and their hearts
were moved to follow Abimelech: for said they, he is our brother. 4. And they
gave him seventy pieces of silver out of the house of Baal-berith, wherewith
Abimelech hired vain and light fellows which followed him. 5. And he went
unto his fathers house at Ophrah, and slew his brethren, the sons of Ierubbaal,
about seventy persons upon one stone: yet Iotham the youngest son of
Ierubbaal was left, for he hid himself. 6. And all the men of Shechem gathered
together with all the house of Millo, and came, and made Abimelech King in the
plain, where the stone was erected in Sheche^.
THe sum of this Chapter I will first set down, as usually I do, together
The sum and parts of this Chapter.
with the parts of it, which are three. The first this: namely, how Abimelech
seeking the kingdom, and having got the men of Shechem on his side, killed all
his seventy brethren, except one: and this to the seventh verse. The second,
the heavy prediction of his overthrow by that one brother Iotham, who escaped
his bloody hands, which denounced destruction to him, and to the men of
Shechem. And this to the 22. verse. The 3. is, how that which was threatened and
foretold by Iotham, the son of Gedeon, remaining alive, came to pass, and was
fulfilled, concerning the ruin and overthrow of Abimelech, and the men of
Sechem, and that by the mutual hatred and vexations that arose betwixt them.
And this to the end of the Chapter.

Thus the Chapter being divided, I will first speak of the former part of it,
as it lies in order, and handle the other two in due place.

The first part.
WE are to consider in this first part, how Abimelech after the death of his
father, wound in with the men of Shechem, to make him king, and for this
purpose slew all his brethren save one; and this to the 7. verse.

And for the effecting of this, it is said here that this Abimelech went to his
mothers kindred: for he saw it was lost labor to attempt so horrible a fact by
his fathers friends help, or any other: and by his subtlety, and flattery,
he won their hearts to be willing to hearken unto him; they nothing
respecting the common benefit of the land, but their own private commodity:
and so helped him forward by money, which much advanced his purposes: and thus
being fleshed (for the more secure enjoying of his will) he was inboldened to
kill 70. persons save one, of his brethren, and then (as they thought) the coast
being clear, these Shechemites went about to make him King, and performed it
accordingly. And thus the house of Gedeon was overthrown, and most detestable
usurpation, and tyranny by Abimelech, came in.

Here first we may note by Abimelechs going to his mothers kindred to Doct. in
verse. 1
further him, when he went about this mischievous intent, in seeking to be
king; we note (I say) the cast of wicked men in the compassing their desires;
that is, when they intend any evil, they will repair to such places and
companies, as they think are for their purpose, and (if they have conuersed
with better before) yet they then take no more pleasure in their company any
longer. Not that they never go to bad company, but when they go about some
especial evil. For it is their meat and drink, and pastime to converse with
such as they themselves are, (as near as may be) cont^^nally; but if they be
forted by education, cohabitation, or other occasions with better then
themselves, (as it comes to pass often times) yet even there, if they grow to
affect, and set their hearts on some particular more mischievous practices then
they were wont in times past, they will (if it be possible) give them over, as
no companions meet for them, and break out to other company, and converse
with those that be of their own disposition, and like themselves. The reason
is, they be not only more weary of the good company that they were in, then
they were before; but they see, that they cannot follow their bad purposes so
currantly while they be among them, neither look they for any aid thereto at
their hands, as they do by the other: but know, that they shall be suspected,
dissuaded, hindered, and broken off by them from their ill purposes. And what
marvel? for this changing of company, as the good for the bad, arises upon
smaller occasions, then upon the minding and intending of such mischief, as
this Abimelech here went about. For they in the sixth of John, when they had
taken a pritch against our Savior, John 6. 66.
it is said of them, that they walked no more with him, and much more and
sooner men do this, when they purpose wickedness. Absolon therefore 2. Sam.
15. 10.
when he intended to rebel against his father, got him away, and gathered
company fit for such a purpose, his fathers house was a prison and wearisome
unto him. And Judas, when he went about to betray his Master, forsook and left
the company of him, and the Apostles, and went to the Pharisees, the most
deadly enemies of Christ, and lincked himself in with them. But most clearly
we see this in the like fact of Adoniah, 1. Kin. 1. reported by Nathan to David
in this manner: Me (says he) thy servant, and Zadocke the 1. King. 1. 25.
Priest, and Solomon thy son, he has not called: (why? they were not for his
tooth) but Ioab the captain, and Abiathar the Priest, and some of his younger
brethren, men fitter for his ambitious humor: them has he called; cry
before him and they say, God save King Adoniah. And even so it is still at this
day, as I have said. For there are many bad mixed with the good, and company
with them in sinister respects, for some benefit they look for, or credit
thereby, or for their safety, who yet when they see their time, wind out from
them, and join to other company, much like to Simon Magus, when he saw the
Apostles were not for him. And it is an ill sign when they do so, I mean, to
forsake the society and fellowship of good people, and company with the bad.
For though there was no great hope of some of them, when they were at the best,
and when they were by means of their calling and employments sorted into the
company of the godly, because they had no pleasure nor delight in them, but
rather their hearts were far from them, even then, when in place they were
most near them: yet they were in the way all that while, to good, and to be
wrought upon, or drawn on, one time or other, while they abode in such places
and companies, if God had been pleased to work in them: but when they leave,
and forsake them, and so bewray themselves in their colors, though they should
mean no worse; then their woe comes upon them, and they wrap themselves
deeply into mischief and misery, with little hope of recovery, or getting out
again, yea, or being stopped in that their bad course.

And yet this I say, that such as keep company with those that are religious,
and take no good by them, they are deeply bewitched, covering their
hypocrisy, with the cloak of good company: as Christ told them, who answered
Luke 13. 26.
him, that they had eaten and drunk in his company: although for the most
part, this proves true of them, that if a man once spy out their lewdness,
and will not allow them in their evil course, but tell them of it, they will
away from them, if they can, forthwith, and count them their enemies. But, as
they are weary of such without any just cause, so they must know, that they
from whom they depart, are weary of them for good cause; and desire, (if they
may do it lawfully, and can have no good hope to reclaim them) to depart from
them also, as Moses did, (when he was able to judge Heb. 11. 24.
what he did) from the house of Pharaohs daughter, and as Solomon counsels
us to do in a case much like, saying: See thou a man in whom Prou. 14. 7.
there are not the lips of wisdom, depart from him.

The use that the godly ought to make of this, is: to learn of such as are
wiser in their kind then we are in ours; that is, always to be careful to
use, and delight in godly company, as they do in the contrary; and by no
means to depart from, or forsake it; whereby not only we may show and give
proof, that we our selves not only warpe not, neither imagine, nor set our
hearts on evil, while we company with, and cleave fast to them that are good:
but also that through their godly instructions, counsel, reproof, and
example, we seek to get all possible good by their company. And if we should
at any time decline by some occasion, yet that we labor to be brought back
again into the right way, and so continue therein: and as for the fellowship
of the leaud, let it be to us more odious, then ours can be Psalm. 15. 4.
to them, as I have noted. The bad also may make their use and profit of this
doctrine, in this manner, let them that be not wholly past hope, but walking up
and down, as the Psalmist speaks, in the counsel of the ungodly, as yet
Psalm. 1. 1.
unresolved what to do, let such (I say) if they have any care of themselves,
draw and gather to good company. For want whereof, and by the contrary, they
grow to be leaud persons, as drunkards, whoremasters, thieves, idle ones, and
such like. For, as I have noted, that a bad man, that he may the better do
evil, departs from the good: so it is true also, and much more that because
a man draws not near the good at all, therefore he is the easilier carried
to that which is naught. And as they are justly to be suspected to be badlie
disposed, who cast off good company, which they have seemed to embrace: so they
are to be pitied, and exhorted to the frequenting of the good, who, for want of
it altogether, have fallen into bad company, and bin seduced thereby. Both are
faulty, though the former more then the latter. For the latter would be glad
(such as are of the simpler sort of them) to be advised, and profit much by
wholesome counsel: the former who have enjoyed it already, are weary of it,
and seek to shake it off: the latter, although they are flexible, and easily
drawn away by ill example: yet they contriue not mischief of themselves for
the most part: whereas the former, through a secret lingering after their lusts,
do not need others (always) to call them on, but they themselves rather
poison other, and like Abimelech, draw others to them: no companions proouing
so leaud, as they who break from the good.

Thirdly, let them that are among the good (so placed by Gods providence)
acknowledge it to be a great mercy: and beware of that subtlety and
falsehood of heart, whereby they deprive themselves of the fruit of it. Let
them say thus: If credit, gain, commendation, or favor (all which I may
obtain by the cleaving to the godly) seem so much to be desired: how much
more desirable is that, for which a good man himself is to be desired, I
mean, his grace? which as it may well go with the other, so it will make his
company to be always precious, and much esteemed. Contrariwise, what is it that
makes a man count good men odious? Surely a bad purpose of mischief less or
more: this is that which makes him to be rather where his heart is, and whither
his lust carries him, then where his bodily presence is. Consider then what an
odious thing is that, which causes such odious effects? It is a foul part to
depart from the good. How much more to flee to the other adverse party, I
mean the tents of the ungodly? and most of all, that which caused both these,
a lust of the heart after their bad qualities. Indeed, for the desire of a man
(be it good, or evil) a man will Prou. 18. 1.
separate himself: meaning from all which might hinder it. Gehazi, for his
covetous desire, will withdraw himself from his master: Demas from Paul, etc.
Yea surely, for his sins sake a man will divide himself from father, mother,
kindred, as Christ says. Is not this odious? much more odious then is that for
which a man will do thus. Again, there is great cause of this meditation,
because some (not knowing themselves to be so evil, as indeed they be) suspect
not the temptation to evil, ere it assail them; and therefore are no sooner
tempted, but they are also foiled. Hazael, when he came to the Prophet 2. King.
8. 13.
Elisha did reverence and acknowledge him so far, as he saw well enough what
good he might have taken by him, and at that time he framed himself to dislike
that evil which the Prophet told him he should work, yea, he detested it: but
when afterward he played the cruel Tyrant against the Church of God, he shook
off all due remembrance of him, and of his own words to him, which were good
then, even as many do in the like case. No wonder, for he was false-hearted,
and never loved him so, but he might hate him as much, when time served.

Lastly, as for such as will boast that they are for all companies, good and
bad; and can apply themselves (like that fish) to all colors, and keep their
bad purposes to themselves, let such impious fellows (far worse then the
former) fear lest he that found out Abimelech for his sin, will not let them
escape scotfree for theirs, which are not inferior to his. Touching the
infection of bad company, more elsewhere shall be spoken in a fit place.

This son of the concubine, ye have heard, went to, and among them Verse 2.
with whom he was likest to prevail, and to this end, that he might be made
King: the which his father utterly refused for himself, and his; and yet this
monster, borne out of time, regarding neither God, nor father, most impudently
sought the kingdom against his will and liking, yea and against all right. Now
it follows, what his device and reason to them of Shechem, was to get it. One
was this: that it was better he alone should be King then seventy of his
brethren. But it might have been answered, that it was neither needful, nor
lawful, that he, or they, should reign over the people. His second device
and shift was, not for the public, for that he was near them and their
flesh. The third was, seeing he would (he told them) be for their private
benefit: for that he pretended to them, that he being of their kindred, he
would chiefly seek their peace, profit and preferment. All which was but
cousonage, subtlety, and flattery.

Here in that this wicked instrument, the son of a good man, rose up to Doct.
1.
attempt, and work the mischief which his father abhorred, we may see, what
wicked posterity come often times of a godly seed, and how unlike the parents in
goodness: whereas one would think, that they should rather labor to
resemble, and to be like those their godly parents at the least. The generation
after Ioshuahs time, degenerated from that which was before it. Ely, Samucl,
and David, most of the good Priests, Prophets, Kings, had wicked children, even
as is to be seen in all ages. The reason is; first, the want of good
education, when they are untaught, and ill governed. Secondly, as the best
corn breeds chafe, so the godly beget their children not as they are godly,
but as they are men natural and sinful: neither is Gods grace tied absolutely
to them, for their parents sake. Thirdly, pride, stubbornness, wilfulness,
and seeking of liberty in youth; and among the rest, this is not the least,
the multitude of bad example, I mean which are fit enough to poison the best
natures, though they have both instruction, and outward government. So that
many leaud youths are trained up at the great cost of their parents, who yet
lose all, and their hope also, their children not walking in their steps.

Oh what multitudes are there of such in our age? In which (yet there is more
done for making them good, (especially in some places) then has been in former
times, though they are rare, who offend not herein even in the sight of others.
A thing much to be lamented, to see so many youths unlike their good parents:
but where none or weak means are used to make them better, it is not to be
marueiled at. The woe to both, is not known commonly, Note.
til it be so felt, that it is past remedying. The beholding of the contrary,
as it is rare, so it is goodly and beautiful. But it is a great cause, why the
death of children before they come to proof, should be borne patiently, seeing
it is not to be doubted, but that most of them are taken away at the best, and
who knows to what woe they might be brought, if they should live? It is to be
lamented that the examples of good parents being so few, yet even of these few,
few (to speak of) prevail with their children: from whence the common
complaint of all sorts is, as theirs to Samuel. A good father: but 2. Sam. 8. 5.
the child walks not in his steps. For the infinite bad parternes of
governors, are generally embraced: none fearing to follow where they have led
the dance, no, though it be to destruction, as if all the beasts of the
forest should each follow the tract of his fellow, to the den of the Lion,
because till they be within the den, and past recovery, there appears in the
footsteps no danger. It is said of Jacobs ewes, that beholding the pilled
rods laid in their water-troughes, they conceived parti-colored lambs
forthwith: and so a man would think that so near and domestical examples, as
good parents are to their children, (who are nourished by them, grow up with
them, and are warmed by their heat, as Nathan speaks of the poor man's 2.
Sam. 12. 3.
sheep: yea have the benefit of the familiar instruction, and conversation, of
such as are of their own disposition, and nature:) a man would think, (I say)
that such should take after them in grace, as they do resemble them in their
visage, or natural properties. A man would think, that they should (as it
were) through a mutual feeling of the joy which a good parent has of a wise
child, and of the sorrow by the contrary: that they should also rejoice in
following their goodness. Thus we might think, and thus it should be, if God
in his secret judgment had not prepared some (even of them also) to the evil
day. It is said of Elie his children: they hearkened not 1. Sam. 2. 25.
to their father, because God had determined to destroy them; to wit, for the
in expiable offense they had caused to the people by their polluting the holy
things of God. And so also, it is pitiful to think that the other sort, the
posterity of bad parents, dare venture so confidently to go where their
ancestors have gone; as it were taking sin by tradition from them, yea
filling 1. Pet 1. 18. Matthew. 23. 32
up the measure which they attained not to, as our Savior speaks This in a
manner, is generally seen: and where it is in a few otherwise, there another
father, even the Father of Christ has revealed it from heaven, flesh and blood
has not taught it. And this dregge of Popery is natural, without teaching:
to make it a strong pillar of a man's religion to do^ as the forefathers have
done. In the story of the Church it is reported* that a certain Heathen Prince
having received so much light of true religion, that he was content to be
baptized: yet when he came to the water, stopped, and asked the Minister this
question: Whether have more of my ancestors (being unbaptized) gone to heaven,
or hell? To hell, says the Minister. So will I then, said he, and refused
Christianity vrterly. Yea doubtless, nature teaches no better then this,
even rather to go to hell with the parents, then to heaven without them. Both
these, I say, are lamentable: as for the use that both sorts are to make
thereof, I shall not need to insist upon it here, having often urged it in other
places.

Now of his shifts, which I will put together for brevity sake, matter arising
The unfolding of the second verse.
so plentifully. And mark by what fraud he goes about it, insinuating with
them, that it he be not King over them, then his seventy brethren must reign
together. But that he thought they would never allow, or consent to. Secondly,
where he tells them, it were better be so, that he reigned; it was untrue
also, for that is best always that God appoints, who did detest this. Thirdly,
in that he sets out himself, as though he should say, who is firter for
your benefit then I? they ought to have known, that in creating of
Magistrates, the public, and not the private commodity is to be respected.

That which we have tolearne hereby, is this: that all shifts and subrile Doct.
2.
practices are ready at hand with them that intend mischief: and that which
they go about, is by lying, cogging, and falsehood. But as for the Lord in
their dealings, he must stand by, and a same off. The reason of both is, the
Ierem. 17. 9.
heart of men is evil above measure, and is deep, and has many abominations
in it. They devise, and go to work without him, and we see likewise that
thereafter they prosper. To these way be added other, and some that profess
the Gospel, who should be ashamed to be found so grossly to degenerate, as to
use like practices to the other, though they be covered with some fairer
shows, who cast off God and say in their hearts, depart from us, Job. 21. 14.
we desire not to have acquaintance with thee. These shall one day know and that
to their cost, that they should have been examples unto other in good life, as
they did profess, without which they shall surely come to naught. Besides the
subtlety of the heart, there is another cause of this, even the craft of Satan,
(who rules in his children) teaching them how to contriue, and warpe all
subtle shifts, and policies, both to atchiue their evil purposes, and to
defend them being brought to pass: And some of his scholars finding this
trade to follow their hand, as they desire, make it their chief work, to
invent evil and mischief, and excuses to cover it withal: they are not where
they would be, if they be otherwise occupied. Our mother Genes. 3. 12. 13
Eve learned it from the beginning, of him the father of shifts and lies, (for
they go together) for her posterity: though some seem to have it entailed
unto them, above others. As, who almost, can be so suddenly come upon, but he
has a shift in readiness? and though all be not a like plausible, yet (as
the proverb is) a bad one is better then none at all. By this let none think
that all policy is forbidden: for Nathan and Bathsheba had plotted a wise
course, but that was to the great good of Church and Commonwealth, and that by
honest means, against Adoniah, as appears by 1. King. 1. 1. King. 1. 12.
and the substance of the device was true, holy, and to a religious end, for it
tended to serve Gods providence. But their practice warranteth not Absolon,
Adoniah, or any such as they, whose policy is wicked and cursed: much less
the hellish plots of Jesuits, and Papists, for the bringing to pass their
designs, the setting up, or tolleration of their idolatrous religion, though
holiness, and the Catholic cause be still pretended, and authority of their
supreme Vicar. The titles are goodly, but the boxes are full of cursed drugges
and poison, as lying, slander, calumnies, treason, murder, confusion: all
badges of the prince of darkness, whose Vicar he is. Salt is good: but if it
has lost his savor, it is good for nothing: Wit and spirit, present speech
and Matthew. 5.
policy are good, but if they be poisoned with those ingredients, they lose
their savor, grace and beauty, and are good for nothing, but to be used as
proppes of the devils kingdom. Better were it for the cunningest crafts man
in this trade, to be defeated in all his purposes, and to be convicted and take
shame of them, then by such means to compass them, or being compassed, to
bolster them. Neither is there any counsel against the Almighty: his hand
shall find them out at length, and countermine them, as (blessed be his name)
hitherto he has done, even the deepest and furthest fetches of them. Let all
sorts learn by this, and namely the simple hearted, to Reu. 2. 24.
thank God that he is no more acquainted with the depth of Satan, I mean
either the depth of sin, or the depth of subtle practices and shifts
thereof: and they who are more ready wittied, let them turn it from playing
the advocate to such a fruitless client, and submit it to the simplicity of
the word, to be guided thereby: which (when all is done) will prove the
safest, when the other shall be as Adams figge-leaues.

Now behold here in these men who were of his mothers kindred, how soon they
hearkened unto this corrupt motion of that Abimelech, and so Verse 3.
approved of his device and suite, that they durst propound it to the rest of
their neighbors, which was too shameful for themselves to open their ears
unto: Like unto whom is that practice of those Courtiers of David* ^ the
advancing of Adoniah, among whom were also many of his brethren 2. King. 1. 9.
and kinsfolk. By this we may see how kindred are blindfolded to bear one
with another; breaking through shame, modesty, yea and honesty also;
regarding no other thing but this, that they are their flesh, and they take
part with them, be the matter that moves them never so bad. For example, how
are parents blinded in their children, and carried by them almost to any
persuasion: and that without all Christian wisdom or regard? being sometime
incensed by them against those that are good; and yet not reproving, but
winking at their childrens faults, and giving them their will so far till
themselves blush, and smart for it, to see to what boldness they grow thereby,
nor taking it in any manner contentedly, if their children though never so
justly be called to their answer for their doing, and corrected: but revenging
it rather, and that with spitefulnes. Even so, what disorders are feign to be
suffered in towns, while every one (forgetting the Apostles speech, that it is
an higher degree to back a sinner, then to commit sin) holds with his Romans 1.
32.
own kindred, so that none must stir against them, but the town is divided
into factions, and parts taking for their cause, (and so it is also betwixt
carnal friends) where as kindred (being nearer to a man then other good
acquaintance, or company) ought to be the first that should bridle, control,
and help to hold under their kinsfolk from ill rule and disorder: and as for
friendship, men should reach it out, and show it, but according to conscience,
not daring to abuse the bond of nature, to brotherhood in evil. The which
produces dangerous effects both to the party wronged, the parties defended,
and also the parties themselves who countenance them: as here, both the whole
commonwealth, Abimelech, and the Shechemites smarted all by this confederacy.
And the greater, and the more authority such friends, kindred or parents be
of, the more this doctrine touches them: For as a common townesman may do in
a town, so a great person may do in a shire, a Prince in a kingdom: even set
all in a combustion for a few malefactors sake, as the Beniamites, chap. 20.
did for the defense of those Sodomites Judge. 20.
of Gibeah. Let these therefore learn of the common speech, [Vsque ad ar as]
that is, as far as in conscience I may, I will do the part of a friend unto
you, and of a parent: but if ye draw me beyond that, I leave you: neither will
I (to pleasure you) make God my enemy. Depart from me: ye shall find no aid
at my hands, ye adulterers, riotous, ill companions and Psalm. 101. 6,
workers of iniquity. And let all sorts take their lesson, if not from the
holy Ghost, yet from an heathen, who saw cause of prescribing this rule, That
especially this must be looked to, lest a man commit any thing injurious, or
unlawful for his friends sake: as he that professed he would burn down the
Tower of Rome, if his great patron willed him so to do. Such amity fitteth
Robbers and Traitors, better then Christians. Who should duly weigh, whether
the matter be such as will stand with their profession, credit, and equity:
otherwise to betray them is faithfulness, and to punish the^, and (as the law
was) to cast the first stone at them, is good severity, rather then to betray
good order, the town, or Commonwealth, by their ambition, or injustice. Men
will admit of this in general, and say, God forbid else, but when it comes to
the push, they show they have the same disease which the other have; (as these
Shechemites had the same sore which Abimelech had) and so are loath to smart for
them, but rather smother their own sins, in other men's. But of this I say
the less, because the two next points aim at the like end, and may serve as
an enlargement hereof.

But (to pass from these) we may see here as great a fault in the men of
Verse. 3. 4
Shechem; as we have seen in the kindred of Abimelech. They who should have
trembled at the hearing of such a matter propounded, being so monstrous, and
horrible; and should have carried it to them that were in authority: behold
how they applaud and like of it; yea and procured money also to the furthering
of it: which, all wise men see, was done of them in great lightness, and rashness
at the least: yea, that was one of the smallest evils in their hearkening to
them. And by this note the ficklenes of the multitude, Doct.
how easily it is to be carried every way as with a blast, never weighing or
considering what sound reason leads them to in their doings, much less
aduising with the word of God.

A clear and notable example of this ficklenes and lightness, we have in Luke
19. 38. compared with 23. 13. 18.
the Gospel, of them that one day honored Christ, and set him up, crying
Hosanna, before him, and bowing to him as a King: but a few days after, when
the Jews and Pharisees rose up against him, they cried in another So in the
former chap. verse last, compared with the 22.
manner, Crucify him, crucify him. So that we see how such are not to be
rested in, who though they hold with religion, as other do, and good order in
words, yet except they be seasoned with sound and saving knowledge, and grace
to govern themselves in the course of their lives, it is nothing. Compare (for
another proof hereof) 2. Sam. 19. 43. with the 20. 2.
But such as give themselves to sobriety and staiednes, are highly to be
esteemed, and so used with all good discretion; considering how soon flesh may
be puffed up, and ill counseled, yea and they are to be encouraged to such
staiednes and constancy, in a Christian and well ordered course: which they
that are fickle, not regarding, but holding on in their inconstancy, they may
read their destiny, that as miserable as they are already, they shall daily
wax worse and worse, till they dye as they have lived. But this offers it
self often: therefore I spare any further discourse of it: Here I will stay 2.
Tim. 3. 13.
for this time.

THE FIFTY SIX SERMON ON THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to proceed, we have seen how these woeful men of Shechem, who bewraying
by the forementioned act of leaning to More of the third verse.
a bad request, the exceeding wickedness that was in them, have yet branded
themselves with another note of infamy like the former, which does much
aggrauate their sin; namely this: that living in the fellowship of honest
citizens, who should have punished evil doers, and have chaced them away with
their very countenance, yet behold, there were no worse to be found there then
themselves. They who should have made the worst afraid of their iniquity, by
their executing of law and justice up ^^ the committers; even they put the
common citizens, and better men then they were, in danger of their lives by
their wicked dealing; and did indeed cause them both to lose their lives, by
bringing in an usurper and tyrant, to spoil and make havoc of them. We know
next to the Prince in a land, are the Peers and Nobles thereof: these it most
concerns to assist the supreme governor in the execution of justice and
government. And yet we see, by comparing this with the Chronicles of diverse
lands, that these often have been the forwardest in defending the worst causes,
in attempting against the State, yea and (in the vacancy of the throne and
kingdom) to further and help forward usurpers in their unlawful claim,
against the undoubted heirs. Whereby we learn, that there are no Doct. ^. in
verse 3.
worse then some of them who live in civil society with others; who also are
trusted with the peace and safety of town and city, and yet by the just
judgment of God, pursuing them, break out and bewray themselves sometime to be
notorious offenders, and are brought forth often times by their due deserts, to
shameful execution with other evil doers; Even as we read of one who lived
in the tents with other, when Israel abode in the desert, after Leuit. 24.. 4
they came out of Egypt, yet being a blasphemer, was taken out of the host of
Israel, and stoned to death, like the worst malefactors: and so some (to come
to our time) with Ananias are found, though they be citizens and headborowes,
to be forgers, sacrilegious, etc. Others, of the same condition with Achan,
prove arrant thieves, and as he was, are put to open shame and reproach, Josh.
7. 25.
as well as rogues and masterlesse hang-bies, and some are found with Zimry to
be whoremongers, yea worse then the incestuous, and no better Numb. 25. 8.
the^ Sodomites, and do publicly receive their punishment due thereto. As also
all the spies, being yet choice men among the Tribes, yea of the chiefer Numb.
14 37
sort of them, yet perished for their collusion and dissimulation, except Caleb
and Joshua. These are not light and small matters that such as are
substantial, and of good reputation among their neighbors, should be brought
forth thus to be set on the stage to be gazed on with the worst, who might and
ought with the best, to have been pursuers and punishers of other evil doers:
and their infamy shall never be put out with God (beside the shame that
befalls them here before men,) without unfeigned repentance, which is no
common thing, as the world (yet) accounts it. And to pass from these, there
are othersome so vile, irreligious, and monstrous in another manner, yea and
even of them who yet bear it out among men, as if they were to be allowed and
justified, their sins being not punishable by the law of the land, nor to be
taxed by the Magistrate, so that the Lord does execution upon them himself,
causing their profaneness, atheism, and miserlike worldliness to rise up
against them, and drive them to hang themselves with their own halter, as did
Ahitophel the great counselor, and Judas the Apostle, when he became a
traitor. These whom I have now mentioned, and many other of bad note, being
found among the ciuiller sort in cities and towns every where, who yet should
help to suppress vagarant and unruly persons; Oh, what are good, faithful,
and friendly neighbors worth, and how highly to be accounted of? such I mean,
as among whom one may dwell peaceable, and without fear, and in whose
faithfulness a man may rest? And as such may much rejoice, though their
infirmities hold them under, so yet they who flourish and lift up their heads
on high, and count themselves the only happy people, because they are more
righteous, as they call it) that is to say, counted honest, and civil dealers,
and such as cannot be blemished with any open blot and stain of infamy for
oppression, falsehood, uncleanness, and yet void of religion, even these also
(so many of them as will show themselves wise indeed; let them (I say) know
they are in little better case the^ the other in Gods account, seeing they hate
to be reformed. And for all their vaunting themselves, and the high conceit
that they have of their good estate toward God, as if they were the only
religious persons, yet while they submit not their neck to the Lords yoke of
obedience, but abhor and scorn such as they think go beyond them in sincere
piety, who make conscience of stricter matters, (as the world count them) as
idle speech, pride of life, foolish resting, filthy pleasures, railing,
slandering, lying, deceiving, etc. even they, most certainly have God their
adversary, and because they repent not, they shall likewise perish. Doubtless
Luke 13. 3.
it were (I deny not) to be wished, that there were no worse in towns, then
these of the ciuiller sort, and it were greatly for the benefit of the
commonwealth, that gross villainies were rooted out among them, and common
virtues practiced, as the outward worshipping of God, and peace with men. But
yet these, (as the Scripture testifies) are far from happiness, as before
has been noted: the which I say, partly lest these men should deceive
themselves and others, with an erroneous conceit of that good which is not in
them, (while they search not their hearts, and purge out the filth that is
there, and yet glory of repentance: and partly, that Gods people may see cause
of endeavoring after a further measure of grace and true holiness; rather then
to faint therein, and break off their good beginnings. And the Lord does often
times therefore pluck out such whole and ciuell men, (as Note.
they love to be counted) by the ears from their fellows, and for the
example of many other, he suffers them to disguise themselves grossly by
falling into the sins for which they have scorned and disclaimed others, as
adultery* and boasted themselves to be free from them. This (I say) God is
feign to do to them: and then they cry out of their hollownesse, ignorance,
unbelief and evil heart, (being so convicted,) which has laid them in the
dirt. These before were no sins with them, neither would they be brought once
to think so; whereas yet now that they have committed the grosser, they accuse
themselves of smaller also. Therefore they are happy, who lay the foundation of
their peace, credit, safety, and true welfare toward God, who lay it (I say)
deeper, then that storm or tempest, wind or weather may cast it down: never
ceasing* till they have by faith purged out the strength and poison of those
corrupt and bitter roots of the evil heart, and by the same faith have
obtained and found mercy with God, that they may fear him, and for a good
conscience sake, go under (if it must needs be so) discredit with bad men,
rather then for credits sake to smother conscience, which building soon
decaieth with the sandy groundwork thereof.

But now to return to the Shechemites again, I have not yet noted nor Verse 4.
set down the particular sin, which they added to the rest, that is to say,
that they help forward this cursed impe Abimelech to usurp the kingdom, by
giving him such a piece of money out of their common treasury, which was the
house of their Idol Baal-berith (of whom we spak before cha. 8. end) with the
which he was able to hire a band and company of leaud fellows to guard and
run before, and follow him, as Absolon did the like, when he took in hand
such a like work. Whereby we may see to what uses many Doct. v. 4.
put their goods, and how commendably they employ them, which they are put in
trust with. As for feeding the hungry with them, or clothing the naked, or
pitying the oppressed, it is too base a matter for them to look Mark 4. 7.
after, though they shall know one day, and that to their cost, that they have
the poor among them, to this end, that they may do good to them. But the
thought of such things is as far from them as the East is from the West: yea it
is death to them to part with the very shreds to good uses: but they James 4. 3.
empty their purse to the bottom to bestow upon their lusts, in roytous life,
in drinking, whoring, and other excess, till they be brought to a morsel of
bread: or else they be of another disposition, namely, to gather and increase
their substance endlesly, neither they themselves, nor any wise man can tell
why: for if they have posterity to leave it to, (which yet many want) they
should leave them but that which remains after they have done, in their time
and place, many good deeds to diverse civil and religious necessary uses: and
otherwise accursed are they in that which they have, which for the most part
does no other good then the pleasing of the eye of the owner, while they know
many smart and are in penury, (that I say) nothing of their wicked increasing
of great part of it by oppression, and defrauding of men; whereof we have too
many woeful examples among us from time to time. The Lord, therefore, has
given them no heart to do good with it, which if they had, they should
consider also, that there is somewhat else to bestow cost upon, as well as upon
themselves, but especially upon their lusts: I mean, the worship of God,
procuring a good Minister, relieuing the distressed, of all kinds, as their
ability will reach. But they show that God and his word are of meaner account
with them then their loathsome lusts. Touching this abuse of men's wealth and
outward blessings, sundry kinds of doctrine have occasioned us to speak
before, neither shall it be needful to make any set discourse upon it in this
place. Only I will add a word or two touching this. That they took these
pieces out of the treasury of Baal-berith. Whether they took it out of their
treasure, appointed to idolatrous uses (for it is probable they had such a
treasury, in imitation of the treasury of the house of God) or whether their
common treasure, was in some place of that Temple, there laid up as in a safe
repositorie, and free from the violence or sacrilege of robbers, (of which use
of temples, especially in times of war and danger of pillage, we read in
Profane and Ecclesiastical writers every where) of this, I say, I will not
affirm, neither can I. Only I incline to the former opinion: and do think that
they robbed their Temple, to supply the want of Abimelech (and sacrilege may
well stand with treason and tyranny, which spare neither things holy nor
profane.) But upon conjectures I will collect nothing. Whether soever they
did, sure it is, that they thought their Idol a sufficient treasurer and
keeper of this silver, (or else they would not have made his Temple the
treasury) and durst trust him with the preciousest things they had: who yet
had neither eyes to see it, or hands and power to defend it from robbers. This
is no wonder (may some man say) that they durst trust him with their money, who
durst venture their lives and souls upon his protection, as they in the days
of Eliah. 1. King. 18. did. I answer: 1. King. 18. 28.
It were the less wonder indeed, if we saw not Christians, worshippers of God
(who profess themselves to ieopard their salvation upon his promise) to be yet
far behind these Idolaters in this thing. For they will not venture nor cast
their goods upon his safeguard, nor think the Lord a meet and trusty keeper of
their wealth; they will put no more in his hands then they are willing to lose.
To such we may say: Is he not much beholding to you the whilst? He has given
you living Temples, not of stone temples, not of Baal, but of his own making,
even the poor members of the Lord Jesus; Into these he commands you to cast,
not your superfluities, but some of your substance: he promises to be the
ouerseer and steward of this treasury, he will reckon and return again such
benevolence of yours, double and trebble unto you, yea tenfold, (which is use
and gain enough) nay, an hundredth fold, rewarding it with everlasting
habitations: For why? he has undertaken, and is become the Surety (as I have
said) to repay all such loan again abundantly. But we think these to be
but words: and keep the principal fast, let the interest go where it will
for us. As for these Temples, we count them Sepulchers, devouring al, asking
give, give, but never returning ought again: and as they in Ecclesiastes, who
think all lost and cast upon the waters, that is well bestowed. But these
Idolaters and their confederates in Baal-berith, shall stand forth, and
witness Eccles. 11. 1.
against such, to their shame.

Again, when they had thus helped him forward, we may see what manner Doct. 2.
in verse. 4.
of persons he hired and provided to bring his wicked purpose to pass, to wit,
such as were empty, lightheaded, and naught worth, and which were lewd and
loose, and were carried headlong to that which they did, and not by sound
reason. Whereby we have a description of such graceles and wicked hangbies,
what they are, and wherefore they serve; which shall be to good purpose to
note, as for other causes, so for this one; to wit, that we may see what
justice should be done and executed on such: who living idly for the most part,
further then they needs must must work, should be laid for as of late years
they were by that Honorable Counselor of worthy memory, and kept from
ranging about. But seeing they are seldom punished, the best use we can make
of them, is to beware of them. First they are, if we will know them, such as
have spent all, and lived idlelie, without practicing any profitable trade or
calling: and how have they spent it? full leaudly and badly, in gaming,
whoring, gusling, caualering, fray-making, etc. and yet hanging in men's debts.
Secondly, they are malcontents both with their own penury and the welfare of
others, yea with the State it self (often) of the Commonwealth, wherein they
live. Thirdly, they are such as are not to be ruled by reason, much less by
religion. But their disposition is, to run on head to be set on gadding,
rouing, etc. And wherefore stay or wait they? but even for such troublesome
times as these here were? and for some tumult and insurrection, that they may
fish in troubled waters, desiring a change of the present condition of these
peaceable times, as a fit occasion to practice and set a work this their
devilish disposition, which in peace and government, is, as it were emprisoned
in them: some by joining themselves with vain and loose persons like
themselves, and wandering to and fro, if there be no employment for them at
home, into foreign countries, not through a desire of getting knowledge or
experience, much to traffic for their maintenance, but to try their fortunes
(as they profanely speak) being weary of their own country, wherein they
are defamed for their lewdness, prodigality, and needless debts, or other
dishonesty: others being readily hired, to sort themselves with such as will
rifle men's houses, and companions in helping to make a head, and if none of
these hit, (as they say) nor come to pass; then fall they to robbing by the
high ways. And such dangerous and diseased members have there always been,
and are in all Commonwealths. In the book of the Acts, in two or three
Chapters, the Acts 17. 5, 8. and 19. 29. ^4.
Jews got such hang bies to make stirs and tumults in cities, and then
charged Paul to be the author of them; when he yet was in danger of his life by
them; and all to make him seem seditious, and a raiser of trouble where he
came. Even so such there are at this day, idle companions, who cannot choose,
but like Vultures and Cormorants, pray upon other men's goods: who might easily
have been stayed from these courses while they were young, if they had not been
suffered to have their own will so far, til this trade (as miserable as it
is, yet because it is joined with ease) waxed sweet unto them. And again, if
they had not been saved and kept from prison and correction, when they had so
justly deserved it: which correction if the civil Magistrate, or the
Head-borrowes of towns wherein they lurked, had neglected; yet their own
parents and kindred should have seen executed. Deuteronomy. 21. 19.


And if such as work not, ought not to eat, why are they suffered, whose 2.
These. 3. 10.
life is idleness? Let such therefore be purged out from among us: and in all
places let provision be made, that they who are idle and vagrant, be
restrained, and set on work, (though they have somewhat of their own) that
so, (will they nill they) as they will do no good, they may be compelled to
stoop to good order, and be held in from doing mischief at least, that this
evil may cease which threatens so great danger to Church and Commonwealth:
which (I must needs say) is hard to do; considering how such persons flock
together to such places of the land as are populous and frequented, where they
may be in harbor and the safer from search and punishment: but then, that
which we cannot amend, let us lament, and bless God if we be free from such
molestation in the places where we dwell.

When this Abimelech saw how his bold and shameless devices and attempts Verse.
5.
prospered, and how he thriued in them, he waxed much bolder, and took heart
to go fall upon his innocent brethren, and slew them. And Compare Act. 12. 2.
Eccles. 7. 15.
herein is verified that of Solomon, Eccles. 7. There is a wicked man (says
he) who continues in his malice: meaning, because he prospers, and is not
resisted. Thus Adonibezek, chap. 1. stayed not till he had served seventy
Princes Judge. 1. 7.
shamefully after his cruel humor, but was fleshed more and more by his
success. O horrible and unnatural bloodshedding cruelty! Here we may see
what monsters are in the world, worthily to be driven from amongst men, and to
be made spectacles and gazing stocks by open and most sharp punishment
inflicted upon them. Such were Athaliah, Haman, and Absolous. Such were they
who wrought that bloody massacre in France, and they who were the chief doers
in the persecution here in England, which may be remembered by some that yet
live; and they of the Gunpowder-treason come nothing behind, that I say no
more. But how much more cruel are they who murder many souls for want of due
food? But touching the sin of cruelty I have spoken in chap. 1. 7. and
chap. 8. 20. and forward. There let the reader supply this place from thence.

Many, not ill minded, desire to know why God does suffer such abominations.
Object. Answ.
I answer, that God knows the cause, who rules justly, and who (as a godly
father speaks) orders the evil appetites of the wicked, to fulfill his
providence, though he infuse not evil into them; as he wrought the salvation
of his elect, by the fall of Adam, and the treachery of Judas: and yet we are
not, neither ought, to be altogether ignorant why God does this. We are not
to appoint the Lord how to govern the world, nor by whom, nor how he will be
glorified. And he who may marvel that God is patient toward the bad, how can
he think himself too good to suffer for his own deserts, be the instruments
never so evil, when our Savior suffered for us without cause? But if any of us
be without danger and hurt by such wicked persons, who are one of Gods
scourges to correct us, let us reckon it among the great blessings of God, and
use it accordingly.

But in this verse let us proceed further with Abimelech. He considered Verse.
5. doct. 2.
that his seventy brethren might be like to hinder and resist him: and
therefore what did he? he resolved to dispatch them all, and so he did,
except one. The hainousnes of the fact, deterred him not from going through
stitch with it: he would not leave it by halues, nay he could not be quiet till
every obstacle and hindrance was removed, and each eyesore taken away. It
bewraieth a most fearful property in the workers of evil: that cannot desist
nor leave of, till they have brought their ungodly attempts to a full and
perfect end: wherein the godly seldom match them in contraire actions. A man
would have thought these seventy men had been a great block in an usurpers
way, to keep him from proceeding currantly in his bad course: and Abimelech
saw that to, but yet it was not a bar strong enough to keep him from
villainy, but he broke it (as it were) to pieces, rather then it should stand
up in his way to hinder him from his purpose. For that, he was resolved to go
forward with: and therefore whatsoever opposition should come against it, he
would bear it down, as floods and winds pull down hills, banks, bridges,
gates, trees, and whatsoever comes in their way, and yields not to them. Woe be
to him that meets a Bear robbed of her whelps; and yet better so, then
cross an usurper of his ambitious desire: although these his brethren had not
crossed him, but by silence and sitting still. Ambition is a raging monster we
see, and although it thirst after honor, yet seldom is it assuaged without
blood, if occasion and opportunity serve. Nothing is so holy, so precious, so
near, which it prophaneth not, defloureth and destroys not. Even his own
son, it he had stood in his way, had tasted of the same sauce, which his
brethren did, as it is reported Herod the great did, in the massacre of the
infants. But it Matthew. 2.
became him well enough to keep that to himself by villainy, which he had
invaded by wickedness before. Even as his successors at this day, these
Italionated devils, and disciples of Machiauel both practice and defend,
according to his rules, that a kingdom gotten by force, must be preserved also
by violence. Again, he that will rule, must not stand nicely upon virtues, but
(when occasion serves) play both the lion and fox, and work out his enemies
by fraud or cruelty, any way, so he can do it. Again, let them strike once,
but (as Abishai said) strike home, and kill all at once that stand in his way
and sit in his light. For to kill often is odious, but to make a riddance all
at once, root and branch, is with such, policy, and a necessity pardonable.
When I think of this fact of Abimelech, I could not but thus resemble it to
these monsters, who lately offered to give us an experiment of the like
enterprise in their powder treason: which, as no age ever matched, so no age
shall ever forget it, to their eternal shame, and the Lords endless praise.
For as they were Abimelechs in ambition and cruelty, so the Lord made them
Abimelechs in confusion. Abimelechs joy lasted not: theirs was but hope, and
yet made them ashamed. The Lord sent a spirit of division between him and
Shechem: so he did between these, one betrayed the other. So let thine
enemies perish O God, etc. Therefore let all wise men (for all Judge. 5. last
verse.
are not great ones) circumspectly take heed and beware what sins they
resolve to commit: for surely whatsoever they give over themselves unto, they
will make no bones of the necessary attendants thereof, be they never so
hideous and horrible. As it is hard to say, whether this parricide or his
ambition were greater, save only that the former served the latter. Men little
dream how deeply they plunge themselves, when they undertake any sin:
themselves often are astonished at themselves, but that when they have begun,
they must play the men in going forward, and not shrink for it. Herod himself
was not willing to behead John: but when he had said the word, he must not go
back, (he thought) for his credit sake, therefore he went through. He might
thank his luxuriousnes, and iollitie, which caused the oath, and the oath the
murder. So says the Apostle; Because men set it down, they will be rich,
they meet with their match, and fall into 1. Tim. 69.
many temptations and snares, etc. Tush, tell not them of trifles, of lions in
the way, they are busy in pursuing their game, and they will get it,
whatsoever it cost them, for they have so decreed and set it down. Well learn
to resolve only upon that which is lawful, and so be free from any great
inconvenience, and go through it with commendation: for all other resolution
is devilish. I would be larger in this, but that there follows in the sixth
verse a doctrine not much differing from this argument.

But in this bloody act of Abimelechs, one of his brethren escaped his Doct. 3.
hands: and in that one of them was preserved from his cruelty, and kept out
of his reach, it was done by Gods special providence, both to hold him in
fear, seeing he that was kept alive, was the lawful son of Gedeon, and
borne of a lawful wife; Abimelech himself coming but of a concubine: and
further, it was also a good dashing of his joy. And moreover, we see there was
good use of the Lords saving alive of that one of his brethren, Iotham I mean,
because of the prophecy that he uttered; therein foretelling the destruction
of Abimelech. To teach us, that although the committers of evil have their
humors satisfied, and their turn served, and things to fall out even as they
would wish, yet there is, and shall be ever, somewhat reserved to vex and pay
them home, even here in this world, and to give them a taste of further
torment. For example, who had better success then Haman? and yet by Mordecay
(who was of no place to stand with, or to cross him) how was his joy quailed
by him? rather then there should be none to resist him: yea, and that which was
very unlike to be, came upon him, for by Mordecaies counsel, and well handling
the matter, Haman was overthrown Ester 7. 10. and 9. 10.
with his whole house.

So Herod and Herodias had nothing that troubled them, but John Baptist; and
yet when they had taken John out of the way, our Savior Christ role up, who
(through this that Herod's conscience put him in fear) kept him at Mark 6. 20.
that stay, that he could not be quiet. Ahab had been at hearts ease, but for
1. King. 22. 8.
Eliah, and yet afterward Michaiah vexed him as much. Gehazi sped well a while;
but at length his master dashed all. And all this is a savor of their 2. King.
5. 25.
woe before it come, unless they be teared and driven from their bad courses
thereby, and so humble themselves to seek mercy; as that third Captain of
Ahazijah did to Eliah, seeing the danger. And thus God fears the 2. King. 1.
13.
whole rabble of the ungodly, and by other terrors also: when his word will not
do it, his works shall; and even thereby, I mean by the casting them down
by the law lively preached to them, and the fear of death, judgment day, and
hell; he does so torment many a man, that all his shifts and devices cannot
deliver him therefrom; neither is all that he has able to comfort him, and
cry down this voice of the Ministry, although it work no true fear of God
in him to repentance, but only awake and astonish him. True it is, that some,
though they be apparently crossed by God, yet they feel it no more then the
dead palsy, as we see in Nabal. But in that they be hardened, they are in worse
case. So then God deals thus commonly, that the wicked shall have somewhat to
make them less eager of their pleasures; as either pain, sickness, or some
such thing, or else inward fear, or the like. Although (alas) what although
they should never be interrupted? they should yet be but carried to hell
merrily, when others go mourning. And when Gods servants fall to the like
sin, as to nestle themselves in the deceiuable inticements of this world, he
gives them the like medicine to cure them of their disease, that they shall
ever have one thing or other to hold them in unquietness, and to fear Note.
them with: which is ever like to light upon them, to vex and sting them, if
they shall dare delight themselves in any evil thing, or to rest in that which
is transitory; and so go from the Lord. As the fear of losing a good wife,
their nearest companion to them, to partake their commodities and delights with
them; or their crosses and decaies in the world, to make them easilier borne,
which affliction disquieteth them much, and dampeth all their earthly repast.
So also, he exercises them with weakness of body, meannes in estate, petty
losses, etc. and al to weane the^ from the breast (as it were sucklings) by
laying such bitter and distasteful corrections upon them.

The use of this is, to rest and joy our hearts in nothing here below; but to
Use.
see, that our delight be in the favor and fear of the Lord continually:
which is the one thing (though we may make them two) that is necessary. Prou.
24. 27. Luke 10. 42.
And if nothing will rouse us out of spiritual slumbering in earthly
prosperity and peace, (wherein to lie senselessely and sottishly, is more then
to have one foot in hell already) let this do it, that we know not how soon
we must leave al, and go to judgment, and to the yielding up of our account.
And yet if the Lord cross us in our enterprises that be evil, we may know
the worst that the means toward us, is, that he would stop us in our race
toward destruction and misery, that it may not come upon us.

When Abimelech had so unnaturally slain his brethren, which ought to Verse 6.
The sense.
have stricken such a terror into the men of Shechem that they should have
abhorred him, and pursued him openly, calling the rest of the Tribes to join
with them therein, till he had received his due punishment: he so subtillie
woound in with them, and they were so credulous, that they believed, for all
that he would deal well with them, as he had promised them; and therefore
proceeded (O fearful to be spoken) and undertook to make him King: and this
they did in a place that pertained to them, none of the other Tribes being
either called, or made acquainted with the matter (who yet had a far greater
stroke therein then they) which must needs raise great dissension and division
betwixt them. But this they regarded not, seeing they had taken in hand the
effecting of the other.

Here we see, when one sin is intended of a man to be committed, it goes
Doct. 1.
not alone, but draws with it many other, as companions to it. For neither
can it be brought to pass without the help of other, neither can a man take
pleasure in it without the company of other sins. He seeks to be King, and
how many sins does he adioyne, to the effecting of it? As he here used fraud,
flattery, and cousonage, and rose up, and drew after him a band of seditious
hang-bies; he slew his brethren; and when he was made King, what contention did
he cause among them?

It is too manifest, that sin is no solitary bird, nor is ever seen out of
Romans 13. 13.
company. Even as S. Paul teaches to the Romans, how strife carries envying
with it; and gluttony draws drunkenness; and chambering, wantonness. And
this is the more to be marked, because wicked persons allege for themselves,
when they are reproved for their faults, that al men are sinners, yea some
sin grossly in many kinds, and for themselves, they say, they hope, if they
have done amiss, yet they may be borne with, seeing it is but one trespass:
and further they will say, every one for himself, Such a man has this
blemish, and such a one that: all have some one or other, and so may I have,
and what then? But to this it is to be answered, where one chief sin is
committed, there are many other as handmaides to accompany it. As in the sin
of Achan, David, Ananias and Saphira, with many others, is to be seen.
Therefore if we think it be a shame for us, to be charged Note.
with many, then take we heed of any one, for it will not go alone, and if we
think it a small matter to be rebuked for one, know we for certainty, that
one will bring and draw many to it: and he only is happy, that wisely takes
heed of all. But this doctrine I have handled before: therefore the less shall
serve. Look back into chap. 1. verse. 7.

Moreover, let the foolishness of these men of Shechem, who believing
Abimelechs fair words, went by and by and made him King, let it (I say) teach
us wisdom. For it is a singular good watchword to all Christians, that we do
not regard so much the speeches of vain and loose persons, as Note.
weigh and compare their actions one with another, that we may profit by them,
and not be beguiled. As the proverb says; what should I hearken to words, when
I see deeds contrary. His were vile and horrible, as they saw, therefore they
ought not to have regarded his words. For he that is faulty in a great matter,
is not to be trusted in a small. For example; if (as our text teaches) a man
be vnpitifull to his own, as this Abimelech was, he will certainly be without
pity and compassion to other, howsoever for vain glory he may show pity
sometime, and in some case; but that will not hold, neither is it to be rested
upon: for one swallow makes not summer. So if one will contend and fall out
with, disclaim, and deceive his near friend, let not a stranger trust him.
For though such an one be now in favor with him, yet they may twenty ways
be easily estranged one from another, as we see it comes daily to pass. So
if a man live not peaceably and kindly with his wife, he may say what he
will of his agreeing with others, but longer then while his corrupt and
inconstant humor be pleased, he will live kindly with none. This David aimed
at, and meant in his answer 2. Sam. 1. 16. and 4. 12.
to them that brought tidings of their murdering of Saul, and of Ishbosheth:
for what likelihood gave they of any more fidelity to him, if the time should
have served?

So to prosecute this point in more particulars, wherein the truth of it does
best appear; let us not be deceived, but wise; if we see, that a man be not
faithful to God, let us not think that he will be to us. So if one help not
his poor neighbor in his need, there is small liberality or neighborhood in
him at any time. If a man bestow not the Sabbath in godly exercises and
religious duties, it is sure he does little that way on other days: and if he
do; yet it is not of knowledge nor conscience, whatsoever he does, without
which it is nothing worth. So if a man cannot be appeased in a small matter,
let him say what he will, it is sure, he will much less be in a great: and
yet men commonly say, any thing but this I would do for you, or could yield
unto, when yet a small matter is requested of them.

So, to enlarge the argument from the greater and more likely, to the lesser:
if thou can not trust them, whom thou have long known faithful, Note.
though thou gettest many new friends, thou shall never be bold soundly to rest
upon them. Also if a man will seem repentant, and leave not an il outward
quality, he has not (certainly) yet begun to search and purge his evil heart.
If the righteous find much ado to be saved; he is far from it, that 1. Pet.
4. 18.
takes his liberty at his pleasure. And who is little troubled about seeking
assurance of his salvation? If one day spent and taken up in a godly life be
Psalm. 84. 10. Prou. 24. 10.
sweet, what were many, may the whole life, if it were passed therein? If we
faint in afflictions, and yield readily to temptations, we may know by that;
our strength was never great. Again also, (as our Savior says) If ye be
unfaithful in the smallest things, who shall trust you with the greatest
treasure? And Luke 16. 11.
so (to say somewhat of Gods dealing with us) if God have helped us in the
hardest, when we sought to him in feruentnes and truth, he will by the same
means, help us in smaller danger. If he spare not his own, (as he did not
the Prophet, who disobeyed him at Bethel) much harder shall the state of 1. Kin
13. 25. 35.
the bad be, as Ieroboams was, who hard of the others punishment. And if we be
sure, that he has given us his Christ, the greatest of all gifts; much more
will he give the smaller, being sought with the like mind. Thus we may take
good by Abimelechs words, and be bold to say, that he set not more by the men
of Shechem, then by his brethren, whatsoever he said.

Now one thing I will add, or repeat rather, having handled it in this Doct.
3.
Chapter more at large; I mean, touching these men of Shechem, who went and
made Abimelech King, for all the abomination that they saw he had wrought, who
ought rather to have pursued him to the fearefullest death, as I have said. Out
of whose practice we may clearly see, that there are none so vile and odious
persons, showing openly their wickedness to the world, but they are applauded
and approved of some in their odious and bad practices: and none are so godly,
but shameless beasts there are, who openly will defame them, and speak
maliciously of them; yea, (if need be) to their faces. The reason is, that they
who commend and maintain these ungodly ones, are as vile and bad themselves as
they, as I proved before out of the Apostles words. And for further proof of
this which I say, Romans 1. last.
let that be considered of Judas, when he had betrayed his most kind and
loving Master, yet how was he encouraged to it before, and rewarded for it
Luke 22. 5.
by the^ that went then for masters in Israel, even for the chief pillars of
the visible Church, yea, teachers and lights to others? though the fact was
afterward cried out of by the traitor himself, saying: I have sinned in
betraying the Matthew. 27. 4.
innocent blood. And all experience, as well as Scripture, proves the truth of
this point; which shows how full of sin and evil doings the times are. And
yet they who applaud such, go for honest citizens and townsmen, till they be
bewrayed by the Lord, and till their wickedness break forth, even as the
others does. Which rightly verifieth the prophecy of our Savior who foretold,
that in these latter days, the abundance of iniquity Matthew. 24. 12.
should be such, that it should cause the love of many to wax cold. So that I
conclude, that they are happy who are wise to turn away from, and to abhor
the sins of the times they live in, but especially, if they abhor sin in
themselves secretly, that they may be far from committing it openly, and
fear to offend God, for the love they bear him. But I leave the rest to the
next Sermon.

THE FIFTY SEVENTH SERMON ON THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse 7. And when they toldit to Iotham, he went and stood in the top of mount
Gerazim, and lift up his voice and cried, and said unto them: Hearken unto me
you men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you. 8. The trees went forth to
anoint a king over them, and said unto the Olive tree; Reign thou over us. 9.
But the Olive tree said unto them, should I leave my fatness wherewith by me
they honor God and man, and go to advance me above the trees. 10. Then the
trees said unto the Fig tree, Come thou and be king over us. 11. But the
Figtree answered them, Should I for sake my sweetness and my good fruit, and
go to advance me above the trees? 12. Then said the trees unto the Vine, Come
thou and be king over us. 13. But the Vine said unto them, Should I leave my
wine, whereby I cheer God and man, and go to advance me above the trees? 14.
Then said all the trees unto the Bramble, Come thou and reign over us. 15. And
the Bramble said unto the trees, If ye will indeed anoint me king over you,
come, and put your trust under my shadow: and if not, the fire shall come out
of the Bramble, and consume the Cedars of Lebanon. 16. Now therefore, if ye do
truly and incorruptly to make Abimelech King; and if ye have deali well with
Ierubbaal and with his house, and have done unto him according to the
deseruings of his hands. 17. (For my father fought for you, and adventured his
life, and delivered you out of the hands of Midian. 18. And ye are risen up
against my fathers house this day, and have slain his children, about seventy
persons upon one stone; and have made Abimelech, the son of his maid servant
King over the men of Shechem, because he is your brother,) 19. If ye then have
dealt truly and purely with Ierubbaal, and with his house, this day, then
reioyceye with Abimelech, and let him rejoice with you. 20. But if not, let a
fire come out from Abimelech, and consume the men of Shechem, and the house of
Millo: also let a fire come forth from the men of Shechem, and from the house
of Millo, and consume Abimelech. 21. And Iotham ran away, and fled, and went to
Beer, and dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother.
The second part of the Chapter.
WE have heard how Abimelech and the men of Shechem prospered, The sum of
this 2 part of this Chapter.
and pleased themselves in that which they had done. Now in the rest of the
Chapter, and first in this second part to the 22. verse, is showed that God
would have them blancked and damped in the midst of their doings, and first by
Iotham, one that was reserved for that purpose. Therefore when it was known to
Iotham, the youngest son of Gedeon, (who escaped the bloody hands of
Abimelech) that the men of Shechem were gathered together to make him king, he
waited his opportunity, by Gods directing of him, when they should meet
together, and came to a place where he might be heard of them, and that was
mount Gerazim, which was near to Shechem, on the top whereof he stood, to
tell them of their doings, and how they should speed for them. That he came
thither by Gods instinct, three reasons do prove, as also Iothams words in the
7. verse. First, in that he went safe away after: which to reason was not
likely. Secondly, for that it came to pass, as he prophesied. Thirdly, the
thing was good, and to good use, and not found fault with. His reproving and
denouncing against them, for more plainnes he set down by a parable, giving
them to understand a truth by a thing imagined, as by a manner of speech more
plausible and perswasiue, then if he had made a direct inuectiue against them.

Herein first let us see the meaning of some things in this scripture, which
The opening of the parable.
are hard to be understood, before we proceed further. In parables, we know
there must be no precise agreement with truth looked for in every circumstance,
nor sense wrung out of every word, but the scope and substance must be looked
to and regarded. By the olive therefore, vine, and figtree, briefly, he
means such of Gedeons family, as might have been profitably employed. By the
Trees seeking a king, he means the Shechemites. By the bramble Abimelech,
good for nothing. And as the bramble, which is one of the worst shrubs in the
field, ought not to be taken above any of the best trees, for any principal
use, but is most fit to be burned: So neither ought Abimelech to have been
preferred before Gedeons sons, who yet would not reign. Therefore both
Abimelech, and they who chose him, should be, as they had deserved, even
worthily cut off. In this scripture are two things: the one a preface, desiring
to hearken to him: with a reason, lest The parts two of the parable.
God hearken not to them: the other, to what they should hearken, to wit, to
the laying out of their sin, to verse 16. and to the punishment denounced
against it, to verse. 22.

In that Iotham, when he knew certainly the premises, being stirred up Doct
out of all the verses general.
of God, went thereupon and told the men of Shechem of their doings, and
denounced the judgment of God against the same: it teaches, that it pleases
God, who set him aworke, and his will is, that iniquity should be laid open to
the committers thereof, and be resisted as speedily as may be; and that all, as
their place and calling give leave, ought to be ready to go against it, and
pursue it. The Ministers by zealous teaching to deface it; the Magistrates by
punishing; the governors of families in their places to do both. These are, as
they are bound, to prevent and take order, as they can, lest such evil things
should come to pass: and so to root out, and reform, when they are come. For
thus both Church and Commonwealth is, and should be preserved.

The use hereof, and in a manner of all which in the first three doctrines I
Use.
noted, touching the contrary fact of the kindred of Abimelech, and the men of
Shechem, is, that they who do evil, ought justly to fear, for God has set
many to pursue them, yea even their own kindred; and though they escape one
way, they shall be taken another. Will thou then live without fear every way?
fear God then, and do well: for if ye do the thing that Psalm. 112. 1. and 8.
is good, who shall harm you? For the eyes of the Lord (as the Apostle says)
1. Pet. 3. 12. 13.
are (as the mothers upon the child, that it may take no hurt) over the
righteous, and his ears open to their prayers: and the face of the Lord, even
his anger, is against them that do evil.

Hearken] By this speech of Iotham note, that as all instructions and warnings
Verse. 7.
sent us of God, ought to be hearkened to; so more particularly, they Revel 2.
29. Doct. out of verse 7. Prou. 17. 15.
who hear not the cry of the innocent being wronged, shall cry themselves,
and not be heard. Note it against the monstrous oppressors and hard dealers of
our time; who in letting and lending, regard neither equity, the common
benefit of both persons, nor the case of the poor, but wring from them what
they can into their own hands, and use other as they list. Judgment shall be
without mercy to such as are so merciless. Consider what James 2. 13. Genes.
37. 28.
a plunge Joseph's brethren were brought unto two or three times, for the
cruelty they had showed to him most unnaturally; when they sold him thither,
from whence they hoped he should never return to trouble them any more. God
and man shall leave such in their most miserable distress, as in the
destruction of Jerusalem, and in the death of Saul and Judas we may see: but
the merciful shall find mercy. This judgment of God in measuring out such
measure to the merciless, as they have met out to other, I have often Matthew. 7.
2.
observed to be paid to them who have been cruel, as to the bodies so to the
souls of men; who for their own pleasure depriving many, that were hungry,
Note.
of the food of life, have (for all their bodily abundance) dyed miserably in
darkness, without any comfort or instruction.

But alas, who believes our report, till he see it verified? But men laugh and
sport themselves in that they have scraped together, we have it in out
coffers, say they, and about us: and as for God, tush, we hope, he will do
neither good nor evil, we hope never to be put to any such plunge as you speak
of: others indeed have found the truth of this by woeful experience, but as for
us we hope to morrow shall be as to day, we fear it not. But oh wretch! what
if the Lord in mercy cull out some one of many to be a wonder and example to
the rest, sparing others the whilst; do thou so abuse this his patience, to
thy condemnation? What if thou be that odd person whom God will set upon the
stage? might not Adonibezek have said as thou? But put case thou escape this
plague from men, is there not a God who can be cruel with the cruel, as well
as froward with the froward? as the Psalmist speaks: that is, match them to
the full? Will thou urge him to deal with thee as once he did with an
engrosser and griper, arming mice and rats to oppress him by sea and land,
till they had eaten the flesh from the bones Note.
without pity, as he had done many men's before? If thou say this is rare,
and not like to befall thee. Well, yet there is one way behind, which shall
surely meet with thee: and if thou can shun that, then say the Scriptures
are fables: and that is, when thou art in hell thou shall cry out as Dives
Luke 16. 24.
did, for woe and pain, desiring relief: But it shall be answered to thee, as
to him: No; remember, the time was when thou feltest not the misery of the
oppressed: Now thou criest out in thine anguish, and none hears thee. But by
diverse occasions this is spoken of and handled in this book.

To conclude therefore, (with a word or two touching another kind of
oppression) I have observed this, that some Protestants have dealt hardly with,
and uncharitably defamed others; even men of the same religion, and (which
aggrauateth their sin) such as they knew durst not give them the measure
back again, which they offered them. Now these men afterward falling into the
hands of Papists, (men of another disposition, cruel like lions, and stinging
as scorpions) have been so vnpleasingly and despitefully handled, by the
slanderous railings of their Jesuits and Rabshakees, who have vexed every
vein of their hearts: that they would have bought off the blemishes and
scarres with a price if they could, which the pens and tongues of their
enemies have defiled the^ with; sparing neither age, person, gifts, or place.
And al to teach the^ to deal gently with the innocent lamb, if they would
avoid the tongues and teeth of woluish adversaries and lions.

Now to come to the parable: By the trees seeking a king, was meant, as I Verse.
8.
said, the Shechemites slipperines and inconstancy, who could not be content
with Gods government, governing them, as he had done, by many, and raising them
up a Judge in their trouble by other nations, to deliver them: but they would
yield to be governed by one and have king, (even as sometime after the whole
nation of the Jews did follow them in: 1. Samuel 8.) 1. Sam. 8. 5.
contrary to that which God had appointed. Which practice of theirs teaches
us, that we soon grow weary of Gods yoke and of his ordinances, Psalm. 2. 3.
by obeying the which yet we might do well if we could see, and loath we are
that God should reign over us. Indeed we say, and in words Luke 19. 14.
seem to pray otherwise, as in the second and third petition; Thy kingdom
come; Thy will be done: but who admits it? And no marvel.

For flesh is unruly, and in the most there is no work of the spirit, and the
operation of it is weak in the best of us, especially as we go to work. By
means whereof, we see how ill it goes with the most at this day. For they
Note.
having no more then nature in them, seek liberty to live as they list, and
to follow their own way. From whence arise so many troubles and garboiles to
them in their lives; when yet Gods yoke is the only easy yoke, and under
Matthew. 11. last verse.
the wing of his protection only is peace and safety. Oh, one day in his
house, to be nurtured by him, even in this life, is better then a thousand in
any estate of pleasure whatsoever: and yet we have liberty to enjoy much even
that way also. Look more hereof in chap. 8. in Gedeons answer to the people
offering him the kingdom.

The other sons of Gedeon are compared with Abimelech, as the good Verse. 9.
10. to the 16.
trees are with the bramble. And yet they, who were more excellent then he,
would not reign: much less should Abimelech, who was far less worthy, and
yet he did. By the trees here, and Gedeons other sons, who would not reign,
though they might, nor the trees, as the vine, olive, and fig tree, that
would not leave their state for an higher, nor their sweetness for any other;
all of us are taught to keep compass, and to frame ourselves willingly to
abide in the estate wherein God has set us (as indeed the only and best estate
for us) and not to break out of our range and compass, to Doct. out of the
former verses.
affect that which is not for us. And as gifts are required thereto, and
calling; so we should attend thereupon, and employ our time on that, for which
we are fitted: yea and look to find most sweetness therein. For as we are
taught to pray for our daily bread, even that success and measure of blessing
that God sees best; so that which he sends, we should hold to be best for
us. A worthy proof we have hereof in David, who, though he were designed to
the kingdom, yet he professes himself so modest and sober minded, that he
looked not at any thing too high for him, but possessed his soul Psalm. 131. 2.
in silence and patience. Noting by the way, that to avoid this pragmaticall
humor and ambition, a man must get an humble heart, much occupied about the well
ordering of his own affections, and finding work enough at home.

But the most of us reach at things beyond our compass, or by our wit, policy
and skill, think to get all into our net; and meddle with those which we are
not trained up unto; and so we suffer our gifts to lie a rusting. Yea surely,
this is the case of the most; either they will have all or nothing, though they
beg for their labor. Busy bodies many are, the private man prying into the
Ministers calling, and finding fault with him; but blind and untoward to seek
what is amiss in himself: not unlike to Absolon, who being a subject, who
should rather have prayed for grace fit for that estate, forgets himself
grossly, and pleases himself to think how fit he was for an higher, and
what he could do in his fathers place far better then he, and wishes he
were put to the trial, 2. Sam. 15. Whereas, if the foot be unfit 2. Sam. 25. 4.
to do it own office, much less able will it be to be the head of the
body: and, indeed, such as these are ever censuring other in their places and
callings, as insufficient, not looking to their own duties. Let us leave
(every one) this course, and have ever in mind this answer of the Vine and
the other trees; Shall I leave my sweetness, etc. Lest we be as ridiculous as
he, who bearing his head aloft in viewing the stars, fell into the ditch, for
want of looking (in the mean while) to his own standing. Rather let us be
content, though we have not as we would, and rush we not in have, and without
consideration to places and changes of dealings for advantage: but let us be
sure, that we have the Lord always going before us, or let us look for it,
that he will most certainly joint us. Yea let us count it our chief praise,
to be faithful in our own condition and calling: and no discredit to be
ignorant and unfit for another, seeing the Lord requires no more of any, the^
according to that he has. And yet it is not unlawful with such respects, in
the decay of our trades or such like occupying, to enter upon some other
dealings for our necessary maintenance, (if need so require) and to shun and
avoid idleness: but let them be such as are fittest for us, and likest to
help us, but with this prouiso in any wise, that they be not too many, lest
we be clogged with them, nor beyond our ability, that we be not cast
behind hand by them. And so when we are driven by necessity, we cannot be
charged as many may, I mean these banckrouts, and such as are weary of their
callings, who being discontent with meanenes, aim at great dealings, never
asking a question about their so vnaduized changes how God aloweth thereof; and
therefore with the trees they lose their sweetness, (as we see by their answer,
they must have done, if they had left their places) yea, they must forgo it
whether will or no, when they make such changes, and cannot keep it, although
they would full feign. But of this point in part see chap. 8. 23.

We may further learn here by the answer which is supposed to have bin made by
the trees, to wit, that they did so contentedly rest in that estate Doct. 2.
of their which God set them in, and which pleased him, and was profitable to
men, we may learn (I say) by this, that God has done much for us, to whom he
has given a sweet contentment to rest and abide in our callings, and to use
them with faithfulness and diligence. For why? (as I have said) there are few
that do so; and beside, we are bound in all things to be thankful: and also
that is one principal part of our welfare. But we must take it thus, that
first we see, we be received into favor with God, and then that we labor to be
in deed, and to be counted faithful of him, that so we may be put 1. Tim. 1. 12.
in his service, for else neither can we walk in our callings aright, neither
find this sweetness therein, that I speak of, but a carnal rejoicing, so
far as we prosper, and not for that we serve the Lord in them. But this I
enlarge not, being only an use of the former doctrine, and mentioned therein.

Now whereas it is said of the trees, that they ioyed God and men, we Doct. 3.
must know, that the oil and wine were used in the service of God in the
Tabernacle: the oil many ways, as to anoint Kings, Prophets, and Priests,
and to burn in the Tabernacle, and to be mixed with offerings: and the fruit
of them al, were meat or medicine also, and comfort to men. Herein we must note
the goodness of God in making every creature to yield such use and benefit to
us, insomuch as the vnlikest of other are not exempted from doing this service
to us, no not the Toade and the Spider, with the like of that kind, and yet by
sin they are become noisome to us, which before fin committed, were not so.
This (if we should go through the creatures) serves us to meditate on, to the
admiring of Gods kindness, wisdom and power, seeing every creature yields such
variety of help to us for our great refreshing and comfort. And yet our
ignorance of many excellent virtues and qualities which lie hid from us, in
many of them, greatly hinders us in this duty, though we see enough to set
us on work thus to occupy our selves about the^.

The naked and dead earth, as it appears in the Winter time, to yield to us,
and to all living creatures here below, food and nourishment, and to case such
a beauty into our eyes by the variety of the furniture of it in the Summer
season, Oh what an admirable thing is it? The sun to give heat and light
daily to cherish the creatures, what a great favor of God is it, as common a
matter as we make of it? and so we may think of the rest. These are Romans 1. 19.
the visible things of God, to make him known to us, who is invisible. The
goodly variety of meats, drinks and medicines, which he has appointed for
our refreshing, health, and comfort, which not only our own soil, but also
other countries afford to us; also that he allows us to eat of the Note.
Nehem. 8. 10.
fat, and drink of the sweet, who can think of all these, but with wondering
at the love of the giver of them in this his large and free bounty: and
especially considering, that we have peace, health, and other public and
private blessings with them, as I have noted chap. 5. And yet who knows not,
that these serve us here only in this temporal life? things eternal are of
another kind, and far more excellent. Yea, and yet that which we see in the
creatures, is nothing in comparison of that which should have been, if the
sin of man had not blemished and defaced the first beauty of their creation.
And howsoever (in great providence) the Lord have released the curse due unto
them: yet they come short of that they were, when God saw all was good, and so
blessed them. And all these his creatures for our need and Christian delight,
may we enjoy, boldly and without fear, who are his redeemed ones by Christ,
and so restored to the right we had first in them: and this we may do with
Gods good liking, if we have learned how to use them to their kindly ends, even
to admire at (in our beholding them) the wisdom, power, and bounty of the
Creator; gathering from that we see, proofs of his mercy, providence, and
love to us, in supplying us with the good things we see not. For by these (in
part) he would have us know him: as himself said, Do ye see how the grass
of the field, the Lilies, and other Matthew. 6. 28.
plants are clothed with beauty in their seasons, and beautify the earth
with their leaves, flowers, fruits, the color, the savor, the abundance of
them? Then think (says he) much more will he furnish you, if you can believe
it. But further, this we must take great heed of, lest these things, being
near and sensible to us, cause such a through vewing, and deep beholding of
them, that our affections be snared by them, and held from ascending up and
mounting up to the Creator: cursed be that view which causes them to be loved
with the love of him that made them, and himself excluded from the heart of
him that enjoys them. Lastly, this also is to be highly regarded, that we
quicken up our selves thereby, to cheerfulness in his service, which is that
good and joyful heart he speaks of in Deuteronomy. 28. breaking Deuteronomy. ^8. 47.
out into a suitable fruitfulness in duty toward him, who has enlarged
himself so greatly to us. For else, when men swim in blessings, having
corn, wine and oil, or (as the Israelites had) the milk and honey of Canaan,
in all plenty; and yet either know not God aright, or if they do, abuse their
liberties, and break out of their bounds; alas, they turn this variety of
Gods bounties and favors, into accusations against themselves and punishments:
they find no sweetness in them to purpose, while they enjoy them, and they
hasten also the remoueall of them unseasonably, and when it shall be full
unwelcome. Only the faithful possess them here, and are led by them to long
after the fruition of him in fullness hereafter, who is much more glorious in
himself, then in them: and in heaven where his honor dwells, then here upon
earth, which is but his footstool.

By Abimelech and the Bramble, which sought that they were utterly 4
unfit for, let us mark, that where ambition is, it makes the unworthy to
take upon them that, which the more worthy will not, but utterly refuse to do.
For this cause we must search our selves better in this point. For want
whereof, the most are deadly sick of this disease, and feel it not. It is
bred in all by nature to aspire, both in Minister and people. That which a
grave and godly man dares not do in the Ministry, that every youth and bold
fellow almost dares, for his commodity, thrust himself into many preferments,
and is not ashamed. So that which honest and ancient inhabitants abhor, and
fly from, as to contend and quarrel, to judge others, and puff up themselves
with a conceit of their gifts, and to think other fools in respect of
themselves, that (yet) dare other do, who in the best things come short and
far behind them. The time has been, when (through a reverent and high
conceit of the work of the Ministry (though erroneously and amiss, I must
needs say) some men altogether with drew themselves from it, as thinking
themselves wholly unworthy of it, and so buried many a talent in the earth. But
that was the extremity of modesty: we complain in our age of the contrary
ouerweening of our selves, and under prising of it, so that we can easily
answer Paul's question [To these things, who is sufficient?] by another, who is
not sufficient? Indeed, since me^ looked to the benefit, and not to the burden
(which so occupies an honest man, that he thinks less of the other) and
enquired rather into the quantity of it, rather then his own quality and
worthiness: while nothing but flourishing in apparel, iollitie, pleasures,
good cheer and booncompanionship is thought to be the complement of the
Ministry, the answer (I confess) is easy, if the living be thereafter, who is
not sufficient for these? But, Oh Bramble! Matthew. 7. 16.
where is thy sweetness? do men gather Grapes of thorns, or figs of 2. Tim.
4. 2. Note.
thistles? do thou thus teach in season and out of season? is this thy
feeding, thy watching, thy planting and watering? Is this to cheer (and not to
grieve rather) the heart of God and good men? Oh who shall heal thy barrennes?
other barren creatures have been cured by a miracle or art: the womb, the
earth, the waters: and if thou were an Olive, a Vine, or Fig Tree, (though
not so fruitful) there were help for thee, by cutting, digging, compassing,
remoouing; but being a Bramble, who shall make thee fruitful? Is it because
there is no Olive in the forest, that thou exaltest thy self? who neither
have oil of understanding, nor oil of grace (much less thy vessel full
thereof) that of thy abundance others may be refreshed? Yea, who if thou
had thy due, and the Lords forresters, thou should not (I say not) have
place above the other trees, but not be allowed to stand among them at all. But
I contain my self.

In this part following of the parable, Iotham denounces against the men Ver.
16. 17. 18. 19
of Shechem and Abimelech, saying: If ye have done well, in that ye have
done, rejoice: else your joy shall God break off: Let us by this see, that all
rejoice in their doings, according to that they are, whether they be good or
bad: but let us be persuaded, that to be the durable and sound joy, which God
allows, nay commands us in all our doings, (as we see Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 28.
47. 2. Cor. 1. 12.
and elsewhere) to wit, that which comes from well doing, and a good
conscience. But all other joy is either wicked, as Hamans, Adonijas and
Absolons: Romans 15. 13.
or vain, and to be repented of; as the young man's in Eccles. and is a Eccles.
11. 9.
compound of bitter and sweet: but the bitter is durable, the sweet soon
vanishes, when men are merry, and in their mirth suffer any known sin, or
dishonor of God among them, their rejoicing is not good; but Christ's 1. Cor.
5. 6.
woe meets with them, when he says, Woe be to you that now laugh, for you
Luke 6. 25.
shall wail and weep. And when in the common course of our life, we are led
by the affection of joy, which has no good ground nor warrant, such joy Note.
is evil, and shall be turned into sorrow and woe. And yet I deny not, but
mirth, yea even natural mirth in things transitory and indifferent is
allowed, so that it be moderated; yea, and especially if it be used to nourish
spiritual joy; to which end it is ordained of God, and for the supporting of
our greatest infirmities, even as all other of Gods earthly benefits are
likewise.

And by this speech of Iotham, we gather, that although good and bad Doct. 1
out of the former verses, 16 and 19.
meet together, and both seem to be merry in their several company; yet
there is a greater odds betwixt them, then a man would imagine. For the
ungodly man's mirth is bred in the tongue and countenance, and therefore is
controlled by an heavy sad heart, which tells him, that if he considered aright
of the matter, he has small cause of being merry, but to turn his meriments
into heaviness. The godly man's joy is hearty, entire, sound, and therefore
lasts: and he cannot check himself justly, except it be for that he is not
so merry as he ought to be. And (as Iotham says here) the wicked though they
rejoice together, yet they add not each to the other any sound, but only
frothie and deceitful joy by their fellowship: the reason is, because the
ground of it is society in evil. But the godly, as they joy in secret, both
in Gods favor and their happy estate, and in the good duties which they do,
(as appears both in their going about them, performing them, and the fruit
of both) so when they meet together, their joy Note.
is increased and multiplied, even as mirth is doubled by music and pleasure.
Whereas therefore the Christian complains of much sorrow, within and without,
his corrupt affections, his loosenes, his crosses, reproach in the world, bad
example, abundance of iniquity, temptations: let such a man know, that even
this sorrow of his, is a good ground of his rejoicing, seeing that his sorrow
is good. He sorroweth for evil to see it so to abound, but his sorrow is not
evil. His conscience still is good, and so long his joy is warrantable: only
the ill conscience marres this feast of a quiet minded and merry hearted
Christian. My rejoicing is my good conscience, says the 2. Cor. 1. 12.
Apostle. But if a good man will do as a bad man, his joy is like his. As for
affliction, if it come upon him in his innocence, though it may dampe his
outward mirth, especially if he be not fitted for it, yet it takes not joy from
his soul, but it shall return again double and treble. For their names being
written in heaven, and they knowing it to be so, no affliction, no nor the Luke
10. 10.
greatest malice of Satan can blot them out thence: and therefore affliction
(to the godly) is compared to sowing: now we know sowing is the cause of
harvest, wherein is great joy. Therefore let them beware, lest by their
disguising Psalm. 126. 5.
themselves and wounding their conscience, they cause not to themselves
needless complainings, fears and sorrows, or half joy in stead of sound,
and so doing, they shall not need to fear that Gods fatherly corrections
shall hurt them. And if they will see good days, and live chearefully, let
them look that out of a good heart, they bring forth no other but good 1.
Pet. 3. 11.
fruits, to be rejoiced in, and flee evil of all sorts, yea though the world
count them but peazants and meacocks for their so doing. The time shall Luke 6.
46.
come when all such iollie fellows shall joy as Abimelech and the Shechemites,
that is, shall sit down and put their heads between their knees, for sorrow,
shame and misery, and yet a greater sorrow is behind.

Iotham in mentioning his father, says that he put his life in danger to
deliver Verse. 17. 18.
the Shechemites: and so again, he requires of the men of Shechem that they
deal accordingly with his posterity, that is to say, in vprightnes and
righteousness. Wherein he speaks as the Scripture does every where, that men
who have had good measure offered them, and stand upon their knowledge,
civility and honesty, and much more their profession, should not behave
themselves as others, who walk by example only of the common sort, and their
own sensuality and will. Neither is that any better, that some allege, that
they do as much as law enioyneth them, when as yet they may be convicted of
palpable injury, and unthankfulness. For a good man, if there were no law, will
be a law to himself: Oh! how much to be accounted is that faithfulness, which
requites love with kind dealing? but it is rare to be found, but yet on the
contrary, that is barbarous to yield evil for good, as many do, and as these
men of Shechem are here charged by Iotham to have done, when yet we have
learned, that we ought to render Romans 12. 21.
good for evil. But I refer the reader to the first and last verses of the
8. Chapter, wherein I have more at large spoken of this point.

Here in that he foretells, that one of them shall destroy another, that Verse
20. Doct.
is: Abimelech the men of Shechem, and they him, even as it came to pass; it
may teach us, that all ill practices and doings shall have an evil end. The
kingdom, on his part was wickedly sought, and on their part as wickedly
granted; and how could the end be good, the work being evil, howsoever for a
time it appear not? Who were greater or faster knit in consent one with
another, then Joseph's brethren, about sending and selling him away far from
them, where he should never trouble them, as they counted it, and hoped, Genesis
42. 21.
any more? But what came of it? were they not after strangled, or rather
haltered with that they had done? When there arose but a little trouble against
them, did they not then cry out and confess, that their cruel handling of
him, yea and that long after, was the chief cause of it?

So, who are nearer joined together then thieves? Yet there comes a time of
pealing one another, wherein they cry out, Oh we are undone! woe to us that
ever we were linked in a confederacy together. Who greater friends then the
wicked that conspire together against goodness and good men? but when it is
bewraied, and they by a greater, and an ouerruling power are called to a
reckoning, what deadly hate is there betwixt them, as Matthew. 27. 4.
we read of Judas and the wicked Priests? And in show, where is there greater
love then betwixt these caualering and drunken companions, who (forsooth) will
be called the only good fellows? Do they not embrace each 2. Sam. 3. 27.
other as Ioab did Abner, in their arms, when they go about their
pot-companionship? And yet, ere they arise from their ale-bench, one of them
stabbeth another, as Ioab thrust Abner through with his weapon, even while he
embraced him. Call ye this love? It is devilish love then, which brings forth
such fruits. Therefore let our beginnings and attempts be always good, yea
and well followed also; or else, let us never look that the end of them shall
be any better: this one thing being excepted, that repentance come in the way,
for then it may end well, in that it is repented of: but this is not the thing
that the ungodly propounded to be the end of their wicked acts, neither if it
were, could they be sure to obtain it, for it rarely befalls such. But read
of this point in the 22. verse following, which mentions the fulfilling of
this prophecy.

In this last verse, after the speech of Iotham, it is said that he fled to
hide Verse 21.
himself for fear of Abimelech. And no marvel though he fled: for men have
been impatient in hearing rebukes in all ages; even as there may be no
reproof, either of men's estates or doings, admitted or borne, be they never so
unsound or wicked: especially by those who are great in the world, for the most
part. That of Hoseah the Prophet does sufficiently testify Hos. 4. 4.
it, saying: Though by swearing, lying, stealing, adultery, etc. the land do
mourn, yet let no man reprove another: meaning, that it should be in vain.
And our Savior foresaw this, in willing his Disciples to flee from city to
city: noting that men would not bear reproof, but through the Matthew. 10. 23.
love of the darkness they were in, they would hate the light, especially to
be reproved, and the messengers of God that were the bringers thereof. Read
how Asa, a good man, handled the messenger of God, Hanani the 2. Chro. 16. 10.
Seer, when he brought his message from God: he was wroth with him, and put
him in prison. Many, who know their own strength what they are able to do,
because they are of great wealth and authority, how justly soever they are
reproved, will not see that, but pretend that Preachers seek to bring their
necks under their girdle, and to dominere over them: and that they allege to
be the reason, why they refuse to be reproved by them. But let their
consciences tell them, that they fear them not in that respect, they being men
of small account in the world: but yet they take occasion to shake off their
sermons or private companies, under that pretense and color. But they hope by
this means, that they may attain most easily that which they have sought, and
do desire; to wit, that they may more boldly go forward in their sins,
while there is no man that shall have access or allowance to tell them
thereof. But what follows such doing, but this; that they go forward in them
still, till they ring in every man's ear, and are in every man's mouth to be
talked of, and they also dye after the same manner, that is, without
repentance, being bereaved of all their greatness, and left helpless and
hopeless in great baseness and contempt. Far are such off from the estate of
the wise, who pray, Let the righteous smite us, that so we may not fall into
the hands of the wicked, to be bought and sold of the ungodly Psalm. 141. 5.
at their pleasure. All the world well nigh sings this note with the Ierem.
Hos. 4. 4.
wicked people of Anathoth, Preach to us pleasant things, but let none reprove.
For though there was never more need, yet to that point they are come, that
even base ones will not admit it, when yet we should all suffer Heb. 13. 22.
the wholesome words of exhortation.

The reason why reproof is so vnwelcom, is, because the worse that men are,
the more dainty and jealous they be to be handled roughly, or to be told
plainly of their faults, and to be drawn out of them: as we see the tenderest
faces can least endure the nipping weather: and the galled flesh can abide no
rubbing. For the truth is tart and bitter to them, few can admit it, except it
be tempered with some sweetness of flattery: which though a man know it to be
dangerous, and as the vipers sting, killing by ticking: yet men had rather be
tickled to death, then healed by corrasiues. We read of one in history, who
was cured of an impostume by the sword of his enemy, which opened an issue in
his flesh, and let out the corruption. And till the Lord give wisdom to such
to suffer their enemies (for so they call the Minister, as the Galathians did
Paul, for telling them the truth) to wound Gal. 4. 16.
them: their own self-love will nourish such impostumated matter within them,
as will break inwardly (for lack of vent) and destroy them. This is an evil
spirit in men, that neither they will be innocent, (for then they might walk
boldly through the pikes) nor yet abide to be called to question. Prou. 10. 9.
Note.
They will both deserve blame with the foremost, and yet (with the forwardest)
be revenged upon him that shall control them, though it be by Gods
commandment. So that, neither Scripture, Minister, no nor God himself, may
stand up against them: they are lawless and exempted persons. But oh man
consider, if thine enemy should wish thee a shrewd turn, he could not invent
a greater then this, that thou should want an admonisher to warn thee, by
the refusing of whom, thou more hurtest thy self, then thy greatest enemy can
hurt thee. The Lord threatens it against the Jews, when he denounces the
most severe punishments against them. Therefore in that thou may be reproved,
(especially in public, where no man is privy to the matter but thy self)
think it a greater portion, then many (of far higher place) enjoy, and profit
thou (if thou be wise) by it accordingly.

Some might think that Iotham ran away, because he said more then he durst
stand to: but we must know, he put his life in Gods hands, and having
discharged his duty, avoided (as much as he could) the lions mouth and danger,
being not bound to put his finger into the fire wilfully: and yet (as it is
like) not afraid thereof, if God had given him into his enemies hands, and
called him to seal the truth by his blood. And therefore, let none condemn
such of rashness or cowardice, who having rebuked sin in such as are
boisterous and malicious, shift for themselves, and provide (as they may) for
their own escape and safety. Rather this condemns the cruel disposition of
them whom they reprove, who when they cannot justly convince such of error or
slander, rashness, or the like; but have their own conscience condemning them
for the same offenses: yet will not suffer those to live by them in peace, who
have done their duties, and discharged their conscience in justly reproving.
How shall such be brought to be convicted, that so they may relent and amend,
who cannot endure to be accused? And it is the mercy of God (considering the
spiteful nature of the wicked) that any godly Iotham or Minister of the word
may be suffered to keep his standing, and to awake and admonish the unruly
that he may be saved: and is not compelled to flee, and run away, for fear
of his opposites, when he has reproved them, although he has but told them
truth for their good and benefit, and that in a kind manner. If God did not
muzzle them, doubtless it were as hard for them, as for Iotham, if every lewd
offender might have his will, as in some places, such bear too much sway, and
deter the Minister (being weak and fearful) from meddling, in challenging
the sins of the place, and laying hard against the offenders, when yet God
has charged them straightly to denounce against them. But why do such hinder
the course of their Ministry? Verily because they themselves may sleep
secure in their sins, as Herod thought to do, when John's mouth was stopped.

THE FIFTY EIGHT SERMON ON THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The third part of the Chapter.
Verse. 22. So Abimelech reigned three years over Israel. 23 And the Lord sent
an evil spirit betwixt Abimelech and the men of Shechem, and the men of
Shechem brake their promise to Abimelech. 24. That the cruelty toward the
seventy sons of Ierubbaal, and their blood might come and be laid upon
Abimelech their brother which had slain them, and upon the men of Shechem who
had aided him to kill his brethren. 25. So the men of Shechem set men to wait
for him in the tops of the mountains: who robbed all that passed that way by
them, and it was told Abimelech.
NOw it follows in this third part of the chapter, how both The sense.
Abimelech and the men of Shechem were destroyed; with the occasions and means
thereof, which were two: first the discord betwixt them and dissension:
secondly open war both which made way thereunto. These are to the 42. verse:
and the destroying one the other to the end of the chapter. For the first, it
is said that the Lord sent an evil spirit betwixt them, even the spirit of
Satan, and therefore there must needs be discord betwixt them, as in these
verses appears, to the 26. And being thus at dissension, they were provoked to
fight, till each slew other, as I have said. But before I enter into, and lay
open these things, this is to be considered, first, that is said here, that
Abimelech ruled over Israel three years. Which words are a preparatiue to that
which follows: for thus they are to be taken; that after these words of
Iotham, thus uttered, Abimelech reigned three years notwithstanding, and the
men of Shechem and he made a shift to hold together so long. All which while a
man would have thought Iotham his parable had been but a dream and delusion:
But when three years (a short time to speak of for a King to enjoy his
crown) were come about, then the Lords threat began to take effect, (for how
should it be otherwise?) though a little while it were deferred? Now if the
time had been long, men might easily have forgotten Iotham, but being within
three years thus fulfilled, who might not remember the prophecy, and note the
accomplishment thereof? Thus the Lord will have his judgments cease upon his
enemies: so that they who see them, may say, This is no casual mischance which
has befallen them, but the hand of God pursuing them manifestly, for such or
such a transgression.

It is not said, that he was Judge over Israel, for they were raised up by
God, but he ruled and usurped, as Tyrants use to do. And to begin first Doct.
verse. 22.
with his prosperity in that God gave him this short time to enjoy his desire,
and to dominere as he did, it is to teach us, that he does for some little
time, give wicked men their longed for desires; and yet not for that he
applaudeth them therein, but that they may have time to repent, and to bethink
themselves what they have done, and how they have gone to work, and how many
ways they have provoked God; and that if they refuse so to do, they may see
that they be justly rejected, and that God had no pleasure in them, in their
greatest flourish. Zimry and Cozby, Chorah and Haman, with the Rich man in the
Gospel, and others many, a short time they had to work, and accomplish their
desires, and take their pleasure, and enjoy the lust of their hearts. And
indeed so short a time had need be well improoued, while it lasts, for when
that time was over and past, what hear ye, even this, that their folly, nay
their shame and madness, was manifested and spoken of in all places. Neither
should their reproach and downfall have been so notable, if they had not
proudly passed their bounds, and carried themselves too loftily before. Many
ways, we see, God has to destroy such. Sometime he suffers them not to plant
themselves at all, but crosses them in the enterprise, as Absolon and Adonija:
sometimes he suffers them to take deep root, and gives them a long time, but
it is with much vexation and vnsetling; as Pharao and Ahab. And otherwhiles he
lets them flourish but a short time, and pulls them up ere they be half
rooted, as this Abimelech. Whether he keeps them from attaining that which
they seek, or keeps them under, or plucks them up again, let them learn by
them all, that he is wise, and knows how to handle them, and to shelter his
own from the annoyance of them. David, Psalm. 37. speaking of this third sort
of flourishers, Psalm. 37. 35. 36.
whom he compares to the green Bay tree, (which though it be barren, yet
keeps the color both Winter and Summer) adds this, that they are suddenly
and horribly consumed: and it is the argument of many Psalms, and the sum of
that which Jobs friends so much insist upon, (though they apply it
preposterously) That the happiness of the wicked is short. So that we must
not wonder if they plie their work apace, and take the uttermost of their
liberty: for the devil teaches them so to do; who rages the more
violently, knowing he is tied by a shorttether. Doubtless their shortiolitie,
is the vantage of the Church, which has many a breathings betwixt whiles, by
their discontinuance: even as we see Sushans perplexity under Hamans malice,
was turned into joy, in his ruin. Natural Philosophers observe, that the
creatures which are most noisome and hurtful, are some way or other so
restrained (either by paucity, short life, or the like) that they cannot do
the harm they would. But if God did not restrain men as well as beasts, they
would wax more monstrous.

And be we wise, though the world be set on wilfulness, and mischief, let
not our teeth water after their dainties: the best whereof is a short
flourishing, to tickle fools with a desire of the like; but they see not their
day coming, which vet is at hand, like a whirlwind and tempest to scatter
their pleasures and glory; and like a fire to devour and consume all, most
fearfully: which painted estate of theirs, all may see to be far from the
grace which the Lord wishes to his people, when he says, Oh, that they were
wise to consider their end. And yet the worst end of the other is not Deuteronomy. 32.
29.
seen. And Gods mercy is great in cutting them off so soon: who else should
live with them, besides the preventing of much iniquity, which would make
their account heavier. For all this, one follows the steps of another, and
the child, when he comes into his fathers place, begins not at first, to
weigh the shortness of his life, how soon he shall be, as his father is, that
is, cut off from al, that so he might apply his heart to wisdom, but takes
possession of his place, as if he were riuited into it for perpetuity, Psalm.
90. 12.
and will not so much as think of any change or remouall from thence.

But to go forward: this evil spirit that was sent betwixt them, being the
first occasion of their overthrow, was the devil; by whose malice and Verse. 23.
subtlety, ill will and hatred were kindled betwixt them, yea and inflamed:
and this, with the breaking their promise, does show us clearly, that the Doct.
league and friendship of the wicked is soon broken off: For why? it has no
good ground. And although there be some outward things which uphold it, as hope
of profit, pleasure, preferment, and the serving one of another turn;
although (I say) these and such like, patch up an agreement betwixt them for a
while, yet their hearts are inconstant, and many things fall out to breed
alienation of affection one from another, and a pritch is soon Note.
taken, many conceits arise, and reports are carried betwixt them, and who can
reckon up all: And yet if there were no other cause hereof, (as yet there is,
for they daube up their friendship with untempered mortar, which falls away)
this were enough that is spoken of here, that God can send an ill spirit
betwixt them, even then, when they are most strongly combined and knit
together: and cause them to break their promise one to another, and jar and
disagree. And although it be a great reproach to them, that their contentions
should break out and be known, (as if both consent together to smite the
righteous) and therefore in wicked policy they do what they can, to hide
them; yet otherwise they are divided, and strongly incensed one against the
other, which also breaks out sometime, and so confirms this truth, that
though they seemed to be glued in friendship and familiarity together, and
make men believe, that their love is firm, yet their league is rotten, and
they grow to be at defiance one with the other, and that often times betwixt
themselves secretly, before it break forth in the sight of men. The use
whereof is, that we make no such wicked and cursed leagues. Use.
Secondly, that we account no otherwise of them where they be made, but as of
the Spiders web, soon swept down: and thirdly, praise God highly when we
see them broken. For that turns to the great benefit of the Church, and the
diverse members of it: as we read that the division of the Pharisees and
Sadduces turned to Paul's deliverance from their rage. But let Act. 23. 10.
the godly continue their league, that their love may be strong, as a threefold
cord, that is not easily broken. Neither let them neglect their mutual
examples Eccles. 4. 12.
to profit thereby; but rather be ashamed that heaven should not tie them
together faster, then hell tieth the ungodly: yea, let them be ashamed (I say)
that even the smallest trifle and a very conceit of one against another, is
enough to estrange them, as it too often falls out, and to set them at
defiance betwixt themselves, till the wicked laugh them and their profession to
scorn: whereas these cursed leagues of the malignant hold sometime longer,
though they be bound together with rotten threads, through wicked policy,
which out renews them, (except the Lord disioyne and separate them)
especially if their concord and agreement be in opposing the innocent.

And seeing God curses and scatters these combinations of the wicked, as fast
as they unite and strengthen themselves, as Psalm. 2. saying of them Psalm 2. 1.
as Iacoh did of Simeon and Leui, Cursed be their rage, cursed be their
counsel: let Genes (...)
not the godly so much fear their bandings, and fast knittings of themselves
together, as look patiently till this curse, as a moth, consume them.
Iehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 20. seeing Moab, Ammon and Seir confederate to destroy
(...)
him, feared at the first: but when he saw the sword of each against other,
till they had made a riddance of all, he was comforted; even as that mystery
of the late matchless treason, with what deep secrecy was it carried, how
strongly complotted, how firmly were the agents thereof united? even as
firmly as oath, vow and the Sacrament (abused) might knit them: but the Lord
(blessed for ever by his name) sent a spirit of division between them, they
were detected and discovered by each other.

And in that it is said, that the Lord sent this evil spirit betwixt them, we
Doct. 2.
may note, that though God be not the author of evil (as some would (perhaps)
be too ready to gather) yet that sin which is in the wicked, hidden in their
hearts, and never so secret, he brings forth at his pleasure, and lets it
break out at his commandment, ruling, and ouer-ruling the same. And they that
nourish it in themselves, and do not give it a vent by repentance, may ever
justly fear, and do sometime too truly find, that as water pent in, breaks
out violently in some place or other: even so the sin that is entertained
Note.
in men's hearts, shall one time or other break out, to their shame in their
lives. But as the stink of the dunghill rises not from the Sun, no more
(assure we our selves) does sin proceed from God.

Also by this division betwixt them, we may note, that when God suffers Doct. 3.
division among the wicked, or an evil spirit any way to lead them, it is to
punish their leaud fellowship, and to revenge the sin of both parts, and to
make each the others executioner. And yet, Oh what a sweet liberty it is
thought to be, to enjoy fellowship with such? We see that the thatcht houses A
Simile.
which stand close together, though they fence each other from the violence of
weather for a time, yet if one be on fire, it serves but to hasten the
consumption of the other. And so there is no knot so wickedly knit betwixt men,
but (while it lasts) it brings (I grant) some benefit to the confederates:
but when once the Lord has dissolved the band, their greatest union turns to
the most deadly enmity that can be, and is as the division of brethren, Prou.
18. 19.
stronger then the brazen bars of a palace or city gates. And first, grudges
secretly being conceived, they are nourished by iealousies and suspicions
exasperated by daily injuries, till they break out into hatred, and end in
extremity. These things are commonly seen: but who beholds Gods justice
therein? or is thereby flayted and feared from having any thing to do with
such? or made wise to lay a better foundation of their amity and friendship?

Furthermore, by this, that God would have the blood of the innocent Verse. 24.
sons of Gedeon revenged upon Abimelech and the men of Shechem, he teaches
us, that he will revenge the innocents cause, and so he made the blood of Abel
cry out for vengeance. The Lord will bless them that bless Genes. 12. 3.
his, and curse them that curse his. And the greater the persons are, and the
wrong that is done to them, the more God will pay them home, who are guilty of
transgression and spite against them. As when the Lords anointed are stricken
at, as lawful Kings, and Gods faithful ministers; for which cause he says,
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Psalm. 105. 15.


Therefore those runnagate Jesuits, that root out and kill Christian Princes,
and subvert kingdoms, so far as in them lies, has the Lord branded with a
mark of perpetual infamy, and of his just displeasure, at the gallows; though
they being brazen faced, and hard-hearted, cannot by any means be brought to
repentance. Judas has left behind him a sufficient testimony of the woeful
estate of those that hurt the innocent, his words are these, out of despair,
and a perplexed conscience; I have sinned in betraying the innocent Matthew. 27.
3.
blood. Therefore he that sees so many to study to hurt such as would live in
peace by them, by murdering, by robbing, or oppressing, and vexing the being
harmless, what do they, but cause talk every where to go of the Lords
threats of revenging them, and bring them also most certainly upon their own
heads, that I say no more. But of this point I have elsewhere entreated.

Also, in that it is said, that the men of Shechem did strengthen Abimelechs
Doct. 2.
hand, by giving money to hire base fellows to kill his brethren; in that, I
say, that such as lived in the city, and should have helped to settle, and see
good order kept, yet were such evil men, even incouragers and furtherers unto
murder: we see, that there are in cities, and towns, oft-times, vile persons
covered with the vizor of honest citizens and inhabitants. For in no worse
account many go, who bearing office to punish and beat down disordered
persons and disturbers, are yet themselves as bad and noisome as any other.
Which admonishes all such, as live ciuilly in towns, to search themselves,
that they may be found faithful also, and that they rest not in the opinion,
that is conceived of them for the place that they are in; who, as we see in
these, may be far worse then the base ofskourings, which fall into their
hands to be punished: but if they keep from open stains, yet another thing is
to be looked for in them, to wit, that their hearts be good also. But of this
point I will not here repeat the same things which I handled before.

This dissension was so hot betwixt them, that it brake into civil war, by
Verse. 25.
means whereof, none could pass in safety. And we cannot be ignorant, how
dangerous those times be. But by this we may see, what troubles and dangers (as
robbing one another in the high way) one vile person, or a few, may raise up:
who may be fitly compared to a firebrand cast into a barn of corn: even such
mischief wrought this Abimelech. Such a one was Absalom, and those caitiffes
who slew the two French Kings: and the same may be said of the Authors of the
Gun-powder-treason. No torture can be too great for such. Such desperate
persons and devilish should be cut off at first, when they be found out, and
not suffered to live to do greater mischief. Touching the benefit of peace,
and the like public blessings, see chap. 5. and else where in this history.

Verse. 26. Then Gaal, the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and they went
to Shechem, and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him.

27. And therefore they went into the field, and gathered in their grapes, and
trod them and made merry, and went into the house of their gods, and did eat
and drink, and cursed Abimelech.

28. Then Gaal, the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech? And who is Shechem,
that we should serve him? is he not the son of Ierubbaal, and Zebul is his
officer? Serve rather the men of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for why should
we serve him?

29. Now would to God this people were under my hand, then would I put away
Abimelech; and he said to Abimelech, increase thine army and come out.

OF the first occasion of Abimelechs and the Shechemites destroying one The
sense.
another: the next occasion of the mischiefs that followed, is here set down,
namely this; that they being thus incensed, one against the other, they fall to
open war, and to set it forward, there came in the way one Gaal, and the men
of Shechem hired him for their Captain to be for them against Abimelech. And
by his help they went out, and gathered their grapes, which otherwise they
durst not have done, and made merry, and cursed Abimelech. And that boaster
Gaal hardened them against him, affirming Thrasonically, that he would put him
down. If the men of Shechem knew him not, as the Scripture sets not down from
whence he came, but his behavior bewraied him. If (I say) they knew him not,
they did foolishly, to receive and rest upon him, being a stranger, though a
boaster: and if they did know him, what madness was it, to take and trust in
him, though a stranger, yet a boaster? But howsoever their sin was great, in
their intertaining of him, yet indeed, it was of and by God (who hereby hastened
their destruction) that they should light upon such a Captain; themselves
being such soldiers, they might well go together; and no wonder, if boasters
and the ambitious so easily accorded, although if they had not been given up to
themselves, they would not have trusted to him. Thus the men of Shechem
provided for themselves, and how Abimelech did the like, it follows after.

And as the doing of the men of Shechem was foolish, dangerous, and Doct.
(as it proved) their overthrow; so it gives warning to them that can receive
it, to beware of resting upon all rotten holds, and broken staves. Of which
sort there are many, with which, men are deceived as grossly, as they of
Shechem were by this their folly, to cast all their welfare upon a boaster. The
Psalmist mentions some of these, when he says: Some put their trust Psalm.
107.
in chariots, and some in horses. The Prophet Jeremy teaching men to shun
Ier. 9. 23.
the saw danger, says, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the
strong in his strength, nor the rich in his riches, but let him that glories,
glory in this that he knows me, says the Lord. If we may not rest on men,
much less on weaker stays, as some do in their present estate of peace,
wealth, habitation, wife, friends, health, and the like.

The same Prophet says: Cursed is he that makes flesh his arm, and trusts
Ier. 17. 5.
in man, and his heart departs from God. So the Prophet David cries out,
saying: Trust not in earthly Princes, who cannot save others, nor themselves.
Psalm 146. 3.
And to King Asa it was said, Because thou trustedst in the King of Aram and
not 2. Chron. 16. 7.
in the Lord, from hence forth thou shall have war. In God only our trust
must be reposed, Solomon says, otherwise we may use man's help and other Prou
3. ^. Psalm. 127. 2.
means, but all in vain. And the use of this doctrine is, that we should
retain in all dangers and troubles, our hope and confidence in Gods promises,
and for other slippery helps, our comfort is thereafter as we rest in them:
and this appears more clearly, the greater the matters are, in which we do
so.

But this doctrine has been diversely occasioned before. One thing I will add
to answer such as might say, These Shechemites had no other shift now, but to
shroud themselves under this, or some such like defense, who therefore can
blame them if they sought shelter against a tyrant where they could get it? I
answer. To seek succor against an usurper is lawful, so the means be
according: but this usurper was set up by themselves, neither did he any
greater violence to them, then they to him; and therefore for this, I say, they
might thank themselves, for that they brought wilful bondage upon themselves.
Indeed, as the case stood with them, either they must fence their city and
people (whom they had brought into the snare being led by them) against
Abimelech, or else yield and perish. But what a cursed thing is this, for the
men either to use vile persons to be their patrons in their desperate quarrels,
or else to bring themselves to that point, that they might be come upon by one
that sought and waited to destroy them? Therefore let not men defend their sins
by this plea, that they are driven to a straight, and have no remedy, but to
fall upon the smaller inconvenience, that they may avoid the greater: For who
brought this wretched choice upon them? God allows his children to walk at
large under his government, and keeps them from such streights as these. Who
then cooped them into so narrow a room? Surely their own sin: when men have
liberty, they are weary of it, till they bestreightned and driven to their
shifts. Therefore this defense is as bad as the crime it self: for if men have
fallen into extremity by one sin, they must not redeem and avoid it by
another, nor do evil that a supposed good may come of it. What then? Humble
themselves for the first sin, and cast themselves upon Gods hand for the
istue and danger, and so avoid the second, as David's example excellently
shows. 2. Sam. 24. 17.
For who are they, that having sinned, they should scorn to bear the shame of
it? And especially if the extremity they avoid, be but only a punishment
bodily: (as commonly that is the straight which men seek to shun) and they sin
doubly by provoking God through indirect means, and al to save themselves from
momentany trouble and danger. Indeed of two evils temporal, the lesser may be
chosen to avoid the greater, but not of two evils moral and mortal which are
sins, much less when the one is a temporal evil, the other moral. For by
this means an adulterer may say, I have no way to shift but one, to buy off my
shame, except I would be shamed for ever. But O thou woeful man; if thou have
deserved it, bear it; if God have laid it upon thee, as the Church did in
Micha, saying: I will bear my punishment, Mich 7. 7.
because I have sinned: and think not by such a shift to escape shame being
guilty, unless thou fall into a greater without recovery.

The Shechemites were so afraid of Abimelech, that they durst not gather Verse 7.
their grapes, which were as their harvest: therefore they hired this Gaal to
help them, who was (we see) sedicious, a boaster and a deceiuer. Now by his
conduct they go forth into the field, and in great lasciuiousnes, rejoiced,
and in their Temple cursed Abimelech.

By this, among the manifold discomforts in war, which in other places I
observe, let this one be numbered, yt men are thereby cut off from the (...)s
Doct.
of the earth, and from their haruests, by which they lived all they ere: which
being spoiled, how far is their life from death? and yet worse then death, to
lie in fear of it, pinched with penury. They could not go out of their
doors, nor reap their fruits, till now they made this shift by Gaal: and yet
neither were they safe in their houses: these besides many like effects of
war most frearefull, are at such times brought against them, who are by ^
war set upon. So that a man would think, that knows this, that such as
are preserved from it, and the like sore oppressions, would bind themselves
while they live, to submit themselves to God in all duty, and that most
willingly.

And no doubt so would they most readily covenant to do, when they are under
such oppressions, upon condition, that they might then obtain a promise of
deliverance from them: which shows that there is good cause why they should
do so: but can we say (who mark it) that men do thus? In smaller troubles,
we see (alas) the contrary. I remember what is said in the Psalm: when the
Lord smote the people, they sought him, yea, they sought him Psalm 78. 34.
early: but what was there found in them when it came to the trial, but false
heartednes and unfaithfulness? which I utter with grief, as knowing how
commonly this is offended in. And we that do but hear of such things, I
mean of war, throughout this book and other stories, and see it not,
through the long continuance of peace, we (I say) do not weigh the greatness
of the benefit, such is our unthankfulness joined with blockishnes, but abuse
our peace to sensuality, and thus we deal with God in many other things?

But having often observed and bewailed this folly in men in other places, and
seeing it follows here expressly, what they did when they were rescued by
that Gaal, and gathered in their fruits, I will note it from hence. And what
was their behavior therein, think we? verilv most brutish, and utterly
unbeseeming such, as had ever served the Lord. For, like mad men, they did eat
and drink, and made merry without measure, cursing their enemies, and praising
their Idols. Which teaches us, that it is hard to say, whether 1. Sam. 30. 16.
the wicked are more to be pitied in their miseries and calamities, or in their
deliverances out of them. For by them they are held in some awe and Note.
fear: but when they are set free, they are most dissolute and unruly, and
more offensive by excess therein, then they are by impatience, and unquietness
in their calamities. But in both they are greatly to be pitied.

And although their bodily estate be to be lamented greatly, yet is it far
worse with their soul, as is manifest in their breaking out so fearfully and
damnably into all manner of sin with greediness. Instances hereof in all
conditions are too many. In such as have some religion, (because they Note.
have no more store of it) who sees not, that they are ever most loose,
secure, forgetful, when they are most at hearts ease? And in the badder sort
it is more manifest: who are quailed in their crosses, and held down by them
from much evil: but if they be at hearts ease, oh the loosenes, sawcines,
quarrelling, lashing out of needless and great expenses; rioting, swearing,
that may be seen in them, and scorning those that seek to reclaim them,
though they be such as they ought to hear, and whom they owe duty unto, and
therefore should readily hear them, whereas they regard nothing in their
prosperity, but curse and bless with one mouth, I may say (almost) with one
breath. But to leave these, let the best look well to themselves herein; I
mean, that in both estates they may yield another manner fruit of their peace
and prosperity, and be careful to have a good conscience. Of which argument,
seeing much is spoke by occasion in the former process of this story, I cease
to say any more.

To proceed: These two, Gaal and the Shechemites having each heartned the
other, and helped forward their defiance of Abimelech, by feasting and
iollitie, which are great means (yea as oil to the flame) to provoke the
proud stomach of a man, they now being well heat with meat and drink,
presumptuously ask, Who is Abimelech? We may say truly, where Verse. 28.
and when do the wicked make an end? For they go from one sin to another,
as one that runs down an hill, and staieth not. Now after all the rest,
they boast against him, and defy and deface him, and that in his absence.
Which teaches the vnmeasurablenes and vnsaciablenes of the wicked Doct.
in sinning, how they go on from one to another, and never are willing to make
an end: and in stead of repenting for the former, they add greater sins unto
them: and by that course harden their hearts in all manner of evil doing, as
they be able, with greediness, and so grow past feeling unto utter
impenitencie.

Many, after they have done evil, have some remorse, as the brother in the
Gospel, who when he had not obeyed his father, sending him to work Matthew. 21.
31.
in his vineyard, but refused; he afterward bethought himself, and went. And
the Prophet Jeremy wondered that they who offended, relented not. Ierem. 8. 5. 6.
But when men go from one sin to another, and cast not up their gorge, it is
almost past hope to reclaim them. Esau when he had sold his birthright, the
sign of eternal life, which one would have thought had sinned Genesis 25. 31.
fearfully enough in so doing; yet he could not stay there, but he must also
justify the wicked fact that he had done, saying: Of what value is this
birthright unto me?

But if this sin rested only in such as I have spoken of, we that fear God
might be sure, that it could not be committed by us: but when we see how Peter
was taken in this snare, to sin again, after he had once or twice denied his
Master, and that with swearing, and cursing himself, if he knew him, and had
been ready to have done it an hundred times more, if occasion had been offered;
how may not the best of us fear the falling into it? For in thus giving place
a little, and in some things taking liberty to go against conscience, it is
the next way to go further, as we have heard. The best remedy against it,
is, while we may to prevent it, and to be so far from such a course, that we
rather in fear and trembling to make an end of our salvation; Philip. 2 14.
but if we have already fallen, then as soon as we can to rise out of it.

Now this Gaal wishes that he were king (for we must know that all the men of
Shechem were not of one mind) and this is the meaning of the phrase of speech
that he uses, saying: Who shall give this people into mine hand? Verse. 29.
The like ye may read in the Psalm: Who will give me the wings of a Dove:
Psalm. 55. 6.
that is, oh that I had them. Even the same that Absalom wished in a case much
like this of Abimelechs: Oh that I were made Judge in the land. Thus did this
2. Sam. 15. 4.
Gaal: which notes the pride and ambition that was in this base fellow, his
boasting being not far off. Which sins in him, with the like in Abimelech,
brought to pass his and the peoples destruction.

To teach us to beware of all sin, and of these particularly, ambitious Doct.
pride and boasting, with the like, in the which is wrapped up, when they come
to their full growth, irrecouerable mischief to the committers and
intertainers of them, as all sins do threaten no better, if they be not
speedily broken off by repentance. Whereunto Gods dear servants being subject,
Psalm. 32. 10.
even as some of them have tried and found it so already, that great sorrows
have accompanied them long time, as the fruit of such sins: David, Sampson
and others: so we that remain are taught, if we will be wise, to avoid
carefully the beginnings and occasions of evil: so shall we be sure to be free
from great woe. As for boasting, it is but the superfluity of the corrupt and
proud scornful heart, arising not always from some worthiness or eminency,
but a bare windy conceit of somewhat which is not. As we see in the body when
the gall is too full, it ouerfloweth and colors the face A similitude.
with the excrement of that humor: and when the inward parts are tainted, the
outward are full of breakings out and sores: so when pride is at the full, it
swells, and breaking out of the heart, vtters it self by the mouth and
behavior. But put the case there be some excellency in him that boasts:
does boasting beseem such a man? nay, does it not impeach his worthiness?
Therefore he that will avoid boasting, let him soberly think of, and use Gods
gifts both inward and outward, knowing who he is, whence he received them, how
naked he were without them, and while he has them, they are but borrowed, he
himself is naked and destitute. Never was an humble man a boaster: except his
boasting were as Paul's, of his infirmities: or of his gifts, to honor the
giver, and disgrace the enemies of Gods glory. Touching the particular point
of ambition and the preservative against it, let the reader see more in the
former chapter in Gedeons refusing the kingdom, and also in this chapter in
Iothams bramble aspiring to be king over the trees. Here therefore I end.

THE FIFTY NINE SERMON ON THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse 30. And when Zebul the Ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal, the
son of Ebed, his wrath was kindled. 31. Therefore he sent messengers to
Abimelech privily, saying: Behold Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren
become to Shechem, and behold they fortify the city against thee. 32. Now
therefore arise by night, thou and the people that is with thee, and lie in
wait in the field. 33. And rise early in the morning as soon as the Sun is
up, and assault the city; and when he and the people that is with him shall
come out against thee, do to him what thou can. 34. So Abimelech rose up and
all the people that were with him, by night, and they lay in wait against
Shechem in four bands. 35. Then Gaal, the son of Ebed, went out and stood in
the entering of the gate of the city. And Abimelech rose up, and the folk that
were with him from lying in wait. 36. And when Gaal saw the people, he said to
Zebul; Behold, there come people from the tops of the mountains: And Zebul
said to him, the shadow of the mountains seem men unto thee. 37. And Gaal
spoke again, and said: See, there come folk down by the middle of the land,
and another band comes by the way of the plain of Moonenim. 38. Then Zebul
said unto him; Where is now thy mouth that said, who is Abimelech that we
should serve him? Is not this the people that thou have despised? go out now,
I pray thee, and fight with them. 39. And Gaal went out before the men of
Shechem, and fought with Abimelech. 40. But Abimelech pursued him, and he fled
before him, and many were overthrown and wounded even unto the entering of the
gate. 41. And Abimelech dwelt at Aranna, and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his
brethren that they should not dwell in Shechem.
IN these 12. verses is showed how the broile grew hotter betwixt Abimelech and
the men of Shechem, and how they warred and fought one against the other,
whereby their destruction drew nearer. And first, how Zebul, when he heard of
the boasting of Gaal, sent word to Abimelech thereof: (for he was his officer
to govern the city in his absence) and he gave him advice, what he thought
best to be done, and that is set down in the four first verses. In the next
four it is showed, how Abimelech, according to Zebuls counsel, came out with
the men that were with him near to Shechem, and lay in wait for Gaal and his
retinue. And thus the matter went forward of the destruction and overthrow of
the men of Shechem, and of Abimelech, as I have said, and as in this third part
of the Chapter was foretold, and in the verses following does clearly appear.
In the last four verses is showed how Gaal and Abimelech met together, not
far from the gate of the city, and many of them that followed Gaal were
overthrown and wounded, and he himself cast out of the city. But now let us
pursue these verses more particularly. First, this must be known, that as the
men of Shechem had hired Gaal to be their Captain; so Zebul was for Abimelech
as a Deputy and Lieutenant set there by him, to hold the people in subjection
from rebellion and mutiny.

And it is said here first, that Zebul could not bear the insolency of Gaal
against The sum of these sour verses more speciallic.
Abimelech, both for that he was under him, and also for that he saw the
bragging of the other was very shameful and insolent, but his wrath was
kindled against him, and hearing the proud words and crackes of Gaal, he was
sore troubled increat, and sent word to Abimelech thereof. And from hence let
some thing be noted: By the one, that is, this boasting of Gaal, which was
mere froth and words without substance, and so gross, that Zebul being
servant to Abimelech, could not bear it, we may see the shamefulnesse of this
sin of bragging and cracking: which none can abide, nor hear willingly.
Doct. out of these sour verses.
For why? Boasters do not consider how they can make good that which they say,
but in the pride of their hearts speak so, to get praise of those who hear
them, as when they are urged to stand to their word, then to their shame they
are driven to run away, and to go from their word also, as afterward this
Gaal did: or else the Lord himself disableth them to perform that which they
boast they would do, as he did Benhadad, when he braggingly 1. King. 20. 3.
1. Sam. 23. 7.
challenged all Ahabs goods, and as he did Saul, vaunting that he had now David
safe enough in his hands, when he was enclosed in a city that had gates and
bars. So that both God and man are enemies to boasting: man, I say, not only
religious, but even ingeneous and civil abhor it. To shame all such delight
in it, and to persuade all that are fit to learn better things, to practice
lowliness and humility in stead of such disguisednesse. And this be said of
Zebuls wrath that it was kindled against Gaals boasting.

Now follows the other thing, that Zebul was incensed against Gaal for, Doct.
2.
and that was, because his bragges were against Abimelech his Master: and
therefore he sent him word thereof, and yet there was no such consent and well
grounded love betwixt them, but for that he set this Zebul over the city in his
absence, which was but an outward favor, that soon changes, especially
betwixt such as they were, (and for that he was a man (as it seems) discreeter
and more politic, then some other. And this act of Zebul in that he could not
bear this defiance that Gaal gave out against Abimelech, being his master:
this (I say) teaches, that much less ought a Christian to hear God
dishonored, no nor his Prince railed on, or to be rebelled against by Popish
enemies, or leaud subjects, but his heart should rise against it, and he should
in the speediest manner bewray, and seek remedy thereof, and that not for
fear of law (which holds the concealers thereof as accessaries) but much
more for conscience sake.

Even as a natural child cannot bear it, if he hear his father reproched:
and therefore the blasphemies against God given forth by Atheists and malicious
enemies, (such as those were of cursed Rabsachee) against Moses, and Christ,
the Scriptures, and worship of God. And such as that was of the Pharisees, who
said to the man that was restored to his sight, We know that this John 9. 24.
man, (meaning Jesus) is a sinner; and finally whatsoever such (as there are
many of this kind, not fit to be spoken of before Christian ears) they are all
intolerable, yea and meaner reproaches given out against him, ought not to be
suffered, as swearing, forswearing, filthy talking, or the like; but rather,
we should honor God in our bodies and souls, for they are Gods. And 1. Cor.
6. 20.
because he that loves him who begat, loves him who is begotten also;
therefore let this natural affection and kind for Gods honor, descend from
him, to the meanest of his Saints, yea let it make our ears and cheeks to
glow and burn, when we hit into such company as make it their game and pastime
to deride and traduce them whom we know zealous and sincere Preachers and
professors of Gods holy truth. Let the Lords example teach us, who professes,
that he had as liefe men should touch the apple of his eye, as so touch his
holy ones. And if we find not such reproaches to touch us to the quick and
search us, so that we step forth, and stand out in the defense of such
innocents when there is cause; but secretly and willingly give way to such
speeches, as if they displeased us not, but we bear, yea and brook them too,
we are no better them false-witnesse-bearers against our neighbor, Exodus 20.
we show our selves, I say, not weak and feeble; but (it Exodus 20. 16.
may be feared) none at all, or rotten members of the body which feel not,
neither are troubled any whit when they are hacked and lanced, wounded and
torn by the tongues and teeth of dogs and swine, and therefore as David
called the Ziphims strangers, because of their falsehood, (though otherwise
Israelites;) so these indeed are, forrenners, unnatural, men of another
household and family, although they otherwise may be (by outward profession and
dwelling) neighbors and brethren.

And moreover this his faithful aduertising his Master of the treason, and the
wisest way to oppress it, teaches, that faithfulness betwixt religious Doct.
3.
friends had need to be well witnessed, lest this dutiful loyalty of Zebul
toward his Master Abimelech put it down and condemn it. We know, that such
trustiness among Christians abides not, or is very rare; and yet in some
particular case, it falls out, that men who are strangers to religion, will
go far one for another: which ought to provoke us, as we have better reasons
then they had to show it to our brethren; so especially when occasion is
offered, to let our innocence and faithfulness appear, and be seen; Prou.
3. 29.
and always to provide, that our love be without dissimulation, that so it
may be safely rested on in time of need by them that depend upon us: Romans 12.
9.
touching which duty of faithfulness both in love and the fruits of it, let
the Reader see more in the history of Caleb and elsewhere.

In these other four verses it is showed, how Abimelech strengthened himself
The clearing of verse. 34. to 42.
by the advice of Zebul his officer, and by the message that he sent him, and
how he prepared four bands of men, and lay in wait al night for him, and the
men of Shechem, not far from their city. And further how Gaal coming forth
of the same city to go to hear of, and seek Abimelech, pretending that he
would set upon, and invade him, Zebul came out together with him, (as though
there had been no subtlety or conspiracy intended) to the end that Gaal might
suspect nothing. And it being early in the morning, when it was not yet clear
light, and Gaal having some shimering of Abimelechs bands and scouts, (as soon
suspecting that which he feared) he bewraied as much to Zebul, that he saw
men lie in wait, yet knowing nothing: but Zebul on the other side, bare him in
hand, (to draw him on further) that he feared without cause, and took the
shadow of the mountains for men, for they are not unlike them a far off in
the dawning morning. But unto that Gaal replied, that it was otherwise, and he
was afraid indeed: in the mean while, light more clearly coming on, and Gaal
and Abimelech more nearly approaching one toward the other with their armies,
Gaal could not go back with any conuenience, as he gladly would have done:
whereupon Zebul then cast his bragges in his teeth; for Gaal had challenged him
before, and had contemptuously spoken of him, saying: who is Abimelech? and so
he must needs go forward, and coming near Abimelechs bands, was sore chased
by him.

Now in Gaals returning toward the city for shelter, he was thence shut out by
Zebul; by means whereof, Abimelech prevailed exceedingly, and slew many of the
men of Shechem, and so Iothams prophecy began to be verified, that he should
destroy them.

Now to note some what from this part of the story, first in the readiness
Doct. verse. 34.
of Abimelech to put in execution Zebuls counsel, we may see our selves taxed
of a double fault. First, in that he shook off al tediousness and toil, and
that for a bare uncertain hope of prevailing against Gaal his enemy, whereas
we having a sure hope of blessing, and that plentiful in all that we obey the
Lord in, (for in obeying him there is great reward) yet we are slow and Psalm.
19 11.
backward: whereby we verify the proverb, That a Lion is in the way, and we
are ready to faint. And this is our just reproach, that bad men in an ill case
Prou. 22. 13.
should be forwarder then we in a good, having yet so great and large
encouragement by the reward that is promised us in that behalf. Where of in
the former history, I have largely spoken in the examples of Judah and Simeon
in the 1. Chapter, and since by diverse occasions.

The second thing to be noted in Abimelech is, that Zebul being but his
Officer; is not disdained of him, but he is advised by him, to furnish himself
against Gaal: and yet Zebul having familier talk with him, he might have been
like enough to have been unfaithful to Abimelech his Master: It sets Doct.
2.
many of us to school to learn, who refuse better advice, and that in matters
of greater weight: Nay we scorn oftentimes to be counseled, though it be
for our good, in the best things: especially, by our inferiors; which folly
while Naaman committed, he had done it to his own utter undoing 2. King. 5. 13.
both of body and soul. if he had not bethought himself, and taken better
advice after, then at the first, when he received the Prophets answer in so
ill part. And what lost David by harkening to the counsel of a woman? Nay, he
blessed God highly for it himself afterward. But such is the foolish 1. Sam.
25. 32.
pride of men, not only in matters of the world, but even in ghostly and
heavenly, that we think it to be our utter discredit and shame to confess
ourselves to be defective or unable to manage every business that pertaines
to us, well and sufficiently. Whereas who knows not, that every fool can
easily run himself out of breath? but he had need be a wise man that should
stop his own bad course, and settle himself again in good order and frame
without the help and counsel of other. Nay, do not prodigal and licentious
persons more imbezle and weaken their estate, credit, health, and the good of
posterity oftentimes, then ten wise men can turn their hand to restore or
redress again? Such is the case of the soul endangered deeply to Satan and
hell: But who (among hundreds of such) is willing to be advised in time, till
thrift and stock, hope and help be quite past recovery? Indeed when all is
in the bottom, yea and worse; then men ask and enquire after Thrift,
Sobriety, Discretion. But oh, had it not been much better for such to have
admitted counsel before, against an irrecouerable mischief? Counsel after
the event is no counsel, but either lamentable pity, or bitter rebuke. It
were to be wished this folly were only bound in the hearts of youthful
Rehoboams, (although even they shall find it sharp enough to be taught by
Mistress experience) and not as well in ancienter years: whose commendation
it ought to be, to show forth the example of staiednes and wisdom to the
younger sort: But if they be neither able to advise themselves, nor willing to
be advised by other, what remains but that even the heathen Poet condemn them
to be miserable? Therefore be glad of counsel for soul or body, and make much
of it: the time may come when it will be precious and desired: when for want of
it the body is turned into prison, beggerie, and rags; and the soul, after
many grievous plunges, to hell. If Paul's advice (as ill a Pilot as he was) had
been rejected to the end, what had become of them that should have scorned to
be beholding to him? Act. 27. I mean of them yt sailed with him? Remember
therefore what the wise man says: Establish thoughts by counsel: and Act. 27.
31, 32. Prou. 20. 18. and 15. 22. 27. 9 1. 30.
know that without it, thoughts come to naught. And as ointment and perfume
rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel.
And further, they that refuse counsel, shall eat the fruit of their own way,
and be filled with their own devices.

Gaal also as well as Abimelech was early up to follow his matters, going
Verse 35. to 41
out of the city to see what was done, and whether he could perceive any
danger to be at hand: to our shame it may be spoken, who are backward, where it
were more meet for us to be speedy and forward in all that concerns and
belongs to our peace and happiness, as I have said before, in the example of
Gedeons hasty pursuit of the Medianites.

But though he was early up, yet (as it appears in the story) he was never
Doct. one of these verses.
the near in the end: to teach us, that it is not early rising, and late
going to bed, nor all the care that may be taken, is not sufficient to bring
our attempts and business to pass, if God please to blow upon our endeavors:
but this is all in all, that the Lord allows of our doings being with an
upright heart taken in hand, and according to knowledge, and that we are upon
good ground persuaded (as we ought to be) that he will vouchsafe to bless the
same. So says the Psalmist, Except the Lord build the house, that Psalm. 127. 1.
is, govern and dispose all things pertaining to the family, they labor in
vain that build it: and except the Lord keep the city, the keeper watches it
in vain. And yet I deny not but God does suffer the wicked often times to
prosper, but not long, as neither he did here this Abimelech: or if long, yet
to a greater overthrow.

A pregnant example hereof is Iehoram, (and his father Ahab is another) 1 King
22. 1. King 39. etc.
who intending a voyage against their enemies of Aram and Moab (having
rebelled) failed not in their outward preparation, and politic devices to
overthrow their enemies; for they provided themselves of men, munition, and
confederated themselves strongly against them: but never considering that
themselves had rebelled against a greater Lord, even the Lord of hoasts, they
went on headily fearing no controlement, nay thinking they had God pinned, yea
bound to them. But the one found to his cost that he went to work against the
edge, and desperately: The other, though he were spared for the time to a more
notable ruin, (as it came to pass afterward) yet he found himself plunged
and driven to an extremity before that, by want of water; which threatened the
loss of his beasts, and his own, and his peoples destruction. Which was
enough to prove that he played the fool in getting two Kings of his side, when
God being shut out, and not sought to, laughed him to scorn and was his enemy.

Oh then, where are the hearts of the people who regard not this, but look
that by their toil and moyle (as they say) all should be brought to pass, as
they would have it? And do neither commit their affairs and dealings to God
by prayer, neither go to work by his direction, nor consult how they may
please him, but rashly and by their own wit go about all, and then look that
it should fall out according to their desire. And therefore when they thrive
not, neither prosper, as they would, they are as mad men impatient and
outrageous: and if they speed better, and have good success, then they praise
their own wisdom and their good hap and fortune in stead of God. Look more
largely for the handling of this point, in the example of Sisera his
preparation against Iabin.

But before I come to the success that Gaal had by meeting with Abimelech,
Verse. 36. 37.
I will note that which went before it. To the which end it is said here, and
it is to be observed, that Gaal was now in the trial timorous: who had
boastingly said before, who is Abimelech? now he was afraid (I say) as soon as
the least suspicion and likelihood of danger arose and appeared unto him: for
he looking out as soon as he was able to discern in the dawning, perceived a
band and company of men a far off: and as he did better discern them, he
was more afraid: so that he said as much to Zebul his enemy, and thereby
bewraied his dastardlines unto him, who had heard before of his great brags and
boasting against Abimelech. Whereby we may clearly, as Doct.
in a glass, observe the property and disposition of boasters: who prate and
brag of great matters, but effect small, or rather none at all. Like to
Benhadad, who triumphed over Ahab, arrogating to himself all that was his: but
was glad after to send a few of his men (that were left of two mighty armies)
with ropes about their necks to sue for his life, and their own, unto the
same Ahab, to his exceeding great shame, when they had small hope to obtain
them.

So that this example lays out a boaster in his colors; noting him to be
one, who out of his vainglorious and frothie humor, undertakes great matters,
but performs nothing less, and therefore in stead of honor purchases
himself shame by his folly. Commonly the boaster is no body in the trial:
like unto a torrent or standing water, which in winter swells and A
similitude.
runs a maine, when there is no use of it; but in summer and droughts, when
it should cool and refresh, that is, when it should stand any man in stead, it
fails and is dry. The impotent nature of man boasts of all the gifts of
God, inward and outward, interuerting and holding back thanks from God, by
presumptuous bragging of it self: but for the most part, these gifts are
rather supposed to be, then be indeed in the boaster: and therefore when the
trial comes, the Thraso or bragger is ridiculous to the beholders. Amaziah
boasted of his valor greatly, and provoked Iehoash without cause, when he
needed not: but he sped thereafter, and was sore foiled. So the late
miscreants, I mean the powder-traytors, how boasted they of their device, when
it was almost at the vpshot? God and man (say they in that letter of theirs)
have decreed the overthrow of these English heretics, etc. But God had decreed
the contrary, and turned their boasting into shame, even when they looked for a
perpetual destruction, upon the vpholders and embracers of the Gospel, and
the overthrow of the Gospel it self. So did Goliath challenge David, by words
to this effect; I will chop thee as small as herbs to the pot, (as the common
phrase of the swaggerer is) but he was 1. Sam. 17. 51.
chopped himself head from body, with his own sword. The Pharisee boasted of
his righteousness, liberality, devotion, thus: I thank thee Lord, I am Luke
18. 11.
not as this Publicane, etc. but the Publicane went away more justified. The
worldling in James, boasts of to morrow: To morrow (says he) we will go to
such a place, and make such a gain, etc. But the Lord was forgotten, James 4
13.
and therefore they thriued as Iehoshaphats ships that went to Ophir for gold,
1. King 22 48.
for they were broken. So Hezekiah gloried of his treasures, Nebuchadnezzar
boasted of his buildings, Achitophel of his policy and counsel, (see his
words) 2. Sam. 17. 12.
Herod of his wit and eloquence: and now adays, who is so naked but he has
somewhat to vaunt of? And if of nothing else, yet of this to his neighbor,
that he was in the town before him, whom he contendeth with, and ouer-croweth;
and will be there when he is gone: So another boasts of his skill in his
profession or trade; another of his selling dear, or buying cheap; of
crossing his adversary and matching him, etc. for boasting has not so small
acquaintance as men think: yea, for a need, if a man be provoked but a little,
he will brag of his pride, and not blush to say to him that is his better,
Though I have not so good a purse as thou, yet I have as proud a stomach as
thou, for thine heart: even thus may ye hear the poor man contending with the
rich. But O earth, earth, earth, consider what thou Iercm. 22. 29.
braggest of, for even thy glory is thy shame: of thine own mouth shall he
condemn thee, who professes to resist the proud. As for them that boast of
worse matters, who say, They will quench the zeal of these precise ones, 1.
Pet. 5. 5.
(as they term honest men) and will weary and pursue them, till they have
made them eat their word, and to renounce their precisenes: as Psalm. 2. Psalm
2. 3.
These (I say) are as near to the Lords despite, and to disappointment as the
rest: and therefore he scoffeth at the boasts of such enemies, casting their
brags in their teeth, and saying; Tell the towers and gates, see the walls of
Sion. etc. As if he should say, What? have they cast down all these, look
well, and consider, ye shall find that not a stone thereof is removed. So bad
a member we see the tongue is, and boasts of great things, to small purpose.
Therefore, to make use hereof, let not the wise, strong, rich, boast of Ierem.
9. 23.
their wisdom, strength, and wealth: but he that will boast, let him boast
that he knows me, says the Lord. And he that can boast of this, shall not
Note.
fear arrogancy, seeing this knowledge of God is ever seasoned with humility
and love. Let us consider this, that the sin of boasting seldom goes
without usurping Gods honor to a man's self, and lying: Both most capital
crimes against the first and second tables. It is gross for a rich man to
boast of his worth and wealth: but for a man to borow of this man and that Job
31. 25.
great sums, and to boast how well monied he is, how absurd is it? Be able to
say (if need be) utter it, of thy well using thy gifts, that thou regardest it
as much as them: or else thy craking of the gifts themselves shall be a
witness against thee, in the giving up of thy account; yea rather let the best
say: To us O Lord belongs shame, and confusion of face, we have small cause
of boasting, if we saw our selves in any sort, as we are, and our vileness.

Nay, let none boast so much as of to morrow, they know not what one Prou. 27.
1.
day may bring forth. Man is a worm, mean and base, if he were laid out in
his colors: But being as he is, he should rather break into admiration, and
say with the Prophet, O Lord, it is thy mercy that we be not all consumed, Lam
3. 22.
rather then to boast of things above his reach. It is absurd and ill beseeming
every way, but especially it is odious, and as dangerous, when it is used
against the people of God, as Iezabel did against Elias, and Rabsakee that 1.
King. 19. 2.
railing heathen against the good King Ezechias and his men, boasting and 2.
King. 18. 27.
threatening them, and all to discourage them from the true service of God, as I
have said. And this of Gaals boasting: now of Zebuls answer.

When Zebul, who being for Abimelech, saw the boastings of this Gaal against
Verse 36. 38.
Abimelech as he sent him word thereof, when he heard of them by other, that
he might prepare himself to come forward and fight with him; so now he heard
him himself, he fleshed him on, and matched him in another kind, to wit, in
subtlety and dissimulation, while yet he spoke fair, and seemed to be
friendly to him, as here we see. For he went out of the city with him, to
the end he might suspect nothing, when he had yet given warning to Abimelech,
to lie in wait for him, against the time he should come forth, and to be
ready to set upon him: and in the midst of the fear and danger that this
Gaal was in, Zebul subtly deceived him, as if there had bin no cause of fear
at all: egging and drawing him on subtly, so that he could not for shame,
when yet full feign he would have broken away from him. Where, besides that we
may note the dissimulations, lyings and sly subtilties that be in the world,
even among such as pretend great love and friendship, as is to be seen in this
Zebul. Which point I have spoken of already in this book: so we may see how
men of evil qualities are matched and Doct. verse. 58.
meet together, as he was with Gaal. For if we mark we may see, that one is
a boaster, another a dissembler, and a subtle vnderminder, a third a
quarrellet, and contentious liver. Other tainted with sundry other dangerous
and bad qualities, of which the Apostle speaks; these I say all, live and
deal 2. Tim. 3. 2.
together. Is it not therefore the great goodness of God, that one deuoureth
not another? Yea if the Lord should not bridle him for the upholding of the
peace of the Church and Commonwealth, they could not possibly dwell together,
nor live and converse the one with the other, nor stand in any sort, no, not as
they do, but being of so contrary and bad qualities, they must needs as fire
and water destroy one another. And whereas the good Magistrate and faithful
Minister with other assistant Christians, do labor to throw down the works
of darkness, and of the devil, and so to bridle the rage of the turbulent and
unruly sort of people; herein it may be spoken with grief, the opposition
against piety and goodness is so great, that although (the Lord working not
by miracle, but by means) somewhat be done for the encouragement of his; and
the restraining of the other; yet but little in respect of that which might be,
and that were to be desired and looked: because such good instruments, the most
of them are too faint to fight the Lords battles against his so fierce,
subtle, and many enemies. The like providence of God I noted before touching
Abimelechs hiring vain fellows upon the fourth verse of this Chapter. And to
that, I may add, that the Lord does use one wicked person to devour and
oppress the other, that so his own people may enjoy the more peace and
safety. As we see here, that this politic dissembler Zebul (a right picture
of our subtle Machiauilians now adays) smoothes and flatters this Gaal, and
serves his humor, (as one that would make his fellow drunk, draws him on
leaudly to drink pot after pot, till he be quite turned over) by a pretended
show of friendship, that so his intent and plot to betray him to Abimelech,
might in the mean season take the more sure effect.

Secondly, from hence let us note, how one sinner (being opposite to another
Doct. 2.
drifts and purposes) goes to work, in the defeating of his enemy. Even thus
that (as the proverb says) one nail drives out another: they have no way to
go beyond each other, but this, who shall use his weapon skilfullest, and most
mischieuously. They all fetch their wiles out of one budget, and their arrows
out of one quiver: either subtlety or force is their weapon: the sligh and
treacherous Achitophel runs to the budget, the cruel and malicious Efau to
the quiver: here lies the point, who shall draw out the subtillest and
cunningest fetch, or who shall take thence the sharpest or deadliest arrow.
Both shoot in the same, I mean the devils bow, but the skill is, who shall
ouer-reach, and ouer-shoote each other therein. And he that prouides them this
artillery, will be sure to be the gainer which part soever loses: he will
provide, that his kingdom shall increase, even in the opposition of his
subjects: they fight as fast for him as they do against each other: Zebul and
Gaal serve two Masters here (in one sense) the one Abimelech, the other
Shechem, and the one by his boasting seeks to outface the other. The other by
his conniuence and dissembling seeks to root out him. But lo in the mean
while both serve one Master the Devil, he reioyces as much in the spectacle,
as Ioab and Abner did, in the beholding their young men to play, (as they
cruelly called it) but in good earnest to cut each 2. Sam. 2. 14.
others throat. If men in their cursed doings and tradings thus in sin, would
consider that themselves are sure to go by the walls, and forfeit their
souls to him with whose engines and tools they appugne each other, yea if they
considered, that their quarrels serve to no other end, but to make Note.
a pageant for the devil to laugh at: If they could see into the issue, that
he who wins, wins hell, and he that loses, loses heaven: the gains
are only Satan's: oh how would this quail them and dampe them in their
lewdness? Put case that in the same ship upon the sea, two men walk contrary
steps to each other, the one crossing the other in their motions: does not
the ship carry them both one way? Can they (will they, nill they) resist A
Simile.
the motion of the ship wherein both sail? Even so all sin has one motion,
though sinners move diversely; let them strive each against other never so
eagerly both must yield to one motion, their sin will bring them both to hell.
The prodigal man walks with quite adverse steps to the covetous, but both
steps tend to hell. One great man seeks to overthrow another: he that is
subtle takes the vantage of him that is ambicious, and lays such a train for
him, as by following his ambicious plot, he incurreth the danger of the law,
and so supplants him; but both the wisdom of the one, and the folly of the
other is hellish. So that the closer and deeper the one is above the other, the
sooner he may subvert him: but a subtiller then both, goes beyond them, and
will (at length) ouerreach them both. One man underhand works mischief
against another: and he again vnsheaths his tongue against him: the former is
like to put down the latter, but his own sin will as fast undo him. So the
buyer would match the seller by his dissembling: the seller would cosen the
buyer by his boasting and praising of the wares: but indeed both deceive
themselves as well as each other. The use is, to teach men not to think
themselves safe and warrantable, because they resist evil, except they dislike
and hate it also; for they may sin as fast in resisting it, as in allowing
it. Again, let it teach men to abhor this estate which admits no peace,
no sound consent and unity: but is a fountain of confusion: and to embrace
that profession and practice, which comes from the God of order, and is as
uniform in the means as the end, and unites them that embrace it, in the
league of love and peace. As for those that are better minded, let them beware
of this error of the wicked: let them not think their liberty hereby
restrained, because they may not match the ungodly in their kind to play the
Cretians with Cretians, the Foxes with Foxes: this is not their profession,
they are bought with a price to serve the Lord in their bodies and spirits. The
other indeed being dissuaded from this practice, answer for themselves: That
if they did not swear, cosen, lie and temporise with the world, they could not
live, every one would ouer-reach them, they should greatly disadvantage
themselves in forgoing that liberty. But let the godly oppose their innocence,
with the wisdom of the spirit, to the subtlety, and all other leaud qualities
of the wicked: and if they cannot match them thereby, let them willingly take
the foil, and submit themselves to God, rather then return evil for evil.

This urging of Gaal by Zebul alleging his own words, that he had said, Verse
39.
[Who is Abimelech] made him go forth against him, but full soon he turned his
face away from him, and fled: where we may see how God shamed him for his
bragges, and that even among the men of Shechem, where he had made his
boasting: that they, as well as he, might take shame for their rash and most
unwise aduenturing to set him up for their head and guide, in whom they saw
nothing but bragges. Thus does God daily put to shame both boasters and such as
advance and cleave unto them: as what boaster is there, if he can make a
flourish, but some base and unsettled persons or other will admire and applaud
him, which God does most justly suffer them to do, the one to deceive, the
other to be deceived, accordingly as they have provoked him, and yet in great
mercy he does it, to humble, and bring them to repentance, when they cannot but
with shame see what they have done: although we see (the more is the pity)
that few are the better thereby, or make any use thereof, but run into some
other bad course, if they be made openly ashamed of that. Which I speak as
well to give a watchword to both, to bethink themselves betimes of taking a
better course, as also to the great comfort of them that are wary and advised
to shun and avoid such deceivers and base flourishers, and do take like heed
and care to keep themselves from every evil way. But to return: in that this
Doct. verse 39. 40.
Gaal was driven so cowardly to fly, who had made so great bragges of courage
and manhood, we see what many do show themselves to be in trial: for without
grace there is little difference. And I do not only mean hereby gross and
great braggers, of whom I have spoken already, but others also in that kind,
though as it is counted in a lower degree. For example: how many may we see,
who show great liking of good things, and who profess their forwardness in
religion, and to dislike others that do not so, as if they were beforehand
themselves in comparison of many? and yet it is clear that either they have
small or no use of religion, (when they be at the best) no, not as many of them
have, whom they disgrace and condemn, or else they revolt in time for all
their fair shows, and thereby do openly bewray that there is nothing but
froth to be found in them. Which is no small cause of grief to the best, that
there being but few that do make any great profession, yet that many of them
should deceive themselves and others. In stead whereof, let Gods true servants
fear always, as the blessed Prou. 28. 14.
do, their infirmities and untowardness, which they feel to be in them, and
give no occasions to any to think of them better then they are, but walk in
uprightness of heart toward God, and not neglect to honor him, 2. Cor. 10. 6.
as they shall have opportunity in giving good example to others.

And while Gaal the Captain of the men of Shechem fled, many of them Verse 41.
fell and were slain, according to the Lords foretelling, and for that their
sin against Gedeons house: and their boasting defender himself (as he took
upon him to be) was cast out of the city with his brethren, that they did not
so much as remain in it. And by this let all learn a further lesson, then to
shun and avoid boasters; to wit that they neither put themselves under Doct.
the shadow of flesh: for even so they shall be served, (as these men of
Shechem were) who repose their confidence in man, or in any earthly thing. And
this does clearly show the beginning of the destruction of the men of Shechem.
But of the argument now handled, I need not repeat that which has been spoke
upon sundry occasions heretofore: as for Gaal, we Prou. 11. 2.
see he roasted not that which he got in hunting. Gaal thought by crakes and
boasting to wind in himself and his brethren with the men of Shechem: Verse
41.
as for Abimelech, he knew he got into the kingdom by tyranny, and he
thought it liker for many to prevail then one. And although commonly it
comes to pass that men stablish themselves and theirs, by flattery and
cosoning, yet here it was otherwise. For he was frustrate of his hope, and as
we see here, cast out by Abimelech. And so God deals oft-times, that Doct. 2.
though many unworthy persons lift up their heads, and build their nest on high
against the darts of misfortune, (as they call it) by pride, extortion,
cruelty, boasting, etc. yet God many times hinders the course of such, and
throws them down: as he soon broke off the ill course that Judas Matthew. 27
4. 1. King. 2 32. 2. Sam. 3. 27. 2. Sam. 17. 23.
took to be rich: Ioab, Abner, and Achitophel, who were near to the King in
whose days they lived, yet in time they were cast down from their greatness
and glory which they had. Oh how has he done the like in latter times since,
that if such will needs darken and obscure Gods glory and the Gospel for their
own pleasure, or the setting up of themselves; they may see with their own
eyes, as also all that applauded them, that they have received their due
reward, when God has cast them down with shame, and yet the worst is behind;
which abides such, whatsoever changes they meet with here in the mean season.
And this being the best state that sin brings (in this life) which I have now
mentioned, let it fear the godly to taste of the dainties of such, (as they
count them) lest they with Eve reaching out their Genes 3.
hands after them, do taste also of their punishments in such wise, as they
wish with many stripes, that they had never done so.

Verse 42. And on the morrow the people went out into the field, which was told
Abimelech.

43. And he took the people and divided them into three bands, and laid wait
in the fields and looked, and behold, the people were come out of the city,
and he rose up against them and smote them.

44. And Abimelech and the bands that were with him rushed forward, and stood
in the entering of the gates of the city, and the two other bands ran upon all
the people that were in the field and slew them.

45. And when Abimelech had fought against the city all that day, he took
the city, and slew the people that was therein, and destroyed the city, and
sowed Salt in it.

46. And when all the men of the Tower of Shechem heard it, they entered into an
hold of the house of the god Berith.

47. And it was told Abimelech that all the men of Shechem were gathered
together.

48. And Abimelech gate him up to Mount Zalmon, he and all the people that were
with him, and Abimelech took axes with him, and cut down boughs of trees, and
took them, and bare them on his shoulder, and said unto the folk that were
with him, What ye have seen me to do, make have and do like me.

49. Then all the people also cut down every man his bough, and followed
Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire with them.

50. So all the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about a thousand men and
women.

AFter the forementioned slaughter, and holding Gaal out of the city, the
Israelites in Shechem thought among themselves, that they would The sum to
verse 46.
be avenged of Abimelech, as it seems; and they went out of the city to
pursue him. They never considered what a punishment they had sustained already,
by their rash putting themselves under that vainglorious boaster Gaal, but
unadvisedly followed their quarrel. But he understanding it, took the
advantage of that their attempt, and so disposed his bands of soldiers, that
he set two of them to take those that came forth of the city, and slew them,
and he and another band rushed to the entrance into the city, and having
fought against it the whole day, took it, and slew the people in it, and
destroyed the city, and sowed salt in it.

If the men of Shechem had gone out of the city, but to walk, or to do The
clearing of verse 42.
some business, as some (perhaps) would think they did, Abimelech should not
have needed to prepare two or three bands of armed men to set upon a few,
scatteringly here and there, and those unarmed, coming forth to their work;
or if they had gone out upon pleasure, what had he gained, to have gone forth
with bands against a few persons? But it is clear therefore (as I said) and
most certain, that they went out in warlike manner to fight with Abimelech,
(though they went without Gaal their Captain) being much provoked and incensed
for the loss of their neighbors, whom Abimelech had slain the day before.
For they were many, and for that they were now heated very much: and more in
spite, rashness, and desire of revenge, rather then good aduisednesse they
went to work: being driven and put to their shifts, as they thought, and that
somewhat they must do to him, either that they must overthrow him, or else
they saw that he would surely root out them: for to this it was now come,
that the word of God by Iotham, Doct gathered generally to verse 46.
might be fulfilled. And by this we see to what desperate shifts men are driven
by their falsehood, cruelty, rashness, vain, confidence in man, and by the
like sins: and what wise man would look for any better end of such doings?

If God had brought upon them that trouble in their innocence, he would have
taught them how to bear it, whatsoever had been like to have followed: but now
they run upon the swords point, and therefore both they that sought to fight
with him abroad, and they that waited for to set upon him and his men in the
city, are both of them destroyed. This is the best end that sin brings
upon the committers. And thus wilfulness, stomach, and stubbornness bring
many to destruction, while they who are contrary minded are in peace. So
contention, whoring, drunkenness and riot, do the like in their kind: and
they that seem to be safest, and freest from danger being of that sort, may
look for no better fruit nor end of their evil doings, but shame, sorrow, and
a miserable death, though not by enemies, as these men of Shechem found it,
whether it be in their beds, or wrought by their own hands, all is one, if
repentance break not off their evil course.

The which while Gods servants behold, and see to what a woeful end their evil
doings bring many, who yet in their iolitie thought themselves Note.
the only wise men of others, and all fools who walked in their innocence and
uprightness. I say while Gods servants see this, they shall praise him highly,
for that they followed a better course by Gods direction; and even now (I say)
when they see Gods threats executed upon evil doers, as they were told that it
should be so in the midst of their prosperity and iolitie. And all that come
after them, shall see good cause, and have encouragement to hold on a Christian
course, and to turn neither on the right hand, nor on the left, although they
shall see piety and good conscience to be iustled to the walls, and scorned,
yet shall the worst day of these that practice them, be far better then the
best of the other, for all their setting out of the matter Note.
for a while; and when their time comes in which they shall smart, then shall
Gods servants rejoice in their own sincerity and innocence. Let the reader
look back to the former chapter, and enlarge this point by adding thereto,
that which has been noted touching the sin and judgment of Succoth and
Penuel.

Now follows the further proceeding in, and laying forth of the overthrow
Verse 42 to 46. still continued.
of the men of Shechem. Abimelech might for all the force of them go and dwell
safely in his house, as he did, at Arnmah, not far from Shechem, their power
being weakened, and Gaal thrust out by Zebul. But yet they rose up against him,
as we have heard, of stomach, if possibly they might any way be revenged: But
their so doing being told to Abimelech, turned to the destruction of them that
did so, and to them that were in the city, with it also; as appears in these
four next verses. Read them in the text. The Lord having purposed their
overthrow, did thus go forward with it: for he has many ways to execute his
judgments threatened upon his enemies. It was a just cause to astonish the rest,
when he began with the foremost: but alas, where there is no counsel from God
to direct them, what can they do, but wait their time to follow their fellows
in the like judgment? Even so, God sometimes sweepes away all the company of
bad men and evil Doct. 2. out of these verses.
workers in some one place at once, as he did whole kingdoms in Ioshuas time,
and made his people possess and inhabit them. Sometime he keeps them under
and wastes his enemies by degrees, and one after another, as here: as before I
noted out of the space of Abimelechs reign, where the same point has been
handled.

So they that mark it, shall find, that though he give them their scope and
liberty for a time, which he does, that they may repent; they in the mean
while looking after no such thing, (I say) they that mark it, shall see, how
God either begins to blow upon their prosperity, as the East wind Note.
in the Spring begins to nip and hold in the leaves that were coming A
Similitude.
forth, or else as a great frost does all at once kill them; so does he
suddenly send desolation upon them, one way or other, when their time is come.
And therefore let no servant of God fear, or be dismayed for the greatness and
pride of such, for in a small time their glory and iollitie shall vanish, it
shall be no more seen; there is a greater then they, who will surely cut off
Eccles. 5. 8.
their hope, and lay their glory in the dust. Oh that the righteous could then
praise God, for that he has kept them in all those times of danger within
their bounds, not suffering them grossly to reach out their hands to
iniquity; and when they have seen such works of God to be showed on his
enemies, then ever after to be more firm in their covenant keeping with God.

These things being thus brought about to the killing of so many of the Doct. 3
out of the former verses.
men of Shechem, a thing so unlikely in their first making of Abimelech king;
it shall not be amiss to consider a little of it, the spoil of the men being
so great, and yet so small likelihood thereof, till the Lord sent an evil
spirit betwixt Abimelech and them. Who would have said in the time of their
agreement and love, that was betwixt them, that they should have grown to this
point, to become utter enemies? and while they were so nearly joined and knit
together in amity and friendship, that they could be thus alienated, and at
the uttermost defiance one with the other? They who were promised by Abimelech
to be above all other respected and preferred; who would have said, that they
of all other should be hardliest handled, yea destroyed? But we must
understand, that there were two causes hereof, and the one rising from the
other. The one was this, their love was wicked and cursed, and bound together
with rotten bands. The other was this; that the wrath of God burning like fire,
brake and consumed these bands: whereby he raised an evil spirit betwixt
them, to the destroying each of other. And let all that are wise, be
instructed hereby, that where men are, as these were, companions and friends in
evil, and that they are not linked together by the fear of God, and the love
of goodness, that their fellowship will not hold long, what likelihoods and
shows soever there be of the continuance thereof: And the more evils that it
is compact and framed of, the deadlier and more violent shall the breach of it
be. If it be not accompanied with wicked practices, as theirs here was, yet
even the secret moths of self-love, privy pride, and the seeking of commodity
thereby, being the grounds of this agreement and fellowship; even they will
consume it as the moth does the garment. It is a work of great difficulty for
the best intended love even betwixt good Christians to be held firm, and kept
unbroken: and there must be renuings of covenants often times betwixt them; and
all little enough, the devil so sets in to raise and make division among
brethren. For why? It is a good note of their welfare and happiness to be knit
together in brotherly love. So says our Savior: Hereby shall men know that ye
are my Disciples, in that ye love one another. But if men be brethren in
evil, as if they be more nearly knit together, because Ioh. 13. 35.
they both join in a bad cause, ye have heard Gods sentence of such agreement
already, it shall surely come to naught, as this betwixt Abimelech and the men
of Shechem did, now unlikely soever it shall seem to be so in the time of
their peace and love: And the same I say of their fellowship, who are both of
them unreformed, although it be not for ill ends and purposes entered into by
them. And let this which I have said, make us wise in seeking love and
friendship one with another. But here, the occasion being fitly offered, I end.

THE SIXTIETH SERMON ON THE NINTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw follows the further destruction of these men of Shechem. Verse 46.
For when their city was destroyed, they fled to a double fort, which was
their castle for the strength of it: even the house of their god Baal-berith,
as they called him, with whom they had made a covenant, and therefore hoping
that there they should have been safe. And these were the chief and wise men
of the city. And Abimelech hearing of it, came and destroyed both them and
their Temple.

In that these hoped there to find ease and defense by the holiness, as Doct
verse. 46
well as the strength of the place, we may see, that when men have no religion
nor acquaintance with God, how wise and great soever they be, what poor shifts
they have to provide for their safety: even to think, that the holiness of
the place, their gods of wood or stone, or the relics of Saints, or some such
rotten props shall free them from their troubles and fears: No, although they
should seek to the true God, in their haste, which is much liker to work their
good, yet their hearts being far from him, and they without confidence in him
that he would help them: even that seeking of theirs should not be able to
deliver them.

But all these are bruised reeds, and spiders webs: much like the help that
Baals Priests obtained by calling on him; whom for their deceiving of the
people in such a manner, Elias caused to be slain. Even such help does 1.
King. 18. 40.
the wilful generation of Papists and Seminaries at their death in their
greatest need, obtain themselves, and their superstitious votaries whom they
have deluded, and brought into the snare with them. Of whom one (a principal
ringleader) at his death, was constrained to renounce the opinion of merit,
and humane satisfactions for sin, although he was loath to have that gap
opened to the people, for shame, whom they had so grossly seduced. Another
(yet living and of greaterreckoning in the Popish Church) Better I mean, is
forced to confess, that for the avoiding the peril of vainglorie and carnal
presumption, it is the safest of all to repose a man's whole confidence in the
only mercy of God in Christ Jesus. And by this we see that howsoever (for
sinister ends) they suppress the truth, and abuse their silly Proselites: yet
when they are compelled by the force of their conscience, or the terror of
death, to put away lying, and equiuocating, which few of them attain to, but
dye in hardness of heart, wherein they lived: but when it f^lleth out otherwise,
the^ they confess and renounce their co^ceits, as bruised reeds, to be unable
to support the^: which as it is commonly unprofitable to themselves, so yet it
should serve to deter others from venturing and resting so boldly upon their
ungrounded assertions. To omit other there was a third, of long and great
account and reckoning among people of that religion, whom I visiting upon the
deathbed, was an ear witness with six or seven other of that place, then
present also; that the party, then shortly after deceasing, renounced the
dunghill stuff of that religion, and reckoned all Popery as a deceitful
trade, and particularly the chief points thereof, who yet had long been a
stiff and stout defender and maintainer thereof. Oh therefore blessed are the
people whose God is the Lord Jehovah, and who know him the only true God, and
whom he has sent Jesus Christ, for this Ioh. 17. 3.
is eternal life. But as these men of Shechem here were slain in the
Idolatrous Temple of their Idol Berith, for their blindness and putting their
confidence therein, so shall all be served that rest on such proppes, that is
to say, they shall be left in the briars, as Judas was of the Priests, whom he
trusted in. Matthew. 27. 3.
Let the reader look back to the fifth chapter, and the 30. verse, where the
answer of Sisera his mother to her self, and her wise Ladies to her, is
recorded: and there he shall find this point further in larged.

As I said they were slain in the Temple of their I doll, which they put their
trust in, so it was done by Abimelech, who followed the matter to the Verse. 47.
40. 49.
purpose, when he heard whither they fled. This was his kindness to the men of
Shechem, that made him king. He promised other matters to the^, verse. 2. that
he being their bone, and their flesh, be would regard them above all other. And
now we see here that all was but flattery: for to what end came all but to
this, that they had no greater enemy then him? True it is indeed, this fell
out according to that which Iotham before had denounced against them: to wit,
that fire should come out of the bramble and destroy the Cedars of Lebanon. But
this excuses the fact of Abimelech, no more then the counsel and purpose of
God touching the deliverance of Christ to death, (A good watchword) excused
Judas the traitor, and the Priests and other Act. 2. 23.
who put him to death. This is good therefore, and an use to be made of this
doctrine, (if ever) now needful, and therefore to be heard and regarded;
namely, that we take heed whom we trust and give credit unto; that is to say,
not such as we have not proved to be faithful, as the men of Shechem may
teach us, who too rashly and readily trusted this deceiuer, and false hearted
Abimelech.

Our Savior would not commit himself to them that were said to believe Ioh.
2. last.
in him, for he knew what was in man. Much less ought we to do so, who know
there is much falsehood and doubling in them whom we trust, and that they are
ignorant, profane, and hypocrites. Therefore Solomon going as near the mark
as he could, gave this counsel about trusting of Prou. 27. 10.
men: Thine own friend and thy fathers forsake thou not, etc. So that if it
may be, some proof should be made of their faithfulness and vprightnes first,
before we rest upon them, especially if it lie in us to do it. And it being so
necessary a gift, this faithfulness I mean, the Apostle requires it in
feruants, the meaner sort of persons, as one of the two necessary duties that
should be in them, (the other being diligence) without which they cannot do
their duties well, that we may see thereby how needful it is in all other
about greater matters.

And as this sincerity is rare to find, according to that which Solomon
complains of, saying, Where shall one find a faithful man? And Paul: Prou.
20. 7. 2. These. 3. 2.
All have not faith, that is the fruit of faith, which is faithfulness and true
heartednes: so it should cause us to begin with our selves, and urge our own
hearts for vprightnes first, and not to marvel that we find it not in
others, if it be not in ourselves: as that we may be trusted upon our word, and
approve our selves such as we would be taken to be. And then by our observation
and experience of the good dealing that we can find in any more then in
other; thereafter let us give credit unto them: and yet I mean such good
dealing, as has been learned by the preaching of the Gospel, such as is
according to knowledge. And by the same vprightnes and good dealings men should
be led in choosing their companions in marriage, and not to hearken to every
glosing tongue that can make fair and large promises, which have deceived
thousands: and also in seeking of servants, or to have them (if it may be) the
children of the faithful well and religiously brought up: and the same care
should be had in choosing executors comeprimitters, and such as we would put in
trust. To the which if it be demanded, where such shall be found, that they may
be trusted in matters of importance: I answer: beside that I have said
already, that every one which will ask this question, must first begin
himself to practice sincerity, that so he may the better complain of the
want thereof in other; this I add, that some who call for it and find it not,
are worthy to go without it, although I do not hereby excuse them that are
void of it, and offer the contrary evil measure. And they, who I say are
worthy to go without it, when they would full gladly find it in those whom
they deal with, are such as are carping, biting, Note.
scoffing, and accusing of them for their precisenes, who labor and endeavor to
keep their consciences pure and good. Too many there are in this age, who
cannot so soon perceive a man or woman to withdraw themselves from the sins
of the time, and to be afraid to offend, as the common sort do, but by and by
they cry out of them, that they are Precisians. Now they who can allow none to
be upright and conscionable in their ways and life, it is no matter though
they meet with such in their dealings, as show small conscience and vprightnes
toward them, God being just to make others to measure out to them as they have
measured to others, as Solomon says in an other kind, Eccles. 7. to teach
them to know what an upright hearted man Eccles. 7. 23.
is worth, and to make much of such, rather then to discourage them. One
example shall serve for all; A cruel Landlord cries out of his unfaithful
Tenant, that he has broken his day, and (it may be) is run away with his
rent. But who is in fault? The poor Tenant that dares not appear before his
Lord to crave in differencie, or the cruel Lord who has borne him in hand,
that he has let him a good peniworth; whereas indeed he has so racked and
fleeced him, that he is fitter to beg relief, then to pay his debt out of
the farm, having had nothing near sufficient (out of his own labor) to
uphold himself. As for such, let them cry out of unfaithfulness till they be
weary, who will pity them? Let the dead bury the dead, as our Savior says,
they are served as they have deserved, and let them reap as they have sown.
Further I answer, let us lament and pray against such unfaithfulness, for that
it is so common. At least let us pray, that we may be free from having to do
with such: for unfaithful men commonly are also unreasonable: at least that we
be not beguiled by them, ere we be aware, as Abner and Amasa were by Ioab:
which (except the Lord give a man wisdom to 2. Sam. 3 27. and 20. 10.
discern) cannot always be avoided. Besides where least trust has been
found by experience, let men be wise to repose least trust in them. For who
will put precious liquors in a broken vessel, having proved it to be vn^t for
use? or through folly venture to dash our foot against the stone, which we
remember has hurt us? Therefore I say, let men trust no such, of whose fidelity
and truth they have no proof, but rather the contrary, or no further at least,
then they may without any great detriment to themselves: and where they must
needs trust some such, let them bind them the more strongly. And so let those
that undertake suretiship, beware that they lose not their liberty and bring
themselves into bondage, and their estate and posterity to wilful penury.
Most of all, let Christians beware of them, that under a color of love, seek
to undermine them, to betray them, to get somewhat from them, which might tend
to the danger of their brethren, or to the wounding of their own conscience;
which I speak because many silly Christians think themselves happy if they
can get countenance or benefit by such as are their superiors, not knowing that
the benefits of the ungodly are forked, and bring more back then they bestow.
Boner did more mischief by his flattering poor men, till they abiured the
truth, then by all his cruelty: for which cause, Solomon admonishes well of
such, saying: Be not desirous of Prou. 23. 3.
their dainty meats, for it is deceiuable meat. But where without inquiry
and observing in the best manner we can by our selves and others, we rashly
believe every one who can speak us fair, (as indeed, Fair words make fools
feign, according to the proverb) I say, they who are so light of credit, I send
them no further then to this present example: let them look what became of all
the smooth words and fair shows that this Abimelech made to these men of
Shechem his kinsman and mothers brethren, in whom they reposed such confidence:
for as they had no greater enemy then him, even so neither let these look to
find any better measure.

Now though this may be laid forth in all kinds of fellowship among men, yet
it is most commonly seen in their earthly dealings, wherein scarcely any
promise is kept, and most lively it is to be seen in marriages. What Note.
solemn, kind, and joyful beginnings have many of them had? so as it might
worthily have provoked the beholders thereof to praise God, and rejoice for
such a goodly ordinance of his, so like to bring forth such answerable fruit
to those beginnings. And betwixt the couples themselves, so marrying and
coming together, what liking betwixt them, and delightings one in another, as
if they could never be enough, neither might one be well out of another sight;
but in continuance, longer or shorter, how have all these been turned into the
contrary?

What dislike and wearines has there been one of another? what alienating of
affection, crossing one the other, chiding, railing and reuiling, separating
from bed and board, (while yet they must needs live together) and afterward an
utter casting off the one the other? I speak not this of the heaviness which
the Lords chastisements meeting and taking hold of them, do raise in them; to
the which, all, even the best are subject, wherein they both should and have
promised to be companions, and one to help the other to bear the burden:
which kind of behavior would preserve their love, as it does betwixt some
others: I speak not (I say) of these corrections of the Lord, but of the
mischief that their evil and corrupt hearts, false, raging, proud, wilful
and inconstant, have wrought betwixt them, they being disguised, and nothing
like the persons they seemed to be at their first meeting. Oh therefore if
toward men we bewray this disease, then how much more is it to be feared in
professing our repentance to God, it being secret and a thing hid from men? and
in coming to the word and sacraments, what need have we of this uprightness?

In these two verses it is showed, by what means he slew them: and that was,
by cutting down boughs from trees, and bidding his men do as he Verse. 48. 49.
did, and putting them to the hold, and setting them on fire, till all the men
of Shechem that were therein, died. And there we may see, what force is in
example, especially if it be bad. Touching which, though I have spoken at large
before, especially in chap. 1. the end where the sin of the most Tribes in
neglecting the Lords charge is recorded: which I desire the Reader to turn
unto, yet unto so apt an occasion as this is, somewhat I will say here of it
also. Gedeons men followed him in carrying their pitchers and lamps after him
in great danger to fear the Midianites: but that was as commendable as this
was wicked and cruel, and most commonly followed: yet it is not to be denied,
but if there were some to give good example, there would be some followers of
them also: as in meekness, humbleness, innocence, faithfulness, mercy,
piety, patience and the like. And namely, if rich men would for their parts
begin to the rest, and go before others in deeds of charity, and sell for
lower prices to the poor, (when things are dear) then the common prices be,
and would be examples in mercy, in harmelesnesse, in gentleness, and such like.

It is hard to say, what good might be done thus? and by having religion and
holy instruction in high account, and loving heartily, and well esteeming of
Gods people. But to this it is come, that men, and the wealthier sort
especially, whereas they might bring on many to Christian practice by well
doing; they have (alas) cold love to good causes, but are slow and backward,
and therefore deadness and unprofitableness is to be seen thick and
threefold in other that should learn of the^, the devil laboring, when he
cannot make all sorts alike in wickedness, to leave as few to give countenance
Note.
to good things, as may be. And men be so unapt to learn to perform duties
aright, that except they see good examples before them, they cannot tell how to
set upon, or go about them. But as for evil courses, they need none to go
before them therein, they can find the way thereto without guides, though they
are much more fleshed and drawn on when they have other to break the ice to
them. But where the best examples are given, let this be our rule, that we
follow them no otherwise then as they follow Christ: and they that do so, let
them persuade us to al zeal and forwardness 2. Cor. 11. 1.
in duties of the first Table, (as to the reverent receiving of the word
preached, and the right manner of preparing our selves to the Lords Supper, and
such like exercise) so in no wise follow we the common sort in their behavior
and practice about duties to men in the second Table.

But let us go forward: The vnweariednes also of this cursed Abimelech in his
business is to be marked, how from one thing to another he toyleth himself:
yea and that not without peril of his life. A base work, one would think to
go up to the mountain, cut down boughs from the trees, and bring them on
his neck, and set them to the hold to burn it. But good enough for him, and
thus will men toil and endanger themselves for their pleasure and profit in
most base manner, though it come to nothing, but that they soon lose all, as
he did. So do all sorts of men for a poor living, which yet they often fail
of notwithstanding. Whereas in the mean while, godliness, which is the great
riches, lies dead by them, and 1. Tim. 6.
by no persuasions can they be brought to seek after that with the least
delighting therein, whilst yet God allows them time and travel enough for
things meet and necessary. For example, how duly come they to Sermons and to
the Lords Supper? though they might reap no small benefit thereby: and so do
they accordingly sit weary and sleepie at the preaching of the word, when they
be there. And yet the most part of men (these two actions with prayer being
excepted) show not so much resemblance of religion in their whole life beside.
But oh, that even Gods faithful servants did not grow (many of them) to the
like point, showing much unto wardnesse at the Word and Sacrament, when yet
they have approached to both, with great reverence and cheerfulness in former
times. If men be asked, how they can endure such toil and pains as they take
for the world, while they be so cold in duties to heaven ward, their answer
is: Man is borne to labor; and the world is hard. If we labor not, we shall
neither have food nor raiment. This makes them (as the Psalmist says) to rise
early, sit up late, fare full hardly, and all for a poor living. Ah poor
souls, and what when they have got it, (not to speak of this, how many ways
they offend God in getting it, and yet they are often times disappointed of that
which they seek: either by their leaud spending it, or Gods curse upon it:)
but I say, What when they have it? Do ye not see, that at the solemn day of
death, when they count all their great gains, and fruit of their labor, that
their soul is yet unprovided for? Was all their life little enough to feed and
clothe their body, and think they (upon so short a warning) to provide for
their soul? Is not a soul of much more value then a body is; nay then a
world? And yet in getting salvation for the soul which the body shall fare
the better for also; yea, even here it shall be the better able to do earthly
labor, with cheerfulness, and without vexation; who will put his finger in
the cold water for it? Who thinks not every little time bestowed that way,
toylesome and tedious? More particularly, to give all diligence to obtain
faith and repentance, as we are commanded, how unwelcome is the charge thereof
unto us, which yet is easilier obtained, and with more assured success, if we
so seek it as if we would find, and is a more durable possession, and of more
necessary and daily use, and far more precious gain, and that which exceeds
the riches of Princes without it. Upon the deathbed all this is confessed, and
yet not once in a whole quarter thought of, while men have life and strength,
because they want heart and will thereto.

And generally let all learn this by the men of Shechem, how they join Doct.
from verse 1. to this 50
themselves to the acquaintance of wicked men for hope of gain, pleasure or
preferment: for God will meet with, and recompense such, as they deserve, at
one time or other. As here may be seen, where Abimelech for his great
promises, was repaired and cleaued unto: but what got they in the end who did
so? Nay, while they sought much, what did they not lose of that which they had,
even to their very lives themselves?

So they that intend that, and seek commodity at the hands of such, do as I
said in the last point save one, even bring themselves into bondage to them, if
they have any conscience to accuse them. For beside this, that they are taken
up with such thoughts, to wit, what gain they shall get by them, after which
manner the devil occupies them, to draw their minds from being better
employed: beside this, I say, it must needs go ill with them, if they profess
the Gospel, and seek to keep a good conscience, when they shall consider,
that by such as Papists, Libertines, profane and bad livers, they be held in
hope, and flattered, where the more they get, the more they lose, and they are
then in best case, when they have least to do with them. But alas, the most
suspect not the servitude that such labor to bring them Prou. 22. 7.
into, (for) the borrower is a servant to the lender, and much more the
receiver to the giver: while they hunt for the precious soul of him whose
benefactors they would seem to be, aiming at this mark, (especially some of
them) even to make them the children of hell as fully as themselves be. And yet
(which is far worse) they being so near lincked in fellowship with them,
they are so bewitched by their enchaunting and intising words, that they cannot
tell how to bring themselves back again out of the Maze wherein they are. I
grant such make shift to digest those things till the day of their visitation
come, but then they be at their wits end.

Verse 50. Then Abimelech went to Theber, and besieged Tebez and took it.

51. But there was a strong Tower within the City, and thither fled all the
men and women, and all the chief of the City, and shut it to them and went up
to the top of the Tower.

52. And Abimelech came up unto the Tower, and fought against it, and went hard
unto the door of the Tower to set it on fire.

53. But a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech his head,
and brake his brain pan.

54. Then Abimelech called hastily his Page that bare his harness, and said
unto him, draw thy sword and slay me, that men say not of me a woman slew him,
and his Page thrust him through, and he died.

55. And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed
every man unto his own place.

56. Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech which he did unto his
father in slaying his seventy brethren.

57. Also all the wickedness of the men of Shechem did God bring upon their
heads, so upon them came the curse of Iotham, the son of Ierubbaal.

THus we have heard how God punished the men of Shechem for their sin against
Gedeons sons: Now how Abimelech was also plagued for the same: that the
prophecy of Iotham might be verified upon them both; is laid forth in these
words, and follows unto the end.

To the former two mischiefs that Abimelech wrought against the men The sense
of verse 50. 51.
of Shechem, in that he destroyed their City, and the people that were in it,
and their strong place and hold that the rest resorted to for safety, and
burnt it: to these I say, the holy story adds how he went about another. As
thereby showing, that he was not yet satisfied with the blood of the former:
and therefore that he went further, to wit, to a City near adjoining, called
Thebez: which also as it is probable, though uncertain, either joined with the
Shechemites, or at least refused to be subject to Abimelech, and going against
that, took it also. Thus we see how this cruel base-borne Tyrant proceeded in
his bloody attempts, and thereby also is showed what extremity these people of
Thebez, were brought unto. For they were all driven to shift for themselves in
a Tower that they had in their city. Wherein Verse 50. 51. Doct.
though they might shelter themselves for a day, yet they could not long live,
but must needs be famished at least, by any thing that they could see. These
and such like dangers men lie open to in this changeable world, whereof they
see no likelihood a little before. Which may teach us the uncertainty of al
things here below, in which yet men repose their confidence, and that no man
can upon good ground say, that to morrow shall be like to day. As by that
speech of the Lord, in the 12. of Luke, to him that bad his Luke 12. 20.
soul take the ease, eat, drink and be merry, seeing he had laid up much
good in store, I say, by that speech may be seen, when the Lord said unto
him. Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee, then whose
shall those things be, which thou have provided? even the day before he died.
And lest it should be thought to be his case alone, this he added: So shall
it be with him that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward
God. Therefore how many may we see and hear of, who are fearfully taken away
from all? and many other are wasted, and have their estate changed, as if they
had never inioyed it? And such as regard not these things, are like to have
much to do, when they shall see their own prosperity so to fade in like
manner: Oh it shall be utterly unwelcome. And who can say any less, then that
in smaller changes by loss, sickness, poverty, diseases; it is hard stooping
to them when they come, yea although they be thought of before, and in some
sort provided for? All this is said to teach the wise to live here as
strangers, and to make heaven their home, though they walk upon the earth; and
to warn the foolish to seek wisdom, that while they cling fast to earthly
stays and delights, they be not with the fool before spoken of, cast out
hence from all, and then utterly to seek of the true happiness also.

But now it follows, that after all this done to them of Thebez, the The
opening of the 52. verse to 56.
Lord brought on the time of his confusion I mean Abimelechs also, as well as
of the men of Shechem. And for the effecting of Gods judgment upon him, it is
said, that when he had sped so well, as we have heard, he attempted the Tower
that was in Thebez, to take that also, and being drunk with his former
success, and therefore looking for the like there, he received his deadly
wound as his due reward, and that by a woman, to his great disgrace; who cast
down a piece of a millstone from the top of the Tower, he going close to the
door of it, to set it on fire, and broke his brain pan: whereupon he being
not struck quite dead, and yet past possibility of recovery, called presently
for his page to thrust him through, to prevent the shame (as he thought it) that
it might else have been said, to wit, that a woman had slain him, and so he
came to his end also.

By this last attempt of his, he having sped so well in the former, we may
Doct. 3. verse 51. 52.
see, how the wicked are fleshed by the success that they have in their bad
courses, and that they be so blinded therewith, that they make no stay, till
they be cut off in the midst of them. For they make account, that they shall
do as they have done: and dream of no resisting of them. They say to
themselves like them in the Psalm: Tush, the Lord will do neither good nor
evil. Is it not time then that God should make them feel that power of his in
displeasure, which they will not acknowledge by teaching? and by this their
going forward, til God stay their course, we see they cannot break off, and
this makes their sin the greater. The like we shall observe (God willing) in
the Beniamites, chap. 20. of this book. So Herod when he had slain James
with the sword, and saw that it pleased the Jews, he went about to take Peter
also, till in his attempt the Lord cut him off. And what marvel Acts 12. 2.
though God usually deal thus? the wicked will not know him, but they do
measure their future success by the former, which he will make them see to be
a wrong ground.

For they thereby being imboldned, go further from God, and by their success,
through the corruption that is in them, they are made more unfit to return to
him again. But all must know, that the word of God followed and obeyed
carefully of us, brings the good success indeed, in which we may rest, yea
and in that only. For what blessing soever it pleases the Note.
Lord to send us in outward things (as he promises many) saying to those that
do so, that other things shall be cast upon them; we have also inward Matthew 6.
33.
comfort thereby, which neither can be bought with money, neither can be taken
from us: which makes us glad to use and embrace all good means for the
strengthening and stablishing of us: which the other being drunken with earthly
peace, make no account of. And both these being considered, the godly have
small cause to repine at the success and joyful proceedings of the ungodly:
the Lord gives them their scope, that he might bring the more sudden desolation
upon them, while they look to morrow should be like to day, and much better.
Neither should it grieve the godly, that themselves are often crossed, and
denied the success they dreamt of, and desired: seeing either their
enterprises were evil, and therein to be crossed is a blessing: or lawful,
but unlawfully followed, and therefore Gods promises were Note.
stretched further by them, then indeed they reached: or although their doings
were religious, yet it may be, they were undertaken with too much confidence in
the goodness thereof, and in the mean season themselves who are the doers,
not looked into, nor well purged from other sins which may easily set behind
the success of their best actions. But doubtless, where a Christian offends
none of these ways, he shall never want success: and the fruit thereof shall
be far other, when it is least, then the wicked man's who ventureth only the
more boldly upon the next onset, because of his former good speed, (as
Abimelech here:) but he shall with Paul, believe that God, who has well begun
in him, will give good success, both in mercies and deliverances. But I have
handled this point at large in this history before.

In this Scripture is set down, that this woeful instrument had his deadly
wound; and by what means: even in a base manner, by a woman breaking Verse. 53.
his skull, by throwing down upon him a piece of a mil-stone: where we may
further note by Gods cutting off this cursed instrument Abimelech, in the
midst of his iolitie, and before he had done any more mischief, that the
prosperity of the wicked is both short and uncertain, when and how it shall
come to an evil end. Which although I noted in general before out of the short
time of his reign: yet a little I will add thereto by this present occasion
here offered. Now this their speedy taking down is wrought by the Lord, not
only by the many ways that he has to meet with, and to punish them, but also
because they are ever putting the Lord, as it were, in fresh remembrance Note.
by their renewed and continued prouokings of him, what he owes them. And in
the mean while, he is not idle, when he is still and patient toward them, for
he knows and appoints the time, and the means to subvert them. So the
Psalmist says: Though the wicked flourish Psalm. 37. 36.
like a green Bay tree, yet a little while, and his place shall have no
resemblance of such a one to have been there, and he shall be no more found.

Behold this verified in Zimry with his Cosby, in Chorah, the Rich man
mentioned in the Scriptures, and in many other in our own experience, who Luke
12. 20. and 16. 27.
while they prosper, are decaying: but they that abide, and remain in the
power of faith, hope and patience, as of Gods servants is required, and are
thoroughly set a work in them, they shall see good days, and be well liking;
and yet even they also, if they withdraw themselves from their confidence, and
will give themselves to live by eyesight, as other do, they shall see the
Lord can soon change his course, and their sorrows will be exceedingly
multiplied like other men's. David's feet had well nigh slipped, when he beheld
the present flourishes of the ungodly, til God drew him out of his own fancy
into the Lords Sanctuary, and taught him this wisdom, to compare Psalm 73.
17.
them with himself, as well in one part of their estate as another, and the
bitterness of their end and reward, with the plausiblenesse of their iollity,
when they are in their flower, and their slipperinesse, when they are at the
best. Therefore as in a picture such as will thoroughly view it, take not some A
similitude.
note of the knee, or foot, or any one part of it, but the whole; for
otherwise they should see nothing to any purpose: so view we the whole course
of Note.
Gods dealing with the wicked, as well the ending, as the beginning, and his
proceeding with them, and thereby our hastiness in desiring their dainties,
will be abated full soon, and our opinion changed; as David's also was in
judging the bad to be happy, after that he had better considered their end.
Lay we also sure hold on this, that as the time and term of the wicked is
stinted and appointed: so say we of the Lords dealing with our selves, Yet a
little while, and he that comes, will come and not tarry, to bring our full
redemption. Heb. 10. 37.


Furthermore, we see here, in that Abimelech had his deaths wound, and Doct. 2.
after was slain; that he had not his will on the people of Thebez, as he had
on the other: but as he suffered him to destroy the men of Shechem, which fled
to the Hold of their God Baal-Berith, so yet he saved the men of Thebez and
their wives, who betook themselves to the Tower that was therein for shelter.
Wherein we may note, that God does often times plague them whose iniquity is
manifest, as the sin of these men of Shechem was, when other who have not
sinned in the like manner, though they be not (yet) religious, are spared and
borne with, as these men of Thebez were. The reason is: the sin of the one
sort is manifest and grievous, and cannot be hid and cries for vengeance: the
other, either through ignorance, or for that they have not so wittingly or
grossly offended, are borne with, that they may come to repentance. And yet
this is no excuse to them, who live in the light of the Gospel, and have
knowledge, if they live and abide unrepentant, though they be not gross
offenders. Neither on the other side have they any cause to flatter themselves,
whose sins are notorious, though they be not by and by cut off. The use of
this doctrine is in this respect to encourage them, who do but walk in the
way of the ungodly, but stand not stiffely to maintain their evil doings,
that seeing God gives them time to repent, and bears with them, they should
not harden their hearts, but take all occasions to turn unto him. And for such
as are not fit to hear this doctrine, but go forward in evil, they may ever
fear, that Gods vengeance is coming. Now he being brought to be past all
hope of life by the blow the woman gave him, we see, that he who sought such
glory as to be made King, yea and obtained it also, though most unjustly; even
he did yet come Doct. verse. 54.
to such shame and reproach, (as he counted it) as to be slain by a woman, and
not so much as by the meanest man of war. Neither did it serve Abimelechs
turn any whit at all, that the last stroke was given him by a Page, having had
his deadly wound by the woman before: only it bewraied his pride, which
increased the shamefulnesse of his foil. And yet for him to be slain by a
Page, was it such an honor to a great King so valiant and victorious, as
Abimelech now thought himself, being in the top of his hopes, and having
brought under his enemies? Therefore where God will set his brand of shame upon
a man, it is but folly for him to strive against him, or to elude him. It was
as confidently given out that Abimelech was slain by the hand of a woman, as
that Sisera was dispatched by Iael: as for the Page, he slew (as we may say) a
dead man in a mockery. If this verify not the saying, [God resists the
proud,] what does? When men that have carried themselves 1. Pet. 5. 5.
aloft, and borne their heads on high, as the tall Cedars, being terrors to
their inferiors, especially of the more religious sort, are thus brought to
shame, as he was, is it not notable to see them as much abased in their death
below the meanest, as they advanced themselves above the greatest before? It is
reported Note.
of a Pope that he entered in like a Fox, ruled like a Lion, and died like a
Dog: if he had also been buried as that proud Iehoijkon or Iezabel like an
Ier. 22. 19. 2. King. 9. 37.
Ass, what could have been added to his shame? and yet a living Lion, to be
made a dead dog is baseness enough. Therefore we may clearly see by this
that the seeking of glory, as Solomon says, is no glory, but the glory of
Prou. 25. 27.
such is their shame. For although for a time it may hold and last, yet in a
short time it shall vanish and end with reproach, whatsoever else go with it.
And so it is generally in all pride and vaineglory, as I noted out of Gaals
example before, it shall end with shame; and contrarily, the humble and lowly
in mind shall be exalted. For there can not one tittle of Gods word fall to 1.
Pet. 5.
the ground, but it must be verified, to the comfort of the one, and the just
rewarding of the other.

In this verse let us further see (for the Lord would not give him the honor
Doct. 2. in verse. 54.
to be slain in war) what he did, when he had his deaths wound: does he cry
for mercy? was that (as it ought to have been) thought upon? And yet the most
past grace will lightly desire, that he may have three words before he die, for
then (though it be to small purpose) he thinks to ask mercy: but the glory
that this monster had hunted after in his lifetime, that was all that he
regarded, even now at his woeful end, as his words testify, to wit, That it
might not be said, that a woman slew him, declaring thereby, that he more
feared infamy then damnation. The multitude of desperate wretches that die in
all ages with as little hope of salvation, as he did, makes it less to be
considered and bewailed: but what is more fearful then to think, a man
should go to hell so apparently, and (as it were) visibly?

Where we are to observe, that such as men's thoughts and affections are in
their life time, such they be commonly at their death. They loved not
blessing, says the Prophet, and therefore it is far from them in their need:
Psalm. 109. 17. Note.

Psalm. 109. 17.


so it is said elsewhere, they sought not after God, neither desired
acquaintance with his ways, while they lived, and therefore God ordinarily
suffers them not to begin to do it at their end. They remembered not their
maker Prou. 1. 24.
in the days of their youth, neither shall they have grace to do it at their
death: but as they are merciless, so God justly recompenceth them with Eccles.
11. 1.
judgment without mercy, in their latter years. And the like we read of
Saul. But yet for all this is one of a thousand (think we) of such as he was
persuaded to repentance in the time of his iolitie? nay does not one follow
another course to condemnation daily, and from age to age?

And such as have their liberty to ask three words before they die, how use
they it? what come they to? but even to worse then nothing? Even as Abimelechs
few words did, [Let it not be said, that a woman slew me.] And so their three
words are used, as Saul used his at his death: [Draw out thy sword, 1. Sam. 31.
4.
and thrust me through.] And as that wicked man mentioned in the book of
Monuments, who when he was haled violently on a bridge by his Horse into the
river, being put in mind of his three words, he said thus: Horse and man to
the devil. A notorious adulterer there was a few years agone, who also had
poisoned many youths by his unclean conversation, and lewd example, and
tongue: he lived till he was threescore year old, to resemble him to the
sinner whom Solomon speaks of, Eccles. 7. never could he be brought to
savor or taste either preaching or praying, which yet he saw many zealously
did round about him: he might have spend fifty pound land by the year by his
marriage; but being visited by God, in a strange manner, and losing his
maintenance by the death of his wife, his body ^ore plagued with pain, and
diseases, when he lay like a lazer in a barn, (for thither he was thrust,
through poverty, and there he died) now to come to the point, for the which I
alleged this example, he being moved by such as came to him, when they saw in
what misery he lay, to call upon God; he answered with fearful oaths: Is
this a time to pray? The which seeing he was never acquainted with in all his
life, (we see) he was far off from it, shunned and lothed it at his death,
by Gods righteous judgment.

And as we have heard that it is commonly so with the vilest persons at their
death, as it has been in their life; so it were good wisdom for us to seek
the Lord while he may be found, in the days of our youth, lest if Eccles. 12.
1.
we should not go about it till death, it should not be a sound turning to
God, but in mood and passion, by violence and in fear only gone about: and
who knows not that late repentance is dangerous? And so let them rejoice and
bless God, who have made the Lord chief with them in their young years, and
have counted his service perfect freedom, such shall not need to fear that
God will frown upon them, and forsake them in their age, or at their death,
but (as many have done) shall rejoice most for this, that they made the Gospel
their solace in their life time, and Gods favor their portion and joy, and
would not for all the riches of the ungodly, have done otherwise: for so they
should have been then utterly to seek how to be saved. Oh one sweet fruit of
a godly life (beside many other enjoyed before) is a most Christian and
comfortable death: so says the Psalmist; Mark the end of the righteous, and
ye shall see that the end of such a man Psalm. 37. 37.
is peace. As for Abimelechs Page, he was as he had been trained by him, one
fit to serve him only in evil. Like master, like man; such an one, as has
many followers, of which sort of hangbies few under such masters, as themselves
be, few of them are (I say) found to come to good. But both of them, desperate,
rash, murtherous, and fraught with such sins as commonly accompany these.
Yea, and yet such hold up their heads in the world, for whom, who sees not but
that the prison is fitter, where they may be kept from doing mischief, rather
then to commit many lewd parts at liberty abroad. But seeing such are past
admonition taking, let the^ that are teachable, learn to take such servants to
be near at hand to them, who may in danger give advice to them, if need be, as
Naamans servants did, to the preserving of 2. King 5. 13.
his health, rather then to be as too many are, that is to say, furtherers of
their utter undoing or death. And such as deserve well (as Ioshuas, and the
servants of Cornelius were) let them (I say) be well encouraged and rewarded,
which are to be rejoiced in, of their masters, when the other being entertained
but to their own, and their masters undoing, or great detriment, shall load
both themselves and them with their bellies full of shame and sorrow. Of this
argument I spare to speak more here, being as much (and a great deal more)
as is like to be regarded, of such as I speak of.

Thus we have seen the woeful end of this cursed Abimelech, and of the wicked
men of Shechem, who had been the furtherers of him to the mischief Verse 55.
that he wrought. And after these troublers of the land were taken away, there
was peace, and every man left off from the work that Abimelech had drawn him
to, and went home to his own place: where first it may be seen, what stir,
disquiet, and trouble one vile person may make in the Church or Commonwealth,
the Lord so punishing the peoples sin, as partly I noted before in this
chapter. Absolon was but one man, but how did he disquiet his father and the
whole land? Likewise Sheba the son of Bicry that raised a new commotion
against David: and so the Prophet Elias told Ahab that he troubled all Israel.
And so I may say of Achan, and of Kora, and of many other: every of these was
but one in his attempts: but each of these, what plagues and mischief wrought
they by their several sins, though most of the^ private persons, to the
whole state of the Church and Commonwealth of Israel? If we compare the
sins of the whole body with the sins of a few, we shall find that the
sorrow which few brought upon the whole company, came little short of the
plagues which God inflicted upon the whole, when all provoked him. Although
alas, what speak I of particular actions? Adam his sin first brought a
fearful confusion into the whole creation? What wonder then if this contagion
and pestilence has ever since, and still does cause the like disorder in the
places where it rangeth? whose deformity (yet) and the mischief that it
works, though we see as it were with our eyes, who (almost) is not bewitched
with the painted beauty thereof?

But to return: when Achan, Sheba, Absolon were taken away, behold all was
whist again, and a great calm there was after so horrible tempests. The whole
Church is as a ship; in which if there be one Jonah, what tumult makes he? but
cast him out, and the danger is over. And as this is true of great sinners and
public offenders: so it is true of more inferior and private persons: as of
Magistrates in their precincts, Headborowes in towns, Masters and parents in
families seeing (but for the badnes of such) the rest should be in peace.

And further, by the rooting out of Abimelech, let us confess it to be a
Doct. 2.
great benefit, when such authors of mischief, and workers of iniquity be
taken away: and therefore give all our endeavor for the maintenance of peace,
and to make holy and right use of it, while we enjoy it. For as we may see by
these, that sought peace after the death of Abimelech, even so the most that
are used to trouble other, in time wax weary of it.

In these two verses is the shutting up the whole chapter: Iothams prophecy
Verse. 56. 57.
is verified, and Gods judgment thereby declared, how he rewards iniquity.
Of which this I say briefly, seeing in some sort it has been touched already,
that they who take ill matters and bad in hand, shall have small Doct.
cause to rejoice thereof in the end. For their sin will find them out, when
they think least of it. And it is most like also, that look what way they
have sinned, even the same way their sin may be punished, as here it was,
Stone for stone. Abimelech killed his brethren upon a stone: and he is killed
by a weak woman most unlikely with a stone. The like we have heard of
Adonibezek, and of Oreb and Zeeb, who took their death where they wrought
mischief.

Oh how does God recompense into their bosom in full measure heaped Matthew. 7.
2.
up and running over, unto such? The which they will not foresee and so
prevent, until they smart, and be past recovery. If this cannot move any of
the like sort, to take warning by such watch-words, in time to hate their bad
course, and that with detestation at least, let those that have shunned and
declined from such evil ways, rejoice with thanksgiving, and that unfeigned,
for that they have been preserved from them, and that they have chosen the good
way to walk in it, howsoever they have had many prouocations unto the contrary.

And last of al, we may see here that as God revenged the innocent blood 2
of Gedeons sons, so God will take part with such innocents. Hurt them not
therefore, for the time will come when thou shall pay dear for thy so doing:
of which point look more in the former part of the history.

The end of the ninth Chapter.
THE SIXTY ONE SERMON ON THE TENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 1. After Abimelech, there arose to deliver Israel, Tola the son of
Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar, and he dwelt in Shamir in mount
Ephraim. 2. And he judged Israel three and twenty years, and died, and was
buried in Shamir. 3. And after him arose Iair a Gileadite, and judged Israel
twenty and two years. 4. And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass
colts, and they had thirty cities, which are called Hauoth-Iair unto this day,
which are in the land of Gilead. 5. And Iair died, and was buried in Kamon.
THE sum of this Chapter is briefly this; that the children The sum of the
Chapter.
of Israel having enjoyed peace and liberty for a time under Tola and Iair;
fell again afterward to Idolatry. Whereupon the Lord also did again deliver
them into the hands of their enemies: wherefore they calling upon God, were at
the first sharply reproved: but afterward truly repenting, they obtained favor
with God, and were released of their sins, as before time. By occasion
whereof, entrance is made into the story of their deliverance in the chapter
following. The parts of it are three: The first contains the time of their
The parts 3.
peace, to verse the sixth: The second, a new defection and revolt of the
people from God, to verse the 17. The third mentions the preparation that the
Ammorites made against the children of Israel, and the peoples and Princes
meeting and coming together to consult and agree how to go against them; and
this is to the end of the Chapter.

The first part of the Chapter.
GOd raised up these two Judges, to wit, Tola and Iair, after the former, to
keep the people in the true worship of God, and in outward peace. Here to
speak somewhat in this first part, of both these two Judges of Israel jointly
together, and afterward, somewhat severally; this is to be noted of the former,
that after the overthrow of that cursed Abimelech, the people of Israel had a
long time of peace in both their days, that is, 45. years. Where note, that
though God justly punishes the sins of me^, as he did theirs here, Doct out of
verse ^. 23.
yet he does still remember his people, and regard them, sending them peace
again afterward, even as after a storm and tempest comes fair weather:
and he has said, that the rod of the wicked he will not suffer to lie always
on the lot of the righteous; God will not keep his anger for ever toward Psalm.
125. 3.
them. It is his great favor to his, that they who are exceeding bad, Exodus
34. 7.
live not very long, and that he vpholdeth his own people many ways. Indeed
when God is provoked, some must and shall suffer, as here by the plague many
thousands in city and country have been swept away of late, who if they have
been ready for their departure, and have repented, it is well; they have gone
under Gods hand in their sufferings the better. And so let such as are
preserved alive, when others are taken away, turn to the Lord with all
feruencie and speed, that so they may testify that they may make their profit
of Gods sparing their lives, and that they may so procure the continuance of
peace and the Gospel to their posterity. Let Gods people (I say) do this,
though other have no ears to hear good instruction: and be well assured, that
though carnal reason see no such thing, God will do much at the earnest suite
of his; yea though they be but few. As we see he would not have destroyed
Sodom, if there had been but ten righteous persons found there. But (alas)
through the abundance of iniquity the love of many decaieth, Matthew. 24 12.
and few are wise to use their outward peace, or health, or other benefits of
God to their good. And as for the most, (which is not to be wondered at) they
utterly reject the things which concern their peace for ever. As in the days
of Noe, the people (living in darkness) ate and drunk, married and gave in
marriage, even as they do in these latter days of the son of man, before he
come in his glory; of whom some shall in their adversity, when he shall awake
them, desire but to see one good day, and it shall be denied them. They neither
labor to keep outward peace each with other (which were no hard matter, while
the common enemy is held under, and that there be peace in the land) nor yet
betwixt God and themselves, but nourish vile lusts (the fruit of Sodom) in
themselves, through fulness of bread and abundance of wealth, the daughters of
peace. But the worst is, that Note.
these fiery darts of men's lusts are thrown at God himself (who has granted
us these days of peace to a far other end, as Act. 9.) and at his servants
Act. 9. 31.
who are the best pledges of our peace. Is this the recompense (says Moses in
Deuteronomy. 32) which ye make the Lord, for your outward peace and spiritual Deuteronomy.
32. 6.
liberty? And justly may it be demanded of us: Is this the thank God has at
your hands for your peace and freedom from Egypt and Canaan? Consider
therefore that in our thus warring against, we fight against our souls, as the
Apostle Peter says: and again, by this, that we serve not God purely 1. Pet.
2. 10.
in this our prosperity, the devil himself (a great word to speak) is
deceived in us, who took it for granted long ago, as he saw reason for it,
that when a man is hedged in with blessings, (and especially this strong hedge
of Job 1. 10.
a public peace) he would serve God without question. Indeed he requires a
further matter of us, even that we serve him in time of affliction also: but
is this likely, when we do it not in peace? But of this matter I spare to
add any more here, having uttered my mind of it before in the fifth chapter
and elsewhere.

These two, Tola, and Iair, are not said here to have risen up to judge Israel
Of the first three verses still.
as intruding themselves, but as following Gods appointment, who raised them up
as good governors to save and deliver his people out of their enemies hands,
so was not that usurper Abimelech, but a waster and a spoiler. So are they whom
God sends in mercy to rule, nurcing fathers, and such as teach, be full of
love and compassion to the people; for he graceth them whom he counts
faithful, and puts in his service even to that purpose. 1. Tim. 1. 12.


Somewhat I have said before touching Gods calling and the manner of it, yet by
this occasion I will add somewhat. God in a general providence Doct. 2.
of permission may be said to raise all that rise up in place of government and
authority. By premission, when he resists not them who raise up themselves
unlawfully, as Abimelech. In which respect the Lord tolerateth many (in his
secret will) to do many things against his revealed will; he permits, I
say, not causes them, for then one will should be contrary to another.
Secondly, he actually blesses many, and raises them outwardly himself,
(though their rising be to no purpose) as Jeroboam. Thirdly, he raises up and
blesses other; (their attempts being lawful, and not indirectly undertaken,
but according to his will) whereas he does only try the other, by raising
them, whether they will raise and advance him or no, and set him up as chief,
and procure the like from others: so, if they forget him, as Ieroboboam and
Saul, that then he may honor himself upon them, when he Exodus 14. 17.
could get no honor by them.

This the holy Ghost expresses lively in Pharaoh, Romans 9. But the last and
most special kind of raising is, when beside common gifts, the Lord raises a
man, as well up to the life of grace and holiness, as inhaunseth him in the
world, adorning him with more rare gifts, as meekness, wisdom, faith, holy
courage, zeal, and the fruits of true love to his Church and Gods glory. And
these only may be said most properly to have been raised by God, and neither
by men, nor themselves, and therefore to be Gods favorites indeed. There are
many that rise in the world, who grow further from goodness: I speak of such
as are apparently raised, and some of them from the dunghill to honor,
learning, wealth; but they were in more hope to Godward when they were lowest
in the world: since, they waxed proud, idle, scornful, their hearts rising
against God and his servants; and to evil ends abusing the steps and degrees
of honor and estate, by which God has raised them, thereby provoking the Lord
to pull them down to their former ebb, even the lowest staier of shame.
According to that of Samuel to Eli uttered from God; Those that despise me, I
will set naught 1. Sam. 2. 30.
by, but honor them that honor me. This rule will not be unmeet to try our
rising by, for even Heathens saw somewhat, when they could say; No good man
waxes suddenly rich. And as torrents, and standing waters bewray some sudden
and great tempests and rain more then usual: so men's sudden risings bewray
the immoderatnes of their affections, exceeding the measure of justice and
religion. And let this serve to quiet them whom God lifts not up to great
place, if he have raised them up with his Christ from death to the life of
grace, and quickened them by faith to the lively hope of glory.

But I proceed to note something of these two Judges severally out of the
verses following.

To begin with Iair, he was of the half Tribe of Manasseh a Giliadite, The
sum of the third, fourth and fifth vers^^
having many sons, seeing they had many wives in those days: his sons
rode, in token of their greatness; and every one of them was a Ruler over a
City, and therefore their father must needs be a man of great Nobility. Now
to give some light into this, it is said in the book of Numbers, that one Iair
took many Cities of the Canaanites, and they were called the Cities Numb. 32.
40. and Deuteronomy 3. 14.
of Iair: not that I say, that the man who is here mentioned of that name was
he, seeing there were 300. years betwixt them both, but being both of one
place, there is little doubt, but that the here mentioned, came of the family
of the other, and so those Cities (it is most like) fell and came unto him.

Now from hence we learn, that God choosing out of one Tribe, as well Doct 3.
out of the 3 first verses.
as another, as by those that have been mentioned before in this story, and
these here, may appear, to wit, Tola of Issachar, a poor Tribe, and Iair of
Manasseh very rich: by this, I say, we may see that he would give to none of
them any cause to complain, no not the meanest, (as they might otherwise (it
is like enough) have taken occasion to do) that he had not chosen out of one
Tribe as well as out of another, the deliverer and Captain over the people.
Teaching us by his example to be without partiality in our dealings, and
injurious to none; which is a singular virtue, and showed by Solomon, as a
companion of his wisdom, in deciding the cause betwixt the 1. King. 3. 27.
two harlots, he leaned to neither, but dealt indifferently with both.

And such indifferency we should show in our actions through our whole course,
that we might not be justly challenged for the contrary, but to practice
equality in comparisons and censures, and in one or other our dealings, we
showing good reason if we at any time do otherwise, not doing as some, whose
office being to profess the punishing of wicked persons, will yet for favor
on the one side, or spite and malice on the other, not only be partial, but
also extenuate the fault of the guilty party, and charge the innocent and
honest to be in greater offense, then the guilty, which is the perverting of
justice, and the direct way to nourish and multiply iniquity, and this Prou.
17. 14.
some will do the rather, if the innocent party be zealous of the Gospel.

When the Lord sent Manna from heaven to feed his people, he made a law against
men's greedy snatching it up one from another, providing that he that gathered
more then his fellow, should part with the ouer-plus, to make the portion of
the other equal, so that none could complain that he was neglected in that
heavenly dole. Men of mean estate murmur that this abundance of the earth is
so unequally divided by God, that some have al, some never a whit. But so to
do in that case is more equality, then if all had alike, for a difference
there must ever be in estates, some rich, some poor. But who sees not (even
in this) Gods indifferency? Know ye not James 2. 5.
brethren (says James) that God has called the poor of this world to be rich
in faith and good works? Meaning that not many rich are vouchsafed this honor:
and therefore in that the poor are betrusted with the Gospel, which is the
Treasure and Manna of heaven, and receive it willingly, Matthew. 11. Matthew. 11. 5.
whereas the rich have other matters to busy themselves about, are they
neglected through partiality think we? But if any of low degree, want his
part in the best things also, he may thank himself for his abasement: who
will pity him who shortens himself of his allowance? there would (doubtless)
be less complaining among the better sort of people; (as for the unruly and
idle, they seek their own sorrow) if men we so provided for, as God
allotteth to them: for neither should many men become poor through their
lewdness, and they that otherwise must of necessity be so, should both
comfort themselves in God, and be the better regarded by others through a
larger contribution of his bestowed upon them.

Therefore again I say, let this seemly virtue find favor with them, whom
the entertainment of it might much advantage. Such as have the rating of
inferiors for public duties, give great cause of complaining, by their
partiality, through friendship or dislike: yea and escape themselves
(proportion being observed) more easily then the mean sort of people. Which is
gross, that men will seek for the highest place of countenance and honor
above others, but in matter of burden and charge, put the basest underling
before themselves.

More particularly, in that the Lord chooses out of the poor and base Doct.
particularly out of verse 1.
Tribe of Ishaker, this Tola, to Judge Israel, it was to teach us the truth of
that proverb, that a man's gift makes him to sit among the mighty, and aduanceth
the base and the mean, who ought not to be despised for want of wealth, if God
has given them gifts. How little this truth has been regarded always,
Solomon declares, who says what he had observed, that a poor and wise man
delivered a city sore assaulted by the mighty, and that he did by Eccles. 9.
15.
his wisdom; but none remembered this poor man. And in another place he says,
There is an evil that I have seen under the Sun, that folly is set in great
excellency, and the rich in wisdom and virtue set in the low place, I Eccles.
10. 6. 7.
have seen servants on horses, and princes walking as servants on the ground.

This, seeing he calls an evil, he well instructs the children of
wisdom, to justify her wheresoever she be found, howsoever she be
iustled and opposed by the carnal. And as the Queen of the South said to
Solomon, Happy are thy servants that attend on thee, and who may 1. King. 10. 8.
hear thy wisdom: so because a greater then Solomon is here, we should
count it our felicity to hear him, and count their feet beautiful that bring
glad tidings. And to receive such, as men of God, and as his Prophets, Romans 10.
15.
what mean show soever they make in our eyes, and to commune with them when
they are dead, while we read their holy works, when we cannot converse with
their persons, being taken away from us out of this life. Thus David out of a
mean family, and Saul also (though destitute of grace) were excellently gifted
with courage for war, and government in peace, so that few of the noblest
(doubtless) might compare with them. So that the meanelier they were
descended, the more admirable they were in themselves, not being beholding to
any predecessors for the spirit and good parts that were in them: but laid the
foundation of Nobility to their posterity. Therefore so long as the base by
birth, maintain worthily the places of high office and honor whereunto their
excellent gifts have lawfully advanced them: not degenerating by pride,
cruelty, and covetousness, (the common companions of men bred meanly, when
they are got aloft) I say, when such are not regarded; it is a great contempt
not of them only, but of God in them, (for he that despises the poor,
despises his Maker, Prou. 17. 5.
and much more, he that reprocheth them in authority) to call them vpstarts,
or to defame them by their base blood, that so their more eminent virtues may
be blemished. A common disease among the factious, and flattering followers of
great and vicious persons, to stain the honor of such as are more truly noble
then they, in virtue and wisdom, by this; that they are but men of yesterday,
and cannot show the Arms, which their patrons can. But whether is it better
(as he in the history answered) to raise up a new, or to bury the old Gentry
and Nobility? Of this the less, because I have said somewhat in the two
points before not impertinent hereto.

Now as we have heard that God chose out of Ishaker a poor Tribe, Tola Verse
3. 4.
to Judge Israel; so also, we see here that he chooses the Noble to be
Governors, as he did this Iair here, who for his wealth, was able to give a
City to every of his thirty sons. To teach us that Nobility is no let to
the governing Doct. out of verse 3. and 4.
of the commonwealth, but the honorable and mighty having examples of their
ancestors to provoke them to virtue, and many other helps and complements to
the well discharging thereof, they may be seen in many respects to be the
fittest: this being added, if they be not lifted up with insolency and high
conceit of themselves, which they have no cause to do, if they consider that
they came of nothing, and are but worms meat, and also, if they would weigh
their mutable state, and how full of lamentables changes their lives be. And to
say the truth, it is an utter shame for us, that when God has done much for
us, we should be found unfaithful. Neither is high place any greater
impediment to private godliness, then public government. Although if every
man might tell his own tale, there is none so poor, nor any so rich, but will
allege somewhat, why they should not be tied to duty precise, but live as
they think good, and be released from this burden, as they count it: whereby,
what do they but lay stumbling blocks in their own way. Therefore we may
boldly give it forth, as a rule in Christian practice, it is a miserable and
unlawful estate of life, which cannot stand with the daily and careful
practice of Christianity. Somewhat (I deny not) must be yielded to the
occasions and inseperable business, which attend upon greatness: but yet so
far forth only, as men defalke and detract nothing from the substance of
that high and great due, which the greatest owe to a greater then themselves.
But yet if men dare go thus far, they shall find, that God will not give his
honor to another; but rather his jealousy will break out against them like
fire, that maintain their honor by treading his underfoot, Psalm 2. Psalm
2. 9. Verse. 2. 5.


This be said of those things which were several in these two Kings, and which
they did in their life; now of that which was common to them both, I mean
their death. For so it is said of both, that they died, and that was, when
their duty, each for his time, was discharged in procuring and maintaining
Gods true worship, and outward peace to their country a long season: the^ they
gave place, and were gathered to their fathers, and their bodies were laid in
the earth, in hope of the resurrection. To teach us, that all of us, Doct. out
of verse. 2. and 5. Luke 19.
are here to do our duties in our callings, to serve God therein: who has
given and committed to our trust talents, with a charge to occupy them till he
come, and allows none of us to bury them in the earth, but straightly forbids
it, to wit, to be idle, and to suffer our gifts to rust in us, and to this
end, we enjoy every man his proper gifts. The Lord has set us our habitations,
and stinted our time of dwelling in them, with commandment, that we should not
be idle nor unprofitable in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus, Act. 17. 26.
nor in our particular calling, but to attend thereunto, for profitable uses to
our selves and others: and has for that purpose, appointed that we should 2.
Pet. 1. 8.
have comfortable fruit thereof in all necessary things of this life, to
encourage us to our duties, that so we might be none of the refuse, and idle
hangbyes in the world: and in both our general and particular calling to serve
God for conscience sake and with comfort. To this end I say, God has set us
here, always to have our eye upon our departure, and with good father
Barzillai to provide for our grave. 2. Sam. 19. 37.


And when we have thus discharged our selves, and the Lord shall give 2
us warning by sickness, pain, disease of our end to be at hand, or call us
home with small warning, we should be ready for his coming, to yield Note.
our souls into his hands, and our bodies to the grave for a season, in hope
of receiving them again: which shall be no hard matter for us to do, who
have, as strangers here, prepared for it before, as we have learned to do.
Neither should we look or desire to have any more abode or continuance here,
but give over our selves in peace, and willingly commend our selves unto the
Lords safe keeping, as I have said. And therefore in the mean time we should
soberly use all the transitory helps of this life; as wealth, friends, wife,
and our life it self, so that they may not be clogs with their deceiuable
show, to hold us from far better things. And in the mean while take the Note.
best use of them to profitable ends, and do the good that we may do by the
help of them, seeing in the grave there is no such thing to be looked for.
And so the remembrance of the time well passed, shall be most comfortable:
Eccles. 9. 10.
but as for those that are calling in for their cheer and merry making in this
world, otherwise then they are sure they shall be able well to give their
reckoning for it hereafter, such can neither possibly dye well, nor willingly,
unless they be desperate. To the which purpose I have spoken elsewhere, as
the diligent reader shall find.

The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 6. And the children of Israel wrought wickedness again in the sight of
the Lord, and served Baalim and Ashtoroth, and the gods of Aram, and the gods
of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and the
gods of the Philistims, and forsook the Lord, and served not him. 7. Therefore
the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he sold them into the
hands of the Philistims, and into the hands of the children of Ammon: 8. Who
from that year vexed and oppressed the children of Israel eighteen years,
even all the children of Israel that were beyond Jorden in the land of the
Ammorites which is in Gilead. 9. Moreover, the children of Ammon went over
Jorden to fight against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of
Ephraim: so that Israel was sore tormented. 10. Then the children of Israel
cried unto the Lord, saying, We have sinned against thee, even because we
have forsaken our own God, and have served Baalim.
NOw follows a new revolt of the people of Israel, and this is handled The
sense of these verses.
to the 17. verse, wherein the things to be considered are these: to wit, a
double repairing and returning by them to God, when he afflicted them by their
enemies for their sin in forsaking him. In their first seeking to him, they had
the repulse, for their repentance was not sound. In the second, God delivered
them, they seeking to him in repentance. In the former note these four things:
First their sin, which was a joining to the nations among whom they dwelt,
and this in the sixth verse. The second is Gods punishing them even by those,
whom they joined with in Idolatry: which is snewed in the next three verses.
The third point is their crying to God: and lastly, the fruit thereof, in the
tenth verse, and so forward. The fruit was diverse: for first God denied to
deliver them, to the fifteenth verse. But at the second crying of the people to
God, he delivered them: which is set down in the next two verses unto the
seventeenth. Now let these things be looked into more particularly. To return
therefore to the sixth verse, The opening of verse 6. more particularly.
and to begin with the peoples sin, it is said, after the death of these two
Judges, in whose days they had enjoyed peace five and forty years, that the
people fell again to provoke God, as we have heard their fathers did. And
how? by committing Idolatry after the manner of the seven nations, that are
here mentioned. For both that was liking to the flesh, and besides, they
thought those nations that did so, lived in more abundance, and in more
pleasure, then themselves did; for many delights to tickle the flesh forward
they adjoined to their false worship, to draw away their hearts from serving
the true God aright, whom, it is said here, that they forsook. Thus much for
the sum of this verse, and therein of their sin. And here are diverse things
to be considered.

First it teaches, that we should not greatly marvel, that so many in this
Doct verse. 6.
our age give themselves to Popish religion, seeing Idolatry has in most ages
been so common: by reason that it has so many player-like toys and bables of
sights to bleare the eye, and sonets to deceive the ear, that it makes them
think they be in a piece of paradise, while they embrace and are made drunk
with such fond conceits, when indeed they be thereby carried (as it were) fast
asleep to hell. There is nothing that moves or delights them in all the
word of God, rightly understood, but only blind devotion in their false
religion, wherein they have been nuzled up, and then a fond and fantastical
conceit, that they shall go to heaven thereby. As for the authority and
warrant of their Mass, and other trumperie; in the beginning of the world, nay
in our Savior Christ's time, and many hundred years after, there was no shred
nor ragge of it used or known, especially to any such end, whereas the true
serving of God was always (as now it is) even from the beginning. Heb. 11. the
whole.


And how prone people are to worship God with ease, (for so far they like,
whether it be sound and true, or counterfeit) it may be seen not only in
Popery, which is coined for the purpose to deceive the simple, with strong
delusions, but also in our religion, which for the outward manner of it is
holy, pure and good, and consists in hearing, prayer, and the use of the
Sacraments for the substance thereof. And yet many of them who allow it, as the
true manner of worshipping God, what do they (for the most part) but draw
near to God with their bodies, but their hearts are far from him? As if they
would say, they would gladly go to heaven, but they would have an easy way
thither; but to serve God in spirit and truth, which Ioh 4 24.
is the direct way thither, they cannot bend themselves thereto: whereas there
is as great delight in the worshipping of God aright, and that by the Psalm. 84.
1.
Lords allowance and promise, (which in the two former kinds; of popish, and
the other, of only outward worship are wanting) as great delight, (I say) and
as sound in true performing it, so far as frail flesh may attain to, as
there is reward promised thereto, which is unutterable. Psalm 19. 11.


In this verse also may be seen, what fruit this people yielded to the Doct.
2.
Lord of their long enjoyed peace, even as we have seen their fathers did,
and that was, how they fell to lasciuiousnes, and forgetting of God: a
sufficient Deuteronomy 6. 12.
watchword whereof they had given them before by Moses. Now for the laying out
of this sin both in them and our selves, how fearful and great it is, let
us only consider of it thus; Seeing this point has been largely handled
already, if the diseased person pained with the stone or Note.
strangury, or the famished, and he that is in penury, or the man that is in
exile and banishment; if these (I say) might be set free from that which
oppresses them, what would they not readily offer, and covenant to do, in the
service of God? yea and that much more fervently then other men? Therefore how
grievous is their sin, (let all men judge) who may in health, in wealth, at
ease, and in outward peace do this, I mean, serve the Lord, which is the
thing that he requires of them, and yet they can by no means be brought to it?
But this I leave to be further considered, as every one shall see cause.

But more particularly, in that it is said, they forsook the Lord, it may be
Doct. 3.
marueiled at, that they should forsake him, whom they had loved and served
before. But by this we may see, what force there is in sin to besot and make
drunken, them who give over themselves thereto; be it whoredom, the love of
the world, or any other: For it is able to bereave them of sound reason, to
turn away their delight from prayer, and all good practice, and to forget the
joy that they had in both, sometimes; and yet to blindfold them so, that they
shall not suspect any danger to be toward them for all this, while they may
merrily serve their humor therein. Sampson and other went far this way. And
let the best of us fear, lest we be carried away of our lusts to love and like
where we ought not, and tempt we not God, but let us resist the beginnings of
evil: we know little what may befall us in time, if we Note.
dare deal loosely and unfaithfully with the Lord, and suffer our selves to
beled away from our stedfastnes. This boldness and carelessness, if it thus be
suffered to bear sway in us, may cause this scripture in time to be said of
and verified in us, that we have forsaken the Lord our strength. And yet
because men are cunning to deceive themselves, hoping that as long as they
embrace not another religion, they shall not become such, nor judged so hardly
of, though they take up their delight in sins that please the^; I thought it
not therefore amiss, to give this caveat, that in vain do such men worship
God, though they draw near to him with their bodies, while they suffer their
hearts to go another way: and it is a kind of forsaking of God, though not in
so high a degree as the other, and as in time they themselves are like to come
unto, and their labor is lost that they bestow in serving God, while it is
accompanied with such anoiance and vnsauourines, he utterly abhors it. This
phrase of forsaking God, is taken from wedlock, when either party renounceth
interest and fellowship in the other, and departs away: even as the phrase of
[selling them away] used in the next verse on Gods part, imports the like
action in the Lord, as justly giving over his part in them. As they had
resigned their right in him, their husband, (who had married himself unto
them) unto strange Idols: so the Lord put over his interest in them, unto
strange Idolaters, alienating himself from them, as the commodity which is
sold changes the owner, and becomes the right of another man. Now then let not
men think they may at their pleasure break their covenant (as the knot of
marriage) with God; thinking they may return to him as they list, and when
they list, (as Sampson to his companion, and the Leuite to his concubine) for
neither will it be so easy for them to do it, neither shall they find God so
ready in their hasty seekings after him, upon each occasion to admit them.

And this is said of the peoples sin, and by occasion thereof. Now we have
heard of that, being the first point of the four: in these three next Verse. 7.
8. 9.
verses is set down Gods displeasure conceived against them for it. For when
they had thus provoked him by their sore transgressions, he provoked them also,
by that which did little like them: for he stirred up the Philistims and
Ammonites against them, who vexed them sore for many years. And this they did,
not only in the land of the Ammorites, beyond Jorden to the children of Israel
that dwelt there, but they waxed more bold, and passed over Jorden and made
war with the tribe of Judah, Benjamin, and Ephraim: so as they were not able
to resist them. And what should we say to all this? It must needs be granted,
that this was an heavy bondage that they were under. But what remedy? If it
had been any less, it would not have moved nor wrought upon them. They would
not complain, nor cry to God for a little. For if they had, they should have
been heard, and kept from so great extremities, that they should not have vexed
them.

So that, to say no more of this, we may all see here, that when we come Doct.
verse. 7. 8.
under sore afflictions, which in a manner take heart from us, and make our
lives wearisome, we may thank our selves for it: God uses not to cast his
punishments upon men all at once, but by piece meal, and by degrees, and
gives warning of them for the most part, at least by his word always: that so
(as wise men seeing the plague coming) they may prevent them; or Prou. 22. 3.
else he lays his hand more lightly upon them, that they may at the first
repair to him, and entreat him to stay it. If it be otherwise, that he
suddenly, and at once take away the righteous with the wicked, they shall have
no cause to complain of that, for they shall rest in peace. If God remove not
his punishments, yet if they be reconciled to him, and live obediently, he
will give them greater grace of faith, hope, and patience, to bear the burden
more easily, and with far greater contentment. All the danger is, if they
harden their hearts, and bow not meekely to God under their burdens, that is
more against them, then all their outward calamity and bondage.

We have heard how God punished the people for their committing idolatry, and
suffered their enemies to oppress them sore and a long-time. But this was not
al which is here expressed, though that was very grievous, as all may well see.
But with this, it is to be noted, how they also by their sin, turned the
Sunshine of Gods favor into most dark and uncomfortable displeasure. This
men purchase to themselves by their wilfulness and rebellion, when they might
otherwise go out and in before him, to their good liking, and dwell most safely
under the wing of his protection all the day long. What madness is it to cast
themselves into deadly fears and unquietness and anguish of soul for the
Lords displeasure, as sharp arrows sticking Deuteronomy. 33. 12.
fast in them, with reproach, discountenance of Gods servants, and many other
crossings and discontentments? But of Gods anger and wrath, read more in Chap.
2. 14. Here I end.

THE SIXTIETH TWO SERMON ON THE TENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
WE heard in the former verses how God afflicted this Verse. 9.
people for their sin: in this verse, the holy story sets down how this
oppression by the enemies reached to the people beyond Jorden, as well as them
that were on this side only. Wherein that thereat was verified (whereof before
has been spoken) that they and their idols, should be as snares unto them,
even to their destruction. But besides this we see, that this misery did spread
further in time, then to those that were on this side Jorden, for it reached
even to the Israelites also, which dwelt beyond Jorden. So that although the
enemies began with them first, who dwelt in the land of the Amorites, yet
seeing the people on both sides of Jorden had communicated with the nations in
their sin, they were therefore both plagued alike by the enemies. And so it
fares with us: for if many join together in provoking God, they shall smart
together, by bearing his corrections. And though the Lord begin, as I said
before of Shechem and Abimelech, with some at the first apart, yet he will, as
the fire burns one house after another, he will, I say, devour the rest with
the former at length, as by the plague we have heard he has done.

Now in that it is said in this verse, that they cried to the Lord, saying: we
Verse. 10.
have sinned, I have spoken of this before, as also of this, that they were
long in misery ere they complained, therefore I will not repeat those two
points, only this here is to be noted, that they did not cry unfeignedly at
the first, but for the smart they felt, but having the repulse of God, and they
seeing that they prevailed not thereby, they did after, set themselves to seek
the Lord, and to repent in the truth of their hearts, as is showed afterward:
and that they did not at their first seeking to him, come in true repentance,
it appears by the Lords rejecting of their cries, and his bidding them go to
their gods, whom they had served, for help; which he would not have done, if
they had turned to him in truth: for he is full of compassion, and ready to
receive those that are of an upright heart. Exodus 34. 7.


And by this we may see, that many men, when they are in extremities, Doct.
confess their sins to God, as Saul, when he feared the loss of his
kingdom, and cry to him, when yet it is otherwise hardly wrung from them,
neither do it they sincerely; and yet I will not say, that they here, or that
all other such, of whom I speak, do it in hypocrisy: but this I say, that in
their Note.
need and have they cry, only they consider not that God looks for truth at
their hands, neither resolve afterward to look above all things to keep
their covenant with God, neither therefore indeed do so: but like Ahab, bow
for the time as a bulrush, and afterward forgetting, through carelesnes and
negligence, what they said or promised; whereas they who in truth and
unfeignedly repent, and turn to God, look duly and constantly to their promise
that they made to him, as David did, who said, I have sworn, and Psalm. 119.
106.
will perform it, to keep thy righteous judgments. And there had need to be
no less in them, that covenant with God, a man would think, unless they will
boldly and grossly show, that they despise him, and help to fill the Church
with reuolters, as they were, that we read of in the Psalm. The Psalm. 78. 34.
use of which I repeat not, but refer the Reader to the places before
mentioned.

Verse 11. And the Lord said unto the children of Israel, Did not I deliver you
from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, and from the children of Ammon, and
from the Philistims.

12. The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites did oppress you,
and ye cried unto me, and I saved you out of their hands.

13. Yet ye have for saken me, and served other gods: wherefore I will deliver
you no more.

14. Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen, let them save you in
your tribulation.

IN these verses it follows what God said to them in these their cryings The
sense.
to him: When the people had called upon God, and began, as it seemed, to
repent, God answered them indeed, but sharply and roughly, as appears in the
text, whether by the high Priest, or by some Prophet. But why he so hardly
reproved them, the reason was, to awake them further, and to bring them to
sound and constant repentance, to the which they were not yet come unto. As if
he should have said to them, Ye seek to be delivered, but ye do it, to the
end that ye being set at liberty, may return to your old byas again, and
follow your lusts, and serve strange gods. But who could have thought, that you
would hereafter, says the Lord to them, have revolted from me? Did you not
call upon me at other times, and were heard? Is this the first, and when I
delivered you, yet he have forsaken me, as is to be seen this day, for the
mark ye still bear of it, and have cast me behind your backs. I delivered you
from the Egyptians, Ammorites, Ammonites, and other, and in stead of the
thanks, ye by and by forsook me, and fell to serve strange gods. O horrible!
Thus therefore the Lord (as we have heard) now casts them in the teeth with
their doings. And namely with their Idols, as if he should have said, ye see
now what your gods (as you call them) are able to do for you. For if they
could have helped you, I see, that you would never have sought to me: I will
not therefore deliver you, and if you seek to them, ye see they cannot.
Briefly to end this; their state being thus Doct.
laid open by the Lord before them, I note (or rather repeat) out of the whole
answer which the Lord makes them here: that it is not so easy a matter for
men to deceive him, who knows their hearts, and the guile, falsehood and
flattery, that is in them, as to beguile men, who in charity do (as they
ought) judge the best of them by that which they hear and see. To hear some
men in their good pangs, either when some great blessing befalles them, or when
they are held under by some great affliction, (as by the fear of death) and
kept upon the rack, or when they have heard some powerful Sermon which has
searched them to the quick, or when they behold the great works of Gods
power, as thunder, lightning, winds and tempest by sea or land, or when they
see Gods hand upon other men, or to be heavy upon themselves any other way:
upon such occasions (I say) to hear the speeches, and see the behauiours of
some men, Note.
what words of thanksgiving, of trembling, of admiration, nay, what confessions
and prayers break from them, with earnest covenants and vows of repentance; I
say to hear these things at such times, would make a simplehearted Christian
cry out as amazed, and not fear, boldly to affirm, God be glorified;
doubtless these persons are thoroughly changed, and truly penitent, and God is
in them of a truth, surely Saul is become a Prophet of God: and thus in their
simplicity do many judge of such, by occasion of that which they see in them:
and who, except they be well experienced, should not say the like in that
case, and cursed are they that deceive such: yet thus they speak of them, till
they are afterward as much astonished to see the contrary in them. Thus we
see, they deceive men, whereas the Lord, as we may see in this example, will
not, nor cannot be so easily deluded by them, neither will so soon be
satisfied with these their speeches: but still waits for the truth and
uprightness of such as utter them, and gives no credulous ear unto them, but
does more then suspect them, for he calls them to further proof of their
soundnes and affection toward him, and expostulateth with them, for that he
finds it not so with them. Saul (as 1. Sam. 15. 24. and 30.
I said, fearing his kingdom) confessed the sin which was laid to his charge,
1. Sam. 15. But the Lord professed (for all that) he had rejected him, chap.
16. 1. Sam. 16. 1.
So the people in Deuteronomy being in fear, and strongly possessed thereof,
Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
in all have, protested they would obey the Lord in all things which Moses
should tell them from the mouth of God: But the Lord smelt them and found them
out presently: for thus he says to Moses, This people says well, all that they
have said: but I will not take their word, and why? Oh there is no such heart
in them, says he, as their tongue would seem to import. For even as a leaud
houswife, who is run away from her husband, or any ill debtor, who is fled
for debt, if they be taken and terrified with the law, they will not stick to
say and swear to any conditions which are offered them, so that the present
danger and shame may be remitted: whereas yet they are as treacherous and loose
afterward, as ever before; as the issue proves (in thieves and other
malefactors) even so, when vile persons are under Gods punishments; (from whom
they see, there is no breaking away by strong hand) what will they not say, in
accusing and condemning themselves? Nay, who can shame them as they will
themselves for their sins? or who can so denounce and plead against them as
themselves? What will they not promise, upon condition of release from the
present woe they are in? And yet when these men come to the trial, they fly
touch, and recoile again, as if there were no witness to convince them, and
as if all they said, had been spoken in a trance. Oh therefore, those forced
exclamations and complaints, which either for horror and fear a grieved soul
makes, or which a body pinched, and in distress, compel a man unto: how may
they be taken for approved testimonies of repentance, either by themselves, or
by other? Yea such as know they have often abused the Lord thus, (as if they
had him at command to order him as they list, upon each flattering promise,
whereas it is his wonderful mercy that he will forbear them, and offer them
means of searching themselves better: let them repent therefore of this
playing wily beguily with God: Oh how should this terrify them, and scare
them, that the Lord still counts them but hollow persons, rotten at the heart,
and false in their covenant, and therefore that he will at one time or other,
reckon with them for all their villainy and hypocrisy, which they durst cover
under the vizard speeches of humblenes and truth. As for us, who have learned
and practiced better, let us beware that, as Paul 1. King. 5. 22.
bids Timothy, not to lay hands suddenly upon any; so that we do not lightly
judge well or commend the estate of any man upon so slender evidence, let his
constancy speak for him: time (the mother of truth) shall prove him: in the
mean season, lift not thou such an one up to the third heaven in one mood,
when in another thou shall be urged to condemn to the nethermost hell: but be
sober, and leave him to God, to whom (as to his master, who knows him) he
stands or falls.

More particularly in these two verses, he tells them what deliverances he
Verse. 11. 12.
had wrought for them, bringing his benefits to their remembrance, to prick
their consciences. And therefore to speak the truth, what encouragement Doct.
of verse 11. 12.
could they have in coming to God in their need for help, whom they had dealt
so treacherously with before? especially, they having no testimony, that they
came in remorse and shame for their former reuolts, and with firm and resolute
persuasion, both that God would pardon them, and that themselves would no more
fall from him. So, how can any of us in our need, do as they did, but we must
look for the like answer from him? And so we have, though not by voice from
heaven, yet by the fearful accusation of our consciences, and by his word in
canonical Scripture. And as for men that have bin so dealt with by any
neighbors, yea though it be but once, if they have been beneficial to them,
they will soon show them their minds, that is, how greatly they detest such
unthankfulness and falsehood. But how we should be moved by the hearing of
Gods benefits brought to our remembrance, and of such like matter I have spoken
largely in the second Chapter, verse. 1. 2. 3.

This speech of the Lord, namely, [I will deliver you no more] because
afterward Verse. 1^.
he did deliver them, giving occasion of some doubt and difficulty, is to be
considered of us accordingly, I mean with more regard. His meaning is this:
Ye (O people unworthy to be beloved) have abused my facility and gentleness,
and you seeing me easily entreated heretofore to help you, plied me with your
cries and complaints, till ye had gotten that ye would have, even deliverance
from your enemies, naming many sorts unto them. But when ye got once elbow
room, says the Lord, (whereas I looked to have been the God of your worship
and service, as well as of your salvation) ye turned your backs upon me, and
rebelled against me: If this be the fruit of my love and tenderness, that I
must have the work to deliver you, but every stock and stone, every Idol of
Ammon, Moab, etc. go away with the thanks and reverence, and get all the
obedience and worship from me, I will help you no more, except I see better
fruit come of it: and otherwise I have done with you, go seek to them whom
ye serve for succor and relief. So then we see this refusal is
conditional: and is applied to them for their former idolatry, and their
present unsound dealing, and reaches only to the present time, though they
cried unto him: as if he had said: At this time, in the case you are in, I will
not deliver you, I will not help you, as fast as you complain, but when I
shall see it meet, that is, when I shall see your repentance sound, then I
will give you another answer. So that it is manifest I say, that he speaks
but conditionally, and thus we must Doct.
understand it; for otherwise (they not having committed the unpardonable sin)
this speech should have been contrarily ^^ other Scripture. Where the thing
which is to be noted is this: that God after the manner of men, shows his
fearful speeches, as he did here, that he is offended with us, Note.
(and for the same cause does often afflict us) to the end he may make us search
out, see, and feel some special sins, they are fore and grievous in his
sight, and yet of us nothing or little regarded. By this means therefore, he
brings us to such a sense of them, that we are not able to look up, but our
heart (to the judgment of flesh) does faint within us, as may be seen in
these here.

This David felt, when he said, Innumerable troubles have compassed me, Psalm.
40. 12.
my sins have taken such hold of me, that I am not able to look up: they are
more in number then the hairs of mine head, therefore mine heart fails
Psalm. 32. 4.
me. So in another Psalm, we may see the like. This do men's sins bring them
to, when God cites them, and sees it expedient to awake them, though he do
not this often, especially to the reprobate, and yet with slender, or rather no
use nor benefit to them, when he does it; they have so many shifts to wash it
away, and so harden their hearts, that they cannot profit thereby, but with
great use and comfort to his own children, in the end especially, how terrible
and fearful soever the beginnings and proceedings also sometime are, or seem
to be unto them.

And so he terrifies many at their first conversion with the feeling of his
wrath and heavy displeasure justly kindled against them, for the odiousness
and detestation of their lives past, so that they fall into a kind of despair,
as the people in the Acts did at Peter's sermon, saying: Men and brethren what
Acts 2. 37.
shall we do? And yet a little before, they made light of their sins, which
then so pricked their consciences, and had no sense of them. By all this that
has been said of this matter, we may gather, what manner of thing sin is, if
it appear in the proper colors of it, and as it is indeed; to wit, the most
Note.
fearful of all things. Many think this true that I say, of murder,
adultery, idolatry, and such like. But the truth that I have uttered, is
verified of other sins also, which yet seem less odious: as of anger,
impatience, worldliness, distrust, tetchinesse, pride of heart, sloth and
idleness, the leaudnes of the eye, self-loue, deceiving, revenge, and the rest
whatsoever they be, if they come clearly to the conscience to be felt and duly
considered.

And because we make them such common matters, and are so little grieved for
them, the Lord is therefore driven to awake us, as here he did this people,
to make us astonished, and stung at the heart for those sins which we
thought were small, or none at all, while we lay nuzled and drowned in them.

For if God open our eyes once, to see them as they are to be seen, and as
they may be felt, with the shame, foulness, baseness, sottishness in the
Note.
committing of them, and the danger that they bring; we judge even so of them,
as well as of the rest.. For what horror does adultery breed, when it is
thought of after the committing? it is as an arrow shot through the liver? But
of that, ve will say, there is no doubt: so what is anger, when it is past, to
him that offended by it but shame, and so I may say of all other. A view
hereof, may be taken in Saul, when God pursued him for his sin, and made him
cry out, saying: What shall I do? for God has forsaken me, 1. Sam. 28. 15.
and speaks no more to me. And what torment (think we) felt Judas, when of
himself he said, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood? And when his
sin so wounded his conscience, that the halter made an end of his life? And
Adams transgression also, which was diverse from both the other, what wrought it
upon him? was he not so terrified for it, that he fled from Gods presence as
far as he could, to hide himself in the thicket Genes. 3. 8.
among the trees? And if I should reckon up an hundred more, who all sinned in
a diverse manner, one from the other; which of them has not abhorred his own,
as if no other had been so vile, when God makes him see it. Therefore the
Martyrs, rather then they would commit sin against their Note.
conscience, and feel the terror of it, chose to lose their lives rather, as
we may read plentifully in the book of Monuments. True it is, men do not
always see, nor feel this, neither can they be brought to be moved and
astonished for their sin, except they be by the Lords strong hand thus forced
and urged. But by this (to end the matter in hand, we may judge what shall be
the horror of the Judgment day it self, when all such things shall fully be
made manifest. And for use of all this, let us learn, seriously to have all
sin in horror and detestation, yea even then, when it puts on an harlots
face, and has most force to deceive us; lest that which we hear, strike and
wound us at the heart, when we look for no such thing, but shall find it most
deadly unwelcome unto us.

Another thing herein to be marked, is, that although they had dealt
deceitfully Doct. 2.
with the Lord, both in their former abuses of their deliverances, and now also
in their complaint which they make for new help: yet the Lord leaves them not
in this case, which had been enough to have hardened them, and made them quite
desperate. But even by these words of defiance, whereby he seems wholly to
abandon them from protection, yet secretly he draws them to a deeper searching
into themselves, and to a far more serious meditation on their estate, that so
he might grant them their desire, and receive them to favor again. Oh
unspeakable and admirable Note.
kindness of the Lord, thus to draw water out of the rock, and to fetch light
(as it were) out of darkness. If God be so gracious to his children when he
seems to frown; then how sweet and pleasant is his amiable countenance? and
how delightful are his promises and his encouragements? If he cannot forget
himself so far to his children (though degenerate) as to put off the habit
of affection toward them, even when he would play the Judge: then how pleasant
is his loving kindness? Therefore, although it is not easy for him that is
fallen, and departed from God, to see this intent of God toward him, in the
time of his threats and terrors, yet they knowing it to be so, they must grow
to believe it, in the time of their need, for it magnifieth Gods deep rooted
and tender love to his children, when they have offended, and it makes matter
of unfeigned thanks and praise, when the worst end of his anger and displeasure
shall appear to have been this, that remorse and repentance might be wrought
in those who had offended him, that so they may be received of him again. The
ungodly see not, neither find any such fruit of Gods renouncing their
complaints and confessions, or his terrors of word and works against them for
their sin: his voice is as the voice which sounds in a deaf man's ear: or if
they hear Romans 7. 8.
it, they either rebel the more, or else run away from him through fear?
Genesis 3. 10.
But did this present terror so work in these? No, the Lord meant better to
them, though he spoke roughly, (because indeed fair speech was no fit medicine
for their disease) and they were drawn to him by the secret condition, more
then driven from him by the open threat. So strangely does the same speech and
word of God instruct or teach wisdom, yea put hope into the believer: and
utterly disanimate and turn off the wicked, or at least no whit profit them.
For as God intends a thing, so shall it work: all shall work for the best
to them to love God: Sweetness shall come out of bitterness Romans 8. 28.
to them: whereas the other having no such promise, find no such effect.
Christ (says the text) looked upon Judas coming to betray him: Luke 22. 47.
and so did he (as Matthew. chap. 26. reports) look upon Peter, having denied
him: These looks were frowning looks both of them: but the work of Matthew.
26. 61.
them was diverse: Peter by that look was touched with compunction, and went
out a repentant person: the other an harned and wretched person, not mollified
by the same aspect, because there was no bounty in it.

Lastly by this point, let Gods children learn a double duty, as well as 3
take occasion of thanksgiving: I say such of them as have declined and gone
out of compass, let them wisely observe what Gods meaning is toward them in
his word or works of affliction. Let them first take heed, lest they give ear
to his subtlety who would prompt them with this suggestion, Thou art already
gone from God: and behold now he seeks to be rid of Note.
thee altogether, and to fear thee quite from him. Avoid Satan (let them say)
this were to renounce my right in God by faith, and his right in me, which is
his free love: this were to put no difference between the believers privilege,
and the unbeliever. No, no, this dealing of God, I see is, as it was to his
people of Israel, and the Ninevites: it has a condition annexed to it, which
argues, God is more desirous to forgive me, restore me, heal and settle me in
good estate again, then to forsake me. If he had meant so, what needed he to
have redeemed me at all? or now to have spoken conditionally? Therefore I will
ever hereafter highlier esteem of that life which has the promise of Gods
favor annexed thereto: and whereas I see my self now frowned upon by the Lord
for my boldness and wilfulnes in stolen liberties taking, and the pleasures of
sin, my peace wasted, my spirit abated, my faith weakened, my joy, willingness
to pray, etc. appalled: I will therefore now give my self no peace, till I have
searched out my sins, repented Note.
of my houerly confessing them, and my drowsy sottish lying in them: I will not
cease pouring out my soul to the Lord, that his terrors may astonish me, and
drive me to lay my sin to heart, and to be so ashamed of them, that God may
accept my humiliation and sorrow, and give me faith to rest in his promise of
pardoning and restoring me again. Secondly, let this also teach Gods people to
indent seriously with the Lord, to use his former blessing and old deliverances
past thankfully, if they desire to obtain new: remembering how God here
vpbraides these Israelites, saying: How dare ye come to demand deliverance at
my hand, having so shamefully abused the former?

In these words [goe cry to your gods, etc.] Does God (think we) bid them
Verse. 14. The opening it.
go and sin? No, in no wise: but he speaks, as he does often times in the
Scriptures, in another manner then the words seem to mean, which if we mark
not, we shall easily fall into great errors and absurdity. It is a most
grievous casting them in the teeth, by an ironicall mocking of them with their
Idolatry: as if he should say, Now ye prove and see what your gods can do.
As Elias did the like to the prophets of Baal, when he bad them cry aloud to
their god Baal: perhaps he is asleep (says he, etc.) he did not (all 1. King.
18. 27.
may so mean) that they should cry to him, but to urge to mark well what a
god they worshipped.

Therefore by thus speaking, and bidding them go seek help at their Doct.
Idols hands, they having shaken off the Lord, he teaches us (as it stands
with good reason) that they whom we have served, and committed our selves to,
must pay us our wages: and to them the Lord justly does, and will send us to
their patronage in our greatest need, even to our conviction and horror, yea
destruction, if he take us not, as he did these here, to his mercy.
Contrariwise, but yet according to the same equity our Savior answered Peter,
when he said, that he and his fellows had forsaken all, and followed Matthew.
19. 29.
him, and therefore asked him, what they should have, he said an hundred fold
here, and after eternal life.

They therefore that have trusted, and still do in man, and have made flesh
their arm, shall know by experience one day, that they have trusted to a
bruised reed. So God will answer the workers of iniquity, that serve Satan,
Depart from me, I know you not. So let them know whose portion is Luke 13. 27.
in stolen pleasures of sin, that there will come a time when they shall be
infinitely more better, then ever they were sweet, and that thereafter they
Note.
shall feel smart and sorrow in full measure, when there shall be no remedy
Revel. 18. 7.
nor redress. So Papists shall be sent for help to their Pope, Saints,
Pardons, Pilgrimages. For God does threaten all such impenitent ones, who have
cast him off by their dead works, that as he never did, so he never will
acknowledge them for his.

And such patrons they shall then find to be cold comforters in those
torments, which they shall feel, as for their other sins, so by the
remembering how they sought shelter by and from them, unto whose service in
their life time they addicted themselves. Thus a wise parent, guide, or
superior is taught to answer a scape-thrift and lewd wretch, that has
brought himself into need, prison, and misery; by idleness, gaming,
prophanenes, bad companionship, and such like doings, when he seeks to them
for help; thus (I say) he is to answer him: Get you to them, to whom, and
whose counsel ye have hearkened and followed: who (it may be) are in the same
misery, or worse then themselves are in, and therefore unfit enough to succor
or help them. And if God manifest his nature here, that this shall be his
answer to such as live after this manner, then let us learn and conclude,
that no man shall end well an evil life: this being added, vnlessed it be
changed before by repentance: and therefore that it had been good for such that
they had never been borne.

Briefly to conclude this doctrine with some other uses thereof: we see
secondly by this, that God does import no less, then that (by the law of like
equity, and by virtue of a far stronger covenant) if this people had
persisted faithful in his service, he could not have denied their suite for
help and defense against their enemies. Otherwise, by what reason does he now
shake them off, and send them to their Idols, whom they had served? except he
had meant, that himself would have besteadded them, if they had cleaued to him
for succor by faith, and attended him by bringing forth the fruit of their
confidence, I mean obedience. And what a sweet prerogative is this for which
we have the express grant of the King of heaven, that so long as we keep a
covenant with God, so often we may also claim from him (in reverence be it
spoken) the liberty of sons and servants, to be defended and guarded
against all inward or outward adversary power of our salvation?

This is that approaching with confidence to the throne of grace, this is that
freedom of spirit which calls God father, whether ye resistance be made by some
lust, or some devils instruments, or the devil himself: what liberty is this,
that a Christian may (with hope which will not make him ashamed) Romans 5. 5.
pray against it, with assurance of being heard, even as Christ himself was in
that which he besought his father for? And why? Because he is within the
covenant, and therefore warreth against all evil, therefore he may boldly
pray for grace against it, that he be not foiled: for he is about Gods work,
and the Lord is a loving Master, he will not see his servant frustrated of his
hope in his service.

Thirdly, these words note out this, That it is wisdom for a man to bestow
his chief cost there, whence he looks for best recompense, and
acknowledgement in the time of most need. The steward in his kind, is
commended for this policy: who would show courtesy to such as he knew in a
Luke 16. 4.
day of hardness and want, would be readiest to remember it with thanks and
requital. The contrary folly the Apostle to the Romans taxes; what fruit
had ye of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? A man is not ashamed of
that labor which has brought him in plentiful gain; but of that which
answers not his cost and hope. Men that have run themselves Romans 6. 21.
out of breath all their life, groping after a blind happiness, in their
unprofitable, superstitious, profane course; at length seeing themselves
deceived, wish they had served a Master who might have saved them and received
them into everlasting habitations: But he answers them, bidding them go, see,
if their money will save them (their god) or their lusts (their masters): as
for me, I had none of their service, neither shall they have any wages from me.
Thus the Lord is feign to vpbraid men (though not by word, saying: Go to your
Idols, yet in effect, in that he leaves them shiftlesse) or else who should
persuade one of an hundred, that he sows among thorns, or loses his labor
and cost, when he casts it, and himself away upon one Idol (a broken
staff) or other? And the truth is, such a bewitching nature these Idols are
of, (not Popish only, but spiritual also, set up in the love of the heart)
that they possess their servants with an opinion of fruit, which is to be
obtained, (if they could hit upon it) till at length with other like
themselves, when time and strength, thrift and cost is all spent and wasted,
they cry out miserably, (like thieves at gallows) they were deceived: leaving
an example for others (if they be wise) to profit by; as for themselves,
neither rule nor example could do them good, as woeful experience witnesses
in too many other.

Verse. 15. And the children of Israel said unto the Lord, We have sinned, do
thou unto us whatsoever please thee: only we pray thee to deliver us this day.

16. Then they put away the strange gods from among them, and served the Lord:
and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.

THe people having received an hard and sharp answer of the Lord to them, to
wit, that he would not hear them, laid it near to heart, and The sense of
verse 15. 16.
cried again to the Lord (how soon after, it is not here expressed)
confessing their sins, casting away their Idols, (which at their first suing
to God they did not): now in stead thereof, they served the Lord, whom they had
forsaken, and beside all this, they submitted themselves to him, to do what he
would to them, resting confidently persuaded of his mercy, and so obtained
deliverance, which they had earnestly sued for and sought, out of that present
calamity: for the Lord was entreated of them, and granted their desire.

Now if it seem strange to any, that in their first crying to God, their suit
Doct. ver. 15. 16
was rejected, we must know, that they sought not to him for it in the
uprightness of their hearts, as is said before; and therefore God meant to hold
them on the rack, as it were, and not only to keep them in suspense, but
also to hold them in a deep fear, by denying help to them. Secondly, to
bring them to a through repentance, as indeed now they did show signs of it,
and those also effectual, which they did not before: and for this purpose he
drove them more thoroughly to examination of them themselves, then they had done
before. So that we see at first, they gladly would have been delivered, but in
the mean while they would not cast away their Idols and other sins, but
would still walk in the ways of their own hearts. Which sets before us a
common disease, that is too often even in Gods dear children: that in our
afflictions we cry to God for mercy and help, and feign would have the
punishment taken away, but so, that we would have liberty to live as we did
before, and hold fast our sins still, and abide in them, Note.
for they are dearer to us then our own flesh. Even after this manner many of
us too often and boldly deal with the Lord: so that repentance is hardly
attained unto, no, not even then, when we are to sue to the Lord for ease in
our trouble. As may be seen in David himself in the 32. Psalm, that it
Psalm. 32. 5.
was painful to him to confess against himself: we need not the speech of
the people of Anothoth to Jeremy, to preach unto us pleasant things: and
again, that we will not hear the law of this thy Lord: neither to follow
Demetrius the silver Smith in the book of the Acts; for these were wicked
Acts. 11. 25.
both of them. And how did they foil themselves; they of Anathoth, to retain
their pleasures; the other to uphold his wicked gain? But that it should be so
with us in any manner, who are of the better sort, how can it be borne! And yet
it may justly be complained of, Oh even the better sort of men will not be
reformed. Insomuch, that when affliction is upon them, of which they would most
willingly be eased, yet they cannot be brought to see or amend any thing that
is amiss, because they flatter themselves, and are great in their own eyes,
while their iniquity is found worthy to be hated. And yet there are worse then
these, who murmur under their affliction, and do what they can, to hide their
sins.

And here more particularly, as it is clear, that this people saw they did
evil 2
in worshipping strange Gods, but would not acknowledge it, til God drove them
to it by his sore judgments: So when we see, and will not see, how we provoke
him by any of our special sins, let us fear, that he will, if we will not
abhor, and be weary of them by his instructions, and warnings which he gives
us, that he will (I say) bring us thereto by sharp correction. So that the
best is to judge our selves, that we be not judged of the Lord.

But by this, that the Lord so hardly urging this people, they fell to a more
serious searching into themselves, and so came to better state, we may see,
that as hardly as Gods people are brought to confess and renounce their
sins, having fallen, as at sometimes they have done; yet when they see and
feel the hand of God against them, and no release nor issue of their trouble
is seen by them; many are drawn thereby to sorrow and repentance. But when
they have not felt Gods anger kindled against them for their sins first, they
can hardly for the most part, abide to be told of them, nor to hear of his
judgments for them, but shake them off, if they can possibly. But if God do
purpose to bring such home; he will so work in them, that he will make them
feel both his threats and his displeasure so fierce and smarty, that rather
then they will still live under the fear thereof, they will run through fire
and water to escape both, though no other bodily affliction be upon them.

Thus many have been brought home, when the Lord has tamed and subdued them by
afflictions, especially inward: for if they rebel not through pride, but stoop
under their burden, there is good hope of them; even as the high minded, who
do kick against the prick, and are refractarie and Note.
wilful, do surely come to evil. Now therefore, seeing we may find that
mercy from God by our afflictions, which we never felt before in our
prosperity, why should we storm at the coming of them, but rather look for
some good by them, as the Apostle James wishes us to do, when he tells
James 1. 2.
us, that it is matter of greatest joy, when we fall into many of them?

And lastly in this matter, in that they returned to serve the Lord, know 4
we that this is the end of all our repentance to serve God, with chearefulnes
throughout our life, even as it is a chief end of our living here, for that to
do is indeed to bring forth fruit or amendment of life; and when that work
fails in us, I mean, that the ways of godliness are not pleasant unto us,
let us know, it is not well with us, but that the devil has much prevailed
Luke 1. 74.
against us.

Now in the next place in these two verses, let us lay together the signs of
the peoples repentance, which are these five. The first, their confession; the
second, the submitting of themselves to the will of God; the third, the putting
away of their Idols; the fourth, their return to a godly life; the fifth,
their confidence in God, taking no nay, neither making any doubt of his holp^.
And for our instruction, these things are here mentioned in this manner, that
though they be not all usually in Scripture expressly set down in the
repentance of men together, yet other are in sundry places, as in Jeremy, Ier.
31. 33.
Hosea, etc. and these also may be found in such as were penitents, if we will
examine the stories of such, and search them out. In Hosea they may be all
Hose 14 2 3. 4. Psalm. ^1. 1. 2. 3. Luke 19. 8.
found, though not all named: in David also, in Zacheus likewise. And so by
them all jointly laid together, let us, whenever we list, look to approve
our repentance to be sound and good: but sever we them not in any wise one
from the other. For to confess alone without the rest, may be an uncertain
testimony, as is to be seen in Saul's confession, and yet in some it is 2. Sam.
12. 13.
sufficient, yea, sure and good, as in David's, when he uttered this bare
confession to Nathan, I have sinned. But to leave evil, and do good, with a
resting on Gods promise, and a submitting of ourselves to his holy will, I say
all these together with confessions are signs of repentance infallable? even
as on the contrary a failing in some of these may easily breed question about
the sufficiency of true repentance, where the Scripture does not otherwise
commend it.

And in that the holy story thus sets it forth, that when the people thus
repented, the soul of the Lord was grieved for their misery, even as he was
angry with them before for their reuolting, it does admirably commend Gods
mercy, as it is often set down in the Scripture: which is not spoken, as Joel 2.
18. etc. Jonas 4. 2.
though God were moved with affections, but those things which are noted to be
in men, are ascribed to God, and so it is spoken after the manner of men, even
as they are first grieved for the misery of those whom they pity, so God is
said to be grieved for them, receiving them to mercy.

So that we may truly say, that God exceeds in mercy toward poor sinners,
that have sore provoked him, when they unfeignedly turn to him. And as this is
true of his affection to them, so is it also of the fruits of his favor, as
elsewhere I have noted at large. And to this end is that often repeated saying in
Exodus: I the Lord am gracious, slow to wrath, ready to forgive, Exodus 34. 7.
and repenting for the evil that I brought upon them. And as the Lord was
wholly theirs, now they repented, notwithstanding all their former
abominations, which blotted out and darkened in them all sound comfort, and so
is to all other in their case; even so does he change the estate of woeful
people by that reconciling them to himself, no otherwise then as the foullest
and most tempestuous day is unto the most comfortable weather, and constant
Sunshine. And they need not know what these changes mean, but walk in Gods
favor continually, as they do who continually delight in his law, Prou. 23.
17.
and in his fear. But of these points from the fifteenth verse hitherto, I
speak briefly, because I have handled them upon the like occasions before, in
the second and fourth Chapters of this book.

THE SIXTY THREE SERMON ON THE TENTH AND ELEVENTH CHAPTERS OF THE BOOK OF
IVDGES.
The third part of the Chapter.
Verse 17. Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in
Gilead: and the children of Israel assembled themselves together, and encamped
in Mizpeh. 18. And the people and Princes of Gilead said one to the other, What
man is be that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he shall be
head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.
I In these two verses, being the last of this Chapter, (to Verse. 17. 18.
pass from the repentance of the people of Israel, which I have spoke of) it
follows now, as we may see, the Ammonites were not satisfied with vexing the
people of God, as they had long done, but now they went about to put them to
the sword, and to take their cities and lands from them for their own. But
mark we this: the Lord so dealt with his people, and provided so well for
them, that they their enemies could never go about it in better time in
respect of the Israelites. For now they had turned to God by repentance, and he
had received them into his favor and protection: this caused the Lord now to
stand with him, who before was against them, so that they did know they had his
direction and help to go about to deliver themselves out of their bondage and
misery. The Ammonites, seeing Gilead was a goodly city, and richly furnished,
they labored and determined first of all to destroy that: Israel was assembled
in Mizpeh (while the other camped in Gilead) but that was too far off from
aiding the Giliadites their brethren, (who were then besieged by those
Amonites.) Therefore as they were directed by God, they propounded betwixt
themselves, namely, the Princes to the people, that he who would begin the
battle against the Ammonites, he should be guide to them, and Judge over them.
And that they were led hereto by God, it may appear by this, that the Lord
raised up those that were Judges over them, and after confirmed Iphtah in going
against them.

The story being thus laid forth, I will here stay a little, and say some thing
Doct. verse. 17.
of them, both the Ammonites and Israelites. And first this: if the children of
Ammon had gone about to take the cities and ground of the people of Israel into
their hands and possession, and oppressed them by war, before Isreal's
repentance, and turning to God, they might easily have done it, for none of
them durst, or had any heart to resist them, as appears in the story: for
they suffered them to oppress them, till now in the last year especially,
they were sore distressed and tormented by them. And besides; they then had God
also against them. But now after they sought the Lord in the truth of their
hearts; he was now with them, and they were heartned and imboldned to resist,
and stand against them, by the hope they had in him, as we see they did
manifestly declare. By the which we may see how God keeps Doct. out of verse.
17. 18. Note.
many evils and troubles from his dear servants, till he has made them fit
for them, and them able to go under them: whereas if they had come upon them
before, they had been utterly overwhelmed by them. For as he turns many
afflictions away from them altogether, which they saw not how they could
avoid, even so he deferreth many, so that they shall not touch them, till he
has strengthened their shoulders, and put courage into their hearts, and so
made them able to bear them. And yet he leaves them not unexercised with one
or other more small and easy, as he sees it profitable for them, and that
they are fit to bear them.

But if any of us well consider it, we shall find that his goodness has herein
exceeded toward us, and who can choose but see it, that at his first
inlightning of us by faith, when we were weak, and might easily have been
dismaide, he has kept many of our sins from our sight, when by those which
we saw we were hardly kept from despair, and sundry troubles also; which if
they had appeared to us, when as yet we were nothing able to hear of them,
much less to bear them, they would have swallowed us up, Note.
and have driven us to utter desperation. And as this is true, we understand it
of our first conversion, or after; even so is it also with us throughout our
whole life. He spares us, to the end we may be better encouraged to serve him
faithfully in that which we know, that so afterward we may be fit to see more,
both of our sins, and also to take part of the afflictions which abide us.
Even as we use our children tenderly, while they be young, but after they be
grown up, we set them to work, and show them that they must labor, and
suffer some hardness, they being now better able to go under it.

Thus did the Lord call back Saul from the pursuit of David, when it was 1.
Sam. 23. 27.
likely that he could not have escaped his hands if he had been let alone. So
when Nashash the King of Ammon might easily have destroyed the Giliadites at
the first onset, while they were unarmed: the Lord stopped him, and caused him to
hearken to a needless condition, whereby the time being 1. Sam. 10.
protracted, they had help sent them in the mean season, and overthrew them.
In this kind of dealing the Lord resembles a friendly person, who spying a
furious enemy coming fiercely with weapon against his neighbor, unarmed and
unprovided to meet him, stays the rage of the one, till the other have got
himself arm or fit to encounter him, or may escape his hands, or when he has
done so, he commits them together, knowing that the innocent party having the
better cause, will easily foil the doer of wrong. Thus the Lord often does,
although when he sees his time, he can also either quite divert the enemy, as
he did the King of Ashur from coming against weak Jerusalem: or else take his
peoples part (as Moses did the Israelites Exodus 2. 12.
against the Egyptian) and fight for them while they stand still and look on.
So he did to Pharao and Zenacherib. Now when the Lord reserues his people till
such a time of strength and courage, not suffering (as I may so say) the
Canaanites to come upon his people, (being weak through their late
circumcision) it is a greater favor, then if he removed their trial wholly
from them: for in this, they have only proof of Gods goodness: but in the
other, they have (beside that) a trial of their faith and grace more precious
then gold; which triumphs, having got the victory over the enemy, whether
spiritual or earthly. Thomas Bilney a godly man, during his imprisonment, had
a strong assault given him by his own flesh against the pain of the fire,
which he feared he should not be able to endure. And who knows what he would
have done, if the trial had been hottest, when he was weakest? But the Lord
so suited the time, that when fire was put to him, he that feared the foil, of
weak became strong (Heb. 11.) and overcame Heb. 11. 34.
the fire, by yielding his whole body to wast it, whereas his finger could not
before abide the candle. It is a great grace therefore to believe, that (as the
Apostle implies) God will keep from us such afflictions as we are not fit to
1. Cor. 10. 13 Note.
honor him in, but liker to be overcome of our corruption, and betray our
cause. If any object the foiles of diverse servants of God, prevented and taken
unawares by strong trials, as Cranmer in the first assault of his enemies
forced to yield to that which he ought not, etc. Let such know, God has a
diverse end of a diverse method: and teaches men humbleness, and knowledge of
themselves by such assaults as they cannot answer, to the end that they may be
abler for those trials afterward, having renounced themselves, and got firmer
hold upon the alsufficiencie of God, without whose protection Note.
they are weak, as other men. Now then let men beware how they abuse this
dealing of God to their own hurt. For seeing God by this holding off, and
forbearing of trials which we could not bear, does require both exceeding
thanks, upon serious recording of this manner of his dealing with us from time
to time: as also a growing daily in strength to suffer greater troubles
hereafter, (a grace not common:) how grossly do they inuert Note.
and abuse this purpose of God, who make no other use of his sparing and
dandling them in the lap and arms, but to wear out the fear or expectation
of affliction altogether? whereby the longer they are free, the weaker they are
to suffer? What difference in this point, will ye make betwixt these and such,
as to whom affliction is ever unwelcome and intolerable? I mean the ungodly?
Let all Christians beware (therefore) of this softness and tenderness.

Furthermore, we have heard in the seventh and eighth verse, that the
Philistims Doct. 2. Verse. 17. 18.
and the Ammonites sore vexed Israel eighteen years: and in all that time
they never durst take up weapon against them, until they repented; but then
they began with good courage to resist them, and assembled themselves against
them. By the which, it may be noted, what liberty and courage true repentance
brings with it. The reason is this: when men in their conscience see, that
they have dealt trecherously with God, and have nourished and followed the
desires of their own hearts, contrary to that they knew they should have done,
they have no hope in him at such times, neither feel any heart or strength in
themselves to deal against their enemies either ghostly or bodily.

This is that plague that God threatens in Leuiticus, that his people Leuit.
26. 17.
should not be able to stand before their enemies, if they sinned against him:
and in the fifth Chapter of this book, it is said, when Israel had provoked
Judges 5. 8.
the Lord, there was no heart in them to stand against those that held them in
bondage. So that we see, how sin disguiseth men, and how preposterously it
causes things to go with them, when they are enchanted and carried away with
the allurements and pleasures of it. Which proves the contrary to be true, to
wit, that the service of God is perfect freedom: and that it is faith and
godliness which only give courage and boldness as to a Lion by well doing.
And seeing it cannot be denied, that no bondage is like this to be bondmen to
our lusts, let all look to receive from God both reward and punishment in this
life, and hereafter accordingly as in their lives they have sought either of
both. See Judges 5. 8. and the notes upon it.

This order that the people took for the choosing of their Governor, Doct. 3.
verse 17. 18.
was by the Lords direction, as we may after see by his confirming it, in
sending his spirit upon Iphtah: He did it as by an outward encouragement, to
stir them up to fight against their enemies. Even as he did the like by
Caleb: who encouraged the people by the like means in such a like case,
saying, in a difficulty of winning a City, He that takes it, to him will I
give Judges 1. 12.
Achsah my daughter to wife: which though the people ought to have done, I
mean, to fight against Gods enemies for his commandments sake only, yet they
had need of spurs, and were the better drawn on by such encouragements.
Even as Magistrates and Ministers owe duty of conscience to God in their place
to beat down sin, and advance the Gospel: but yet they are the better
heartned thereto, when both sorts are encouraged by the high Magistrate, and
the Minister beside, by the readiness of the people to their duty. And so
every other in his place shall be better set forward in well doing, by
temporary encouragements, though Gods commandment be the strongest motive. So
husbands and wives should live kindly together by bond and promise each to
other for conscience sake; but yet they do this much better, when each
respects the other, by yielding mutually that which they owe each ^^ other.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE Book of Judges.
Verse. 1. Then Gilead begat Iphtah: and Iphtah the Gileadite was a valiant man,
but the son of an harlot. 2. And Gileads wife bare him sons, and when the
woman's children were come to age, they thrust out Iphtah, and said to him, Thou
shall not inherit in our fathers house: for thou art the son of a strange
woman. 3. Then Iphtah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob; and
there gathered to Iphtah idle fellows, and went out with him.
IN this Chapter the person is mentioned, who should go before the people The
sum and parts 4.
of Israel in the war against Ammon. And the sum of this Chapter with the
parts (which are four) is here further set down to be this. First, the
calling of Iphtah is mentioned unto the 12. verse. The second part is, how he
seeks to appease the Ammonits by messengers, moving them by reasons to desist
from war, but all in vain, to verse. 29. The third part contains the
overthrow of the Ammonites by Iphtah to verse. 36. The fourth shows what fell
out after; and particularly how he performed his vow which he had made to God
(if he might get the victory) in verse. 32. and this is to the end of the
Chapter.

Now to come to the first part, before Iphtah became their Guide and The first
part.
Captain, it is showed how unlikely it was that he should be so: therefore he
is described in the first verse, to have been the son of an harlot; who
(ordinarily) might be admitted to no such place. In the second and third verse
it is showed how his brethren did therefore (whether through pride and scorn
or emulation or both) expel him out of their fathers house, so that he was
feign to fly into another land, and so much the more he was unlike to be
governor. And yet God so brought it to pass by his providence, that the
Princes of Gilead, even such as had driven him away, were constrained to send
for him again, even him among all other, (whom they had banished from their
fellowship,) to be their guide, according to their decree made in the former
Chapter, to wit, seeing he had of all other begun war with the Ammonites: and
so upon agreement betwixt him and them, he yielded to them, and the Lord
ouer-ruling the action he was elected Judge over them, and this to the 12.
verse.

Now of these more particularly, as they lie in order. And first how he is
described, namely, in these two points. One, that he was the son of an harlot,
The first verse.
being the son of Gilead. the other, that he was yet a valiant man, and of
great courage, and fit for war. So that by the first he was basely accounted
of, as he was base borne; by the last, he came to good estimation and credit
among men, as he well deserved.

For the first, whereas Gilead, the father of Iphtah took to him an harlot
beside his lawful wife, we see, he did not obey the commandment of the Lord
in Deuteronomy, to wit, that there should be no whore in Israel. And Deuteronomy. 23.
2.
if it be demanded, why God forbad such as were borne in bastardie to enter
into the congregation of the Lord, that is, to bear any office in the Church,
it was not forbidden, for that the man so borne was worse then others but that
the people might know, how greatly God abhorred whoredom, and this was but a
judicial constitution appertaining to the Jews. And in that Iphtah so borne,
was yet set in authority over the people, (which thing God forbad) we must
know, that he made not that law to himself, but for the Jews, that it should
not be lawful for them to prefer any such, but as for himself, who has
authority to call him into question for that which he does.

Now for instruction, we see here by this that Iphtah was begotten of an Doct.
verse. 1.
harlot, that the law of God (forbidding that there should be any whore in
Israel) was not obeyed, even as before we have heard of Gedeon his concubine:
whereby we see, how little Gods law is, and has been regarded in all ages of
many, whether this one law, or what other of his soever we understand it of.
As for this, of and against whoredom, that it was never more common then in
this age, woeful experience proves it to be too true, so that there want now no
such offenders more then in former times: I may truly say, in number they far
exceed them, as if the antiquity of corrupt example in this kind, were enough
to license men to continue it still. And so it is in all other kinds of sin,
verifying to the full the Apostles prophecy to Timothy, that in the latter
days shall come perilous times: for men shall be 2. Tim. 3. 1.
lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, boasters, and infected with diverse
other sins. And for this cause comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience: and no marvel that we have many plagues, seeing God is not
obeyed almost in any thing. And so may every one particularly say to himself,
as he is most obedient, so shall his blessing be. And as this sin in any man
had been bad enough, so in Gilead a great man, and who should have punished it
in others rather, (being the father of a family) what a reproach was it? Even
as in David, in Sampson, in Judah, and in Reuben. For alas, when a mean person
sees the commandment of God to be of no greater force, then that every great
man is bold to dispense with it, he grows to think it but a scarecrow, and
says boldly (as the strumpet in the Proverbs) Tush, it is but a trick of truth.
But for such tricks of youth the Lord in wrath destroyed 24. thousand of
Israel. Yea when the great enemy of the Church Balaam being frustrate of his
cursed attempt against Israel, (for they are cursed Numb. 24. 9.
who can find in their heart to curse Gods people) sought how to bring an
equivalent plague upon the Congregation, he could invent no more fit and
mischievous a plot, then to entice them to uncleanness with the Moabitish
women, and to Idolatry with their heathenish gods. Therefore how great a
judgment of God hangs over this land for the lust of the eye, (a maine branch
whereof is filthiness) and the unlimited lust of all sorts, (especially in
places of darkness) we can more easily conjecture, then persuade them that
are guilty, to redress it. Oh it is lamentable that such spots of our Note.
assemblies are suffered boldly to spit in the face of modesty, and to hold up
their heads aloft, as having the better end of the staff, I mean greater
advantage against their accusers (commonly) then they against them. How should
this move us to sue to the Lord, that such should be noted and shamed for
inordinate persons, that the rest may blanke and fear by their example, and so
the anger of the Lord be stayed, as once it was by the zeal of Phiniees, for
the Lords cause, thrusting through Zimri and Cozbi for their Numb. 25. 8.
shameful abomination. So should the word preached be more forcible, when the
transgressors should see the price of their boldness; and so should the law of
the Magistrate take better effect, and not become ridiculous. And so should not
we fear that plague which Iehu denounces upon Iehoram (saying, What peace?)
seeing the abominations and whoredoms of 2. King. 9. 22.
thy mother Iezabel are still in great number. Of which I say the less,
because I have noted it as the fruit of all sin as well as this, in the
former parts of this book. Only I say, if the ungodly sort will not take the
Lords bridle to restrain their flesh from this lewd course, (for adulteries,
as our Savior notes, are the breakings out of the filthy heart, even as the
sores and scabs Note.
of the body are the fruits of a corrupted blood) then let the people of God
learn this duty, even to possess their vessels in holiness, to keep
themselves unspotted and pure, and to preserve their bodies and spirits in
chastnes, except they will make of the temple of the holy Ghost, a stie of
unclean and loathsome lust, fit to drive the spirit of God away. And otherwise
the Lord shall set a mark upon them, worse then the brand of a these, even a
mark of infamy, which I dare not promise that repentance it self shall quite
wash off, while they live, but that the stain shall still continue. For this
sin is of a scarlet dye, as David speaks, Psalm. 51. Psalm. 51. 2.


Now to end this verse, by that it is said that Iphtah was a valiant man, we
The re^^ant of verse 1.
must know that in those times of war, courage and valiantnes was a gift much
set by and of good use. So that though he had a blemish upon him in that he was
the son of an harlot, (which was not his sin) yet the Lord covered it (as I
may say) with this excellent gift of fortitude, that made him much desired. It
was a cross to him (all may see) that he was thus abased, and yet if he had
not been under that, or some other such chastizement, it had been like he
should have been a worse man, and in greater danger. For such blemishes in the
body, are occasions through Gods work, to turn the Doct. 2.
mind to better matters, and to bring it in love with them, and to hold from
the party greater troubles thereby.

As we read of Mephibosheth, Ionathans young son, that he being lame 2. Sam
9. 3. 2. Sam. 2 9.
on his feet, could not resist David, as Ishbosheth his uncle did, (to his
great toil and little prevailing) but lived peaceably in the Kings favor and
fed at his table: and how could he have been in better state? whereas if he had
enjoyed his limbs at liberty, it is hard to say whether he would not have
been stirring, and taking part with Ishbosheth to his own overthrow: which had
bin very like to have befalne him, when Abner forsook him, if he had not bin
prevented by violent death. Thus does the Lord (as Paul speaks) clothe 1. Cor.
12. 23.
the more unseemly parts with most honor. And in our experience many worthy
men for their excellent parts (both in Church and Commonwealth) have yet had
their deformities. One among the rest of late and godly memory, Master Perkins
that worthy instrument, being lame of his hand, testified often, that his
defect was the occasion of his training up to learning: as being unfit thereby
for other employment. Wherein Gods admirable providence appeared, in making him
lame, that his blemish might be an occasion of doing good to the Church. Indeed
the common speech is, that Nature notes some men, for their sinister and
notorious qualities: (by how much the rather all such had need pray much and
use good means to rectify and perfect their inner man, and purge out their
corruption, lest this imputation be justly cast upon them) but we must know
that God has a further stroke then Nature, and lays his hand upon many, that
he might be glorified by them, and show his works on them, as (in a sense
somewhat diverse) our Savior speaks of the blind man, Ioh. 9 So that such as
are notable Ioh. 9. 3.
for their grace and gifts, as the other are notorious. Naturally we pity such
as are deaf, lame, blind, and we do well, (for it is the part of a cursed
Cham to deride such) but the Lord often turns pity into admiration, yea and
condemns by such, the shameful unthankfulness of them who have no bodily
blemishes, but inwardly are tainted with all that naught is. God had done his
part (to use the phrase) one way to Absolon, who had not a wemme from top to
toe, but who had a more disguised soul then that fair body carried within
it? Even as we see, the compleatnes of many a man's person, draws by degrees to
the halter: many a woman's beauty makes her a strumpet. Whether then of the two
is more to be desired, a copper ring with a precious Jewel set in it, or a
golden with a common peble?

While many children have their parents living with them, (who are their
glory) how bold, saucy, and lewdly disposed are they, so that they were
better unborn. And other in the mean while, being deprived of their parents,
which chastizement is nothing vnferiour to a blemish or scarre; how have they
been driven to live under good government, and in good order?

For use hereof, let us not wonder, though the Lord mix troubles with
blessings, and (as I may say) blemishes with beauties, wants with perfections.
Paul lifted up to the third heaven, was not so safe as being buffeted. A little
2. Cor. 12. 7.
abasement may prevent the greatest of all, yea I say, that some chastizement
laid upon us by the Lord, does keep us often times from perishing in the 1. Cor.
11. 32.
world, and so sickness and poverty do take heart from sinning, whereas
health and wealth imbolden thereto. Therefore if thine affliction come from the
Lord, (I mean when no apparent cause of thy drawing it on thy self can be
seen, and so as thou suffer not for evil dealing) wait for some special
good to come thereby unto thee, and to that end, labor to make use of it.

And if it be an hindering of thy bodily commodity by loss, disease, Note.
pain, and such like, look that it be to the benefit of thy soul, and that
thou have a rich and large supply that way, for so the Lord is wont to deal
with his: and that to the end they may see cause to say as David did, it is
good for us that we have been afflicted. It was sometime the speech of a
virtuous Psalm. 119. 71.
and religious gentlewoman, well exercised in Gods nurture, that if there had
fallen to her any hard trouble, and heavy cross, (as there did many) she did
confidently look for some great blessing more then ordinary, which was for
the most part some addition of new grace, or a quickening of the old. And Saint
Paul says the same in other words, that as God sends our afflictions Romans 8.
28. Note.
for our good, even so we should look for them to be to us; which if we did
they should not be so unwelcome to us as now they be, nor so discontentedly
borne and gone under, as commonly and for the most part they are.

For the blemish of his bastardie, we heard how his brethren thrust him Verse.
2.
out, which was an unjust and cruel dealing with him. For what had he done?
and as for their fathers shame which they raised thereby, they ought to have
covered it, as they had bin able, rather then to have revived it. And who sees
not that the son for his part had sorrow enough in that he was so branded
with disgrace for it, so that there was small cause that his brethren should
add more affliction unto it.

By the shameful fact of them, here we are taught to beware that we do Doct.
not despise any in their affliction, being base, mean and contemptible for
the same commonly in the world, and especially if there be any good parts and
gifts of God in them, whereby they may be like to be profitable to Church or
Commonwealth. Yea and without respect of this also, for because Christ died
for them and they are our brethren. For we are taught of God how to carry our
selves toward the^, though the wicked will be taught by nothing. We learn in
the Psalm, that he is happy that judges wisely Psalm. 41. 1.
of the afflicted, and that we should pity them, and mourn with them that
mourn. And in such cases it were our wisdom to put the case, and suppose;
what if such affliction and abasement were cast upon our selves, would we not
desire to be pitied and regarded? And besides this, we have learned, that
judgment shall be to the hard hearted and merciless, and that without James
2. 13.
mercy. And therefore to add sorrow to their bands, who are already wrapped
deeply therein, as it is a great sin, so it threatens to the committers, that
they shall not go unpunished, but receive the like measure themselves at Gods
hands for their so doing. And sometime they suffer the like disgrace and harm
at their hands to whom they offered the injury. For when God lifts up their
heads out of adversity, whom they have abused and done the wrong unto, (though
they thought that they being once down, should no more get up again and
recover) they take stomach and revenge the injury that was done them much more
eagerly. As Joseph might have done to his brethren, (their own consciences
being witnesses, when he was advanced) for their unnatural dealing with him in
his mean estate, and would most certainly have done so indeed, if the fear of
God had not Gen 50. 17.
stayed him.

But although there were no fear of any such revenge to come by pitilesse
dealing with others; yet this were enough to dissuade a true Christian from it,
yea and from any hard measure offering to any brother living by him, how mean
soever; that (beside other inconveniences) by so doing, he should bring
himself into an hard conceit with him, and so he should never after be able
to do him good by counsel and good instruction, exhortation, or comfort, as
the other should stand in need of it. And that hope no servant of God should
lose, (especially the Minister, it being Note.
so precious a thing to help save a soul) to wit, to harden the heart of the
meanest against him by unchristian handling of him, that he should therefore
refuse to take any good by him afterward. And yet I do not for all this, say,
that we must tolerate and wink at any in their sins and evils.

In great persons sometimes cruelty and wrong is shrouded under the name of
policy. For when as (according to the rule of their master Machiauel) they
seek to bring under and discredit their corriuals and men of equal
worthiness, or it may be (better then themselves) they practice this
principle, When he is going, down with him; if he rise up after he be sunk,
if he be coming up the hill again whence he is fallen, sink him again,
thrust him backward, tread upon him, that he get up no more. Thus dealt
Daniels adversaries in the Court of Darius: Thus dealt the enemies of David in
Saul's Court. And there be many petie and lower kinds of this injury among
inferiors: as when the heir of the deceased or intestate party (having the
stroke in his hand) defraudeth both mother and brethren of their inheritance
and portion, dominering over them, and driving them to unequal conditions, or
else to endless and bootlesse suites. So the like may be said, when men mock
others even for their affliction, (which secretly vpbraideth them of it self)
as crookednes, blindness, etc. of which more (God willing) shall be said
hereafter in his due place. In the mean time, let these consider the reward of
mocking such, in the example of those Bethelites, 2. King. 2. (being but
children) and of those Philistims how they smarted, 2. King. 2. 23.
that made Sampson their may game (and yet but Heathens) what shall be the
portion of Christians, and men of discretion then think we?

The law had dealt severely against Iphtah, thrusting him out of the public
place of worship: But these thought that not enough, except they drove him also
out of the number of the people of God among Meshec and Kedar, I mean
Infidels. Let David speak what a bitter punishment this is: who says to Saul,
Cursed be they who have cast me out from the inheritance 1. Sam. 26. 29.
of the Lord. To return therefore, woe be to him that curses the innocent: but
double woe to him that adds affliction to the Lords affliction. If Ishmael
were cursed for mocking Izhak: doubly accursed were those Babylonians, Genesis 21.
9. 10.
who seeing Ierusalems ruin, cried, Down with it, down with Psalm. 137. 7.
it, race it to the ground. As hailestones upon the ripe ears of corn are
unseasonable: and as the putting out of that man's eye who has but one, that so
he may be utterly blind, is cruel: so is the adding of sorrow to the heavy
hearted. This caused the Lord to make this law to the Jews: Grieve not the
stranger: it is enough for him that he is from his place, and even that Exodus
22. 21.
alone makes him sad in heart. Let the rule of the Apostle conclude this:
Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep: remembering thy
self, and doing as thou would have others do to thee. For who seeing his
neighbors house on fire in one place, will take some of the brands Romans 12. 15.
and set it on fire in other places that it may be quite destroyed?

Now follows the third verse, wherein we see, that by his brethrens Verse 3.
hard dealing with him, he was feign to fly whither he could for shelter, even
thither among strangers, where he might have miscarried altogether, if God had
not greatly regarded him. Whereby we may see, that the injury and oppression
of some causes the innocent to undergo much hardness. A thing that may long
enough be complained of, before any one of many so offending, will amend it.
Great cries and complaints are heard every where of the inferiors and
underlings, what wrong and hard measure is offered them by the mighty, or such
as have power over them, as pitilesse Landlords, and such as have men at
advantage, who when they are put to their shifts for money, make them take it
up on conditions that undo them, with such exactions as they were as good flea
the skin from their bodies. So ungodly parents, who laboring to raise some
one of their children, and casting off the rest, compel them to seek their
fortunes (as they profanely speak) and drive them to extremities. Also
stepfathers and mothers, and cruel masters and dames, may be reckoned here
among many doers of injury, for I can give but two or three instances among
many, lest I should be tedious; let the rest in other kinds be considered by
these. These with cruel dealing, as depriving them of necessaries, and laying
heavy burdens upon them, cause the poor orphans and underlings to run away,
as Esau did Jacob, and being shiftlesse, to starve or miscarrie. And even such
is the dealing of the rest, who are cruel and void of mercy. Let them take
warning: for if the poor and oppressed cry in the ears of the Lord, they
shall be heard, and shall pay to the full, for the injury which they have
offered. I would be loath to do the least wrong; for God will make it come
against him that shall be bold thus to provoke him, and grieve his neighbor,
when it shall sting as a Serpent, and be deadly unwelcome.

It were a wise part for a man to judge of his sin, as he judges of the many
dangerous effects that follow upon it. But who sees it an absurd unseemly
thing in the wealthy, to play the Lords and controllers over the baser and
poorer sort? Not being content to make them their drudges and slaves to do
their meanest works: but both in word and deed taking liberty to usurp over
them, as if they had been only made for them to crow over? Sometimes rating
them with reproaches, nicknames, vpbraiding them by their poverty, (which is to
despise their maker) other whiles making a pray of them, and racking them for
the poor commodities they buy, whereas yet for their work, they will drive
them to the lowest wages that may be, as hard as times are, and all things
dear and chargeable, which the poor stands in need. But now when the worm
trodden upon, turns again, and draws out the only weapon it has, the
tongue I mean, to revile and rail most disdainefully upon the rich, for their
misfortunes and oppression, then I say every wealthy person can say, this is
odious. And so it is indeed: but was not their dealing as bad which provoked
them? They do badly, but by them God will teach the wealthy how to consider
wisely of the estate of the poor. Therefore when men being exasperate, turn
to shifting, every man can speak against them: but who considers the
greatness of their sin who urge them? The law of necessity (we know) is
hard to undergo. And when these shifters turn upon their oppressors, not only
with tongue, but with hand also, rejoicing in stealing and purloyning from
them, do not then all cry out and complain of the damage they sustained?
And yet their stealing was caused by the others robbery: only the one being a
rich thief stole openly, the other for fear in secret: and defends himself
by this, That he has but robbed him, that first stole from himself. Indeed it
is Gods mercy, that (oppression of the poor being so rise, as who sees not
that all the gripings wherewith one rich person oppresses another, are in the
vpshot wrecked upon the poorest, who can worst make his part good?) that there
is so little harm done in this kind: and in great part the cause is in the
good government civil which restrains such. But if we should read or hear
of the disorders of other places (wanting settled order and execution of law) it
would amaze us, and teach us to practice that equity and moderation of mind
toward our inferiors, which might prevent such ill measure at their hands, or
rather Gods hand who will revenge it.

For all this hardness that Iphtah sustained at their hands, yet this is worth
the noting, that God provided for him in a strange country, where he was able
to maintain diverse that resorted to him, and to frame them to fight against
the enemies of God. And thus the Scripture is verified, that when Doct. 2.
verse. 3.
father and mother forsake, the Lord takes up. As he dealt with Joseph,
Hester, Mordecay, and many others. And this protection of his, if it reached
only to the maintaining of such needy and distressed persons in their bodily
necessities, and temporary sorrows, it were much: but to bring them also Note.
into favor with himself, that in so wicked a world they may be weaned from
the defilements of it, and that in better sort then many thousands, who have
father and mother to bring them up, this is no less then admirable. Oh
therefore what madness is there in them, and how are they to be pitied, who in
the multiplicitie of dangers and miseries that swarm every where, cling not
nor cleave neerevnder Gods wing, where only safety is to be found and enjoyed?
And yet where they seek it any other way, they have got that which will not
stand by them, if they get any thing, and yet their account is to come.

Now although this be a privilege of the faithful, only to have God their
prouider for, and vpholder, yet every hang-by catches the speech by the end,
and says, I hope God will provide for me as well as he has done, etc. Whereas
yet, neither have they any faith to believe it, nor grace to bear their
cross, when they fall into any unlooked for extremity: no, nor yet apply
themselves unto any such means (as through Gods blessing) may give hope of
sufficiency. How can a man shift and use bad courses to maintain himself,
and yet (in truth) say, he believes God will provide? For first he believes no
further then he sees how he can bring his desire to pass, (which is not faith)
and (which is worse) he uses unlawful means, whereas God makes no promise,
but to the obeyer of his commandment, but curses wicked practizes. Iphtah
here was provided for: But how? First, God gave him a gift of valor above
others, and then taught him how to set his gift on work to good purpose, and
so (believing that God would not be wanting) he obtained the fruit of his
labor. Now this is not the course which all such take, as yet with great
confidence will profess. They doubt not, but God will feed them, having given
them a mouth, and clothe them, having given them a body, yea and save them too,
seeing be has made them. These hopes are blind hopes, neither is faith the
parent of them, nor contentation and thanks the fruit of them, when they enjoy
their desires, much less patience and depending upon God, when they are
frustrate, as often they are.

In this verse a further thing then we have yet heard, is laid out. For by
More in verse. 3.
Gods providence, Iphtah had set these men that resorted to him, who were
needy, he had, I say, set them against the Ammonites, and they carried away
from them what they could get. And in the mean while, they warring against
Israel, and namely Gilead, a great and wealthy city, the Princes of Gilead
had agreed among themselves with the people, that he who first began war
with the Ammonites, should be their Captain and guide to rule over them. And
thus it came to pass, that they sent for him, I mean Iphtah, to intertaine
him for their Captain, whom before they had cast out from among them as has
been said.

Now here in the end of the third verse, where it is said, that he used the
Doct. 2. verse. 3.
service of certain wandering fellows, who (it appears) had no dwelling
place constant, and set them on work against Gods enemies, (for how could they
have been better employed?) as David also did: we learn that 1. Sam. 25. 7.
such as are idle, needy and without employment, should* brought by the wisdom
and godly care of men, as the Magistrate (...), and ranged within compass,
unto some work profitable, and to the maintaining of themselves, and putting
them out of their idle course. For such vagrant persons wait but to do
mischief.

So then, these are neither to be cast off altogether for their bad qualities,
(but pitied and relieved in their misery) nor yet too much nourished and
harbored in houses or towns, but (by them that are religious, and make
conscience themselves of spending their time) whether Gentlemen (who entertain
many into their houses that are shiftlesse when they are out of office) or
others, and their gift that is in any of them, as of wit, courage, or skill,
etc. is to be wisely directed to the fittest and most profitable object, lest
it break out to outrage, being not governed. And this being done be times?
labor and exercise (by habit and use) will be more welcome then idleness,
besides the cutting off of much sin, both against God and man. Whereas for
the want of this provident care, we see that many growing up to man's estate,
in the practice of lewdness and licentiousness, wax impudent and
incorrigible, filling the Church with noisome example and offense, and the
Commonwealth with theft and beggary. But I will not repeat that which I have
said of this before, chap. 9. 3.

Much good has been done of late years to diminish the number of such, and to
cut them off from a rogueish life, by enioyning them to labor: and if it were
not crossed, I mean this good order, by the foolish pity of some, who
encourage them to continue this begging and idle life, by giving relief to
them, rather then to the needy that dwell by them; much more good might yet be
enjoyed thereby. And further, they who take such into their service, or being
able, ought so to do, when there is cause, if they would instruct them, and
rule and look to them carefully, as Iphtah and David did, we should not have
such disorders, and outrage in Church and Commonwealth as we have: neither
should it be such reproach as it is, to keep such bad ones in men's houses: for
though they are rude and bad themselves; yet by good care had over them, they
might be brought to better order. This being added, that if they will not be
ruled and kept in compass, that they be delivered to the Magistrate, and
committed to the house of correction.

THE SIXTIETH FOUR SERMON ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse 4. And in process of time the children of Ammon made war with Israel.
5. And when the children of Ammon fought with Israel, the Elders of Gilead went
to fetch Iphtah out of the land of Tob. 6. And they said unto Iphtah, Come and
be our Captain, that we may fight with the children of Ammon. 7. Iphtah then
answered unto the Elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of
my fathers house? How then come ye unto me now in the time of your
tribulation? 8. Then the Elders of Gilead said unto Iphtah, Therefore we turn
again to thee now, that thou may go with us, and fight against the
children of Ammon, and be our Head over all the inhabitants of Gilead. 9. And
Iphtah said unto the Elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight
against the children of Ammon, if the Lord give them before me, shall I be
your head? 10. And the Elders of Gilead said unto Iphtah, The Lord be witness
between us, if we do not according to thy words. 11. Then Iphtah went with
the Elders of Gilead, and the people made him Head and Captain over them: And
Iphtah rehearsed all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh.
IN these eight verses, we see how God brought to pass by his providence, that
the Princes of Gilead, who with Iphtahs The sum of these verses.
brethren, had unjustly expelled him out of the city, were driven by their
own law to desire him home again, and to fight against the Ammonites for
them; which that they might the better effect, they go themselves in a solemn
manner to the place of his banishment, even to the land of Tob, and with
entreaty in all humbleness, offer him the government, and chief command in
the battle against Ammon. Iphtah at the first casting them in the teeth with
their unkindness before-time, (as it was meet that such discourtesie and
disgrace as they had offered him in time past should not be altogether buried
in silence and be unmentioned) requires of them good assurance of their
fidelity, because it might be doubted, that their present necessity drove them
to make this offer, rather then any love toward him. Which being tendered and
granted to him accordingly; he yields to their request, and went home with
them, and (the Lord ordering the business) there he found the whole
congregation ready to confirm the election of the Elders of Gilead, as also,
afterward, the Lord himself did: and so Iphtah was made their Captain, and
proceeded to the work whereto God had appointed him.

Generally this teaches how strangely God turns the times and state Doct.
ver. 4. 5.
of things by his wisdom, whereby he rules and disposes them: and this he
does for the trial and comfort of his, and contrary to and against the
expectation and desire of their enemies, as here he did to Iphtahs comfort, and
to the crossing of them of Gilead, raise this war. To teach us all that are
fit to learn, to depend upon him alone, and to have his word for our
direction, that so we need not be ashamed whatsoever come to pass.

Whereas if we have followed our own humor, either in crossing, and wronging
any, as they here did Iphtah, we may be driven to stand in need of them, and to
seek help at their hands, as they did at his, which will not a little cross
us; or if we have reproched ourselves, by bragging and boasting, we may receive
the foil at their hands, whom we have so abused, and so we may with shame be
made to eat our word; or if we have proudly set up our sail, or do depend
upon uncertain hope of future commodities, and momentany preferment, we may
be disapointed to our just reproach, and that easily; the Lord so altering and
changing things as he does. And herein his daily frustrating of many men's hope,
who depend upon blind fortune, promising to themselves, that all shall be, as
they wish, utterly shutting God out from their attempt, might make us wise.

An example hereof in the King of Aram, as in many other, is to be seen: who
often appointed his armies secretly against the King of Israel; but he was 2.
King. 6. 10. 11
disapointed by God of his expectation, till he raged and fretted at it.
Hereupon S. James reprooueth his resolution of man, that he will himself, and
James 4. 13. 14.
of himself say of these changeable things; to morrow we will go to such a
city and gain, etc. when yet Solomon tells us, we cannot tell what one
Prou. 27. 1.
day may bring forth. And yet men cease not to determine what they will do,
and how they will thrive, revenge, take their pleasure and pass the time: and
so we reckon of, and deal about seasons, that although all know the weather
alters the price of things, yet we will sell and buy our commodities Note.
before hand, when we know not how to make good, and perform covenants to
other, or how other will to us, no, neither are willing, if prices alter, to
stand to our word: which yet God does bring to pass ofttimes, to the ioynting
not of such common doings only in smaller matters, but also of the richest in
their greatest affairs, and that a thousand ways according to his good
pleasure. And therefore it were our wisdom to submit our selves to his
providence in all things, and not to stand stiffely upon our own will, seeing
he will break our stomachs in spite of our hearts, by disappointing of us,
and except we do so, we shall never be quiet.

But to return again, we see that God brought this about principally for the
good of his servant Iphtah, and to work his enlargement, though to the shame
and conviction of his adversaries. Iphtah neither himself made any means, by
messengers, writing, or suite of friends, for his return out of banishment:
neither would the Lord permit him to do so, but provided better for him, that
he should have a calling to it: for if he had returned blindly home, as a
private exile, what great matter had it been, or how could Gods work have been
seen in it, as now it was? But behold, the Lord will rather have Iphtah abide
sometime in distress and baseness, that he may be fetched home with public
consent of his nation, as Joseph was out of prison; and that they did not so
much to the gratifying of him, as themselves: the greatest persons of Gilead
requesting it at his hand, and professing themselves highly beholding unto him,
if he would grace them by returning, who had disgraced him before, by casting
him off. Nay, and he must not Note.
be sent for, but come for, not by friends, but by his ranckest enemies, not to
his former estate of a subject, but to be a Lord and Governor. A carnal man
hearing of this, Oh how his teeth water and his fingers itch at the success of
Iphtah, and how does he wish he might have his desire upon his enemies, and
triumph over them as he did? But oh fool! this is no prerogative for thee to
claim, it is the glory of innocence, the fruit of faith, of patient waiting
upon God, and committing a man's ways to him in well-doing. Such another example
(lest we should say this is alone) is Mordecai. The Lord might have put it
into the Kings mind to peruse the Chronicles and recognize Mordecaies well
deserving long before he did: but alas, that had been an obscure favor in
comparison. God meant his worthy servant far better then so: he would have
this break out when it was most seasonable: and the season was, when his
providence might be most manifested thereby. Therefore when great Haman was
working his overthrow, and all the Churches; then is the opportunity to bring
forth the record: that so (all under one) the adversary may be defeated with
shame, the Church notably delivered from danger, and Mordecai not rescued
only, but brought forth out of trouble, with the highest honor that his
rankest enemy could be forced to give him. Come forth (ye disciples of
Machiauel) and set your brains on work in the politiquest manner ye can, and
see if ye can teach your nouices such a way as this, so famously to supplant
your opposites, and set up themselves in their room! ye cannot doubtless, or
if ye could, yet ye teach them but devilish policy to contriue it, whereby you
and they have more cause of shame and repentance, then boasting and insulting.
Therefore (not to digress) now Iphtah is busy about Gods matters (never
thinking of a revenge of his own private wrongs) and lo, the Lord is as busy
about Iphtahs affairs, and contriuing how he may bring him forth out of his
trouble. Is not this enough to persuade us to make God our Factor and Advocate
Doct. 2.
to plead for us, and bring about our matters? yea to tie our own hands
behind us, from putting them forth unlawfully in our own defense? May we not
say now, there is a truth in those words, Roll thy ways, or cast Psalm. 37. 5.
thy care upon Jehovah, and he will give thee thy hearts desire? Did he not so
to Iphtah? Even that issue which he would have desired and sought by revenge,
or evil means (if he had been a bad person) I mean to have his enemies to be
his pages to conduct him home as their Commander; that I say obtained Iphtah,
not by using evil means, but without using any at all. Was not this as a man
would have it? What needed here any shifting, any stirring, any plotting? Did
not God effect it without these? So when Joseph in prison was forgotten by
Pharaohs Butler to be set free, how did the Lord remember him, to bring him
forth with far greater honor. Thus he dealt with his, where they rely on
him. And if he did this for Iphtah, a poor soldier, a bastard, and banished,
and for Mordecai a despised stranger, and for Joseph a poor prisoner, as we
have heard; will he not do the like to us, if we would cleave unto him as our
alsufficient God, and honor him by putting over all to him, to deal wholly
for us, while we sit still, and go about his service? And what less can we
do then trust him with our matters, and wholly give up our selves to be doers
of his work, when as our Master professes himself to be wholly ours, and to
bring our matters to pass, which our selves (with much labor and more sin)
should never be able to compass?

We have heard how Iphtah was repaired unto by the chief of Gilead, The sum
of verse 6. 7. 8.
and what a free and large offer they made to him if he would go with them:
thus had the Lord provided for his servant. Now follows his answer: Iphtah
therefore (as he might well) told the Princes of Gilead of their fault, by so
good occasion and opportunity as was offered; and how injuriously they had
dealt with him, in driving him out from among them against all right and law:
and hereupon he demanded of them how they could now in their straight seek to
him among all other? and indeed they could with no sound reason request favor
of him whom they had hated; and as for him, having received such measure from
them, how could he trust them? And they could not deny it, which was a shame
to them to remember: but now they would prefer him (they said) to make him
recompense, and the rather to persuade him thereof, they confessed the whole
matter unto him. But if he had been as wilful now they stood in need of him,
(which he saw very well) as they had been cruel and spightfull against him
before; he would never have condescended unto them, but would have held them
on the rack.

We learn here, that God does often make us stand in need of their help Doct.
verse. 6.
whom we hate and despise. First to the end we may see our fault in hating
them, and take shame for it, as there is cause. Secondly, to overcome envy,
which if we had not need one of another, would grow very strong. For this cause
did the Lord so dispose, that the Tribes ever needed one another, (as we see
through the stories of this book and the books of Samuel) that they might
hold one with another against Idolaters, and might not hate each the other; and
in a spiritual respect, so God made the people stand in need of the Apostles,
whom before they had railed upon in the second of the Acts 2. 37.
Acts. And so we, if we weighed it would never hate each the other, nor fall
out as we do too easily, one with another, considering the plunges we may be
put to thereby, as when we are driven to stand in need even of them among all
other, and it is in their hand to do us some great hurt.

And yet some do so rest in their own sufficiency, through the want of Note.
wise foresight of the casualties which after may befall them, and through the
pride of heart in their present estate, that they would stand in need of none,
neither be beholding unto any, which is but a nourishing of the hardness of
their hearts, and high mindednes, that so they may further glory in
themselves: and therefore such will rather offer violence to themselves, then
they will use the help of any such as they like not: As Ahab spoke of
Michaiah, when he both stood in great need of his help, and was wished to use
it by godly Iehosaphat; No, says he, for I hate him, and he does not prophecy
1. King. ^2. ^.
good for me: but it had been better for him to have been beholding to him.

So that in respect of such passions, it is some restraint of nature and
bridling of the corrupt heart, in him that can seek to his enemy. And seeing
God does make us all to stand in need one of another, why should we not make
our hearts to bow and bend, especially when it shall be also for our own good
and benefit? Although I must say, that this is not so commendable in us, nor
profitable for us thus far to seek to other, when we may fear the better
thereby; (for a natural man will strain himself for advantage) but when we
do it to cross ourselves, and our evil hearts (which rebel in us, and would
carry us to the contrary) and so stoop to the ouercomming of the poison and
corruption that is in them, and that also for conscience sake, that we may
please God therein; this is a grace and worthy thing indeed.

This being done, we should do well to help one another, and persuade each
other to turn away to alienate rancour and stomach from their enemies, as
Jacob has commendably gone before us herein to Esau, and David Genesis 32. 18. 2.
King. 6. 22.
toward Saul, and the Prophet Elisha did persuade the King of Israel to handle
his enemies kindly which fell into his hands. But yet on the other side we must
take heed as well of flattering men in their evil, as hating the^: for we may
not sin to obtain and get men's favor, but bear our cross contentedly, if
ever we be driven to seek help of them whose sin we have set outselues
against; for why we have done our duties, though we receive ill measure for
our good will, and God will make a way for us, that al shall be well, and he
will (if it be expedient) turn their hearts toward us, for all that: but (as
was said before) let us make none our enemies by needless provoking of them,
but hold peace with all, (if it be possible) yea even with them that are our
enemies.

For how would these here have done, if Iphtah had used them as they did him?
Or what had become of Iehoram, 2. King. 3. if Elisha had persisted in his
rejecting the motion which he made, because he and his father had scorned 2.
King. 3. 13.
him and his predecessor Elija before? Therefore be we wise, for God may so
order it, that (to resist proud men) even they whom we have provoked in our
rashness, may be in place to do us much hurt, and that none save the very
persons whom we have scorned, can help us in our need. When Saul was newly
created King, there were some just of this humor (and therefore they are
called sons of Belial) who defied him: Tush, say they, 1. Sam. 10. 27.
what new vpstart is this? how shall such a base fellow save us? so that they
would not acknowledge nor take him for their King. But shortly after, how
should they have done (when Nahash came upon them) if that despised fellow (as
they accounted of him) had not helped them? Then there was seeking to Saul: and
after the victory it was demanded by the people, who were these that spoke
against Saul so despightfully, saying, Shall he reign over us? bring them
forth, and let them be slain. Therefore (that we may avoid this shame and
imputation of folly to be in our extremes, now to abandon a man as nothing
worth, and after to seek to him, acknowledging him to be our only helper) let
us learn this moderation toward all, as neither to be burdensome to the
greatest, nor yet bear a scornful mind toward the meanest. If the
Samaritan, and the man that fell among thieves had known each other before,
and the one scorned to be the better for the other, is it like the one would
have loosed and relieved the other in that extremity? Yet we may well think
(in such a case) he must have been of a rare proud stomach, that would have
lien still wounded and in pain, rather then be beholding to him that was there
to help him. And let me give the poor a caveat, concerning this humor (for
they that must depend upon all, yet having a proud heart, wish that all
depended upon them, and sometimes will utter words to that effect) and I say
this unto them, It ill becomes the richest: and even they may be sure at one
time or other to smart for their proud stomachs: but much worse it beseems
the poorest, who rather (as Solomon says) should use all entreatie. Let such
break their hearts, and make holy use of Gods affliction upon them, and submit
themselves to the bearing of their burden, that so the hearts of the wealthier
be not justly hardened against them.

Also we see here in their desiring the help of Iphtah, whom they had before
Doct. 2. verse. 6.
expelled, that often times the things which men reject, God chooses to do great
enterprises by. Which as it was most clearly verified in our Savor, who being
the stone which the builders refused, was made the chief Acts 4. 11.
corner stone; so was it also lively verified in the Apostles after, Paul
himself saying of himself: For all the good he had done, and the rest, we are
al made 1. Cor. 4. 9.
a gazing stock to the world, to the Angels, and to men. And so at this day,
by whom does the Lord gather his Church together, but by them that are counted
the abiects of the world? or whom does he make members of his Church, but them
and those to be dearest unto him, who are not counted meet to live on the
earth? Therefore let no faithful servant of God be dismayed for the
discourtesies and discouragements which he shall meet with by the unthankful
world; the Lord sees their works, and has them in never the less account,
but will plentifully reward them: of which point I need not say much, having so
often handled it in this book already.

THE SIXTY FIVE SERMON ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw let us proceed with Iphtah his answer made to the Elders of Gilead: First
therefore in this he repeateth and Verse. 7.
rippeth up their fault, which in times past they had committed against him:
telling them, that they now coming to him in their distress, he (as he might
well) marueiled at it, they never having made agreement with him. And it is
easy to be seen, that in all this, he answered, as he might lawfully do,
putting away all gall and bitterness; for it was meet they should secure him.
And even so it is lawful for us, by so good an occasion as was offered to him
by them, to do as he did, in a like case: to wit, to rehearse men's great
iniurying of us, when they would make nothing of them. And yet all is not
necessary to be followed and practiced of us always, which Iphtah said to
them here, and namely his repeating of their Doct. in verse. 7.
fault, but as the party is able and fit to bear it, and as the weightines of
the matter requires. But without due regard had, the ripping up of matters
Note.
and faults betwixt such as have been at variance, is often times a reviving or
an increasing of strife betwixt the parties. But these men of Gilead seeing
they were many, and their offense had bin great and apparent in excluding him,
therefore he makes mention of the injury which they had offered him, he
having so good opportunity, and doing it so meekly and kindly; and yet Gedeon
did well before in not ripping up, but burying an injury done to him by the men
of Ephraim, and passing it over in silence, when yet they had sore provoked him.

Therefore herein we must crave of God the spirit of wisdom to direct Note.
us how to deal in the like cases, and whether to repeat wrongs done unto us,
and how far, and when: as if they be but words, and in heat and passion
uttered, then to pass by them. But if it shall be found expedient to rehearse
our wrongs, yet this must be resolved of by us, to do it without bitterness and
provoking of them who have hurt us: and if we can make them see their fault, it
is well: but to this end, in the affection of our love let us go about it, and
seek it at their hands, but not to cast them in teeth with it, to ease and
satisfy our stomachs thereby, and so stinging them, but earnestly desiring
their good in any thing that we say to them, neither denying to them (for all
that mentioning of their offense) any help we can yield to them for their
benefit. And when we shall see cause to speak, let us also take heed of
harshnes and tartnes in speaking, whereby our hearts will otherwise easily be
incensed, and set on fire against them before we be aware.

Now in their answer to his exprobration made against them, in verse. 7. let us
in this verse note, that they do not deny, but confess that they had Doct
verse. 8.
injured him, but indeed they show that they (conueying it cleanly another way)
are utterly unwilling to hear of it: telling him why they came to him, namely
to make him their Captain for their deliverance, by which kindness offered to
him, they hoped (they said) to make him amends. Where we may learn, that it
was commendable in them, and to be followed, in that they do grant that they
had faulted and injured him. So is it ever to be done of us: and contrarily,
that the washing away of men's faults, (whereof they may justly be convicted)
by facing, lying, or otherwise hiding, or cloaking, or extenuating them, must
be carefully avoided. By which means we do but lay them more open before
God, and as it were, put them in remembrance of them: the only way to cover
them, is by confessing and renouncing them, for to such belongs the promise of
forgiveness, Prou. 28. 13. Psalm. 32. 1.
which is called the true covering of them by God himself, Psalm. 32. For if
we have sinned, we ought to acknowledge it, according to the nature, quality
and kind thereof: whether to God or man, publicly or privately, yea if it be
to one: according to S. James direction, in these words: Acknowledge your
faults one to another. And if we cannot be brought to do James 5. 16.
so, and that willingly; much more hardly, or not at all, will we offer further
resistance of, and violence to our corrupt nature, which some sins do and
will require. And yet if we come to yield so far, yet if we do it houerly
and for fashion, or to get that which we seek, by our so confessing, howsoever
it may be commendable before men, yet before God it is nothing worth.

But in that they hasted from hearing much of that matter, it being harsh Doct.
2.
in their hearing, and sore against them, it bewraieth a corruption to be noted
in us which is over common, to wit, how unwilling we are to have our faults
brought to light; we care not how little and seldom we hear of any Note.
thing that is against our corrupt nature, or evil practice, against which yet
Ioh. 3. 19.
we should be ready to hear the hardest, knowing that we are not debtors Romans
8. 12.
to the flesh, but enemies to it, and that professed. A token (no doubt) of a
filthy and hard heart, much putrified: for should we not be ready to purge out
the poison and putrefaction which will burst and kill us?

In particular, the practice of most men is like these Gileadites; for if they
have slandered their brother by whispering reports in corners (where they
think they are safe enough from coming to light against them) and afterward
are charged to make them good, or take the shame thereof by eating their word,
they can cunningly wind themselves out of that argument, by turning their
speech to some other matter, which they think will better please their
accuser, at least which may cover their own lewdness. And if they be pressed
with it, oh then (say they) let us hear no more of Note.
that, ve speak out of season, etc. Is this honest dealing? to lay on load of
reproach upon the innocent, and to aggrauate conceits or false rumors against
them, and when the truth should be brought forth to the saving and preserving
of our brothers good name, then to leave him in the briars unconscionably? Let
Joseph's brethren condemn these, who confessed their sin against their
brother and concealed it not.

If it be the property of a servant of God, to hunt and pursue himself for
his inward sin, yea though it be but one, as we read David often to have
Psalm. 51. 3. Psalm. 73. 3.
done; what ought we to do for many, and those also manifest before men? But
if men do accuse and judge themselves no sorer for their sins in private,
Note.
aggravating and bewailing them to God, with taking shame to themselves for the
committing them, then they give testimony thereof to men: also, if they do
not more resist them aloue, then they love to hear of them by others, it is no
marvel that they be so bad as they are. And as it is too common to take a
private reproof unkindly, nay rebelliously, and with Leuit. 19. 17.
hating him that offers it, which yet he is commanded of God to do: even so in
public hearing it fares; insomuch as if some men's consciences be touched in
any lively manner, (which is an wholesome warning) yet we see how unwelcome it
is to the most, and excepted against, though without the least cause of so
doing, but of the contrary rather, to wit, of yielding thanks for it. The use
is, that if we cannot be willing to hear of faults, we should in no wise give
liberty to our selves, nay nor by any violence be brought to commit them. But
of these points, see chap. 9. in Iothams fleeing from his brother, etc.

Now out of the offer of the Elders, compared with Iphtahs speech in Verse. 9.
the ninth verse, demanding assurance thereof, (for he did indeed urge them
about it, as he had cause) a question may arise, how they could offer this to
Iphtah to be their Judge, and how he could take it with a good conscience?
First, seeing they had no authority to offer it. Secondly, seeing he and they
Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
both had this block in their way, that a Bastard might not enter into the
Congregation of the Lord to bear any office. The answer is to both questions
one: that the Lord directed them thus to do, who is bound to no law: and that
he guided them herein, the whole story through the Chapter testifies. The Lord
excludes such in Deuteronomy from bearing public office: and that to terrify
men from begetting Bastards, who are in this world reproachful, and lie open to
much misery. And yet how this forbidding that sin prevails with men, this
the commonnesse of the sin, and this profane practice of adulterers too too
much bewraieth, who think that by this means, of bringing Bastards into the
world, (that is the pity they take of them) they shall shun the wearisome
company of the wise, and tediousness of children, with the unwelcome
annoiances that they count to accompany both. But oh monsters! do they think
by avoiding the burden of the lawful wife and children, to escape the blot of
unlawful liberty, even reproachful whoredoms? Does not God set a brand both
upon them and their cursed fruit? For it is proved by experience, that besides
the discouragement which bastards are oppressed with, as of scorn, and
opprobrie in the world, (which of it self is enough to hold them under) the
Lord denies them (commonly) good education: so that they prove vagabonds,
curses them with a more then common indisposition and aukenesse of nature, to
retain instruction and government. And lastly, there are few of them who are
not tainted with vile and odious Note.
qualities, such as they derive from their vicious and unclean parents. And
therefore the greater is their sin, who for all this his prohibition, most
wickedly fill the world with them, and cause them to be brought into so great
calamity. Yet as the innocents cannot do with it, so (God be thanked) they
are not shouldred out from the hope of salvation, for there is no respect of
persons with God, if they fear him. But if they were cast off by the Lord,
Acts 10. 34.
yet such is the unconscionable beastliness of those graceless persons, that
for their own filthy lust they would thus endanger them, as the loathsome
practice of those unclean Locustes, the Popish Monks and Friars, both in this
land and elsewhere has abundantly witnessed to the world in former ages. See
more in the first verse of this Chapter.

Iphtah having found ill dealing at their hands before, as we have heard, Verse.
10. 11.
for that they were not lead by conscience and the fear of God, when they cast
him out, but by partiality, used cruelty against him; he did not therefore
trust them upon their word, but requires an oath of God at their mouths, as
may be gathered by their making God a witness of the promise which they made
unto him, and so tieth them to a sure couenanting with him: For it had not
otherwise been wisely provided for by him: and therefore when he went with the
messengers to Mizpeh, he rehearsed these things there before the Lord, that so
the promise which they made, might stand sure, God being desired to be the
beholder and witness.

And here let us learn, that when men have dealt unfaithfully, and
dishonestly, Doct. verse. 10.
they have no wrong offered them, if they be not credited as before, no,
although they be bound by bond, (whereas their bare word was taken while they
went for honest men) for they have given just cause to other to suspect their
credit. And by this, which I say, may be noted, that one cause Note.
why men are in less credit now adays, is their unfaithful dealing. And
whereas some cannot be trusted, nor borrow upon their word or bond, but for
want of credit do go without that which would stand them in exceeding great
stead, for their upholding and maintenance; it is the fruit of their own
doings, and that which they have sought by their own untrustiness, and
breaking of their promise, whereby they have lost their credit together with
their honesty.

For in these days many care not to deceive, yea, and undo others, and
therefore come to naught themselves also for the most part, whereas some other
being faithful and conscionable; upon their bare credit, live and maintain
their charge by borrowing, and by other men's forbearing them. And whereas it is
objected on the behalf of these unthrifts and deceivers, that they must be
borne withal, though they cannot pay that which they have borrowed: I answer;
Some of them see no likelihood that they can repay so much as they will seek
to borrow, and take into their hands, of other men's goods; which argues little
honesty, and therefore are well content to wind it from them cunningly and
craftily, whereby also they impouerish some; others will not diminish their
occupying in the least manner, though they go above their reach, nor detract
from their belly and pastime to pay the owner, thereby showing that they care
not how he come by his due and right, or whether he ever have it again or no.

Now while these things are thus, we may note that the beauty of religion is
such, if it be planted in men soundly and indeed, as that it winnes credit to
him that has it for contrary dealing, and makes him to be approved for his
faithfulness, conscionablenesse and honesty: whereas he that is void of them,
lives in utter discredit and just reproach. And whereas ye will say, some of
them that make show of religion, do yet deceive and deal vntrustily with
their creditors. I answer, it is not the show of religion, but the practice of
it that carries the beauty with it that I speak of: and if any that be taken
to be religious, offend this way, know we that it is not their religion that
imboldneth them to such dealing, but that they have so little of it. And so it
is true also, that some that have credit deservedly, do, for the sweetness of
the gain, if they take not heed, hold their due from the owners sometimes,
though they may little rejoice in it. And let them know, that their sin is
the greater: but yet all this notwithstanding, there are some who dare not,
neither will by any means be brought to do so. And if ye ask me, Why then
do men take bonds of such as are of approved honesty, and have not broken nor
lost their credit; as if they were no better trusted then other common men? I
answer: Not because they be distrusted, but first, seeing all are mortal, and
so men might lose their goods, if they had no security for them by those in
whose hands they are: and secondly, that contention may not arise betwixt the
posterity of both parties that shall come after. And again, seeing there are
such deceivers in the world, as would provoke even the honest to contention, if
they can see any hole open, or epsy any advantage.

And this rule holds also firm and good in religious actions before God. For
as it is the honor of a Christian to continue constant in his love to the
truth, and the Church of God, the fruit whereof is a sound and good report: so
if a man begin to warpe and bewray his hollownesse or treachery in either; his
stain is not easily washed out, neither can he look for that current
estimation or reverence which before he had, nor scarce obtain so much
afterward as to be credited, for all his profession. Although men will be trust
their vessels with oil or wine, while they be sound and whole, yet if they
begin to leake and run, they will not commit any thing unto them, which is in
danger of losing. Our Savior asked Peter but once, Whom say thou that Mat.
16. 16. 17.
I am? and took his word, when he deserved no other: whereas afterward he was
not satisfied with one nor two professions of his affection, Simon John 21. 15.
love thou me? good reason, he had made a great crack in his credit, and
therefore he that had forsworn Christ, deserved not upon his own bare Note.
word and answer, to be believed. And those who have deceived the opinion of
the Church touching their religion, by falling into error and schism, or their
piety and honesty, by gross offenses; may thank themselves, if ever
afterward the people of God have them in a iealousic. As we read in the
Ecclesiastical history, that when once the baptized party revolted either
from his religion or good conscience, (as Miriam by her arrogancy) the Church
admitted him not without serious repentance and confession of his fault. But if
he slipped the second time, they practiced greater severity toward them,
enioyning them not repentance only, but (for a space of time) to remain out of
the Church as in famous. Yea, some even of the reuerendest Fathers of those
times, as Cyprian and others, grew to this erroneous opinion, that such were
not to be admitted without rebaptization, as if their former seal had been
quite pulled off by their sin, I mean the seal of forgiveness. Therefore let
all Christians look to their standing: the didiuell (if it be possible) will
quite overthrow them; but if he cannot, he will Note.
foil them, and take away the crown of their rejoicing, which is their
faithfulness and constancy. And he is an impudent person, who having foully
dishonored God and his profession, will hold up his head boldly, and claim his
old privilege. Do we not see that among men, one perjured, or a forger, is
disabled from ever bearing any witness, against or for any, in public court?
And have not all men such a one in suspicion? Does not treason taint even the
blood of the traitor, so that (even when he is loyal) he goes for no better?
and he who has got a patent of restitution, or pardon for his fellonie, does
he not forfeit it by a second offense in the like kind? But of this enough.

Another thing worth the marking is this, that in as much as Iphtah went Verse.
11.
so easily from his just quarrel that he had against them of Gilead, and had
so soon done, when he had wisely told them that which concerned them to hear,
and when they had assured him of that which he demanded; by this I say, we are
taught, not to hold in our hearts an injury against us by any, Prou. 16.
but soon to remit an offense, for it is an honor to pass by it. He
mentions the matter but once to them, and once requires security, but goes
no further. And who sees it not to be a great grace in any man to do so? for
therein he does after the example of the Lord himself, who does not follow
Exodus 34. 7.
things against us hotly, but shows great lenity and kindness. And as Note.
we should not be rigorous and cruel in our dealings, to provoke men with our
bitterness to wrath, so should we make an end of controversies, as soon and in
as few words as may be, as for other causes; so, not in the least respect for
this, seeing in many words commonly there is much sin. Of this somewhat was
said before in verse. 4. but especially look back into Chap. 8. verse 2.

And further learn what has been the religiousnesse of an oath in times Doct.
2.
past: to wit, such that if it were once offered and taken, there was no more
question, but the controversy was ended. As we see Rahab, having it granted
Joshua 2. 21.
her by oath of the spies, that she and her fathers house should be saved
alive, at the destruction of Ierrico, rested satisfied. Therefore men must
look to what they swear: seeing an oath is not to be violated, unless it
were made for the accomplishment of evil: in which case the keeping of it were
double sin; (as Heroas was) and the least evil therein is great. And Mark
6. 20.
as heed must be taken, how men swear, so must they who offer the oath to
other, that it be so done, that they to whom it is ministered, may be free from
snare, so that they may do it (as the Prophet speaks) in truth,
righteousness and judgment.

Therefore such as draw men by oath to fulfill their desire, and to do things
against conscience, have the more to answer for. Men then must not be drawn
and forced thereto, to which they cannot yield, nor of themselves rashly swear
to do that which they approve not, but abhor. Iphtah doubted no more after
the oath, but goes after the army. But an oath is not strong enough now adays
to hold a man fast, neither can we safely Heb 6. 1^.
rest in it, for the deciding of controversies, although the Lord has taught
us otherwise. Now for the further ratifying of the covenant betwixt them, it is
rehearsed before the Lord in Mizpeh by them: for thus the men of Gilead say, We
covenant with thee before the Lord, to do, as we say, and that he may punish
us, if we break it. Therefore such as are common swearers are not to be
admitted to this solemn oath, either in accusation or decission of
controversies. For (as I said) they have lost their credit: they have often
falsified their oaths, (for how should a common swearer avoid common perjury?)
and therefore that which another man uses reverently, and with conscience,
such rush upon commonly and carelessly, through a profane habit: being herein
worse then Heathens, who counted not such worthy of society, but
intestabiles, as they called them, that is, such as were not to be admitted as
witness. And commonly such they are, who prostitute themselves for gain to
swear falsely before the Magistrate: of whom there are many, and some the Lord
shoaleth out from among their fellows, as notorious monsters, branding some
with in famie and misery, and terrifying the consciences of other with hellish
fears, if not with despair. And a step to this sin, is the abusing of the
tongue by false asseuerations, or contestations: as to say, Verily it is thus,
or so: As sure as I am in this place it is true: God knows I speak no more
then truth: I take God to witness, etc. Whereunto commonly men join
deprecations with Peter, if they be not believed. And yet all false. This I
say, never goes alone: the commonlyer, the false asseuerer, will not stick, if
need be, to be a false swearer also. Therefore (to shut up) let men account of
oaths as divine bands and pledges: cautions of our fidelity and truth
deposed, and left in the hands of God himself: which he that dare forfeit or
break, let him be sure, that God (to whose censure he yields himself) will
find him out, if not in this world, (as many are) yet hereafter, when he shall
give him his portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever.
As indeed what punishment can equal that sin, which overthrows all civil
society and (the sinews thereof) religion itself?

THE SIXTY SIX SERMON ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 12. Then Iphtah sent messengers unto the King of the children of Ammon,
saying, What have thou to do with me, that thou art come against me, to fight
in my land? 13. And the King of the children of Ammon answered unto the
messengers of Iphtah, Because Israel took my land when they came up from
Egypt, from Arnon unto Iabbok, and unto Jorden: now therefore restore those
lands quietly. 14. Yet Iphtah sent messengers again unto the children of
Ammon, 15. And said unto him, Thus says Iphtah, Israel took not the land of
Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon. 16. But when Israel came up from
Egypt, and walked through the wilderness unto the red Sea, then they came to
Kadesh. 18. Then they went through the wilderness, and compassed the land of
Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the East side of the land of Moab, and
pitched on the other side of Arnon, and came not within the coast of Moab; for
Arnon was the border of Moab. 19. Also Israel sent messengers unto Siho^ King
of the Amorites, the King of Heshbon, and Israel said unto him, Let us pass we
pray thee, by thy land, unto our place. 20. But Sihon consented not to Israel,
that he should go through his coast: but Sihon gathered all his people
together, and pitched in Iahaz, and fought with Israel. 21. And the Lord God of
Israel gave Sihon and all his folk into the hands of Israel, and they smote
them: so Israel possessed all the land of the Ammorites, the inhabitants of
that country. 22. And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from
Arnon unto Iabbok, and from the wilderness even unto Jorden. 23. Now therefore
the Lord God of Israel has cast out the Amorites before his people Israel, and
should thou possess it? 24. Would not thou possess that which Chemosh
thy god gives thee to possess? so whomsoever the Lord our God drives out
before us, them will we possess. 25. And art thou now far better then Balak
the son of Zippor, King of Moab? did he not strive with Israel, and fight
against them? 26. When Israel dwelt in Heshbon, and in her towns, and in
Aroer, and in her towns, and in all the Cities that are by the coasts of Arnon
three hundred year? Why did ye not then recover them in that space? 27.
Wherefore I have not offended thee; but thou do me wrong, to war against
me. The Lord the Judge, be Judge this day, between the children of Israel and
the children of Ammon. 28. Howbeit the King of the children of Ammon, hearkened
not unto the words of Iphtah, which he had sent him.
IPhtah being now stablished their Captain and The sense of these verses in
general.
Guide, as we have heard, it is showed in the verses now read, how he went to
work against the Ammonites, and that was in this manner. First, he sends
messengers to the King of Ammon, with reasons to appease him, if it may be, and
hold him from war, but he hearkens to none. His quarrel was for land, which
Israel had now enjoyed full 400. years, and yet the King of Ammon claims it,
and being denied it, now makes war with them for it. Now more particularly
let us hear their reasoning about the matter: the which to avoid tediousness,
I will not at large set down first, but lay it out in the verses, as they be
in order.

In these two verses, Iphtah demands of the King of Ammon by his messengers,
Verse 12. 13. particularly.
why he made war against him, and what injury he had offered him, why he
should do so. The King of Ammon answered him, that Israel had taken away part
of his land, when they came out of Egypt, and this he required to be safely
delivered, and restored peaceably to him, and he would depart from molesting
his country, but otherwise he would not. Of these in their order.

First here let us consider Iphtahs dealing, who before he goes to war,
Doct. ver. 12.
debateth and enquireth about the matter, to see if by this means the enemy
might be appeased: in a word he uses the best means he could devise to keep
peace: which ought to be observed as a rule, that so we should do before the
attempting of war with nation, or suite with any person. According to the
general rules: As much as in you lies have peace with all, and Rom 12. 18.
Heb. 12. 14.
again, Ensew peace and follow it, though it flee from you, (for it is a
precious treasure.) So in this particular especially: We know how carefully we
labor, to preserve a member of our body before we will cut it off. So much
more we should deal in this case, to preserve many bodies of men and persons
rather then commit them to the hazard of war, (as making no more account of
the lives of Christian men, then of dogs, oxen, or sheep, or to suffer
civil and private envy, contention and strife, to the losing of many souls.
And so did the ten Tribes deal with their brethren on the other side Jorden,
that is, they did prevent and stay much that might have risen, and
bloodshedding. For when after their departure from them, they heard they had
committed a grievous trespass against the Lord, for the which Iosu. 22. 33.
they thought they had just cause to make war with them: yet did they not
follow their own minds, nor give full credit to the report, but did first
wisely send unto them to know the certainty, and thereby they were satisfied.
But I doubt not of the easy consenting to this part of justice, as being a
point disputed and agreed upon by Heathens and their practice in their wars,
as also your Moralists, whose position it is: That an honest war, is to be
preferred to an unequal or hurtful peace, and no otherwise. To leave this
therefore and to come nearer to our selves, the same rule is to be kept in
private controversies betwixt men, that law be not attempted, till all other
means be first used: and a great sin it is among Christians, to run by and
by to law, and to the suing one of another, as too many use to do, hotly,
rashly, and wilfully, though themselves sustain most hurt by it, who do so,
as being authors of the contention, and suite. Likewise the same may be said of
offenders in other kinds, who if they have been lead away by leaud counsel or
company, and yet relent for it afterward, and take admonition against it
willingly, they are to be used more favorably (so far as by the law they may
be forborne:) even as the stiffenecked and saucy, and bold defenders of their
sin are sharply to be dealt with, lest they grow past recovery, and do as
the waters, even ouerflow all places where they come.

Some controversies shall (no doubt) always arise between man and man,
touching things, the equity whereof is unknown, and uncertain it shall be
whose the right is. But if contentions proceeding from manifest wrong, or from
ungrounded surmises, were at the first taken up, and cut off, (in which
commonly most rashness, heat and distemper is bewrayed) yea if trifling
quarrels were trodden under foot; then neither should men have so many
needless ianglings, and those which are serious and could not be avoided,
should more indifferently be handled and decided, either privately Note.
or (with peaceable consent of both parties) by trauerse of law. Yea I say, if
themselves could not hit upon agreement, they would yield to the discretion and
love of such as might compound their differences: rather then multiply one
sin upon another, as fiercenes of words to the gall of their stomachs, and
other actual pursuit each of other to both the former; showing themselves
unappeasable and inexorable. It is the pride, bitterness and envy of the
heart, rather then the weightinesse of the cause, which often prouokes men to the
heat and stomach which they utter and bewray (all may see) in their iarrings
each against other. And therefore they are so far from Iphtah his practice,
that they rejoice they have any pretense of debate and suite against their
neighbor: and follow it in such eager and odious manner, that all may see they
sue not because they have cause, but are glad they have any occasion (such a
delight they have therein) that they might fall to suite. The claim of a whole
Tribes inheritance, did not so stir Iphtah to wrath against this usurper, as
many of us would be stirred against him that would challenge a few acres of
our possession: what do I say? nay, against him that contendeth about a twelve
penny matter with us; and yet we should exceed them, that go many degrees
before Iphtah in the means of knowledge and acquaintance with Gods will in
particular duties, if we did well consider it. Let such doings be heard of
among Heathens: as for Christians, if one party will not hear of his duty,
let the other give him over, and let him contend (if he will needs) with his
own shadow. Doubtless in many contentions, if either party were wise, the
others folly should soon appear, and the contention which grows past
recovery should cease, and be at an end.

And further Iphtah, by asking what wrong he had done him, that he came 2
to war against him, gives all to understand, how absurd and odious a thing
it is, to do wrong and deal hardly with them who have done no injury to us:
and therefore he says, If I have done wrong, good reason it is that I should
satisfy the challenge, etc. For if that be foolishnes when we do but meddle
with a matter that belongs not unto us, and with the which we have nothing to
do; yea though we mean no evil thereby, if that (I say) be folly; and as
Solomon says, all one as if a man plucked a cursed Prou. 26. 17.
dog by the ear: then to hurt any willingly, and to be cruel and injurious
to him, that would live in peace by us, is an high degree of iniquity. And if
we ought to sustain a double injury, rather then to offer to revenge Matthew. 5
39. Prou. 17. 15.
one, how great a sin is it to do wrong, or hurt any man, we not being
provoked by him? It is abomination; even as it is to let the guilty go free,
and yet many make no conscience hereof. But I have spoken of this point in
chap. 8. in Gedeons protestation to Zeba and Zalmunna and in other places.

The King of the Ammonites sends him word, that Israel had taken away Verse. 13.
part of his land, when they went out of Egypt toward the land of Canaan, and
therefore he made war with them. But how true this was, ye may see in
Deuteronomy, where the Lord speaks thus to the children of Israel, Deuteronomy 2 19.
when they should pass by them: Thou shall not lay siege against the children
of Ammon, neither make war against them, for I will not give the land of the
children of Ammon into thy hands. And in the 37. verse, Moses tells them, they
obeyed the Lord therein, saying: Unto the land of the Deuteronomy. 2. 37.
children of Ammon thou came not: nor unto any place of the river Iabbok upon
which it bounded. So we see, that whereas it is manifest, that the Lord
suffered not Israel to meddle with Ammon; yet the King answers boldly, they did.

This teaches that such are to be found, who neither mean well and simply,
Doct. verse. 13.
neither care what they say: but as their hearts are full of falsehood and
deceit, so their mouths are full of lying. The Lord himself had said, the
people of Israel should not, neither did they meddle with the Ammonites, as the
forementioned scripture testifies; yet their King boldly and untruly
avouches, that they took his land and enjoyed it as their own. The which,
who should not be ready to believe, being so boldly avouched, and that by a
King? Even so, many care not what lies they coin, nor how shamelesly they lay
claim to other men's goods, and how boldly and impudently they set against the
truth in many other dealings. And this they do either for their commodity, as
this King did; or for their credit, and to set a color on their doings, as the
old Prophet of Beth: I did by lying, and 1 King. 13 18.
Gehazi also when he had gotten the tallents of Naaman: or for both respects
together, as Anantas and Saphira; and Saul also: See his answer Acts. 5. 5.
1. Sam. 15. Let the credit of such be with us thereafter. In stead of this
dealing 1. Sam. 15. 20.
we see the beauty of truth and faithfulness, without which, how can men live
one with another? Put away lying therefore, as the Apostle wills, Ephesians. 5.
25.
and speak the truth every man to his neighbor.

In this unreasonable and absurd answer of this King, compared with Doct. 2.
Iphtah his wise and equal proceeding, we see the contrariety of men's
dispositions: there are some that strive by all possible means against
contention and vnpeaceablenes: there are others again, whose delight it is to
be ever at debate and odds with such as full gladly would live at peace, as
Esau with Jacob: and all because they would make a gain and booty of them
that are honestly minded, or have their will of them some other way. They know
a godly man will buy his peace dear, rather then want it: and they will lay
load enough upon such therefore, to see what they can wring from them,
although without all color of equity. Besides, peace is vile and of no price
with an unrighteous person, there is nothing to be got by it, he says: but
when the water is troubled, then is his season to cast in, and therefore all is
fish that comes to net. Who sees not that this King was mischieuously minded,
in that he shapeth such an answer as either (being yielded unto) tended to the
undoing of a Tribe; or if not, threatened implacable dissension? So Benhadad
sends this message to Ahab, Thou and all thou have 1. King. 20. 3.
are mine, deny it if thou dare. It is plain he was set upon war, who sent
so proud a challenge, as excluded all possibility of agreement and peace. And
such there are in all places, who (if they might have their minds) would choose
war, rather then to live in peace, that they might boldly rifle their houses
whom they grudge at, and whom they could not suffer to live by them, except
they might possess them, and all they have, as Hamor spoke of Jacob and his
sons to the men of his city: Therefore see thou an unrighteous Genesis 34. 23.
person? wonder not then if thou hear of unreasonableness to come from him: for
these two go yoked together, (though fear and danger of law do often restrain
the inward corruption from breaking out) so hideous a monster is injustice, if
it might be seen in the colors! As for this practice of lying, forging,
subborning, concealing truth, and impudent facing out an ill cause (as an ill
title, to go no further) for advantage sake, though to the treading down of
the poor innocent, nay, to his utter undoing, when was it more common then now
adays? And this evil (as well as other scurfe and iniquity) will cleave to
the better sort too, (if the devil can) and he will also, except they walk
armed with their breast plate continually. Ephesians. 6. 14.


In these five verses, Iphtah sends word again to the King of the Ammonites,
Verse. 14. to 19.
that it was not so as he affirmed: they took no part of his ground to them:
and then proceeds further by reasons to persuade him to desist from his
attempt. As first thus: Israel sent messengers when they came out of Egypt, to
the King of Edom to go through his land, and he not yielding to them, they
were feign to go a great way about, by a long and tedious journey in the
wilderness: so they desired to pass by Moab also, and could not be suffered.
But did they make war with either of both? No, they chose rather to abide
long in the desert, and to go far about (as I have said:) so far is it
off, that they did them any wrong, that they chose rather to offer violence to
themselves. So that they did no injury to any. And was it like then, that they
would offer violence to any? and consequently, not to thy predecessors, the
children of Ammon.

As Iphtah here gives not place to untruth, though he prevailed not: Doct.
ver. 14 15
wherein he honored the Lord, in bearing witness to a good cause; so let us
know, it is our duty to do: namely to bring the truth to light, as much as in
us lies; if it be but to bring them to shame who resist it, for they work
much mischief and iniquity thereby: and to hold sin from multiplying, as it
does greatly by lying. And have we it in greater detestation, then some of them
who would be taken for honest men, for as much as we know that the Lord has
linked such as love to make lies among dogs, Inchanters, Revel. 22. 15.
and whoremongers. And let us remember that which Solomon says: He who
justifies the wicked, (lier or other) is as abominable to the Lord, as he
Prou. 17. 15.
that condemns the innocent. And the Apostle puts the consenter to evil
(whether to lying, swearing, etc.) in an higher degree of sinners, then the
committers. As who sees not, that the Pharisees and Jews which hired Matthew.
27. 20.
and fleshed the false witnesses against our Savior, were worse then the false
witnesses themselves? Thus Samuel convicted Saul of his lie, 1. Sam. 15. Elisha
1. Sam. 15. 14. 2. King. 5. 26. Gal. 2. 14.
argued Gehazi. Nay Paul, Galath. 2. did openly check and detect dissimulation
in Peter, and resisted him to his face. The truth is, men in general hate
lying, both the coyner of it, and the teller of it: but in particular, there
are so many occasions fall out, (as sometimes when a man in favor of his
kinsman will not stick to swear against conscience to purge him of adultery)
to lay men open who do so, that their general hatred thereof, is turned into
a special liking of it, or a tolerating it, and conniuence at it. Neither is
it strange, that they who are not just and armed with the breast plate of
righteousness, should want the girdle of verity. Some for bribes, favor,
flattery, friendship, commodity, and such like partial and smister respects,
will (to use the proverb) not stick to say, The crow is white, if their great
patrons, or such as they depend upon, will say it before them: and others for
fear, are driven to conceal the truth, and to hear a falsehood justified,
who are as bad as liars, and coupled with them, Revel. the last. And yet we
must know, that every untruth is not a lie, except we know that which we report
as an untruth, to be so. Yet must we beware that we offend not therein, neither
by uttering rashly whatsoever we hear spoken of other (but as it may do
good:) neither in telling the truth are we bound to utter all the truth,
further then we shall see it expedient to do so.

Iphtah not only withstands an untruth, but also shows reason: so we Verse.
15. 16. 17.
must withstand untruth by reason, approved of all and of the Scripture it
self; so that they who will not yield to it, may show themselves unreasonable,
and so they are to be accounted, and no better, who wash away all sound
reason, which they are not able to resist, breeding quarrelling and contention
hereby: wherein the Pharisees and Priests went before other, never resting in
the most sound reasons, wherewith our Savior in commoning with them, did
convince them, but withstood them shamelesly. So when other allege reasons to
us, it is our duty to yield to them: as Laban himself though an Idolater,
answered Abraham's servant, in that matter he dealt with him for; seeing the
report which he made of things unto him, to be so current and reasonable, I can
say neither less nor more, says he, for Genesis 2^. 50.
this thing is of the Lord. But more of this in the 28. verse by way of use
hereof.

Now what his reason was we have heard: to wit, that the children of Israel 2
did offer violence to themselves, rather then they would in the least manner
wrong other: therefore they would much less take away so great a portion of
ground from him with whom they had nothing to do, neither were provoked by him.
Where we learn this, that we should never find sweetness in coming by any
profit amiss, and namely with the hurting and wronging of other. First, seeing
we thereby provoke God against us, for God is the auenger of such things: and
what is our life, if God be against Gen 12. 3. Matthew. 7. 2.
us? Besides, as we deal to other, so shall we be dealt with again: and
lastly, besides an ill name, we shall have an ill conscience also, as we may
see in Judas.

And as we should offer hard measure to none, so least of all to the poor, and
to such as cannot bear the loss, and are not able to stand with us in suite.
For we being by the commandment of God to relieve them, what pleasure should
we take in plucking from them? and God threatens to Romans 12. 13.
hear their cry against their oppressors. And yet how are the poor griped
and pilled? But he that observes it, shall find, that either God makes
themselves who so wrong them, to cry out of it, for fear of his revenging
hand, one time or other: or else it shall be to them, I mean their sweet
morsels (as they count them) which they take in by wronging other, as the
Israelites Quails were, who died with them, while they were in their mouths.
Even Numb. 11. 33.
so shall they have small liking of their injury they do, that I say no more.
But let them rather make restitution, and that speedily, while they may, in
token of their repentance, which is the only good end that can be made of such
doings. This point has often come to hand and largely been insisted upon. See
verse twelfth. Only let us mark the example of Jacob for the proof of the
doctrine, who rather then he would give Laban (a quarrellous and Genesis 31. 39.
unreasonable man) the least occasion to challenge him for pillage and
robbery, did more then he needed, even make good every sheep, which was
cassually destroyed or perished, with his own. Now if all this our good
dealing, do not prevail with our evil adversary, nor stop his mouth, yet
(as Jacob answers Laban) the Lord who sees us in secret, will take our cause
into his own hand, and plead for us; whereas otherwise, although all men
should stand out for us, yet our conscience and God being against us, we
should not be able to stand under our burden.

Another reason Iphtah sets down in these verses, thus: Sihon, king of
Verse. 19. to the 25.
the Ammonites, would needs come out against us, as we were going toward
Canaan, and God gave him into our hands, so that by him we enjoy this land
which ye contend for, and which he enjoyed; and therefore what have ye to do to
claim it? or what right have ye unto it? For ye never possessed it, but
Sthon of whom we won it by the law of war. So that if the Lord our God has
cast him out, and given his land to us, come thou in who have nothing to do
with it, against us to possess it? He further in the 24. verse shows that
which he said clearly by a similitude, thus: Ye Ammonites worship the Idol
Chemosh for your god, and you think that the land which ye possess, ye
enjoy it by his benefit, and so by good right: so we have this by the benefit
of the true God, and therefore we possess it by very good right. And as for
Chemosh, he called not that idol a God, for that he took it to be so, but
for that the Ammonites so judged it to be.

We may see here, how far we may lawfully enjoy such things as are taken
Doct. verse. 19. to the 29.
in war: and that is, when the war is lawfully taken in hand, as by Israel
it was. That which we thereby obtain by good success, that may we enjoy, as
given into our hands by the Lord. And to speak of things more private, the same
may be said of all that God gives us by the good will of our friends, or by
our lawful dealing, and by Gods blessing in our calling. But yet with this
watchword, that we honor him therewith in Christian life, and glad the hearts
of Gods people thereby: which we ought as well to do, as to be able to prove
and show, that the commodities we enjoy, are no fruits of our own rapine,
oppression, covetousness, and evil conscience, but indeed the bequests of our
father, which, as Jacob said, the Lord our Genes. 32. 10. Genes. 33. 5.
God has bestowed, as a blessing upon us his servants, seeking first the
things that concern our happiness and God his kingdom, and receiving from
him these smaller things again, in token of his allowing and approouing of us.
But this is an usual argument in this book, therefore I pass by it.

More particularly, let us note out of this verse, in that Israel would not
Doct. verse. 19.
(and was guided by God therein) when he had great need, so much as go through
the land of Sihon without his leave, learn we hence I say, that no man may
usurp or challenge to himself another man's right, but every man is to be
content with his own portion and allowance; yea in this the Lord will have the
meanest free from the tyranny of the greatest, and takes the cause of the
poor into his own hand, against their potent enemies, though there be none
upon earth that can judge them, as in the case of Ahab and Iezabels extorting
Naboths vineyard, does appear. And the reason is good: for next to the good of
the Church, the Lord has a special care of upholding of society among men, by
order and good government, which are overthrown when propriety in goods and
commodities is taken away, by the unequal usurpation of the greater over the
smaller. And in truth, as there is small odds betwixt beasts and men, when the
common bands of equity are broken: so much less is it like, that a Church can
be settled and established in such confusion: and the greater is their sin,
who even in the Church exercise this mischievous practice, whereof not God (who
is the God of order) but Satan is the author, even as he is of all other
disorders. Therefore let none be troublesome or injurious to other, more then
he would be content, that another should wrong or hurt him in that which is
his. None should be oppressed in bargaining, or otherwise, as the Lord by the
Apostle has given in charge; which if it were well regarded, 1. These. 4. 6.
much complaining of injury and hard dealing would cease. But this is a branch
of the other.

It came of the Lord, that Sihon did not only deny passage to Israel through
Doct. verse. 10. to the 23.
his land, but also that he should provoke them to war, that he might give
him and his land into their hands, and withal give them passage through his
country. Even so it is, that many do wilfully and stiffely oppose themselves
against the innocent, as by suites of law, until their wealth be consumed, as
the fat of lambs against the Sun. Others meddle needlessly, where they have
no cause often times, neither can by any reason be dissuaded, yea and some with
their betters, through a proud stomach (contrary to the counsel of Solomon)
because the Lords meaning is, to let them fall into evil, and to suffer them
to meet with their match, that they may pay for their griping of their
underlings, and smart for their own sin. For otherwise he would, as he is
able, hold them back some way. And thus adulterers, drunkards, cauillers, and
such wilful persons, go forward, but to their confusion. And so Elies sons
were hardened, that they might be destroyed. 1. Sam. 2. 25.
And Pharao in not suffering Israel to depart. So Ahab would not hear Micaiah,
Exodus 14. 8. 1. King. 22. 28.
that so he might fall at Ramoth. And had Judas proceeded on to betray his
Master, (think we) having had so fair a warning by him a little before
(enough to have cooled his courage, and to have holden him back from such an
attempt) but that he was a cursed vessel of wrath appointed to misery? And
happy is he who relenteth and meekely submits himself to God by resisting
his wicked attempts, and stopping his bad course: lest by kicking against the
pricks, he go forward to his sorrow and destruction. And this is much more
verified in such as will take no counsel by the reproof of the law of God,
but turn away their ears from it, yea live a long time under it unprofitably,
till they wax obdurate: surely thus they do, because they of al others are the
unhappy people, who^ the Lord has not purposed, by his promise and the
ministry of the Gospel, to convert and save. Else why should it not be the
case of all aswellas of some? Now if any will cavil against this and say,
either that God is bound to deal with them as he did with Paul, whom he saved
by violence as it were: or that God in so hardening men, is the author of their
perdition: I answer to the first, that God is a free agent, and bound to none
of his creatures, he need not at al stop them in their evil course, much less
to strive with them, when they break through his opposing of them, as Balaam
did in his journey to the King of Numb. 22. 18. 19.
Moab. For the latter I say, that the Lord need not cause any man's destruction,
for if he stay him not, he runs on to it of his own accord: and as for the
Lord, he finds matter of sin in him (he need not infuse any) and therefore if
he do not mollify the heart, it waxes hard of it self without his hardening
of it.

And here further we see, that the wilfulness and stiffeneckednesse of evil
Doct. verse. 21. 22.
and rebellious persons redoundeth to the benefit of Gods servants many times,
who have to do with them. The reason is, that God resists the 1 Pet. 5 5.
proud, and gives grace to the lowly. Whereby it comes to pass, that such
wilful persons meet with much hardness, they provoke other against them, and
although they want not power, yet by cruelty, violence, and rashness, they
run themselves against a rock, and contrarily algoeth much the better with
the other, (for the most part, though sometime they be borne down) and in
suites and comprimises their innocence and good dealing is seen and rewarded.
Thus the Lord gave sentence on David's side against Saul, and chose him, rather,
then his house, and rewarded the innocence of the one, and gave up the other
to a reprobate sense.

And by these two verses we see, that Gods servants may with good security,
Doct. verse. 23. 24.
and boldness, use and enjoy the possessions and goods which God has given to
them, and by much better reason then other, who think that to be their own
which they have, howsoever they have come by it: whereas these have no
sanctified use of any thing they enjoy, having no right nor title to it from
God by Christ who is heir of al, although the means be lawful which they
use: but besides that, they come unlawfully (many of them) by much of it: they
I mean. The other not only have right to it by Christ, but also have sought it
by a good conscience, and the use is accordingly blessed unto them. This I say
we may learn by that Iphtah answered the King of Ammon thus: Thou think it
to be thine which Chemosh (as thou imaginest) has given thee, much more we may
enjoy this land of the Amorites which the Lord has given us. But this I touched
in the 18. verse.

In the frame of this argument we may observe the arguers discretion. He
conuinceth his adversary, by a ground confessed by himself, handling it
comparatively after this manner: Thou (says he) think thou have good right
to that which is given thee, and that by Chemosh: so do I account my self to
hold that firmly, which Jehovah my God has granted me. We know he might have
said, much more may I lay claim to Jehovah his gift, then thou to thy Idol,
who indeed has no more authority, then deity. He might have discoursed much
(and that truly) touching the difference between God and an Idol, Heathens
and Jews, the true Church of God: But to what purpose? he might have been
ridiculous, but he could not (by such dispute) have convicted him. To teach us,
that all men must not be alike handled in confutatation of their errors,
heresies, profane customs: but by grounds acknowledged by themselves, they
must be urged to confess the truth of conclusions which they would not
acknowledge. No man puts new wind into old vessels: No man punishes a
Frenchman by English law: for why? he takes not himself to stand bound to a
law which he never consented unto: the law Civil is not like the Common law.
Sometime we may take the true confession of our adversary, as an argument
against him: and this is the more forcible of the two; both because it is a
truth, (and therefore of it self confuteth the contrary necessarily) and also
because we consent with him therein (whereby we show that we would not dissent
from him at all, if it were possible to avoid it.) And sometimes we may use
his own confession against him, though it be false, so it be to convince him,
and do him good, (for otherwise we must not abuse his error to hurt him:) and
this manner of arguing, though it conclude not directly, yet it is strong
against him that holds it. The Apostle Paul being to convict the Athenians of
their false worship, first argues from an absurd confession of their own,
absurd in reason, Ye worship (says he) an unknown God, as the title of your
Altar imports, and therefore ye know not how ye worship: whereupon doubtless
your worship is a preposterous, and false worship. And we know Paul uses one
kind of Apology to Heathen Festus and Felix, another to Agrippa a Jew borne.
This teaches us in dealing with any adversary of the truth, to smite him with
his own weapon, not with Gods weapons, drawn from the Armorie of the
Scriptures, which are truths by revelation only, not by nature; and therefore
to such as they are unrevealed unto, they are as Paul's doctrine of Resurrection
was to the profane Stoics. The Church smites not the Infidel by spiritual
Censures: because he is not capable of spiritual direction and doctrine. There
are none so erroneous, but they hold some truths: and the truths which they
hold, may serve to infringe the errors they maintain. And so when they are
brought to suspect or renounce falsehood, they may the sooner be persuaded to
admit the truth, which before their strong prejudice will not suffer them to
do. The Heathen by confessing a Deity, may by graduall consequences, be
forced to acknowledge an unity: and so by the works of this deity, urged to
confess a worship due thereto, and that inward as well as outward, as also to
see the folly of his manner of worshipping. And thus being prepared, he may
the better be instructed in the truth. The reason of the former point is,
because all truth is uniform, and repugneth to all falsehood, though it be not
discerned so to be but by demonstration. So the Popish Transubstantiation, the
Lutheran Vbiquitie, are best confuted by their own positions and confessions
(as also other their errors and heresies) and not by our own. Neither will it
be hard to do so, since that it is impossible, but that he who writes many
truths should contradict himself in his errors ere he be aware. And let this
course be used against the ignorant and ungrounded: neither let us presently
rail upon such or abandon them, because they are not persuaded by the things
which are forcible with us, but let them be kindly drawn on, by little and
little, and not driven further of. Thus much be said of that which hitherto
has passed betwixt Iphtah and the King of Ammon.

THE SIXTY SEVEN SERMON ON THE ELEVNTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to proceed: In communication betwixt the King of Ammon and Iphtah, it
follows, that he used another Verse 25.
reason to the King of Ammon by his messengers: and that is prescription, and
long continuance of time, even 300. years well nigh: all which time this
ground was never claimed. No, nor Balac the King of Moab, when Israel was newly
come into the cities belonging to it, and dwelt in them, never challenged it,
nor contended for it, when yet he strove with them, that they should not enter
into his own borders. Now this reason of Iphtah must be understood to follow
upon the former more pertinent reasons, after this manner. He had proved
directly, that this land was no part of the Ammonites land: now he proves
further, that Ammon could lay no just claim to it in any second respect: as
because it was a part of the Amorites land, bordering upon them. For (says he)
then might Moab as well (nay better) challenge it then the Ammonites: which yet
neither they did, nor had done in 300. years space before. If the reason be
not thus considered, it concludes nothing: for it does not directly follow,
that Ammon had no title to it, because Moab had none. Thus Iphtah answered him,
and then committed the success to God. But the King of the Ammonites did not
hearken to him.

Although Iphtah shows that for 300. years, Israel enjoyed the country Doct.
verse 25. 26.
of the Amorites quietly, yet he brought other reasons also, drawn from right
and reason as well as fact and possession: which made that more strong as we
have heard. All which laid together, did sufficiently prove that the land was
theirs, and that the King of Ammon did trouble them unjustly, and without
cause. This I say, for that we may know, that prescription of time, as it may
fall out, (though seldom it do so) is no sufficient reason, to hold our
commodities by: but that there may be right on the other side, and good proof
for the same: and yet our law, supposing a great likelihood of right to be on
our sides, when we have long enjoyed our lands, has well determined the
controversy, by giving it to us, when it has been long enjoyed of us and our
predecessors, seeing (otherwise many endless contentions might arise) because
it is not like that any alive can allege any good reason against so long a
continuance of time, neither can bring any thing certain from former times to
overthrow it. And the equity of the law aims at that which most usually,
though not generally or infallibly, holds for the most part ordinarily.

And where Iphtah says, that Balak King of Moab stood against Israel stiffely
to hold him from going through his land, yet he strove not with them for the
recovering this land of the Amorites, which he might as justly have done, as he
the King of Ammon did, he proves thereby, that he had nothing to do with
it, nor any right unto it. Teaching this thereby, that when men are deadly set
against their adversaries for any matter, seeking thereby to vex them in the
sorest manner they can, they would show their rancor, in bringing forth
greater crimes and accusations against them then they do, (whereby they might
much more easily bring them down) if they were provided with any. And whereas
they seek to blemish their names, or to impouerish their estate, or to afflict
their persons by restraint of liberty, imprisonment or banishment: they do as
the old Serpent, bite at their heel, because they cannot break their head,
but they would be gladdest of all to shed their blood. God indeed plucks them
back, and so they vomit not their poison out, to so great mischief as they
conceive it, but fall short: but their poison is nothing less deadly for all
that, they want but matter to work upon. And this is manifest by these two
signs: the one, that they are content to take the slightest occasions, and
rather choose to be ridiculous in their malice, then not malicious: the other,
that both they aggrauate their slender accusations, with slanderous additions
of their own inuenting, and comb both the warpe and the woof, both the crime
and the amplification thereof in the devils forge, their lying hearts and
brains, because the innocence of their adversary yields them no just
exception. Thus those enemies of our Savior (for want of matter) suborned
false witnesses: which perjury argued, they would not have spared to produce
true and greater crimes if they could have found them. It is noted of Daniels
adversaries, Dan. 6. 5.
chap. 6. that wanting matter of treason, they were feign to bring out his
religion against him: which (as they contrived the matter, by the law they made
for the purpose) touched his life also: but if they had found ought to lay to
his charge in the other, they would rather have used it.

This doctrine serves to answer them who pretend for the covering of their
malice, that whereas they vex their adversary one way, they could do it many
ways, and say, that they have greater and more causes to pursue them, then
that one which they allege. But all such speech is bragging and boasting
without just cause: for if they had greater, does any man doubt but they would
take their advantage by using them, when as they prosecute the smaller so hotly
against them?

Upon the forementioned reasons, he concludes, that he gave him no cause to
make war with him, as he had done, but he had been stirred up Doct. verse. 27.
unjustly against him. And as Iphtah was bold to accuse him, and avouch his
own innocence, having so good proof for both, so every one that can prove
the goodness of his cause, shall be able boldly to defend his own
innocence, against his adversaries and accusers, to their shame and just
reproach, and their own peace and comfort. Whereas other must be driven to use
shifts, as lying, dissembling, boldness, heat, multiplying of words, and false
witnesses, as may be seen in the cause of the Priests and Pharisees accusing
our Savior before Pilat. The truth seeks no corners. See notes upon verses
14. and 15.

And so he appealing to the most highest for his simplicity in the matter, 2
to be judge therein, he ends his message. Thus must we be able to do, I
mean not to be afraid, to make the Lord judge in the cause, that so, though we
be iustled to the walls by our unequal Judges upon earth, yet we may rest in
Gods testimony of and unto us and our cause, and therefore, not fearing man,
may be confident; verifying the proverb, The righteous Prou. 28. 1. Job 31. 35.
is bold as a lion. In the same kind Job speaks, saying: Though mine
adversary should write a book against me, would not I take it upon my shoulder
and bind it as a crown to me? Meaning it should be to his commendation. But
seeing the men of the world see boldness so much to prevail in the defense of
their bad causes, therefore they face out matters themselves thereby. Whereby
this watchword is needful to be given them, that men look not so much how
boldly they stand in the defense of themselves and their doings, as how truly:
for that which in a good cause is courage, in an evil is impudence.

But though Iphtah had said enough, and that also to good purpose, yet we Verse.
28.
see that it moved the King of Ammon nothing at all, but as he had taken a bad
cause in hand, so he meant to defend it unto the death; even as men too
commonly do, who having begun an ill matter, do purpose to go forward. So
that we see wise and sound reasons, and persuasions, howsoever they be used,
both to purpose and in season, so that they (who can judge) would think they
might be like to prevail and move (especially not knowing the corruption of
the heart, which couers it self with show of honesty) yet with the wilful
they do no good, nor with any such as bewray themselves (being put to it) to
be resolute to do wrong, and of a preiudicate mind, or possessed of strong
passions. Therefore it is that Solomon says, A word more Prou. 17. 10.
enters into the wise, then an hundred stripes will avail with the froward.
This humor possesses many, whom it would not easily be thought to be in, and
therefore (being discovered) so much the worse beseems them, even civil
courteous persons, still, and sometimes religious: because, either they suspect
not themselves, and so are overtaken by any occasion suddenly falling out: or
else they nourish this serpent in their bosom wilfully. Naaman was taken with
that tech, (and no marvel he being an Heathen (when he heard the Prophets
answer, by what means he told him he should be healed. But highly to be
commended was David, who received the counsel of Abigail (a woman) so readily,
to turn him from a cruel and wicked resolution. And even so, they who are
obstinate, (as thinking it a discredit to them to desist) shall meet with more
shame by proceeding: but happy are the meek and tractable, who receive the
wholesome words of exhortation, and stop not their ears from good counsel,
but submit themselves without respect thereto: such shall deliver themselves
from great evil. And (a man would think) such behavior does better become
professors of the Gospel, then wilfulnes and obstinacy. Concerning the use,
whereof I have spoke somewhat by the like occasion in the 21. and 22. verses:
let the reader join them both together.

Verse. 29. Then the spirit of the Lord came upon Iphtah, and he passed over to
Gilead, and to Manasseh, and came to Mizpeh in Gilead, and from Mizpeh in
Gilead, he went unto the children of Ammon.

30. And Iphtah vowed a vow unto Lord, and said, If thou shall deliver the
children of Ammon into mine hands,

31. Then that thing that comes out of the doors of mine house to meet me,
when I come home in peace from the children of Ammon, shall be the Lords, and I
will offer it for a burnt offering.

32. And so Iphtah went unto the children of Ammon to fight against them, and
the Lord delivered them into his hands:

33. And he smote them from Aroer until thou come to Minneth, twenty Cities,
and so forth to Abel of the vineyards, with an exceeding great slaughter. Thus
the children of Ammon were humbled before the children of Israel.

The third part of the Chapter.
IN this third part it is showed generally, that Iphtah overcame and subdued
the Ammonites. And in particular, first how God gave him the spirit The sense
of these five verses.
of courage and fortitude to this end. Secondly, that before he entered the
battle he made a vow to the Lord, that if he should get the victory, he
would offer that to him, which should first come out of doors to meet him.
Thirdly, how after this he went forward to Gilead and Manasseh, and came to the
place where the Ammonites were: and so lastly, how (fighting with them) the
Lord delivered them into his hands.

In this verse it is showed how Iphtah came to the Ammonites: from Mizpeh in
Gilead (for it is distinguished from that Mizpeh, that is in the Tribe of
Inda.) Before that, the Lord had furnished him with gifts of his spirit fit for
war, both valiantnes of mind and strength of body, as was said before. And by
this it may appear, that the Lord had appointed before, that he Doct verse. 29.
should be their Judge and deliverer, though it was unknown to the people when
they sent to him to have him to be their Captain.

Now for our instruction and benefit, here we may see, that when the Lord
appoints any man to any special calling, he gives him gifts for the
discharge of it. When Moses was to be sent to Pharao, he alleged his unfitness
and insufficiency to speak to a King, the Lord provided for that, before he
began to discharge it. The Apostles likewise whom Christ left weak and
unfurnished for such a work as they were to take in hand after his ascension,
to wit, to preach the Gospel to the most nations of the world, yet before they
took it in hand, he made them meet for the work they went about.

So Iphtah, when he was to fight against the Ammonites, for the delivering of
Israel, he was by the spirit of God endued with gifts for that purpose, even
far greater then he had before, now when he was set about a greater work.
So the Ministers much more, as the calling is far more excellent, when he
sends them to any people to convert them, and make them of his militant
Church, he stirs them up by love, zeal and labor, to set their gifts of
knowledge a work, and makes a great change among the people by their
ministry. They who are unfit to do the Lords message Note.
to them to whom they are sent, are not sent by him, but seek themselves and
their own profit, and not the peoples. It is worthy our view to behold the
difference of men called by God, and such as climb in by another way of their
own framing. Both do one and the same work, but the one sets himself
aworke, the other is set aworke by God. The one (after his fashion) goes about
it: but how? awkly and untowardly, by setting a bold face upon the matter, by
carrying a great show, and bearing sway, by preaching what and when he
pleases, and in the manner he likes best: but errand he has none to do to
the people, (no more then Cushi had to David) and thereafter is his welcome.
For as he fails of the end of his office, so loses he the honor of it;
except with a few flatterers and hang-byes. Alas they have enterprized a long
race and journey, without provision to enable them to run it through: It is
not the habit that makes the Minister, nor the learning (though that comes
nearer) degree, dignity, or applause of man, which only will carry this
work through stitch: It is this, that God has said to him as to Paul and
Moses; Go, I will be with thee: that is, fit thee, embolden thee, (for a
Minister has enough to discourage him, even from within himself, as I have
noted elsewhere) yea bear thee out against opposition, and encourage thee by
blessing thy labor: otherwise all thy provision is to little purpose, thou
may stand like a fool, errandlesse and speechless. Now being called and
separated by God, (and therefore also qualified) though thy self a weak
earthen vessel, yet what precious treasure do thou carry? How admirably
does the Lord make way for him, making high hills to stoop, and lie level
before him, procuring honor from the consciences (not the countenances only)
of such as they have won to God from the power of Satan and darkness, by
converting and saving them. And by stopping the mouths of such as might
despise and discourage them, saying: Who is this newfound babbler? what, will
he bear down all, and think to have us tied to his girdle? No, no, he
deals for his Master who sent him, and therefore seeks to bring ye under the
yoke and girdle of Christ: and therefore let the discouragements be never so
great, Note.
this work shall prosper: and even out of the mouths of blockish, brutish,
savage and ignorant, yea profane ones, the Lord shall procure credit to his
Ministry, (when he has changed them thereby) and these shall justify
wisdom against all cauillers, scorners and enemies thereof. Let them be of
never so many kinds, as in this age there are many, who (contrary to the
manifest fruit they see) impeach either the sufficiency of their calling, or
the worthiness of their message. Oh therefore how lamentable is it, that all
congregations are not thus furnished, and made partakers of so blessed an
ordinance of God! Therefore the Lord Jesus, to show how pitiful a case it is,
to see the people dispersed, as sheep having no shepherd, he not only had
compassion on them himself, but also willed the Disciples to pray to Matthew. 9.
38.
the Lord of the harvest to thrust laborers into the harvest, seeing none are
forward to that work, except the Lord stir them up thereto. This point has
been spoken of before, I therefore will not be tedious therein to the reader.

The vow, that I said before Iphtah made, is here showed what it was: Verse.
30. 31
namely, that he would in token of his thankful heart, offer and dedicate to
the Lord that thing that should first come out of his house to meet him, if he
returned with the victory. This vow, though he meant well, was ill made and
in great ignorance, in that he did not make it more distinctly and advisedly.
For what if a dog had first met him? which is a fauning creature, and had
been like enough to have first come forth to meet him? he could not have
offered it to the Lord, it being unclean, and so forbidden to be made a
sacrifice. His words have this meaning when he says (It shall be the Lords,
and I will offer it for a burnt offering) that is, I will offer it in
sacrifice, and it shall be a burnt offering to the Lord, for he meant simply,
that he would offer the first thing that should meet him; if he had thought of
his daughter, would he have made that vow? And will any say, that in so vowing,
he meant, that if that which should first meet him, should not be fit for
sacrifice, he would offer it to virginity, and yet perhaps it should not be
fit for that neither? as if it had been a dog: and if he had meant to offer
it to virginity, as some hold he did; did he not see that his daughter had
been most like to have bin the party upon whom his vow should have bin
performed? For who had bin liker to have first come forth to meet him then
she? And would he (think we) have vowed that which might have turned to his
own, and his daughters so great sorrow? Therefore I say, he meant no offering
of that which should meet him, to perpetual virginity. Neither are those
words of his to be taken disiunctiuely, as some think they may, thus: That
which first comes forth to meet me, shall be the Lords, or I will offer it.
For though the Hebrew letter (^) be so taken sometime, yet very rarely: and so
little reason is it, that it should be so taken here, being most commonly
taken coniunctiuely, as they well know that have any understanding in the
Hebrew tongue, yea and often in some one chapter, as may easily be showed. As for
example in Genes. 32. 1. 2. 3. 4. four of five times it is so taken in 3. or
4. verses. So in Genes. 33. 1. 2. as often in two verses, and Genes. 45. 1. 2. 3.
As many times it is found to be, and in most Chapters (if not all) throughout
the old Testament this word (,) signifies (and) coniunctiuely, not (or)
disiunctiuely, as I have said before. Therefore here to take it otherwise,
there is small reason for it, especially the sense of the place not being
amended thereby. For to understand it disiunctiuely thus, [It shall be the
Lords, or I will offer it] what sense can it have thus? If it be be not fit for
sacrifice, it shall be the Lords: How should it be the Lords? they say by
offering it to perpetual virginity, if it be fit thereto, for so some
understand it, as I have said before? But where did God require virginity to
be enjoined to any children by their parents? or what example have we thereof
in Scripture? And yet if he had meant so in vowing, we know it had been most
like to be his daughter, I say again, that should first have come forth to
meet him. Therefore what sense can there be in it to take it so, that he
would offer it to perpetual virginity, if it were not fit for sacrifice? For
this cause I conclude, that the words are to be understood coniunctiuely, and
the latter clause to be the exposition of the former, thus: It shall be the
Lords, and I will offer it in sacrifice.

And if it be asked, whether Iphtah offended in making such a vow, which some
think he did not, because it is said here, that the spirit of the Lord came
upon him: and again, seeing he is reckoned in the Epistle to the Hebrews
Hebr. 11. 32.
among the faithful. I answer, first to the question, and after to the
reasons: to the question, that if he had vowed simply to be thankful, he had
done well: but in such a vowing as this was, he sinned greatly, as shall
appear better, when we come to his performing of the vow afterward, verse. 39.
And to the first reason I answer, that the spirit which is said in this verse,
to come upon him, was the spirit of courage and fortitude for war: although it
is not denied that he was a believer, and had the spirit of sanctification
also. But what hindered, but that he might in some particular actions, through
ignorance or weakness, offend, as Gedeon and Barak did, and yet they were the
true servants of God, and obtained the victory also, for all that? So many
sound Christians among us there are, who yet tread awry sometimes, and so did
Iphtah: and this one answer may serve both the reasons: And this of and
concerning his vow, till the 39. verse before mentioned.

Now as he offended not in vowing (for that tended to the praising of Doct.
God, though as he made it here, he faulted greatly) so we may be persuaded,
that it is a lawful thing to make a vow to God. Whereby I mean neither the
general vow of faith and obedience required and performed, both in the old and
new testament, neither that special vow that was ceremonial only, practiced
in the old Testament, and some where in the new (to wit, in the first age of
the Church) but I mean that special vow, which is a promise made to God,
touching some duties to be performed to him, and to a good end: and this vow
(if it be made accordingly) is lawful, and belongs to the Church both of the
old and new testament. Such a vow was Iphtahs (in respect of the godly intent
thereof) but that it was not lawfully made, nor in a right manner, as has been
said. And such are ours, when we promise as Jacob did, that if God deliver us
from such a danger, we will more Genesis 28. 20.
carefully and constantly walk with him afterward.

And so when to help our dullness and infirmity, we set ourselves by firm
covenant, to prayer and reading, more then ordinary, for measure or for
frequency and feruency, and to give set alms, for special causes known to our
selves, or to keep set times of fasting for a season, as there shall be
cause; or if we perceive and find our selves prone to drunkenness, and in
danger to fall thereto by drinking wine or strong drink, we may vow to
abstain for so long a time, as may be fit to keep our selves from sinning.
And although we be bound already hereunto by the word, yet may we more
solemnly, and for the better bridling of our rebellious nature, renew the same
bond in a vow, to this end, to help our dullness, for want of zeal, and to
make our selves more forward in duty to God, and love to men; as David did: I
have sworn (says he) and I will perform it, to keep thy righteous Psalm.
119. 116.
judgments.

These kinds of vowers are lawful, so as they be agreeable to Gods word, and
stand with Christian liberty, and be agreeable to our calling, both general
and particular; and be in our power, and made deliberately, not rashly and the
end of it be good: whereas not Popish vows only, are failing in these, but
even Iphtahs also in many of these points. And although vows made in this
manner, are no part of Gods standing and constant worship by themselves, yet
neither are they wilworships, nor yet simply left to our arbitriment always,
but to be used as helps and furtherances to godliness, well approved by the
experience of the Saints, as to preserve the gifts of faith, prayer,
repentance, and other virtues of the mind, so also to testify our
thankfulness to God, for blessings which we have received of him. And with
this mind, Jacob vowed in the way as he went to Aram, as I said before. Genesis
28. 20.


Now this vow of his, as it was a more then usual token of his thankful
heart, which he indented before hand to express, if God should give him the
victory: so we must know that it proceeded from a rare feeling of the spirit
of God exciting and quickening him up to such feruencie. Gods people find not
themselves always in one tenor and tune, either for inward joy and comfort in
God, or for outward forwardness to duty. Paul had his 2. Cor 12. 9.
lifting up into the third heaven, and he had also his buffeting to abase him
lower then the earth. Peter was ravished in spirit, when he was in his heavenly
Act. 10. 11. etc.
trance before his going to Cornelius, but we know he had as rare ebbings at
other times. Elias, a man of men, for grace and familiarity with God, and that
appeared by his real assumption into heaven bodily: but he was in a poor
case, when he was feign to flee from Iezabel, and go 40. days fasting and
mourning for the misery which lay upon him and the Church: besides his
weaknesses which he bewraied, and therefore is called by S. James a passionate
man, one that was clothed with the like infirmities that others had. It were to
be desired, (and we hear men make great moan for the contrary) that there
were always in us that abundance of grace, faith, feruencie, cheerfulness,
which is at some odd time. But the contrary befalls most men, partly the
Lord so disposing of it, because he knows we were not able to bear it, but
would turn it into a distemper, (even as too much good blood in the body
makes a pleurisy, and when there is more water in the channel then it can
contain: it must needs ouerflow the banks, and do harm) and partly our
selves procuring it, who nourish not in our selves such motions, nor make wise
use of them, by setting them a work, and applying them to some fit object, (as
Iphtah here did) but delight only in the sweetness and pleasure which we
feel, and so suffer the heavenly flame to vanish, for want of laying on fuel
to preserve it.

And although the Lord causes his children, even here, sometimes in health,
sometime at death to enjoy such unspeakable feelings and operations of the
spirit, (which he does to give them such a taste of heaven, as may cause in
them a restless longing, til they come thither) yet he knows, they would say
with Peter, Master it is good for us to be here, and would think of Matthew. 17.
4.
no departure, if this should be an ordinary diet. Therefore he rather
considers, what they can digest, then what he can afford, and says, My grace
shall neither be given in superfluity, nor yet in penury, but it shall be
sufficient. And let us learn to account so of it, as the best for us. Only
let us beware, lest by our giving way to our flesh (the counterpoise of the
spirit) that is to the earth to our sensuality and lusts; we bury and quench
the spirit, and smother it from appearing in the beauty thereof; and also lest
we cause it to be heavy and sad in us, and so our selves to be blockish and
sottish, rather then heavenly and joyful: which is to choose to feed with
swine, when we might eat Angels food.

In these two verses is not only set down the victory, which God gave to
Iphtah over the Ammonites, but it is also particularly amplified and in larger
Verse 32. 33.
manner described. As that many fell in the battle; and that he overthrew
twenty of their cities; and that he brought the Ammonites in subjection to
him. Where we may clearly see, what it is that encourages us, and sets us
forward in our duties doing. Even the Lords appointing and calling us thereto,
as of the public calling of the Minister I spoke before: it is true of the
private duties also. Husband and wife from thence have their hartning on to
live mutual helpers one of another to their Christian and peaceable conuersing
together, and passing their days sweetly, and bearing their crosses
contentedly; even from hence, I say, that they believe God has joined them
together to that end. So the Magistrate, and all other in the several duties
of this life. And want of this faith, is enough to make Note.
men's lives ouercast, as the weather is with clouds and tempests, and to fill
men with sin and sorrow. Other things which might be noted from hence, have
been mentioned before, but besides them of these two a little.

In that the King of Ammon went by the worst in the battle had with Verse. 33.
Iphtah, it shows what wilfulness brings a man, or the contempt or rejecting
of good and sound persuasions, such as Iphtah used to dissuade him from war.
For though he were an Heathen, yet he knew by the law of Nature, that he ought
not to offer injury to the innocent. And we know that when the Gentiles knew
God only by the light of nature, and did not honor Romans 1. 19.
him accordingly, he gave them up to their hearts desires to fulfill them
against nature. Much more, they who have light in the word of God, having no
regard of good instruction and admonition, shall come to naught, especially the
despisers thereof, unless they take shame and abashment to themselves for it,
and so come to better state: according to that which is written, He that
knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.
Luke 12. 47.
But more of this punishment upon wilfulness, see before set down by the like
occasions, and by name in Chap. 8. 14.

And in that he lost twenty cities which he had of his own, and lost 2
those also which he fought for, which were none of his, it lively sets
before our eyes, that many not contented with that which is their own, while
they claim to, and seek that which belongs to other men, either by color of
law, or otherwise; they lose that which they sued for, and spend and consume
that which they had before. The Lord does often times requite their
inconsionableness that way: and yet in great mercy he deals with them in so
doing, to keep a heavier judgment from them, who would Note.
(most certainly) be worse, if they should by their corrupt and bad dealing
speed better, and be suffered to have success.

I will clear this point by example and instance. Pharaoh not contented to
have oppressed the Israelites (for many generatio^s) with bondage; would needs
pursue them, when they were gotten out of his claws, though he had smarted
many ways for not letting them go. But what came of it? seeing Exodus 14. 28.
he sought unjustly to encroach upon Gods possession, he not only failed of
that he desired, but lost also that which he ventured, even his own life, and
all that he had, and his people also, in the midst of the sea. The same is
verified in other parts of unrighteousness: Sampson not content to live with
credit and honor in his own land, and within his compass, would needs break
out among the Philistims, and there hit into Delilas company, which his soul
entirely loved, (though unlawfully) and was made a vassal to a base mistress.
But behold a short time this pleasure of sin lasted: for lo, his lover
rewards him with treason, and then Sampson (poor Judges 16. 20.
man) is feign to forgo his mistress by force, (who could not be plucked from
her by conscience,) and that which he abhorred, that he was made to undergo,
(and that by them whom he most hated) to wit, a painful bondage while he
lived, beside shame and sorrow, and after all, an untimely death. I will
instance first in the sins of the second Table. The murderer and thief can
by no persuasion be brought to labor with his hands, and to do the thing
which is good: tush, it goes utterly against him to be put to labor, and to
work hard all the year long for a poor living: he can bring in all at once,
and get great booties, to live at ease, and plentifully for a long time, as he
imagines, and is not that a merry world? yes while it lasts; in his kind,
but how long is that? He gets two or three purses, and in the fourth enterprise
he is taken in the manner. Does he not then (think you) wish from his heart,
that he had obeyed Gods ordinance, and been hard at work, (as much as he
loathed it before) rather then to have put forth his hand to violence? For he
sees, that neither he has obtained that which he sought for: and that
overthrow which he little looked for, that he has brought upon himself. He
lay in wait for the life and goods of another: therein he was defeated, but
this will not satisfy for his sin, he must give life and goods to boot, and
all to make amends by man's law. What needed he have feared the law (which is
not made for the just, but the transgressor) 1. Tim. 1. 9.
if he had holden himself content with his own? But men say they must
venture: nothing venture nothing have: till by venturing all, they lose all:
Note.
not money and body, but soul also, if God be not more merciful. These things
notably lay forth the folly and fruit of sin, even in outward respects: and
yet it is as manifest in spiritual. For to add another instance in the first
Table: Many there are that say, they hope that God is not so hard a master,
neither will punish sinners so severely as the Ministers would bear them in
hand: others go further, and will enter upon Gods prerogative, saying every
one for himself, I cannot believe that God has rejected so many thousands,
and will save so few: (meaning, that if God do so, he is cruel.) But oh
fool, as Paul says, what gettest thou by disputing against God, nay by
bereauing and spoiling him of his justice, (oh sacrilege and unrighteousness in
the highest degree?) Surely, as Austin says (speaking hereof, That which they
would have, they lose, but that which they would not, they have (even woe) for
ever. They would get heaven by disanulling the decree of God: that shall they
never get, (for the Moon keeps her course, though dogs bark at her:) and
they would escape hell too, but that (will they, nill they) must be their
portion for ever. But what fruit see we in the lives of most men, of this and
the like doctrine, driving and scaring them (a man would think) forcibly from
all kind of unrighteousness. But I pass from this to that which follows.

THE SIXTY EIGHT SERMON ON THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 34. Now when Iphtah came to Mizpeh unto his house, behold his daughter
came out to meet him, with timbrels and dances, which was his only child: he
had no other son nor daughter. 35. And when he saw her, he rent his clothes,
and said, Alas my daughter, thou have brought me low, and art of them that
trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and cannot go back. 36.
And she said unto him, My father, if thou have opened thy mouth unto the Lord,
do with me as thou have promised, seeing that the Lord has avenged thee of
thine enemies the children of Ammon. 37. Also she said unto her father, Do
thus much for me: suffer me two months, that I may go to the mountains, and
bewail my virginity, I and my fellows. 38. And he said, Go: and he sent her
away two months: so she went with her companions, and lamented her virginity
upon the mountains. 39. And after the end of two months, she turned again
unto her father, who did with her according to his vow, which he had vowed, and
she had known no man. And it was a custom in Israel: 40. The daughters of
Israel went year by year, to lament the daughter of Iphtah the Gileadite,
four days in a year.
THE FOVRTH PART OF THE CHAPTER: Of the executing of his vow.
WHen Iphtah had gotten the victory, he returned home to Mizpeh, for The sum
of these verses.
there he dwelt: and therefore we heard before, that he made a league with the
Gileadites, before the Lord in Mizpeh. And behold (for now I return to his
vow) to the bewraying of his deep folly in making his forementioned vow) the
first that came forth to meet him was his daughter, which so troubled him,
that his joy for his triumph, was turned into most deep and bitter sorrow: but
she, when she understood her fathers vow, submitted her self, only desiring a
time to bewail her virginity. And he after her return, performed his vow on
her. And it was a custom that the daughters of Israel went four times in the
year to bewail her.

Now to peruse the verses particularly, it is said here, that when he had bin
Verse. 34.
made joyful by the victory; at his return, his daughter was the first that
came forth to meet him with trimbrels and dances: for so they were wont Exodus
15. 20.
to celebrate the worthy acts of Princes and greatmen: As they did I mean the
maids) to Saul: thus they used to express their public thanksgiuings 1. Sam.
18. 6.
to God. Now to the aggravating the grief of Iphtah, it is said she was his
only child, and he had no other.

And in that his daughter came the first to meet him, who must be done Doct.
to (he thought) as he had vowed: all may see what effect comes of rashness, and
how unbeseeming a companion it is to a wise man, who should ponder his doings,
and weigh his words with reason, yea religion, even in the balances of the
sanctuary, that is, by the word of God, before they be uttered. The best
fruit of it is sorrow and repentance. It is a true saying; Rashness does
nothing well, as in Herod's rash promise and oath is to be seen. The like Mark.
6. 23.
had David done, if he had not bin stayed by Abigail against the house of
Nabal. 1. Sam. 25. 34.


Much like was the wilful and rash act of the Prodigal, who would needs go
see the merry world abroad, (as he thought it) yea and he might in no wise be
stayed from his purpose, as though he had gone about some great Luke 15. 13.
and weighty work, when he had gotten his portion into his hands to that end;
but to what extremity of misery brought he himself? The same may be said of
the rashness of choler, whereby men smite out teeth and eyes out of the heads,
yea and breath out of the bodies (sometime) of wives, children, servants, or
any of them, whom they light upon, in their fume: also of the rash bargains
and suertiships which are made and undertaken in the world, and a thousand
mischiefs besides. Likewise of the protestations commonly made in this manner:
I pray God I sink where I stand, if it be not true that I say; or, Gods curse
be upon me. Which Peter himself through rashness and forgetting himself, did
fall into. Therefore it behooves all to be wise and well advised in their vows
to God, and promises made to men, that they snare not themselves, neither bring
needless sorrow and woe upon their own heads. And even so, when they be
advisedly and circumspectly made, according to the rules before set down,
verse. 30. then in no wise to go from them, but to perform them as David did,
Psalm. 119. Of this look Eccle. 5. 3. Psalm. 15. 4. Psalm. 119. 105.
more in the history of Gaal, chap. 9. and elsewhere.

Furthermore in this verse we are taught, that God is to be praised 2
publicly for the public benefits which we receive in common, as both here
we see in Iphtahs daughter, and in many other places I have showed, although
not in the same manner, and Moses also, Miriam, and Debora, with sundry others
did: and that as for other reasons heretofore set down, so to teach posterity
by our example to do the like. But of this after. God would have the first
fruits consecrated to him, that we might use the rest with thanksgiving.

And in that she was his only child, it must needs increase his heaviness,
that by his vow he had brought upon himself, when he saw he must be deprived
of her: and to this his sin brought him, in his rash vow making, or
whatsoever other sins they were, that others may beware thereby. And by this
we learn, that God for men's sin will not spare to deprive them of that which
is most dear unto them. One reason hereof is, that the Lord means to humble
them deeply, and to cause them to descend into themselves more seriously, and
to purge out the sin that waits them a mischief, Note.
and so to prevent it. And therefore this use we should make of it, that
whenever the Lord deals so with us, we should know it is for the hardness
of our hearts, which otherwise and without such breaking of them, will not be
softened. And let us the less marvel at it, when we find it to be so; for
though he have often gone about it by gentler means, yet we know they have not
prevailed: so that we have driven him to deal more hardly with us, as we
count it, and to handle us more roughly, as to wound us so deeply, by taking
the things from us, which are most dear unto us. And if we are not to be
accused for that our hearts are hardened by the deceitfulnes of sin, but that
we relent, yet let us know, that God has sufficient cause to afflict us; as
to exercise and prepare us for greater, and to hold us here as strangers. But
of this in another place; although I have often observed it, before in the
several stories, of the punishments which fell upon the idolatrous Israelites.

By this verse it may appear, how sore Iphtahs daughters meeting of him Verse.
35. The sense.
did trouble him, as both by his word he testified, saying; Oh thou that
should have been my chief earthly comfort, thou (I say) art one that have
chiefly cast me down. Also by signs thereof he showed it, in that he cut
his garments for sorrow, after the manner of the Hebrews, when they saw that
some great calamity was suddenly befalne them, as in Joel and other Joel 2. 13.
places it appears. And he shows the reason, that he having vowed to offer
her to the Lord, he might not (he said) go back: such was his ignorance, that
he knew not there was liberty given by the Lord, in that case to redeem that
which a man had vowed amiss.

This verse affoordeth us many good lessons, and first by this, that she was
Doct.
such a trouble to him, after he had gotten the victory, and that the Lord
pulled him down so sore thereby; by this (I say) we are taught, that God sees
it expedient thus to deal with his servants often times, that when he has
exalted them by some great favor bestowed upon them, lest they should take too
much delight therein, and so become surfeited therewith; he adds some
affliction to it, or takes away some part of the benefit, which point I have
at large handled in chap. 8. verse. 1. of this book, yet I will here add
somewhat. This appears therefore, in sundry particulars; as in our goodly
show and likelihood of fruitful haruests, and hope of other commodities,
commonly wet or dry, cold or heat immoderate, and other changes and
casualties cut off a great part of our hope.

So in marriage, wealth, credit, and such like, the Lord adds sickness, Note.
some losses, or other affliction, or holds the fear of them over our heads,
(as the parent does the rod over the child) to weane us from too great
pleasure taking in them. Even as we read in all ages he has done the like: So
Isaak and Rebecca, in their kind and comfortable marriage, had Esau their son
to be a vexation to them, in his most wicked marriage, and before Gen 26. 35.
and verse. 7. 22.
that, sometime a famine, and sometime the ill dealing of strangers with them.
So Job for all his wealth, had his crosses and namely his wife, yea he Job 1.
and 7. 1.
was so acquainted with this truth, and Gods dealing with his dear children,
that he said in the midst of his prosperity, that he looked for his change.

And who does not see it necessary, that the Lord should deal thus with us?
For else it should be found so to be with us, as it was in the days of Noah,
when they did eat and drink, marry and were married, and made Matthew. 24. 37.
that the chief end of their living here: whereas godliness being the great
riches, and a day passed therein, being better then a thousand in any estate
beside, the Lord would have us claspe about that, and be ready to learn by
Note.
little and little, that we have no hold of any transitory thing here below
though lawful, but we should count one thing necessary, though we be occupied
Luke 10 42.
about many. And to make good the doctrine that I have gathered out of this
verse, to wit, of Gods keeping us under, some way in the midst of our
prosperity, I conclude, that if Paul had need to be buffeted, lest he 2.
Cor. 12. 7.
should be lifted up above measure, we may lay our hand upon our mouth and say,
God has most just reason to deal thus with us, as I have said. Now if he
sees it meet thus to exercise us, lest we should be lifted up, then much
more if we have already been so, and passed our bounds in any such manner.

Now to go forward: by these words of Iphtah, (Oh my daughter thou art of them
that trouble me) and by the deep and sudden sorrow which Doct. 2. ver. 35.
they testify to have then possessed him, by them I say we may see and
observe another thing, that the best delights and greatest pleasures of this
life, in which we have had exceeding comfort, as he had in his daughter, may
possibly and do often turn to our great sorrow and coffeehouse. We see the
same in Jacob, when his sons hating their brother Joseph, had dipped Genesis 37.
33.
his coat in blood, to hide their own sin, and brought it to their father,
to make him think that he had been slain by some wild beast; when he saw it,
he brake out in a great passion, and said, This is my sons coat, an evil
beast has deuouted him. Oh what heaviness took hold of him, even from and by
him who was his joy and most dear unto him? And thus it is with us, as it was
with them. So consider how dear Absalom was 2. Sam 18. 33.
to his father David: and when word was brought him of his death, how heavily
did he take it? how did he wish and desire that he might have lost his own
life, to have saved his, as his words uttered in most patheticall and
lamentable manner, do testify, where he thus cries out: Oh Absalom, my
son, my son: would God I had died for thee, oh Absalom my son, my son.
Even so what sore disquiets and corsiues, are many children to their parents,
wives to their husbands, and these again to them, and one dear friend to
another? And what vexations have many men's goods been to Note.
them, as their house and land, when they have brought them to naught, and when
they have seen they must forgo them? And how have other men's pleasures stung
them at the heart, when they having been the joy thereof, they have forsaken
them? Oh if men durst or could be persuaded to bewray it, when they have seen
they must dye, and leave all, how have they been wrapped in deadly sorrow and
thraldom thereby, so near were their hearts knit to their earthly delights,
that they have been able to think of no good thing to help them to salvation,
and to make their account well to God, no nor to entertain any good advice and
instruction, if it had been offered them. And what may be the reason of all
this? Truly this, seeing they have so greatly abused them, by setting them in
the Lords place, and their hearts upon them so impotently and fondly, directly
contrary to Gods commandment, giving this charge: If riches increase, set not
your hearts 1. Tim. 6. 17. Psalm.
upon them. And to make this their sin the greater, they must know, that they
who are not brought as yet to faith in Christ, and true repentance, so that
they be by him entitled to them (who is Lord and heir of all) they have no
right to any of their lawfullest pleasures and profits, no not their children
by Gods allowance, having lost the same right by Adams sin, which indeed
once was given in Adams innocence. And yet even the godliest must use them
soberly, and learn to enjoy them with Gods allowance (as they may, when they
resolve with contentment to leave them, and when they are put to necessary,
profitable, and godly uses) for that is (indeed) to learn to want them, (as we
are commanded, and have example thereof) 2. Tim. 3. 4. Phil. 4. 12.
when God will so have it: And otherwise they who have had most, shall wish
they had had least. And if ye will ask, if there be nothing that men may
safely and boldly rejoice in: I answer, Yes, let them rejoice in believing,
Romans 5. 3.
in hope, patience and a good conscience: that joy shall not be taken from them.

Besides in this verse, in that Iphtah said, his daughter troubled him, and yet
it was by no ill behavior, let it be an instruction for children, that they
Doct. 3.
had not need to be crosses to their parents, by loosenes and disobedience: for
their parents are many ways grieved by them in other respects; as to see them
crossed and brought behind hand in the world, by poverty, or for that they
thrive not in their outward estate, so for their other sundry troubles that
befall them: and with these, when they look to have them the staff of their
old age, then if they see them taken away by death, or crossed by their awke
and bad matches; if then they also with the like to these shall vex them in
their life, how can they choose but bring their gray hairs with sorrow to their
grave? Monsters therefore and unnatural children are they, who knowing that
from their very conception and birth, they are occasions of grief and
heaviness of heart, to their parents many ways, who take thought for them
also afterward in every part of their life, how to bring them up and provide
for them, monsters (I say) they are who do yet add more heart smart, and
greater grief to them by their unruliness, stoutnesse, loftines of mind,
riot, ill spending their time, and goods with lewd companions, and many other
evil ways, even so many as who can reckon them up? But this point has been
diversely occasioned already, and more directly concerns the 36. verse
following.

And because he says he could not go back, but must execute his vow, 4
Leuit. 27. 2. 3.
many marvel he should be so ignorant, that he knew not the law in Leuiticus
concerning the redeeming of a son or a daughter in such a case, for so might
he have done. But he being driven out of his fathers house, because he was
base borne, and banished, and fell to a soldiers life, it might the rather be
therefore, that he was less acquainted with the law of God. But it is more
marvelous, that being so famous a thing, that the high Priest should not be
consulted with, by the motion of some of his friends especially, there
remaining two months before the vow was put in execution. But his ignorance it
was, that held him in that grievous error.

And it is a watchword to all Gods people, to labor against it, seeing he
being ignorant of this one point, brought such sorrow and woe upon his own
head: for who finds not likewise, that want of knowledge in some one point, or
want of care to remember that which he knows (which in effect is all one) has
been a sore blemish to him among his betters, who can epsy his ignorance? or
else through the want of it, he has run upon rocks, I mean endangered
himself, to do that to his shame and grief; which, knowledge thereof would
have guided him, to have done to his own great comfort. Oh seek we therefore
saving knowledge, and all that is necessary while we may, and as we may, it
is a crown to an humble and sanctified person: and in a doubtful case, do we
not, as Iphtah here did, to neglect the seeking of resolution, when and where
we may have it. And let them who live under an ordinary Ministry
unprofitably, repent betimes, and redeem the time: for it is a great plague of
God, to be ever learning, 2. Tim. 3. 7.
and never coming to the knowledge of the truth. And such as want means, let
them quicken their appetite the more, and labor to set the best Note.
price upon knowledge and wisdom, which is the holy use of it. For he that
matcheth these with the most precious jewels, and searches after the^ Prou. 2.
5.
as gold, he is like to find them soonest. The other passes by them unknown
at unawares, as he that walks over mines and treasure hidden in the earth,
never the wiser.

But the text giving occasion rather to urge this care upon the better sort, we
may justly bewail it, how long it is ere even many a good Christian attain to
that measure of competent and necessary knowledge, which might guide his
course. I speak not now of exact knowledge in all points, much less of
curious knowledge of things less pertinent, which yet many seek after more
greedily, then they do the other; like distempered stomachs, which feed upon
trash rather then good nourishment. Now what makes it so difficult a thing as
it is? Sometime an invincible defect in nature: in which case I confess, a
tractable and modest mind may plead an excuse from God: in others a conceit
that if Christ be known in any sort, it skils not whether other matters be
known or no; (which is a foolish opinion and collection.) Others and the most
hear badly, or add no private help of their own reading, or use of the
memory by conference. Therefore as contraries be cured by contraries, so let
every man seeing his disease, address himself to the cure. We see that
ignorance in the law of the land, sometimes breeds a man such trouble and
loss, as makes him rue it all his life long: much more then, a man would
think, in the law of God. For example, many a man through ignorance (though
otherwise wel-minded) is drawn into bad company, and by such, entised to
lewdness, or made drunk, or snared by rash promises, bargains, suretiships.
Others join with their religion, abuse of their lawful liberties, and are
overtaken therein grossly, in unlawful gamings, and ill spending of the time,
lasciviousness, foolish mirth, and many other blemishes. Some doubting of the
lawfulnes of a thing which they earnestly desire to do, entangle themselves,
which (if they had knowledge) they durst not do. So it is rare, but a goodly
sight, to see a man order his steps by knowledge, and to have fellowship with
the light, and the contrary (besides the other named inconveniences) much
dishonors the profession it self of the Gospel.

Further, to omit that he might have redeemed her, as I said, and to speak no
more of his ignorance in that point, note we this, that his care was great 5
in keeping a good conscience: a good conscience I say, according to the
knowledge he had, though I confess it cannot be in it self a good
conscience, which is not a sound conscience. But an evil conscience it may
be, even to do a thing lawful, if it be contrary to that which a man is
persuaded, though erroniously. And it appears Iphtah sought to keep a good
conscience, in as much as he spares not his only child, to the end that he
might please God, as he thought, by performing his vow. For there was nothing
else could cause him to bring such sorrow upon himself by offering his only
daughter in sacrifice, but the shunning and avoiding of a greater sorrow,
namely, the bringing of God to be against him, as he feared he should have
done, if he had not offered her according to his vow.

His care to keep a good conscience in that he thought he knew, teaches all
Gods people, in that which they know to be faithful. Better is he by many
degrees, who in that which he knows is careful to do the same; then another
who swells with pride, and is puffed up with great knowledge in the letter,
when he sees not the end of it, much less attaineth to it; which is by love
to edify, and do good to himself and others by it. But in them who be
upright hearted toward God, as the good women were, that accompanied our
Savior on earth, that is, verified which he spoke. If ye know John 13. 17.
Matthew. 5. 19.
these things, happy are ye if ye do them. etc. And contrarily, he that
offends in the least (teaching others so to do) shall be least in the
kingdom of God. Now to this we must add that which (in part) was touched
before that men must beware of that corrupt conceit of Popery, that conscience
(for such is all true devotion) may be in a thing where knowledge is not. Nay,
they go further, for they are so bold as to say, that devotion is the fruit of
ignorance. It proceeded not from Iphtah his ignorance, but from his grace, that
he was so devout. That which ignorance properly brings forth, is error and
wilworship: devotion is neither caused by ignorance, no, nor yet by knowledge
without faith and grace, though knowledge must guide and perfect it afterward.

Now to this lamentable complaint of the father, to wit, Iphtah, let us hear
Verse. 36.
the kind and dutiful answer of the daughter. My father, says she, if thou
have vowed any thing to the Lord concerning me (as she perceived by him he had,
for every word is not recorded in a brief history) I yield obediently to thee,
and am willing to confirm and help to make good thy vow. Her obedience, or
rather desire of obedience to her father, was highly commendable, even as his
was to God, but yet in the respect before named, to wit, because she thought
her fathers vow was lawful, as himself thought; it must be performed and
kept: for she ought and might have denied to have yielded, where her father
had so vainly and needlessely vowed, if she had known that her father had had
liberty by the law of God to redeem her. But she to please God, as she
supposed, and that her father might not offend him neither, by breaking his
vow, did submit her self, and makes no exclamation at the hearsay of it, nay
does not so much as question about, and discuss it with a scrupulous mind. And
mark further that she says, it was not grievous for her to die, seeing the
enemies of God were overthrown.

This her ready and obedient affection (setting aside the error thereof) is a
clear glass for youth to look in, to show their readiness in obeying their
Doct. 1.
parents, it being agreeable to the law of God, which is required of them, and
so in obeying their governors set over them. And as she said in her own case
for her self, so should they say, every one for himself unto them, far be
it from me, that I should procure, or be a mean of your sorrow. Children
that are teachable may hear her, and learn when they may or must speak, and
how to do it. And that is thus: that whereas reverence, obedience and
thankfulness is required of them, so they be ready accordingly in the
performing of them all unto them to do their duties.

Their humble and kind words should comfort and glad their parents hearts, and
yet they should look carefully to be found suitable also in their deeds. And
these were as double armor to them, when the wicked children wound and lay
open their parents to reproach among the bad sort, and are corruption to their
bones. These should make them not to be ashamed Prou. 12. 4.
of them, as their children. And blessed is the man that has his quiver full
of such arrows, they shall defend him from the ill tongues of his enemies.
Even so the common ill behavior of the most children, and namely, their words
and answers, which they give to their parents, chattingly, stoutly, saucily,
(yea and with gybes and taunts, some of them,) they are to their parents, as I
have said, reproach and poison to their own souls. But to make this point more
sull and clear, here let all good children learn this duty from God, that
with their ready and willing mind, submitting themselves to their parents, they
join also wisdom and sound knowledge, to direct them wherein to obey, that so
they may not commend their affection only, but the whole duty to their father
in heaven, as well as to their father in earth. I speak not this, as if I would
teach them to contest with their parents, or descant with them about their
lawful demands; but to beware left by obeying man in a good intent, they
offend God in the maine. Neither do all parents make conscience what they
urge, but require a strict obedience without control. And they that do make
conscience, yet require their due often ignorantly: and would be full loath to
do it, if they knew it unlawful, as Iphtah doubtless would. Indeed I
confess this duty lies streightliest upon the parent, to know what to demand,
but the child (if he neglect) is bound to perform the same, which might of
the other be lawfully demanded. And let none think that by this rule, the
inferior is ever a whit privileged: no doubtless, he obeys the parent and
governor best and most, who obeys in the Lord upon knowledge.

And in that she says, Seeing thou art revenged of thine enemies, I am Doct. 2.
well content to dye, it was a speech that might well have become the
experiencedst servants of God, though uttered by a young damsel. Oh let such
examples be our instruction! for as Paul said the same words in a like case; so
Acts. 1. John.
the Lord instructs us to do the same. So that we have cause to say and
think it, that our lives should not be dear to us, in respect of the welfare
and peace of Gods Church and people: for her prosperity should be our desire
and joy. As we are taught by the example of that rare noble man Nehemiah, more
famous for grace and godliness, then for his greatness and advancement: who
being asked of the King, why his countenance was cast Nehem 2. 3.
down, and sad; he answered, Oh my Lord the King, why should I not be sad,
when the house and city of the sepulchers of my fathers lies waste, and the
gates thereof are devoured with fire?

Commendable also was the answer of Mephibosheth to David, when he was safely
delivered from the rebellion of Absalom, and restored again to 2. Sam. 19. 30.
be the vpholder and welfare of the Church: thus he said, What are all my goods
and substance to me, seeing my Lord the King is come home in peace? And Paul
showed by his words to the Romans, Chap. 9. and 10. that Romans 9. 1. and 10. 1.
so earnest was his desire and prayer to God for Israel, that they might be
saved, that he would pledge his own salvation to purchase theirs. And he
tells King Agrippa, that so as he and all that heard him that day, were added
as true members to increase the Church, he was content to bear the bands and
hardness himself alone, he (I say) could have wished that he Acts 26. 28.
might have borne all the brunt, to free them from it. Such love should we
bear (and not pretend) to the Church of God, that a great part of our joy
should be diminished, unless she might joy with us. But we may complain with
the proverb, Every man for himself: but they are happiest that weep and
rejoice with her. For wherein stands our happiness, and whence have we our
chief cause of rejoicing? Have we it not from hence, that we are members of
that holy Catholic Church of Christ, which (being his body) is knit and
compacted by joints and sinews together, and draws from him (as her head)
life and grace? And partake we not even here singular fruit from this
communion of Saints, not only by the sweet Note.
conuersing with them, whom we are next unto, and dwell among, but by the
prayers of such as we are only present with in spirit, though in place far
distant? Therefore next to our communion with our Lord Jesus himself, what
sweeter meditation have we then of our fellowship with his body? whereunto he
has granted such singular privileges, and which he has beautified with so
many admirable gifts and graces? in all which we have our parts, if we have
any part in her. What think we? Is Christ divided: Is his body subject to
dismembring? Can any of us draw from the head, any influence of grace, if we
will be singular by our selves, or separate our selves from our brethren? Does
not a great part of our felicity hereafter, consist in this, that we shall
have fellowship with the Saints in light, even the light of Gods and the Lambs
immediate presence? For these reasons, let us be persuaded to enlarge our
selves, and not to be straightened within our selves, as if we neither had any
part in the sorrows or prosperity of others. For as there is a duty required
of us toward the whole body, to pray for the peace of it, and mourn for the
grieuances thereof: so especially for that part thereof, whose estate is best
known to us: and with David we must say, If I forget thee (O Jerusalem) let my
tongue clean to the roof Psalm. 137 5.
of my mouth, and my fingers forget to play. And again, For Zions sake, I will
not hold my peace, etc. till her beauty break forth as the light, and till
Jerusalem be set up, the glory of the earth. And this affection should be so
strong, that it should ouerflow the banks of the Church, and extend it self
to the borders and confines thereof: and be earnest with God, for them that are
yet strangers and aliants, that they may be made members of this body, and
citizens of this City: that the Kingdom of Christ may be stretched out from
sea to sea, and he may rule far and wide throughout the world. And it will
become us as well to entreat the Lord, to pity the many thousands of them that
sit in darkness, who cannot discern betwixt the right Jonas 4. 10. 11.
hand and the left, as the contrary ill beseemed Jonah, who was checked for his
labor. And further, seeing the variety of the necessities and estates, both
of diverse particular Churches, and members of each, (some of them known to us)
is manifold: we must think this duty not easily discharged, without a great
measure of love, and an heart dilated therewith, and well purged of selfeloue.
There are many that pretend this office to the Church (being indeed
Schismatikes and Heretics) out of a preposterous love of a communion, out of
union. But let them know the Church acknowledges no such bastards, neither
hearkneth after those that would, under the pretense of a new devised
communaltie of their own, draw her to either a separation from her head, as
Papists do, or from fellowship with the body of Christ, as they who term
themselves of the separation do.

When Iphtahs daughter had answered her father, as he had given her occasion,
Verse. 37. 38.
she made a request to him for her self, as in this verse is showed, saying:
Give me leave to go to the mountains, to bewail my virginity, I and my
fellows. For it was counted a reproach in those days, to die childlesse. And a
solitary place as she asked, was fit for that purpose. Now that she would not
without leave do even that which was good, she shows clearly, and we may
see, that much less would she have done as Dinah, Jacobs daughter did, to
range and roue, idly, needlessely and dangerously.

Which may teach our youth, and particularly the maidens of our age, to Doct.
learn this point of obedience of her; namely not to be their own caruers,
to cut out their liberty to themselves, while they be under the government and
authority of their parents or other; to go where they list, and to think
themselves too good to crave leave, especially, for their lawful going forth:
which to do agrees not with stout and lofty stomachs, and therefore the
most of them, going commonly to such places, and to such ends, as they wish
afterward that they had stayed at home, do with shame and sorrow, reap the
just fruit of their disobedience: whereas by craving leave they might have been
answered by them with whom they should have consulted, that such goings forth
had not been for their good, and so might have been stayed at home with safety.
And if she asked leave for her going abroad, how much more would she have
asked it in more weighty cases? But this is a branch of the general duty of
obedience, whereof much has been said in Chap. 1. and elsewhere. Only this
we may wonder at, that the daughter of Iphtah, a man ignorant (no doubt) and
unacquainted with many things, concerning the will of God; and therefore none of
the fittest to season his children with religion, (especially considering his
banishment, and manner of living) that she (I say) should yet attain to this
excellent courage, and show so rare a pattern of obedience, as that few men's
example in the Scripture may compare with her in the one: but assuredly, the
greatest part Note.
of the children of the most careful and religious parents (for all their
knowledge) come far short of her in the other. But where grace is, there
nature and sex is not to be respected: that which the Author to the Hebrews
says, That by faith many waxed strong, is truly verified in this worthy
damsel, Heb. 11. 34.
among the rest.

The leave she asked, was to this end, that for two months she might go The 2.
point in this verse.
and bewail her virginity, and comfort her self with her companions, (which
were virgins also) on the mountains in solitary places: for it was among
women a reproach in those days, and lamented, to be barren, and so it was by
her, that she should die a virgin without issue. For it was a kind of curse of
itself to die so. For God had commanded men from the beginning, to replenish
the earth. And the Hebrews desired to increase a holy seed and Commonwealth:
and they hoped, seeing the Messiah should come of the seed of Abraham, that he
might possibly come of theirs.

Now in that some think, that seeing she asked to go bewail her virginity,
that therefore she was not offered in sacrifice, but only kept from marriage,
and was vowed by her father to perpetual virginity while she lived. I
answer: That cannot be, seeing neither God did ever command, or require of
any, to vow the virginity of their children, and so ^rie them to it, neither
could Iphtah mind or mean that, when he made his vow, as I have said before,
for he saw that it had been most like that his daughter should have been she,
that should have met him, as it was so indeed. Beside his daughter was not
consenting thereto, which of necessity she must have been, if his vow had been
made of that. And besides when he returned, and met his daughter, how was he
stricken with great grief, she not knowing why: and what sense had there been
in this, when he made his vow, that he should mean thus? [The first that
meets me, I will offer her to perpetual virginity.] But his lamenting it,
and common sense shows the contrary: and if any other but his daughter (as
what knew he) had met him, what authority had he to vow her to virginity?
And if ye will say, nay; he meant his daughter, I have answered that, and
besides, how can his vow of a burnt offering be expounded of virginity.

Likewise the absurdity of the fact, and his unnaturalness to his own child,
and having no more, and the Lord not requiring it of him, what had it been
less then madness in him, (though it had been in his power to do it) to have
either vowed, or intended any such thing, and much more to execute it?
Therefore although he did as ill (I grant) through ignorance, in offering her,
yet it cannot be that he vowed her to virginity, but he meant when he
vowed, to offer that as a sacrifice that should first meet him, and he thought
he might. But if ye ask, why she said, she would go and bewail her
virginity, if her father meant not that, I say virginity is here expressed
because she more grieved that she should dye a virgin, then simply that she
should dye: for in as much as losing her life she died childlesse, it was all
one as if she had lived all her life long in virginity. The meaning then is,
she lamented that she must dye a virgin.

That which we are to learn here, is this, that the afflictions which God
Doct. 2.
lays upon his servants, ought both to be grievous to them for the present
Heb. 12. 11.
time, and also according to the measure and continuance of his afflicting
hand: so ought the measure and continuance of their sorrows be. The whole
book of the Lamentations of Jeremy, is a plentiful witness of this truth,
for it contains a bitter continued complaint, made in the behalf of the
Church, for the desolation which was upon her, every part and circumstance
whereof is laid in the balance, to provoke her to a due correspondent
heaviness and humiliation under Gods hand. And so ought it to be with us also.
First, because we have none laid upon us, but we deserve them by our sin, and
we must be led to repentance by them, or else we abuse Lam. 3. 3^.
them. And besides, the greatness and continuance of aflictions argue, for the
most part, that we are not sufficiently humbled, nor repent as we might do,
for our sins; nor call upon the Lord effectually as we should. But most men
turn away their eye from that which is unpleasing, and carnally solace Note.
themselves with their outward blessings, that so they may avoid all
heaviness, or choke it.

The use hereof is, to reprove the stoicall blockishnes of those that be not
moved with afflictions, and to reprove them again on the other side, that by
continuance under the cross, do grow hard hearted and rebellious; which
condition is a fearful sign of Gods rejecting of them. Also to teach us the
heavier and longer that troubles are upon us, the more earnestly to labor with
our selves, to grow in repentance, zeal and feruencie of Iam. 1. 5.
prayer. But oh how soon do even the better sort of Gods people faint or wax
blockish under them, if they do no worse, especially being grievous and long
upon them? Yea and how do they exceed in the other extreme oftentimes, in
laying their crosses too near their hearts, and aggravating them beyond
measure? which sin Job himself, when his troubles exceeded, was not free
from.

Now to perform this solemn work, she chose both a solitary place fit Verse.
38.
for the purpose, and also far from her fathers house, to weane her self
from thence or for to avoid recourse of her friends unto her. To teach us, that
there fall out times and occasions to be solitary, even as it is it self
commanded us of God. and that both extraordinary, as here, and in private
fasting, and ordinary also for meditation; and these both the one and the other
we should use to our good when we have cause, either longer or shorter time to
go apart by our selves, knowing that this is a special action of religious
worship, and therefore requires separation from hindrances. So did our Savior
Christ for a time, after much preaching and being in company, go into some
solitary place, with his Disciples, as it were returning to himself, that he
might have more freedom for heavenly contemplation and prayer. So in the time
of great lamentation, as the people did mourn for the death of Josias, and in
the time of Zachary the Prophet, when Zach. 12. 12.
the family did it apart, one member of it from another, the husband apart,
and the wife apart. But fondly does Popery abuse such examples, to maintain
Monastical life, and such like fancies, when they were used in the best
manner, (if ever well used) but now much more, when they have brought them to
such abomination as they are come unto, that it is but a cover for much and
great wickedness.

And this point deserves our observation: that she being now in heaviness,
wisely chose the fittest exercise to set it in on work, and did not yield to
her passion, which then would have made her loggish and unprofitable, but used
it to a singular good end, even to fit her self for her death and departure.
In mirth and joy how hard a thing is it to recall home our wandering senses and
straying affections, and retire our thoughts and minds from rouing in every
corner of the world, our woeful experience can tell us. Sorrow has likewise
many and those grievous annoiances attending it, but that of the two (the
comparison being equal) is the fittest trumpet to sound this retreit. And as
naturally it contracteth the body and the spirits, so if it be taken heed unto,
it brings the superfluous and noisome cares, delights and desires of the
soul into a narrower compass. And when a man is wholly at home, is he not
fitter for any good duty, then when he is absent in great part from himself?
Therefore as the day of grief is a season and opportunity for some good
duty, which at other times is to us unseasonable, so let us use it
accordingly, that is, redeem it. Solitariness (I confess) is not fit for
every sorrower: and yet it is necessary for the better doing of this duty. I
therefore distinguish of persons: Such therefore as are ignorant, and yet
oppressed with heaviness, for that they doubt, and are uncertain of Gods
favor, for their sin, and especially if they be pressed with melancholy. To
these I give this counsel, that they avoid solitariness in their pangs of
grief, and melancholic passions, and give not vantage to their enemy the
devil to find them alone, (as near as they can) lest they find his
delusions and temptations the more forcible, as Judas in his perplexity did,
when he went aside from all company. But let their sorrow drive them to ask
counsel, and make their cases known to such, as can advise or comfort them.
The devil was bold to assault our Savior himself Luke 4. 2.
in his solitariness. But to return and to speak of the point. If a survey
were taken, I doubt we should find few hours (I speak not of weeks or
months) dedicated by the most part of Christians, to this heavenly work of
using solitarines for meditation, especially for preparation to dye, to make up
their accounts against they should be called for. Oh they look to live long,
they are not in the case of this maid, who was within two months of her dying
day, and applied them wholly to fit her for death; but they are made drunk
with an insatiable desire of living still; and therefore tell not them of such
sad unwelcome matters. But oh fools! are they not suddenly taken (and as
unprovided) within few days and hours of their death, as they were many
years before? Therefore to leave them: when the Lord at any time justly
occasioneth us to be sorrowful and pensive, let us beware of blockishnesse
(which commonly accompanies them, who in in their mirth think of nothing but
iollitie) and say we every one thus to our selves: Now the Lord calls me home
to the practice of a duty, (which indeed ought to be often in use) to meditate
of my estate, to unburden my mind and soul of those manifold, needless and
noisome thoughts and affections, which I have ouerloaden my self a long time
withal: now the Lord will have me bent to search out my errors, corruptions,
and disorders of heart and life, and going aside to ease my stomach of them,
confess, loath, renounce and ask pardon of them. Now the Lord will have me to
pray, that his spirit may be restored to me in greater measure, that I may
return with more liberty to his service, and beware that I be not again
surfeited, with that which now I have vomited up, as the world, pleasures,
vain desires, vile and loathsome lusts. This is a good use indeed of
heaviness: the Eccles. 7. 1.
house of such mourning, is better the^ the house of feasting. And to this end,
oh it were to be wished, that damsels as well as other, living in these days,
would setforth themselves to the world, not in pride, boldness, niceness and
curiosity of fashions, but in modesty, grace and wisdom (as this maiden here
did) which were another manner of spectacle, then to see many golden rings in a
swines snout.

Now whereas it is said here, (to fill up the measure of her due commendation)
Verse. 39.
that she returned at the time set, unto her father, to do to her as he had
vowed; the faithfulness, constancy and obedience of the maid is not only to
be commended, but admired. For why did she so, but to serve God therein, as
she was persuaded? Such keeping of covenant and promise Doct.
made by her, when it was to the forgoing of her life, does urge all in smaller
matters, much more to keep promise, and to make conscience of their word, and
that not only toward God, but even to men also. The like we see in Paul, who
having his liberty given him, both in his journey toward Rome, and at Rome
also (where he was Nero his prisoner) whereby he might have made many an
escape and shifted for himself: yet never attempted any such course, but
faithfully returned to his Captain, and to his Keeper, (though to the peril
of his life) rather then he would procure safety by breaking away, by
distrusting God, or by unfaithfulness. A good cause will seek no such shifts:
and our great Jesuits, if there were in them that zeal, which they pretend,
they need not by breaking oath, nay prison, provide for themselves, as sundry
of them have done, to testify what a good cause they have to maintain, who
betray it so grossly. And this further condemns that common unfaithfulness
and falsehood (which also I have noted before, but cannot too much complain
of) at this day practiced, to the utter undoing of many thousands, by breaking
both promise and bond, and running away with men's goods, or playing the
banckroupts, and all to defeat them.

Now in that it is said, he did to her according to his vow, it is a sufficient
Verse. 40.
proof, that he vowed her not to virginity. I have in ye verses before showed
how these words are to be understood: to wit, that he sacrificed her, as his
vow was to do, to that which should first meet him, and did not tie her to
live a virgin: and therefore I say no more of it, lest I should make a needles
repetition: and if I dissent herein from any, they are those who confessed, it
was but their opinion, in that they thought otherwise then I do: and I have
showed my reasons of this my assertion. Now though he did so perform his vow
upon his daughter of mere conscience, (for he thought that he ought to keep
and perform that vow which he had solemnly made, though it fell out upon his
own daughter) yet this that he did consult with none in all that time about
it, (which is admirable that he did not) does admonish all in doubtful and
dangerous cases to ask counsel, and seek resolution. But withal let them
take this: to seek where they ought, namely, in the Scriptures, or at the
mouth of the godly and learned, to be resolved by the Scriptures. See before
verse 30.

It is said further, that it was kept as a custom of the daughters of Israel,
Verse. 39 40.
that they went to bewail the daughter of Iphtah four times in the year.
Some translate the Hebrew word to talk with, and to comfort; other to bewail:
the word yields both significations. But whether of the two is to be
understood in this place is easy to see: for the vow of Iphtah being taken in
this meaning, that he meant thereby to offer her in sacrifice, it follows of
necessity, that these maids bewailed her when they met, and did not talk
with her, she being dead. For although the Hebrew word in deed signifies,
both to common with, and to bewail, yet I have showed that the latter sense
here is to be embraced. Now in that they held this as a custom to lament her
that she was sacrificed, it appears they sought this thereby, that it should
not be forgotten, and besides that, it is like enough they did it, that all
parents might be warned to make no such vows.

This custom while it was not abused, nor brought to any superstitious Doct.
use, was the less to be misliked, whereas otherwise, it had been fit to
break it off: accordingly should customs be thought of, and dealt with. For
as they agree with Gods law, and with charity, they are to be observed and
kept, but otherwise, as they be superstitious and profane, to hinder, or put
by Gods worship, or when there is danger that they will grow to such abuse,
they are to be broken. Also when they tend to the maintaining, of needless
charge and expenses, the hurt and hindering of any, or be otherwise unlawful,
(as there are many such at this day maintained and keept) they are to be
abolished. And therefore the blind and wicked practice, of spending the twelve
days at the Nativity in play, revel and disorder, also the leaud customs
still retained in some parts of this land, to keep their profane customary
feasts and drinkings on the Sabbath, with all other misrule of like sort, are
utterly to be rooted out, and better plants set in their rooms, if it may be:
of which I say no more, having before more fully discoursed thereof.

THE SIXTIETH NINE SERMON ON THE TWELFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse 1. And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went
Northward, and said unto Iphtah, Wherefore wentest thou to fight against the
children of Ammon, and did not call us to go with thee? we will therefore
burn thine house upon thee with fire. 2. And Iphtah said unto them, I and my
people were at great strife with the children of Ammon, and when I called you,
ye delivered me not out of their hands. 3. So when I saw that ye delivered me
not, I put my life in mine hands, and went upon the children of Ammon: so the
Lord delivered them into mine hands. Wherefore then are ye come upon me now to
fight against me? 4. Then Iphtah gathered all the men of Gilead, and fought
with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye
Gileadites are runnagates of Ephraim, among the Ephramites and among the
Manassites. 5. Also the Gileadites took the passages of Jorden before the
Ephramites, and when the Ephramites that were escaped, said, Let me pass, Then
the men of Gilead said unto him, Art thou an Ephramite? If he answered, Nay, 6.
Then they said unto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he
could not so pronounce: then they took him and slew him, at the passages of
Jorden: and there fell at that time of the Ephramites, two and forty thousand.
THe sum of this Chapter consisting of two parts, is The sum and parts 2.
this, first, the sedition of the Ephramites, but to their own cost. For they
quarreling with Iphtah for a light or rather no cause, and coming to make
war with him, many of them were slain by him, and others of them in flying,
were in the like manner put to the sword, and this to verse 7. this is the
sum of the first part. The second declares and sets down the time of the
government of Iphtah, and of the three other Judges, who succeeded one another,
and of their death and burial, to wit, Iphtahs, and the other, who were these,
Ibzan, Elon and Abdon, and this to the end of the Chapter.

The first part of the Chapter.
IN this former part, these two things are contained: First, the bitter
contending The first point.
of the Ephramites with Iphtah, threatening to burn him and his house with
fire: and Iphtahs answer and defense to verse 4. The second thing is, how
Iphtah kills diverse of them in the skirmish and fight, and others of them in
their flying away, to verse 7.

The sins of these Ephramites, which they show here in one action, are Verse
1.
many: of the which it shall not be amiss to take a view, as the text offers
occasion, in the most whereof I will be the briefer, because I have handled
them already, upon the like fact, Chap. 8. 1. The first is sedition, in rising
against The sense of the 3. first verses.
their lawful governor Iphtah; and this came of pride, whereby they
attributed so much unto themselves above other. Then their unthankfulness to
him, who had far endangered himself to the Ammonites before he got the
victory, for theirs, and the safety of their brethren. Thirdly, their false
accusing of him, that he had not called them to help him in the conflict,
boldly making a lie in so charging him, whereas he had called them, and they
refused to come, which showed their disobedience to him, who by his authority
might command them: and lastly, their threatening to burn him and his house, a
fruit of their sedition; and to void this their stomach of the baggage in it,
it is said they went Northward to Gilead against Iphtah, that is, to contend
and fight with them.

To make some use hereof, first we see, that such as bear the face of honest
Doct.
men, and live in countenance among their neighbors, as these Ephramites did,
may yet possibly become and prove seditious. Pride of it self is able to set
men forward to it, as it did Absolon, and these here. Much more, ease and
idleness, ill counsel and envy, with such like. And though the sprigges of it
bud forth full fast, and are ready too easily to yield fruit in all, yet we
must have an especial care, that they grow not: but let them be pruned-off,
yea and a digging at the root betimes had need to be, that the branches may
wither. See what I have noted of this point out of the face of the Shechemites,
chap. 9. 2. 3.

Now for the remedy hereof, seeing pride and coffeehouse are the causes
hereof, let the heart be kept with all diligence, from nourishing of such
affections and thoughts, and to crack pride, and pull it down, think Note.
we of our selus as we are: even such as if we could see our faces in the
clear glass of Gods law, should appear more loathsome, then the most
deformed Lazer: such is the filthiness of our inborne corruption, and foul
litter of most monstrous sins that proceed from thence, so far off should
we be from swelling and thinking our selves to be great, yea, petty Angels as
we are ready to do, whereby we imagine we be too good to be in subjection to
our betters in the Lord, yea, or to the Lord himself, in obeying his word.
There are many who accuse the sincere preachers and professors of the Gospel,
as seditious and tumultuous, yea, enemies of good order, etc. A man would not
think, that the accuser were like to be stained with the crime, which he
charge upon another. But when for want of the fear of God, some of the
ciuillest, and such as stand for law and government in towns shall be pulled out
for notorious malefactors, either in this crime of sedition, as Demetrius and
his fellows, or in any other riot and disorder; while they whom they chargde
shall be found innocent, then they wish they had been a little preciser in that
kind, and confess that only conscience can resist these temptations to sin.
They make a shift for a while to conceal their lewdness, but if forcible
occasions and prouocations assault them, they have no power to withstand them.
Thus much of this. Look upon the quarrelling of the Ephramites with Gedeon,
Chap. 8.

Secondly, their bitter and causeless contentions, threatening to burn him and
his house, where they had cause rather to have been highly thankful to him,
does teach of what metal and disposition some be, that they cannot live in
their place innocent and harmless with other, but take upon them to dominere
over them, holding them in fear of them, when yet the Lord has commanded,
that we should not be many masters, neither suffer James 3 1.
any to live in fear by us. Such were the Jews against Paul: for this sin of
contending with others, though it be odious wheresoever it be found, yet when
it is raised for religion, it is monstrous: and they that hate their neighbors
for their weldoing, and for that they cannot join with them in their
unfruitful and shameless works of darkness, but reprove them rather, such
I say hate them with a deadly hatred, and cannot in their disliking and
malicious conceits against them, be pacified or reconciled to them, their wrath
is vnapeazable, as we read that Cains for that very cause was toward 1. Ioh.
3. 12.
his brother Abel, that his brothers deeds were good, and his evil.

This ought to teach us, not only to live peaceably with those that are
quietly disposed, though they be not framed to live Christianly; but also to
do our best to win and persuade them to look after the life to come, and to
fear God; and that first by our innocent living among them, and good example
giving unto them, and then by little and little drawing them forward, by good
instruction, admonition, or otherwise, as there shall be cause. But especially
it should urge us to be more nearly knit in brotherly love, one Christian with
another, and to bear the infirmities which we see each in other, and help one
another out of them: rather then to take a pritch and conceit one against
another, and so to cause strangenes and breaking of fellowship, wherein many
offend greatly, till they be forced by the hard usage, that they find among
the bad sort, to make more account of their brethren afterward, then they did
before. But of this often.

To the former doctrine, this may be added as a limme or branch of it, that
civil men not Heathenish only, as the King of Ammon, chap. 11. but 3
Professors also sometimes (as we see these Ephramites did) to add strength to
their contentions and braules, and to give them more liberty therein, will, I
say not, stick to set out their dislikes, and accusing of other with lies and
false chargings of them, that so they may seem to have just cause to hate and
contend, as that wicked Ziba did bring into disfavor and disgrace, 2. Sam. 16.
3.
that innocent man Mephibasheth with David, as much as in him lay; with lies
and false accusations. Let the odiousnes of such dealing, make the speaking of
the truth to be more set by of us, and yet for loves sake to our brethren not
to urge the utmost that we may do, though we might do it justly, which is the
right and kind showing of our love to them. Let the reader see chap. 11. 13.

And by the unthankfulness of these Ephramites, which it is no marvel to see
in them toward Iphtah, they being branded with such gross evils, as 4
we have heard to be in them, let us learn what Gods servants may look for
in this world, for all their love and labor in procuring the peace and welfare
of other, and in bringing them to good: truly, unthankfulness they may look
for, if not ill will and the fruit thereof: and that recompense is rendered
them for all their good will, to go about to bring the wicked world to a better
point, I mean in laboring to acquaint them with God. They owe them more then
all that they have is worth: as we may see by Paul's words to Philemon: yea and
it is clear also by the word of God, that they Phile. 19.
are beholding to them in great part for their lives; as we read, that for ten
righteous men's sake Sodom should not have bin destroyed: even for this Genesis
18. 32.
they are (I say) beholding to the same good servants of God, as well as for
the welfare of their souls, who by their holy prayers and other good endeavors
would be helpers to them, if they might be regarded of them: yea to say much in
few words, if it were not for them, the world could not stand, so that they
have all that they enjoy for their sakes, and more might have at Gods hands,
but that they willingly withhold it from themselves.

And what does the whole rabble of them yield again to Gods people (think we)
but unthankfulness, (unless it be a few whom God inlightneth to believe the
truth) even as Iphtah did receive at the hands of the Ephramites, whom he set
at liberty, yea and that with all indignity, discourtesie, and bad usage. But
to omit them, with whom there is little hope of good to be done, this I say to
them who desire to glorify God by bringing forth John 15. 9.
much fruit, let them not be discouraged, but bear it contentedly at their
hands, it is the only recompense that the unthankful world can yield to such;
as Christ himself found and foretold it us, saying, I have done many good
works among you, for which of them do ye stone me? And again, If they John
10. 32. John 16.
have not known me, says he, neither will they know you. For the fuller use
hereof, look in chap. 8. verses 22. and 35. also chap. 8. 1.

Lastly in this verse, whereas this finne of contending and dissembling in
these Ephramites, is found to be not in one, but many generations of them, 5
as partly we have heard already in the 8. chapter of this book, where we see
the Ephramites did the same to Gedeon then, that these their posterity did
here to Iphtah, and afterward the like pride is read to be in their posterity;
it reaches how a sin keeps in a kindred, for many generations after, as
treason, whoredom, flattery, dissembling, and such like, and such taints and
stains are not worn out, till special grace of God do work and effect the
same. But of this before, chap. 8. 1. for in these points I shun tediousnes
of purpose.

In these two next verses is set down the answer of Iphtah to these
Ephramites, by which answer it is clear, that he used all means, like a wise
Verse. 2. 3
and well governed man, before he would take up weapon against his brethren
the Ephramites, notwithstanding their bold provoking of him, and he Judge and
governor over them, and might therefore by his authority have beaten them
down. And the sum of his answer was this; that they laid a false accusation
to his charge, for contrariwise, at such time as he was sore provoked by the
Ammonites, and driven to make war with the^, he sought help of them, and
they would not go forth with him, but put him to his shifts: and when he
fought with them, to the peril and danger of his life, the Lord delivered them
into his hands: Therefore he demands of them, what cause they the Ephramites
had, to assault and set upon him in that manner they did. Thus much of Iphtahs
answer.

Now let us a while consider of this more particularly, as we have done before
of the Ephramites quarrelling with him. Where this comes first to be noted by
their disordered contending with him, not in course of law, Doct.
but seditiously and with tumult, how one affliction arose to this good man
after another: as the trouble yt he had by his daughter was accompanied in some
sort with this, that came to him by his neighbors the Ephramites. Whereby we
may see the condition of Gods people as in a glass, that they are ever wrapped
into new combats and troubles daily, so as the end of one is the beginning of
another. As we see in the book of Job, it is said of his Job. 1. 16.
troubles, how one complaint came to him in the neck of another: and yet
(which is more to be marueiled at) God of his goodness so works by them,
that they who will be ruled by him, may see them turn to their profit and
benefit, according to the saying of the Apostle, to wit, that all things Romans
8. 28.
turn to the best to them that love God. The like says S. James; Count it
Iam. 1. 2.
(my brethren) matter of the greatest rejoicing, when ye fall into diverse
tribulations. And it is a doubt mercy of God that it is so: For we are so
corrupt and defiled, that if things succeed with us after our desire, we are
exceedingly lifted up, and forget our selves, in such wise that our pride is
intolerable, and we shamefully disguise our selves, so that such as fear God,
and behold us, knowing we are but worms meat; are greatly grieved to see our
insolency. Therefore to keep us from such disguisednes, and the danger that
comes thereby, what a favor of God is this, that he after some prosperity,
does use to exercise us with new combats and afflictions, and all to hold us
under, yea, and much to benefit us. For as it is better to go to heaven Mark.
9. 45.
with one foot, then to hell with both; so he will rather save us with putting
us to some pain and grief here, rather then to lose and forgo us utterly, by
suffering us to enjoy uncertain and momentany prosperity and the pleasures of
sin for a while. Of this having spoken what I thought fit in chap. 11. verse.
34. and 8. 1. I add no more here.

Only this watch word is necessary to be taken of us, that although we be
now and then (as Iphtah was before, chap. 11. 35.) humbled with some
afflictions, so that for the time we be brought to obedience, and subdued as it
is meet for us to be; yet because we do so soon wash them off, therefore we
have need of many, and those also strong afflictions, (as Iphtah had) as
mallets to bear us down one after another, and bruise us that so we may be
meekned under the mighty hand of God; and we must be importunate with him in
our prayers, that we may be more and more accustomed daily, Note.
to bear the cross patiently and contentedly, till he have perfected and
Luke 9. 23.
brought to his appointed measure, the good work that he has begun in us. And
whereas the succession of heavy afflictions much dismaieth us for the most
part, (though alas they are not worth the naming in respect of Christ's, whose
afflictions we should be conformable unto; nor yet to the glory (which
through him) they work us, as the Apostle says, I say it Romans 8. 18.
should be otherwise, and we should cast one eye eft upon the righteous and
equal dealing of God, and eft upon the cause within our selves, as well as
upon the greatness of the affliction, or the multiplicitie of them, as has
often been noted before in handling this argument.

Secondly here we see, that answer is to be made to false accusations, when
they be proudly given out against us, and are to our reproach and hurt, as
Doct. 2.
these of the Ephramites were against Iphtah: such (I say) are not to be
suffered to pass, lest the authors of them be imboldned thereby, to do so
still, yea and go further. So Solomon teaches, saying: Answer a fool
according Prou 26. 5.
to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit, and so he wax bold to make
a practice of it.

For though we walking in our innocence and vprightnes in all good
conscience, should not regard the taunts and unjust reproaches of evil Eccles.
7. 11.
tongues, which they commonly send after us, much less hearken what they say
of us, for then we should never be quiet; yet in weighty matters that touch
our profession, and the credit thereof, we ought (if we can obtain it) Note.
to use the help of the Magistrate, both to restrain the slanderer, (in which
respect Mephibosheth complained to David of Ziba) and to procure unto him his
due, unless he repent. But especially take we heed that we give them no just
cause to speak evil of us, while we suffer as evil doers, for so we 1. Pet
3. 17.
bring a double punishment upon our selves.

And because much seed of contention is sown in the world by bad persons, this
I say further of it, that it is our part and duty to root it up, as fast and
as much as in us lies. And if ye ask how that is done: I answer, besides
that which before I said, we should carefully look that we take all in good
part, if it may be; but if it cannot be, yet in defending our innocence, let
us show all meeknes, and strive against all bitterness: if the offender see
Note.
his fault, we have good blessing of our labor; if not, it is lawful to go
further, and according to the greatness of the fault, so let satisfaction be
urged at his hands: but in any wise, let us see that we keep the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace. This I thought good to add to that I have
said before in the eleventh chapter in Iphtah his answer to the Elders of
Gilead, and in his reply to the King of Ammons lying answer.

To come more particularly to the matter, we see, that whereas they make this
the chief cause of their quarrel against him, that he called them not to
help against the Ammonites, he tells them he did call them, but they would
not come. So that he conuinceth them of a lie. But who would Doct. 3.
think, that so many should consent together so boldly to maintain a false
matter? And men of the visible Church and of the tribe of Ephraim, one of the
famous tribes among the rest. Therefore they who at this day do carry their
heads aloft, both for their profession and outward estate in the world, have
great cause to suspect and fear themselves both in and about this sin and
the like. But to terrify and withhold men from standing stiff in a lie, let
that fearful example of Gehazi prevail with them, with such 2. King. 5. 27.
like in Scripture.

The heart of man is false and naught, and will easily carry men to that which
is odious and vile, especially if the matter savor of profit or pleasure, and
selfeloue shall so blindfold them, that they shall not see the evil they have
done, till they smart for it, unless they be such as keep a narrow watch over
their hearts, and a searching into them faithfully, to find out that which is
amiss. And this that it may be done, God has given us two especial good
helps: the first is our coming to the light, that our evil John 3. 19.
deeds may that way be made known to us. The other, our own examinings
privately of our ways, and arraigning of our selves before God, that so Psalm.
4. 4. Lam 3. 40.
we may cast out such filthiness, of lying, dissembling and the like sins. See
branch 3. of verse 1.

These Ephramites dealt with Iphtah, as the men of Succoth and Penuel Doct 4.
ver. 2
dealt with Gedeon, when he followed the Princes of Midian, to wit, Zeba and
Zalmunna: for they dealt roughly and unkindly with him. So these when Iphtah
their governor sent to them for help, they most undutifully denied it, and
yet (which was much worse) they came and quarrelled with him, now when he had
got the victory, for that (as they shamelesly affirmed) he had not called them
to the battle, and so they would be thought to have deserved as much fame and
commendation in that victory, as Iphtah, seeing they boasted that they were as
ready to have gone against the Ammonites as he, when indeed they meant it not.

Therein they bewrayed two foul faults, very odious and to be taken heed of:
the one, hard-heartednes and barbarous unkindness, not to help their brethren
in their need, the case being their own as well as theirs; and this was joined
with disobedience, in that Iphtah was their governor. The other fault was
their subtlety, in that they did (which way, and on which side soever the
victory should go) provide for themselves. By the first we are taught to
beware of this unkindness and incompassionate hard heartednes, to be senseless
of the miseries and necessities of our brethren; but to be moved with pity
toward them in their distresses: and this we should do, as for the
commandment of God and other causes, so for this that we our selves are
subject to fall into the like troubles, and do also at one time or other. In
which case our consciences bear us witness, that we are justly forsaken of
other, and left to sink in our sorrows, and smart by our calamities, and that
none should offer themselves to pity us, seeing we showed ^o little mercy
and kindness to other before in the like troubles, but were rather hard hearted
toward them. And it is (doubtless) one cause (as we Note.
may see by the evil servant, who had no pity on his fellow, and therefore
his master was wroth with him, and delivered him to the tormentors) it is
Matthew. 18. 34
one cause (I say) why God afflicts us, for as much as we should otherwise
never pity our brethren in their troubles, but thereby we learn commiseration
toward them. Look chap. 5. in Deboras complaint of the (...): and chap. 8.
verse. 6. and 8.

The other fault was their subtlety and double dealing; for they having Doct 5
in verse. 2. 3.
an ill conscience propounded this to themselves, that if the Ammonites had the
victory over Iphtah, then they should be free from hurt and danger, seeing
they had not stirred against them to aid him; and if Iphtah should prevail
against them (as he did) then they would come forth, flourishing boldly with a
lie, affirming that they had cause to take it hardly, for that he got the
victory proudly with a few, (and would not call them to be partakers with
him) and so they did indeed. And thus they had, as men say, two strings to
their bow. This falsehood is so common in the world, to deal subtly, as it
is hard to know whom to trust, as Solomon complaining asks, where a faithful
man shall be found? Touching this ungodly policy and Prou. 20. 7.
subtlety, enough has been spoken upon the like occasion before. Now of their
hollow heartednes and falsehood (the ground of it) I will add somewhat more
particularly.

This sin, as it is committed many ways, so in three things especially I
Subtlety and bad policy appears in three things chiefly: the remedies.
observe it. First in the professing of religion: secondly, in friendship
betwixt and among men: and thirdly, in men's bargainings and worldly dealings.
For remedying of the which (for it were very long to discourse at large of
the^) this should be done: For the first, because many professing, are brought
to like religion for credit, profit, and vainglorie, and so fall from it
again, by small occasions: therefore take this for instruction, let the power
and beauty of the Gospel persuade thee to become a professor of it, rather
then hope of profit, or the seeking of credit thereby, etc. and when thou have
felt Note.
it to have wrought in thee (by the powerful preaching thereof) faith, and a
new life; and when thou see how safe and well liking that has made thine
estate to be unto thee, in comparison of all that was before; this (by Gods
blessing) shall work faithfulness in thee, to honor and beautify thy
profession, so as thou shall not start aside from it, as too many other do;
and otherwise thou shall never hold out in thy profession, what fair shows so
ever thou make; or if thou do, yet thou shall reap no fruit in peace,
nor harvest of such profession, because when it was at the best, it was not
sound.

To pass to the second: for the remedying of doublenes and dissimulation The
second remedy.
in friendship, let this be one chief rule: Choose thy friend for his
goodness, and his excelling others in piety and virtue, especially he being
approved to be a continuer therein, and one that is free from strong affections,
Note.
as choler, anger, tetchines. And love him still for that, (seeing the thing
that is to be desired of a man, is his goodness) whether there be other
kindnesses Prou 19. 19.
enjoyed therewith or no; which if there be any and fail, yet hold the
principle still, and nourish it, by thinking true friendship to be both rare
and precious: and let not that counsel of Solomon be forgotten; Thine own
friend and thy fathers forsake thou not. And beware thy self of tetchinesse
Prou. 27. 10.
and conceits against him; yea though thou think he has given thee cause;
or of the talebearer, which would set division betwixt him and thee; neither
Prou. 17. 9.
repeat any matter which ought to have been buried and forgotten, which may
easily alienate him from thee; and in no wise let hope of earthly commodity
tickle thee, or the want thereof cool or diminish affection in thee toward
him: So faithfulness in friendship will be preserved, and hollownes and
dissembling avoided: otherwise, like the league of fools, it will be soon
broken off.

And to remove falsehood and untrustiness in bargaining and worldly dealings,
think not that good for thee, that thou see is evil and hurtful to The
third remedy. Note.
another, especially to a meaner man in wealth then thy self, but most of all
to a poor body. And when the worth or value of the ware or commodity shall be
agreed upon, plainly and without subtlety, be willing to give a penny for a
penniworth: and as Abraham weighed the silver, according to the manner and
custom of the time to Ephron the Hittite, for the piece of Genesis 23. 16.
ground that he bought of him, to bury his dead in; so do thou pay current
money and coin for it, according to covenant, that as near as may be, there
may be equality to both. If a day be set for payment, keep it, at least let
there be no fault in thee, but let it be seen that thou art disappointed and
hindered from paying, against thy will: and so if the Common wealth be regarded
of thee, not thine own private only, thou shall come near the rule that our
Savior gives for earthly dealings: that is, look what ye Matthew. 7. 12.
would that men should do to you, even the same do ye unto them: So shall
thou not be guilty of double dealing and falsehood. And if thou thus Note.
shun in these three, hollownesse and subtlety, thou shall have great cause
to rejoice in and for thine vprightnes and sincerity, and not easily brought
to halting or dissembling in other matters.

Now let us proceed: Iphtah answers further to the Ephramites, When I saw you
would not help me (says he) I put my life in mine hands, meaning Doct. 6.
I adventured without you, and rested on God, going forth with smaller help,
when I could not have greater. And by this pattern we are taught, that we hang
not, neither depend on other men in the good things we take in hand. For
example, that neither in those things that concern our own happiness directly,
(I mean the seeking of faith and conversion, nor which pertain to
sanctification of life and godliness, as mercy and love, righteousness and
innocence) we must neglect any good duty, because we see other backward in
it; but rather look we to the examples of the forwardest and most faithful
both in their general and special calling, and in no wise let us regard to
follow them that come behind in good things. As all will acknowledge that we
should do so, in the preventing a mischief near at hand, as Iphtah did here
in following hard the Ammonites, when the Ephramites refused to help him.
Abigails wisdom and ear is to be commended 1. Sam. 25. 33.
and imitated by many degrees before Nabals folly and senseless blockishnes.
Even so let us say with Joshua, If other will not go and join Joshua 24. 15.
with us, yet we and ours will serve the Lord. When our Savior saw many
offended at his doctrine, and departing away, he asked Peter in the name of the
rest, Will ye also go away? Peter answers; Whither shall we go (Lord) Ioh. 6.
68.
if we forsake thee, who have the words of eternal life? Be we sure therefore
we provide ill for our selves, if we pin our zeal and forwardnes upon
others, and gather not strength enough from our own assurance of Gods peculiar
goodness toward our own souls, to keep us close and firm in our purpose
of cleaving to him and that daily. Who does so, is wise and Matthew. 7. 24.
builds upon the rock, and no assault shall batter his building: as for the
declining or starting back of others, he leaves that, saying thus to himself:
They stand or fall to their own master: and whether they have ever been truly
persuaded of Gods favor toward them or no, I cannot tell: But I know in whom
I have believed. Therefore if other men will be blind, shall I put out my own
eyes? If I see the world generally disposed to coldness, Note.
loosenes, and luke-warmnes; shall I presently repent me of my zeal and
forwardnes? Have I resolved upon no better grounds, then may be shaken with
every blast of wind, the frowning of my betters, the want of encouragement
from men, or because I see these things are not in price and account among such
as cannot judge? If I only serve God faithfully, of many that live in the same
town careless and profane: will God be ashamed of me before so many, or
rather will he not acknowledge me and reject them for all their multitude? Oh
then what a wretched part were it for me to be ashamed of him before men! or to
fear base and sinful man (whose breath is in his nostrils) more then God, who
can cast body and soul into Matthew. 10. 28.
hell? But of this point see chap. 8. verse 11. compared with former.

In saying, God delivered the Ammonites into his hands without their Doct. 7.
help, as it is manifest he did, we see first how graciously God provided for
this his servant: that whereas he could by no means procure aid from these
Ephramites, the Lord dealt so for him that he needed them not, but went
through as prosperously, as if he had obtained their best assistance. For why?
God will not forsake his, that trust in him, he is their help and defense in
time of need, in so much that if father and mother forsake them, he takes
them up. This is a thing which greatly flesheth the ungodly, (who alas little
know what refuge the righteous have in time of need) to wit, that if they have
friends, might, and wealth, they think they can ouermatch their adversary:
and then they think he has no shift, (as for the Lord, they exclude him) but
he must either fall into reproach, or make shipwreck of his conicience:
although if God see it expedient, he disappointeth and frustrateth their hope.
Thus the enemies of David, Daniel and our Savior, insulted, when they had
contrived their purposes so mischieuously to manward, that they saw no way for
them, whom they pursued, to escape: Now (say the Jews) let us see if God will
help him at this pinch. But oh fools! if God were far off also from his,
when you are hottest in your fury against them, ye said somewhat indeed: but
lo, he is then nearest them, to carry them through and laugh their enemies to
s^orne. Iphtah was desirous here of the Ephramites help; but being denied, the
Lord so wrought that they were the first that complained, and not he: There
needed no Ephramites help, the Lord of hoasts being on his side to make a
supply. And let this be added as an encouragement to them whom I spoke of in
the last doctrine; that their hakednes and solitarines, I mean want of men's
countenance and furtherance, ought rather to drive them to cling more closely
under the Lords wing, who is able to make the enemies of his people their Prou.
16. 7.
friends, if their ways do please him: if not, he can use means to uphold
them without their help. For either he can so muzzle them, that they shall
Note.
not hurt them, as they would: or he can enable them with such courage and
boldness, that they shall contemn their contempt, and little regard their
opposition: or if they be such as may do them any hurt, yet the Lord can so
grace them, that they shall go under that cross willingly and be rather
confirmed, then unsettled in their good course thereby. And let all such as
would willingly be religious, save only for the reproach with others, yea even
their own flesh would cast upon them: let such (I say) labor to believe this,
and that temptation shall little trouble them. Again, observe from hence what
blessing God gives by weak means; when men go to work in their simplicity
and in a good conscience: which in all good attempts ought to encourage them
that offer themselves willingly to the work, as the ten thousand of the men
of Zebulon and Napthali did in the Judge. 4. 6.
Lords battles against some hundred thousands in Siser^s army that came
against them. In such a case where God has set us on work and heartned us,
let us not be discouraged by our meandness, which in show of reason is indeed
able to do little: which hereby I may persuade, that they have not been the
greatest men of account, that have brought greatest light in the Gospel unto
men, but such as are very mean in the judgment of the world; even so, in many
other of his dealings, he effects great matters by weak means. See that
which is noted upon Iphtah his victory in the eleventh chap. and 32. verse,
being the same words.

Upon these promises Iphtah concludes with an interrogation, asking Doct. 8.
them wherefore they were come to fight against him? As if he should have said,
I saved your lives, you sitting at home with ease, what reason have ye
therefore thus to come against me? By this we may learn, that when we should
do good to all by Gods commandment, it proves us to be of a most bad
disposition, when we shall be found injurious and hurtful to the innocent, as
these men of Ephraim were against Iphtah; and so I may say of those that do us
hurt, and no good, though we live innocent by them: whereas the Heathens do
good to such as do good to them, etc. The use of this Matthew. 5. 46.
doctrine is, that we so live among men, that we may not be charged justly,
nor convicted of wronging any: and yet not to rest there, but to be ready to
do them good, as it may stand with our calling, and as we shall be able, so
shall we be sure never to fear accusations of unkind and unbrotherly
dealing; but if any be brought, we may answer them as Job did, If mine
adversary write a book against me, I will take it on my shoulder, read it
Job 31. 36.
who lists.

As touching their rejecting this Apology of Iphtah, the point has been 9
handled before in the eleventh chapter (although this wilfulnes far worse
became them, then the Heathen king of Ammon) yet somewhat I will add by so fit
occasion. It is like their wilfulnes troubled Iphtah not a little, especially
being their governor, who was loath to have turned the edge of the sword upon
his own people (if it could have been avoided) and besides yet could not
suffer it to have his grave and just defense so slightly rejected. But what
other fruit was to be expected at their hands, who came ready armed to try
the matter by force? Was it like they would stand debating and reasoning long
with him, who came with a preiudicate and resolute mind to the contrary? It is
not said indeed, that they gave not ear to him, but their real refusal to
hearken, appears in their proceeding to war. But ye will say in the eighth
of this book, their predecessors bewraied the contrary, for their wrath was
appeased by the answer of Gedeon. I answer: Indeed being used like froward
children and condiscended unto, that is, their proud and angry humor being
pleased, they gave over with much ado: they had bin beasts if they had not:
nay doubtless, they could not although they would (for an angry man cannot
continue in his anger so long as he would, the fuel being removed:) But is
this the praise of a man, that being humoured (as I may say) he gives over? No,
though it be the honor of the appeaser, yet it is his shame, because he should
have overcome himself before; his shame I say in that respect, although indeed
he that desisteth by any means, is better then the implacable. But to return:
If there had been but a dram of good nature and indifferency in them, (for
religion they had none) would they not as well have abated their spirit toward
him by their harkening to his sound reason, as their fathers did before to
Gedeons mildness? Yes doubtless: but it is as impossible to order an
unreasonable paffion by reason, as to be mad with reason. Let this then set
before our eyes (who are Gods Ministers) the disposition of the most of our
ordinary hearers, that so we may learn how to be armed against that
discouragement. We are yoked with such stiffenecked and opposite natures, as
wind about their fingers, the most serious charges we lay upon their
conscience, and (as they in Hosee) we declare unto them the large Hos. 6. 4.
etc.
and weighty things of the law, and they account them as a strange thing, that
is, after long information, fare as if they had never heard, and make them as
words of course, or as if we spoke in an unknown tongue unto them. We look
that they should receive them as from God, (and so some few do) and yield,
subscribe, and hearken: but it is not so: we may say to them, We have piped
unto you, but ye have not danced, etc. And why do Matthew. 11. 17.
they not conceive our meaning, and of the tune of our song? Yes, but they are
otherwise resolved, they have another course to run, (as those Ephramites
had, of whom God complains that he knew not how to entreat Hos. 6. 4.
them) and therefore they hearing understand not, seeing will not see, but
wink and harden their hearts against us. Must not this needs grieve us? Yes:
and so it ought to make us mourn: but how? moderatly, as the Physician over
the patient, whose disease was pass his skill, ere he meddled with him. And
indeed so it ought to be: let us feed them, and if they cast away their meat,
or thrive not with it, they discredit not us that diet them with a good
ordinary. We could wish, that we could find them appetites as well as food: but
this is past our skill: they died not of a famine, but of a surfeit: the means
were used, and therein we rest, and say; we are a sweet savor to the Lord in
them that perish. It is manifest by the sign, that Gods will was to reject
them: that God would not persuade them by us, and then (alas) how should we
persuade them? we have saved our own souls, their blood be upon their own
heads, they died not for want of physic. Now of this their wilfulnes (I mean
the Ephramites) against Iphtah came civil war between them. Of which in the
next Sermon.

And lastly, in that so many could agree together in so wicked an action, 10
(no less then two and forty thousand men, for so many lost their lives
thereby:) we may see how easily men agree together in evil: as traitors,
rebels, and other confederates in evil, do. Whereas it is hard for a few, yea
dwelling together in one town and of the better sort, to agree together about
a good matter, or against the evil committed therein, though it be to their
own great ease and good to do so. For why? the most of them that should seek
the punishing of sin, as are far gone themselves, and as deep therein, (in
one kind or other) so that they must hold back for shame, and that, lest
their own punishment should be procured, in urging it busily upon others.
Besides this, men are commonly of their own corrupt nature, slow and backward
in doing good.

The use of this is, to purge and cleanse our selves with all care from that
which is evil both of soul and body, and to keep our hearts with all
diligence, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
that good life may come from thence. So shall we never need to fear that
we shall be vpholders of sin in other, or agree with them who Prou. 4. 23.
are such. To the which purpose it is good to note, by what degrees we grow,
either to that or any other height of sin, which even here may be learned
by the example of these Ephramites. In whom as in other of like fort it may be
seen, that first anger was kindled against Iphtah, and bred in their hearts:
then wrath followed, which is continued anger; next to both, hot contention;
and then consent to join in war, and to band themselves against him, who was
both innocent and helpful yea even to them. But this point I have handled
heretofore. Thus much of the Ephramites quarrelling with Iphtah, and his
answer.

THE SEVENTIETH SERMON ON THE TWELFTH CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw follows the fight and cruel war that was between Verse. 4. 5. 6. The
sum of these 3. verses.
the Ephramites and Iphtah. For they, as we have heard, would in no wise
relent, at the sound and good reason that Iphtah brought to dissuade them from
battle, but were resolute to proceed therein. Wherefore he fought with them,
and overcame them; and that they might not escape, he prevented them, and
took the passages over the waters at Jorden before them, that they could not
pass over, and return home, but there also many of them were taken and slain.

But to come to the verses severally: In this fourth verse, whereas it will The
sum of verse 4.
be marueiled at, that Iphtah made civil war with these Ephramites; such are
to know, that as they could not be stayed nor dissuaded from making assault
upon him, and therefore it had been free for him, in that respect, he being in
such a straight to defend himself, although he had been but a private man: so,
much more, he being, as he was, to wit, head and chief over them, had the
sword and authority put into his hands, whereby he was not only to go
against foreign enemies, but also to suppress and punish the rebellious and
seditious of the land, when they should offend in that manner. And the Lord
gave him the victory over them, who had despised him, and sought against all
right of law to take from him the government over the Gileadites, and to cast
him out by strong hand, he being rightly possessed of it.

All which being duly considered, and the punishment and destruction Doct verse.
4.
which befell them thereby, even the loss of two and forty thousand men's
lives, who by no perswations would yield to peace: it lays out the heavy and
just judgment of God against those who are unthankful, wilful and seditious;
and it is worth the noting, to see what such proud spirits bring upon
themselves, and how they trouble themselves, who seek to trouble others. For
either God takes vengeance of such by men, as upon Achan he did by Joshua, who
said unto him, Seeing thou have troubled us, God shall Josh. 7. 25.
trouble thee this day, when they stoned him to death: or else the Lord does it
himself without means, as when it is said, He will recompense tribulation 2.
These. 1. 6.
to them that trouble his. To teach us to follow peace with all men and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lords face. Heb. 12. 14.


Of this fruit of men's wilfulnes and the dear price it costeth them, I have
noted somewhat elsewhere. To knit up the point therefore, mark how justly God
met with these Ephramites, and what a shame it was unto them, to be the first
disturbers of peace, and good order, and to be so foully foiled and beaten, by
them whom they provoked injuriously. When it falls out so, (for it falls
not out always so) what a cutting of their comb is it, and a pulling down of
their proud stomach? And if they should carry away the field, and prevail
always, who should live with such? But for the defense of the innocent, and the
preventing of that confusion which would otherwise ensue, (for what is more
intolerable then a boaster, when he has his will) the Lord resists such, and
pares their nails: so that their horns are but short, though their hearts be
full cursed. And seeing all will say, that when a makebate and contentious
person is put to the worse, he is well served, to teach him to live within his
bounds, and meddle not with them that give him no cause: let us provide in our
dealings with others, that both our cause be honest and well grounded, and that
our affections be suitable, not carried with passion, heat, and rage against
him, who has Note.
wronged us: for if it fall out that we be defeated, and put to the foil, (as
we may look for no other in such a case) and God himself take against us in
our bad courses, how shall we be able to hold up our heads for shame, when men
rejoice at our overthrow? Surely he had need be impudent, who should bear God
and men and his own conscience down altogether, and not blank for all the
shame which his own boldness has brought upon him. But as for such as measure
all by the success they have in their leaudnes; thinking it becomes them
well enough, while they prosper, more shall be said of such in the 5. and 6.
verses following.

In this verse a reason is added, why the Gileadites slew them of Ephraim, 2
to wit, because they railed on them, for these Ephramites which branded
themselves with so many foul sins together, as we have heard, (which was too
bad) yet added this to the rest, that they railed on them also. These railing
words were used before in their contention with Iphtah, upon which the
Gileadites were doubly incensed. For seeing they quarrelled with Iphtah, and
threatened him so, what wonder if they grew to disgrace the whole family of
which he was? The meaning then is, Gilead smote Ephraim, because Ephraim,
besides their sedition, added disdainful and reproachful terms, and (because
they dwelt between two tribes) they took occasion to call them, Mungrels,
hang-byes, and men of no set tribe, but Neuters.

So that by all that has been said, though the tribe of Ephraim was a famous
tribe among the rest, and none of the meanest, yet we see how the best for
birth and descent, may possibly degenerate and grow companions with the base
and shameless, as these here who had worthily such measure offered them by
their brethren, for their leaudnes, quarrelling, tumult and railing. Now if
those may thus disguise themselves, then how easily, nay how usually (think
we) may it be seen, that very vile abiects and ofscourings may dwell among
worthy and right honest servants of God and good christians, and be of their
kindred also? For as many vagrant and idle persons do hang about Princes
courts, who are neither hired, nor belonging to the house, but shifters for
their bellies and backs, offering themselves to run of mean persons
errands: so are there in towns and cities, unruly and disordered fellows,
either shrouded under the wing of their godly kindred, or nestling themselves
among other of good note for religion and Note.
honest behavior, some without callings, brought up to no labor, some without
living, but all void of grace, ready to be set a work in doing mischief if
opportunity serve.

Such in diverse cities we read of in the book of the Acts of the Apostles,
who waited to be hired to make tumults and vprores therein. And yet I would
have none to take me thus, as though I meant, by such as I speak of, the poor
folk in towns, who are in mean estate to live: of whom I say this, that many
of them follow their calling diligently, and labor painefully for their
living, and where the Gospel is truly preached, some of them are religious and
approved good christians, I speak of that which I know: although I deny not,
that there are of them also, many idle hangbies which may be reckoned worthily
among the other that I spoke of. The use of this is to help to weed out such
(as men have ability and authority) and chief men in towns, and all other
to be furtherances hereunto, and to prevent idleness, irreligiousnesse and
living without callings, from whence such annoyances do arise. Look more
about this before in chapter 9. 4. and 11. 4.

We have heard of the subduing and killing of many of the Ephramites in Verse.
5. 6.
the battle before mentioned: now it follows how the rest were slain. And
that was, by taking the passages at Jorden before them, and there as many as
they found to be Ephramites they slew; all that were put to the sword, and
that lost their lives at one time and other, were two and forty thousand. Now
because many passed over Jorden of the Reubinites and Manassites, as well as of
them who were Ephramites, therefore they tried them by their language and
speech, whether they were Ephramites or no, and that was by their tongue in
pronouncing. For when they bad them pronounce Shibboleth in a more full manner,
they could not, but said Sibboleth, being not able to pronounce so, and by that
means they were discerned, and so taken and slain.

The first thing to be noted here, is the occasion which moved the Gileadites
Doct.
to use this policy, to bid the other say [Shibboleth] and that was, because
these Ephramites being asked who they were, made a lie to save their lives, and
denied their tribe. It is true which Satan said, Job 2. Skin for skin, Job 2. 4.
and all that a man has, he will give for his life; even truth, honesty, and
all. And few will marvel at (it may be) or blame these for lying in so
weighty a case, as life it self is, because they think that if they should be
put to it as these were, it were no more then they might and should do to save
their life. Indeed i confess life is sweet, and if lying be lawful in any
case, it is in the case of the peril of life. But it is one thing for a man to
omit some duty of the law for mercies sake to our own life, another, to
commit an express sin against the negative of the law. Therefore although it
be lawful for a man to prefer his life before the doing of some duty
commanded (put case it be the Sabbath days duties) yet a man may not before a
Magistrate answer falsely, or equiuocating-lye, under color of mercy in
saving his life. For it is not only the omitting of some duty, but the doing
of a gross fault: herein therefore the rule is true, Evil must not be done,
that good may come thereof. And the negative rules of the law admit no
exception, except God dispense (as he did with the Israelites in robbing the
Exodus 11. 2. and 12. 35.
Egyptians) who is above the law. And hence it follows, if lying be a
sin, that it is as well a sin to lie, in the defense of a man's life, as it
is to lie needlessly, or to please. All three, the officious, the vain, and the
shameless lie, are of the same cloth, though not the same color, nor equal
and of so deep a dye. And to us Christians it should seem no hard condition
neither, to cast our selves upon God, rather then be beholding to a lie for our
life, if the case should so stand. Better it is not to live, then to live with
that Note.
(which is worse then any death) an accusing conscience. As the abiured
Protestants in the time of persecution can witness. It is not the fond and
foolish pretense, or color warped by the subtle brain of man which can
diminish one jot of the commandment of God, much less disanull it. He that
will save his life, by evil and indirect means, shall lose it when all is
done: as we see these Ephramites gained not by their lie, but were convicted of
it, by the same tongue that made it, as it were with one breath. The Matthew. 16.
25.
truth is, as the case stood with them (they fleeing before their enemies in so
bad a quarrel as this was) little better was to be looked for at their hands,
then to lie and shift for themselves, having brought themselves into the briars
by their contention, rebellion and railing before. But let us beware, we bring
not our selves into such streights by our sin: for we shall find it a matter
hard enough to help our selves in extremity of danger and trouble: which God
brings upon us, if we be not the better fenced with faith and a good
conscience. But the danger of the former is desperate and remediless, as
elsewhere I have more fully declared in the Shechemites and their Captain
Gaal, chap. 9.

Secondly, whereas the text says of these Ephramites, that they failed of
Doct. 2.
the full pronouncing of the word, we see that although all the Tribes spoke in
one language, yet even therein such a difference was, that one spoke not as the
other (for we see that these Ephramites could not pronounce, as the Reubinites
and the Manassites did) even as also the Greeks have great difference, and we
Englishmen, namely southern and northward, differ much one from another in our
dialect or manner of pronouncing, though we all speak one language. This
should teach us, that as often as we hear or think of any hurt or detriment
coming thereby, we should call to mind, and be humbled in our selves, for the
sin of them that caused the confounding of language first, the fruit whereof
remains among us at this day, and ought justly to humble us, for that much
toil and time is now spent in learning to understand languages, which might
else have been otherwise bestowed. And also by strange tongues we see how the
wicked keep many from understanding the pure word of God, as the Romish
Prelates long have done, which could not have been, if there had been but one
language and speech over the earth, as once it was. Besides with what
difficulty, in respect of this which I speak of, do many travel into
foreign lands, to exchange their wares and commodities, or to other ends and
purposes? For except they have learned their languages, they cannot speak to
each other, but by an interpreter? What labor is there bestowed in the
translating of the Scriptures and other writings, which else might have bin
spared? which when all is done, comes short of the natural tongue and
language. Not to insist in the inconveniences which arise by Translations, even
controversies in religion, about faith, which had been (in some part) cut off,
if one and the same language be generally embraced: and they which translate
best, attain not unto that significancie of words and propriety of meaning,
which the natural language would afford them, and that without difficulty.
These and other like discommodities arise from this division of tongues:
although they that live at home in their own country, and converse with such
as are of the same speech with themselves, do not so much observe them: let
such consider, that it is Gods mercy, that this confusion reaches no further
then it does, but is confined though within so large bounds as it is. And
again let us know, that men's dishonouring God by their tongues, by perjury,
yea or swearing, by blasphemy or cursed speaking, and specially by
imprecations, might bring a deeper judgment upon them in person (though the
general little trouble them) even the taking away of their speech altogether;
which kind of examples, neither experience of former ages, nor our own have
been wanting in: although if God should smite as often as he is provoked, there
should be no end. I conclude this therefore, let it be a watchword against
abusing our language, lest we provoke (as many daily do) some curse and
punishment from God, and be made examples to fear others, seeing other men's
would not admonish us.

Lastly from hence, that they slew such as could not pronounce the word, Doct.
3.
we learn, that as these lost their lives in returning homeward, though they
escaped in the battle, so when wicked men pass by one danger, yet they shall
fall into another. For the Lord being against them, they are never safe nor
free from fear or peril of some evil to light upon them, although not by and
by. For which cause the Prophet Amos says, If a man fly from a Amos 5. 19.
Lion, a Bear shall meet him. And even so we see it to be by experience, if
such escape by lying, friendship, money and such like, by the hands of men, God
himself will certainly meet with them, by the pestilence, or arrest them by
some strange disease, debt, imprisonment, shame, or some Note.
other visitation: or else the worm of conscience as a serpent shall bite them;
and if they have their conscience seared as it were with an hot iron, yet this
plague shall take hold of them, even an hardened heart which cannot repent, and
so they dying (for few of them seek to get out of that plunge) they do most
certainly perish utterly without any recovery, being thrown into that gulf
that is bottomless, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

And although such ill disposed persons dye not always by companies and
multitudes, as they did here, and at the flood in Noah's time, and as it
comes often to pass, according to the occasions that are offered, (and
therefore it is the less marked) yet he that observes it, shall find that
they who bewray that they are not upright hearted, but dissemblers and hollow,
and that they have no favor in the Gospel and good things, and by their
behavior, speech and company, do testify their bad lives; I say such as
observe it, shall find that now one, and then another, and some by one
judgment, and some by another, shall verify that which I say, namely, how such
pine and wanse away secretly in ignorance or impenitencie, or be arested
apparently with such visitations of God, as in which they testify the same.
See my notes upon the ninth chapter in the death of Abimelech and the men of
Shechem.

The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 7. And Iphtah judged Israel six years: then died Iphtah the Gileadite,
and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead. 8. And after him Ibzan of
Bethlehem judged Israel, 9. Who had thirty sons, and thirty daughters,
which he sent out and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons.
And he judged Israel seven year. 10. Then Ibzan died, and was buried at
Bethlehem. 11. And after him judged Israel, Elon a Zebulonite, and he judged
Israel ten years. 12. Then Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in
Aijalon, in the country of Zebulon. 13. And after him Abdon the son of
Hillel the Pirathonite judged Israel. 14. And he had forty sons, and
thirty nephews that rode on seventy ass colts, and he judged Israel eight
years. 15. Then area Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite, and was buried
in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.
IN these verses following, is contained the time of the reign of Iphtah and
Verse. 7. to the end The sum.
diverse other, that were Judges in Israel, together with their death and
burial in their own cities, where they dwelt and abode in their life time.
Wherein that which is said in common of them both, I will speak of jointly, as
of the time how long they governed, and of their death and burial: for they
are all set down alike. Other things herein contained, I will severally note
as occasion shall be offered in the text. And first of the time of their being
Judges over the people.

It is said Iphtah had that place six year: Ibzan seven years: Elon ten,
Doctrine in general out of all.
and Abdon eight. All which being but one and thirty, were a small number for
four to enjoy the place one after another. Whose office, as it was to deliver
the people out of the hands of their enemies, so (doubtless) they did, if
there were cause, by their being in bondage, or else they kept them in peace,
that they were not oppressed nor brought under of their enemies at al. And that
was a great favor of God to Israel, that they changing their Governors so
often, yet they are not said betwixt the time of the one and the other to have
been in their enemies hands; which when it was so, is expressly set down in the
former examples and stories. Thus the Lord has blessings of all sorts for his
Church, and is not willing to change them into punishments, till our abuse of
them turn them to our own bane. And as these 31. years of peace, under four
governors were granted to Israel, so it was their own sin and revolt from
God, which brought upon them so long or a longer time of war and disquiet:
the Lord could have allowed them their peace without interruption, if they
could have served him in it without vnsetling and weariness. And as he dealt
with them, so would he with us also: who as he has undeservedly continued our
peaceable days even in the times of our late change, (a work of his most
worthy to be had in remembrance) so he would have freed us from plagues and
dearth also; but in that he has allaied our peace with such domestical
punishments, as these late years have witnessed, we may thank our selves,
and marvel that they have been no sorer, for (doubtless) he has therein
remembered mercy in judgment. Our peace is from him, our troubles wherewith it
is accompanied are caused by our selves, and far more bitter should the cup
be, if we were made Lam. 3. 39.
to drink it, as we have tempered it: but the Lord in mercy holds back from
us, confusion, and bondage, to our enemies, which he inflicted often upon
these Israelites. But more particularly, this teaches that it is a great mercy
of God, when in the change of Princes and Governors, there falls not out
some great detriment and hurt to the people, especially when the changes are
often. For that is counted a punishment, as Solomon says. For the Prou. 28. 2.
transgression of the land, there are many Princes: and the state of the Common
wealth, if it be in peace and prosperous, is then like to change to the
contrary. It caused David when he heard of the death of Saul, who was not very
commendable in his time, yea although he knew that he himself should succeed
him, it caused him (I say) to mourn with a great lamentation, saying: Ye
daughters of Israel, mourn for Saul, how much more would 2. Sam. 1. 24.
he have done so, if he had been religious and godly? The same I say of
inferior Magistrates who help to uphold and countenance the Gospel, and do
maintain peace in their precincts and corners where they dwell. The losing of
them is with great danger, besides fear of worse to follow: and of faithful
Preachers the like may be said also: though there be many instructers, yet
there are not many fathers: the taking away of them therefore will not be
without much cause of grief also, for who knows what shall 1. Cor. 4. 15.
follow?

The use is to stir us up to thankfulness for Gods goodness to us and our
land, in respect of the late peaceable succession and present prosperity and
health of our Sovereign: which indeed all are willing to take part in, but few
take the pains to consider how much they owe to God for such a benefit as
this; which as a knot contains in it all the particular blessings which we
enjoy as infolded in it. Much less do they weigh that ouer-ruling power of
God, which swept down, as a cobweb, the long contrived plots of the Popish
practisers for a foreign government, and defeated in a moment and derided
their hopes, by setting the crown upon the head of the true apparent Heir,
our gracious Sovereign, without the least contradiction of so many enemies.
The sensual abuse of this blessing, has now caused the Lord to abate somewhat
of this his favor, by abridging us of a part of our hoped welfare, in the
death of our late enjoyed noble Prince. The which (among other uses) ought to
teach us first to be earnest suitors to God for the long life and prosperity
of the young Prince: secondly, to teach us sobriety, that seeing there fall
out such changings in our lives, so that no man knows what shall come to
pass, and what troubles may fall out in our days, therefore to set our
affections on things not subject to change, even to furnish Col. 3. 1.
our selves with knowledge and grace, whereby we may be fitted for the best
estate while we live, and after death to enjoy durable honor.

Of Iphtah to say a little particularly, when he had so many and great Doct.
verse. 7.
troubles, for the short time of his abiding in his place, as three are set
down at large: his dangerous battle with the Ammonites, the unlooked for
forgoing of his only daughter, and this bitter provoking of him by the
Ephramites, this teaches (besides that which has bin said hereof before,
verse. 2.) what great afflictions they have, who are of calling and high place
in the world, who in comparison of many thousands are thought by their wealth
to have a little paradise in this life, (and do indeed enjoy many outward
privileges above other) and what then may the life of meaner persons be
accounted but a vale of misery?

And especially the lives of such I may say, who are in penury and want with
many other calamities which accompany it, and yet have no hope of salvation
neither; which were able not a little to assuage the force and anguish of such
tribulations. All which I speak to show how great the madness of men is, and
that of all sorts and conditions, who for all their daily and manifold
afflictions which cannot be expressed, are yet so wedded and glued to this
world: as that they are not fit to hear of a departure from hence, no nor to
be brought to a sober and moderate use of it, nor by the strongest persuasions
to look after and wait for immortality, so as they may enjoy it. Now let all
judge how little cause they have to do so.

It might be thought a benefit, that the long life of man is so shortened from
nine hundred years to scarce half nine score, if men duly weighed how evil
they are, as old Jacob told Pharao; Few and evil have the days of thy Genesis
47. 9.
servant been. But oh, at what a rate would most men buy the lengthening of
their misery? a madness so much the more extreme, because they want that
which might much allay the vanity and vexation that falls out in their life,
I mean faith and grace. Others, on the other side, meeting with much, yea and
that stinging trouble in their lives often times, wax discontented, desperate,
and weary of living, and yet without all willingness to dye, save through a
necessity of their own making, thinking thereby to avoid that, which they
increase thereby. A third sort lay all their miseries upon their poverty:
whereas (alas) if they had the best estate and happiness upon earth, Iphtah
might teach them, that they should be never the nearer their desire, for they
may have sorrow and vexation enough for all their wealth.

Now of the death and burial of them I say this: as they all died, with all
Doct of verse 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
other unto this day, so it lively admonishes that it is the way by which all
that yet remain must go, and who knows how soon? that we may mind and
provide for it. And as they were buried in the places where they dwelt, (as
Iphtah in one of the cities of Gilead, etc.) so we should submit our selves
thereto, with such other abasements as accompany it, (though flesh rebel
against them) and this we should willingly do for the hope of the glorious
resurrection. But of death and burial before. Thus much therefore be said of
the Judges jointly.

Now this is severally said of Ibzan, that he had thirty sons whom he Doct.
verse. 8. 9.
lived to marry, and thirty daughters whom he also bestowed in marriage, for
so long he lived together with them. And this is set down to show, that the
great number of children is reckoned, as then it was, for one of the great
blessings of God. Therefore the Lord promised to Abraham his Genesis 15. 5.
friend, that his seed should be multiplied as the stars of heaven, and as
the sand of the sea. And so sung the Prophet in the Psalm: Thy wise shall be
as Psalm. 128. 3.
the fruitful vine on the sides of thine house, and thy children like the
olive plants round about thy table: and then he adds this, Lo thus shall the
man be blessed, that fears the Lord: calling it not only a blessing, but
more then common.

And it does the more condemn the unthankfulness of them who do what they
can to avoid that blessing, and do of purpose shun the occasion of having
their part in it, by marrying with full purpose and resolution, where they may
be sure they can have no children. Whose fault may be the less, if it be of
simple ignorance, but else it may be reckoned as a companion with theirs who
grudge and murmur, for that they have so many children: which arises partly of
distrust in Gods providence, partly fearing that they shall not have wherewith
to nourish them; partly of pride, who see they must pull down their
countenance, for because of the number of them, and cannot set forth
themselves with the wealthiest of their condition, to brave it iollily in the
world, for that they be plucked down with such a company of brats, as they
term them. And yet as bad as these sorts are, far more gross and barbarous
are they, high or low, Minister or people, who rather then their countenance
should in the least manner be abated by marriage and multitude of children, do
not only live in continual whordome, zodomie, and such like unnatural and
filthy uncleanness, but are glad (though most unjustly and in dissimulation
they do it) to be counted and numbered amongst them that live chaste, which
sin shall bring the swifter damnation to them: They are loath to abase
themselves (as they count it) by stooping to Gods ordinance: but God has many
ways to pull them down, and make them stoop (as I have noted in the former
chapter) though they escape it one way and time, yet he meets with them
another: for fornicators and adulterers God will judge, as the Author to the
Hebrews says, Heb. 13. 4.
and the experiments thereof are infinite in all kinds of judgments, by
scripture and experience, both of old and daily: Although what need we go
far? That which they shun by their avoiding marriage, the most pull upon
themselves, by the contrary course, as I have said. Now what remains, but
that they who have and count children a blessing, endeavor carefully to make
them the children of God also, that so they may be to them a double blessing?
Which is done of few, especially as the case requires, that is, with careful
and constant looking to the religious bringing up of them, and the marking of
their disposition, and the sins which they are most prone and inclined unto,
that they may in due time and good manner help to remedy it accordingly.

Another thing that is several in these verses, is this, that this Abdon,
Verse. 13 14.
the last that is reckoned, had forty sons, and thirty sons sons, and
these were of place, and some countenance, riding stately, and not as meaner
persons going on foot. Whereby it appears (to say no more of the number of
children) that they had peace then, and were free from oppression by the other
nations that dwelt about them. For they must not else have had such elbow
room, nor their liberty so to show themselves boldly and openly, but to hide
their heads as well as meaner persons, and to lay their iollitie aside.

For our instruction this we may learn, that in the time of peace, when there
is freedom from war and persecution in a land, there is great prosperity in
every kind, as multitude of people, building, purchasing, and growing in
wealth and promotion. For though the plague and famine sometime sweep away and
diminish the number of people, yet they through Gods goodness not continuing
long, nor sore, are the sooner outgrowne: but the other, I mean war and
persecution, make strippe and waste, as we say, even as the violent fire
burns all where it comes, and the raging waters drown. But when they
cease, there is plenty for the most part going with peace, and there is with
both great outward prosperity.

Which is to be acknowledged a singular great favor of God, and to such as
are able to use it aright, it gives much liberty and encouragement, to live
well and happily. And otherwise what is all iollitie and abundance, if we have
not learned, and be not fitted for the right use of it? The which how few
regard or look after, but only seek to pass their precious time, in ease,
vanity, play, idleness, whoring, drinking and such like: and the ciuiller
sort to mind little else, then to increase and gather wealth, the most of them
not knowing why, but to content and please themselves thereby: to Note.
see (I say) how fondly, nay madly so many do use this peace and liberty of
quiet living; it is much more to be bewailed, then the benefit it self is to
be rejoiced for: And to think, how in this time of peace, good preaching
should be in use throughout all parts of the land, to hold down Popery,
Atheism, prophanenes and other sin, and that which should be all in all with
us, to bring many people to God, and yet how little is done this way, it cannot
without much bewailing be thought on. Now if in this earthly mansion of ours
(wherein we are absent from the Lord, and live as strangers for a time) he can
allow his people so liberal and comfortable a supply of earthly refreshings
meet for them, until they shall no longer stand in need of them; then what is
like to be their entertainment at home in heaven (think we) and what
provision will the Lord make for them there? where all sound rejoicing is
without end or measure? A great means (doubtless) to provoke them to serve
out their time with cheerfulness and faithfulness, when they consider that all
things are theirs, both here and hereafter: all good things serve to make up
the happiness of them who are Christ's, who is Lord of all. And this be said of
that which is to be considered of in these Judges severally and apart, and so
of the whole chapter.

THE SEVENTIE ONE SERMON ON THE XIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 1. But the children of Israel continued to commit wickedness in the
sight of the Lord, and the Lord delivered them into the hands of the Philistims
forty years. 2. Then there was a man in Zorah of the family of the Danites
named Manoah, whose wife was barren, and bare not. 3. And the Angel of the
Lord appeared unto the woman, and said unto her, Behold now thou art barren,
and bear not: but thou shall conceive (...) bear a (...). 4. And now
therefore beware that thou drink no wine, or strong drink, neither eat any
unclean thing. 5. For lo thou shall conceive and bear a son, and no razer
shall come on his head: for the child shall be a Nazarite unto God from his
birth, and he shall begin to save Israel out of the hands of the Philistims.
HEre before I give the sum of this Chapter, as I use to do in the entrance
of every Chapter, I will first lay down the short sum of the four Chapters
next following; containing the story of Samson. And it gives good light to
the matters therein contained. This Chapter sets down his birth: the next
his marriage, the 15. some of his acts, the 16. his death. For The sum.
the first of these it is said that the Israelites being for their sins brought
into the hands of the Philistims, and oppressed by them, Samson is promised of
the Lord to his parents, to be borne as a revenger of them: and the Angel of
the Lord instructing them what to do about the child, confirmed the promise by
a sign, and at the time it was performed that Samson was borne.

Agreeable hereto are the parts of the Chapter, which are three: first, The The
parts 3.
appearing of the Angel to Manoahs wife, with a message to her of a son, 1
that she should bear, to help Israel against the Philistims, to verse 6.
Then 2
his second appearing to them both together, Manoah and his wife I mean, to
the fifteenth verse. Lastly, the sign that the Angel gave, that the thing 3
he promised should come to pass, as it did indeed of the child's birth, and
this to the end of the Chapter.

The first part of the Chapter.
THe holy story shows in this first part of the Chapter, that God sent Verse.
1.
tidings and hope of help against the Philistims, and that is done in this, and
these four next verses following: and that was because the people having
fallen again to provoke the Lord, he delivered them into the hands of the
Philistims, and that for forty years. But here it is said, he thought upon
their bondage, and went about their deliverance. This their bondage when it
began and ended, is hardly gathered for certainty: but most likely it began
after the death of Abdon, and continued almost to the time of Heli.

Of the sin of Israel, that they added to work evil in ye fight of the Lord,
Doct. verse. 1.
for so are the words: meaning, as they had done before in times past, and as
their fathers had done before their late peaceable government, so they did now
again. For this must be understood of the body of them, not of particular
persons: who (there is no doubt) committed sins against the Lord, but not so
boldly, grossly and openly with consent. But now they fell to that, and most
like to idolatry among the rest. And now the Lord had omitted to punish them,
and had given them peace, they fell again to their old byas. This teaches how
natural it is, for all flesh to decline, and to fall to those sins which
once they abhorred.

Our latter works should be better then our former: but how rare is this to be
seen, no not in the better sort? no, unless it be in them, who do observe
Note.
their own frailty, and how many ways they are ready to fall, and lay daily
for especial grace of faith and good government, and knowledge without
fainting and wearines, as at any time they have done, since they first began,
else I say it is hardly to be found. And no less had need to be done of them,
because both old and new prouocations to evil are so many and strong, and ever
in the way, that they will otherwise prevail one time or other. And therefore
men should know and consider, that they wait for a reward of great price, and
no man is crowned except he strive for it lawfully, and to the end: therefore
they should not be weary of weldoing, neither faint in their good beginnings.
But (oh to be lamented) many of the forwarder sort in times past, are now
grown to tempt God boldly, and take upon them to stint him in their prayers
and other service, and detract from it, and coldly go about it, much like them
who are driven to work dead work with their creditors, and are constrained
rather to pay them thereby the debt that they owe them, then that they have any
wages to receive for the same: which kind of work, all know how unwillingly
and wearisomly for the most part it is taken in hand. And to speak a word of
those who are not ingrafted into Christ at all by faith, and to show how awkly
they come forward, in the sincere receiving the doctrine of the Gospel,
(though we know, and so may they, that the Lord bears long with them, to the
end Romans 2. 4.
he may bring them to repentance) yet how many of them may we observe, who
though they live under good teaching, do not verify the Apostles words to
Timothy, of the wicked and ungodly, viz. that both for knowledge, they are ever
learning, but never obtaining it, and as for their practice, they 2. Tim. 3 7.
wax worse and worse, rather then that they have so much as any purpose 2.
Tim. 3. 13.
to set their hearts to seek after true repentance. For the fuller handling
hereof, let the reader look back into the former Chapters, wherein the other
reuolts of this people are mentioned.

In that it is said, God gave them (when they had thus provoked him) into the
hands of the Philistims, as he used (when they fell to the like sins) to sell
them to other nations about them; and they and their fathers had so often found
it so, that they might have known (if they would) that they should find some
such like thing again as often as they revolted from him. The Lords thus dealing
with them, I say, not only lays forth their boldness Doct. 2.
in sinning (which I have spoken of) but it certainly testifies also what God
will do to them, and to all others in such a case, to wit, that he will
surely be avenged of such his enemies, who dare so boldly tempt him; yea one
time or other he will most certainly do it. And so let us and especially such
as take advantage, by deferring of Gods executing his judgment, to settle
themselves the more to do evil, let us tell to our own hearts, and that not
doubtingly, as the woman answered of the punishment to the Serpent, Genesis 3. 3.
which God had certainly annexed to the eating the forbidden fruit, but
assuredly. And this let every one that is wise apply to himself, as a most
undoubted truth upon the committing of those sins, to the which he is most
in danger, or else he must look to smart afterward. But of this point and the
next in this verse, namely that he did so long continue the people in bondage
to the Philistims because of their sins, I have spoken in another place.

The Lord purposing to raise up one that should help his people, does Verse. 2.
3. 4. 5.
first appoint his parents, and them he mentions and describes in this
second verse: and shows in the third, how he sent word to the woman by his
Angel, that she should bear such a child, as should help to avenge their
enemies: in the fourth he directs her how to use her self who should bear
that child, and that she should not eat or drink any forbidden or unclean
thing: in the fifth he shows a reason hereof, to wit, because the child
should be no common person but a professed Nazarite. And therewith he
declares what he should do, that is, begin to save Israel out of the hands of
the Philistims.

Touching the first of these points, of describing the parents of Samson, I
would say the more, but that I see the holy Ghost omitteth and passes by the
commendation of their godliness here, which yet by that which follows
appears to have bin great. But yet I will borrow somewhat from other places
in this chapter to this purpose. We may observe in Scripture, that upon the
like occasion sometimes a very liberal room and commendation is allowed to
the parents of worthy instruments. One for all may serve, of the parents of
John Baptist, Luke 1. 6. not so much described by circumstance of place and
outward condition, as by their grace and godliness. This is here omitted, and
yet so as by the sequel of the history in this chapter, it may appear they
were a worthy couple: and the holy Ghost (as it were) leaving it to the
discretion of the reader, to make up their description by the good fruits and
effects which are after recorded of them both, as (God willing) shall be noted
out of the text, I do here make mention of it, as being to good purpose, in
the first mentioning of them. Briefly then, let us note from this practice of
the spirit of God, how much it avails to the due setting out of a good
posterity, to see from what manner of parents they are descended, (the godly
progenitors, being the crown of a good progeny) especially if the
unworthiness, and vnsutablenes of the younger, deprive them not of that honor
which their elders have purchased for them. The godly parents are the root
whence the children (even Exodus 20.
by promise and covenant, Exodus 20.) are to derive blessing upon themselves, if
they be faithful. Hence is it, that all believers are honored with the
spiritual privilege of being the sons of faithful Abraham: a greater by
far then to be his degenerate children by carnal propagation, John 4.
Secondly, this insinuates to Parents the duty of care and government: seeing
when the children are named (as in the book of Kings commonly) there the
parents are set in the forefront, to bear the blame, or to carry away the
honor: if their children deserve well, they may claim the praise of it
justly, as a blessing and reward of their education: to the shame I speak it
of such loose persons, as whose childrens religion shameth the ignorance and
ungodliness of their parents. Thirdly, this redoundeth to the honor of God,
and his faithfulness, when one posterity after another, for some generations
shall be found to know the God of their fathers: in whose steps to walk it is
to them a worthy commendation before men, but much more in the sight of God, as
Timothy a godly child and grandchild, 2. Tim. 2. 5.
is commended.

Secondly here, in that the Lord does raise a deliverer out of the tribe of
Doct. verse 2. and the rest.
Dan, in which this place Zorah was, near to Eshtaol, and verse 25. shows;
this tribe being one of the meanest: It teaches that God will serve himself
by the meaner sort as well as by the mightier and greater, when it pleases
him. For if he furnish them with gifts fitting, for that he sets them about
(whereof they are as capeable as the other) thereby he enables them for the
work, which not their birth or wealth alone can do, as we have seen before.
Therefore it is not for us to scorn and reproach such, whom the Lord by their
gift will exalt, though this be to be added, that neither mean nor mighty
shall have any cause in the end to rejoice in their preferment, otherwise then
they have well and rightly used their place, and themselves in it with their
gifts. And as I have said of outward place and advancement in the world; so I
say of inward grace and gifts of the spirit. That even out of the mean or
middle sort of people, the Lord chooses many, yea most to be heirs of
salvation: and to use our Saviors words, Matthew. 11. to be seasoned Matthew. 11.
5.
with the Gospel by believing (for so I expound the words.) And doubtless in
comparison of these, few great ones are called: nay many 1. Cor. 1. 26.
who have striuen against mediocritie of estate (which yet Agur prefers as
the best to serve God in) they have forsaken their own mercy. See more in the
tenth chapter, 1. 2. 3. verses thereof.

The Angel speaks to her of her barrenness, that she might receive the
Doct. verse. 3.
message of bearing a child more thankefully and joyfully, for barrenness in
those days was generally holden a kind of curse, as I noted in chap. 12. the
end, and fruitefulnesse a blessing: but we see that God turns this curse to
a blessing, and it was counted no doubt by this woman, a great work of his
mercy, that he gave a child to her being barren, as well as of his power, as
David reckons it. Thus does the Lord make way for the thankful entertaining of
his mercies, by laying before us our want and insufficiency: Psalm 113. end.
Luke 1. 37.
and yet all is little enough to procure that affection, (except it be a little
at first) for in a very short time our minds are changed with the time, and we
rather look upon that we enjoy, then look back upon our former penury, or
the author of our change. So that the Lord is feign to vpbraide us, by his
undeserved kindness (as he did David by his taking from the sheepefold) in
stead of reaping the fruit thereof in praise and duty: which is verified well
in many of them that have mourned and complained long of the heavy burden that
oppressed their conscience (which they feared, as Hezekiah once did, that they
should never be eased of) and at length met with such comfort, as they long
wished for: for although at the first obtaining Esaias 38. 10.
thereof, they indented with God, that he should be all in all with them, yet
in time they have worn out the remembrance of such kindenes, as Pharaohs
butler did Joseph's. Let such and all others whose conscience Genesis 40. 23. Note.
bears them witness, that the Lord has made them fruitful of barren, (in
what kind soever) but that they have brought forth sower grapes, and wild
olives, and made themselves barren again of fruitful: let them (I say) look
back and view the matter yet better, and pay their rearedges which they are
run into with God, lest at length they wish they had bin beholding to God for
less, except their fruit might have made the Lord (as I may say) beholding to
them for more then they have yielded. To him that Luke 8. 18.
has shall be given: he shall receive favor upon favor, that keeps the old
in precious remembrance and regard, occupying for him whose the talents are
which are occupied: whereas he who has not, shall forgo still, till he have
lost all: that is, he that has forgotten him of whom he received that which
he has, shall both lose that for which he hops, yea and the principal to
which he has. This for one point.

Besides, by this example, the Lord shows us, how he turns his
chastisements Doct. 2. in verse. 3.
to benefits unto his people, as the issue of Jobs afflictions witnesses. For
if they from whom he takes away any good things, and corrects, receive not
greater outward benefits then they forgo; yet if they wait on God, they shall
have proof of the graces that are in them, as faith, patience, and obedience
(as often I have already noted in this book) which are far more sweet to them
then any outward liberty which they lose and forgo. So then let the people of
God provide to walk before him with uprightness, and they shall see whether
their life be not replenished with comforts, and they followed with many a
token from God of his love to them, and pleasure in them, by all which they
shall find their days upon earth to be sweetly passed, and they exceedingly
well provided for, till they be taken to glory.

The Angel in prescribing to the woman, that she should drink no Doct. verse.
4. 5.
wine, nor eat no unclean thing said so, because the child that she should
bear, should be a Nazarite to the Lord: who (by the law of the Nazarite) was
himself to be tied to certain ceremonies, for that time of his so being: the
one was that he should (also) abstain from wine; secondly, that no rasor
should come on his head; thirdly, that he should not touch or come near any
dead body: of this read further in the book of Numbers. Now a Nazarite was
one that was separated from others, and more particularly Numb. 62. etc.
such a one as served the Lord in a more strict manner then other did: as for
Samson, who was to continue this estate throughout his life, he was a peculiar
person and therefore a type of Christ, not only in death, and that most
victorious, but even in life, wherein our Savior fulfilled all righteousness.

The signification of the Nazarite was this, that the Lord would have all that
come near unto him, and will be in his service, to be separated from the
common sort, which do not examine their ways after the rules of Gods word,
but walk after their own hearts desire. And hereby, and under a ceremony, he
requires that of his, which in plain words he does elsewhere; saying, ye
shall therefore be perfect as your father in heaven is perfect: also purify
your selves even as I am pure: Be merciful even as your 1. Pet. 1. 16.
heavenly father; And be ye holy, for I am holy. Insomuch that in another place
he says, without holiness, no man shall see the Lord. And the signification
Heb. 12. 4.
of the Nazarite, does exclude all that are unclean and unsanctified, from the
Lords presence, favor and service. True it is, the ceremonial rule is
abolished: for in the Church of the new testament, it is not permitted to any
man to vow any regular serving of God according to outward obseruances and
orders, with placing any religion therein; no not so much as to retain the
observation of the Nazarite, much less to invent new rites and orders, and yet
such are holden the only religious men and women at this day in the church of
Rome, as have solemnly entered into some order or other (as they have many
confused orders of their own forging) and therein aim at perfection. But to
let these and their disorders go: the equity of this institution still
remains firm, and binds us. For the Lord will have all his to know, that
they are not set here to live, no nor to serve him as they list, or be as
servants that be at their own hands, but he tieth them to a rule and an
order, according whereto he will have them to walk. But this rule is
spiritual first, then uniform, and binds all without exception. Romans 12. 1.
The sum whereof is (as I have said) to give up themselves in body 2. Cor.
7. 1.
and soul to the Lord in all inward subjection of heart and outward obedience
of life strictly: with clensing themselves of all superfluity and filthiness
of either body or mind.

The ceremonies also here required to be used of the Nazarite, had their
signification: those which are mentioned in the text are these two: the one,
the suffering of the hair of his head to grow and not to be cut off, for the 2
time that their vow of being Nazarites remained, for they vowed it either for
a certain number of days, months or years. But when their vow was at an
end, and the time of keeping it expired; at the offering of sacrifice and
burning the flesh in the fire, they cut off their hair and burnt it in the
same fire. And after that they were free, and returned to their former course
of life. Although it was otherwise with Samson: for he was by the Lord
appointed a Nazarite for his whole life: though that was not according to the
common manner of being made Nazarites. The signification of it was, that much
time should not be taken up in too nicely trimming and looking to our bodies,
seeing we know they must be consumed to the earth, and become worms meat; and
therefore a ridiculous folly to forget that, and to please our selves in such
deceivable fancies. And also when the mind is set curiously on that work, as
it is a dangerous token of pride, so it bewrays that it slenderly regards
the inward apparrelling of it. But as this nicenes and curiosity in the weaker
sex (who spend too many good hours, vainly and vnfruitefully in this kind)
argues pride and folly: so there is a foul abuse in men about this matter,
and that is their disguised wearing of long hair. I think there are few of
them who will defend themselves by the practice of Nazarites: if they did, yet
the world would convince them, as being (for the most part) furthest off from
the strict worship of God, and sincere walking after his will, as the Nazarites
did: if they do not also mock and skorne those that embrace it. Me thinks it
is strange, and argues somewhat more then common for the badnesse thereof,
that among many changes of corrupt English fashions, worn out and expired, yet
this unnatural fashion (as Paul calls it) for a man to wear long (...), 1.
Cor. 11. 14.
has suruiued them all. I know some nourish it for amarous lightness of
mind: others as a supposed ornament to their person, or mark of gent^ie; or
at least imitation of gentlemen. These, as I think, might more wisely forbear
it now, (seeing it is become the fashion and habit of the basest swaggerers
and ruffians, and the devils mark which he has set upon many that will not be
reformed) then at the first, when they used it, either as ensign or ornament.
It was the speech of a worthy and reverend Judge of the land, That the use of
the long lock was first taken up by branded fellows, for a cover of their
shame. And that honorable personage in his circuit, sitting in the place of
justice, upon malefactors, practiced according to the former observation:
commanding all whom he saw beset with such deformed hair, to be immediately cut
or shorn, whether to discover their ear mark, or to shame their unseemly
guise, I know not. And yet many of them (far enough from Nazarites all may
think) set as much by their hair, as if they had put religion therein, and
were as loath to have sheares or rasor to come upon it.

The signification of the abstaining from wine or strong drink, was not 3
simply to forbid the using of it to all (for we see in Nehemiah the Lord
gives Nehe 8. 10.
his people liberty to eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet) but it was
commanded them that were Nazarites, for the time that they continued so, to
abstain therefrom: the signification (I say) thereof was, to teach Gods
people, that they should avoid all excess that way, lest thereby they should
dull and blunt the powers of their minds, and so they must of necessitive use
them to shameful ends, which were given them to far more excellent purposes:
which I say to the just condemning of all beastly drunkards, and such as are
their pot companions, though they can better bear drink without open
disguising of themselves, then the other: who yet spending their time wickedly,
and in needelesse and brutish devouring of it, are nothing inferior to them in
sinning: but in sundry respects are much worse then many of them. But of this
sin by other occasion I have spoken. This particularly be said of the rule of
Nazarites, and the caueats thereof: more generally this I add to the former,
that by these prohibitions and such like, the Lord would teach us, in how high
account he has an heart well mortified and purged from the dross and
superfluity of lusts and concupiscence which it is stuffed withal. We see
how he enioyneth his Nazarites not so much actual worship, as a straight
restraint of the flesh from all unlawful excess, which he shadoweth out by
these two, of diet, and d^cking the body, and abstinence in both. Doubtless if
it were possible for a man, to equal the Angels in obedience, and
cheerfulness, readiness and integrity of service, yet if it were possible
again, that the old man with his desires and passions, might still remain
alive with them, as wrath, malice, covetousness, uncleanness, hollownesse,
looseness, pride, uncharitableness, an unruly tongue, etc. the religion of
this man were altogether vain. There are reasons of this: 1. The Lord says,
Son give m^e thy Prou. 23. 26.
heart, he means not a rotten heart and corrupt (he needs it not) but an
heart well searched, and well drained from sinful affections and lusts: such
an heart he calls for, and chooses. For he knows, that where a mortified
Note.
heart is, there also is an heart quickened to the life of God, and the more fit
for duty, both within and without. 2. The chief service of God is inward; and
this inward stands especially in repentance, which first consists in the
change of the evil habites and qualities of the soul, ere new be put in. For
no man grafteth upon a rotten stock; nor puts new wine into old vessels. 3. A
christian man fetch surer evidence from hence of his reformation, then from any
particular duty to the affirmative commandments of the moral law: and more
soundly distinguishes himself from an hypocrite. I separate not the parts of
repentance, but divide the false from the sound by this rule: many a good
Christian is behind hand in this work (and ever shall be, for no man is pure)
and hardly forgoes some one or few old relikes of Adam: and therefore look how
much a man profits in this piece of religion, so much he grows more truly
religious. The use is, that they who have chosen the easier course of service,
I mean Note.
to do good duties, do better tend that other part of christianity, which
has been less regarded by them; and that they travail in denying themselves,
ouercomming their passions, abstaining from, and crucifying their corrupt
nature, where it is strongest in them, and so shall their religion prosper, and
better beseem them. For though it be the harder part of the two, yet time
bestowed therein, will counteruaile the labor most plentifully. And for a
good man to be a debtor to any lust, is most unseemly, but to be Romans 8. 12.
a seruer, fulfiller, and obeyer thereof, and to have the weapons of sin
still unmortified, and fighting in him against righteousness (as Paul speaks)
is monstrous: Thus much of the Nazarite.

In this verse, the Angel tells the office of the child that should be
Doct. verse. 5.
borne, to wit that when he should come to age fit for it, he should begin to
deliver his people from the bondage of the Philistims. Wherein the Lord
declares his tender love and care of his people: who when they are oppressed
and in tribulation, does pity them, and thinks even before, of easing and
redressing their sorrows; whereby he would draw them to relenting for their
sin, and to be ashamed of their provoking of him to punish them, and of the
hardening of their hearts, by lying still in their offenses, without humbling
themselves and crying to the Lord for mercy and deliverance. And if ye ask
why he does not as well take them out of their Object.
troubles, as well as he pitieth them therein, and why he suffered this people
to lie in bondage so long to their enemies, till Samson grew up and was able to
deliver them. I answer: he were willing and ready to do it, and much Answ.
more, if it might be good for them; but that cannot be, while they still
harbor and nourish their sins, but they would procure upon themselves
greater vexation by continuing their wicked course, if the Lord should deliver
them, before they repent for the same, as has bin often proved by the example
of these Israelites, crying for ease, but never heard, till by repentance Judge.
10. 16.
the Lord was grieved for their misery. So that Gods suffering their
oppressions to hold them under a long time, as this his people was by theirs,
namely from the birth of Samson, till he came to man's estate, and after; it
was not for that he takes pleasure in afflicting his, (he professes the
contrary) but it is for that they relent not, neither cast themselves down
before Lam 3. 33.
him, to draw compassion from him, by their lamenting after him. And therefore
1. Sam. 7. 2.
their long abiding under their tribulations, do argue exceeding hardness of
heart in them, whereby they procure the same.

And whereas men cavil with God, and say they cannot bow their own Object.
hearts, nor force them to relent, God must soften them and break them, or
else he is the author of their misery. I answer, they can bind heavy
burdens Answ.
upon his shoulders, which themselves will not take up with the least of their
fingers. And that appears by the slight account they make hereof, and their
dealing so carelessly in so weighty a matter. For although the Lord can pull
out the stone of the heart (as the Prophet speaks) and make Ezekiel. 36. 26.
it an heart of flesh: yet if this were the thing they desired, they would
first apply themselves to that grace of his, which is able to work this effect
in them, and then put over and commend the blessing of their labor to God:
which while they neglect to do, they have that within them which shall
witness against them, to be the wilful causes of their own desolation. The
Lord is not bound to them, in the least respect, to minister the means of the
word, in afflictions, benefits, examples, help by others, much less grace to
be humbled and repent. Therefore in that they use none of these ordinances of
his, to the wholesome ends to which they are appointed, the sin is theirs: he
is guiltless, in that he has offered them more fair, then themselves were
willing to accept of. Never did the Lord leave any to himself, hardened and
impenitent, who desired to profit under his doctrine and discipline. Therefore
let men beware they ouerreach not themselves in their subtlety: for as bold as
they are in speech here, yet when they come to answer the Lord face to face,
they shall be dumb: and of their own mouths shall the Lord condemn them. To
the which end more might be added, if the point came not so often to hand
throughout this book, as often as the relapses of the people are mentioned. See
also the first branch of the doctrine upon the 7. 8. 9. verses of the former
chapter. Thus much of the first part.

The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 6. Then the wife came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came
unto me, and the fashion of him was like the fashion of the Angel of God
exceeding fearful: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told he me his
name. 7. But he said unto me, Behold thou shall conceive, and bear a son,
and now thou shall drink no wine, nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean
thing: for the child shall be a Nazarite to God, from his birth to the day of
his death. 8. Then Manoah prayed to the Lord and said, I pray thee my Lord, let
the man of God whom thou se^test, come again now unto us, and teach us what
we shall do unto the child when he is borne. 9. And God heard the voice of
Manoah, and the Angel of God came again to the wife, as she sat in the
field, but Manoah her husband was not with her. 10. And the wife made haste,
and ran and showed her husband, and said unto him, Behold the man has
appeared unto me that came unto me to day. 11. And Manoah arose and went after
his wife, and came to the man and said unto him, Art thou the man that spakest
unto the woman? and he said, Yea. 12. Then Manoah said, Now let thy saying come
to pass: but how shall we order the child and do unto him? 13. And the
Angel of the Lord said unto Manoah, The woman must beware of all that I said
unto her. 14. She may eat of nothing that comes of the vine tree: she shall
not drink wine, nor streng drink, nor eat any unclean thing: let her
observe all that I have commanded her.
NOw it follows how the Angel appeared the second time, and that Verse. 6. to
15. The sum.
to them both, to wit, Manoah and his wife: and that was thus. She like a good
wife went and told her husband, that such an one, some Prophet or man of God
appeared to her, and told her of such a thing, and what she should do, but she
said, she answered nothing to him again. Then Manoah besought the Lord, that
he might come again, and he appeared again to the woman, who immediately went
and called her husband, who finding the man of God in the field, asked of him,
both of the former message, which he had brought to his wife, and also what
they should do to the child, when it should be borne, and he answered him, even
as he had before said to his wife.

Here the woman in her telling her husband of the messenger, describes him
thus: The favor of the man of God (says she) that appeared to me, was (as an
Angel of God) fearful; for so the Hebrew word is translated, which
signifies also wonderful: and so it is like she said and meant, though it be
translated fearful. And to prevent all doubts and suspicions, further she
tells him, that neither she knew him, nor from whence he was, neither did he
tell her his name. But this only he said to her, that she should bear a
son, and she must abstain from wine, and eat no unclean thing, for the
child should be a Nazarite from his birth unto his death.

But let us now peruse these verses throughout more fully. Touching that Doct.
verse. 6.
which she utters of the reverend presence of the Angel, I will not insist
in it, having elsewhere noted the substance thereof. I begin with this sixth
verse, where first know we this, that the woman by and by going to her husband
simply, to signify the matter to him, as soon as she received the message,
which equally concerned them both, did as became a good wife. For so it
behooves that married couples should communicate their minds one to another,
matrimony being a society betwixt two, as if they were but one. Ephe. 5. 31.
For they ought to have their fellowship together in imparting heavenly things
one with another, and earthly also, even as there were both, in this matter:
heavenly, seeing the message came in the name of God and from heaven; earthly,
seeing it was of and about a temporal comfort or blessing pertaining to this
life, to wit, of the bearing of a son. This example betwixt two godly
couples, does commend to us the sociable and kind agreement and living together
in marriage, that both be of one mind in good things, and show forth their
inward consent in affection, by the tokens of communion in outward things
concerning them both, as Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, with many other
did. And as God has commanded that it should be thus: so in like manner it
stands with all sound reason, that they who are so nearly linked together in
cohabitation and fellowship, should be nearly affected, and agree together
most kindly. Therefore Solomon wishes the husband to rejoice in his wife, and
that she should Prou. 5. 19.
be as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe before him. And so we should see cause
why marriage should be counted a singular benefit, as the Scripture calls it.
Concerning the which, though some couples void of religion, have some shadow
hereof, seeing they agree in upholding the family, and in gathering wealth one
with the other: yet they are out and in, their love is not constant, but full
of unsoundness, dislikes, dissimulation, inconstancy, and unquietness; for they
want the principal, which is some true measure of the fear of God, for that
is the chief staier of debate, and the nourisher of true love betwixt them:
which should therefore be laid for at their first coming together, or else
will hardly be wrought in them after. But this kind agreement betwixt couples,
is so far from the most, that strangenes and wearines one of the other, does
soon meet with them, with other blemishes Note.
manifold, which deface the beauty of marriage exceedingly. And yet lest while
I urge this consent, some couples should catch more liberty then I or the Lord
allow them, let me add that their agreement must be in things warrantable, or
else they rather band themselves together against the Lord, and abuse his
ordinance. For they are not yoked together, that they may join their wits and
wills to do mischief, as Ahab and Iezabel, Ananias and Saphira, which is not to
be helpers of each other, (as they come together to that end) except it be to
evil and to hell. This I say, because many couples are never at one, but when
they consent in evil: then they are as close as bark and tree, where they
should differ and dissuade each other: but in good duties their mutual
affections are so far from joining, that they are repugnant and divided each
from other as far as may be. By virtue of this holy concord, great is the
blessing, and sweet is the fruit of this ordinance. In all duties of the
family, as education of children, in all actions of Gods worship, in the
works of love to the Saints, in the use of their lawful liberties, etc. with
freedom of mind, what joy and contentment arises in this unanimity and
amity between them? which otherwise is much impeached. And the fruit of this
accompanies them in their inward troubles of mind, and outward crosses of body
and estate: the one being strengthened, comforted, resolved, and helped by the
wisdom, knowledge and assistance of the other. Yea surely the precious
memory of this agreement remains as a pledge in the bosom of the suruiuor,
when death has made a breach between them. But woe to him that is alone:
double woe to couples that are divided: where the one scorneth to communicate
with the other: and the wife chooses any to break her mind to, rather then
her husband.

But (to return) as the woman is to be commended for telling her husband; so
the more she deserves it, seeing that the party that appeared to her, was
taken of her to be a man, and his message to her, being barren, was, that she
should bear a child. This might have raised strange thoughts in her, as
doubting and wondering how this should be; and some woman would have concealed
such a matter, lest her husband should have had her in jealousy and suspicion
about it: and again, seeing that if he should have heard of such a matter by
some other and not by her, it might have been hardlier taken of him against
her. Between these contrary motions and conceits, some woman (I say) would
have been held in suspense, or would have chosen silence as the safest: but she
dealt simply, and did the best in opening it to him. And this teaches that in
faithfulness about the marriage bed, there should be such holy loialtie and
agreement betwixt couples, that there may not be the least doubting one of
another faithfulness, neither any occasion offered of the contrary, neither any
suspicion about it. Which by their religious and often confirming one another, in
their faithful keeping of covenant, and concerning all things else betwixt
them, and the free opening of their minds each to other, and their agreeing
together in holy duties and exercises of religion, might easily be. But where
are these to be found almost among the better sort? but to be sure they be
rejected of the common sort, and thereby it may easily be judged what manner of
life they lead. Of this I say the less, because all will grant, that if this
amity ought to be betwixt them in all actions mutually concerning each other,
then especially in that office which is most essential and natural to
marriage. And the Greek word, which Paul uses in the former text, I mean
benevolence, although it do admit a composition of two words, which signify
to be well minded, yet more properly it is derived from the word that
signifies a bed, as noting that this contains the other smaller beneuolences
under it.

In saying to her husband, that she did not once ask the man of God, from
whence he came, nor he told not her his name, for it was needless: 3
let us be taught by both, not to stay in company needlessly, and especially
men with women, and most of all alone without other company, and where they may
be in danger of doing or taking evil, or giving occasion of suspecting Note.
any such thing to other. Oh the infinite mischief that has been wrought
hereby, I mean by the idle and needless meeting and tarrying together of men
first, whereby one draws another to some evil or other; and much more of men
and women, whereby much whoredom has bin committed, (yea and much that was
never thought of before:) as by Elies sons meeting women in the Tabernacle,
which although it was lawful, yet they abused it monstrously. Particularly,
let women learn of the Shunamite, 2. King. 4. 15.
2. King. 4. that comely modesty and shamefastnes which is fitter for their
sex, then that boldness and lightness, which the most of them bewray, when they
are in the companies, wherein they dare show themselves. This woman therefore
being called to Elisha his chamber (and yet not alone neither, but his servant
standing by) came before him, and stood in the door, that is, she went not to
him, but stood aloof, as became a sober Matrone. But those days are past:
modesty is a burden to many women, and further then fear or shame restraines
them, grace and wisdom there is little in some of them to do it, as may
testify when the other bands are shaken off.

The last thing in this verse is, her sparines of speech to the Angel; She 4
asked him not any question, but rested in the message. The little time she
stayed in his company she spent in hearing and marking, pondring (as Mary Luke
1. 29.
did) not inquiring and descanting about it. Admirable is it that a weak
woman, hearing a report of a thing so strange, so unlikely, and yet so
pleasing, and that from a man that she knew not, should not once move a
question. A less occasion by many degrees, had been enough to have set some
woman's tongue on endless running, and her eye and mind on rouing and casting:
but then we must think (if she had bin of this humor) an Angel of glory had
not bin sent to her. Oh rare woman, which may set both men and women to
school, to learn sobriety. If Eve had been as wise, she had prevented a
great deal of woe, from her self and us. Curiosity is a foul blemish in a
man, but a far greater in a woman: and as this woman was chaste, so she was of
few words, and both go well together: For she in the Proverbs who is described
to be light footed and fugitive, oftener and more in Prou. 7. 11. 12.
the houses of others then her own, is taxed also to be light tongued, and
talkatiue. This iangling and prating of women (a vice so detested in them by
Paul) was never more rife in any age then ours. And (which is to be lamented)
it is a disease incident to such as (otherwise) are not of the worst sort
neither: and all because it is an impotencie and intemperancie, which issues
from the weakness of their sex (in great part) which they think no discredit
to themselves, because it is another nature unto them. It is a nature unto them
indeed, but a corrupt one, which must be spied in time by those that are wise,
and corrected. I will not say, that such are not fit for Angels company, they
beseem not the company of a discreet or grave man: for a wise person would
soon be weary of them, though themselves have no stay of their unruly member,
till their breath fail them, or they be put to silence: no more then the
wheels of a Jack, till the plummets be upon the ground. I need not amplify
this: I wish that all praters and tatlers were but galled and gagged with this
example here, and in the midst of their work, made but to see their face in
this glass, which I think would trouble them more, then the glass which the
old Curtizan once looked in, and beholding her wrinkles and spots therein,
cracked it asunder because it was so true a mirror.

In this verse is showed, how she told her husband what the man of God Verse. 7.
said to her of the birth of the child, and what she should do her self, as
we heard before verse 4. and 5. of the which I have spoken there: for this is a
repeating of the same things. Only this we may learn by Manoahs wife, to
report and relate things truly and aright as they were done, or as we heard
them related unto us. For through forgetfulness, carelessness, or of a worse
meaning, things are carried in such sort often times, that by untruths and lies
told out, much strife and contention arises, which bring and cause great
trouble and annoyance. An example of many, may that be of Ziba, his false
report to David of Mepbibosheth, that he refused to go with David against
Absalom, when he himself withheld his beast from him, at such time as he
would full gladly have gone, and whereon he should ride, because he was lame.
Another is that of the Jews slandering our Savior, 2. Sam. 16. 3.
that he said, Destroy the Temple, and in three days I will rear it again.
Whereas he said destroy this Temple, meaning his body: so they that Matthew. 26.
61. compared with John 2. 19. 23. John 21. 23.
hearing Christ say of his beloved disciple John, If I will that he abide till
I come, what is that to thee, etc? gave it forth erroniously, that he said, I
will that he abide till I come, and so gathered that John should not dye.

Concerning this soundness and fidelity in reports hearing, bearing and
telling, this I say, that he must be a man well balanced with grace, and
girded with verity, as a piece of his christian furniture, who less or more
lies not open to the devil in this kind, who will do much to make them that
go for professors, to lose the credit of their godliness. Was it not a
goodly ornament for the old Prophet (whose honor is to be true of his word) 1.
Kings 13. 18.
to be taken in a lie, both warpe and woofe, making and telling? Was it not a
sweet nosegay to the Church, think we, that two great and forward
professors, should be drawn forth and censured for liars, I mean Ananias Acts
5. 9.
and his wife? Even christians rake up the common scumme and scurfe of the age
they live in: and having heard reports, do out of a corrupt vanity, or a
leaud and sinister intent, altogether corrupt the truth and text thereof with
glosses and comments, additions and detractions of their own making, Psalm.
15. this is no good sign of a man that shall dwell with God, if we may collect
by contraries. If the Lord require that we be wise, and beware Psalm. 15. 2.
of believing every thing, lest we become reporters of an untruth unwillingly:
how shall they escape that cast each tale in their own mould, and hammer it in
their own forge, ere they give it out? and when it is broched, it is no more
like that which they heard from another, then an apple is to an oyster, as the
speech is. Whereas the breast of each honest man should be an harbor for truth
to lodge in: and should be as precisely careful to see it safely delivered and
uttered forth, as of a pledge or secret pawn left him by his friend. And let
this work a detestation of this Popish practice of lying and giving forth
reports (yea and coining them often times) which they think will make for their
vantage, not only falsely, but so incredibly, and shamelessely, that the very
hearers blush for shame thereof. It has been, is, and ever will be, one of
the rotten pillars wherewith they stay up their kingdom and maintain their
devilish doctrine. But here I end.

THE SEVENTIE TWO SERMON ON THE XIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
IT appears that Manoah believed his wife, and therefore Verse 8. 9. 10.
he prayed to the Lord, that the man might appear again to them, who had
brought the message to his wife, that they might not be left in doubt what they
should do to the child, even as they believed him that it should be borne.
And the Lord heard his prayer and sent him again unto them: and hereby it was
that the man of God appeared the second time, as in this second part of the
chapter may be seen.

In that Manoah gave credit to his wife, as appears by his prayer, to Doct.
verse. 8.
send him to them again, we see that there was faithfulness and trustiness
betwixt them, in that as she reported the message by and by that was brought
unto her, so he believed it at her mouth accordingly. A lively glass for
couples to look in, to direct them in this point, how they should Note.
be true and trusty one to the other: according to that which Solomon speaks
Prou. 31. 10.
of a faithful wife, Prou. 31. That her husbands heart rests in her: and a
man would think, that there had need to be no less betwixt them, who must
live for their whole life time together. And much weariness and coffeehouse
must there of necessity be betwixt them otherwise; as they find, who respect
not grace chiefly in their matches, but either to satisfy their eye, saying
with Samson, give me her for she pleases me: or else make them up for wealth,
or begin their marriage in a worse manner then by Note.
both the former. Such find little trustiness one at ahothers hand, as
appears within a small time after: who yet have that which they sought, and
reap the fruit of their own labors; when they meet with many curses in
their matches, even as God has foretold them. But of this I will add no more
here, having so often spoken of it.

And it is well to be marked, that in this doubtful case of the childs
bringing Doct. 2.
up, about which they were careful, but yet knowing not what to do; in this
doubt, I say, he therefore prays to the Lord, for direction by the appearing
again of the Angel, for he knew that God would not leave them in suspense,
about such a thing as he would have them do. Which should teach us, that in
all difficulties and doubts, as well as in other troubles, we should seek to
God to guide and assist us: they being matters in doing whereof, we must give
proof of a good conscience, both as Iehosophat did, 2 Chronicles. 20. 2. Ps^lm. 50.
15.
and as the Lord commands in the Psalm: saying, Call on me in the time of
trouble, etc. We can skill to complain and make our moan, to every one that
we meet with, what heavy affliction have befalne us, who yet cannot help us,
but rather increase our sorrows; but with God, to whom they should chiefly
complain, and make their moan, men have no acquaintance. But as it is with
them in this, that they be strangers to him, even so they have help, and
thrive accordingly. Let the reader see chap. 1. 2. and often in this book,
touching this argument, as also the next point, which is answerable thereto.

As he sought to the Lord, so he obtained that which he asked, to teach Doct.
verse. 9.
that it is not in vain to pray, and as he seeing that God having sent to them
a strange and unusual message, which Manoah did not well understand, knew he
would not leave him in suspense and fear, but would make his mind known to
them more perfectly, and therefore prayed in faith: in like manner we are to
do; to believe that we shall obtain that which we pray for. He must pray in
faith, and waver not, says Saint James, and in an Iam. 1. 6. Iam. 5. 15.
other place, It is the prayer of faith that must save. And Saint Paul says,
that we cannot call upon him, in whom we believe not. Which I say, both because
Romans 10. 14.
that is no prayer but babbling, that is void of faith, and also for that such
prayer of faith, even by one, much more by many, being seruent, obtains most
unlikely things at Gods hands. And in all difficulties, this is the speediest
remedy, (both because for the time present, it eases the heart well, and for
the time to come, gives hope of redress one way or other) Note.
and vnburdeneth the mind of that unprofitable heaviness which cloggeth it,
and deteineth it from being well occupied. Although more particularly, the
occasion that moved Manoah hereto, was a trouble which concerned the married
estate; which howsoever it never falls out (in this kind) now adays to
couples: yet in stead thereof, many other do, as care of bringing up the
children, employing them in the fittest trade of life, bestowing them in
marriage; defraying the charge of housekeeping, with many more such. In all
which are there not many difficulties, fears, and doubtings, which arise in
the minds of careful and tender Parents and governors? Yes doubtless, and
such I mean, so daily and successiue, that they will breed no small
distemper, inwardly by fretting, carking and contriuing: nor disturbance in the
family by impatience and discord, if a wise course be not taken to stay and
prevent the one and the other. Now what course can be like this of Manoah, who
being troubled about a message, which God had sent him, does repair to the
same God, and desires him to free him from the fear and doubt which he had
caused: so should the husband and wife do together, that seeing the Lord is the
ordainer of marriage, the blessing of posterity is from him, and he has
undertaken to provide for them and theirs to many generations that fear him:
therefore it would please the Lord to giude them in their government, to frame
their minds to patience and contentedness in their crosses, to give a
blessing to their education and care of their children, to bless their labors
and callings, that there may be sufficiency, and in a word to show them the
best way or issue out of those troubles of household and family, which
unsettle and disquiet them. A man would think it were a iollie ease (in such
cases) to have God a man's friend, over it is with them, that neither have God
nor friend to counsel them, but uncomfortably to bear their burdens by their
own strength, which none at all is able to do.

The Angel at the prayer of Manoah, appearing again to the woman in the field
without her husband, she made have to tell her husband that he appeared Verse.
10.
again to her, as he had done that day already; which news she knew would
not a little joy his heart, and ease him of much doubting that troubled him.
And this teaches the wife another duty to her husband, to fulfill his joy,
and to do the things that may make him cheerful and a glad man, as far as
she is able: as on the other side, the husband should, yea and that much more,
do the like to her again. And such countenance, gesture and speech, with
their whole carriage should be between them, as might free them from fear or
doubt of hearty love and kindness, but rather by all good occasions, might
make one another joyful. As for brawling, chiding, Note.
provoking each other, or secret dislikings, tetches, or conceits, which might
cause the same, though there will never want occasions; nay if they should, yet
the evil heart ministers too many, they (I say) should be far from them,
especially from nestling, and being seated in them. Therefore Solomon speaking
of such a woman, says of her thus: Who shall find a virtuous Prou. 31. 10.
woman? For her price is far above the pearls. The heart of her husband
trusts in her, even as hers also should rest in him: for they have many other
troubles, and such also as accompany marriage, so that they have little need
to trouble one another also, but ought every way to allay Note.
and stop occasions, or to remove them by their sweet and christian
society and living together. And therefore it is most absurd, that one of them
should do that, which may grieve the other; but monstrous that one should
seek to vex the other.

And indeed, where both are of one mind, and will, in good things, this is no
difficult matter, thus to join and work together that natural love and
content in each other, and so (which is the fruit thereof) joy and peace in
the good success they have in their endeauours and affairs, may be procured
and augmented, I say among such as be of one sound mind, it is more easily
obtained (though the best had need to watch for such grace, that fickleness,
estrangement and weariness, do not break in) but how shall this be found
among other couples, wholely corrupt, and void of goodness, such as the
greatest number is? Surely not easily, especially if trials come (for alas the
worst make a shift to please each other while they prosper) as we see in that
foolish woman, Jobs wife, who while things went well with them, is not said to
have broken out so grossly, but seeing her husband plunged into misery, added
to his sorrow by her unseasonable speech, whereas she should then (above all
other times) have spoke somewhat in season, to have comforted him, when all
other outward helps failed. No man (says the Apostle) ever hated his own
flesh, but nourished and cherished it: so that selfeloue might somewhat
persuade this duty, that couples should seek the peace and welfare of each
other. And if the example of our Lord Jesus may prevail (as we know married
persons are sent to that rule to learn of him) then let them consider, how
tenderly he cares for his Church and spouse, by all means procuring delight
to her, and avoiding molestation from her, saying: I charge you wake not my
spouse Cant. 3. 5.
till she please. This chariness and care of remoouing all such things out of
the way, as might cause each others heaviness and grief, and bearing the
burden of each other, that the afflicted party might be eased, is the best
way to witness in them this sympathy of affection, and like mindedness.

Now when Manoah comes to the Angel to be satisfied in his doubt, Verse 11.
mark the manner of his speech: he uses no long circumstance, but directly
goes to the matter. Art thou the man (says he) that appeared to the woman?
Such was the simplicity of that age, that one might ask of another that which
concerned them, and be answered. How far was that from the practice of our
time? for now there is much courtesy, glosing and colored hypocrisy and
subtlety, but little good meaning and honest simplicity: neither shall a man
be sure of the mind of his neighbor, when he has fair words enough tending
that way. A show of love but with dissimulation. Romans 12. 9.


Touching unfaithfulness in dealings and conversation among men, I have
elsewhere spoken chap. 12. 2. 3. to the which this as a limme thereof may be
added, which I am to speak of, to wit, unfaithfulness in speech. Both are
birds hatched in the same neast of a false and deceitful heart, I mean as well
Ioabs courtesy to Abner, as Zibas fidelity to Mephibosheth. It is an equal 2.
Sam. 3. 27. 2. Sam. 16. 3.
ornament to a christian (say they what they can, that mislike the old
fashion) to be a plain dealing and a plain spoken man; for both argue he is a
plain hearted man. He that carries with him an heart and an heart, carries
Note. 1. Chron. 12. 33
about him, a tongue and a tongue, an hand and an hand, all double and
dissembling, all abominable to the Lord, as Solomon faith. For though the
cloven footed beast was cleaner then the whole-houed, yet the cloven hearted
and cloven tongued man is more unclean to him, then the single heart, and the
uniform tongue. In which respect the Jews were brought up to hate doubleness
and falsehood by the forbidden types of Plowing with two kinds of beasts,
wearing two kinds of stuff, and sowing two Leuit. 19. 19.
kinds of grain, to wit, at the same plough, in the same garment, and in the
same field. But we at this day have both abrogated ceremony and substance too
for the most part: and though (as in other points, so in this) we hold, that
generally the equity of moral commandments is eternal, yet in particular,
this plain hearted and faithful communicating and dealing of men together, is
abolished, as if it had been a mere ceremony. True it is, men have not quite
forgotten ceremonies in this duty, but their new found ceremonies have eaten
up the old substance sheere, even as the lean kine devoured the fat in
Pharoahs dream, I mean this, the affected apish Genesis 41. 4.
or complementall speeches of the most men, have quite consumed the truth,
simplicity and honesty of the heart, that should be found among them. I
mislike not seemly and courteous speech, if it carry with it the color and
temper of the heart, but I mean that which Solomon speaks of in Psalm. 55. 22.
the Proverbs, when the words are soft as butter and oil, sweet as honey, but
the heart is sharp as a sword, and bitter as wormwood, and has seven
abominations in it. Indeed I confess all have not in them this cursed habit
(it commonly being the cloak of the malicious and politic whom a man may for
the most part understand to mean contrarily to that they speak) but it is
also a vanity and affectation of many others, to be more full of shows and
courteousnesse, then to intend friendship or goodwill. Be it of malice or of
vanity, it is naught: if of the former, devilish: if of the latter, frothie
and superfluous. Sins stay not always in the Court: they come down also into
the country, wherein many men are so hollow, that their consciences tell them,
they deserve to be hollowly dealt with: they have used undermining questions to
others, and so they have answers, as sinister, indirect, and forked. So that
now adays, if a man would have a plain answer from another, he is saine to
use some slight or wile to get it out: for if he speak plainly, the other has
so many casts and conceits in his mind, that he fears advantage will be taken
some way against him, which can be no less then a token of a bad conscience.
If it be a matter that we would communicate, for redress of any evil, in
town, family, or person, we know not how to break one with another about it,
(the meaner to his better especially) but if we do, a slender regard shall be
had of it. Even so in friendly meetings at table, when we have apparent cause
offered of thanks by Gods benefits, yet even there it is harsh to hear any
words sauouring of Ephesians. 5. 4.
religion, or tending to edification, (although giving of thanks is the speech
with which our table should by the Apostles commandment be seasoned) but if
there be not some to cross them, that offer occasion of such speech, yet shall
ye have the most part winding away from (seconding or giving liking of it) into
other needless, worldly, or frothie speech, every one as he delights to
talk. And as our speech to men is many ways to be charged, so is our
commoning with God seldom, and when we have any, full of coldness, loosenes
and wandering.

Manoah, understanding the man of God, in that he had said to his wife, Verse.
12.
and seeing that she had rightly related the matter to him (for the message
which this man of God had done to his wife before, and she had reported to him,
agreed with his second rehearsal thereof in all points) he rests in that
they say: for so he answers, Be it as thou have said: or thus, I believe it
shall so come to pass, although to manward it seems not likely. So when we
have received any message from God, and by examining and comparing one
scripture with another, for the confirming of us therein; we have Acts 10. 17.
proof what the will of God is, which we were in some doubt of before; we
ought to cease discoursing, and though we were held in suspense, as Peter was
at the vision, till we were resolved, yet now we should without contradiction
or difficulty receive it from God, yield to it, and rest in it. Even as before
we know it we were, according to the occasion offered us, to do as Manoah did,
being unresolved; that is, try the spirit, whether it be of God or no, and to
pray God to reveal it to us: and therefore as our Savior speaks, to search
the Scriptures for further knowledge therein: according to John 5. 39. Acts 17.
11.
the example of the Beraeans, who tried all things, holding themselves to the
truth; as the Apostle counsels the Thessalonians to do. We see that all 1.
These 5. 21.
natural motions tend to a rest and quietness: wherein the perfection and end
of the thing so moved, consists. And he that runs a race, attaineth not
his purpose, till he have reached to the end of his course, and then he
rests. And because I am come by occasion of Manoahs resting in that
particular which he sought, and have showed that we also ought to do the like:
I will say something of that which we ought to rest in, after a more general
manner. My meaning is this: A Christians perfection and end which shall
hereafter be full in the blessed rest of glory, (the Sabbath of the Saints) is
begun even in this life, and that is, when the mind, soul, and whole man is
at rest, that is, enjoys, feels, and possesses that, for which they much
travailed and took pains. The rest of the mind is actual resolution and
Note.
certainty of the truth against error and doubting: and this is the fruit of
seeking knowledge. The rest of the soul is, persuasion and assurance of Gods
favor and his alsufficiencie, being reconciled unto us, and this is the fruit
of seeking faith. The rest of the whole man is his inward setlednesse, being
the fruits of faith, repentance, and sanctification: and this is the end of
seeking increase and growth in grace. Now because all these are but imperfect
in us here, (for we know, believe, and grow, but in measure) therefore we must
seek still to know, believe, and be settled, more and better, daily. Howbeit
herein stands not our happiness, in that we are learning, laboring,
endeavoring after, but rather in that which we hold, and have learned and
gotten. This lays much to the charge of such as having long been under
teaching, fare as if they never had heard: after ten, twenty, and more
years asking, Oh that I were resolved of the truth! Oh that I might hear the
way to salvation plainly described! Oh that this or that doubt, fear,
temptation, lust and corruption were removed! Why, O thou sluggard, what has
bin a doing all this while? Have thou not bin iogged, pulled, and punched out
of thy snorting and dead sleep by the Ministry, and do thou now open
thine eyes, and ask why no body would awake thee? It was thy sottishnes and
lethargy, not want of rousing, which drowned thee Note.
in sleep so long. Therefore if thou have care of thy soul, beseech the Lord
to bedew and moisten those dry clods of thy mind and soul, wherein the seed
of the word has lien so long unprofitable, that at length it may take root
and fructify. And cease not till by this means thou be resolved and settled
about, and in the truth, that so thou may rest safely, and not (as before)
dangerously: rest, I say, not from work and exercise of thy knowledge and
faith (for the use of both is to be occupied, when thou have them) but from
uncertainty, error, doubting, and distrust. This point I desire the reader to
compare with that I have spoken touching Gedeon, chap. 6.

When Manoah was resolved that he should have a child by his wife, Verse. 13.
14.
though she had been barren, he asked what they should do to the child, of
which thing they no less doubted: whereby he still shows his desire of
resolution in the doubts that remained: and teaches us to be wise in making
our benefit of the company and familiarity of such as are able and willing to
resolve us, and pretend we not foolish bashfulnes, (when indeed it is but
slothfulnes) or lothnes to be troublesome, lest by that means we procure to
our selves more trouble (then we can easily avoid afterward) by such
bashfulnes, ignorance, and sloth. But I will not repeat any thing. Now to this
second demand, the Angel answers the same that he did to the woman. But to
the woman his prescription was; what she should do her self, and not what they
should do to the child. So that it seemed he answered not Manoahs doubt: for
when he asked what they should do to the child, the Angel answered, what she
should do that was to bear the child. But it was all one in effect, as if
he had spoken thus: That which I said that she should observe, was that she
should do it, because of the child, and therefore much more he must observe
the same.

Again, whereas she was bidden to abstain from that which was unclean, and
that might seem a needless charge, seeing the law forbad all people the use
of unclean things before that time: to that it may be answered, that after the
Philistims had got dominion over the people, as confusion in the Common wealth
and tyranny grew; so religion among the Jews began not a little to decay. No
wonder then, if among other things of greater weight, this one point of the
ceremonial law was broken, that they fell to eat things unclean, as well as
that which was clean. For it was common with the Jews, upon diverse occasions
to break the ceremony, as appears by that 1. Sam. 14. See the place. And by
this we may learn that 1 Samuel 14. 32.
it ought not to seem strange when we see in the places of ignorance and
darkness, sundry evil customs, errors, and profane practices received and
used: and no print nor step of Gods commandments and ordinances remaining, but
all worn out and forgotten. Alas, they are to be pitied and lamented, not
wondered at and scorned. There are more ways to deface and race out religion,
then war and foreign tyranny. Blessed be God, we sigh not under that
burden: no, nor yet under the bondage of Antichrist: we have peace, and
government, free from a profession of Popery. Let us pray the Lord to add
hereunto this mercy, that by the free passage of the Gospel, we may be also
cured of that blindness which now possesses many places, and keeps the
people in error, superstition and all kinds of ungodliness. Secondly, in that
the Angel spoke the same thing to Manoah, Doct. ver. 13. 14
that he did to his wife before, about the same matter; we observe by his
example, that it becomes, and is meet for Gods servants always to speak
the same truth, in or about any matter, at one time and in one company, that
they do at and in another: according to the Apostles words to the Ephesians,
that they should cast off lying, and every man speak the truth to Ephesians. 4. 25.
his neighbor; which is to the just reproach and conviction of them, who carry
two tongues in their head (as they say) and are such as have lost their credit
by reporting untruth where they come, and do hurt to other, as well as bring
an ill name on themselves. But this I noted out of the woman's report to her
husband, and in diverse other places.

By the other part of the Angels words, in prescribing that the woman should
abstain from things forbidden and unclean, seeing the child that 2
was to be a Nazarite must be borne of her; when yet the prescription was
chiefly for the child, we should learn this: That when things which seem
less likely are commanded or forbidden, much more those which are more
apparently so. As if the servant and child must keep holy the Sabbath,
Command 4.
much more the parents and master should do so: and most of all the Minister.
And if the appearance of evil be forbidden; much more the evil it self. And
so if a smaller thing be commanded or forbidden, much more a greater. And this
is to the iuster condemning of them that both hear this taught them, and see
many well governed christians to give them example herein, yet not only follow
them not, neither the doctrine which they hear, but offend in the shamefullest
and foullest manner. And let us know that if the Lord in his Commandments will
have all his servants to understand by the great sin or duty expressed, that
his will is the same in all the rest of that kind, be they never so small and
special: how much more then if he manifest his liking or disling of a lesser
evil (that is more secret and more doubted of) or of a lesser duty (serving
to be of less necessity) ought we to collect that he will not hold us
guiltless in those evils committed, or duties neglected, which are more
manifest, as being either by the light of nature, or by apparent Scripture
allowed or forbidden? If he will not hold him excused, who is not wise to
gather the less by the greater: woe be to the careless, who being commanded
to streine out a gnat, swalloweth a cammell. Thus much of this, I proceed in
the text.

The third part of the Chapter.
Verse. 15. Manoah then said to the Angel of the Lord, I pray thee let us
retain thee, until we have made ready a Kid for thee. 16. And the Angel of
the Lord said to Manoah, Though thou make me abide, I will not eat of thy
bread, and if thou will make a burnt offering, offer it unto the Lord: for
Manoah knew not that it was an Angel of the Lord. 17. Again Manoah said unto
the Angel of the Lord, What is thy name, that when thy saying is come to
pass, we may honor thee? 18. And the Angel of the Lord said to him, Why
ask thou thus after my name, which is secret? 19. Then Manoah took a Kid
with a meat offering, and offered it upon a stone, unto the Lord: and the
Angel did wonderously, whiles Manoah and his wife looked on. 20. For when the
flame came up toward heaven from the altar, the Angel of the Lord ascended up
in the flame of the altar, and Manoah and his wife beheld it, and fell on their
faces to the ground. 21. (So the Angel of the Lord did no more appear unto
Manaoh and his wife) Then Manoah knew that it was an Angel of the Lord. 22.
And Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely dye, because we have seen God.
23. But his wife said to him, If the Lord would kill us, he would not have
received a burnt offering and a meat offering of our hands, neither would he
have showed us all these things, nor would have now told us any such. 24. And
the wife bare a son and called his name Samson: and the child grew, and the
Lord blessed him.
IN this third part, follows the sign by which they should be certified,
Ver. 15. 16 17. 18 The sum.
that the thing told them by the man of God, should come to pass. But first
Manoah does two things: one, he desires the Angel to eat: the other, he
asks him his name, to both whereof the Angel makes answer. Of these first
in order.

Concerning the first, the Angel of God has now done his message, and Verse. 15.
answered Manoahs doubt. But he kindly accepting him for the good tidings he
brought unto him, desired to retain him, that he might refresh himself after
his travail, and (as he thought) his hunger, and therefore he said to him,
let us stay thee while we make ready a Kid for thee. But the Angel having no
need to eat, drew Manoah from his purpose, telling him he would not eat, and
led him to more heavenly matter, that is, to honor God, by offering a burnt
offering unto him.

In these two verses we may consider diverse things: first in Manoah, then Doct.
1.
in the Angels answer. In Manoah these two following: First his courtesy and
thankfulness in offering him to eat, (thinking he had been a man) having
brought such a message from God to him and his wife. And this confirms us in
that we have heard before, that where we receive kindness, we should render
and show the like again, as we can. And the godly used both, then, before, and
after, to offer such courtesy to the servants of God being strangers, though
they brought no message to them from God, and it is called hospitality, as we
read of the Shunamite, who requested Elisha to turn in as he came by, and
built him a convenient chamber for that purpose. They knowing that he who
received a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, Matthew. 10. 41.
and a righteous man because he was so, should receive the reward that such
should.

It is not a thing so commendable in Christians to be kind toward them that
deserve it, as the contrary is odious and brutish in them. Those that are
commanded to do well to their enemies, and love them that hate them, what
great thing is it if they love and be kind to the well deserving? (Heathens
and Publicans do likewise) But to be unkind toward them that have been loving
and well affected toward them, is not only worse then heathenish, but also then
any beast will yield to another. Nay histories report that alion having bin
eased and helped by a passenger that came by, of a wound which by some means
had befallen him: long after acknowledged the benefit. For the Romans using to
behold the spectacle of men sighting with beasts: condemned malefactors to this
death. Now among the rest this man being one, came armed into the place, to
fight for his life: and (as it fell out) this Lion was the beast, which was
committed with him. The Lion no sooner saw the man, but came and fell down at
his feet, holding up his foot in the sight of all the people, and making no
semblance of fury against his preserver. The matter being enquired into, it
was found that this man had taken a thorn out of the foot of the Lion and so
eased his pain. This (being but a discourse of a thing of inferior nature) I
may be thought not so wisely to insert in so grave an argument: neither had I
done it for the strangenes of it, but that I would thereby shame such
boisterous, rough and barbarous natures, as being provoked to this duty of
kindness, by the strongest means, yet out of a bitter stomach, do rather
thereby take occasion of hatred and mischief, like Saul, who by David's
innocence and pity to his life, was the more enraged against him. But these
meet with their match, for God gives them over to be touzed and hampered by
such as spare them not, and want conscience, when they are fallen into their
hands, to teach them for ever after to abhor such inhumanitie, I had said
lionlike cruelty, but that I should wrong that creature, if I should ascribe
man's evil quality unto it.

Thus much of the first thing to be noted in Manoah, as I said before. The
Doct. 2. verse. 15.
other thing here to be learned out of the example of Manoah is this, with
what reverence we ought to receive Gods message by them whom he sends to do
it, and to be entirely knit unto the messenger himself, for his message sake.
Eglon a heathen king showed this reverence to the message of Ehud from the
Lord, and Gedeon much more, with others. Beautiful should the feet of them
be, who bring glad tidings (and yet the feet of such as Romans 13. 15.
went barefoote in those countries, were not very beautiful of themselves, but
unseemly) And so much the more precious and heauenlier that the message is
which they bring, they doing the same in such manner as becomes it. And
therefore (blessed be God) we have experience of no less in some, that they
who apprehend and embrace the joyful tidings of salvation brought unto them by
Gods messengers, soundly, sweetly, and sauourly, even to the assurance of
pardon and happiness, are knit to the messengers most dearly and unfeignedly
for their work sake, (though they be but the instruments, and sometime mean
persons in the eye of the world) by whom God works and reuealeth his will and
mind unto, that they may believe.

Which thing Paul knowing very well, told Philemon that he owed himself
Philem. 19.
unto him, for the good he had received by his ministry, whereby he was
truly turned unto God; and what marvel? Therefore such messengers of God
deserve not checks and taunts (as the wicked and unthankful world can do no
other then give them) for their so testifying their affection to them. And they
are justly to be pitied, who having heard the message of God at the mouths of
such, yet have their hearts no way enlarged to them, whereby they give
testimony that they have taken no good by their preaching.

Will an earthly King endure his Ambassador to be lowred upon, or abused
think we? Look upon David, how he revenged the indignity which ^. Sam. 12. 31.
Hanun offered his servants? And what did the husbandman to those that farmed
his vineyards, and beat, wounded and slew his messengers? He Matthew. 21. 41.
John 15. 1. Luke 10. 16.
that despises you (says Christ this husbandman, Ioh. 15.) despises me, and
him that sent me. Next to the contempt of the message, this despite of the
messenger is most damnable. For by Pastors and Teachers, the Lord manifests his
will, touching our living peaceably here, and enjoying life hereafter for
ever: (which are treasures precious, far above those of Princes) and
therefore they are savage people that lightly weigh them: But they that have
found comfort by them, yea their reconciliation, as Job. 33. Job 33. 23.
speaks: they that have tasted of the good gift of God by them, and have
their souls bathed in this dew of heavenly knowledge, esteem them worthy of
more honor then they can yield them, and count them as a few men of a
thousand, and are neerlier knit to them, then nature can knit them to their
own flesh. And so is the Minister again to them, being as the 1. These 2. 20.
crown of his ministry. And yet to prevent a cavil, I say not that they
worship them as God neither, for all that: but indeed they make more of them,
then common men: which little likes them who would have them thought of as
men, not worthy to have place in the Church, no, nor on earth at all.
Therefore let all good hearers learn, first to be riuetted into their
doctrine, to get acquaintance with that first, and then, if their hearts can go
against the messenger let them; but that cannot be, they must needs advance
themselves in joy and affection to the instrument, if once God and his
ordinance have got any honor and love in their hearts. As for senseless
blocks, or cauilling controulers, either of message or instrument, who take
upon them to carpe at their doctrine, or the manner of uttering, or the persons
that bring it, (as the truth is, the woeful people make no other use of these
things, but to iangle and censure them) they bewray themselves to be no
children of wisdom as yet: what they may be, I say not, but yet they be not
bred nor begot by her, for doubtless they would then plead for, and justify
her. I have often thought it Gods mercy to keep the knowledge of such
discouragements from them that are to enter into this office (lest they should
be deterred wholly from it) till by experience they might be armed against it.
To conclude then, if Manoah for a temporal benefit foretold him by the Angel,
and but once appearing to him, yet because he was the messenger of God, showed
himself so kind as he did to him, and as he took him to be a man, so he
was careful to entertain him, as it was meet such an one should be; oh how
much more ought the teacher and messenger of God, and the people over whom he
is set, and to whom he is sent of God to guide them safely to his kingdom, yea
and to whom he declares the whole secrets of God, and that daily both in
season and out of season, as Paul speaks: how much more ought they (I say) to
be knit in true love the one to the other? Whereas there is scarcely outward
peace and agreement betwixt the most of them, unless it be in evil, as in
vain iangling and prating, drinking and gaming, and such like spending their
time together: and this of Manoah.

The words of the Angel follow: wherein first, that he denies not, that Verse.
16.
he may be moved to stay with him if there were cause, but not to eat, if he
should make provision for him: therein (I say) he teaches us these two
things; the one, that we may lawfully and willingly be persuaded (unless there
be necessity to the contrary) to stay together, one neighbor with Doct 1.
verse. 16
another in company, after we have done our earthly business, if there be
seen cause, and namely, if thereby we may do good or take good one by the
other, as to confer, and use good communication together, for knowledge,
edification, and their mutual comfort and increase of love betwixt our selves,
or for the good of each other. In these respects (I say) neighbors may keep
company one with the other, after their other affairs and business ended,
which though it be not in use among neighbors, where no religion is, yet let
not other lose that benefit. But otherwise if they do not so in tarrying
together, I mean, instruct, edify and comfort one another, and provoke
mutually to love, and good works, it is much meeter for them to depart asunder,
each to his own home and calling; rather then to fall to idle, needless, or
hurtful iangling and spending the time in no good sort together. This is
somewhat like that which I have been before occasioned to speak of in the
woman's wisdom, showed in departure from the Angel, as soon as she had
received his message. There is a danger as well in men's too long staying
together with men as with women: and it is apparent, that many have held out
company longer then was meet, after their necessary affairs were dispatched,
or their lawful refreshings by the creatures enjoyed: because they fall from
eating and drinking, to drunkenness, to ungodly gamings, to buy and sell their
neighbors, to plot mischief, to wrangle, quarrel and be at daggers drawing
each with other: had it not bin well these had not met at all, or at least, to
have bin parted in season? But on the other side, if time, place, and good
occasion offered do serve, it is the duty of a Christian to redeem any
seasons in company to do good therein, if it were but for this cause, that
they meet not commonly nor often together. And where there is willingness, and as
it may be thought, simplicity and uprightness in them that desire it, there
ought to be readiness and forwardness in him that can yield it (except
other predominant reasons do urge the contrary) without any strangenes and
austeritie, and the rather, because the most part of the world look after no
such matter in their meeting together. And this wisdom we may learn by the
Angels words.

The other part of his answer is this, that he would not eat, if he should 2
provide for him, because he was no man (as Manoah took him to be) and
therefore had no need to eat. For though sometime the Angels of God did eat,
as with Abraham and Lot, and did put on the shape of men when they had some
message of God to do, and so tarried the longer, yet here the Angel having
done that he came for, and so hastening to depart, refused to eat, seeing it
was needless.

In this speech the Angel teaches this, that the creatures of God ought Doct.
2.
not to be spent needlessly, but received for necessary use: even as our Savior
taught long since, that the broken meat and fragments should not be John 6.
12.
cast away, which were left after the people had been satisfied. And this
commends frugalitie and honest sparing, as it condemns the prodigal
lauishing and wasting that many stroy goods do use, who fat their dogs,
and famish the poor, for whom broken meat should be reserved. But of this I
shall say more afterward God willing.

Neither is it unworthy the nothing for us, to see how careful the holy ghost
is here, to clear the good meaning of Manoah from any blame. He 3
knew not (says the text) that it was an Angel of the Lord, q. d. If he had
known it, ye may well think, he would not have spoken so: but being ignorant,
he is to be excused: I blame him not for it, no reason therefore that his
simplicity should make him subject to hard censure. It is not simply indeed
excusable in Manoah, only because he was ignorant (for Peter was faulty for
saying he knew not what, being with Christ upon the mount) but because he was
neither bound to know, nor able of himself to know any such matter. See then
how tender the Lord is of the credit of his good servants, that whiles they in
their innocence walk according to their knowledge, he auoideth all the blame
that might grow to them by their unavoidable ignorance: the Lord will judge the
work of his servants, according to that they have; but as for the defect which
is invincible, it shall do them no harm: this by the way. The thing I purpose
to insist most in, is, Doct. 4.
that knowing afterward this messenger to be an Angel (otherwise then he
supposed) was ashamed even of his blameless error: how much more ought we to
blush for our faulty errors, nay gross ignorance, or (which is worst) wilful
sins? That which Paul Romans 6. says, implies no less, Romans 6. 21.
That we being regenerate should be ashamed to look back into our old
profane course of blindness and badnesse: as if a devout Papist (like Ephraim
in the Prophet) being converted, should be abashed to consider the
unfruitfulness of his devotion, and kneeling to the Crucifix, and the image of
the Virgin Mary, and a piece of bread, saying to these Idols, Fie upon you, get
you hence, they were blind that made them, they themselves are like the makers
of them, and I as blind that worship them. So should the proud boaster, that
has scornefully disdained his neighbor (in his heat and madness) being come
to himself, and seeing he is no better then earth and a firebrand of hell, be
ashamed of himself, and say; Who am I, that have thus basely forgot my self?
So he that has come iollily to the Sacrament, and yet profanely, because he
could discern no more at the Lords board, then his own: when he sees his
boldness, and how far he has ventured; how should it astonish him? The
truth is, knowledge and grace have no greater enemies then the ignorant, who
(if they could see themselves as they cannot) how highly would they magnify
God for knowledge? if for no other cause, yet for this, that thereby they are
made to see their estate far other, then they could ever believe it to be: and
so resting thankful, walk in the light thereof, and abhor their former
blindness.

The Angel seeing Manoah deceived taking him to be a man, led him further to
more fit matters for him, bidding him make a burnt offering of the Doct. 5.
meat that he desired to refresh him with. For to no end was Manoahs speaking
of meat to him, offering him to eat the kid of the goats. This speech of his
shows that it is true wisdom to take occasion to draw one another forward
to holy duties, and to communication of heavenly things. The most being
earthly, and fast locked up therein, Manoah was busy about providing for him,
which through his error, was to no end, therefore the Angel drew him to that
which was profitable indeed. And so it well becomes Christians to be ready to
lead one another from unprofitable expense of the time, to talk of things
more divine and fit to the edifying one of another: neither ought the wise
christian to stumble at it when he meets in company with such as are
unsavory, whose tongues are their own to set themselves on work as they
please. Alas what other is to be looked for at the hands of such, as never
learned how to govern themselves either alone, or in their private houses, or
in the public actions of Gods worship? How should their tongues be well
seasoned in company, or bring forth fauourie and gracious matter, out of an
unclean heart abounding with the contrary? But rather let him pity such, (for
all bad men are not bad of malice) and by his mild and modest silence at
least, and much more by speaking that which is likest to prevail and do good;
turn off, and put by their superfluous and frothie talk: not fearing but that
it will give place, and cause the vtterers thereof to say, Indeed this speech
of yours is far meeter for the company, and deserves to be accounted of,
and pity it were that loose and vain talk should have put it by: pardon us,
for if we had known better, we would have used better. Is not this a good
effect of Christian boldness (though no more then needs) thus to take occasion
to break off bad communication, and to be far preferred before an offensive
giving place to ill speech till it have gotten the upper hand, so that it is
too late to repress it? But to come nearer to the occasion of this text. A
Christians duty toward them that come behind him in experience and the right
use of conference with such, is, not to make himself sport at their weakness,
or to scorn their ignorance, but to go before them, and teach them how to
spend the time more profitably. A man may discern teachablenes, and an humble
spirit in many, who out of a simple meaning, utter that little good speech that
they can, or which comes next to mind, though they can little consider to what
purpose or edifying. Here is a fit occasion offered to the other, with lenity
and softnes to divert rather then break off such speech, to loosen the bands
of it rather, then violently to cut them asunder, that so the hearers may see
themselves wound into better communication ere they are aware, and secretly
blush at their own ignorance.

The particular that the Angel mentioned, was to counsel him to offer Doct. 6.
a burnt offering to the Lord. The signification thereof was, that thereby he
should consecrate himself, body and soul, with the powers and parts of both
unto the Lord: and so he should honor the Lord, as became him, and show, that
he did thereby acknowledge himself willing and ready to obey him in all
things. And this is our true serving of God to offer Romans 12. 1.
up our selves wholly under his government, as the Apostle speaks to the
Romans. And so on the contrary, they do nothing less, who give themselves to
follow their own lusts, and the devices and desires of their wicked hearts, or
who in some things will yield him duty, and by halues, as we read that Saul
did, for which cause the Lord rejected him. Let the reader look more of this
point in chap. 2. and in chap. 10. and elsewhere.

And further as Manoah for the kindness he received of the Angel, was bidden
to offer to God that which he offered to him; so we should not offend, who are
Gods Ministers, if in the like case we do the like. As for example, if for our
travail by advice and counsel to any brother, either troubled in conscience,
or otherwise with some great and dangerous doubt; he being satisfied and
quieted to his good contentment by our counsel, if (I say) he, the party so
counseled by us, out of a thankful mind should offer gratuitie to us, (as
many think it their duty) I say, we should not offend, if we should desire
him to give it either wholly, or a part thereof, as freely to some very good
use, if he be well able, as to some godly poor, as he would have done to us,
seeing we think it unmeet for us to receive it, because we would in no wise
bring a reproach to our ministry, orgiue occasion to any, to think, that we
do basely sell the gifts of God for money. For if he be both able and
willing (as Naaman the Sirian in the like case was) to show thankfulness, which
we think it unmeet to receive, we shall do a good duty to help to benefit
some other, where there is need of it, and so fit an occasion is offered by
Gods providence, to relieve him. Too few such occasions are offered of doing
good in that manner, and if they be, yet they are not taken; and yet it is well
known how many there are to do good unto and how we are commanded by God to
take all occasions thereof, as he offers them. And if ye ask, why Elisha did
not work upon Naaman in that manner: I say, he was an heathen, and a
stranger, newly converted; and if he had requested any such kindness of him,
it must have been put into his hands to dispose; in all which respects he
refrained. But of this I have said somewhat before, chap. 8. in Gedeon his
refusing the kingdom and demanding the earings: the less therefore shall
serve.

Another thing I think good to stay about a little in this verse, and that is,
by occasion of a word the Angel spoke. And that is this: that he called that,
bread, which Manoah called flesh: For when he desired the Angel that he
might prepare for him a kid of the goats, the other answered he would not
eat of his bread: whereby who doubts (will some say) but that both meant one
particular thing? Manoah, that he would prepare some refreshing for him; and
the Angel, that he would not eat with him.

Here by the Hebrew word (...) which signifies not bread only, but all Doct.
7.
food, and so flesh particularly; by this word (I say) the Papists (who are
feign to catch hold of every thing that they think may serve for their
purpose) take occasion to maintain their transubstantiation; and they cry
aloud, that the bread in the Sacrament may signify flesh, as it does in other
places of the Scriptures. Where it appears, that they are so hasty to allege
a proof from hence for their purpose, that in the mean while they take one
thing for another. For though the Hebrew word may signify flesh, as it does
bread, yet they should remember that Paul wrote in the Greek tongue, where the
Greek word (...) signifies bread, is never taken for flesh. And what gain
they by thus playing the Sophisters among the ignorant? For they who are able
to judge, do see yt they abuse the reader grossly in saying, bread may be
taken for flesh, because the Hebrew word sometime signifies so, when the
Greek word never signifies so; in which tongue yet all that concerns the
Lords Supper, is written. And so while they go about (with the dog) to get
the flesh that shines in the water, they lose that which they seemed to have
in their mouth, and so both. And yet if the Greek word (...) did signify
flesh, as it does bread, how does it follow that it should signify so in the
Sacrament against sense, reason, scripture and truth? So we see what
substantial proofs they bring to uphold and justify their absurd opinions
and religion. This I say upon this supposition granted, that the Angel and
Manoah spoke of the same indiciduall thing, which yet no man will grant to be
a necessary consequence. For though Manoah meant flesh, yet the Angel might
mean bread, both by a Synecdoche, meaning a refreshing by bread and meat:
Manoah might offer him a kid, and he might answer (I will not eat of thy
bread) in this sense; Prepare nothing for me, I will not eat so much as any
bread, much less of thy flesh. Who is so simple as to think otherwise, except
any should imagine that the meat was like to be set before the Angel, without
bread? If bread were needful also, what necessity is it that both their
meanings must needs be about the same particular? But I spare. Thus much of
Manoahs desiring him to eat: the second thing follows, of asking him his
name: but of this in the next Sermon.

THE SEVENTY THREE SERMON ON THE XIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
THus he still seeing the man of God (as he took him to Verse 17. 18. The sense.
be) to show such grace in his speech, was the more knit to him, and so desired
to know his name: and he shows him the reason, to wit, that when it should
come to pass, which he promised, Manoah might honor him with some reward: The
Angel seeing it a needless thing that he asked, did not answer to him in
word: but thought it fitter to make himself known to him in deeds then in
words, and thereby to confirm the former promise made to them. And this to be
the meaning of the verse, the next words do prove, namely, that he did
wonderfully; for so are the words in the original: he was marvelous, or he
did wonderfully.

The Angel that resolved there should be no yielding of gratuitie to him, for
which cause Manoah asked his name, he did not tell him: and yet who can deny
but Manoah asked it upon good consideration, namely that he might show
himself thankful to him, as he thought himself bound to be? Wherein he gave
clear testimony of his honest and single heart, in desiring to take the
opportunity thereof unto him afterward for the kindness that was offered
him. Which is a necessary duty, though it be not regarded nor looked for of
them to whom it is due. But of this before.

Now that the Angel did show (as we see in this verse) what he was, by Doct.
verse. 18.
deeds rather then by words, he has not only left us his example, but also
confirmed us in that the Scripture teaches both Minister and people concerning
that matter. And first of the former (who being a public messenger of God, is
called an Angel) my meaning is not that the Minister is liable to every
ianglers censure, for his allowance of him, or for his sufficiency. But let
him get this Seal of his Ministry, which here the Angel brings out, to
wit, the efficacy of working, I mean, both a powerful teaching, and a
powerful example; and these shall be his judges. By these they must judge of
him, who are able to judge, and they who judge by any other rule, are ignorant
or malicious, and therefore disabled to judge. And the best Ministers that ever
were, never refused this Canon of doctrine and life to be examined by. Neither
our Savior nor the Apostle Paul ever arrogated to themselves such liberty as
to be received, the one for true Messiah, the other, for a true Apostle, upon
their bare word. It might have opened a gap to every seducing spirit, to have
stood upon his own worth, and (like Antichrist at this day) to compel men's
consciences to acknowledge him a successor of the Apostle, because he (out of
the abundance of his own sense) boasted himself so. So that base testimonies
are inartificiall arguments (all mere men being liars) but to try the spirits
whether they be of God, is a 1. John 4. 1.
needful duty: they that are so tried, have no wrong done them, neither can
complain, if their charter be demanded, I mean the power of teaching, and
the power of godliness. These works admit no appeal, though they be no
miraculous works, (as the Angels here) yet they are demonstrations. In the 11.
of Matthew, John Baptist sends his disciples to Christ in Matthew. 11. 2.
policy to resolve them of the truth of his mediatorship: our Savior (when
they had done their errand) does not scorn them, or disdain to give account
of his calling. But what manner of evidence gives he? Go (says he) tell
John, what ye have heard and seen, The blind see, the lame go, the poor
receive the Gospel. q. d. If these works will not euince what I am, take me
not for him that I go for. So he tells the Pharisees, If I gave witness only
to my self, I could not claim credit thereto: but the works I do, they
bear witness of me, and further I desire not to be embraced. So Paul tells 2.
Cor. 3. 2.
the Corinths, ye are my Epistle written in your hearts, etc. q. d. The spirit
of God coworking with my Ministry, to the begetting of faith, a new heart and
life in you, has sealed also this truth unto you, That I am a true Apostle of
Christ, against all gainesayers. And it is the duty of all Gods Ministers to
add this commendation and allowance unto the outward calling Note.
of the Church, their letters commendatorie I mean and licenses. And if
hereupon we may be received, let us not complain: as for them who upon this
testimony from God, will not admit us, either our persons, as factious
Separatists; or the power of our Ministry, as all unbelievers and ungodly
ones, woe be unto them, for in not receiving us, they despise him that sent us.
As for their censures, we may appeal from them with our Savior; saying, I
receive not praise or dispraise of men, I have another Judge: And with Paul, It
is a slight thing with me to be judged of such, I pass not 1. Cor. 4. 3.
for your judgment. And secondly let all private persons, that receive the
message of God by the Minister, know their duty also, which is to declare what
they be by the good actions of their lives, rather then by their talk, and to
be examples to other in their conversation, and not in their communication 1.
Tim. 4 12.
only. So our Savior taught when he came to give his life for us here on
earth: If ye abide in me, and my word in you, then are ye my very John 8. 31.
disciples indeed.

Agreeable hereunto are his words in another place, Not every one that says
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will
of my father which is in heaven. Neither let any man desire to be Matthew. 7. 21.
taken for better then he is, but submit himself to this touchstone which will
bewray what metal he is made of: and for as much as the inward duties of
faith and piety are unknown to others, let the works of each man's calling
say for him what he is, let a good magistrate be content to lose the credit of
his profession, if he cannot maintain it by vprightnes, courage in punishing
offenders, and defending the innocent, being free from covetousness,
parcialitie, or injustice. Let the husbandman approve his religion, by walking
as a man of understanding before his wife, and she hers, by submission in the
Lord, and reverence toward him: and so the other parts of the family in their
several places. And otherwise, let them hold their peace as guilty persons.
Thirdly, this doctrine is to settle the best Christians to be so still,
notwithstanding the taunts and mockes of the ungodly, who bayte them with the
names of hypocrites, and men of singularity, seeing they declare that out by
their good lives, which they embrace with their hearts: and generally let all
such take warning by this, as only have a name they live, but are dead, and
who speak well, but have not hearts to do thereafter, and as for such as
reproach and scorn them who honor their profession with a life answerable,
their judgment sleeps not.

It appears by that which is said here, that as the Angel willed Manoah to
do, even so he did: I mean, offer a burnt offering unto the Lord. Now Object.
where it is objected that it was not lawful for him to offer in any place,
but at Jerusalem, and therefore that it was not lawful for him to offer where
the Angel met him; I answer, that it was lawful to offer in other places
while the Arc was carried about, and was stayed in no certain place: but
after the building of the temple at Jerusalem, then indeed that law took
effect, and it was not lawful to sacrifice elsewhere, but all high places were
then to be taken away. And this I say, supposing the action to be ordinary;
Answ.
but indeed this of Manoah had bin warrantable at any time, as being grounded
upon divine warrant, commanding him so to do.

And whereas it is again objected, that Manoah not being of the tribe of Leui,
but of Dan, ought not to offer sacrifice, neither was that according to the law
that he did: it is answered, that he gave the flesh and the other things to
the Angel, whom he took to be a Prophet, that he might offer them, for the
Prophets had an extraordinary calling, that though they were not of the house
of Aaron, yet it was lawful for them to sacrifice, as Elia and Elisha did: for
when the Priests corrupted the pure worship of God, the Lord stirred up the
Prophets to restore it again. But this was no Prophet, ye will say; I answer,
no he was not, but more then a Prophet: and therefore the flesh and the other
offering being laid on the rock, the Angel did wonderfully; he raised fire
out of the rock, and consumed the sacrifice.

And the same we have heard to have been done in Gedeons sacrifice before: for
although it be not expressly said here, that fire was brought out of the
rock as there; yet seeing there is no mention of any fire brought by Manoah,
and yet that the Angel is said to have departed in the flame, it is most
likely that fire was stricken out of the stone: the Angel ascended into
heaven, as though he would use the flame insteade of a chariot, and he
dissolved the body which he took on him, and went away in the fire, which was
a great wonder to them, for Monoah and his wife were stricken with a great
fear, when they saw that he was an Angel of God: and after that, he appeared
no more to them.

In that Manoah did as the Angel willed him, turning that which he Doct.
verse. 19.
would have set before the man of God for meat, into a sacrifice; it teaches
how fit and ready we should be, to be moved and led by good instruction to
any duty that we know not, neither thought of before: meekely receiving the
words of exhortation without resistance or unwillingness. This mind was in
the Thessalonians, to whom Paul writes thus: We are 2. These. 3. 4.
persuaded of you in the Lord, that both ye do already, and will do still
the things that we command you, meaning, that they resolved with themselves,
to make the doctrine of the Apostles the rule of their life.

Thus should all Christians be affected, like the pattern that Paul gives the
widows, that they should diligently be given not only to the particular 1.
Tim. 5. 10.
duties of compassion, Romans 12. but to every good work. This commends the
grace of God highly in all such as are thus prepared to serve God in every part
of their life, that as they shall see what the good and acceptable Romans 12. 2.
will of God is toward them, so they are ready still to new duties. And so it
does much check and accuse them, who are slow and backward to any good thing
that shall be required of them, and readily yielded to by their brethren: they
would be counted with the forwardest, but yet in duties that like them not,
they will be reasoning against them, though in some other they show themselves
commendable. And yet for all that which I say, let it be clearly seen, that
there is enough to bind their consciences, to that whereto they should yield,
lest they be lead by company, will, or fancy: and there is cause of this
readiness and alacrity in receiving the word by the people, if they consider
that the Minister himself is tied to the like duty in uttering it, according
to that charge of Peter, feed the flock of 1. Pet. 5. 2.
God with a ready mind, not of constraint: and the Apostle Paul confirms it,
There is necessity imposed upon me, and woe be to me if I preach not, etc. If
then I do this necessary work willingly, it is thankworthie: otherwise it is
necessary, and I must do it without thanks. How shall this be, if the people
hold off and plead liberty to take and refuse what they please? Therefore
Cornelius, Acts 10. professes himself and his, ready to hear Acts 10. 33.
whatsoever Peter should say from God to him. And when he says [whatsoeuer] he
means, whether reproof, or commandment, as well as comfort and instruction.
This she weth, that not all that do some duties, do them readily; but either
for finister respects or by halues: as he in the Gospel? who was bidden go
into the vineyard, answered, he would, but Matthew 21. 32.
went not: so, many hear zealously, but never weighing the work of God, Note.
nor forecasting the difficulties, repent them of their forwardness. Others
readily yield to the truth in their minds as sound and good, but their hearts
come slowly forward, they delight not therein, nor approve it, as liking that
it should govern them. Again, some things which the word requires we yield
to, (for the outward action especially) yea and stand stiffely in the defense
of it, as Judas did for the relieuing the poor, because (in a diverse respect)
our desire concurreth with Gods commandment, even corruptly perverting the end
and use of a good duty to our own benefit, which ought only tend to Gods
glory. But here we do not obey readily, because the manner of obeying, which
is for conscience sake, displeases us: as the artificer likes it well, that
God calls for diligence in his calling, for his coueteous Note.
minds sake; but to be occupied therein for the serving of Gods providence, the
avoiding of noisome lusts and temptations, the practice of his faith and
patience, thankfulness and contentment, he has no readiness thereto: yea this
awkenesse is in the best, that they like any duty should be urged which
others are tardie in, and themselves prone unto; but to be drawn any further,
and to suffer exhortation and reproof for their blemishes and errors, that is
unwelcome. So that readiness and teachablenes humbly to give place, and curb
our contradicting and rebellious nature, where God has manifested his will
upon good ground, is a rare gift of the spirit, and attends only upon them,
who with David have a respect to all Gods Psalm. 119. 6.
commandments. Excellent is that speech of David, O Lord thou said, Seek my
face; and I answered, Lord I will seek thy face. Even as the wax applied to
the seal, receives the impression, and the holy instruments of music in the
Temple sounded according to the skillful blowing or fingering of Asaph and his
brethren, so pliant and tunable should our hearts be to the voice of God, and
make such harmony in his ears, as he himself has made inwardly in them: as
the servant mentioned in the Gospel, Note.
whose obedience in going, coming, and doing, seemed to be so prompt, as if
it were the echo of his Masters voice. And such as have attained any measure
herein, let them look to this one thing, that they be constant in so doing,
lest (beside the expectation) the devil in time by inward or outward
discouragings or allurings, quite alter their temper, and make them first to
hear without delight, remissely and coldly, and in time with dislike and
resistance, as woeful experience witnesses. Touching the particular kind of
Manoahs readiness to turn the meat into sacrifice, see more in the peoples
giving to Gedeon the earings of their pray, which point is diverse from the
former.

Further this consuming of the sacrifice with fire by the Angel procured 2
in such a wonderful manner, as it could be no other then the work of God,
this, I say, was done for the confirming of Manoah and his wife: the which also
was granted to Gedeon in the like case, and at the prayers of Elia, Judge. 6. 17.
he did give the like sign for the confirming of the people, that Iehoua the
God of Elia, was the true God, and Baal an idol, and his priests deceivers 1.
King. 18. 24.
of them. By all which and many more such, the Lord testifies, how willing he
is, that his poor servants should be free from doubtings and fear, which do
much distract and disquiet them.

For though he allow them not to look for, or depend upon signs now, as in
times past, yet a most sure rule he has given us in his word to go by, to the
which he sends us, saying; Search the Scriptures, for they bear record of
me, and show, what my will is toward you. And whereas it will John 5. 39.
be objected to me that all cannot understand the scriptures, and therefore
that may be far enough off from resolution in doubtful cases: I answer, the
Lord has taken order, (if he were obeyed therein) that throughout his Church
there should be preachers to reveal his mind to the hearers, and to have
their abode, and live with the people, to the end they may help to resolve
their doubts, as they shall arise daily in them, and so help to stablish their
faith, and set them forward to the kingdom of glory, all Note.
which the poor people have need of.

And if Gods matters were regarded of men but as their own be, there would be
such care to furnish all places, by them whom it concerns, with fit and meet
teachers (choice being made always of the best first, and they sought after)
that both the rest of them who are students in Divinity might be well
encouraged to follow their study, and best examples, and the people well
provided for thereby, and so might grow to resolve themselves in many of their
doubts, and be helped by their teachers in the rest, so as they might live
comfortably, which a few attain to of many, and then it may be seen also,
what other people go without of their due, by wanting such Note.
teachers, and they who are causes of it, may repent, which would bring great
joy into our streets.

It is said further here, that after this was done, the Angel did yet
wonderfully Verse. 20.
in another thing: to wit, that when the flame ascended from the altar toward
heaven, he ascended in it, Manoah and his wife beholding the same, that so they
might know what he was who appeared to them, even the Angel of God, whom they
took to be some man of God, or prophet. Thus they were better confirmed about
that which was said to them concerning the child. This, as the former verse,
confirms us in that we learned Doct. 1.
there, namely, what a care the Lord has to ease our infirmities, and to
relieve us therein: which being believed of us, is no small refreshing and
encouragement to us. But of this point has been already spoken much in the
history of Gedeon.

Also it is said here, that Manoah and his wife, when they beheld this, and
knew, as it follows in the next verse, that he was an Angel of God, they (I
say) fell on their faces to the earth for fear, as appears by his words to
his wife afterward. For we may not be ignorant of this, that in those times 2
the people were afraid at the sight of an Angel, or in beholding any signs
of Gods presence, as in Exodus 19. we read, and Judge. 6. so I say, it was with
Exodus 19 16. Judge. 6. 22.
them, and so it would be with us, if we should have the like occasions offered
us: the reason is, first our inherent sin, and the inborne corruption that is
in us: secondly, the accusation of our consciences, which tell us what we are
in, and of our selves: to wit, most vile, rebellious, and disobedient; the
which ought to humble us, when God by such or other means, does as it were,
show us our face in a glass, that through our sin we be afraid, whereas we
should rejoice.

In that they did show reverence in such cases, it was their duty so to do:
and we owe the same, in respect of Gods special presence in the congregation.
But as we see it was with them, that in doing a good thing they passed measure
in their fear, and it was excessive in them: so we may behold thereby, how
hard a thing it is to avoid corruption in our best actions. But as they went
too far in one extremity, that they were too much afraid, so we go further
in the contrary, for that we come short, and do not fear the presence of God
at all, when we come before him in special manner, or very little. So that the
reverend behavior of the Fathers toward God, will be an accusation of us for
the contrary, when yet we ought to carry our selves reverently in all places.
Let the reader look back into the 6. chapter and 22. verse, where this
argument is largely handled.

In that it is said in this verse, that the Angel having done that which he
Verse 11.
came for to them, departed, and was no more seen of them, it teaches us the
same, to wit, that when we have met together before the Lord to serve him, as
for example, in the public use of prayer, word, and Sacraments, and have
religiously ended these duties; then we should depart, every one to his place,
considering how many and great inconueniencies do follow idle and needless
tarrying behind, and loyterings: whereby we do not only forget such good
instructions as we have heard (whereas while they See Hebr. 2. 1.
be fresh in our remembrance, we might in our returning, either meditate on
them, or revive the memory of them by good company, but also fall to drinking,
playing, prating, and such like behavior, as whereby we do much more hurt to
our selves and others, then we got good by our hearing. The devil has more
strings to his bow then one: and therefore if he cannot draw men to neglect the
means altogether, he will busy their heads with wandering, or oppress their
bodies with sleep: but where neither of these prevail, yet sometimes he
windeth in with the^ so by other deludings of them, that he depriueth them of
all fruit which they seemed to have got, and that as easily as they may be
brought asleep: and not least of all, by occasioning forgetfulness of that
they hear, by needless company afterward, or some other improuidence. And
while men are yet hot and glowing through the power of the word, he does cast
cold water upon their affections, and quenches the spirit, which had kindled
good desires in them before. And yet few are so wise as to suspect the danger,
but think themselves safe enough, and well fenced from the devil, they having
so lately been taken up in holy duties, as in hearing and prayer, and so are
easily beguiled by him, that doggeth them, though inuisibly, from the Church,
as well as to the Church, and in it. And this I speak not only of the common
abuse of the Sabbath, (which of Christians ought to be abhorred) but even of
other meetings occasioned besides, and not avoided. But let this be well
considered after their public hearing, besides the shunning of unseasonable
companies, that although I forbid not men to return to their lawful callings
and affairs after hearing, whereunto the word fitteth them much better (and
they are no enemies to the fruit which they have gained in public) yet I say
thus much: first, that there ought to be some respite between the one and
other (if it may be) so much as may serve to draw the mind and affections
together, and settle some reverence upon them, that they rush not forward
loosely to matters of another nature, as if with the fool in James they had
forgot the hew whereof they saw themselves to be in the glass of the word.
Secondly, that if it cannot be that they separate themselves to the reuiewing
of the things they have heard, Prou. 18. Prou. 18. 1.
but it must needs be that they have to do with others, as in markets and
faires (where yet Sermons are usual heard by all sorts) or the like occasions:
then let men watch more specially to their hearts and tongues, that neither
they break measure, nor forget the right manner and end of their companying
together, but rather take occasion to season others with such things as they
lateliest heard, then to drive out one nail with another (to use the phrase of
Ecclesiastes) and lose all abroad which they should have carried home for the
provision of their family. But alas, as for the common sort whereunto shall I
liken them? They are like to foolish market men, who having stored their purses
with money, and their sacks with necessaries, step into some lewd house or
other, where they find such companions, as either by gaming, or drunkenness,
or iugling, pick that money out of their purses, and their commodities which
they had bought, so that they send them home far more bare and empty then
they came forth. This dealing is bad enough at a market, but worse at a Sermon,
or upon the occasion of religious actions: worse, I say, because the former
commonly falls out against a man's will: but the latter wrong, men offer to
themselves voluntarily. It is not to be wondered at that there are many such;
for as they whom our Savior whipped out of the Temple, because they made the
house of prayer a den of thieves, came not thither to serve God, but
themselves: so now many come to the congregation, only to meet their
copesmates, with whom they are to deal, contract, buy and sell, and the like:
the Temple is their place to them where they appoint to concur: their market
begins not for the most part, while Gods is done. This point is needful to be
enforced daily, where such meetings are.

How much more then, are the loose and unadvised gaddings from our own houses
wantonly and wailily without any good end, how much more I say, are they full
of danger? For of wilful goings forth to evil ends and purposes (as in youth
and masterlesse persons is to be seen) I need not speak, all do know how
odious they are, and what mischief they bring with them: the most are easily
deceived about the other. Dinah Jacobs Genesis 34. 1.
daughter, who went to see the maids of the country, may be an example to
all such. It were meeter for Christians, to learn of David in this behalf,
what to answer: when he was of his envious brother Eliab asked what he made
there, (his father having sent him thither, namely into the camp) he answered
him, is there not a cause? As if he should have said, have I not cause to be
here? then I might indeed be justly found fault with. So let all advised
persons see cause of their being abroad, and that they are where they may
defend their being, to the peace of their conscience. The most mischiefs that
are now, or have been, have come by men's leaving 1. Sam. 17. 29.
of their calling, and going into company without cause, or having cause, by
not returning in due time. But of this by the way, more shall be said of it in
his proper place.

And this be said of the sign, and that which went before it: now is added
Verse. 22. 23. 24.
to the former in these three verses an other thing, and that is a new trouble
which befell Manoah and his wife, which was this; that because they had seen
an Angel of God, therefore he concludes, they should certainly dye. To whom
his wife answered (as more strong in faith, and confident then he) we shall
not dye, and shows her reasons, as follows to be considered. Thus, as I
noted in the story of Gedeon, we see how a new Doct. verse. 22.
trouble arose to the good man, and so does daily to Gods servants, marueiled
at by them no doubt, but in great favor brought upon them by the Lord, and
seen of them also that will try it out, and receive it meekely. But Psalm.
119. 71.
of this in the story now cited.

The trouble that oppressed Manoah, and that caused him to break out into
these words (we shall surely dye) was, for that they had seen the Lord. And by
this we see what Angel it was, that was so called in the 21. verse? See chap
6. 14.
Even the eternal word, whom here he calls God, and in the next verse is of
his wife called Iehoua, who sometime put on the shape of a man, and appeared to
men, as also Angels did. And it is clear in the stories of the scripture, that
after good men had seen God thus, or an Angel, they were exceedingly
terrified, and out of heart, and looked for no other then present death: for
they knew what God had said to Moses, that a man should not see him, and live:
but they misunderstoode the words when they took them to be meant of his
appearing in a bodily shape, for many had often seen him so, and yet lived
after: as both Gedeon did, and this Manoah and his wife, with others. The
reason of this their fear, read before in verse 20.

The thing I note here, is this: what great weaknesses oppress Gods servants
Doct. 2. verse. 22.
often times, as we see here they did Manoah, of which kind is deadly fear,
doubting, and distraction. And who can say, even of the servants of God, that
they have not been wound and wrapped in with such sore disquietnes either in
some sore affliction, while they have thought of the uttermost that might come
to them by it, or when in some sudden and deep passion, they have feared some
grievous calamity to be coming toward them? In so much, as they have made
this resolution with themselves, that Note.
they were undone.

And yet they have seen that God has given an issue out of them, and that
they have passed over their heads as a clowd: and they have safely escaped and
waded out of them. So that they have not risen from deliberate consideration
and grounded knowledge of Gods will, but from fear oppressing them, and too
unadvised and rash judging, and unbelief, and often times hasted on by
melancholy: unto the which as the best are subject, so yet they must know, that
grace and goodness are smoothered and overwhelmed in them, when they fall
deeply into these disguising of themselves, and therefore that they must be
careful daily to watch and pray in faith, that no such oppressing and
turbulent thoughts and vexations take hold of them, even as our Savior has
given charge, saying: Let not your John 14. 1.
hearts be troubled.

And to conclude, seeing it falls out (as in this story is manifest) that
Doct. 3.
good people may often times be at this point, and are also (as Manoah was here
being plunged into fear) to doubt so dreadfully of Gods favor toward them,
all may learn by this, how needful it is, for them to gather and get all
arguments and testimonies thereof before trials come, and in the days of peace
to give all diligence to make their calling and election sure, that in 2. Pet.
1. 10. Acts 21. 1.
their greatest need they may be quiet and confident, and not doubt in time of
trial. One way is to endeavor to have a good conscience always both toward
God and men: also to be the same in secret, that we would seem (when we walk
most innocently before men) openly to be; with many other such fruits of
faith: wherein the folly and senseless blockishnesse Romans 2. 28.
even of many of the better sort may be marueiled at, that they can in this so
weighty a matter, and of so great use unto them, be so careless. Let the
reader look into the sixth chapter, as I have already referred him.

We heard in the last verse, of the great fear that oppressed Manoah for Verse.
23.
that he had seen the Lord. Now it follows in this verse what his wife did,
when he uttered his fear to her, and in the next and last verse is showed that
Samson was borne. When the wife of Manoah saw her husband so troubled, she was
better stayed: and therefore counseled, and by reasons did persuade him so to
be also. Thus the Lord often times spares one of his Doct. verse. 23.
children, and that also in the same house, when he afflicts another, and
vpholdeth one when another is cast down, which is to be marked of us. And
this he does, as we see here in spiritual trials, as well as in bodily health,
and visitations: to the end that one may be an helper and comfort to another.
And if he visit all together, which is rarely seen, yet he supplieth their
wants some other way, in giving that grace to the parties asunder, that they
were wont to enjoy one by the other together. And although this mercy be
little observed, while it is enjoyed, (men being ready to aggrauate their
crosses, and amplify them to the highest degree, but blind in seeing Gods
goodness in his afflicting them) yet such it is, as might full ill be spared,
and when it is, it causes men to accuse themselves of unthankfulness, which
has procured the increase and multiplying of their crosses. We know addition
of misery made him who thought it a small benefit to live as a son Luke 15.
17.
under his fathers wing, to wish he might be entertained but in the place of a
hireling.

To return to the point again, this merciful forbearance of the Lord is even
seen oftentimes in one and the same persons visitation: that although he lay
his hand upon the body, yet often times the mind is free, and the spirit is
able to sustain the bodies infirmity. Yet I spoke not this, as if this were a
token of Gods forsaking a man, when he seems to afflict on every side: for
then the Lord drives his people to cling to himself, when all props and
crutches are removed, lest they should sink altogether. Jobs wife and himself
Job 1.
were down together, (as we may say) children slain, cattle and substance
destroyed, friends and kindred alienated. And this wrought (no doubt) strongly
upon his weakest part: but if the Lord had not been on his side, yea instead of
all comfort by wife, or others; he could neither have resisted desperate
impatience, even at the hearing of the first heavy message that was brought
unto him, nor (much less) have said afterward, Although he kill me, I will
trust in him. Therefore although the Lord do ordinarily Job 13. 15.
thus measure out to his children, that all sorrow comes not at once: yet let
none indent with the Lord, that thus he shall deal always with him. The Lord
is tied to no certainty, or necessity in temporal crosses to his best
servants, save only to be their God alsufficient, and to minister unto them
the grace which shall be sufficient. Many have fallen into such streights
through infectious diseases, poverty, travail, etc. that they wanted succor
and comfort, from the nearest unto them. Only the Lord forsake not his, being
nearer to them in misery, then nature can make the nearest friends to each
other.

But seeing the woman here, though in regard of her sex the weaker Doct. 2.
vessel, was yet the stronger in faith, to encourage her husband when he
fainted, let us learn, that the husband may not despise his wives counsel,
when God shall grace her equally or above him. It is many men's cases to be
honored with such wives, who by their faith, experience, knowledge, humility,
innocence, and such other good gifts of God, might hardly be wanted, and are
much to be regarded. But they that have these gifts, let them be far from
thinking on the other side meanly and basely of their husbands, remembering who
commands them the carriage of reverence toward them: Husbands again must
rejoice for them, and not scorn to take good by them, upon a vain conceit
that their wives will deny them supremacy, or (as many will say) crow over
them. And yet those that want grace, and be otherwise ill qualitied, let them
not lean much to their counsel, remembering Ahab and Solomon, in this sin,
little differing. See verse. 9. and 10. of this chapter.

Her first reason was this, and it was sound and good: If God (said she) 3
would have killed us, he would not have received our sacrifice. But he has
received it. And how knew she that it was accepted of God? I say, seeing he it
was that bad her offer it, therefore it was acceptable to him. And again, the
manner was allowable, for that God had consumed the sacrifice with Doct.
the flame. And we may say the like. That if God hear our prayers, and approve
of our weak and poor course of life, we may assure our selves that Acts 10.
4.
he loves us, and therefore will not in any adversity forsake or cast us off.
But God hears not such as lie still in their sins. This reason of the woman
Ioh. 9. 31.
(pithie and concludent) may be further extended to this sense: that seeing
God had then allowed and accepted them and their offering, when they had less
ground to look for it, nay were more unlike to speed of their desires: then
much more would he now and in time to come testify his love toward them,
having passed his word to them, and in token thereof, devoured their sacrifice.
It was his mere goodness (says she) to give us any access at all to his
Majesty, to offer up our requests and thanksgiving to him and to vouchsafe to
smell asweete favor from our offering. He needed have done no such matter, it
came from himself, it was his free love to us, to reueile himself to us more
specially then to others. Doubtless if he had meant to slay us, he would have
done it before, and spared all this labor: therefore these are arguments
rather, that he will reueile himself yet further to us, and love us more
dearly, and give us more cause hereafter to trust him, and give thanks to
him. So that when she says, He means not to kill us: she implies more, viz.
But rather bless us more abundantly then before, so far will he be from
killing us. And this argumentation of hers, is not unlike to that of Paul's,
Romans 5. 8. If Christ dyed for us being sinners, much more being justified in
his blood, shall we be saved from wrath. And it serves as a president for Gods
people, in their doubts and temptations, to rouse up themselves from deadly
fear, and to gather strength again to themselves, by reason framed according
to this of hers. And thus should every afflicted soul and conscience reason in
time of his trouble, and say to himself: There was a time when I was out of
covenant with God, had no promise to ground my faith upon, and wanted hope: yet
then the Lord visited me in mercy, opened my eyes to see, and my heart to
mourn under the burden of my sin, to come to him for ease, and to find
forgiveness. Since that time I have had much doubting, and been troubled about
believing, and repentance, which have driven me to prove them, and thereupon I
have rested, and found peace. Now therefore though I am tempted again strongly
to think my estate to be unsound and naught, yet I remember Gods mercies of
old, and therein am and will be comforted. If God had meant to forsake and cast
me off quite, he would not have proceeded so far with me as he has done, he
would have let me lien still in darkness, unbelief, hypocrisy, etc. and
taken less pains to call me, change me, reform and govern me. These betoken
not hatred, but love, no more then the devouring of the sacrifice argued that
God would kill Manoah and his wife. Doubtless the Lord who did owe me no such
favor at all, showed me mercy freely, to the end he might show me more in time
to come, and finish his gracious work in me. And thus I construe all his
dealings with me hitherto, his enabling me to pray, and to believe, to hate
sin, to grow in knowledge, and to enjoy his blessing upon all these to much
increase. Let others say as they will: I will not be so unthankful as to think
he has done all this in vain, that were to mock and deceive me: but I verily
believe all was and is for good, and therefore that I shall see more promises
fulfilled, till I see the Lord himself in the land of the living, etc. But
here I end.

THE SEVENTIE FOUR SERMON ON THE XIII. AND XIIII. CHAPTERS OF THE BOOK OF
IVDGES.
OF the first reason of Manoahs wife, we heard in the last sermon. The second
follows, which was this: he appeared again and again to us (says she) and
instructed us what we should do, whereto also she said to her husband, we
attended readily (as you know) and believed his words: (for thus we must
understand her, for as much as the word profits not, if it be not mixed with
faith) therefore she concludes, that they should Heb. 4. 1.
not dye. And this, which was in her so commendable, is no less in so many of
us, as the like is found, but an especial gift of God, to uphold our selves in
Doct.
trials, and then to believe God, and give credit to him, when we have nothing
else to depend upon. But if we be faint in trouble, then, as Solomon Prou. 24.
10.
says, our strength was never great. And as it was no small trouble to Manoah
so to doubt, in like manner shall we find it. Further, out of this second reason
of hers rightly understood, we learn, that although this is no good
consequent, God has sent his word among us again and again, therefore he
will not destroy us, but loves us: yet let us take it, as it was both meant of
her, and practiced of both her and her husband, to wit, that they received the
message at the mouth of the Angel, and believed his word, being confirmed Doct.
by a sign, and then the reason is good, in this manner: God instructed us,
and we received it, therefore he will not destroy us. And thereafter is our
instruction. For if we embrace and believe the doctrine of the scripture, that
it is for our use and benefit, and receive it, not as the word of John 1. 12.
man, but as it is indeed, the word of God, and it be sweet to us, as the honey
1. These. 2. 13. Psalm. 119. 103.
to the taste, as the Prophet spoke, then may we be sure that we shall not
perish. But more particularly, the words of this second reason having relation
to the Angels message, give us occasion to look back into the nature and
quality thereof. The Lord (says she) has told me, that whereas I was barren,
I should conceive a son, and that he should be an instrument to save Israel
out of the hands of the Philistims. The time also he has appointed, the manner
of my diet and abstinence he has prescribed, adding the reason, because the
child must be a Nazarite. And this he has not once to me, but the second time
to us both testified, and we have rested therein, believed the report, and
received a sign. What? shall we now think God will kill us? How then have we
believed the message, seeing that if he kill us, it is not possible that a
child should be borne and begotten by us, and therefore all the other
particularities are absurd and frinolous. Or, if we still believe the word of
God, how can we say, God will slay us? Thus does this woman bestirre her self
to settle and restore her husband, by a strong reason drawn from their faith
in the promise of God, which could admit no contrariety, except God himself
could be charged to be opposite in his performance to his promise. And this
shows how rarely God has graced this woman, that she (a weak creature)
should be able thus to rest her self, and vnder-lay her husband, by an
argument of the greatest force, which might not be gainsayd, except gross
absurdities were granted, yea impossibilities, to wit, that God might falsify
his word. And in such cases as Manoah was, no less evidence of truth and
proof would have served the turn. It commends this duty unto us when we
shall be tried in the like manner, to wit, that we suffer not our selves with
Manoah to forget who it is that has made us a promise of forgiveness, and who
has assured us that we shall not perish, but be kept to the resurrection day.
John 10. 28.
It may be, that in some great and sudden fear, or trouble, the Devil may
quite spoil us of the remembrance of the grounds whereupon we have Note.
built our faith, and strip us naked of the experience of our faith, which in
time past we have had the fruit and benefit of, yea and the particular
circumstances also, which have added great force and likely hood to the truth
of the promiser: as we see in poor Manoahs example. But then should we step
forth with this woman, and accuse our selves for this our forgetfulness, as
Christ did the two disciples, saying, O ye dull and slow of heart to believe,
etc. and give no place to our unbelief, struggling against our weakness, as
a strong man (whose hands and feet are bound by thieves) to break the bands
and get the use of our joints and limbs, to help our selves withal. Note.
Then should we strive to call back the word of God to our minds, whereupon in
times past we built our faith and confidence: and so shame our selves, that
we did not still ascribe to God the honor of believing him, which in times
past we have done. Nay more, we should embolden our selves thus, that we cannot
be disappointed of our hope, (whether it be of any deliverance present, or
glory itself hereafter) except God himself can be convinced of falsehood,
which is impossible, and to say so were blasphemy; for he has passed his word
to us, we have been persuaded of it, and had clear testimony thereof at
sundry times: so that it is as sure our state is good, as that Gods word (so
much as in one jot or title) can not be frustrate. In things merely temporal
there may seem a repugnance between the Lord his secret will, and his
revealed: I say, seem, because men e^large temporal promises further then
they reach. But in spiritual promises there is never any repugnancie at all,
where faith is ready at hand to argue with this woman thus: If this should be,
God should be contrary to himself, which is impossible.

Now in this lastverse, (for I refer the next to the Chapter following) Verse
24.
the birth of the child Sampson is mentioned, as the sign thereof was given
before by the Angel, and how the Lord prepared him for such a purpose, as to
help his people against their enemies, by giving him strength of body, and
courage of mind. About his birth, after his parents had received a promise
from God of having such a child, yet there were many doubts in them, which now
we see were all answered.

Even so we are to know, that though there be many thoughts of heart, Doct.
and much heaviness in Gods people about the inioying of the sundry good
things that God has promised them before they be accomplished, yet we see God
in his appointed time effects and brings them to pass. It is true, that by
reason of the much unbelief that is in us, yea, though sometime it be well
purged out of us, we are every while doubting Note.
till we obtain the things which are promised, and yet some of them we live to
see performed: and as certainly shall the rest be also, even as we see the
promise that a barren woman should bear, came to pass to the parents that
believed it, that Gods deed and his word may be one. And this is true in the
promises of removing any judgments or crosses, as by the malice of the wicked,
by pain, penury, or other oppressions, or of any blessings temporary, as well
as of grace to bear afflictions, or to use prosperity rightly, or of a good
end of our days. How many and great promises had David of the kingdom? yet
through not only the long deferring thereof, but also the admirable and
manifold oppositions that he met with, what likelihood was there that he should
ever have inioyed it? in so much as upon the sight of them, he brake out
himself, and said, I shall surely dye by the hand of Saul one time or other,
but yet came it not to pass that he inioyed it, and was stablished in it.
Therefore let all those who have a part in the promises of God, count it their
singular privilege and honor to have the Lord of heaven and earth thus bound
to them, (as indeed to be out of this compass is the greatest misery, though a
man had all abundance) let such, I say, rejoice daily that they are reckoned
among them whom God has assured to grace, enlighten, purge, govern, uphold,
and hereafter glorify. And let them watch and wait for the performance of
these promises, seeing that he who has made them, and in whom they Note.
are made is no man, that he should change yesterday and to day, and the same
for ever: renewing his mercy daily. To hold this by faith is the believers
crown: let him beware that none take away his crown from him.

As the child grew up, so it is said, the Lord blessed him with common gifts
of the spirit, as it is manifest that this is to be understood: but it is not
so clearly seen that it should be understood of the more special gifts also
that are peculier to the godly. But yet forasmuch as the word [blessed him] is
general to both kinds, and not restrained to one kind only by the holy Ghost,
we have no reason to restrain it, but to take it generally, and the rather,
for that the worthy acts he did were fruits of his faith, as we see Hebrews
11. and it follows after, that Sampson was induced with special gifts of
grace, as well as with courage of mind fit for a valiant man, and bodily
strength suitable to pursue his enemies. And this is said of Samson, as being a
type of Christ, of whom it is said, that he grew in favor, etc. (Luke 1. last
verse) as in years and stature.

Whereby we see, that all good gifts which we enjoy are of Gods free Doct. 1.
Iam. 1. 5.
bounty communicated to us: as the Apostle speaks. And the graciousest,
wisest, or he that excels among men any other way, is beautified with the
gifts which he has, by God who gives them. No man has any thing of his own,
but sin. The heart of man is only, and always evil: and as the heart is, so
is the man himself, that God may be all in all. Therefore it Luke 6. 46.
is a finne to be bewailed in the most not meanly, that they make no haste to
sue to him, for all good that they would have, as we repair to the fountain
and spring for water, neither (having obtained them) do praise him for the
same, nor use such blessings to honor the giver. So that if any should desire
or long for any gifts of God that we have, we should not make them fall into
an admiration at us, but they should be sent to the author and giver of them:
and lest we might take any part of Gods due and honor from him, we should
answer them as Joseph did King Pharaoh, and Genesis 41. 16. Dan. 2. 30.
Daniel Nabuchadnezzer, The Lord has revealed the secret hereof to us, but we
have no such wisdom in us, more then other men. This be added to that which
heretofore has been said by occasion of the like words before, as chap. 11.
21. 32. and many other places. And so much of Samsons birth, the chief thing
in this chapter, and of the things pertaining thereto: now in this next Chapter
I proceed to his marriage.

THE SEVENTIE FOUR SERMON, CONTINVED IN THIS XIIII. CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. And the spirit of the Lord began to strengthen him in the host of
Dan, between Zocah, and Eshtoal. 2. Now Samson went down to Timnah, and saw a
woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Philistims, and he came up and told his
father and his mother, and said, I have seen a woman in Timnah of the
daughters of the Philistims, now therefore give me her to wife. 3. Then his
father and his mother said unto him, Is there never a wife among the daughters
of thy brethren, and among all my people, that thou must go to take a wife of
the uncircumcised Philistims? and Samson said unto his father, Give her me, for
she pleases me well. 4. But his father and his mother knew not that it came of
the Lord, that he should seek an occasion against the Philistims: for at that
time the Philistims reigned over Israel.
THis first verse is in some translations the last of the former The sum of
the Chapter.
Chapter, but I make it the first of this, as some other also do. In this
story of Samson contained in four Chapters, we have spoken hitherto,
concerning his birth, and that he was ordained to be an helper to Gods people
against the Philistims: now in this next Chapter it follows (to the further
effecting hereof) that we see how the Lord did strengthen him with further
measure of the gifts, wherewith he had blessed him before, and more especially
after his marriage. This is generally set down in the first verse, and
particularly laid forth and declared throughout the whole Chapter, and in the
next two following, to wit, the fifteenth and sixteenth. And in this Chapter
his marriage is spoken of, seeing one particular occasion was offered there to
him, by which he was moved first to set himself against the Philistims,
namely an injury wrought him at his marriage by them. Hereby (I say) he began
to be stirred and provoked against them, and to that purpose the whole Chapter
discourses at large concerning his marriage.

The parts of it are two. One is, how he was strengthened by the spirit of God;
in the first verse. The second is, the showing forth of Gods gifts, The parts
2.
wrought in him by the same spirit, both at the going about his marriage, and at
it: and this is throughout the rest of the Chapter.

The first part of the Chapter.
HEre it is showed, that as Samson grew in years, the Lord strengthened Verse.
1.
him, and ofttimes the spirit of ye Lord came upon him, that is, endued him
with a burning love of honoring God, and seeking the good of his people: and
this he did, when he abode in his fathers house, who was of the tribe of Dan,
and dwelt among them in their habitations, in that place which was betwixt
Zorah and Eshtaol, which was near the city Ioarim.

By this we may see, that the Lord opens the hearts of those whom he will be
served by, as he did the heart of Lydia, and counts them faithful, Doct.
and puts them in his service, as he did Paul, and leads them by his
spirit, Acts 16. 14. 1. Tim. 1. 12.
as he did Samson, to love, desire, and endeavor to do those things that
please him, without the which, they should never go about them to any purpose,
much less be well carried through them. Of what place, state, or degree soever
men are, thus they must be graced and fitted to their duties, although indeed
God do not now, as in times past, I mean, he deals not the same way that he
did with Samson and many other then. For in those days he spoke to our
fathers, and enlightened them after sundry manners, Heb. 1. 1.
but in these latter times, the outward mean that he uses, is chiefly his
word truly preached. But the spirit of God has always wrought grace in their
hearts, what other means soever he has used. But we look not for
revelations, nor Angels ministry now, but while we give heed to the doctrine
of the Lord Jesus, which is plainly, foundly, and powerfully taught us, the
Lord inlighteneth us with grace and power of the holy Ghost, and gives us
another heart to serve him, (as he says in Ezekiel. 36.) then we had before.
Ezekiel. 36. 26.


This doctrine is a double linck of that golden chain, mentioned by the
Apostle in these words, Romans 8. [whom he predestined, them he called,
justified, Romans 8. 30.
and glorified.] There is no other way to seek out the certainty of our
election, but by the means which serve to our calling: and our calling never
goes without the gift of faith, and the spirit of God sanctifying, which is
the beginning of our glorifying in heaven. So that as predestination it self
is manifested in time, by the inlightening and opening the heart to receive the
glad tidings of the Gospel: so when Christ is embraced by faith, the holy
Ghost is given to the believer, who quickens the heart with spiritual grace,
and fitteth such a party to the work of God; both inwardly more renewing and
changing his nature, and outwardly framing the life to his will. And thus he
works in all his: though he give greater measure to some, (who are deputed
and appointed by him, to greater employment and service) I mean he gives
them more zeal, courage, love, diligence, constancy, experience, judgment,
and the like. And yet (lest any should err about this point) know we, that
he works none of these without means: those therefore whom he will thus
sanctify, he will also prepare, by stirring up in them an earnest coveting of
these graces, a special hunger and thirst after them, an high opinion and
account of them, and a singlar affection of love to them, with a fervent desire
of honoring the giver of them, and a studious endeavor by all means both of
prayer and labor, to attain them: yea look what affections he works in
such as he will bring to the certainty and assurance of salvation: the like he
preserves and nourishes in the believer, for the increasing of grace, and the
inabling him to his service in better manner. He suffers them not to sit
still, or take their ease, till these gifts drop into their mouths: nor to be
indifferent, whether they attain and come by them or no: but he causes them
to give themselves no rest, till they be satisfied from time to time with the
good things that they desire. And in this sense and respect it is verified
which is here said, All whom God will be served by, he will furnish them with
gifts for that purpose, as he did here Samson.

The second part of the Chapter.
WE have heard in the former verse, how Samson was led and strengthened Verse. 23
by the spirit of God: now it follows to see how that grace was set aworke in
him: and first in going about his marriage, to the which he was led by God, to
make it with a Philistim woman, for it had otherwise been unlawful: which
being spoken of throughout this whole Chapter following, I will lay forth in
this manner, referring all things about it, to these four points. First, how
he sought his wife, in these 4. next verses. Secondly, how he went to agree
with her and receive her, and what fell out by the way, to the tenth verse.
Thirdly, what was done in their meeting at the marriage, which is set down in
the eleventh verse; and this to the twentieth. And lastly, what followed the
marriage feast, and namely, that he paid the Philistims the apparel and
linen, and how he took occasion by somewhat done there, to begin to vex the
Philistims, and this to the end of the Chapter.

Concerning the first, his seeking of a wife was thus: He going to Timnah The
more particular sum of these verses to ^he sixth.
a town of the Philistims, he saw a woman there, whom he liked: and he desired
his father and mother, that she might be given him: but they (as it is no
marvel, seeing they feared God) disliked that he should deal with one that
was an Idolater. Nevertheless he was earnest for her, they not knowing then
that God had moved him to take a wife there, to the end that he might seek an
occasion thereby against the Philistims, who at that time were Lords over
Israel.

Now in that Samson was grown up to years fit for marriage, and yet the Doct.
verse. 2.
people of Israel were still in subjection to the Philistims, and lay under
oppression by them, (as they were before he was borne) we may see clearly
that they were long held under of that calamity. And so it comes to pass
often times, that as it is long before God punishes, so it is long before he
cease punishing of his children. And that we may not much marvel at it, we
may know that he does so; first, that his correction may in some measure
recompense the abuse of his patience: And secondly that he may frame us aright
to his mind and liking, which is hard to do at his first afflicting of us,
and long ere it be wrought in us, because of our untowardness. For a little
affliction and short, does not commonly search us deeply, nor bring us very
readily upon our knees, and therefore such great sores must have deep tents,
by longer continuance of the pain and smart. Some we read of to have been
afflicted twelve years, some eighteen in the Gospel: as this peoples
forefathers were long under the Moabites, and the Canaanites, and sore vexed by
them: so famines have bin continued, three, 1. King. 17. 1. Ruth. 1. 4.
seven, and more years: which how uncomfortable, grievous, and stinging they
have been, we may easily gather, by that which we sustained some few years
since, who saw the third year of famine to hold and continue, much more
pinching and oppressing, then the former two: neither was it seen of the wise,
how a fourth year could have been borne, (if it should have been cast upon us)
without staruing and famishing to death of a great number of the people; so
sore was the want of bread. To speak of particular men's calamities, in which
also they have lien long, it were endless and infinite. Let Acts 7. 6.
the use of this doctrine to all of us both persons and companies, be, not to
make full account of present or speedy riddance from any cross, by the which
we are held under; and yet not to despair, though we have suffered long, not
being relieved and eased, but abide patiently, and pray the more fervently: for
God, before we shall fall into extremity, will certainly come with help,
though we know not how, and not tarry. More of this the reader may find in
the former Chapters, as 13. 1. and others.

Now to proceed: It is said in this second verse that Samson going down The
answering of a doubt in this verse 2. and ^*
to Timnah, saw there a woman of the daughters of the Philistims, whom in the
next verse it is said, he desired might be his wife. But before I proceed
further, a doubt arises about this attempt of his whether he did well or no:
Object.
for this action of his, being in it self against the law of God, on the one
side, namely to take a stranger and an Idolater to wife, his parents also being
godly and disliking it; and on the other side he himself being led by the
spirit of God, and renowned in the Epistle to the Hebrews, among the faithful
of worthy memory: these (I say) thus considered, breeds a question, how he
could not only like such a thing, but go forward with it, and bring it to
pass, and in all the time not once calling himself back. For though it be
not to be denied, but a godly person may possibly slip into a sin
wittingly, yet either he shall see his fault by and by, and dislike it, before
he proceed to other duties, saying in repentance; What have I done? as some did
(by the lamentable example of Ananias and his wife) fear, or at least repent,
when it shall be brought to his remembrance some good Acts 5. 11.
time after, as David did. But neither of these we read to have been done of
Samson, as though he had been either void of conscience, (which he was not) or
as if God had privileged him in that action, yea and (which makes the
question and doubt the greater) his parents themselves, who first withstood
him, and disliked his attempt therein, did afterward consent, and his father
went with him to the woman, and was at his marriage feast: what shall we say
then hereunto? I answer: This thing came of the Lord, that Answ. Judge. 13 5.
Samson might thereby have occasion to vex the Philistims. And though the
marrying with an uncircumcised woman was generally forbidden, yet the Lord
giving him a personal charge so to do, (who is above his law, and not tied to
it) he offended not therein. As both the whole story following does prove;
where we may see, that God not only brought it not against him afterward as a
sin, as he did David's and Peter's sins; and there was as great cause, if
Samson had been justly to be charged in this, why he should have done the like
to him: but God blessed him still afterward, and supported him in great
difficulties and troubles raised against him by the Philistims, (except where
he ranged and ran after stolen liberties without his allowance) that all
might see apparently, God to have been with him herein. And as for his parents,
they knew not Gods mind in that matter at the first, and therefore, as they saw
themselves bound by duty, they were against him in his marriage. And in that
they did afterward agree to it, who doubts but that they had it revealed to
them by God, or that Samson himself told them, that God would so have it? And
all this was necessary for me to say, for the answering of the doubt, and the
clearing of this verse.

By that which has bin said of this point, as we see ye Lord may dispense with
his own law, as he did here, and with Abraham, where he has given Doct. in
verse. 2. and 3.
a personal commandment contrary to it: So where he has done no such thing,
know we, that neither we may look to be dispensed withal by any other
means; nor contrary to his commandments, attempt the thing that Samson did
here, in seeking a woman, and taking her to wife from among Idolaters, or any
other such like. A fact utterly unlawful for us to do, and which shall be
reckoned against the committer, as a capital and great sin. I put both the
actions together, of his seeking and liking such a woman, for they are both of
one kind, though in degree one worse then the other (to wit, if he that
seeks such a wife, desist and leave off, before he likes, and before he
gives over himself thereto:) but else, small difference there is betwixt them.

And great reason there is, that they should be both odious to us, for as much
as there can be no true serving of God in such matches; but it is to be looked
for, that the great sins, namely Idolatry and prophanenes in the one party,
shall devour, and as a canker, eat out the goodness of the other party,
rather then be avoided thereby: neither is it possible, that they who are so
unequally yoked together, can enjoy the chief benefits of their marriage,
without which the rest are little worth: for whereas they should consent and
agree together in all good things, as in conferring, praying, and reading
together, and to be of one mind in all other things of like sort and quality;
they are contrary minded one to another, and draw an unequal yoke; and what
faithfulness or love (except it be in dissimulation) can there be betwixt such
(especially on the behalf of the worser party) through the course of their
lives? As they find it, who will not be held from marrying in Popish kindred,
and with persons well known to be uncircumcised? which they find, to the
just accusation and vexation of them long after. And no marvel, for we being
staightly commanded to marry in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7. 39.
we are thereby justly challenged for matching with Canaanites in a strange
religion, or with such as are impious, and very scandalous in their lives,
though of our own religion, as in the second point of the next verse shall
appear. Let this be added to that which I spoke of more briefly, upon ver 2.
chap. 2. and other places.

Samson having broken the matter of his marriage to his parents, they give Verse.
4.
him answer in this verse, and a reason of that answer is rendered by the holy
Ghost in the next. In their answer they object, the kindred and religion of
the woman, that she was a Philistim, and uncircumcised, and do further tell
him, that he ought to take a wife among his own people. Here his practice,
that he attempteth not the matter, without acquainting his parents with it,
when he liked the woman, does condemn the common attempts Doct. in verse. 4.
of the most of our age about this matter, who have so degenerated and turned
away from this durifulnesse of seeking their parents consent in their Note.
match, as Samson did, that they have made an end, and done what they desired,
with their wives, yea many of them are undone and ready to leave them, before
they begin to break with their parents about it.

So that, whereas the Lord has by commanding them to seek their parents
consent, provided, that they should not rashly and unwisely cast themselves
into danger, and be led (as unexperienced youth easily is) into depth of evils
and sorrow, but well advised and directed, as well as dutiful, therein to
them; they not only despise the counsel of God, but casting it and their
parents help and furtherance behind their backs, they do therefore right
soon both smart and sorrow for their hastiness and wilful proceedings. But
herein they follow Esaus most cursed example, who against the will and liking
of his parents, took Canaanitish women to be his wives, Gen 26. 35.
whose sight and conversation they could not bear nor abide.

A great part of the crossings and vexations in Marriage, do arise and spring
from this fountain: for as they have begun amiss, who thus go^e to work in
their matches, so they proceed (for the most part) worse, because they never
feared that God would sit in their light, till after many wearisome and often
complainings, and (sometime also, of their hasty and rash making up of their
marriage, though out of season, and too late) but most of all, of the miseries
which they sustain: after all these, I say, they do with pain and
pensiveness end their days therein. But of the annoyances in marriage, which
come of other causes, I have no time here to speak. Therefore with one caution
and watchword giving both to parents and children, I end this point: And to
them this I give, that they do not exercise a tyrannical power over their
children (as many do) to draw them to such marriages, as they cannot yield
unto: to these, this I say, that they do not lightly and hastily cast their
affection where it cannot be fastened without great danger, when just causes may
be seen of breaking off their match, and that they proceed in them as God has
commanded, to wit, with their Parents liking and good will, unless they will
apparently resist God.

Now out of the answer of Sampsons Parents, we learn another thing, Doct. 2.
that the marriages of Gods servants ought to be made with such as are like
minded to them, not with the uncircumcised, and with those that be of an other
and contrary religion, for so they say to him in this verse, Is there never a
wife of the daughters of my people, but thou must go to the Philistims for
one? This to be necessarily required of them, as commanded by the Lord, the
seventh of Deutronomy, with other scripture, does clearly teach, namely, Deuteronomy.
7. 3. Exodus 23. 33.
that the true worshippers of God may not join themselves with Idolaters, and
those that be of another religion. The reason is at hand alleged by the Lord
himself, to wit, for that they will be infected and corrupted by them. And
besides, how can one hope that such shall be faithful together, when the
Papist, who is an Idolater, is unfaithful to God? Look not in then at the
doors of such persons for a wife, though much wealth be there. But forasmuch as
many of the professors of our own religion are found to be bad, lewd, and of
vild qualities, and those also arising from evil and distempered spirits; here
lest any should stumble, and take liberty amiss, let them know, that it is
likewise forbidden them of God, to cast themselves away upon such ungodly ones:
and to marry with any that be of their own religion, if they be such: but they
ought especially to look unto it, as they will answer it to God, that they be
as well married in the Lord, as in their own religion: for that did Sampsons
parents include and understand, when they urged him to marry with the daughters
of his people, that were not of the uncircumcised, but lived after the law of
Moses, which was then the known truth among them; and this duty of marrying
aright was afterward more clearly expressed and set down by Saint Paul, when
he giving liberty to the widow to marry with whom she will, adds this; that
it be in the Lord, that is, religiously, and in the fear of God. 1. Coc. 7. 39.


For many otherwise professing true religion, are exceedingly disguised in
their lives, so as whosoever be yoked with them, and merely lincked to them in
this fellowship of marriage or otherwise, must of necessity either live in
deadly vncomfortablenes, if there be any better things in them then in their
companions, or else (which is worse) they shall fall to their manners Note.
and fashions, or match them some other evil way. So that concerning marriage,
(for of that I speak here) it shall behoue them to be wise in so weighty a
matter, both themselves, and their faithful friends, and namely to enquire of,
and learn both the disposition, and behavior of those whom they seek to make
their companyons, that if they be tainted with any gross and notorious vice,
or in a high degree given to anger, wrath, impatience, currishnesse,
stoutnesse, wilfulness, or be scoffing spirited, oppressed with melancholy;
women particularly, of a stinging tongue, and Parretlike, or exceeding other in
any such bad qualities: and so the man in some like manner disguised, I say, if
these be, let there be great wisdom and care used to avoid matches of such
quality and condition.

For although in this act of Samsons, God did put in himself to lead him, yet
otherwise, these speeches of him; that he saw a woman in Timnah, (whom he
desired to marry, and that she pleased him well) were no way to be allowed in
him as sufficient causes to rest in, neither therefore in us of proceeding
therein. The pleasing of the eye, and fancy, are both very dangerous to advise
us in this case, yea utterly insufficient, if they go alone; though where
better things accompany them they are allowable, yea and ought to have place in
both the parties, I mean, that both the eye and the heart be pleased,
contented, and satisfied. For seeing marriage is for a man's life time, it is
meet there should be good liking the one of the other, to the Note.
well bearing of all molestations, crosses, and adversities that may befall
couples: yet with this liking, the one of the person of the other, there must
also be good graces and qualities, as I said before, to go therewith. For who
knows not that the eye is blind, and the heart deceitful: by the one, sin
is let into the other, as light into the house by the window; and whatsoever is
done by them alone, without better aduisers, does surely come to an evil end:
as that one example may testify long agone given, that the sons of Genesis 6. 2.
God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them to be
their wives, and so iniquity multiplied.

Now that we have heard how the parents of Samson consented not to Verse. 5.
him, that he should take a Philistim woman in marriage, the reason is rendered
in this verse, that they knew not that it came of the Lord; to the end that the
Philistims might first give occasion to Samson by injury offered him, to be
afterward avenged of them the more justly. So that they followed their
knowledge that they had in the law of God, in denying their consent to such a
match. And therefore when they knew not that this marriage was of God, they
disliked it, as their knowledge in Gods word directed them to do. And in that
they yielded to it afterward, they did so when they were made acquainted with
the will of God by their son, or otherwise, to wit, that God would have it
so, for they would not else have yielded, and gone from their professed
obedience to that law which for bad it.

And their example ought to be our instruction, that as they have done, Doct.
verse. 5.
so we should know we ought to do, that is to say, that we follow the light
and knowledge which we have of the will of God. Of the which if we be persuaded
that it is the truth we should sin if we did contrary to it, for we should
go against our consciences in so doing. Thus did Peter while he did not yet
understand the vision, he followed the knowledge that he Acts 10. 28.
had in the law, but after, when he was clearly and fully instructed in the
contrary by the vision, and saw that God allowed him so to do, he then changed
his mind, and still did after his better knowledge.

It was commendable in Abimelech toward Sarah, that he would not have taken her
to him, if he had known she had been an other man's wife: and Genesis 20.
also that being admonished afterward by God that she was so, yet though he
were an Heathen, yet he followed the light he had in not touching her, which
was the wife of an other man. And Pilate also did well, while he defended Jesus
against the Priests bitter and false accusations according to the Luke 23. 4.
knowledge he had of his innocence. And this much more well becomes us who
are Christians, that according to the light we have of Gods will, so we should
do, every one according to the measure that he has, yet ever seeking to be
enlightened more and more, and confirmed in our knowledge, lest we should be
deceived; and to be well grounded, lest our conscience be erroneous. But to
do against it, I mean that which we are persuaded to be the truth, (which yet
is the most men's case) it threatens sore such persons, that they will make so
many wounds at length in their conscience, that they will never be kindly
healed: See more of this in Chapter 11. 35. and the caveat there propounded.

Now whereas it is said, the Lord (or Samson by him) sought occasion 2
from the Philistims to fight against them, (and therefore was this marriage
sought by him) though he could many ways have plagued them, and defended his
people from them; yet seeing he would not do it by open war, but by one man,
he must have a fit occasion thereto, which by this marriage was offered, that by
private injuries done against Samson by the Philistims, he might more fitly
take occasion openly to vex and annoy them. And it appears that while they
were thus under the dominion of the Philistims, there were certain covenants
made betwixt them, which might not without great danger rashly be broken by the
Israelites. And further, Samson was but a private man, as far as any could
know, and therefore God would have a sufficient occasion of fighting against
them to be offered, that if in sustaining any injury by them, he should again
make any requital, it might be thought of them that he rather revenged his
own private wrongs, then the public against their nation; although it cannot
be denied but that the Lord might, if it had pleased him, have armed Samson as
well as he did Othniel, Ehud, and other in the like case, to have chased and
subdued them by professing it openly.

But now, for that which concerns our instruction out of this place, Doct.
though God would have Samson do thus, yet (as by the like occasion I noted
before out of the second and third verse) we have neither warrant nor
authority to do the like, seeing we have a plain commandment from God of
the contrary: to wit, that we should avoid all occasions either of doing, or
of revenging wrongs: and that we should sustain some hurt and damage rather,
then offer the least, without the which there is no living in any peaceable
manner among most men in this world. He that is fit to bear injury, and so to
buy and redeem quietness thereby, may more easily enjoy Note.
it, then some other: but if he be noted for offering wrong, he shall have his
load of trouble in that one respect, as he well deserves, beside many other
ways: and therefore we are commanded to follow, and ensue after peace, (yea
although it should fly from us) and holiness, without which no Heb. 12. 14.
man shall see the Lord. Whereof seeing enough has bin spoken elsewhere, I
need not here insist longer therein. And thus much of the first of these 4.
points in this second part of the chapter, that is, of Samsons seeking a wife.

THE SEVENTIE FIVE SERMON ON THE XIIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 6. Then went Samson and his father and his mother down to Timnah, and
came to the vineyards at Timnah, and behold a young lion rored upon him. 7. And
the spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he tare him, as one should have rent
a kid, and had nothing in his hand, neither told his father and his mother what
he had done.
NOw follows the second general point in this second part of the Chapter, to
wit, first, the double journey of Samson to this woman, which was to be his
wife: (in both the which, he was accompanied with his father and mother:)
whereby it appears that they knew Gods will then, about his marriage, better
then they did before: and secondly, what fell out in both iournies by the way;
and this to verse. 11. His first going to her at Timnah, with that which fell
out therein, is laid forth in these two verses, and that is this: That as he
went with his father and mother, (he going aside from them out of the way) a
young lion met him, roaring on him, and the spirit of the Lord came upon him,
and though he had nothing in his hand, yet he rent him in pieces: but he told
not his father and mother what he had done.

And by this that fell out by the way, God would give to Samson a proof of the
strength that he meant to endue him with afterward, that he might be bold to
look for power to do greater things. And now, this being said, it remains
that we observe more particularly that which concerns us, out of this
story. And first this: that when his father and mother understood that his
marriage pleased God, they went down with him to the woman whom he should
marry, to finish the agreement betwixt them, and to countenance and further
him every way in it. So parents, when they see Doct.
that their childrens attempts, either that, or any other way, be pleasing to
God, they should be ready to help and free them by all means from delay, and
trouble and grief thereby, as much as in them lies; even as in the contrary
they are bound to cross and hinder them, lest if they should allow them in
their evil course, their childrens sin, beside their own bad example,
should be chiefly laid to their charge. And this assistance of theirs unto
Samson, is further mentioned in the 8. verse of this Chapter: therefore let
this only be here noted, that parents be very wary lest they turn that
authority and power of theirs, which God has given them for the good and
benefit of their children, that they turn it not (I say) unto the destruction
or damage of them, by laying the bridle in their neck, and so embolden them to
evil, by their allowance, counsel, or example.

Now in that a young Lion is said to have met him, (not a whelp) which 2
had been like to have fawned on him, and played with him, but one that was
full grown, (for the word signifies one of full growth) and therefore neither
pleasant, nor kind, as sometime they be, being as yet not grown: in that (I
say) such an one being cruel and fierce, did set upon Samson, as the nature of
them is to do; which thing so falling out, suppose we in that case, that he
had gone about any unlawful business, behold what ill success had followed
it? Even as we read for example, how it fell out to the man of God, who came
from Judah to reprove the Idolatry of Jeroboam at Bethel, 1. King 13. 24.
who, seeing he transgressed the commandment of God afterward, in going into
the old Prophets house to eat bread, (which God had forbad him to do) lo, a
lion met him, when he was gone out of the town, and slew him.

And it was an apparent correction of God upon him for that; for though in
other things he had obeyed God to his high commendation, yet because in that
one thing he had done contrary to the charge given him, (he being told by the
old Prophet of Bethel that he might do it) we see what an heavy judgment
befell him. It teaches, that we ought to see in all the manifold actions of
this life, that we look we have good warrant for the taking in hand of them,
and the going about them, lest we meet (I say not) with a lion, but with the
Lord crossing of us, worse then a lion could hurt us, some 1. King. 21. 20.
way to our little liking in the midst of the hot pursuit of our desires,
and that either with outward resistance of us, as he did Ahab by Elias, when he
was going to take possession of Naboths vineyard; or with inward wound of
conscience, as most commonly he uses to do, to such as have knowledge; or
with hardness of heart, which always hinders and keeps away Romans 2. 4.
repentance. And by occasion of Samsons iourneying out of Judah to Timnah of the
Philistims, I say more particularly, let such as travail, (whether within the
land, or beyond seas into foreign countries) see, that their errands are
lawful and warrantable, not expressly crossing the Lords charge, (as that of
Shemei did Salomons) lest although they escape Shemei his punishment, 1. King 2.
43.
yet a worse befall them. Remember Dina, and Gehazi. Nay, see they not only
that their business be good, but look they also that their affection be well
and orderly carried thereto: otherwise their seeking after novelty,
curiosity, vanity, (I speak of them that do so) or their sinister intent
any other way, will mar their action of travailing, be it never so lawful.
And as that is nourishment to one creature, which is another bane; even so is
travail to sundry sorts of men, though to some other it be good and
profitable. It is apparent that many travelers who went out with no evil
purpose, yet being unarmed against evil, and not strongly resolved to depart
from it, have rushed upon the pikes, tempted God, cast themselves upon
streights, and endangered their bodies, lives and consciences manifold ways. I
speak to such as profess to have God the directer of their ways: as for
others, let the dead bury the dead. That is a journey well undertaken, which a
man can take in faith, and sanctify it by prayer, and so commit himself
therein to Gods protection and blessing. And surely if we go otherwise to
work, we are as able to bear meekely and patiently; either disappointment,
ill success, or any hard accident that shall befall us, as we are to
encounter a Lion, if he should meet us. But beside these untimely and
unseasonable trauailings abroad, there are other no less dangerous at home, or
near at hand: and among the rest for example sake, when the Sabbath is abused
to wanton and waily gaddings, to stage plays, gaming houses, drinkings, on
which yet by Gods commandment the most lawful common actions and ordinary
business ought not to be done, which may be done on other days. This is one
instance of many other wicked iourneyings and trauailings on that day, which
are as usual with the ill disposed, as it is ordinary among the better sort to
hear the word preached, or to use any other religious exercises. But although
such persons have no stop in their way to turn them back, neither do meet
with the opposition that Balaam did, to hinder and cross their desires; yet
they shall reap the wages of their iniquity, as he did, and wish they had
kept at home, and been free from such company, with many stripes.

The meeting of a Lion by Samson, which was (as we have heard) with Verse. 7.
the peril of his life, yet was to him, as God did use it, an occasion to
try, declare and show forth Gods power and strength in him, which should else
have been hidden. For the spirit of the Lord stirred up in him an extraordinary
gift of might and manhood, more then is to be found in the strongest person,
whereby he having nothing in his hands, did yet tear the Lion in pieces, one
part and member from another, as if it had been a young kid or lamb.

By this example we may learn, that though the cross be to us as fearful,
Doct.
when we see it coming toward us, as a Bear or a Lion is to meet with, yet
the Lord who loves us, as he did Samson, does use by his quickening grace, to
hearten us against it, so that we find it to turn to our great good Note.
and benefit. But let this be marked which I say: that God does by his special
grace bring it thus to pass, not that we should look for it by extraordinary
means, though he dealt so with Samson, but we are to believe and wait
certainly for it, because he has promised it, and by the help thereof, we
shall not need to doubt, but that such strength shall be granted us, as shall
put away fear, or at least abate and restrain it: but without that help from
God, we shall fear and be troubled, when we do but hear of the cross or
danger, as at the sight of a lion, yea and be disquieted and overcome with the
heaviness that we have for it, as if we should meet a Bear.

We have too many examples of this weakness and fear in Gods dear people, as
in the servant of Elisha, who when he saw an army of Aramites 2 King. 6. 15.
compassing the house, cried out, and said, Alas (master) what shall we do?
So in the Disciples the like is to be seen, who through their unbelief,
Matthew. 14. 26.
thought they had seen a spirit, and were sore afraid, when yet that which
they feared was Jesus their Master, coming toward them, to comfort the^: So
that we of our selves indeed, are most timorous even when we have little cause,
much more otherwise: but yet when great afflictions oppress us; God being with
us, as I have said, we are able through his might, to do great things, as the
Apostle says, I am able to do all things through the help of Phil. 4. 13.
Christ, who strengthens me. Yea so great odds is there between one and the
same man oppressed with fear, though for a small trouble, when he is taken on
the sudden, and with a great one, when he is provided for it, as Note.
between the heat of the least candle, and a greatest fire. He that fainted
at the one, when he was weak in faith, escaped and overcame the force of the
other, being assisted therewith, as has at large been showed in Gedeon, at one
time afraid to go and behold that camp, which after he blanckt not both to
encounter, and to conquer.

And this whole story of the Lion, all that consider, may understand, that 2
it tends directly to this end, to prepare and make Samson able to bear the
displeasure and enmity of the Philistims, which was afterward raised up
against him, the Lord giving him strength for that purpose: and that it might
minister matter for the riddle which he did after propound to them, whereby
they did sore provoke him. By the first, learn, that when God indueth men with
excellent gifts betimes, (as he does many) he thereby declares, that he will
both double and multiply them in those persons, and also use them to serve him
to singular purposes, if their proceeding be not hindered by some sinister
practices of theirs, to stand in their way, or by the devil and Note.
his instruments subtilitie, diuerting his good gifts to bad purposes. This is
apparent by that which God did work in Samson in his first years of
discretion, and when he was yet but young, compared with that which followed
afterward when he made strip and waste of the Philistims. Even so when he will
work (I say) in more special manner by some in future age, he will give
signs thereof in younger years; which is notably to be seen in David, who in
the great danger he was in by Goliath, (when Saul told him that he was but a
boy, but he whom he undertook to fight with, to wit Goliath, was a man of
war from his youth) answered unto Saul, Thy servant 1. Sam. 17. 36.
kept his fathers sheep, and there came a Lion, and likewise a Bear, and
took a sheep out of the flock; and I went out after him and smote him, and
took it out of his mouth, and when he rose against me, I caught him by the
beard, and smote him and slew him. Therefore this uncircumcised Philistim (said
he) shall be as one of them; seeing he has railed on the host of the living
God. And the like is manifest in Samuel, whom because the Lord meant to make a
more then ordinary instrument of his glory, in the function of both Judge and
Prophet: therefore he revealed himself familiarly by visions unto him, in his
tender age, yea before he seemed to be of discretion, and ripenes of years and
judgment, the Lord began that work in him early, which in time to come, he
meant to accomplish in great measure. So that we see that the religious and
prudent training up of young ones in the knowledge of God, and of themselves,
and good literature, (being the ordinary means now adays to promote this
work of God in time to come) is not to be despised: much less the
towardliness of such as whom God in their youth shall begin to grace above
others, is to be snibbed and checked, as the practice is of some brutish
persons to scorn and reject such, saying: Tush, what reckoning make ye of
such? A young Saint, an old Devil.

This truth is exemplified in many young persons at this day, who by good
education do show very great towardnes: as scholars in the University in
their learning, and other in the country, both young men and damzels in such
things, as wherein they are trained up, and both sorts in the practice of
Christianity far differing from the common sort of youth, who are saucie,
disobedient, and profane, and give fearful signs of mischief working, and
sustaining misery afterward. And out of them he raises excellent
instruments, some fit for Magistracy, and some in other places to do much
good in the Ministry, not to be teachers only, but also fathers begetting
many children to God, and others to bring forth much fruit to his glory. And
herein that prophecy is verified, that in those days the Lord would power out
his spirit upon all flesh; not old men only, but Acts 2. 17.
even the tenderest, young men and maidens. A fruit (no doubt) of that unction
of Christ Jesus the arch Prophet of his Church, who began at the age of twelve
years to give demonstration of strange forwardnes, for wisdom and grace,
because in his riper years he was more fully to declare Luke 2. 52.
that he was anointed with the spirit without measure.

These therefore whom I spoke of before, if they use well the gifts of God, as
David and Samuel did, which they received in their youth, shall (after they have
gotten experience) see how God prospers and inlargeth them to their sound and
great rejoicing, and the good of many other, and help to to cast down, and
destroy the works of darkness, and of the devil, in places where they be
not too strongly resisted and set against, by such as love darkness more then
light, because their deeds are evil. But if after they have begun well, and in
their younger years given great hope, if (I say) they coming further into the
world, shall be dazzled with the deceitful Note.
beauty of it, as though they had found a better portion then grace, and shall
be blindfolded with profit, pleasure, and promotion, so that thereby they
cannot do their former works, they shall complain too late (when all these
must forsake them) that they were once in the way to do well, if they could
have seen it. And all may see, that howsoever they woond out of the devils
hands in the first maine temptation, wherein they were in danger to be brought
to despair, and in the next also, which tended to bring them to presumption;
yet that he has prevailed against them in the third, about the glory of this
present world, and thereby has deceived them. Matthew. 4. 8.


And thus much be said of the first thing which I mentioned now last in this
verse, to wit, of the gifts of God appearing in Samson, in the first years of
his discretion: of the second, namely, that this story does minister matter of
the riddle afterward, I will speak in place, where I shall have a fitter
occasion offered, namely in the fifteenth Chapter.

Lastly, in this verse in that it is said, he told not his father nor mother
of this that he did to the Lion, it showed both that neither he himself was 4
vainglorious, (for then not only they, but other should soon have heard
thereof) but also it appears, that he saw no cause nor end of uttering it to
them at that time. So let us learn when to speak, and when to hold our peace,
and to be silent, even when our speaking can do no good; or more hurt then
good, or when it cannot but do hurt. And by this rule, which guides us how to
be silent, and when; let us also learn how to speak, and when, namely, when
we see it may do good, and no hurt, or more good then hurt. The same is
repeated of him in verse 9. and agrees with that which I have often urged in
the general, to wit, that we should show all godly wisdom as well as
vprightnes in our doings: as our Savior Mat. 11. would not commend John
Baptist before his Disciples were gone, lest it Mitth. 11. 7.
should have as much hindered them, as profited the people.

Verse. 8. And he went down and talked with the woman those things that were
pleasing in the eyes of Samson.

9. And within a few days when he returned to receive her, he went aside to
see the carkeis of the lion: and behold, there was a swarming of Bees, and honey
in the body of the lion.

10. And he took thereof in his hands, and went eating, and came to his father
and his mother and gave unto them, and they did eat: but he told not them that
he had taken the honey out of the body of the lion.

11. So his father went down unto the woman, and Samson made there a feast:
for so used the young men to do.

12. And when they saw him, they brought thirty companions to be with him.
Then Samson said to them, I will now put forth a riddle unto you: and if you
can declare it me within seven days of the feast, and find it out, I will
give you thirty sheets, and thirty change of garments.

NOw it follows according to the division made in the second verse of The
sense of verse 9.
this second part of this Chapter, how Samson went to agree with the woman, and
his father and mother with him, as we heard they did in the seventh verse: and
that his father, when they came thither, did that which pleased him in
concluding the match with her. For that is the sense of this first of these
verses: to wit, that where it is said, he did speak the things that pleased
Samson, we should understand that to be meant of his father, that he talked
with the woman to the good contentment and liking of his son: also here is
showed, what fell out at this their next going up in the way when he went to
receive her, and this to the 11. verse.

But here I must a little stay the reader, by occasion of a doubt arising out
Verse 8.
of the 8. verse, to wit, in that it is said, Samson went aside to the carkeis
of the lion, and took honey out of it. For seeing he was a Nazarite, as
appears by cap. 13. 5. and chap. 16. 17. it may be thought that Samson
either sinned against the rule of the Nazarite, or else had a special
dispensation to break it. Touching the rule, we read Numb. 6. and
particularly verse. 6. that it forbad coming at a carkeis. And yet we should be
uncharitable in casting the blame of wilful finne upon Samson, and as rash in
justifying any dispensation, seeing neither of both are mentioned or intimated
in the text. The answer is, Samson neither sinned against the rule, nor was
dispensed with by God: and the reason is, He was tied to no such rule. And
seeing it will be demanded still, How then could he be a Nazarite? I answer
again, that we must make a difference between Nazarites: Some were borne
Nazarites, and by an immediate ordaining of God, separated to this profession.
Others voluntarily undertook the vow according to the Ceremony. Both sorts had
something common, both the profession of a more strict and pure worship of God,
and some ceremonies annexed thereto. But they differed herein, that as the
former sort were necessarily tied to that estate, and that for their whole
life, so they had privilege allowed them to be exempt from some ceremonial
obseruances which the vowed Nazarites were tied to. For as the vowed Nazarite
was voluntary, and for a certain space of time only, so for that time he was
bound indifferently to all the Articles mentioned in Numbers. Samson then (I
say) was no voluntary or vowed, but a borne and ordained Nazarite
extraordinarily. And therefore though it be probable that he was tied to more
then his long hair, as namely to abstain from strong drink, (as his mother
was) yet it is clear that he was free from this ceremony of touching the dead
and sundry other. Of the like ordination was John Babtist, as by the text
appears, Luke 1. 15. This answer is applied by them who hold our Savior to
have been a Nazarite (not by the place of his education only, Matthew. 2. 23.
but by profession also) to salve the objections of his drinking wine, coming
to the dead, etc. but how soundly I will not here enquire: only this I say, if
that could be proved that our Savior was a professed Nazarite, then those
objections hinder nothing, because they only oppugn the vowed, not the
ordained Nazarites. But of this, thus much. Now I proceed to the doctrine.

First, here by Samsons father and mother going with him to conclude the
marriage, it teaches, that when parents see that the match which their children
Doct.
upon just occasion propound to them, and desire their consent in, is of the
Lord, and pleasing to him, they ought (as I said before) to be ready to further
and accomplish it in the best manner, and with the best conditions that they
can: so their children may in reverence desire them, that seeing God does allow
and bless them herein, that they would not hinder them. But if they make their
matches so that their parents and guardians may not, neither dare be seen in
them, as it is a great blemish to themselves, so it is just that they be both
held back by them, and their attempt stayed therein; let them therefore submit
themselves to the Lord, and give their parents the honor that is due to them,
lest they make them most strangers in this work, who should be chief doers in
the same, and by that they may know, that their prospering therein shall be
small. But for this point, let the reader see that which I have noted of Caleb,
chap. 1.

After Samson and the woman had agreed about their marriage, he went again
afterward and took her to be his wife: and what fell out in the Verse 9. 10.
way as he went is showed. By the first of these two, in that he married her 20*
afterward and took her for his wife, when he had now first consented with her
to live together as man and wife, and that with his parents agreeing thereto;
all these do prove that the uniting of one man and one woman Doct.
together in marriage, is a solemn ordinance of God, and appointed by him, and
so it is likewise blessed by him, where he is obeyed in it: and that the loose
and brutish living together otherwise, (as one man with many women, etc.) is
most unfitting a Christian, and contrary to God; ordinance, and brings forth
most noisome evils: even as the parting and separation of one of the married
persons from the other, save for adultery, is odious. And this of the first of
the two points be said briefly, seeing occasion is offered to speak more
particularly of it elsewhere.

The second thing in these two verses, to wit, what fell out in the way as he
went, was this that Samson went aside, as he travailed to his marriage, to see
the carkeis of the lion which he had rent in pieces, and what was become of it.
And he found in the body of it, a swarm of Bees and honey: a strange thing to
behold, for those creatures love the sweetest places, and not those which are
unsavory. But the Lord had so brought it to pass, and that his father and
mother should eat thereof, and yet not know from whence it came, to the end
that it might minister matter for the riddle that he propounded at his marriage,
whereby occasion arose to him of pursuing the Philistims. Thus God prepared the
honey in the body of the lion, and directed him to find, eat, and give it to
be eaten.

By this that I have now set down in these two verses, we may see, that Doct.
2 in verse 10. 11.
when God pleases either to punish or bless, as here he did both, (for he
intended a blessing to Israel, and a punishment to the Philistims) he will use
means for the effecting of the same, though we see not always how, and
extraordinarily, rather then they shall fail, and not come to pass. And so
when he purposed to deliver his people out of Pharaos bondage, and none Exodus
14. 12.
saw how it could be, they being hedged in (as it were) on every side, he
made a way (we see) for them through the red sea, as it had been by the high
way, and dry ground.

Even so be we persuaded, that he having appointed and purposed to do us good
in this life, who fear him, and to bring us well through all difficulties, as
he has promised, and to finish our course with joy; he will most certainly do
it, though we see not how, but it may seem often times to us impossible, for he
has many ways to bring his will to pass. Even as he did, when he delivered
Elisha the Prophet from the army of the Aramites, by an 2. King 6. 17.
army of heavenly soldiers, and when he promised great plenty of corn by
his Prophet on the next day, when yet at that present they were almost
famished, he did (I say) perform it, and that by the means of four leprous
persons, in so much that a great man near to the King affirming, that although
2. King. 7. 16.
God should rain down corneout of heaven, it could not be so; yet he lived
and saw it so, though he lived not to eat of it, even as the Prophet had told
him. And so be we persuaded that whatsoever he sees expedient for us, he will
bring it to pass, though we see not how, he has ways enough; and that which
he does not for us, we must willingly submit our selves to want and forgo, as
knowing that it were not good for us to have it granted. Whereas we in our
troubles and fears either about grace to be Note.
granted us, or deliverances to be wrought for us, do either smoother our
faith, by fear and despair of help, or break forth into open murmuring and
discontentednes, which in time causes us to shift and make way for our selves
by using unlawful remedies. And by this means we double our affliction, both
for measure and continuance oftentimes: or else shake it off, as the ass does
his burden, not staying Gods leisure, till he case us: so that when the next
comes, we are unfitter for it, then for the former. Now if we (being in our
selves most shiftlesse) could behold that alsufficiencie of Note.
power which is in God, and the variety of means which his wisdom can work
by, for our deliverance, this confused and distrustful behavior of ours
should in great part be cured. Especially, seeing whatsoever power he has in
him to succor us, his distressed servants, his love sets him on work to
show and exercise it, and all for our exceeding benefit and good. David saw not
before Saul's coming against him, by what means God 1. Sam. 23. 27.
would rescue him, neither was it needful seeing he had promised so to do:
howbeit he waiting by faith the issue, he was delivered, and so saw how the
Lord wrought it for him: and thereby gathered, that so he was able and ready
to do often in the like danger, rather then his promise should fail and Note.
be falsified. Thus we should hearten on our selves to wait with patience
through all difficulties, till we have finished our course with joy.

And in that he told not this either to his father or mother, which was 2.
very like he should have done, (it being a strange thing to find honey in the
carkeis of a Lion) and we are all given to tell such things to our friends, as
are seldom heard of, and are like to be wondered at, as news very welcome to
them, yet I say, in that he signified it not unto them, it was wisely done of
him to conceal it, whether he then thought to make a riddle of it, or no, it
is uncertain, as after he did: for then, if he had told it to them, it might
easily have been known to many, and so it had been like to have by some means
been disclosed to and among the Philistims, as we see it was afterward, when
he told it to his wife only. It confirms us in the former doctrine out of
the seventh verse: namely, that we be very wary to conceal things that need
not be uttered, especially secrets, when we see no good can come thereby, but
by concealing them there may. And because it is not easy for a man to foresee
every inconvenience which may come of unseasonable speech; therefore it is the
wisest way for us to cut off al talk, whereof we see not some good reason to
move and warrant us to utter it. Now if there grow any inconvenience thereby,
notwithstanding our care and respectiuenes, we shall have the less to accuse
us, as we see in David's fact, 1. Sam. 21. I mean in his requiring the show
bread and armor of Golia 1. Sam. 21. 6, 9.
from Abimilech in the presence of Doeg, necessity drove him to ask it, and
Christ defended the fact, and therefore he had less cause to be troubled,
though much hurt arose by it. To them that object, that Samson told the riddle
to his wife, which was more dangerous then to have opened it to his parents: be
this taken for an answer, that he offended greatly in so doing. And we may
learn by it, that we may possibly show wisdom in some part of our life,
whereof yet we may fail, without great heed taking, afterward.

We have heard how Samson went to take his wife, and what fell out by Verse. 11.
to 20. The sum generally to ver. 20
the way. Now follows the third point (in this second part of the Chapter) to
wit, their meeting to accomplish his marriage, and what things were done
thereat, and they were especially four. The first, he made the Philistims a
feast, in this verse. Secondly, what the Philistims did to him: verse 12. That
is, they provided thirty companions to be with him; Thirdly, Samson propounded
a riddle to them, with condition what they should have, if they could tell him
the meaning of it, within seven days, and contrariwise: and this to the
midst of the 15. verse. Lastly, how they labored to know the meaning of it,
but could not, till the seventh day, and then they told it to him, having
gotten it of his wife before: and this to the twentieth verse.

The first of these 4. things mentioned in this verse, was, that he made The
sense of verse 11. particular.
them a feast: his father going down with him again, (no doubt) to be a
comfort to him in that strange place, and to countenance him, as I have noted
twice before in verse 6. etc. And it is added, that Samson did that according
to the custom of the place, for so the young men were wont to do at their
marriage. Here by this custom (not unlawful in it self) we see it has been
an usual thing to call friends together at such times of marrying their
kindred, to feast and rejoice one with another. It has been the practice of
the good, as well as of the bad: neither is it our commendation, simply to
shun the civil or indifferent actions of common men, and the multitude; but
this indeed is to be looked to, that we conform not our selves to the evil
manner of using them in the age we live in, Romans 12. And Romans 12. 2.
as for this one custom and fashion of feasting, as Samson used it, so Christ
was present at a marriage feast in Canan a town of Galile, where many Ioh. 21.
were met together, and he approved their feasting.

And as for the bad, Laban made a feast, and called together the men of the
place, when he gave his daughter to Jacob to wife. So also did the young Genesis
29. 22.
men of the Philistims use to do at such times. The action therefore having
been the practice as well of the godly as of bad people, in it self is
indifferent to be used; and as it may be done lawfully, so it may also be
omitted, because wicked men have used it, who do nothing well: and therefore
as it falls out for the most part, that the greatest number that meet at
feasts are none of the best, it may be seen often times more convenient to omit
the meetings of such, lest much wickedness should be committed by them, and
lewdnes in tongue and behavior, to the dishonor of God, which is the more
easily done, when they have well filled themselves.

Or if it cannot be altogether let pass, yet a smaller company would be
gathered, especially of such of our friends as are of the best sort of people;
and for the other, if they must needs be there, they should so be placed at
the table, that as few of them be set together as may be, and that it be
observed, that they may be soon interrupted and broken off, (by such as sit
near and are better minded and wise withal) if they should fall in any
offensive behavior. As for our Savior Christ, he gave good example at the
marriage where he was present, and took occasion, by the miracle which he
wrought there, to hold them occupied in good talk, and to turn the people
away from the contrary; and we as far as we may see our company to be to
good ends, as that we may be like to do good, or take good so and thereafter
to use it. And this be said of this point here, having before touched it, and
having occasion to speak fullier of it afterward.

Further, by this that is said here, that the young men used to make a feast 2
at their marriage, and therefore Samson did so, we see the force and strength
of custom how it prevails, and is as the Medes and Persians law was, that
is, not easily broken. Such a custom that was, that the people at their desire
had a prisoner delivered and set free to them at the Passover: by means
whereof they asked Barrabas a murderer, rather then Jesus. Such customs
Matthew. 27. 15.
as are bad are continued still, whereby disorder and revel is maintained,
even fruits of darkness, into the which the people is so reuited, that though
the preaching of the Gospel has bewraied and brought to light the shame and
odiousnes of them, yet they can hardly be broken almost in any places. As the
profane spending the greatest part of the Lords Sabbath in carding, drinking,
feasting, and such like abomination, and other such, in every country after
the manner thereof, making it a day rather held to Bacchus, or Saturn, then
the Lord. And the same may be said of the riotous and intemperate mispending of
the twelve days, and certain other days in the year, far worse passed,
then (I say not Papists) but even Heathens often times use to do. And except the
putting down of Faires, that were wont to be kept on the Sabbath (which with
much ado were some years agone abolished) I remember not many more ill
customs overthrown and put out of use. As for the overthrowing of many blind,
dangerous, and disordered Alehouses, (for there is use of the honest, for the
necessity of travelers) it has indeed very commendably been gone about by
some honorable and worshipful persons; but yet through the upholding of them
by some gentlemen and others, to their small credit, they remain still, to the
working of much evil and mischief thereby in most places. As for those that
are good customs (to say no more of the bad) they ought; and other that be not
hurtful, may be suffered and continued. And in that respect (I take it) did
Samson here, after the manner of the young men, make a feast to the Philistims.

But to proceed, they being on both sides met at the marriage, I mean Verse. 12.
Samson and his friends on the one part, and the Philistims on the other, the
holy story shows what the Philistims did: to wit, they took thirty young
men (for they had choice enough) but the friends of Samson being strangers
there, could not command such a number, neither is it like that the Philistims
would have liked it: so that it cannot be meant of Samsons friends, that they
took thirty men to countenance and honor him, but of the Philistims, who when
they saw what manhood and stomach was in him, and that they had need to
beware of him, they gave him thirty men (pretending they did it to honor him)
to attend upon him, which indeed they did for fear of him.

In these Philistims we may observe two things: the one is, their policy: the
other, the care that they had of, and over themselves, when they thought there
was danger toward them, and cause of fear. Policy (I say) was in them, for
that when they feared, they would not seem so to do, but covered it with a
fair cloak, namely in appointing thirty companions to him, as if they meant
to set him forth and countenance him. This the light of nature did teach them,
to keep themselves from danger and harm. Neither were the means evil that
they used for that purpose, though it must be granted, that it was all one to
them whether they were or no.

So much more we being more clearly and fully enlightened by the written word
of God, may in great peril not seem to fear, when it can do us Doct. 1.
no good (but it may put us to reproach:) but use such lawful help, as we
have at hand, to repel the same, though we let it not appear. Even as Paul
did, who when he was in great ieoberdie of his life by the Pharisees and
Sadduces, and like to be rent in pieces betwixt them, he bewraied not to them
what he feared, but used that help that God showed him, that was this
policy, that he said with a loud voice among them that he was a Pharisie: Act
23. 6.
whereat there was a sudden division of his adversaries, the one sect being
against the other; and the Pharisees holding with Paul against the Sadduces.
Only let no man (by this that I have said) justify his shifting and unlawful
policy in bringing himself out of trouble: among which sort of shifters at
this day, the most bold and dangerous and devilish is this treacherous crew of
Jesuits, who when they have brought themselves into the briars by their
villainous doings, seek to relieve themselves by lyings, equivocations, and
perjury, or flying (if they can) from coming to their answer.

The other thing to be noted in these Philistims, was their wise care to 2.
keep themselves from hurt by Samson, when they saw him to be a man to be
feared, and this they showed herein, that they set thirty men of their own
country, as if they would have honored him, (much like Herod, who pretended
that he would honor Christ, when he sought to kill him) whereas Matthew. 2. 8.
they intended no such thing, but to set them as watchmen to take heed that no
hurt might be wrought by him against them. And as they did by the light of
nature thus provide for their own safety, so we ought wisely and warily to
prevent danger, where it is coming toward us: and to be wise as serpents and
beware of men, as well as to be innocent like doves. Matthew. 10. 16.


We have great cause in these days to beware whom we trust, and to whom we
commit ourselves by giving credit to them. Our Savior has left us a good
example behind him, whereby we may take heed how far we commit our seiues
to men. For when he was at Jerusalem at the Passover, Ioh. 2. 24.
many believed in him (it is said) when they saw his miracles that he did. But
Jesus did not commit himself to them, seeing he knew what was in them.
Teaching us to be circumspect, how far we trust them, whom Note.
we do not sufficiently know. Many smart for that they are too light of
credit: namely, for that when they hear fair words, and conditions, they are
ready thereupon to put themselves into their hands. Whereas they should know
this, that they who are not faithful to God, will not be faithful to men, as
Papists and loose professors. It has been many men's utter undoing, who have
too rashly put their estate and goods into the hands of them who have made
fair shows of trustines of friendship toward them. Other have sustained the
like by their own children, having a better opinion of them through blind
selfeloue, then there was cause; and trusting them with almost all that they
had, have lost all through their own folly. The same I may say of unwise and
indiscreet lenders, and such as have unadvisedly brought themselves into danger
by suertiship, till with their load of grief they have ended their miserable
days in prison or penury.

But none are either more commonly deceived, or more to be pitied, then silly
and shiftlesse damsels and maids, who care not into whose hands they put
themselves, till they complain and cry out, that they have not found truth
and faithfulness at their hands, who promised them great matters of quietness,
and living at ease: who have in a short time grossly broke their covenant with
them, by most contentious and unquiet living, or left them with their charge to
shift for themselves: of which woeful persons England is full. For I must say
the truth, that in most places there are few faithful people to be found. Let
us make the more account of them that are such, and for the rest, I say with
our Savior, let the dead bury the dead: and let them match together, seeing
they will needs do so, who are both of them unfaithful. And seeing (in this
subtle vizard age) we can hardly discern often times between one and other, I
mean betwixt the trusty, and the deceiuer; let us with Paul pray God to
deliver us from having to do with such 2. These. 3. 2.
as have neither faith, nor fidelity in them. And so far as by our narrow
observation we can find any hollownesse or falsehood in such as pretend the
contrary, (as for others, they are more easily avoided) let it be a watchword
for caution in time to come. All is not gold that glistereth: fair words are
fit to beguile even good people, whose innocence makes them think that other
are as themselves. But with the breast plate of righteousness, (which serves
to keep them from being offensive) let them use their head-peece, I mean
wisdom and prevention of danger, that they may be defended from hurt by
others. All know that none less deserve wrong then the harmless: yet none we
see daily are more usually beguiled, and made a pray to the spoiler for want of
circumspection.

THE SEVENTIE SIX SERMON ON THE XIIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 13. And Samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddle unto you:
if you can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the feast, and
find it out, then I will give you thirty sheets, and thirty change of
garments: 14. But if you cannot declare it me, then shall ye give me thirty
sheets, and thirty change of raiments. And they answered him, Put forth thy
riddle, that we may hear it. 15. And he said unto them, Out of the eater came
meat, and out of the strong came sweetness: and they could not in three days
expound the riddle. 16. And when the seventh day was come, they said unto
Samsons wife, Entice thine husband, that he may declare us the riddle, lest we
burn thee and thy fathers house with fire: Have ye called us to possess us?
Is it not so? 17. And Samsons wife wept before him, and said, Surely thou
hate me, and love me not: for thou have put forth a riddle unto the
children of my people, and have not told it me. And he said unto her, Behold I
have not told it my father, nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee. 18. Then
Samsons wife wept before him seven days while their feast lasted: and when the
seventh day was come, he told her, because she was importunate upon him: so she
told the riddle to the children of her people. 19. And the men of the city
said unto him the seventh day before the Sun went down, What is sweeter then
honey? and what is stronger then a lion? Then said he unto them, If ye had not
plowed with my heiffer, you had not found out my riddle. 20. And the spirit of
the Lord came upon him, and he went down to Askelon and slew thirty men of
them, and spoiled them, and change of garments unto them, which expounded the
riddle: and his wrath was kindled, and he went up to his fathers house. 21.
Then Samsons wife was given to his companion, whom he had used as his friend.
NOw follows the third thing that was done at the Verse 13. 14.
marriage, and that was the riddle that Samson put forth to the Philistims
there met together: the which course was in great wisdom taken by Samson, if
it be well considered. For if the cause be sought, why Samson propounded this
riddle, I answer: It was a pleasant whetting of their wits, and ministered
occasion of mirth to set them about the inuenting and searching out the meaning
of it, which was hard and difficult, that so in the mean while they might be
kept from manifold offendings. And it was without suspicion to the Philistims
of any evil intended by Samson. And he seeing that the seven days continue
while the feast lasted (for so their manner there was to do) was a long time
for him and his friends to be in company and conversant among Idolaters,
without much sin and offending God, he could not have taken a safer nor
better course, then so to set them a work and occupy their heads.

As for religious talk there was no place for it: to have fallen into that,
had been the next way to have set them altogether by the ears at the first.
And yet by the propounding of the riddle, they were held greatly within
compass from lewd and wicked talk, and ill behavior, which could hardly have
been borne by Samson and his friends: the which yet had otherwise so abounded
with much other disorder, such as falls out at those kinds of meetings,
(where yet one would think there should be less fear of it) as would have
bred most bitter contentions among them; the which by this wisdom that he
showed in putting out the riddle, he shunned and avoided.

And by this practice of his we may learn, when we be pent in company, Doct.
where no good things have intertainment, but evil many ways is to be feared,
(which companies are too common) how to bethink our selves what is best to be
done of us. If it may be, let such companies be turned from altogether,
especially if they be our betters, who will take more liberty to offend, and
yet bear it more hardly to be resisted, or spoken against: whereby our grief
will be the greater, when we see no means to keep our consciences quiet and
peaceable, but that we must have part in the sin. But if it fall out sometimes
(as it may do, that we be brought by Gods providence into such companies by
necessity, when we cannot prevent them, if they be such as we may be bold to
speak to them, they being of no wealthier sort then we, or not much above us,
there is the less cause of fear, or of any such great danger to fall out: but
yet even there we must take heed that we iumpe not, neither fall in with them,
to justify and consent to their offensive talk and behavior: but if
religious communication will not be borne nor brooked of them, some other
things indifferent (and yet not impertinent nor unprofitable) would be thought
upon of us, and ministered by us, to stay and prevent worse, as fit occasion may
be taken thereof. And if ye ask what, I say, for example; the mentioning of
the death of any among us, and namely such as are of note: and of any
judgments and plagues of God either present or lately fallen out about us, as
burnings, strange death, and namely upon drunkards; also the execution of
malefactors, and such like: which matters will be better borne to be talked of,
then things merely divine: and yet by occasion of speaking of them, not only
ill communication may be kept away and avoided, but better also, and that which
is to edification, may the easilier come in place. For to an honest Christian
man it is a great grief to lose and be cut off from his sweet words, which
flow from the abundance of the heart. But seeing this must be borne often Pro
23. 8.
times, and worse also at the hands of such as are of wealth and power in the
company being ill minded, there; if we cannot restrain them, neither may have
place or liberty to speak, when God is dishonored by them, in cauilling
against the truth, railing upon Gods people, or slandering the innocent, or by
swearing, filthy talk, or any such like; the best way will be to depart out
of the company, or to give no ear to them, if we may turn to other who are
near us, or to show dislike in our countenance; or if they will needs ask our
opinion, at the least to show our dissent from them, but yet in meekness and
in a peaceable manner. But if the case be so, that we may rebuke such
unfruitful works of darkness, God giving us occasion justly, let us not
carry our zeal in our bosoms, as a sword in a rustie scabberd, but vnsheath
it to the defense of Gods truth, and his religion, lest if we hold our peace in
such a case, the stones of the street will cry: which point has elsewhere
been opened.

Samson, as it appears, tells them, he would propound his riddle to them so,
that if they could tell it, they should have thirty changes of apparel, and
pieces of linen, whether sheets or shirts, etc. and if they could not tell it
within seven days, then they should give as much to him: which was a kind of
wager laying, and their sport was for loss on the one side, and gain on the
other. Which kind of dealing, I mean after this manner of wagering for gain,
(seeing he had his direction from God therein, and warrant in special to
practice it) cannot be counted unto him for sin, neither ought any to stumble
at it.

I might here take occasion to speak largely of the like actions and exercises
among me^ to that which was in this place used of Samson, but I should be too
long. This is all that I will say, that as the most handle the matter, they do
grievously sin against God: as when men play or wager either in a covetous
desire to win, or when they are angry and passionate in playing or wagering;
or when they swear and blaspheme the name of God in their play; or when they
fall a quarelling, or go together by the ears amidst their pastimes and
wager-laying; or when they are immoderate in their playing, spending whole
nights and days therein, neglecting in the mean time the necessary duties of
their vocation, and the most necessary duty of all others the service of
Almighty God: of which sort alas there are too many who spend most of their
time in bowling allies, and at trucksbettings, and swearing upon every cast;
profane men, that make so little account of their time as to pass it away so
idly; let them take heed that they be not driven as many have been in time to
desire one hour to repent, and yet go without it: or last of all when they
thus play or wager away all their maintenance. And for such kind of gamesters
who have not money competentlie to maintain their family, much less for the
relief of others, though Paul bids them that stole to steal no more, but
labor with their hands, that they may have wherewith to help the poor (for
which two ends it chiefly serves) and yet have enough to play away, let them
with the rest of their companions take heed, that among many other punishments
of God, which they draw upon themselves, this be not also one and not the
least, that because they love pastime they become poor men. And we may well
think that if God deny to clothe the bodies of such with Prou 21. 17.
apparel (for rags are their liuerie) much less will he clothe their souls
with grace here, or their persons with glory hereafter, except they repent;
which is not at commandment, nor easily found of such.

We have heard of Samsons wagering with the Philistims in the former Doct.
verse. 14.
verse, and part of this: now it follows in the latter end of it how they gave
allowance thereto, and showed their liking thereof, saying unto him, Put forth
thy riddle that we may hear it. And this shows, how readily wicked men turn
to hear even the godly (whom otherwise they dislike and scorn) when they
speak pleasing things to them. Even as Jeroboam King of Israel did greatly
like Elisha, and spoke kindly to him when he did that which pleased him well,
in bringing the army of the king of Syria his enemy 2. King. 6. 21.
as prisoners into his chief City Samaria, hoping that thereby he might have
his will of them in putting them to the sword. Oh when they fit their humor by
words or deeds, they will change themselves on sudden toward them, and applaud
them as if they were friends with them. And even so is it with them in the
construing of those actions that please them, such I mean as whereby they
receive benefit and favor or advantage: for these, they shall be advanced
above the skies: but let them therewith join admonition and good counsel, or
so much as the mildest repoofe, especially if they take themselves crossed by
them in their purposes of profit, pleasure, or will, (although never so
justly,) then they are the worst that go upon the earth, their goodness is
remembered no more. Yea and this which I say may be extended to the best
Ministers, who so long as the plausiblenes of their gift does hold the bad in
any admiration or affection, will show the greatest signs of taking pleasure
and delight in their company. But let the Minister leave tickling of their
corrupt flesh, and begin to search them a little, or bewray their corruptions
which were hidden from them before, oh then he is bitter and irksome to their
taste, and becomes their enemy for telling Gal. 4. 16.
them the truth, yea, then all his former desert is vanished with commendation
and all: all which do testify too clearly, that they allow not of those who
are godly, either Ministers, or other for their goodness, which ought
chiefly to be regarded, but for other causes. This must further teach the best
sort to observe themselves with the best circumspection how far they go in
humoring the wicked, to wit, so far only as they keep bounds, that is, speak
that which they may, for the turning them from evil, or drawing them to the
liking of the best things by degrees, always preserving entire their liberty
in reproving, without any just cause of blushing. As for them that will not
admit of such kind of dealing, but like only to be flattered, let them know
their stomachs are distempered, and they in a dangerous case, (when they can
take no liking of any thing but fleshly and sensual) even as they are who will
serve their turns by flattering them.

Thus now of the first two things that were done at the feast, we have Verse. 15.
heard, and of part of the third, to wit, that Samson told them, he would put
forth a riddle to them, and how they readily apprehended it, and were willing
to hear it. Now therefore in the former part of this verse it is said, he
propounded it, which was the third thing done at the marriage, [Out of the
eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness.]

The meaning is, that honey which is sweet, and meat to eat, came out of the
body of the Lion who is strong, which I open and utter, seeing the ignorant not
comparing this with the 19. verse, would not else understand it. In this latter
part of the verse it is showed, that when the Philistims had heard the riddle,
they toyled themselves, and went about by their own labor and wit to find
out the meaning of it, but could not by their own help. And this is the
fourth thing done at the Marriage, namely, how they sought to find it out, and
how they prevailed. But of this more in due place.

But I will first return a little to Samson, and show how he made use of the
Doct. verse. 15.
works of God, which he considered and observed. For to his great benefit he
gathers a riddle, and raised thereby a question out of the work of God in
the Lion, which was a mean to hold much evil from among them. So it behooves
us to mark things that come to pass daily, (which all fall out by Gods
providence) and his dealing in and by them, that we may learn wisdom
thereby, and take good by them. For as Preachers gather similies by the things
they see, read, and hear, to illustrate that which they utter in their
Sermons to the people; so should we by Gods judgments upon the wicked, and his
blessings on them that fear him, we (I say) should learn to profit by them,
and to shun the one, and to get our part in the other, so as all may say, we
have made right use of them in deed, whereas the most part take no good by
either of both, nor by any other of his great works: my meaning is not, that
the general administration of God only in the governing the creatures (which
he has admirably made) ought to be noted, but specially the ends of the just
and unjust: that to the one there is always peace, the other cannot, no not at
death give testimony of a good estate, nor depart with hope, nor encourage his
companions to be like him, but dies either with a wounding, yet desperate
conscience, or is stricken like Nabal, with a dead Palsy of insensiblenesse.

But to proceed with this act of Samson, in the latter part of this verse, we
Doct. 2. ver. 15.
see how by occasion of this riddle much evil was stayed in that company: for
the time which would have been otherwise very lewdly and ill bestowed by the
Philistims, was now busily taken up about studying and searching out of the
meaning of the riddle: for so it is said in the text, they could not in three
days expound it. And hereby we may learn, that much sin may be stayed in
meetings of friends and neighbors at feasts and merry makings, if there be
any persons there, to intend and endeavor to prevent and stop it. And that is
done by good and religious talk brought in, (if it will be admitted) or of
things indifferent, yet tending to good ends: (as I have said before) the which
once occupying and possessing them, may put them out of their bad by as, which
I have often seen done in my time: namely, much evil to have been hindered, and
put by, while by some in the company better minded then the rest, it has thus
been prevented carefully and wisely by christian and sauoury communication, and
also kind usage of them, and such like good means.

And to enlarge and urge this matter a little further, of and about these
Philistims, that as they were least hurtful when they were most busy in
seeking out the meaning of the riddle, so I may truly say this of the most of
bad sort, that the greatest good they do either in Church or commonwealth, or
at least, the sewest evils that they commit, are when they be at their labor,
and tied to the works of their calling, even as the thief is fast from doing
of evil when his hands are tied behind him. For though evil persons are ill
minded even at their work, and as ill occupied, if they have opportunity,
seeing they are framed thereto, yet this can be nothing so much, as when oil
is put to the flame: for then they are at elbow room, and much more when they
be lincked in company with such as be like themselves, which is as far from
that which ought to be, as may be, seeing every part of a christian man's life
should bring forth fruit. And it ought to be a great humbling of such when God
shall open their eyes, (until which time they dream of no danger) that
whereas they are commanded in all that they do, or go about, to honor the
Lord, they yet shall be by manifold witnesses brought against them, convinced
of the contrary. For whether they fast or feast, labor or be idle, whether
they be alone, or in company, or whatsoever they do, yea even when they
worship God in the congregation, their hearts are lusting after some evil, and
far from goodness. Therefore happy are those servants, who when the Lord comes
may be found occupying their talent, so as they may be able to say, they have
been neither idle nor unprofitable in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus willingly
and with good aduisednes, but since they were taken into his service have
showed themselves faithful and diligent: (always except infirmity) and yet even
then they are also occupied, namely in resisting the same.

Thus we see that for three days they did beat their brains about finding
Verse. 16.
out the meaning of the riddle, and we read no other but that they do so the
other three days, till the seventh came. But very probable it is, that they
devised among themselves (if need should be) that they would use Samsons wife
in the matter, to help them to come by the meaning of it, because it is said in
this verse, that they came to her, and urged her sore to get it of him on the
seventh day, when their hope otherwise was altogether past, although it is
like they had sore urged her to do so before, then (I say) they threatened that
they would otherwise burn her fathers house. And further they made a great
matter of that they should lose thereby if they could not show the meaning of
it, as if they had been undone by it, (and all this they ascribed to her
bringing of him thither) if she did not learn the meaning of the riddle, and
tell it to them.

And hereby their seeking to get it by shifts and guile, when they could Doct.
not find it out by coniecturall wit, and deliberation, we may see how like
to these Philistims the most part of people are: who for a while keep compass
in their matters they deal in, and in their behavior, as though they were
well ordered persons; this (I say) many do for a time, while they have no great
provocation nor temptation to break out, but if they do like storms and
tempests arise to stir and disquiet them; lo, then they appear in their
color, and make themselves known what they are, and what little government
they have of themselves. Saul when David being pursued of him, showed him
plainly, that he had such advantage against him, that he could have killed
him, spoke mildly and kindly to him: but 1. Sam. 24. 18.
when he had thoughts put into his head, that David sought his life, then he
was most spitefully exasperated and incensed against him.

So in another kind, while Ananias and Saphira his wife kept their possessions
in their hands, there was no complaint made of or against them, neither were
they accused to have lived offensiuely: but when the Church was in need, and
they for praise of men would do as other did, according Acts 5. 2. etc.
to the Apostles persuasion, that is to say, relicue the poor, and so
proceeded to sell some part of their lands, then they began to distrust that
they should have enough, and of a covetous mind kept away part of the price
that they sold it for, and yet would make a show to give it all, swearing
falsely thereunto. So many among us live peaceably, innocently, and
vnoffensiuely, as honest neighbors, and well liking religion for a time, who
yet in trials, and yet these not great, and particularly in matters of money or
money worth, bewray that they are to be commended for none of all these shows
of goodness, but lay forth themselves in contrary colors. Much like to that
which Satan spoke of Job, (though amiss, and in another case) Touch Job 2. 5.
him, and he will curse thee to thy face. And we may almost bind it for true,
that if a man being laid to the touchstone of gain, especially when no man
knows what he does, do approve himself conscionable, he is an honest Note.
man indeed. And as the Philistims did here fall to shifts, unlawful means,
cruelty, and many other evil ways, who first did not so. In like manner we
see among ourselves, that some will show themselves as fair chapmen as may be,
like the bargain very well, and boast they will not take good gain ten
pound, etc. for it again: also they will agree upon covenants, seal the
writings, take witnesses, appoint the day of payment or delivery; and what
should I say more? yet let the ware or merchandise in the mean season wax
cheaper then was supposed, then begins the frank buyer to shrink, palter, and
shift dishonestly for himself: And so does the seller commonly, if the price
rise any thing: whereas they bought and sold before hand, pretending they were
resolved upon whatsoever event to rest satisfied; if there were loss, to
depend upon God for restitution, and not to shrink back: Psalm. 15. 4. if
gain; yet to confess it equal and just, to yield, and forgo it without
grudging, seeing God has cast it upon the party. And the same humor is
bewraied in such sellers, as coming short of the Note.
price they would have, yet being compelled to deliver the commodity, do
change and impair the quality, and goodness of it, or cut it short in
measure, or use other men gripingly, to make themselves amends: showing
plainly, that they regard not any thing in their contracts, save only to make
a pray of their brother, and serve their turn by him, without conscience, or
civil respect of the Commonwealth. So also when men cannot enjoy their
commodities, and thrive as they would, but decay, or fear that they Note.
shall; or if things grow dear, or by an hundred like occasions, they who for
a time were of good carriage and behavior, have fallen to bad practices, and
very offensive courses to live and be maintained by, and thereby disguise
themselves, as if they had never been well reported of, nor had been honest of
behavior. Yea, (and which is more) this takes hold of many of the better sort
even of Christians, if they be hardly laid at by trials, and prouocations,
they too readily yield to do things evil and unbeseeming them. All which, if
they will not see and so amend and reform such dishonestie, when it appears
to men, or secret falsehood, though God only see it, they sufficiently bewray
that God has no pleasure in them. But if any break out in their lives
offensiuely, and in such a wicked sort, when they be not strongly laid at and
provoked to do so, they do worse then these Philistims, who were sore
provoked and nearly driven (as we have heard) (the time drawing near in which
they must give the meaning of the riddle, or else suffer inconvenience) before
they fell to subtlety and violence, and yet even therein we see they disguised
themselves grossly.

And here it shall not be amiss to mark the wrangling and dishonest 2
contendings of these Philistims, when they saw they must lose; and what
comes of playing for money, or wagering. Even in this our age, wh^re the
users of them are of the same mould and nature with these Philistims, the same
may be seen: Among many other evils, which I will not here set down, these
that are mentioned in this place, to have been practiced of them, are for the
most part, companions with play and wagering. That is to say, coffeehouse,
quarrelling, contentions, denying, and breaking the covenants, and seeking to
do this by force and by threatenings. As these here are not ashamed to require
that Samson should tell his wife the meaning of the riddle, that she might
declare it to them, which was as much as to go from their covenant, and so
with dishonestie to deny it. But of these mischievous fruits futable to the
causes, I said somewhat before.

But in the mean season this further mark (for the aggravating of the fact)
how small a matter it was, that they could have lost thereby: which I do not
so much speak, as though I would cause maruciling, that the uncircumcised and
irreligious people should contend for so small a matter, who did the like
throughout their life; but to the end I may fitly take occasion hereby, justly
to charge numbers at this day, what a great and grievous finne they commit, who
fall out one with another for a less matter then for a change or suite of
apparel, when yet they profess to be guided by knowledge in the things which
they do. But it is less marvel that they so break out at their playing to
win one another goods, when as they will do as much in their lawful
bargains, that is, quarrel and strive (that I say no worse) for a groate or a
shilling value, as I said in the former point in a more general sort.

Oh the mischief that many do, yea and upon a small occasion, and for a very
trifle. For these were ready to burn down the house and her, and all that was
in the house, rather then they would lose the value of a suite of apparel: So,
how much is spent by men in their rage and heat at the law for a twelve penny
matter, though not so much for the thing, as the satisfying of the will and
spiteful stomach of the man. Yea what vndoings withal of one another are
seen, and that in one age after another, lest they who come after, should seem
to learn wisdom by them that went before them; both woeful and long
experience do too lamentably teach. Behold how great a fire a small sparkle
kindles: that is, when it falls upon matter fit Iam. 3. 5.
for it. This be said for amplification of the former point, and of the whole
for this time.

THE SEVENTIE SEVEN SERMON ON THE XIIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
HOw earnestly the Philistims urged Samsons wife to get Verse. 17. 18. 19.
the meaning of the riddle of him, we heard in the former Sermon: now the holy
story sets down, what followed their threatenings of Samsons wife, that she
might get the meaning of the riddle at his hand. First she sued to him in most
earnest manner to know The sum.
it, and and required of him, that as he loved her, he would declare the
meaning of it unto her: who answered her by sound reason, and gave her a
denial. But she not satisfied therewith, desisted not, but was importunate
with him, and weeping to him the rest of the seven days after the first three
were past: for so are the words to be understood in the 18. verse [she wept
before him the seven days, while the feast lasted:] then, I say, he told her
the meaning of the riddle on the seventh day, and she declared it to them, and
they to Samson, and so the controversy was ended.

And first let us mark the woman's dealing with him: thou love me not, Verse
17.
says she, but hate me. That had been hard indeed at the first entering into
their marriage, though a thing which falls out often in the marriages of many
unadvised couples. But her words were not true, neither therefore by and by so
to be believed, as she uttered them, to wit, that he loved her nor: yet if it
had been so, we all see had been guilty of a foul and great crime: whereby
before we proceed further, let us note this: that in the judgment of an
heathenish woman, there should be no hatred but near and unfeigned love
betwixt couples in marriage: much more among Christians should it be verified,
Never any man hated his own flesh, etc. Such an absurdity (I say) is not to
be admitted, but to be abhorred, which causes (that I say no more) weariness
one of another. The falling out among those is much more to their great shame:
yea, and so is the diminishing of love also which makes ready way to hatred,
seeing love ought to be strong Cant. 8. 7.
as fire, which cannot be quenched with many waters. But they provide ill for
this, who make their marriage (when yet it is void of grace, and the fear of
God) the only ground of lovely and delightful qualities: whereas the best
things that are in it, beside these, are flitting, and momentanie, and so is
the love yt is grounded on them: but the true and christian love is constant,
and brings forth much fruit. And this is a point of such importance, that
the Apostle includes all the husbands duty therein, that he love his wife: as
if he should say, Where that is, other good things are not wanting. For he
being the head of relation and union, from whom must flow and descend to the
wife all comfort and welfare; he must know, that he is thorough this love, to
communicate himself to his wife, in all free, bountiful, and plentiful
affection, and duty: whereupon it follows, that she is to him again in all
reverend submisse, and yet cheerful manner, fitted and framed. Yea so
weighty a point is this of love, (I speak not of frothie, hot and foolish
love, which is vanity of vanities) that except the heart of the man be knit
to the woman in the Lord, as to one not only religious and well qualified, but
also as the only person, whom he can delight in, and live within this special
kind of fellowship: except this (I say) it is not the general choosing of a
good woman, which will serve the turn, neither shall the several and mutual
offices which concern each party be ever currantly or constantly performed,
much less the whole life, and the estate of marriage blessed or comfortable.

Further, by her weeping, when she had no just cause, we may note the Doct. 2.
subtlety of a bad woman, to complain bitterly of that, which her husband
gave her no occasion of. For what though he told her not that which he ought
not to do, must he therefore hate her? and although the Philistims threatened
her, did that prove that he hated her? I say therefore (to leave her to her
self, and such as she was) let no just cause of unkindness be offered by a
Christian husband, and let it be well testified that he does so, and if she
will then (as many women do) dissemble, and charge her husband unjustly, and
knows that she does so, and that only to bring him to the bent of her bow, or
to make her own cause seem tolerable and good, and so seek (as she did here)
to draw him to inconvenience; if (I say) she do thus, let it make all
Christians wise and wary of such fetches, and teach them that they in the
mean while, giving them all due that belongs to them, take heed that they be
not overcome of them that way, or in any such case. As for example, if a
spiteful woman will call her husbands love into question, because he will not
revenge the falsely supposed wrongs which another has offered her, as she out
of her impotent humor pretends: Or if a proud woman will thus vpbraid her
husband, for not satisfying her demands touching costly attire, or allowance
of more money, then his estate will admit. So also if a jealous woman, to
justify her base and uncomely conceits and behauiours to her husband, shall
make her case good, by alleging that he is cheerful in other women's
companies, though he do it with sobriety and wariness: In all these cases let
the husband see that he be innocent, and then beware how he prostitute or
imbondage himself to such of his wives passions, lest by yielding a little, he
lose his liberty: but yet let it be done kindly and peaceably anger and
bitterness.

Now further, in that she charge him that he loved her not, because he Doct.
3.
told her not of that secret that in no equity it concerned her to know; what
reason had she so to do? But she drew her reason from a wrong ground: that
is, that women must know their husbands mind in all things, or else they think
they love them not. If this had been her error alone, I would have said no more
of it. But behold, it is a fondnes and folly that possesses many women. I
confess that in things common to them, and that concern both, either
pertaining to soul or body, or this present life, there be a free and ready
communicating of all such things betwixt them, for the woman has a right
therein, as well as the man: but seeing there are many things of fecresie
besides them, which lie waightily upon the husband, but do nothing concern
the wife, yea and dangerous to be told forth, and many women weak to
conceal them, the husband in no wisdom may impart them unto her: and yet for
all that, he shall not be justly charged with want of love. But more of this in
the next Chapter (God willing) save one.

Samson withstood his wife at first by good reason, namely, this, that he had
not told it to his father, nor mother, whom yet he loved dearly, and 4
long; she was but new married to him, neither had he proof of her
faithfulness, wisdom, and silence; but otherwise his reason had not been good,
seeing a man may impart some things to his wife rather then to them, and in
denying her request he did well. So we should with reasonable answers withstand
unreasonable suits, and then we shall show ourselves well fortified by the word
and sound resolution out of a good conscience, when we can give a sufficient
reason of our refusal: and otherwise we are as like to be drawn to sin,
although we be not greatly solicited by the importunity of others, our selves
being ungrounded or unarmed against the subtlety and loose disposition of our
own hearts, though we think never so well of our own strength. But it must
be granted, that the greatest danger is when beside our own readiness and
pronesse to evil, we have prouocations also, and those strong by inward
temptations and outward occasions. In avoiding and resisting both, Joseph has
given us an example worthy our following, who was neither snared nor enticed
inwardly, when he saw he might easily have had such desire satisfied, neither
being allured with words and flattery, did so much as hearken to his whorish
mistress. Now as I have spoken to men, so a word I will add to women, and
that is this, that if they were wise, they would learn to shake off the bold
and shameless suits of such as should dare demand that of them, which were
their dishonestie, reproach, and undoing, namely, to prostitute their chastity
to any of them at their pleasures, who having once spoiled them, do leave them
so. But of the fruit of dalliance more afterward.

It is said here that she would not be answered so by him, but was importunate
with him all the rest of the seven days of the feast, after the first Verse
18.
three, in which they could not find out the meaning of the riddle, and so she
won and obtained at his hands at last that which she sought: and so she told
it to her people and country men the Philistims. These three things may be
seen in this verse distinctly, her importunate urging of him, his impotencie
in being overcome of her, and her telling the exposition of the riddle to the
Philistims her people. And they minister several instructions to us. First by
her importunate urging of him, when no reason would answer her, we may see,
how unreasonable shameless, and bold, and yea vnwearyed wicked persons are in
the following of their bad suites, so that they will never give over, but
think they shall prevail by one means or other, at the least, by their
importunity: we cannot do the like, nor come near them either in seeking to
further goodness by men, or in suing to God for it; but a small denial, and a
weak withstanding of us by men, makes us soon weary of our honest attempts,
and so we may faint by and by, and in like manner give over in making our
requests to God, yea, and that for great matters if we prevail not at once.
How unlike are we to the woman of Canaan, who would take no repulse, nor be
discouraged by the hardest answer that was given her. And our Savior has
taught us, that if we were Luk 18. 8.
importunate with him, we could not fail, nor go without that which we a^ke,
our requests being made according to his will. And this is one special point
of wisdom, wherein the children of light are to learn of the children of
this world.

Now further to pass to the second thing of the three, we see that by this
Doct. 2.
following him thus with continual urging of him, he yielded to her suite, and
told her the meaning of the riddle. So that he who withstood her at the first,
was afterward overcome. It teaches, that when we have overcome a temptation
at the first assaulting us, (which one would think were hardest to do in
respect of times following) yet we may possibly be overcome of it afterward,
and be given over to it: as for example, whether it be to such unlawful
demands as this was, or to incontinencie, filthy gain, seeking, or any such
like. The reason is, because we are fickle and flexible, and do not strengthen
our selves to be constant at one time as an other in a good thing, neither be
often instant with God by fervent praying, watching, neither couenanting against
sin, or not looking carefully to the keeping of them, neither disgrace sin: by
means whereof, Satan takes his advantage against us one time or other.

Even so the same Samson here spoken of, did afterward the very like, who
withstanding the inticements of a subtle woman as now he did at the first, and
that with full purpose (for a time) to do so still, yet yielded by long
persuasion unto her unjust and unreasonable request at the last. It is no
marvel to see it thus in some particular sin and temptation that one is
brought to yield at last, who resisted at the first: for we see it to be so in
the general liking and embracing of the whole doctrine of the Gospel. That
some, who received it with joy for a time, yet fall away from the love of it
afterward, as if they had never embraced it. Therefore, much more they who have
resisted a sin for a time, may possibly afterward fall into it
notwithstanding. And it ought to make the best of us constant in watching
against all evil as well as at the first, remembering that our Savior his
charge is peremptory and indefinite reaching at all times [Watch.] As for them
who never have had any sound proof of the forgiveness and death of sin
wrought in them by the power of the Word, no marvel if this inconstancy be
seen in them, that they please themselves overmuch in their good actions, and
soon are discouraged either from within or without themselves by the least
occasion. The best people must plie God with their prayers to hold out, and to
build up daily upon a good foundation. Can a rush grow without mire? or can a
man be watchful to persist in the good course which he has seemed to like, or
in hating the sin which he seemed to have disliked, when there is nothing to
set him forward in a matter of such difficulty? Flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God: neither is Satan divided in himself. Rejoice not men in
their shows therefore, but get the assurance of Gods favor, and not patch up
an evil heart with a few colors of goodness which are not joined with
substance.

Also this weakness and folly of Samsons, before I pass to the third point, 3
teaches another thing: that when we have overcome an hard difficulty, and
greater temptation, yet we may be afterward overcome of a small one. For he
had concealed the opening of the riddle to his father and mother, to whom he
had far greater reason to tell it, as having so long proof of their piety,
love, and faithfulness; rather then to her a stranger, and whom he knew to
be void of the most of them, if not all. And it is like he told not them,
lest they should by some occasion have opened it to the Philistims, as his wife
did now unto them.

His folly in bewraying it to his wife, was like the sin of the man of God,
who came to reprove Ieroboams idolatry at Bethel. For he having a charge given
him of God that he should go into no house in that wicked place, to 1. King.
13. 8. 9.
eat or refresh himself, did well and carefully observe it in the place where
it was hardest to do it, that is the Kings house, and yet behold he was
overcome, and went from his charge, through foolish credulity, where he might
much more easily have kept it, that is, to his fellow. For he being invited
home by the King, he withstood it, not fearing his displeasure: but when
afterward he was moved by the old Prophet of Bethel, to go to his house and
eat, he went with him contrary to the commandment of the Lord, and was
therefore after his departure slain of a Lion in the high way.

The reason hereof both in him, and as many as offend that way, that they are
overcome of a smaller sin, when they have overcome a greater, is this; that
men are more afraid of committing that, and distrusting themselves, seek the
more fervently to God for help, and obtain it: but when it is a Note.
smaller sin, we do not so much suspect and fear our selves, and so being
unarmed and ill provided, we do the easilier fall into it. And thus it comes
to pass, that when we have slain a Lion, a Bear foiles us, and having
devoured a camel, a gnat chokes us, that is, we avoid the harder
inconvenience, and yet bewray and show our weakness in a smaller, which we
might more easily have overcome. And so it fares with us in repenting, that
for a great trespass we are easilier brought to relent, seeing we know that
we were more hardened in and by the committing of it, and yet in a less
offense we shall hardlier bewail and confess it, seeing the heart in
committing of that does not see so much evil. Therefore it is well with Gods
servants, while they live by their former experience, and renew their care of
pleasing God, and fear of the contrary: for then they shall be so far from
this distemper, that they shall be able (with the same Prophet at another time)
to believe that he who delivered them from the Lion and Bear, (the more
dangerous) will not suffer the Philistim to prevail.

Now to come to the third point: whereas it is said, that when Samson 4
had opened it to his wife, she did by and by tell it to her country men, the
Philistims; it appears, that all her weeping to her husband was but
dissimulation and falsehood, treachery and unfaithfulness, even a pack of
mischief she did bewray to lie hidden in her heart, under that fair show of
kindness and love. To teach us, that we should not give credit to the outward
shows of goodness and simplicity, so as we rest in them as sufficient
proofs thereof, and when we have no better testimony in them that will Ierem.
17. 9.
seem such. For the heart of man is a deep gulf full of abomination: and
such as are subtle can wait their opportunity to get and obtain that which
they seek. And yet judge we none before the time, and till God shall lay them
open, but wait and try them. Many pray to God, but it is only as S^ James
says, to bestow amiss that which they ask, even upon their Iam 43.
lusts. And so do many pretend fair to men, when there is no such thing in
them, but dissimulation and hypocrisy.

Now they had got the knowledge of the riddle by the woman, they Verse 19.
bring it forth to Samson before the Sun went down on the seventh day. A
most gross part played by them, to seek it out that way, as Ahabs act was in
killing Naboth, when Elias met him, and said to him, Have thou killed and taken
possession? But it may give warning to us, to have no more to do with such
then we must needs. For this is so common, that false hood, violence and
vnconscion ablenes is crept in even among men of better profession, so that
they who deal with such, cannot tell when they have made their covenants and
bargains sure enough. For not only they fly from their word, but also from
witness and writing too, if there be the least Note.
hole to be found. Which is to make men more faithful themselves, and more
wise in taking heed of others.

Besides, note the vnweariednes of these men, that after they begun; they 2
never gave over laboring, and persuading the woman by flattery and threats,
sweating at it, till they had that which they sought, and yet had little hope
of coming by it by her means, who was wife to their adversary Samson, with
whom the wager was laid who if she had been faithful to him, might as well
have fetched the water of the well of Bethelem, (by going through an host of
armed men for it) as they should have got it of her.

Oh the toil that lewd fellows will take for their pleasure and profit, and
to bring their wicked purposes to pass. If they have no success at one time,
yet they take no discouragement at it, but set upon it another. They that take
such pains for trash, a man would think should take some for Note.
grace. But oh that they who profess to love goodness, could be brought to
do but half so much to bring good things to pass, and to seek happiness
for ever, as they do in hunting after the pleasures of sin, and filthy
gain, which are but for a moment. I have said somewhat of this in the woman's
importunity, though indeed she was woed to this by these, and these were the
first that swaied her motion. But she (of the two) was the more like to
prevail with him, then they to draw her to be a party with them. Therefore
strange was their confidence and presumption in attempting to go thus between
bark and tree, and obtaining their purposes by so desperate a means, as were
no less then the setting husband and wife together by the ears. But what will
not such adventure, as are set upon mischief? A right Emblem of the cursed
brood of Jesuits, negotiators for the whore of Babylon, whose fury no
attempt, no sedition is impossible unto us.

And to shut up this matter about seeking out the meaning of the riddle; 3
now let us hear Samsons answer, when they brought in the meaning of it,
after this manner: [What is sweeter then honey, or stronger then a Lion] he said
in effect to them again; And what is more unfaithful or untrusty then a
woman? He answered little less, when he uttered these words to them; If ye
had not ploughed with my heifer, ye had not found out my riddle: which was as
much as if he had accused them of falsehood, and unjust dealing, and her of
unfaithfulness to her husband.

By this learn one property of a wicked woman, that she is more true and
trusty to strangers, then to her own husband. And yet to speak as the truth
is, she is neither constant nor sure to either of them, if a third come in Note.
the way betwixt both. But she that will deal so with her friend, namely her
husband, what, think we, would such an one do to her enemy? And if she
would do it without just cause, what, if she should be provoked? Whereby let
other be admonished. But oh faithfulness, how precious and much to be desired
art thou? And of Samsons wife and the Philistims thus much: of Samson himself
I will say more in the next Sermon.

THE SEVENTIE EIGHT SERMON ON THE XIIII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw I will end the Chapter with Samson, and show what Verse 20.
was done by him then, after the feast was ended: which is the fourth and last
branch of the second part of the Chapter. We have heard how ill he was dealt
with by the Philistims, yet (as the story relates) he did perform that,
which they challenged as their due, which yet in deed they had justly deprived
themselves of by their bad dealing, if Samson would have stood with them. But
the Lord strengthened him, so that he paid them with the apparel of their own
countrymen. And having slain thirty men of them, and answered the demand of
the other that wagered with him, he was greatly offended with his wife, and
went away from her to his fathers house, not telling her whither he went, and
in the mean while, she was given away from him by her father to one of his
companions. And these things fell out after the marriage feast.

It is said here, that the spirit of the Lord came upon Samson again, that we
may know that he was guided thereby, in that which he went about, when he slew
the thirty Philistims at Ascalon, and was thereby strengthened also to do it.
This example of his is not to be followed of us, I confess, but we must do
things in our vocation which God have commanded generally in his word.

The apparel of these thirty men of the Philistims whom he slew, he 2
gave to them that told the meaning of the riddle. So that although he fell
into their hands by subtlety, yet does he not shift them off, and serve them
according to their dealings with him, but satisfy them: for though no mention
be here made of the linen that he gave them with the garments, yet we must
understand it thus, that he gave them all, though the chief only be named,
it being the manner of the spirit of God to express the whole oftentimes by a
part: and besides, we know, they would not otherwise have been contented and
satisfied. So we are to know that it does not become us who are Christians, to
yield ill measure to them that offer it to us, as we see that neither Samson
did, but to overcome evil with good: which (it must be granted) will hardly be
yielded to, and the flesh affords much ill counsel against it: but we are
not debtors to it, to fulfill the desires of it, Romans 8.
but to practice innocence, through many prouocations to the contrary. Nay
further, although we should pretend that we use our advantage against him
that has wronged us, to this end that we may play stopgame (as we say) with
him, and save our selves harmless, although we do not deprive him simply of
his own, even this (I say) is not permitted us: except the advantage be such
as we may lawfully take, and would have taken against him in equity, whether
he had given us occasion of revenge or no. As for example, if he have wronged
us in our bargain through our oversight, we may not provide for our selves by
some oversight of his: but if he stands not to covenant, or deny us our due, we
may lawfully seek our own, after all other means to come by it have been
used, so we have no respect of revenge. And this is the straight rule: but
where is the practice of it, even among them that know it, and profess it
should be so, to let others go? But we think our condition unequal, if we
may not deceive the deceiuer, and prevent his subtlety with the like, and play
the Cretians with the Cretian, that is, dissemble, cogge, and lie with him that
makes no conscience, as if Christianity might not meddle in this business;
which yet is as apparent a relike of the old man, and the lust of our flesh,
from which we should be purged, as any other, if Paul may be believed. Oh what
occasion does the common sort take to recompense evil for evil? They then
show themselves in their kind and colors, when they can hit them home, who
have stood in their light never so little, and they love to talk and glory of
it, when they have done. But to say a word more of them, though it was not
expressed in the agreement betwixt Samson and the Philistims, that the meaning
of the riddle should be declared by their own finding out, and not by
falsehood, or indirect means: yet who doubts, but that they meant so? In
like manner, this departing from innocence in bargains and contracts, and
going to shifting, and against that which is honest and just, under a pretense
that every particular cannot be mentioned and set down, it is a great fault
among men, and proves them that deal so, to be far from vprightnes: but
those that yield of their due rather then strive endlesly, to be odd people.

But to pass from this, and to come to another point, namely of Samsons 3
wrath kindled against his wife for telling the riddle to the Philistims, and
therefore going away without her to his fathers house, or at least, not telling
her of it, that act of his is not to be justified. For he ought not in such a
moodie manner to have departed from his wife, and leave her in a wondering at
his so sudden going from her, and giving her cause to fear at his return
home, a renewing of his displeasure toward her again: he should not (I say)
have left her (a young woman new married) in doubts and fears, what might
befall her: but he should have told her fault unto her, as she had been fit to
hear it, betwixt them two, and so after a kind reproof, and a counselling of
her to be better governed, to have ended the controversy, and either to have
taken her with him, or at least not to have gone away frow her sullenly in
displeasure.

This shows what a fault sullennes is, when we be angry with any body, and
yet we will not be known of any such thing, neither show the cause peaceably
and plainly, why we are grieved, that so we might make an end of the matter,
and be satisfied (if it may be) with the answer given us, or at least bear it
patiently by little and little, and so cut off anger; but either to go out of
the company discontented and unquiet, or saying nothing, but broyling in our
stomachs to the great grief and offense of the party against whom our anger
is kindled and conceived, thus to do (I say) is a thing utterly unbeseeming a
Christian. But if question be made which of the two is worst, either open or
secret anger; I say, the bewraying of it, and the letting of it appear, if we
be so impotent that we cannot bridle and suppress it, is of both evils far
more tolerable, then this smoothering and keeping in of it, though both be vile
and odious.

For as if an house be set on fire, it is far more dangerous, and threatens
greater mischief to the speedy consuming of all that is in the house, when
the flame is pent in, then when it has vent to break forth: Even so, the
anger that is hidden and concealed, is far worse then that which shows it
self; as may be seen in Absoloms hidden wrath (breaking into murder) which
except it be in a high degree inflamed, (and that bewraieth much folly) will
soon vanish and come to an end: whereas the other imagines evil, and
brings it forth, when he thinks and sees best. Yet I grant there are
degrees in this sullennes, but it is too unbeseeming a Christian, when it is in
the lowest degree that is; yea though it go away in time, when the strength of
it is over, without any further hurt doing.

The remedy here, is to weigh the folly and shame of such disguising of our
selves. Also to consider what and who we be, that take the matter so hotly,
which is done against us, who have provoked God as many times as we have hairs
on our head. And how much greater cause we give to God to be displeased with us
we should consider, and whether we could like that the Lord should so hide his
displeasure against us, and execute it upon us, when we would not, neither are
aware of it. Thus, and by such like means, we should go about to resist and
assuage it. And if it be hardly done at the first, yet afterward it will be
done more easily, if we labor for it, and so in times chase it away
altogether, further then that some relics of it will remain in us, as after
some sore ague. Causes (I confess) there are of separation between married
persons, but every man must not be his own Judge, but either the Civil
Magistrate, or else those that are appointed by God in the Church to be judges
in these and such like cases, must determine. For what manner of society were
there like to be among men, if each husband upon every tetch might for a
shorter or longer time, leave the fellowship of his wife? To be sure, this
practice is one means (besides many more) of much uncleanness, confusion of
blood and posterity, beggary of the parties and families so forsaken, and of
what other riots and disorder God knows. For where the sacred ordinances of
God (which are the religious bands and securing pledges of peace, union and
order) are once leapt over, and trodden down, who can limit within any bounds
the mischief like to ensue? Therefore let none of such as are guilty in this
kind, plead Samsons example, who had as little liberty given him herein as
they.

Now whereas some object, that Samson herein gave place to wrath, and rather
withdrew himself, then abode with her, lest he might possibly have broken out
further: I answer, Samson in not dealing outragiously in words or deeds, is to
be commended: howbeit his going away in passion, is not thereby excused, seeing
this did not amend the matter, but made it worse. And although the party
offended may sometimes avoid (as Jonathan did) to alleniate such as are
displeased in the company, yet this follows not, that the party offended of
the married couples) may depart from the offender, and go away for ado: for
thereby he nourishes his own humor, and provoke the other further, rather
the^ slaketh it in either.

But to go forward, and so to draw to an end, here we may see what men Verse.
21.
get by such dealing. For while they be sullen, and take displeasure, and will
not bewray it, the other against whom they conceive it, are impatient, and
cannot bear it, as we see here Samsons wife and her father not enduring this
manner of his departure from her in dislike and coffeehouse, they (no
marvel) break off their love, and turn and show it to another. This was the
good he got by his inconsiderate dealing. And if we mark, we shall find,
that such rash folly and unadvised dealing (as this of Samsons was) is
commonly recompensed with some such unwelcome cross and trouble, and all
through their own fault who cause and provoke it: so that they would after buy
it off with labor and cost, when it is too late; which by a little wisdom
and patience they might altogether have removed, and kept away. As may appear
by that fact of Absalom, who being secretly incensed against Ammon for abusing
his sister (whereas he ought to have accused him to his father, and committed
the righting of his cause to him under God, without nourishing of a reuengefull
humor;) what brought he to pass thereby, and what ensued of it? but Ammons
murder, David's sorrow, a breach in the family, and to Absalom himself an
unpleasing exile from his fathers Court and presence. But far different was
David's behavior, being provoked by Shemei: he leaves the man, and looks into
himself: It may be I have deserved (says he) that God should suffer him to
curse me, let him alone. A most worthy president. Therefore, let the angry and
sullen person come forth and show what he has gained by his folly, save the
name of a fool, and the brand of reproach, and we will recant and call back
that we speak. No wonder if the mad man, casting fire, darts, arrows, and
deadly things, have some of them light upon his own pate. It is just also with
God to be displeased with such, and resist them, while they are unjustly
displeased with others, and meditate how to revenge. Many even upon the sudden
in their unadvised rage have killed their dearest friends, (as Alexander is
reported to have done in his drunken fume) and after being sober, they have
been ready to revenge themselves for their madness. Others leave prints of
their anger in the faces or bodies of such as they light upon, and some they
kill forth right: which they then repent of when either they have smarted well
in the purse, or be drawn forth to punishment which is appointed for such
fury and outrage. Let it teach us, to shake off wilfulnes, impatience, and
heat passions, and in stead of a little pleasing of our selves through folsie,
not neglect wise and kind dealing, which shall not be repented of. And to this
end we must use to meditate, both of our own corruptions of pride, selfeloue,
anger, loosenes, tetchines, frowardnes, and the like; how many and foul they
are; and also of our selves, who are but worms, dust and ashes; and therefore
no such as may not be crossed: and last of all, we should consider of those
whom we are wont to be offended with: that they are but men and mortal, and
therefore subject to humane infirmities; and what marvel then, if they do
things sometime that we like not, and which do cross us seeing they do to
us, but as we have done often to other. And we being sick of the same disease,
and being infected with the same original contagion and poison, should rather
pity them, then be angry and out of patience with them. But it were infinite
to set down that which yet might be said to good purpose of anger, and
remedies against it. This for this time by occasion of Samsons sullen mood at
his departing from his wife then.

As for the fact of Samsons wife and her father, so soon to be aleniated from
him, and she to be given to another, it is not to be marueiled at, neither any
reason to be asked of it, they being not led thereby, much less by a better
guide in their doings, but by will, and strength of flesh, whereby they were
ready to take very slight color and pretense of reason for their doings, as
has been noted before, and as shall further appear in the next chap. verse. 2.
And so we must look for no better measure at the hands of wicked and
unreasonable men, if we give them the least occasions, who are commonly carried
to outrage without any occasions: to teach us to have as little to do with
them, as we may: and when we must needs, take we heed that we make all sure
on our sides, (as possibly we may) to avoid evil and peril by them. But if it
fall out afterward, that we be in danger to them, and that they have
advantage against us, (as who is not subject to that and to the like?) we must
bear it patiently, committing the success to God, with well doing. And here
an end of this Chapter.

THE SEVENTIE NINE SERMON ON THE XV. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 1. But within a while after in the time of wheat harvest, Samson
visited his wife with a Kid, saying, I will go in to my wife into the chamber:
but her father would not suffer him to go in. 2. And her father said, I
thought that thou had hated her: therefore gave I her to thy companion. Is
not her younger sister fairer then she? take her, I pray thee, in stead of the
other. 3. Then Samson said unto them, Now am I more blameless then the
Philistims: therefore will I do them displeasure.
I Will proceed, keeping the order that I observe in the The sum of the
Chapter.
rest. And first to begin with ye sum, it is thus much: Samson, when his wife
was denied him, upon his return to her, took occasion to set on fire the
corn fields of the Philistims, and to kill them, being armed against them:
whereupon they came into Judea, to fight with the men thereof, unless they
would deliver Samson into their hands bound: who therefore did so. But his
bands being broken by the Lord, he slew a thousand of them with the iaw bone of
an ass: and being thirsty after his labor, he obtained water from God by
prayer: and so he was refreshed again.

The parts of it are four. The first, how Samson took occasion to hurt The
parts 4.
and to be revenged upon the Philistims, to verse 9. The second, how the
Philistims got him to be delivered bound into their hands by his own
countrymen: to the midst of verse 14. The third is, how he was strengthened by
God, so that he brake the cords, and slew a great many of them: to verse 18.
The last, how he thirsting after his labor, and obtaining water of God, was
refreshed. Of which in order, as the text gives occasion.

The first part of the Chapter.
COncerning the first part, and the woe that he wrought them, the occasion The
sum of the first part.
was, that his wife was denied to him, when he returned to take her, and was
given to another, as appears in the first two verses: hereby he was
provoked, as we see in the third verse, and so he set upon and hurt them in
their commodities, being so provoked, as is showed unto the 9. verse.

And first it is said, that after a while he came to his wife again, and
brought Verse 1.
a Kid with him to make merry with her, and to show thereby that he was
reconciled to her, and was purposed to live with her again. For he having in
absence considered his fault, in going from her in such a manner as he did,
resolved and thought good now to cut off all occasions of grief from her, and
of separation, and to renew and recover his decayed love again. It all that
will condemn Samson for his choler would shame themselves as he did here (in
returning, which was a condemning of his departing) when they have bin
overtaken as he was it were well: or if m^n could be brought out of love with
such their wilful doings, by considering that for the time they banish God out
of their thoughts, and make a man slave to his rankest enemy. But by this we
see, that though good and bad have passions, carrying and ruling them, yet
where grace dwells, they shall be found out in Doct.
time, and that shall be done to the vanquishing of them which the strength of
corruption in those that want grace, will not suffer a man to mark and resist
them. Sin nourishes it self (especially anger) by self-love: smoothing it
self up with Jonah his conceit, [I do well to be angrie] and so Samson Jonah
4. 9.
would (perhaps) have answered, if he had been demanded a while after he
departed from her. But now at leisure he recanteth, and by returning, condemns
his departure, as I said; much like the son, that being sent into the
vineyard, bid his father do his work himself for him; but after, coming
Mat. 11. 29.
to himself again, did as he was bidden and went. Whereas a lewd person
having sinned, pleases himself in it, and doubleth it with Esau in Genesis 28. 9.
his taking strange wives; or if he relent, it is for shame and terror only
as Judas; as I have noted in Abimelech before, chapter 9. Samson in his
cholencke Mat. ^7. 3.
pang, went away with resolution (likely) of never returning, but to let her
go as she deserved. But now in cooler blood he appeaseth himself (as the
Musician did Elisha) and demurring of his doings, confesses, that though his
wife deserved ill measure, yet it became not him who in so great 2. King. 3. 15.
heat sought to marry her: to deal so despitefully against her, and that
presently upon his marrying of her.

And more particularly, as Samson here upon better consideration returded to
his wife again, so it must be granted of all that there should not be any long
displeasure conceived betwixt couples, (if it cannot be avoided but that some
will be,) and specially that it is too much that there should be any separation
betwixt man and wife, unless it be with consent, and in love, and that also
but for a while, and as the Apostle wills that they may give themselves to
prayer and fasting, and so to come together again, lest the 1. Cor. 7. 5.
devil tempt them to evil. This I say were to be wished: but if there fall
out worse matter betwixt them, it ought to cease betimes, as we see here
Samson returned to his wife within a while after he went from her. For if the
prayers of married persons ought not to be broken off through dissension any
day, as S. Peter charge; much less ought there to be a separation 1. Pet.
3. 7.
for a longer time.

Therefore seeing many occasions fall out hereof betwixt couples in marriage,
by reason of much conceitednes one against the other, way wardnes, inconstancy
in love, false heartedness, and such like; let such as abhor and Note.
would shun this and the like wearisomenesse of their companions, never cease
till they renounce and disclaim those corruptions, and pray often and earnestly
against the same, and arm themselves with many renewed covenants, that no such
thing may be betwixt them. So shall they the better keep other in order who
are under them, when they shall see no breaches nor brawles betwixt them: yea
and they shall be fit to set other couples together who are at variance; but
they shall ill do that abroad, if they maintain not peace at home.

But by occasion that I said, that married couples should not be absent any
Object.
long time one from the other; it is objected that many are, who through
necessity of following their calling, cannot choose but be a long time one from
another, as many Lawyers, Merchants, Sea men and other: and therefore how can
that charge that is given by the Apostle to the Corinths 1 Cor. 7. 5.
stand? to wit, that there should be no long absence betwixt couples. I
answer: because that charge is no better kept, therefore is much evil
committed, Answ.
I mean through long absence one from the other, and many complain how they
smart by means thereof, and yet redress it not, nay say plainly, they see
not how they can.

And I say further, that men suffer much sorrow, and sustain great troubles
through their own fault, who seeing what their callings are, and that absence
must fall out betwixt them, do neither labor for more grace themselves to
bear it the better, neither seek such yoke-fellowes as excel other therein,
neither faithfully take order between themselves carefully to look about them
every way to avoid danger. For God is not contrary to himself, neither
commands he contraries: as that there be no long absence one from another:
and yet that they shall follow such callings as of necessity require it. But
if the last must needs be; then certainly they may be helped and relieve
themselves in the first. And if they both fear God (as otherwise what promise
have they that God will bless them in any thing, or what speaking to them is
there about any such matter? If (I say) they fear God, then by good order
taking, betwixt themselves, and by often and earnest praying on both parts, for
quiet and chaste minds and bodies, using therewith all good means for the
same as need shall require, then they shall attain redress against it, and
God has promised to such, that with consent they may be absent each from
other, without the many vnquietnesses and other inconveniences, the which yet
do most certainly meet with such as be not so qualified: who if they fall
into adultery, and the like evils, it is the fruit of their sin which God
punishes, I mean of their irreligiousnesse, unfaithfulness, and such like,
as they fall out to be; who is able to say what or how many?

It follows in this verse, when Samson would have gone into the chamber to
his wife, to do the duty of an husband to her, the father the Philistim, 2
would not suffer him, for he had given her to another! Oh woeful act, but
especially before he had spoken with him. But we need not wonder at that; for
what reason do such profess to yield of their doings? By this dealing of the
Philistims, we may see, what a sore punishment it is to have to do with such
unconscionable men, that will boldly hold our right from us, and so deal with
us, that we cannot make any reckoning, no not of that which is our own, if it
must come through their hands, neither can be sure of our own, if it be owing
and due unto us by them.

And what bondage is this, that another should have power and authority over
our goods? Nature it self being the foundation of propriety in each man's
goods, and abhorring community, as the cut-throte of civil society and
commonwealth. As if the labourer when he had done his work, must nor look to
receive his wages; or the man who has lent wares for money, should be denied
it: as though he that lists, should claim or detain another bodies goods.
And to that point things are come in many places, that for the heathenish
inconsionableness that is grown up in this world, Note.
a man cannot say that any thing he has is his own, there are so many ways
to defeat the owners of their due. And so are men pursued with other open
wrongs, that they may well say, as Samson had cause to complain; you deal
with us as Philistims. The use of this is, to account of honest and faithful
men much the better, and in dealing with other be wary and circumspect; also
be ready to offer all good measure to those with whom we have to do. But this
point offers it self often.

And as for Samson, who was denied his wife when he returned to her fathers
house to take and enjoy her, all may see what a punishment it is. But when men
bring it upon themselves by their own sin, as he did, they are the less
pitied And this is true of the final disappointment of the ungodly, as the
example of the foolish Virgins shows, excluding themselves from that place,
which yet they desired. Let every man therefore avoid occasions of troubling
himself as well this way as otherwise, by giving liberty to his corrupt
affections and lusts; wherein Samson failing, by going from his wife in a
fullen and discontented manner, rather then wisely saluing up her offense, now
brought it to pass that he was denied her when he would gladly have enjoyed
her. Thus does a man's sin crop off the blossom which should after in season
yield fruit. And this and such like are the fruits of our sins, which never
yet, no not the pleasantest, did us any good. This hurt among many other
comes; that thereby we are deprived of our best liberties, when we would enjoy
them, and all because we did, in our sinful mood set light by them. But of
this enough in the last verse of the former chapter.

Her father to excuse his cursed act, in giving his daughter to another man,
tells Samson, he thought he had hated her, therefore (he says) I gave her Verse
1.
to thy companion, and then he offered him her sister, as being fairer then
she. We may learn by this his first speech, that wicked and unconscionable
men, when they have offered great wrong to their neighbor, make a light matter
of it: they thought (they say) they might have done as great a matter as that,
without offense taken thereat, and that they had cause to do so; and they
thought it would not have been so hardly taken; yea and many bid them go seek
their remedy, where they can get it. So in the History of the Church, Julian
the reuolter being solicited to deal more indifferently with the Christians,
used to answer: Tush, they have no wrong done to them, for their Master
commands them being smitten on the one Mat. 5. 39.
cheek, to turn the other. So did the cruel Pharaoh vpbraid the poor
Israelites groaning under their burdens; saying to them, Ye are idle, and want
Exodus 5 17.
work: and the Babylonians so taunted the poor Jews mourning under
captivity; Sing us some of the songs of Sion. Rehoboam also being willed to
mitigate Psalm. 137. 3.
the heavy hand which his father held over his subjects, answers; 1. King.
12. 14.
Tush, ye had too good measure showed ye by my father; my little finger shall
be heavier then his loins. And as slightly bad men deal with the Lord in his
service: they think their drawing near to him with their bodies is sufficient
service, though their hearts be far off, when yet he himself professes,
that in vain do such worship him. Math. 15. 9.


So Saul thought he might offer a burnt offering and a peace offering to 1.
Sam. 13. 9. 13
the Lord, (though it was contrary to his commandment) and would needs imagine
it to be well pleasing to him so to do, taking it harshly that Samuel
presses him so with his disobedience. But he should have obeyed God, and not
have followed his own fancy.

But to return to their dealings with men, whom when they have sore hurt and
wronged, they make a light matter of it, and say, they meant no harm; they are
like the man in the Proverbs, that fained himself mad, and cast firebrands and
arrows, and says, he was in sport: so they deal deceitfully Prou. 26. 19.
and wickedly with their friend and neighbor, and say, they are in sport, that
is, they mean no harm. But if the least injury be offered them (as was
here to this Philistim by Samson, going from his daughter but a while) they
will make of a little matter a great, rather then be satisfied with such an
answer, that the party thought it would not be so hardly taken. To conclude,
as Solomon says to the young men; Reioce in thy youth, etc: but be Eccles.
11. 9.
sure God will bring thee to judgment: so I may say to these men while health
and iollity lasts, and none to control you, tread your underlings under your
feet, and wind God himself about your fingers: make a slight matter of sin,
and say, it was but a trick of youth, it was but a small matte, I did it but
once; as many at this day make a But of Adams sin, he did but eat an apple (a
matter of nothing) and lo both he and all his posterity must die for it. And
do ye as Esau did, Tush, what great matter is it to sell my birthright, Genesis
25. 32.
let it go? Sooth up your selves (I say) with the conceit of him that thinks
God is (as the Papists paint him) but a good old man and sits idle, he will
neither do good nor evil, we may use and deal with him as we list. But
when God shall take the wild Ass in her months (who being light, cared for
none of her pursuers) I mean, when he shall visit these men, Ier. 1. ^4.
and set before their face their vnconscionablenes and hard measure, which they
have offered and made nothing of, (as if other men were made to be their
tenis-balles, and the objects of their wrong and scorn) then their sin shall
not seem a small But, but a great hill and mountain unto them, and they shall
cry out, saying, We never felt the weight of our sin till now; it was light
in committing, but the punishment is greater then we can bear. And as the
holy Ghost threatens adulterers, God shall judge them; so let these Heb. 13. 4.
know, that seeing they are too stout and stately for common men to meddle
with, God will take them in hand, and (as James says) be an advocate for the
innocent against their oppressors. This be added to the former point, Iam. 5 4.
to this end, that as there I counsel others to have little to do with such
2. These. 1. 6.
Cormorants: so by this mark and cognizance, and the like (as the next point
notes) we may know and avoid them the better. Thus much be said of the first
speech of Samsons father in law: the next follows.

And that was, that he offered him his wives sister to be his wife. For he 2
respected not how near she was in blood, but feared him, because he saw that
he was a man of a great stomach, and did fret sore against the Philistims,
therefore he offered him her to appease his wrath, and yet many of the Heathens
did know that such marriages were unlawful, and made laws against them. Thus
he thought to put him off. Even so wicked men, when their bad dealings are
found out, and they in some danger and fear by means thereof, mark what
recompense they offer: and that is worse then if they offered none at all, (as
he did here) and such as they cannot take, nor be the better for, being (for
the most part) against conscience: for either they promise them fair and go
from it: or if they pay their debts, and satisfy for their wrongs which they
have done, it shall be done most unwillingly, or with other men's losses and
harms.

By this act of his father in law, Samson took occasion to vex the Philistims,
Verse. 3.
the Lords enemies: for he saw that his father in law did but mock him, and
so he took not the condition that was offered him, but said, I have received
wrong of you Philistims, and my dealings shall be seen to be better then
yours, if it come into question. Ye have given me just cause to seek revenge.
But yet we must know, that this he did as one appointed by God thereto, and
not as a man to ease his stomach upon them for his own pleasure. So we may in
no wise revenge our enemies in the heat of our hearts, (howsoever we hardly
hear that saying) but leave vengeance to God, and bridle our unruly
affections, that they may not carry us to evil against men; but overcome
their evil with doing them good. Although I deny not, but Romans 12. 21.
where we are commanded of God to pursue evil, we must go about it readily,
as Samson here did. But here I end these verses.

Verse. 4. And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took firebrands,
and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst between two
tails.

5 And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the standing
corn of the Philistims, and burnt up both the shockes, and also the standing
corn, with the vineyards and olives.

6 Then the Philistims said, Who has done this? and they answered, Samson the
son in law of the Timnite, because he had taken his wife and given her to his
companion. And the Philistims came up, and burnt her and her father with fire.

7 And Samson said unto them, Though ye have done this, yet will I be avenged
of you, and after that I will cease.

8 And he smote them hip and thigh, with a great slaughter, and he went down,
and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam.

SAmson having gotten occasion to set upon the Philistims, the holy story in
these five verses shows how he used it, that is to say, these two The sum
of these verses.
ways: first in spoiling their commodities, their vines and olive trees, and
burning up their corn; and then in taking away the lives of many of them also.
The first of these two vexings of them is set down in these two first verses,
and he did it in this manner. He got three hundred foxes (which abounded in
those places) and the tails of them he bound together, and put firebrands in
the midst of them, and sent them into the corn of the Philistims, which then
was ripe, and burned up heaps or rickes of corn gathered in, and that which
was standing also.

It is but a folly for us to ask why he plagued the Philistims that way among
Verse. 4. 5.
all other. It is sufficient that the holy Ghost has set it down that he
punished them very sore even that way, as we may conceive. For a fire being
kndled in many places, and spreading further and further in every place where
it was kindled, much hurt might soon be done thereby; as appeared by Absaloms
dealing with Ioab in setting his corn field on fire. But much 2. Sam. 14. 30.
more these wild creatures (being terrified with the fire) running too and fro,
and carrying it through the fields might do greater mischief. A thing
(doubtless) unlikely to have come to pass so; but the more unlikely it was,
the more it admonishes us, not only that our commodities and riches are
subject to loss sundry ways which we may conceive, but even that way also
that we cannot think. For who would have thought (though by winds, wet, and
drought they might have lost their fruits) yet that they should have been
spoiled this way? But the reason is, for that there are so many casualties and
changes in this transitory life, and we are lively put in mind of it hereby.
Possess we therefore these earthly benefits, as if we did not, and so we
shall be less addicted to them. For no man can show to how many unlikely
dangers men's goods lie open, beside those which are common and ordinary. We
have heard of late, that many men's commodities being brought in (and so in
likelihood past danger) have been in great part destroyed by vermin, as mice
and rats.

Therefore they are called uncertain riches, seeing no man has any hold Luke
12. 20. 1. Tim. 6. 17.
of them, but one man's they are to day, and another man's to morrow. Besides, we
ought not to set our hearts on them, which we cannot keep, neither thereby
give occasion to our selves to be disquieted when God by any means shall
deprive us of them. But mind we better things, and those not seen with
mortal eye, which shall also be witnesses that we have treasure Mat. 6. 20.
laid up for us in heaven. And when we walk in the discharge of our callings,
whereby, through Gods blessing we increase our substance, yet even then regard
we more the commandment enioyning us labor, then the profit: and comfort we
our selves in our good conscience in coming by and using them, with Gods
promise of good success, rather then by reckoning our commodities before we
enjoy them. But of this point I have said more elsewhere.

The next thing in these two verses is this, which we are to make our profit 2
by; that when the Lord gives us opportunity, and offers us occasion to do
him service, we should be wise to see it, and ready to use it, that we may so
testify our obedience both to God and men. For so did Samson here. The Lord
would have him set upon the Philistims, but so, that he should first be
provoked by them; lest if he had done it without just occasion offered him,
they might not have pursued him alone, but all the land; as they made much ado
for the hurt he here did them, till they knew that some of their brethren, the
Philistims, had provoked him, and that thereupon he sought to be revenged on
them; as in verse. 6. Look more in Gedeons story.

Before Samson proceed any further against the Philistims, to pursue them Verse.
6.
in their lives, it is showed in this verse, that there was hot inquiry among
them who it was that had so spoiled their commodities. And they learned that it
was Samson that had done it: and further the reason was rendered why he did so,
and that was, because the Timnite had taken his wife from him, and given her to
another. Which when they understood, they went by and by and burnt her and her
father with fire: for they considered that they had done him great wrong, and
thought that he avenged himself on other of them for that which they had done
to him.

In this verse, by the earnest inquiry after him that had done them so Doct.
great displeasure, we may see, that by the light of nature they did this,
(even as it is lawful for us to do in our own cases by the help of the
Magistrate) to seek to find out such as have done much evil in the
Commonwealth, and that were troublesome. But yet herein we must differ from
them, that as these here did eagerly pursue the doer of wrong to themselves,
(more then the disorder) so much more we that are further enlightened by the
word of God, ought to hearken after such offenders, and to procure their just
punishment as we may; rather for their sin, then to avenge our selves
thereby. As Solomon dealt with Ioab, who had joined himself with Adonijah 1.
King 2. 34.
against the Lords anointed: for he commanded him to be slain, that the
blood which he had shed causeless, might be upon his own head. And great is
the sin of them, that rather then they would incur the least danger and
displeasure at the hands of bad persons, worthy to be cut off, or sore
punished; do suffer them to go on in their wickedness, rather then to
withstand and bring them forth before authority to receive their due; yea
rather, if they can, they will be ready to excuse their fault and defend
them: but if a trespass be committed against themselves, there is no measure
in pursuing their enemies. But a fitter occasion to handle this, will be
offered in the 21. Chapter.

When the Philistims understood that Samson had thus spoiled them, because 2
the Timnite had given his wife to his companion, they went (it is said here)
and burnt both him and his daughter, and the house over their heads. But why
did they so? For the Timnite was not he that hurt them. No, but seeing they
could not come by Samson, to take revenge on him, therefore they punished them
who were the occasions of Samsons spoiling them, though they were in no wise
consenting to it, nor knowing what he did. A most unreasonable act, to fall
upon them who were no way guilty of the hurt done to them. The Lord (indeed)
did most justly hereby revenge that villainy, which they had all of them offered
to Samson, but this they looked not at: God only ouer-ruled their appetites,
that in one and the same act (most injurious in it self) yet the Lord executed
his most righteous justice against these malefactors, arming one wicked person
against another, and preparing a way thereby to revenge these Philistims
themselves, as shall appear afterward.

But here we may see the madness and outrage that is in men. For though these
were Heathens, and therefore might be thought to have none to match them in
gross wickedness, among such as are baptized: yet behold, they who are
destitute of grace among us, (further then the fear of man restrains some)
are let loose to as great sins. For proof whereof, behold the dealing of
those furious Jews, Acts 18. who when they could not come by Paul, fell upon
Sosthenes his companion, and beat him: and at this day Acts 18. 17.
the Papists when they cannot come by the heretic himself (as they term him)
use to draw his picture, as exactly as they can, and with great despite burn
it in the fire, showing what they would do to the person. Not unlike to the
practice of seditious soldiers, in chopping them as small as herbs to pot, who
oppose them in their mutiny. And we see it comes to pass sometimes, that
when vile men are given over to fury, passion and mood, he shall bear the
blows that comes next in their way, though he was in no fault, and
whatsoever is next them, be it knife, dagger, cudgel, or whatsoever else,
whether it beat out the eye or tooth, or break arm or leg, all is one with
them, when they be moodie: even as she-Beares that are robbed of their whelps.
Nay, so little are they led by sound reason, that when, through their own
rashness, they have hurt themselves at a door, or fall, by stumbling at a
stone, they curse the one, and beat the other. But if they sustain damage or
loss by any neighbor, they are not satisfied, till with the Philistims they
have their blood, at least till they seek it, though the hurt done to them was
against their will, who are thus doggishly pursued of them.

Touching such rage and madness I have said somewhat heretofore, to discredit
it, and dissuade men from it: both by showing the hideous face thereof, and the
cursed fruits issuing therefrom. As who beholding Lamech in his fury and
outrage, and hearing the terror of his words, would not abhor Genesis 4. 23.
him and his qualities? And yet there remain among us men of no better
disposition, (though they will not speak so plainly as Lamech did) who could
in their rancour eat the very heart of their enemy with garlic, as the
saying is: and yet nourish this serpent in their bosoms still, and fight not
against it with the sword of the Spirit, nor confess themselves to be beasts
for their yielding so far, whereby their whole Christianity is called into
question.

But another thing in this verse is not to be omitted, that whereas Samsons
Doct. 3.
wife being threatened by her neighbors before, that they would burn her,
except she told them the meaning of the riddle; she (as we have heard) to
avoid the danger, did tell it them, to the grief and great hurt of her
husband; and yet now behold, she could not avoid it, but by the Philistims was
burned for all that. For by and for her telling the riddle to her people, she
was saved from burning, but Samson went from her, and for that her father gave
her to another to wife: for that, Samson spoiled the Philistims corn and
commodities; and for that cause they burned her and her father; and so the
riddle, the declaring whereof saved her life, the same was the occasion of
losing it. Even so, that which she sought before by unlawful means and
shifts to shun, I mean burning; by the same unlawful shifts she procured
it. And so it was with Joseph's brethren, when they sought to be Genesis 37. 27.
rid of him, because of his dreams of such honor that he should have above
them, which he told them of, and they in no wise could abide it, and therefore
they sold him into a far country: even thereby they brought him to that
honor, clean contrary to their minds and liking, as is clear in the Genesis
39. 1. and 20. compared with 41. 40. etc
story.

And what is more manifestly and manifoldly proved by experience among us then
this, that whereas many seeing great troubles coming toward them, do seek by
evil practices, as lying, swearing, forswearing and such like, to wind out of
them; what may be commonlier seen (I say) Note.
then this, that thereby they bring far greater and sorer, if not the same
troubles upon themselves? For while they seek to avoid worldly sorrow for a
while, which had come by their trouble, but much less, they are plunged into a
far greater, even to torment their consciences with deadly stings of sorrow
by their sin, which of a long time will not be plucked out. So the Jews
sought liberty by putting Christ to death; yet when Matthew. 8. 11.
thereby he rose rose again from death, it cut their hearts deeplier, and
imbondaged them much more, (I speak of such as were not seared with an hot
iron) and so much the rather for that they have thereby brought his blood upon
them, and their children unto this day.

I stand the rather upon this, because it is thought a foolish part for a man
to bear a discommodity patiently, rather then to shift it off by unlawful
means, and is counted a point of wisdom to fall rather into the hands of bad
men, though by yeeding to sin, then to commit his case to God, with
confidence in him: for what account is made of that, though it be against a
man's conscience? As many Politikes censure Daniel for his upright Dan. 6. 10.
persisting in the service of God, after the decree was made against him by the
Princes. What? (say men) had he no shift nor evasion to deliver himself, and
elude his adversaries, but he must wilfully fall into the snare? Oh fool!
learn by this example the truth of that denunciation; He that will Matthew. 16.
25. Job. 2. 4.
save his life, (that is, give skin for skin, conscience and all to save
it) he shall lose it: that is, either be disappointed for his shifts, God not
giving him favor in the eyes of his enemies, who count him but an hypocrite
for all his shifting) or if he seem to gain somewhat thereby in one kind,
yet he shall never enjoy his penniworth with comfort, but rather with a
checking and vpbraiding conscience, if he do not at length with wearines
renounce it, and cast it away, as Judas did his wages of iniquity. But he
that loses his Matthew. 27. 3.
life, that is, trusts God with his most precious liberties, rather then he
will run upon the pikes to have his will, he shall find it, as Hester did,
by saving Note.
ir; or as the good Martyrs did, by changing it for eternal life, after the
short enduring of trouble, which their good and quiet spirit, and the hope of
reward shall make tolerable. Oh that men would once learn to measure gain,
not by the presentnes, but by the cleerenes, and worthiness of it! they should
by this means avoid many a sin, with the shifts that attend upon it, besides
preventing of many after-reckonings of sorrow and punishment, which an evil
conscience makes insufferable: especially if the same mischief light upon
them, which with so dear a price they sought to avoid. Very Heathens could
say, that vengeance would not suffer the guilty to Acts 2. 4.
escape, though they might shift for the present. But the word of God teaches
us the cause: because the God of vengeance is the Lord of hoasts, and has a
hundred soldiers armed to meet with his enemy, though he have escaped one.
It is as if a man having shunned a Bear, should meet Amos 5. 19.
with a Lion: he has escaped the former, but he is still in chase, never at
rest till he be destroyed, and he had been better to have yielded to the
first. The story of al Churches verify this truth in the examples of abiuring
hypocrites, who met with worse measure when God took them in hand, then they
shunned at the hand of men. For the wisdom of man is foolishnes with 1. Cor.
1. 20.
God.

Now in these two verses the other way is set down whereby Samson Verse. 7. 8.
hurt the Philistims, and that was in their bodies, which he so lamed and
pained with kicking them with his feet, that he did beat life out of them.
And so we are to understand those words in the 8. verse [hippe and thigh] that
is, with a necessary supply added for making the sense run the roundlier,
thus; his foot put forth to their thigh with a strong blow, and had no other
weapon to fight against them, but his foot; spurning them as sluggish persons,
not able to resist him. This as the best exposition (in my opinion, leaving
others to their own judgment) of these words [he smote them hippe and thigh
with a mighty plague] I set down, not troubling the reader with other
opinions about it.

Now by this extraordinary strength that he had, thus to spurn and Doct.
tread them down even to death; and the slavish dastardlines of the
Philistims, on the other side as much to be admired, that they seemed not to
strive or fight for themselves a whit: we may see how mightily God assisteth
his servants, whom he sets about his work, when he will have all to see
that it is he that brings it to pass, and not they. As in Gedeons
vanquishing the Midianites that covered as grasshoppers the face of the earth
Judge. 7 7.
for multitude; for he did it with a very few, even three hundred men. And so
he dealt with Iehosaphat. For when the children of Ammon, and Moab, 2. Chro.
20. 17.
and mount Seir, came to cast him and the people of Judah out of Gods
inheritance, with a fearful and an exceeding army, the Lord sent a messenger
to them, saying: Fear not for all this great multitude, for the battle is not
yours but Gods. Stand still, move not, and behold the salvation of God toward
you, To morrow go out against them, and the Lord will be with you. And (to
make use of this doctrine) I say, that if we have eyes we may see, that God
assisteth and helps his, in their trouble, fear and need, beyond all that
man's reason can reach unto, when they depend on, and trust in him: yea he
brings them into danger oftentimes and straits, and all to this end that his
power in delivering them, may be seen in their weakness, and fights for them
as sensibly as he did for Iehosaphat, or for David against Goliath. Of the which
truth Jonah is a lively proof, who was received into the fish, (when he was
cast into the sea) preserved in the belly of it, and cast up to land by the
extraordinary providence of God, rather then he should be lost and forsaken.

Samson having thus slain them, he went and abode in a place called Etham, an
high rock, which belonged to the tribe of Simeon, in the borders of Judah. And
therefore it is said in the next verse, that the Philistims came and pitched in
Judah to seek for him. But before he thus slew them, as is said in the 8.
verse, that is to be marked which he said, and is set down in the seventh
verse; that when he saw that they had burned the Timnite and his daughter,
seeing they were only an occasion of their loss, he said thus to those
Philistims; If ye have done thus to them your neighbors, and of your own
country, who did not hurt you, what would you do to me, if I should fall into
your hands? I will therefore be avenged of you, before I cease. Thus much for
the clearing of these two verses.

Out of this verse we may note, that if men be cruel and outrageous against
Doct. verse. 7.
them that were only the occasions of their hurt, though they never sought nor
intended it; how much more will they show their fury and madness against them,
who have done the hurt and wrong unto them? This may fitly be gathered from the
reasoning of Samson. And so we may well conclude and say; that if we will be
exasperated against such as do but come in our way, or were only present
where we sustained some reproach or injury; how much more, if we light upon
him that has done the wrong to us, will we show our selves unreasonable? For
he that cannot bear a little, much less will bear a great deal. Fall not
we (as near as we can) into the hands of such. So he that will beat the
ground at which he stumbled, will much more fiercely rise against him, who has
cast him wilfully on the ground.

Further, in that Samson said, he would be avenged of the Philistims before he
ceased, he spoke as it became him, seeing God had appointed him to do so. So
are all in authority set in place by God to be a terror to the Romans 13 4.
wicked, even as they are for the comfort of those that are good. For it is a
grace, and no easy matter to punish sin aright, and to seek to win the
Prou. 17. 15.
offender. And it is as great an offense for them to do that work of the Lord
negligently, as it is to fall upon the innocent hastily and cruelly. So all
private persons, and Preachers of the word especially, should do likewise: to
wit, make that sin odious to themselves and others (as far as lies in
them) which the Magistrate is to punish, and they to reprove: even as they
ought to be like affected to all sin, because God abhors it. Herein saying
with good Leui; Who is my father? I know not even my father, if he Deuteronomy 33. 9.
go about to hinder the work of God: and herein follow we our blessed
Savior, who came to destroy the works of the devil. But I have often noted 1.
Ioh. 3. 8.
this before, therefore I press it no further.

That which in the former verse he was said to threaten, the same in this Verse.
8.
verse he is said to do and accomplish. That is, to smite them with a great
plague and in reproachful manner: setting (as it were) his feet upon them, or
spurning them unto death. This, if it had not been commanded by God, had bin
cruelty. So that here we may learn to know, that except we have 1
our charge from God to execute upon men severe and sharp punishment, it is
mere cruelty to set upon it, which we should in no wise like, much less
delight to attempt: no more then we would be willing to have the like offered
to our selves. But have we compassion and commiseration over such as are in
misery any way, as we our selves would in like case desire the same. This is a
branch of the former, often touched before.

That which is said of the rock Etham here in in Judah, is to show that 2
he abode there, till he was after taken from thence by the men of Judah, and
carried to the Philistims: which was soon after. Of which I know no more to be
said, save only that we may see that he did not go to hide himself in a
corner, as though he durst not stand to that which he had done, but being
like to be apprehended he went, God directing him to take that patiently which
they should do to him, and to depend on him for issue, though to a defenced
and high place, yet to an open, where he was known to be, and was easily
removed from thence, when the men of Judah came up thither to carry him bound
to the Philistims, he committing himself to Gods providence, whose work he
had done. For though he went thither from the Philistims, yet he was even there
in a place where they governed.

So let all be wise, to do that for which they may not be driven to fly for
it: but so answer to it, and be armed to bear that which comes upon them for
the same. As it falls out often times, that even for that which they have well
done, some instruments of the devil or other will be ready always to molest
and bring trouble upon them for it. Notwithstanding the which, yet they may
rejoice as our Savior wills them, and be glad if Mat. 5. 12.
they be persecuted and reviled for his sake, that is, for well doing. But let
1. Pet. 3. 17. Prou. 20. 1.
no man suffer for evil doing, for he shall be forced to hide himself, and
run away; the wicked flying, when no man pursues him. And yet (all that I
have said notwithstanding) it is not denied any man, to rescue himself from
the open wrong of the unconscionable, by any lawful means, neither ought it
to prejudice the equity of our cause.

THE EIGHTIETH SERMON ON THE XV. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 9. Then the Philistims went up, and pitched in Judah, and spread
themselves in Lehi. 10 And the men of Judah said, Why are ye come up against
us? and they answered, To bind Samson are we come up, and to do to him, as he
has done to us. 11 Then three thousand men of Judah went to the top of the
rock Etam, and said to Samson; Know thou not that the Philistims are rulers
over us? what is this that thou have done to us? And he said unto them, As they
did unto me, so have I done unto them. 12 And they said unto him, We are come
down to bind thee, that we may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistims.
And Samson said unto them; Swear unto me that ye will not fall upon me your
selves. 13 And they spoke unto him, saying; No; but we will bind thee fast,
and deliver thee into their hand: but surely we will not kill thee. And they
bound him with two new cords, and brought him from the rock. 14 And when he
came to Lehi, the Philistims shouted at the meeting of him.
HOw Samson vexed the Philistims, we have heard in the first part The sum of
these verses.
of this Chapter: In this second is showed, how they pursuing him, got him to
be brought bound unto them. And that was after this manner. First they came up
against Judah where Samson was, threatening to fight against them, unless they
brought Samson bound unto them. And this is in verse. 9. 10. Secondly, they of
Judah fetched him from the rock Etam, where he was, and brought him bound
unto them: verse. 11. 12. 13. And thirdly, when he came to them at Lehi, the
place here mentioned, the Philistims shouted for joy that he was come,
thinking to have some great hand over him: and this is in a part of the 14.
verse.

But to come more particularly to these three points, it is said first, that
the Verse. 9. 10.
Philistims came with an army against Judah in that part of it which was near
adjoining and conterminate to their own country, here called Lehi, which
signifies a cheek or iaw-bone, and took the name from an act that Samson did
in that place afterward, in slaying many there with the iaw bone of an Ass.
Into Judah, I say, they came, putting the men thereof into great fear, for
that Samson, who had done them so great hurt, had his abode among them, and was
(as they took it) harbored and maintained in that evil which he had wrought
against them, by them of Judah. And when they demanded of the Philistims, why
they did so come against them, seeing they had not broken their league with
them; they answered: that they did it for the great hurt that they had
sustained by Samson, and him they would have to be delivered unto them, or else
they would make war with them.

The Philistims did in this, but as any like them, nay many far better, Doct.
verse. 9.
would do in the like case. Nay, there are few to be found, either nation
against nation, or man by man provoked, who are not ready enough to seek
revenge, yea to pass their bounds therein exceedingly, rather then to come
behind in such cases: who though they do evil, as the Philistims also did,
yet if any man would ask whether a Christian must put up all wrongs and
injuries? I answer; he may defend himself in his innocent case, and stop the
course of his adversary, so as it be without malice and a revenging mind, of
which more is said in another place. Neither do I affirm, that sin is to go
unpunished, by this debarring of every man in his private quarrel from
revenge: for (as that officer of Ephesus told the seditious Citizens) Act. 19.
38.
If ye have ought against these men, there are advocates; so I say, in cases of
weight, there are Magistrates, who are to look to this, that neither by the
impudency of the wrong doer, nor the impotency of the revenger the
commonwealth be disturbed: And so much more in the sins committed against
the Majesty of God, ought the Magistrate to bestirre himself, if he do as
behoues him: wherein he is no revenger, but rather one that stands in the gap
to stay Gods hand from being revenged upon the whole body for the disorder of a
few bad members, as in Phinees his story is manifest. But that which I
complain of is this: that whereas men are so hot one against Numb. 25. 8.
another for bodily trespasses, and temporary harms done unto them; yet their
own special sins, which do themselves infinite harm, they have no heart
to go against them; no neither are wise enough to believe what Note.
deadly enemies they be unto them. And thus we may find it in all kinds of
offenders. A thing worthy to be bewailed, if it were duly considered;
especially in those who having found them by woeful experience to have wrought
them more sorrow and just cause of complaint, then their rankest enemy could
possibly have procured them.

As for revenging of others; that should always be ready to fear and hold us
from it, which is written, Romans 12. Vengeance is mine, says the Lord, and I
Romans 12. 19.
will repay it. For whiles men are over busy in quitting themselves of their
enemy, they both exasperate him, and make God a party against them, and so they
find the harder match of it. David durst not revenge when he could have done
it, but answered; As the Lord lives, either the Lord shall smite him, or his
day shall come to die, or he shall fall by the sword, or otherwise: as for me,
I will 1. Sam 26. 10.
not smite him; wickedness be with the wicked, but my hand be not upon him.
But 1. Sam 24. 13.
we (though we can do nothing) yet please our selves in Iezabels humor, 1.
King 19. 2.
and her sons, saying, God do so to me, and more also, if I make not Eliahs
head as the head of one of these to morrow. So said Iehoram of Elisha. Whereas
before we can bring our purpose to pass, we are our selves prevented by God,
and 2. King. 6. 1.
our nails pared, and we laid full low oftentimes, more fit to be pitied, then
to revenge. Doubtless, if we could moderate our selves, and take the Apostles
counsel to the Romans [If thine enemy hunger, feed him] Romans 12. Romans 12. 19.
20
we should sooner make our adversary submit himself unto us, and acknowledge
his offense with shame and grief, then we shall ever do it by opposition:
which were a double victory both over him and our selves. See that example, 2.
King. 6. 22. compared with the end of the 23. verse.

Now by this their seeking of Samson, and requiring of the men of Judah Doct.
verse. 10.
with threats, and in armor, to bring him bound to them, as in this verse it
appeared they did) we see a new trouble arose against him, for the faithful
and diligent performance of his duty: even as David received many
discouragements for his well doing, and namely by Saul, and those many and 1.
Sam. 17. 8.
great, and before that, of Eliab his brother, in offering himself to fight
against Goliath. But so God has provided in his wise disposing of things, that
we cannot be forward in any good cause, but commonly for the humbling of us
it shall cost us trouble: as either by our own corrupt nature crossing and
hindering us, seeing we are renewed but in part, and the flesh resists against
the spirit, when we strive to do well, and to renounce evil: or else by
outward affliction befalling us for the same. As oftentimes ill will of men is
ready to meet us, for laboring to keep a good conscience, and that many ways
showed and testified: as by railing upon us, and speaking evil of us,
persecuting, and other unreasonable measure offering unto us, because we
cannot brook, and digest the sins of the times that we live in, nor walk
after the bad examples of other, as Saint Peter speaks. But oh, little 1.
Pet. 44.
know we or consider, that by such opposition the Lord tries what courage is
in us, and whether we were like to honor him by suffering greater things for
him, when we can so easily bear smaller reproaches for his names sake, and make
them our crown, counting our selves happy that we may suffer for well doing.
Moreover this manner of our living, and such carriage of our selves, brings
another way great rejoicing. For what joy or comfort is like to that which
arises from a good conscience? which Solomon therefore compares to the
continual feasting of the ungodly. But this Prou. 15. 15. 2. Cor. 1. 12.
has been often urged.

This be said of the first of these three things in this second part of the
Verse. 10. 11. 12.
Chapter, to wit, of the Philistims coming armed against the men of Judah to
require Samson of them. Now the next point follows thereof; that is to say,
how the men of Judah, being sore afraid of them, went and bound Samson, to
deliver him unto them. And this they did after they had asked of them why they
came against them, and they had answered; to have Samson brought bound unto
them. The which they went about immediately, as shall further be laid out in
the 11. 12. and 13. verses.

But the men of Judah demand of them in this 10. verse, why they took Verse 10.
up armor against them, seeing they (according to agreement with them)
submitted themselves to them, and paid their tribute, and had not provoked them
by rising against them: upon which condition, they had promise of the
Philistims that they should enjoy peace, and live without fear. But they
answered for themselves, by pleading how Samson had spoiled them, who was one
of them, and if they would (they said) defend his doing, then they would fight
and make war with them: but if they would deliver him bound unto them, they
would depart: for they would (they said) do unto him, as he had done unto them.

They of Judah thought they had great wrong offered them by the Philistims,
Doct. verse. 10.
whiles they themselves did none to them: for they did not defend Samsons fact.
And the Philistims thought much that they should be opposed by any of Judah,
they having made peace with them upon conditions, and would hurt none but him
(they said) that had hurt them. By both we learn, that it is more then
heathenish, and a thing that reasonable men do marvel at, that peaceable and
innocent people, who give themselves to lead an harmless life, should be
hurt by any, and that they should not be quiet and in safety by them with whom
they live, and to whom they do no harm. So says Solomon; Intend no evil
against thy neighbor, seeing he does Pro. 3. 29.
dwell without fear by thee. And they who enjoy such peaceby them, have that
earthly benefit that God allows them; which how great it is, who does not
know?

But on the contrary, the unpeaceable (for the most part) do reap the fruit
of their unquiet living, answerably. For it must be granted, that unrighteous
people, and such as shiftingly hurt and wrong others, procure to themselves
much hatred, trouble and sorrow; and the breaking out of men that way, does
cause the exclamations, disquiets and complaints that are in all places. But
God does pay such home, and requite the leaud and bad dealings of
unconscionable men often times in this life, causing them to find such measure as
they offer to other. From which dealing yet how far they should be, even this
teaches; that both the Philistims, and they again, the men of Judah, do
claim covenant keeping of the heathen Philistims, and challenge them for the
breach of it, as being against the light of nature. And how much more should
Christians keep covenants which they have made for peace one with another,
howsoever things fall out, and not break and go from them dishonestly, when
by Gods providence they sustain some hurt thereby. Even as we read in the
Psalm. If thou have sworn to thy neighbor, disappoint him not, though thou
should lose thereby. Sundry Psalm. 15 4.
are the bands which tie men (otherwise lawless) to duty and peace. The
generallest is the common band of humanity. Then our Baptism, profession, the
Communion (for so we call that Sacrament) and among some, Matrimony,
consanguinity, affinity, friendship, partnership, neighborhood; yea the law or
comprimize has bound some from offering violence. Here are lincks enough, a
man would think, to make a cord not easy to be broken: but where a boisterous
and unreasonable spirit, nay brutish, bears sway, what is there, either holy
thing or civil sufficient to contain men? Even as Samson did with those new
ropes, so do these with such bands of love and amity, shamelesly and at once,
break all in two, like flax. But here an end of this.

Now to go forward, we have heard that the men of Judah answered Verse. 11.
the Philistims, that they had not risen up against them, and therefore
marueiled why they came to make war with them. Whereupon arises a Quest. 1.
question, whether they did well in yielding so to the Philistims, and in
answering them so, to wit, that they had been subject to them according to
agreement. Also, whether they did well herein, in offering to yield Samson to
them? And now (as is said in this verse) in forsaking him their country man
and auenger, nay in apprehending and binding him, and so to deliver him into
their hands? For God had raised him up an helper unto them, his people, against
their enemies: and should they be so unthankful as to offer him, their Judge
and helper, into their enemies hands?

Again, (to make the doubt the greater) it was said in verse 4, chapt. 14.
that it came of the Lord, that Samson should take occasion against the
Philistims, that he might sore vex them; and should they of Judah then help
them to cut him off, who was given of God to be such an helper to them? And
whereas he was not so openly and professedly suffered to show himself such a
one, as the other Judges did; Othniel, Ehud and the rest: but only in private
manner to vex them, as they gave him occasion,

To this the answer is; that so God had appointed, who would thereby have the
enemies curbed, and their force weakened, for the ease and quiet of his people,
and yet he would not give them a full deliverance, whom he had so often proved
to be unfaithful and unthankful toward him.

I say therefore that hereupon it may seem that the whole course of the words
and deeds of the men of Judah toward Samson, was faulty and evil, for ought
that has yet been said to the contrary, and their yielding him up to the
Philistims, as they did afterward, was no better then that which they are said
in this verse to have spoke and done to him: to wit, that they went so speedily
about the apprehending and binding of him, and so sharply rebuked him for the
hurt he did to the Philistims, whereas they fared the better for it, and saw it
was to the easing of them.

To all this I answer, that it is not certain that the men of Judah knew Answ.
any such thing that Samson was given them to avenge them of the Philistims,
(though it was told to his mother by the Angel in the 13. Chapter, verse 5.)
and that may be gathered by the words of the men of Judah to Samson, when they
spoke to him so sharply and said, that they must bind him, and so deliver him
to the Philistims: which had been absurd for them to speak, if they had known
that he was set by the Lord to deliver them. Besides, God gave them no
commandment to break their league with the Philistims, which they had made
with them, being brought under of them, neither had he given them any means
to defend them by violence and arms against them, therefore they were to
commit the success to God: and it cannot be laid to the charge of the men of
Judah as their fault, that they did so to Samson in delivering him up into the
Philistims hands, notwithstanding that God in his providence had called Samson
to be their auenger. And we must observe that by this delivery of Samson, the
Lord still gave further heart as also opportunity to him to afflict these
Philistims more then before, as shall appear in the fifteenth verse. So that
the Lord thus carrying the business, we must not (without apparent cause)
condemn the fact of the people. Yet hereby I do not altogether clear them
from blame. For there is no doubt of this, but that the men of Judah were too
much afraid of the Philistims, and too ready to keep themselves from danger by
them, and to stay them from making war against them. And though it had been
commanded them of God to have kept Samson from them, yet seeing it had been
with the peril of their lives, it is like enough they would not for all that
have done so, but would have delivered him up unto them: only indeed they are
the less to be charged, because (as I said) they had no commandment of God to
do so, which excuses the fact, but not them, because they looked not at these
grounds, neither were guided by knowledge. So then thus I conclude (and let the
reader mark): The fact of the people of Judah had been bad and gross, if they
had left Samson to shift for himself, against an express commandment from
God, and if he had bidden them to take Samson for their helper, and to assist
him: for then they ought to believe, that he would both have directed them
what to do, and would also have assisted them. But this not appearing by any
necessary proof, they are only to be charged for this, that they proceeded
herein upon sinister causes, and not by the warrant of knowledge; as appears
by their fleshly fearing the Philistims, because they were strong: and they did
not cleave to Samson in this respect, seeing they saw not that they were like
to be eased greatly by him against them, and thereupon were so ready to go
about to apprehend him, and to ask him what he meant to provoke the
Philistims against them, they being yet under their dominion.

So that this we may learn hereby; That howsoever God promised to Doct. verse.
11.
be with us in all our ways appointed to us by him to walk in, as he did to
these men of Judah, yet if we cannot do so without opposition, displeasure and
resistance by men, we commonly look, as they did, to the strongest side, with
fleshly and carnal eyes, I mean, to the power of man, and not of God, and so
we soon go out of the way: which is not like to be without our great hurt.
And yet marvelous it is to see, what slavish minds are in us, Note.
that how plainly soever God reueile his will to us, in and about any
particular duty, we will have an hundred shifts and excuses why we cannot (as
we say) but indeed dare not walk in the approved beaten way, which God has
laid out for us.

No tongue is able to express the innumerable breaches of Gods commandments,
and fearful sins which are committed thus and by this occasion: and all to
shun an outward and temporary danger and discommoditie; but the inward
violence and smarting words which we make in our consciences thereby we do
not at all, or very little regard them: which therefore arise after, and
sometime many years after to trouble, yea and torment us. As the fact of
Joseph's brethren did vex them more then twenty Genesis 42. 21.
years after; and David was sore troubled, when he remembered the sins Psalm.
25 7.
of his youth.

And this to be true both Scripture and experience teach us, that while men
run into sin, to avoid outward trouble and danger, and yet make nothing of
it when they have done, lest they should too much disquiet themselves; yet that
God does afterward make their doings as pricks in their eyes, and thorns in
their flesh; that thereby we may know, that they who hold up their heads most
iollily after their sione committed, as though nothing were amiss with them,
shall not so easily go away with it; but their sin which they have made
their dearling, shall sting them in their bosoms, and rise up and strangle
them, as it often does, and make their lives wearisome, if it put not also an end
to them; as the sin of Zimry and Cosby did; Corab also and his company. But
where might one make an end of Numb. 25. 8. Numb. 16. 32.
this discourse? Look more of this in the story of Gedeons demand of the men
of Succoth and Penuel, and in this Chapter, verse 6.

To the question of the men of Judah, demanding of Samson what he meant so to
provoke the Philistims against the^, by hurting them (he knowing Verse. 11. 12
that they, even all their land, were under them, and subject to them) he
answers them; As they have done to me, so have I done to them; meaning,
according to my charge. Samson might have been like, if he had followed
carnal reason, to have fallen upon them, for that they knowing him to have so
greatly hurt their enemies, and he knowing himself to be their Judge and
helper, saw yet that he was so roughly dealt with by them: for they might seem
to deal with him as the Hebrews dealt with Moses; Exodus 5. 21.
who being oppressed by Pharao, told Moses that he made them stink in the
sight of Pharao, Samson (I say) knowing that which he did, might have bin like
to have slain these men of Judah for their slavish fearing of the Philistims,
and for their sl^rh and dasterdlines in yielding to them, and setting
themselves against him.

But he kindly answered them, and told them gently what he had done to them,
and why. And when they showed him that they must bind him, and carry him to
the Philistims, he rages not against them, neither hurts them, he only
requires an oath of them (and upon that condition he would yield himself to
them) to wit, that they would not kill him themselves: the which he did,
because he loved his country, and would in no wise shed the blood of any of
his citizens; which (yet) he saw he must do, if he should fight with them
by hand-blowes. Such was his love to them, that he would rather be delivered to
his enemies, then that his country for his cause should come into danger: and
his faith in God was as firm and constant. In whose mercy he trusting,
doubted not to commit himself to his enemies and to defend his nation from
them with the peril of his life. And this teaches, that we should have regard
of other, as well as of our selves, in so much that though we have power in our
hands to hurt them, yea and though some cause be offered us to deal hardly
with them, yet we should forbear, and rather in godly wisdom pass by an
offense, except greater evil and inconvenience do come thereby.

For (alas) what pleasure should we take in seeing evil fall upon our
brethren, when we might have held it from them? which Job in no wise would Job
31. 29.
be brought to do. And as we should every way have regard of this toward our
neighbor, so in our families we should show this wisdom, care, and love
toward them that are under our government. For the Lord sparing us, Note.
where we have deserved hard measure at his hands, nay we receiving many and
continual blessings from God, why should we not also deal well with other?
So Job gave his servants leave to plead their cause, and hearkened Job 31. 13.
to them, if they were wronged. And of his neighbors he said; I was not moved
with joy when evil came upon them that hate me, neither suffered 29. 30.
I my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to their soul. All these commendable
graces in Job are condemnations of the spiteful and malicious, who glory in
cruelty against other, and seck to hurt and wrong them, whom See Hester 10.
last verse.
they should kindly regard.

Nature has engraven a love in us to our country, but grace must season,
ripen, and direct it. And a shame it were for Christians to come short of
Heathens in this point. And yet there are memorable examples among them of such
as for the procurement of their countries good, doubted not to deuote
themselves to execrable deaths, and offer themselves of their own accord to
assured slaughter. But what shall I say of this nation of ours? Those Decij and
Marcus Regulus shall rise up in judgment against many cursed vipers,
degenerate miscreants of this our nation, who (having some of them more bonds
to obliege them to love and loyalty then this alone, I mean, favors from
Prince, dignities and rewards more then for their desert) yet have attempted
and taken up arms against their own parent, and sought to shed her bowels
upon the ground: some out of pretensed conscience, but most out of hellish
rancour, discontent, pride, and unthankfulness, have raced out the image of all
love, duty, or allegiance to God, King, Religion and Nation: sorting
themselves into two treacherous ranks of runnagates, the one shrouding
themselves as soldiers under foreign Popish Princes: and waiting their
opportunity to do mischief: the other creeping into Cloisters, and there
taking upon them the mark of Antichrist the Pope, the deadly enemy of our
Religion and State, and renouncing their own country and service thereto, to
the end that they may return again and work the ruin thereof by their
cursed policy.

But to leave th^se and shut up the point, let Samson teach us, both
Governors, Ministers, and people, to unite our love to our nation and the
Church of God therein, by almeanes wishing her peace, and procuring her
welfare: and pray God that they may more and more do it, whom it concerns to
root out all adversary power which might threaten it. As we see, Paul cannot
think of his nation, but he bursteth forth into prayers for the salvation of
it, not doubting (as a loyal soldier) to pledge not his life Romans 9. 3.
only, but his soul for it. And David when he beheld his people standing
amazed at Goliath, breaks out thus; What is this uncircumcised Philistim, 1.
Sam. 17. 26.
that he thus brayeth against God, and the host of Israel? Thus let it be with
us, and not only content our selves with that common love that stands in the
communion of peace, wealth, ease, pleasure, and liberties: for then the least
discontent for the want thereof may prevail so far, as to cause us to
forswear all religious or civil interest in her that begat and nourished us.

The oath that he required of them, was for the securing of him; for he Verse
12.
thought himself safe if he had an oath from them, that they would not kill
him: because then he doubted not, but that he should break his bands, and
escape the hands of the Philistims, and vex them again. This his example
teaches us to take heed how we commit our selves into the hands of men, and
whom we cannot safely trust; and such as are not faithful to God, except we
have good security for our so doing, (yea though they make shows of
friendship and love) but much more when they bewray themselves to be such.
Neither hang we the peace of our conscience upon men; for they that have none
themselves, will not tender and regard us, but put us to our shirts. Look in
the former chapter more at large hereof.

And here we see, that men venture their lives upon the security of an oath.
He puts his life into their hands, when they had sworn they would not kill
him. So the Gibeonites thought themselves safe, when the Princes of Israel had
sworn to grant them their lives: and Rahab was satisfied, when Josh. 9. 15.
the Spies had promised her by an oath, that they would save her and her
fathers Josh. 2. 12.
house, when they came to take Jericho the city wherein she dwelt. Such an
account has been made of an oath, even among the Heathens; as has been noted
in the story of Iphtah and the men of Gilead, chapter 11, verse 11.) by the
like occasion. Therefore most fearful it is, that such as go for Christians
break and go from their oath which they have made to witness their faithfulness
to their brethren, putting their trust in them; whereas their bare word ought to
have tied them: much more this condemns such as lay unconscionable oaths on
people, and urge them to swear to that, which is in no wise to be urged upon
them.

Now they did as they had said to him, I mean, they bound him with Verse. 13.
two new cords, and brought him down from the rock: lo, thus they dealt with
him, and delivered him into their enemies hands. Now in that they were
constrained thus to bring him bound to them, even as a sheep to the shambles,
(and as if men should deliver their dogs to the wolves) and so must be
deprived of such a great benefit as he had been to them almost twenty years,
in delivering them from the oppression of the Philistims, (God giving them no
commandment to assist him:) note we, that it falls out many times, that we
must (and cannot avoid it) be deprived (the case so requiring) of our best
helps and means of our health, peace, liberty, and other commodities. And
God will have us feel the smart thereof, to make us know our selves the
better. And how ought this to bring us out of love with our special sins,
which are the causes hereof, or of like unquietness and distraction in our
lives? And if we desire to keep the best things we have, to our comfort, then
let us offer violence to such our sins, as loosnes, inconstancy,
hollow-heartednes, wilfulnes, stoutnes, worldlines, or to any other as they
shall sit more near us. Touching this fruit of sin, we have had occasion
to speak often, and through this book.

The men of Judah to show their diligence, and to purge themselves from Verse.
14.
blame with the Philistims, brought Samson from the rock bound unto them in
that place Lehi before mentioned, nigh the borders of the Philistims, and
yielding him up so into their hands, at least going about so to do: (for else,
if he had escaped before they saw him bound, and before they had received him
into their custody, they might have been thought to deal fraudulently with the
Philistims, and not to have bound him,) I say when they brought him to them, in
that manner, I mean fast bound, they shouted with a great noise for joy: so
glad they were, when they had him their enemy, so near them, even in their
hands, and (as they thought) past escaping.

Behold here the joy of the wicked, wherein it consists, and how it is Doct.
caused. In a word, when their desire is accomplished; howsoever it be: as in
the apprehending of a great enemy of theirs, (as here it was with the
Philistims, when they had got Samson bound) so in their advancement, in
feasting, in play, vain pleasure, and such like. But as for good things, as
the certainty of the favor of God, the assurance of eternal life, other
heavenly tidings of the Gospel, the setting up of the kingdom of Christ, or
the overthrow of idolatry or some great sin, finally in holding and keeping a
good conscience (which yet is continual feasting) they know they cannot Prou.
15. 15. Note.
rejoice in these. Whereby a man may judge more certainly of their estate to
Godward, then the Physician may of the state of his patients disease, by
feeling his pulse.

And to speak as the truth is, what resting is in such joy, how lawful soever
the things are in which they rejoice? but a sudden sorrow may follow as greatly
stinging and tormenting them, or such as will at least a while after Note.
undoubtedly take hold of them, in this changeable world (if no other way) by
losing and forgetting that which caused such rejoicing. And these moods and
passions) which are as mere extremities, as the noonetide is to midnight) are
nothing beseeming the faithful servants of God, but do utterly disguise them,
who have learned to take up their delight in the other things holy and
heavenly, which I have last mentioned, and such like: and in their reioycings
in and about these outward to be carried always in a mean, and with measure.

And because I know, that upon that which I have now said, it will answer
these demands and questions, whether it be unlawful to rejoice in such lawful
things as God gives men to enjoy in this life, as victory over enemies,
promotion, wealth, and such like: I answer, no, as I said before: so as
withal we desire and resolve to make right use of them, so far as we know
how, or may learn: but to rest in them is unlawful, for that were 1. Tim. 6.
17.
to trust in them, which is idolatry. Also to exceed in rejoicing for having
them, is to take away our joy from better things, if we have any, or to hinder
it, that there may be none; of which fault to be convinced, Job in no wise
could abide it. I think it not unfit here, (though I might bring hither Job
31. 25.
his own words, which do clearly show that he was a pattern of rightly
enjoying riches (to set down the observation of the right learned Father
Master Beza concerning this point. He well weighing the story of Job and his
practice this way, speaks thus of him about this thing. Job (says he) lost
his goods without any great grief, therefore he enjoyed them when he had them,
without any great love. Thus we have heard in this second part, how the
Philistims prevailed thus far to the satisfying of themselves in seeking
revenge upon Samson, that they caused the me^ of Judah to bring him bound unto
them, to their great rejoicing. Now follows the third part of this Chapter,
wherein we shall see how flitting and short this their joy was.

THE EIGHTY ONE SERMON ON THE XV. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The third part of the Chapter.
Verse. 14. And the spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and the cords
that were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his bands
loosed from off his hands. 15. And he found a new iaw bone of an Ass, and put
forth his hand, and took it, and slew a thousand men therewith. 16. And Samson
said, With the iaw bone of an Ass, heaps upon heaps, with the iaw bone of an
Ass have I slain a thousand men. 17. And it came to pass when he had made an
end of speaking, that he cast away the iaw bone out of his hand, and called
that place Ramath-Lehi.
THe sum of the words which I have now set down is briefly this, that first
Samson broke his bands: after The sum.
that, he slew a thousand of them: and lastly, gave a name to the place
accordingly. To proceed first with this other part of the 14. verse, for the
former part was spoken of in the former Sermon, it is said concerning the first
of these three points, that while the Philistims were shouting for joy at the
delivering of Samson bound unto them: the spirit of the Lord strengthened him
in such wise, that he did as easily break the cords, as if the fire had burned
flax. Wherein still let us mark, that the Lord is said to give strength to
Samson, that we may see that he was with him, and assisted him in all the great
acts that he did against the Philistims.

Which many in reading the story not marking, do not understand it, but take it
amiss, as though Samson had done all that he did against them, cruelly and
spitefully; when (yet) all may easily see, that strength and rare courage and
labor, which he had not of himself, were requisite for the doing of the
things that he did, if he had been never so malicious. And so in all the
Doct. 1.
duties that we perform, to the magnifying of the Gospel, and our holy
profession of it, more then other do attain unto, let us look that the Lord
set us about them, and go before us in them by his word, and be the perswader
of us thereto by his spirit, (whereby only we are enabled.) that so neither
fancy, nor mood, and passion may be said to lead us therein: which may easily
come to pass in the doing of good things; as by the like occasions I have
often observed.

And here it is very profitable to note, how short and momentanie the 2
greatioy of the Philistims was at the beholding of Samson bound: forloe, the
Lord unbound him immediately, and so turned al their joy into as great sorrow.
This may be learned here, how flitting the reioycings of such are as be not
guided by the spirit of God, but follow their fleshly humor therein; the best
of them are fickle and momentany, yea even the pleasantest of them Eccles. 7. 6.
as the cracking of thorns under a pot. Only this caveat I would have the
reader to observe, that what I speak of these uncircumcised Philistims in this
and the next point, I apply not unto their particular condition (being not
enlightened, but destitute of all feeling of their misery, or sin,) but I
take occasion by the just judgment of God upon them for other sins against
their knowledge, to put all bad persons in mind of the woe which hangs over
them for their unbelief, wilful loving of darkness more then light, Ioh. 3.
19.
and the several sins issuing thence, and by name the abuse of earthly
blessings. And this I say of all such; The wicked flourishes (as David faith)
like the green bay tree, that does not as other trees cast or change her
leaf, no Psalm. 37. 35. 36.
not in winter: so does their iollity appear above other men's: nay it seems
in the eyes of fools, to be such, that they live (as they suppose) in a little
paradise: and yet within a while there is no remainder or token of any such
thing left behind, but desolation only and confusion to be seen, but of
their estate to Godward, as a secret I cease to speak of.

Nabal swimming in wealth, did make a feast as the feast of a King, and his
heart was merry with wine, but about ten days after, he was taken from all,
1. Sam. 25. 37.
and died; and his heart died the next morning, after he heard he should die,
and he was like a stone, when his wife told him what had been intended against
him. And how was Hamans heart lifted up by his advancement and great favor
with the King? So that he could not contain himself, but he Ester 5. 12.
must needs tell forth to his friends, what prosperity he had; and yet he had
as good hold of it, as can be enjoyed in this world, being backed and vpholden
by the mightiest that was in the land under God. But how soon was all his
honor laid in the dust, and his joy ended with most bitter anguish and torment?

The Scriptures and experience are full of such examples. He that has lived
and observed the courses of those, who in diverse ages have seemed most happy
of other of their condition, and have most given themselves, as their state and
place would give them leave, to take the utmost of their liberty in the
merriments of the world, (and yet what have they been, but play and other vain
pleasure taking in pampering the body with eating and drinking, company keeping
with such as themselves b^^, or in gathering wealth, and such like) they (I
say) who have marked such things, what have they seen but this, how soon they
have been taken from them all, never looking for it, not thinking of it, and
yet others often fearing it, and many of Note.
them in such manner plucked from all, as if a man would say. God would have
all to mark and speak of it. For if Solomon could find nothing in all
Eccles. 2. 11.
his royalties, dignities, and pleasures, but vanity and vexation, do other
coming after him, look to find better then be ever could? no, this world
affords no better.

So that it may justly grieve him, that knows that all such shall come to
fearful judgment, who have made these fading and deceivable pleasures
Eccles. 11. 9.
their greatest joy, to think they have been no wiser, but to trifle out their
precious time, in which they might have taken so much good; I mean, they might
have sucked out of the Gospel true comfort here, and salvation Note.
afterward for ever. And this is the right use that should be made of this
doctrine, to wit, of the momentanie joy of the godless and irreligious in this
world, that we should seek durable joy, and that which is also most sound and
sauorie, namely, the assurance of Gods favor here on earth, (till we enjoy
it most perfectly in heaven;) and a Christian and godly life, which is the only
sweet companion and guide, that leads us thither.

The first of the three things in this third part, we have now heard, and
Verse. 15. 16. The sense.
that was, how he brake the double cord wherewith he was tied. The second is
set down in these two verses, namely, that when he had escaped out of their
hands, yet it was so far off, that all they who were there present could
apprehend him again, that he slew a thousand of those Philistims, there
gathered together to see him, and rejoice at the bringing of him thither bound.
But ye will ask how he could do so, being but one alone, and yet naked also
and unfurnished of weapons; I say, the Lord, as we have heard, strengthened
him: and for weapon, though he had none, a new and moist iawbone of an Ass by
Gods providence lay by, which he took up, and made that serve for the purpose,
as if it it had been sword, staff, or other weapon. And when he had slain
them, he showed what heaps he had made with so slight a help or instrument.

Here we see that these Philistims lately so exceedingly joyful, did not
only lose their joy, but their lives also. And this may tell us yet a heavier
Doct. verse. 15.
thing then the former. For it teaches, that for the most part, look what
fearful and blind estate the blind and bad people live in, and choose to
repose themselves in, in the same they continue for the most part, and end
their days. For is there almost any place left for amendment? Therefore the
Apostle says; The wicked and the deceiuer wax worse and worse, and when they
cry peace, peace, and all things are safe, then comes destruction suddenly
2. Tim. 3. 13. 1. These. 5. 3.
upon them, before they be aware, as the travel upon a woman with child, and
they shall not be able to avoid it.

When the rich man in the Gospel rejoiced most in that he had, he was Luke 12.
20.
nearest a woeful end. So Baltazzer when he was drinking wine merrily with his
Princes and Concubines, in the vessels of the Temple, then the fearful Dan. 5.
27.
hand writing appeared on the wall, having this meaning, God has finished thy
kingdom. So Agag. And as such live, so they die. Although I deny 1. Sam. 15.
33.
not, but God, where it pleases him, can give a new heart, where it is sought,
and cause such vanity to be distasted, as wherein men have delighted, and
work found rejoicing instead thereof. Therefore choose we the best delights,
and so the longer we hold them, the soundlier we shall enjoy them, until we
keep them unto our end.

Another thing that he did, was, that when he had slain an heap, he
corrects Verse. 16. 17.
himself, when he smote them on both sides with the iaw-bone, they preasing
about to take him; and he says, two heaps, or many: as if he should have
said; heaps upon heaps had been slain by him. And seeing he knew that God
gave him the strength thereto, he being a godly man, Judge. 15. 18.
why does he utter these words, but that al might see and acknowledge what a
great work God had wrought by him, and that by a weak mean, even with the
iaw bone of an Ass? To teach us, that where the Lord will have us execute
justice without pity upon evil doers, we must not faint, nor be negligent to
do his commandment upon them, as Samson did here, Joshua before on Achan,
Ehud upon the King of Moab, and Shamgar on the Philistims. Josh. 7. 25. Judge.
3. 21. and 3^.
God will have the wicked smart for their trespasses openly committed; to smart
(I say) by men according to the weight and heinousness of them, and utterly
forbids foolish pity to be showed in such a case; according to the saying of
Solomon: It is an abomination to justify the wicked. Prou. 17. 15.
The like may be said against that foolish pity which arises in us, when we
behold Gods immediate hand upon them, and yet we ought not then for all this
to insult over them: but we must ascribe honor to God, with those 24. Elders
in the Revelation, and David upon the death of Nabal. Revel. 5. 14. 1. Sam. 25.
39. Verse. 17.


Now follows the third point, that as Samson honored God in showing what he
had done by him, in slaying heaps of men, even a thousand, so he added this
thereto; that he gave a name to the place where he did it, as a memorial
thereof, that all posterity coming after, might know unto the end of the
world, what great things God did for his people against their enemies. The name
of it he called Ramath-Lehi; as if he should have said, the lifting up of a
iaw-bone, which remains as a monument of Gods mighty work by him even to
this day. Thus, and by this means Gods servants have praised him in times
past, as in the book of Numbers, Joshua and other, is to be seen, as well as
other times by songs and dances, that we all may mark and remember his
benefits and great works, and praise him among the generations following, to
the quickening and comforting of his people, and the fear of his enemies;
although not in the same manner that some have done in ages past. But of this
before, once or twice.

The fourth part of the Chapter.
Verse. 18. And he was sore athirst, and called on the Lord, and said, Thou have
given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and now shall I die
for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised? 19. But God claue an
hollow place that was in the iaw, and there came water thereout, and when he
had drunk, his spirit came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name
thereof En-hakkoreh, which is in Lehi unto this day. 20. And he judged Israel
in the days of the Philistims twenty years.
NOw follows the fourth and last part of this Chapter: wherein is showed, The
sum.
what an exceeding great thirst Samson had after the slaughter of these
Philistims, and that he prayed to God, and he give him water, so that he
revived: and so he praised God there. And (...) time that he judged Israel, is
in the last place adjoined and set down, ^^ch was twenty years.

By this thirst of his, the Lord would have him to know himself, and to be
held under, lest by that which he had done to the Philistims, he might have
been lifted up above that which was meet. Thus he deals with his; intermixing
his chastisements with blessings, that both they may be held in humility by the
one, and yet may have sufficient encouragement to abide Note.
constantly in a good course, and not forget the Lord and become high minded,
as they are easily brought to be by the other, to wit, his benefits. And thus
the Lord saw good to deal even with Paul himself, who was buffeted 2. Cor.
12. 7.
by Satan, when he had been listed up to the third heaven by the rauishing of
Gods spirit: yet he had that humor remaining in him, which needed settling and
cooling, that his joy might be kept within holy lists and bounds. And the same
I have noted in that famous accident of Iphtah his daughter: Judge. 11. 35.
whom God set on to abase him, that he might proceed on to the triumph more
soberly. We must think Gods servants are dear to him, when he sticks not
to bereave them of their preciousest delights, to the end they may hold their
delight in him, and not turn their sweetness into bitterness, I mean, their
holy rejoicing, into fleshly presumption. The reason hereof Note.
is, because else God cannot trust us in the business he sets us about, except
he gives us coolings and abasements to consume the superfluity of our
hypocrisy, conceitednesse of our selves, pride and security: which are as
unfit dealers in heavenly matters, as Nadab and Abihu their strange fire was to
kindle Leuit. 10. 1.
incense or offer sacrifice withal. And secondly, the Lord honoreth many of
his dear servants (whose faith and setlednesse in grace, and freedom from
such gross stains he is privy unto) by giving them the proof of their
patience, uprightness and humility, presently after the exercise of their
thankfulness and rejoicing: that so the cross suddenly coming upon great
blessings, or deliverances, they may approve themselves soundly religious, in
that they are fit to go under the one without murmuring, as well as they used
the other without foolish lightness and vain glory. And it is a rare gift for
a man by his wise carriage under such kind of afflictions, to show, that he
waited for his abasement, even in the greatest welfare, as Job, in the height
of his prosperity looked for his change. Whereas the common sort of professors,
if God endow and furnish them with any privilege above others; as good
success and thriuing in the world, victory over their adversary in suit of
Law, credit and good account, either for labor in the the Ministry, or for
profession of the Gospel, liberty to hear the Word, and to enjoy the
Sabbaths, fellowship of the faithful, or the like; they presently are sick of
a spiritual Plurasie, and rankenesse of corrupt blood, which if God (by some
sudden change) abate not, would soon oppress them. And this nurture we
should all learn, that we may keep compass in our lives, and neither turn
to the right hand, nor to the left, which is a Note.
great portion, and sauoureth of much grace and godly wisdom. For if we
swell, know we for certainty, that God will pull us down, and lest we should
faint and be laden with trouble to our discouragement, he will put under his
hand in due time to lift us up again. And if we regard to be guided by his
word, his handie work and corrections shall be fewer, or more favorable, and
fruitful in us. As for hypocrites and time seruers, God uses no such
discipline toward them, but lets them fall from one extremity into another. See
that I have said of this in the eleventh Chapter.

In that this extreme thirstines did not breed in him murmuring against God,
for that he who had done him such service, should now be suffered to 2
miscarrie, as it were, and to fall into the hands of Gods enemies, as they
fell into his; it is to admonish us, that we should beware of that sin of
impatience, and breaking out against God when we are crossed, (as we are too
prone and ready to do) as though he must help and deliver us when we would,
or else he does us great wrong: even as Mary in the want of wine at the
marriage, looked unwisely that Christ should provide it by miracle by John 2. 3.
and by. Nay rather, let us know that we are ever unprofitable, and that God
sees we have need often times to be spurred forward, and therefore with Samson,
David, and other his people it behooves us to sue humbly to him, that so his
help may be the more sweet unto us when it comes: and that we think not
our selves too good to wait upon him patiently, but rather with importunity
call upon him in the mean season. We make a good shift while the Lord spares
us; but if once he lay his hand upon us, then we verify that which Satan spoke
falsely of Job, that is, we curse him to his face. Job 2. 5.
Not unlike in this to him, that seeing himself and his host in peril by
thirst, murmured, saying; What? has the Lord brought three Kings together 2.
King. 3. 10.
and their armies to destroy them? And the like was his behavior after in the
famine, of which we read, 2. King. 6. So the Israelites in their return 2.
King. 6. 30. 31.
from Egypt, of whom the Prophet complains, Psalm. 95. And these (the more is
the pity) are our presidents which we follow (yea even in petty trials)
rather then Job, who in the midst of his miseries, was so far from Job 1. 22.
charging God foolishly, that he blessed him, and rejoiced in suffering
tentation, as S. James says, are blessed: and therefore as we hear of his
patience, so we see what end the Lord gave him. Far are we from considering
Iam. 1. 12. Iam. 5. 11.
that our own sin being the cause why we suffer, we may well bow our
shoulders to bear our affliction. Or, that he who sent one, might have sent
ten, and set them on ten times deeplier, and might have begun Note.
sooner. But this I have often urged by occasion of showing what the power of
faith is in the well bearing the cross; without which patience is a stranger.

He vpholdeth and strengthens his prayer by two maine and strong pillars,
that he might be confident that God would hear him. One was 3
the acknowledging of his power and mercy in the late victory: for thus he
says; Thou (O Lord) grantedst by thy servant this great preservation to thy
people. The second, this: I am thy servant, and in this business against the
Philistims I have done thy work, which thou set me about, therefore leave
me not now to this reproach. And this, with that in the last verse, that he is
said to have judged Israel, do still prove that God in all this resisting the
Philistims, did appoint him to it, and that he is not to be blamed as a
private man, that did rashly and furiously take it in band, as some more
ignorant and hasty then wise, will be bold to judge.

Our instruction is from hence twofold: first, that the remembering of Gods
former benefits and favor do add great force to, and cause much feruencie in
our prayers, (this being added, that we quench not the same by any sin
committed against conscience) for then we may be sure God will hear us, as he
has done often before. And here that of the Apostle has Romans 5. 4.
place, Experience brings hope, which makes not ashamed: because God is not
changed, and therefore we suing to him fervently as in times past, may rest
the better persuaded: but the forgetfulness of Gods former kindness, and our
unthankfulness, does on the contrary as much weaken and cool our prayers. For
we can nothing so confidently look for help from God, whom by nature we are
afraid of, as when we daily remember his former kindness, and that it abides
for ever toward us: and yet (which is Ioh. 15. 9.
much to be pitied) few awake out of this drowsy forgetfulness and
unthankfulness wherein they lie.

By this we see, that it stands every Christian very much upon, to hold his
confidence and comfort in the promises of God, whereby he may stay himself
and be vpholden in his trials, till God give a good issue. For why? The benefit
hereof does not only reach to the present time, but prepares him also for all
crosses in time to come, to entertain and bear them the better. Because his
experience formerly, being joined with this, That the arm of the Lord is not
shortened, makes every new trial seem more tolerable. Isai. 59. 1.
Whereas he that upon occasion of each sudden and unwelcome trouble, fetches
help rather from his head, then his heart, and falls rather to contriue
fleshly shifts, how to avoid or ease him of his distress, (like Saul in
getting him a Musician to heal him of a troubled conscience) then to meditate
1. Sam. 16. 17.
of God his former mercies; does make every new cross more heavy to himself
then other. I confess, such have an expetience, but it is like their hope,
neither shall help them. For thus they argue: Such a sickness I recovered of,
therefore I look to break this too. Lo, their experience breeds a rotten
confidence in them, and makes them presume of that which often they fail of;
and when they fail, they are either like Iehoram, very lions; or as Nabal,
mere blocks. The case is plain; They dig to themselves pits which will
hold no water, but forsake the Lord and their Ierem 2. 13. Iona. 2. ^.
own peace, for a vain conceit; and as Jonah says, While they embrace lying
vanities, they forsake their own mercy, whereof they have no promise. And so
at length that is verified of them which is written by the Prophet, Though they
escape a Bear, yet a Lion shall devour them: yea and often that which they
least fear shall be their undoing. Now this caveat let me Amos 3. 19.
add to the doctrine, lest I be mistaken. I say not that a Christians
experience breeds hope of the selfsame outward issue and manner of
deliverance Note.
out of his trouble, which he has before time found. Neither durst the three
children in the third of Daniel, expressly avouch that God would work a miracle
for their delivery; and yet they had faith nevertheless to Dan. 3. 17.
believe that he would bring them well through: which I speak to control the
fantastical spirits of some, who affirm that ye not recovery of a disease
(as it might be the plague) is the fruit always of unbelief. If we could believe
the promise (say they) in Psalm, we should not fear that sickness, nor dye
thereof. Contrariwise let us know, that the act of faith is ever carried
according to the quality of the promise. Paul's faith was not expressly carried
to believe, That the prick in his flesh should be removed, and yet he had
experience 2. Cor. 12. 7.
of many deliverances) but that Gods grace should be sufficient. And he
believing this had the fruit of his former experience, because he obtained an
equivalent supply.

This be said by occasion of the first prop of Samsons prayer, to wit, the
rehearsing of Gods former goodness: the second follows, that he was his 4
servant, and had done his work in that his great labor against the
Philistims. And by this we must know, that it is a thing very material to be
able to prove our selves Gods servants. For by what right can we else claim
any place in his house, otherwise then as strangers? But if we be so, then we
do him faithful service (as the Apostle says, his servants ye are to whom
ye obey) yea and that we perform joyfully and without fear all our days,
(for Romans 6. 16.
it is not a service in name, but perfect freedom indeed) and so doing we may
claim the benefit of servants, that is, protection.

The Angels had this title to be called the servants of God. And as he said Heb
1. 14.
he was his servant: so particularly he showed that he was so in this: for he
said, I have not pleased my self, nor served mine own humor in killing these
Philistims; but I did thy work, and fought thy battles: Even so in our
particular actions, we are to look to be guided by God, to prove that we are
in the state of servants, and not hangbyes: and then we may be able with
boldness to say, we have a good conscience in all things, and where we are
accused, yet to be at peace, else God might also discharge himself of his
promise unto us. It is no small privilege (as I have noted elsewhere) that
whiles we are well occupied, we may boldly sue to God for blessing. And so did
Samson here. For if earthly masters tie themselves to provide sustenance for
their servants, not looking that they should be troubled with the care of any
thing, save their labor; then with what boldness might Samson here call upon
the Lord, that he might not perish for thirst, being in the heat of his work?
For it might else have turned to the dishonor of the Lord, to suffer him to
miscarrie for want. Oh that men would try the Lord in this, and commit their
ways to him in well-doing, to see if he would not effect their good desires,
and else let them not wonder that he seem an hard master to them.

Now follows the substance of his prayer, and that was, that he having 5
employed himself to glorify Gods name, might not be delivered into the hands
of the uncircumcised: and he says further; I being set by thee (O Lord) to
judge over thy people, suffer me not to come into their hands and power,
contrary to that which thou promisedst to me, till I had fulfilled thy work.
So we should be earnest with the Lord that we may not live nor dye to the
dishonor of his name: but to be kept (if it may be) from just reproach. Such
requests can none make, that set themselves on work without God: though they
counterfeit, or make great florishes, as Ioab did. See 2. Sam. 10. 12.
2. Sam. 10. And whereas ye will object, that he did yet fall into reproachful
evils afterward, for all this his prayer: the answer thereto is, that he
neglected the nourishing of the grace that he did now pray in; and further
answer will by more fit occasion be made hereto, in the next chapter:
therefore I will defer it to that place.

When Samson had made his prayer thus, in his extreme thirst, the Lord, Verse.
19. The sum.
as it is manifest in this verse, caused water to come forth of the hollow
place of the iaw, breaking out of the tooth, which stood therein, and so he
drunk and was revived. And therefore he gave a name to the thing done
accordingly, calling it, the Fountain of him that prayed.

By this that the Lord heard Samsons prayer, and rather gave him water
extraordinarily, then he should perish; it teaches the same to us, that rather
then we shall miscarrie, he will provide for us, though we know not, neither
see how. As he sed Eliah by the ravens, and the good widow with the increase 1.
King. 17. 5. 2. King. 4. 7.
of her little oil, till it paid her debt, and maintained her and hers, and
preserved Jonah in the fishes belly, and against all likelihood brought him
safe to land. So God has many ways to comfort his, and uphold their estate,
and he is as willing as he is able to do it, and that by his extraordinary
providence, rather then they should fail. And if he see it not expedient
always to do so; yet he does more for them a great deal, then if he gave
them their desire; for he works in them contentation and other grace: and
sooner shall the stones of the street be turned into loaves of bread, and the
water of their wels into drink, before they shall perish even here, unless he
do better things for them. Cleave we therefore to him inseparably, and be we
not removed from our steadfast confidence in him, for he that has said it, will
also do the same. But this point comes often to hand.

Of this water Samson drunk, and was revived again, being near to death 2
before, as in this verse appears. Whereby we may see these two things: One,
that thirst is a most deadly and intolerable pain, as we may well see by the
thirst that our Savior complained of on the cross, for it is reckoned Ioh 19
28.
as one part of his pain. And as thirst is, so is hunger: by either of which
to dye, is, as a lingering, so a most wearisome and grievous death. Like unto
the which seeing there are many other kinds of death, we may see from how
many deaths, and those most painful, God keeps us. For we might easily
miscarrie both this way, as Samson was like to do, and by infinite other
ways, if God did but hold back his helping hand. Which is the more to
condemn our blockish unthankfulness, who never or seldom reckon up, as daily
we should, such benefits and deliverances among other, neither are thankful
for them. And seeing hunger and thirst are so biting and painful, and
nakedness like both, we must be pitiful to such distressed people, and moved
with bowels and compassion toward them: remembering Christ's words, I was
hungry, and ye gave me meat, etc. Matthew. 25. 35.


The other thing here, is, what a small refreshing did preserve Samsons life,
even a little water in so homely a manner provided for him, as we see here
mentioned, did comfort and revive him. What should this teach us, but that we
should mark how many comfortable refreshings we enjoy from God, (in
comparison of the which, this was mean and small) without the which we should
have been much distempered in our bodies, and thereby unquiet and unsettled in
our minds also? as meat in our hunger, drink in our thirst, rest after
weariness, case and asswagement of pain and diseases. All which, while we be
pinched with them, do better teach us, how much the freedom from them is to
be accounted of. Oh a little intermission from the pain of the stone, the
anguish and extremity of the gowre, or the like diseases, how do we price
it? even far above much treasure that cannot be valued.

O then, when we be free from all kinds thereof for a season, yea and laden
with benefits also, on the other side, to make out lives comfortable, Psalm. 68.
19.
(both grace and other good things) which makes them all sauory; what (think
we) should we yield unto the Lord for them? Therefore Samson gave a name to
that place also, as he did before to the other, according to the occasion
offered; to testify his thanks to God for hearing his prayer, by sending him
water in his exceeding thirst, in which he was near unto death. The doctrine
out of this place has been taught before sundry times; and last of all, out of
the 17. verse. Only this I wish might be annexed to the doctrine of
thanksgiving that it be continued, and specially for that great deliverance
from the fear of everlasting torment, that it be continued all our life long.
As in the song of Zacharias we are taught that God will give Luke 1. 74.
grace thereto. And great reason there is that we should do so, seeing we
reap and enjoy the fruit thereof all our life long.

But this other thing out of this place I will not omit, and that from the name
of the place, which he gave. For he calling it the fountain of him 4
that prayed, meaning, which God extraordinarily provided for him, when he
prayed to him in his thirst; it teaches us, not only what rare effects and
fruits spring of fervent prayer, as S. James says (that fervent prayer
avails Iam. 5. 16.
much) and as we find, that thereby we obtain grace against daily sin and
corruption: but also, when such fruit is obtained of God by us, it should well
appear, as it did by Samsons leaving a memorial of his thankfulness in the
place. So much more should we, who do not once, but often, yea and that in one
day, receive many blessings (as effects of our prayers) from God; we should (I
say) let those places be witnesses of our remembering Gods kindness, there so
plentifully shead upon us. That if such places could speak, they should be well
able to testify, that we had not been barren nor silent in yielding praises
unto him there. And this not our houses only, and chambers Note.
should witness, but our gardens, and the fields, yea and the high ways, by
which we have so often passed safely and without danger, should do the like.

Now for the shutting up of the Chapter, the holy story adds this, that for
the space of twenty years, while the people were under the dominion Verse. 20.
of the Philistims, Samson did continue in his place judging Israel, that is,
helping them, and vexing the other; whereby we may gather, that although the
Israelites were not freed out of their hands altogether, yet they had many
great calamities kept from them, by means that Samson was ever in the way, and
at hand, to cross and disquiet them. And therein we are to mark, that the
Lord having often delivered his people, and yet seeing them to revolt from him
after, and not to be better for it; he holds them under now the longer, and
yet he lessened their bondage, and made it the more tolerable by the help they
had by Samson.

We may hereby learn, that seeing we, when we have liberty, peace, and other
blessings, and also inlargements from affliction, do not yield to the Lord the
fruit that is answerable to so great kindness of his, and that also looked for
at our hands, but we forget it, and wax unprofitable, yea and Luk 17. 17.
grieve the Lord with our returning to our old evil course again; therefore he
does the longer and the straitlier hold us under with one cross and trouble
after another, and we either have not so good means to come out of them, as
he would else give us; or we profit not by them, as some of his worthy Note.
servants do; neither enjoy sweet and comfortable days as we might do, and
that with his good liking; for all the which we may thank our selves. And it
is his great mercy that it is no worse with us.

But take we heed that we tempt not God still in such manner, that while he
looks for grapes, we bring forth wild grapes; that we lie not in our Esa.
5. 2.
sins, which we cannot be ignorant, that they do much displease him, for God
will not be mocked. As he left here upon this people a long continued bondage,
so will he deal with us, as he has done heretofore; namely, that although
he have taken the heavy yoke of bondage from the neck of his people in this
land, I mean subjection to Idolatry and Popery, yet he Note.
will leave matter of sorrow enough by scattering the most part in ignorance,
and without good and diligent teachers and guides, and cast the spirit of
bondage upon the rest. Even as he dealt here with this people who were under
the Philistims a long time, that is, before Samson was borne, and all the time
till he grew to be able to set upon them, and all the twenty years while he
judged Israel, and so continued after that. Yea and he will punish us yet
Leuit 26. 21.
seven times more, if we continue in our evil course.

And let us observe a far different manner of God his visiting the godly, and
his punishing the wicked. The people here by their breaches of covenant and
daily reuolts from God were feign to be inured to affliction, and particularly
to be in servitude to such as hated them: and yet because the Lord had chosen
them from among all nations, to be a peculier people unto himself; therefore
his eye could not see their misery, but he must needs pity them, and even
then when he could not but bridle them, he must needs provide that their
bondage may be tolerable. We may thank our selves for any straitness and
trouble that befalls us: but in that we see any light of comfort through a
creuis, or have any breathings and relaxation, it is Gods indulgence: who
thereby shows that he could be content the rod were burnt, and might not be
used at all, forasmuch as he is content to shake it over us only, when as he
might beat us with many stripes. And to say the truth, he holds us under
rather to prevent greater offenses, and sorer punishments for time to come,
then deal with us after and according to our former and past transgressions.
Let this teach us to be wail and be humbled for our hollow and false-hearted
dealing with God in our promises of amendment, and for our formal
thanksgiving for the blessings we enjoy, and for that we retain no more
fruit thereof, but become as bad or worse afterward, as ever we were before.
And let us choose rather by a sound and well ordered course to enjoy the
constant feeling of Gods love, and the fruition of his blessing, then by our
breaking out, to cloud and blemish our Ioh. 15. 10.
own happiness by the mixture of many unwelcome afflictions. And again, let
it serve to alleniate and qualify our rebellious nature, which commonly
deemeth that God has quite hidden his face from us, if all go not current and
smooth with us, as in time past. For why? The favor of God is not like to his
displeasure, because sin is not like obedience: but is it not much, that in
the midst of displeasure, and when he has been so often provoked by us, he
forgets not to show mercy to us? whereas if we look to the wicked, we shall
find that it is nothing so with them: for neither does the Lord exercise them
with afflictions always, to restrain them; but suffers 1. Sam. 2. 25.
them to go on to perdition: or if he do punish them, yet he sweetens not the
cross to them, but smites them in wrath, and gives them even here Mat. 27. 3.
a taste of that eternal displeasure of his, which they shall feel endlesly
and easelesly hereafter.

THE EIGHTY TWO SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
Verse. 1. Then went Samson to Azzah, and saw there an harlot and went in unto
her. 2. And it was told to the Azzahites, Samson is come hither, and they went
about, and laid wait for him all night, in the gate of the City, and were quiet
all the night, saying, Abide till the morning early, and we shall kill him. 3.
And Samson slept till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the doors of
the gates of the City and the two posts, and lift them away with the bars,
and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of the
mountain that is before Hebron.
THe sum of this Chapter is thus much. The Philistims The sum of the
Chapter.
having been often plagued by Samson, as in part we have heard, they laid for
him to kill him. And they hearing that he was at Azza or Gazza as it is called,
(one of their chief Cities) they set watch for him in the night to take him,
but were disappointed. After that they used means in another place, and there
they apprehended him, and cruelly handled him, and made themselves pastime in
bringing him before them to be scorned and laughed at, till at the last, he
pulled down the house upon the chief Princes of the Philistims, and many of
the people, being met together to sport themselves, and laugh at him, in
beholding him their great enemy so disguised and abased, and so there he lost
his life with them.

The first part of the Chapter shows how Samson escaped the hands of The parts
the Philistims lying in watch for him at AZza, and this to the 4. verse. The
second declares how at another time they laying wait for him, took him at
the house of Delilah in the valley of Sorek, to the 21. verse. The third part
shows their entreatie, even their cruel handling of Samson, after they had
apprehended him, and what came thereof, to the end of the Chapter.

The first part of the Chapter.
IN this part is showed how Samson came to this City AZza, and there went into
the house of an harlot: which being heard of by the Citizens, they The sum of
the first 3. verses
laid wait for him, but took him not: (for to the great disappointing of them)
he at midnight took the posts of the gates upon his shoulders, and carried
them to the top of a mountain, in the land of Israel, betwixt Hebron and the
Azzahites.

Here moreparticularly it being said that he seeing in the City a woman Verse.
1.
which was an harlot,) for so the Hebrew word is to be translated here,
though it signify also a victualler) he went in to her: which phrase is as
much as that he being not her husband, had unlawful company with her; as in
chapter 15. 1. that phrase of speech is taken for the companying of husband and
wife together, as also in many other places it does appear; so that it is
clear, that Samson in this first verse is said to have unlawful company with
an harlot, neither is there any show of reason to take it otherwise, against
the signification of the phrase, as that he saw a victualler, and went in to
her, that is, into her house: for their houses were known to be for the
receiving of passengers by some signs, or report, and not by meeting the
victuallers in the streets, and so accompanying them home. Sure it is, that
this was an harlot, whose house he went into, and he went in thither to an ill
end, even to have company with her (as I have said) in an unlawful manner:
therefore to seek any other exposition to salve the matter, is needless.
Doct. verse 1.


It has been well seen in this story, that Samson (notwithstanding some
faults) was one of the dear servants of God, as also, it is confirmed that he
was so in the Epistle to the Hebrews. And yet now behold, he is snared Heb.
11 32.
with an harlot, nay made drunk with that which was precious to him, and
deceivable in her. This is wondered at, and raises doubtful thoughts of heart
in many of Gods weak people, to see a man so beloved of God as he was, to be
left to himself to fall so shamefully. They desire therefore to know how this
should come to pass, that Samson, otherwise so good a man, should be thus
bereaved of his former good mind at this time, yea so disguised, and become so
unlike himself, and that in so short a time after he had served God so
commendably in the former Chapter, verse. 16. etc. and that he who could
overcome, and by his strength slew a thousand at one time, and that without
weapon, should become so impotent, thus to be overcome of a poor silly
woman, yea of an harlot. But it teaches, that such a thing may possibly befall
the dear servants of God. Such frailty they are subject to, and such
corruption remains still in them, that they may possibly forget God for the
time, (a fearful thing to think of,) and the holy estate they are in, and
be soon carried by occasion from their steadfastnesse in faith, knowledge,
and other grace to such fearful sins, and thereby it was that Samson fell
into this sin of whoredom, his heart not being armed against uncleanness,
nor he vpholden in his former chastnesse and grace.

And therefore let us know, that the people of God (as David, Solomon, Jonah,
2. Sam. 11. 4. 1. King. 11. 4. Jonah 1. 3.
and others did give too good proof of) have not God his grace so pinned to
their sleeves, but that they may possibly fall either into this, or other
reproachful and foul sins, partly by the forementioned means, and partly by
the inward suggestion of the heart, giving liberty thereto; besides this, that
there are many other outward occasions and prouocations among which they walk,
with bad examples, whereto Note.
they are in danger of being fashioned and made like to them, which may first
teach us all to see that there is great cause why the best of us should not
trust our corrupt nature, nor content our selves to deal slightly in looking
to our vow and covenant made with God against al sin and wickedness; but be
fast knit and united to him by faith unfeigned, and true love for his infinite
kindness to us, so that we might not be let loose so far, as to prostitute
our selves to any such villainy and reproach: but rather for the same his
goodness to us to be so far off from it, as that we should rather be daily
drawn to endeavor to please him in all things, and that with readiness: yea
and to watch thereunto constantly for all power from God to arm and enable us
thereto: well considering with our selves, that they are not our great words
and boasts of our chastnes, honesty, and grace, which will stand us in stead,
in the time of tentation and trial, neither are cold prayers and endeavors
able to weaken strong tentations in us, but we must look for strength, and
hearten on our selves by diligent and reverent using of al good means
appointed of God for this purpose, and yet to know that we are great gainers
thereby. And to speak more particularly of this sin of Note.
Samsons, we must (as we shall see cause) arm our selves against dallying with
the least tickling of us thereto, and with the forementioned means using, as
has been said) to attend our particular callings, and avoid idle and
unnecessary goings abroad; (which Dinah did not, and therefore smarted) Genesis
34. 1. 2.
whereby we shall obtain no small liberty and freedom from the same. These
things being duly regarded of us, and fervent prayers offered up often and
constantly to God for assistance and blessing; there is no fear, (God having
so spoken) that we shall be strongly possessed of smaller sins, as anger,
impatience, etc. much less tainted either with this uncleanness, or with any
other reproachful evils: but rather, by daily and renewed care and
watchfulness, we shall gather experience, and hope of being vpholden Note.
from the same unto our end. But if good things grow in mean account with us,
yea if we hold them not in an high price and reckoning, then begins our woe,
and then we lie open to infinite dangers. The use of this is to make the best
of us to fear and suspect our selves, lest we should fall, seeing we have not
grace at commandment, but as we make much of it.

And further here, as in fittest place, I think good to add this; that
seeing Samson did afterward recover and rise again; therefore this should
secondly serve to hold any that have been dear to the Lord, (and yet have
fallen as Samson did) from dispairing of Gods mercy toward them, and rather
encourage them to cling again in all true submission to him for mercy. And
much more ought our knowledge hereof to stay us from condemning such for
Apostates, who have so offended, though it cannot be denied but that they have
stained their credit which they had for godliness, with such blemishes. Sundry
among us not considering themselves, are too ready to fall to such rash and
uncharitable judging of other: and it is (as they think) a good piece of
religion (to their small commendation be it spoken) that they can censure
others, until their uncharitableness, high mindedness, and rash judging with
the devils malice and subtilty together, have brought themselves into the like
or worse case, and justly exposed them to that re^proch Note.
which they in their distempered mood did most spitefully draw up on others.
But of this point the several relapses whereof the former story is full, has
ministered occasion to entreat: let the reader compare the several places for
his own benefit.

Another thing in this verse is, that it is said, he was carried to this sin
by Doct. 2.
his eye. For he saw a woman that was an harlot, and he went in to her. So
that the occasion of his sin was his ungoverned eye, the evil heart being
soon inflamed and provoked thereby. And so it is often times with many other.
Thus was David deceived, and (though that is less to be wondered 2. Sam. 11.
2. Genesis 39. 7.
at) Joseph's Mistress. So all experience teaches, that the eye is a glass
window to let sin into the heart, though it have little need of help, for
it is it self a fountain of filthiness, out of the which as smoke out of a
furnace, all wickedness does proceed and come. Our wisdom shall be here, and
it is the use we should make of this doctrine, to keep our eyes continent,
while we walk in the midst of the allurements of this world, and therefore
to make a covenant with Job, not to look upon a woman, lest we be Job 31. 1.
caught and snared with that which is precious in her, but rather, where our
eye offends, to pluck it out, and turn it away from such alluring objects.
Matthew. 5. 29.


Oh it gives great ease and rest to us with safety, over that they find, who
will give liberty to themselves that way, I speak even of those that repent
for it afterward: as for other, they have no ear to hear, till their eyes
bring both soul and body so set on fire, to destruction. And the like I may
say of the ear, the tongue, and company, which all of them, even as idleness
and venturing to meddle and deal, where we have no calling nor warrant,
threaten infinite mischief to us, as not only that example of the fool in
the Proverbs does testify, (whose rouing about the streets made Prou. 7. 5.
Genesis 34. 2.
him a booty to the harlot) but Dinahs also, and many other do witness, who,
when they were caught in the snare, though not the same, (for the neglect of
this rule carries all sorts into deep danger) have cried out bitterly, Note.
when it was too late. But who could persuade them to do otherwise before? or
who by such examples can teach others wisdom, till they have brought it and
paid for it dearly themselves? For as in this sin of dalliance, so is it in
the rst: men think they are wise enough to guide their own way, though God be
shut out, (whereas the Prophet Jeremy denies that it Ierem. 10. 23.
is in man to direct his own way) and they that are not so bad, yet they think
they may be bold to go upon the brinke, though they fall not into the water,
but when they are fallen in, (for what other thing may they look for) then
they wish they had abridged themselves a little of their liberty, rather then
to have taken a whit too much: then no precisenes, (which has sometime been
scoffed at in others) nor any setting watch over heart and eyes is too much.
And to say the truth, God (who is only wise) knows what he does, when he
lets such bold persons (seeing they will needs) fall dangerously: not only
that others might learn to believe those admonitions concerning such offenses,
when they see examples, but even for the offenders themselves, that their pride
may be cracked, their loosenes corrected, themselves made more privy to their
own corruption, and glad to live ever after more thankfully under Gods
government.

And yet this I say further about this point, that some who glory to be
counted virgins, and therefore refuse marriage, and the rather to shun other
discommodities accompanying it, they shall have small reward for their so doing
of God; but their sin breaking out another way, as by Sodomie, and the
nourishing of unclean lusts, and so being doubled, they shall have their
punishment accordingly.

But seeing this sin of Samsons was committed immediately after the great Doct.
3.
service that he did to God against the Philistims, mentioned in the latter
end of the former chapter, (from the which work he came to this city Azza,
where he saw the woman) by this (I say) we may see, that when we have
praised God (as he did at the victory he had gotten) and after we have served
him in any good sort and manner, yet even then are we subject to offend, and
break out against him some way, as occasion may be offered, Note.
and even then are we not free from danger of falling, no, not after so firm
standing: whereas it might be thought that we be then out of peril for many
days after.

Indeed it were meet it should be so, I mean, that we should be better
fenced and strengthened against evil of all sorts, when we have been well
occupied and taken up in duty to God before, and I confess, (as all will
grant) that if we consider it well, that we should after and by such service
Note.
done to God, as Samson did against the Philistims, we should (I say) be senced
against all the sweet baits of sin for a long time afterward; and it were
meet, that by such good spiritual refreshing of our souls, we might be the
fitter to proceed cheerfully and readily from one duty to another, at least
to be far from such disguisings, as this of Samsons was. But as the devil
handles the matter, who slightly and covertly works thereby in us security,
and a pleasing of our selves in the good that we have done, we are sometimes
easily led to dream, and imagine, that we having now been well occupied, we
may more boldly take our liberty, and by good right remit and slake our care
that we had before: to the which we are all prone by the rebellion of our
wicked nature. To be forward any way to sin after we have been fleshed on by
ill company, and such like inticements, it is a thing not to be marueiled at:
but after we have been well occupied, and have done faithful service to God,
then to break out amiss, and to go (like Cain and Judas) out of Gods presence,
as it were into the devils shop forthwith, about his work and business, this (I
say) would not easily be thought, that we might be brought unto. But yet
through wilful ignorance, that we will know no better, neither will see, when
yet we do, or through sloth, pride, loosenes and security bearing sway in
us, we may possibly be misled, yea and that easily and full soon, after this
manner, as I have said. The use of this is, to reprove them who will say: What?
must we ever be in serving of God? The which speech how unsavory it is, and
unbeseeming professors of the Gospel, all may see, who know, that the service
of God is perfect freedom: and they shall see also, when for the neglecting of
it, they have well smarted.

And if that will not stop their mouths and answer them, let that saying of
our Savior be added to it: to wit, that when we have done the Luke 17. 10.
most, we are but unprofitable servants, and that we come far short of that
which we ought to do: yea and that all means using will not fray away Satan
and noisome temptations, except we watch and pray to resist him Matthew. 26 41.
always, as frailty will permit. These things and the like, if they be duly
considered, we shall see small cause to flatter our selves, as though we might
take some liberty by authority to sin.

What these men of Azza did, when they heard that Samson was there, is Verse 2.
showed in this second verse: to wit, that they went about presently to take
him, and compassed the house, and lay in wait for him in the night, purposing
(though they were disappointed) to kill him in the morning. This diligence in
them without delay, being heathens, to prevent a mischief, puts us to blame
and just reproach, who are Christians, if we be not much more careful to do
the like. For thereby we prevent, or cut off atleast, much inconvenience, when
it is already begun, if we do not also hinder and mar the growth thereof,
that it go no further. As for example more particularly, if disorder, lewd
meetings, to drinkings, gaming, whoring, and such like, be sprung up in our
country towns, or houses among us, all should be hinderers of them (that are
such workers of evil) as they may, and oppose themselves against them, both
Magistrates, Headborowes of towns, and Masters of families: so for the
apprehending a Jesuit or Seminary, and such as are known to carry traitors
hearts against their Prince and land, or any that come to sow their heretical
and Idolatrous cockle and darnell among the Lords wheat, also if any should
go about to aleniate the people from the true worship of God, from public
hearing the Gospel preached; we should be as forward as these Philistims, in
hunting them out of their holes, and bringing them forth, rather then to have
our sloth, and backwardnes in such good attempts to be condemned, and that
justly, and especially by the diligence of such as these Philistims were.

Against all which abominations we should so join together for the rooting
out of them, that they who can lend no other help hereto, should yet enquire
after them where there is cause, and to tell and bewray their haunt, as they
did here tell the citizens of Azza, that Samson was there. And so all of us
with the poor people at the building of the Temple, (who brought mortar to set
forward the same, when they could do no greater thing) all of us (I say) are
to do our best endeavor, at least to show our forward and ready minds to do
the good we can therein. But lamentable is the sloth and backwardnes that is
showed in setting Gods matters and business forward, when yet no time nor
labor, no, nor cost, is enough in following our own: much like them who are
mentioned by the Prophet, who dwelt in sieled houses themselves, but suffered
Gods house to lie wast. Habac. 1. 4.
But more of this before oftentimes, and lately in the former Chapter by the
like occasion.

But it is said in this verse that Samson escaped their hands, for all their
labor and diligence to take him, and not only so, but also did them further
Verse. 3.
hurt: whereby we may see, that God did not by and by punish him for all his
great sin committed, but gave him time to think of it; whereas if he had
forthwith chastised him, he had dealt with him but justly. But seeing God often
times deals so with us, I mean, not to pursue us by and by after some wilful
and known sin committed, here lest we should misconceiue of his so doing;
learn we the end of his forbearing any of us, when we have provoked him: for
we know that he should do us no wrong, if he should forthwith lay his hand
upon us, yea and that in some sharp manner. The reason of Gods deferring, the
Apostle Peter sets down: who tells us, 2. Pet. 3. 9.
that the Lord is patient to us in such cases to this end, even to bring us to
repentance: lo, this good he means us by forbearing us. And though it be no
wise man's part to tempt him at all, in hope of being spared, as Samson here
was, (because sins can never be without fear, though they may be without
outward danger for a time) yet if we have done so in times past, for the time
to come, do we so no more.

For so our Savior speaks to the man in the Gospel who had been healed Ioh.
5. 14.
of his disease, (and the caveat and watchword is as fit for us) Go thy way
and sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee. So the best that we can do
in such a case, is, to judge our selves speedily, for the evil we have done,
that we be not judged of the Lord, which will be sharp and smartie. Even as
Samson found it afterward, and as other do in the like case find it daily. And
1. Cor. 11. 31.
yet without due regard had, our corrupt hearts will drive us upon the common
rock; to wit, that we shall hurt our selves that way which many do, even to
cry peace, peace; if God defer to punish, and to think (for so we love to
flatter our selves) that he favors us, when he does not by and by strike us:
even as the wicked said in the Psalm, (because the Lord did (as it Psalm. 50.
21.
were) hold his tongue, and did not by and by smite him for his sin) that he
was like unto him, that is, of his mind, and allowed him therein; but God
answered him, I will reprove thee, and set thy bad doings before thee, that
thou shall acknowledge them whether thou will or no, and so I will show how I
favored thee.

The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 4. And after this he loved a woman by the plain of Sorek, whose name
was Delilah. 5. Unto whom came the Princes of the Philistims, and said unto
her, Entice him, and see wherein his great strength lies, and by what means
we may overcome him, that we may bind him and punish him; and every one of us
shall give thee eleven hundred shekles of silver. 6. And Delilah said to
Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great strength lies, and wherewith
thou might be bound to do thee hurt? 7. Samson then answered unto her, If
they bind me with seven green cords, that were never dried, then shall I be
weak, and be as another man. 8. And the Princes of the Philistims brought her
seven green cords, that were not dry, and she bound him therewith. 9. (And
she had men lying in wait with her in the chamber,) Then she said unto him,
The Philistims be upon thee Samson: And he brake the cords as a thread of tow
is broken when it feels fire: so his strength was not known. 10. After,
Delilah said unto Samson, See thou have mocked me, and told me lies, I pray
thee now tell me wherewith thou might be bound. 11. Then he answered her, If
they bind me with new ropes that were never occupied, then shall I be weak,
and be as another man. 12. Delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound him
therewith, and said unto him, The Philistims be upon thee Samson (and men lay
in wait in the chamber) and he brake them from his arms as a thread. 13.
Afterward Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto have thou beguiled me and told
melies, tell me how thou might be bound. And he said unto her, If thou
plattest seven locks of mine head with the threeds of the woofe. 14. And she
fastened it with a pin, and said unto him, The Philistims be upon thee
Samson, and he awoke out of his sleep, and went away with the pin of the web
and the woofe. 15. Again she said unto him, How can thou say, I love thee,
when thine heart is not with me? thou have mocked me these three times, and
have not told me wherein thy great strength lies. 16. And because she was
importunate upon him with her words continually, and vexed him, his soul was
pained to the death. 17. Therefore he told her all his heart, and said to her,
There never came rasor upon mine head: for I am a Nazarite unto God from my
mothers womb: therefore if I be shaven, my strength will go from me, and I
shall be weak, and be like to other men. 18. And when Delilah saw that he had
told her all his heart, she sent and called for the Princes of the Philistims,
saying, Come up once again; for he has showed me all his heart. And they
came up to her, and brought the money in their hands. 19. And she made him
sleep upon her knees, and she called a man, and made him to shave off the
seven locks of his head, and she began to vex him, and his strength was gone
from him. 20. Then she said, the Philistims be upon thee Samson. And he awoke
out of his sleep, and thought, I will go out now as at other times, and shake
my self, but he knew not that the Lord was departed from him.
IN these verses is set down the second part of the Chapter, wherein Samson
sinned again, in like manner as before, but he had not the like issue as The
sum of these verses.
he had out of the former wicked fact. For God did not arrest him upon that
trespass, nor pursue him; but seeing he made no benefit of that his
conniuence, when he went away without punishment, but proceeded to the like
sin again; behold he now paid dearly for both, accordingly as he tempted God
far by this sin of whoredom. For here it is said, that he loved another
woman of the Philistims, and when they understood it, they considered by what
means he vexed them, and that was by the great strength of body which he had,
whereby he wrought them great mischief: and they by and by enticed and
flattered the woman, and easily won her, by promising her a great sum of
money, and so agreed all of them together therein, to persuade her to get of
him by subtilty, where his great strength lay, that so they might when they
knew it, use some means to weaken him, and then handle him afterward at their
pleasure. The which practice she being so hired, readily went about; and he
being made drunk with the sottish and inordinate love of her, suffered her to
move such questions to him about it, that although he held her off a while,
yet at last he told her all his heart, even that which she asked of him, how
he might be made weak, till he saw too late with Adam, that God was gone
from him, and that he had Genesis 3. 7.
lost all the great strength which God had given him.

In these verses (containing the second part of the Chapter) seeing they are
many, and the matter of them much; therefore for avoiding confusion and
tediousness in the handling of them, I will draw them to these two points. The
first, how by a new occasion the Philistims laid wait for Samson again. And
this is to the end of the fifth verse, and that was in this manner: to wit, by
most earnest suing to Delilah, to learn where his great strength lay: The
second, how she never ceased til she had found it out, and brought them word of
it, to verse. 21.

And first touching Samson, the holy story relates what the occasion was of
pursuing him; in verse 4. and then how the Philistims thereby were moved to lay
for him, in verse. 5. The occasion was, that he cast his affection upon another
woman, not an Israelite, (but of the nation of the Philistims) and the holy
story expresses the place where she dwelt, which was the plain of Sorek, and
the woman's name whom he loved was Delilah. By this that is said of Samson, that
he went to another woman as before; note Doct. verse. 4.
that filthy lust is not satisfied, by yielding to it (no more then anger and
wrath is) that is, only for the time, but breaks out, and rangeth still yet
further. For as the fire, when it is broken out into a flame, stands not
still, but takes hold of one house when it has burned another: Even so it is
A simil.
with wicked lust: It is not one woman, two, or twenty, that can satisfy the
vnbridlednesse, and outragiousnesse thereof, but it would, if it might be
served and yielded unto, go as far as Solomon did, even to defile a
thousand. As Iehu in his answer to Iehorams demand of peace, 2. King. 9. tells
him that 2. King. 9. 22,
his mother Iezabels witchcrafts were without number. The reason hereof is,
because the unlawful pleasure of sin does (as the bait does the fish) egg on
the sinner to go forward, and blinds him from seeing the manifold
unfruitfulness thereof. Like gamesters, who will never leave off their trade,
while there is a penny left them. Which shows, that the wickedness of the
heart is in that one kind, as in many other, out of measure sinful. For what
though there be no clear proof of this always that I speak of, I mean the
insatiableness of men's filthy appetite. It is so, partly seeing the sin is
secretly committed, for the most part, and therefore can hardly be known to
many how far it proceeds: and partly, for that such as sin in that kind,
can hardly have ordinary opportunity to effect that which they desire. But the
truth of that which I say, appears by this, that it has been found out, as
by other ways, so by the confession of some, who have gone far in that
wicked course of life, and howsoever they may have come short in the number of
so many as a thousand with Solomon, yet they have made it up to the full, in
the longlying in the sin with them who were their leaud companions, when they
have not been intercepted, but have had their full swinge. So true is it which
is affirmed of the guilt of sin, that it is infinite, both in respect of the
transgression against an infinite Majesty, and also because the sinners
appetite (though actually finite) yet extends itself to a desire of
multiplying sin infinitely, if it could. And it is death to bad men to think
that their evil course should be stopped, or that they may not do as in times
past they have done: yea because that age and death, if no other thing, must
needs end all their iollity.

And not to insist in this instance alone, it may be seen in sundry other
kinds of sin, (as theft, prodigality, drunkenness and the rest) how the
heart is out of measure sinful, and gives not over evil doing, till it want
opportunity, or till it must cease by necessity, and that violence be put unto
it. It delights the old ribald to see and hear, and report the pageants,
stories, and practices of uncleanness, which he remembers he has wrought,
and though his old bones cannot bestirre them so lively as in times past, yet
old Adam within is alive, and as lascivious as ever. The angry man, when has
he done? till he have none to be angry with, or till he be cut off, so as he
cannot show it. But I might be endless, if I should follow particulars. How
often (think we) had Peter been like to have denied his Master, who did so
three times, and vehementliest at the last, when yet he did it only through
fear, of mere infirmity, and not professedly, which had been much worse?
neither yet were the occasions very strong or great by which he was brought
thereto, but even the words of a silly damsel.

The use of that which I have said is this; that both in tentation to the sin
of uncleanness, (and the object thereof) and to any other sin, we Prou. 4.
18.
keep our hearts and eyes with all possible observation and diligence from
allowing or liking the offer of it, in any sort, but that we curb them up and
tie them short. For though carnal reason would persuade us, that the giving of
a little liberty to our fleshly affections, and covetous desires, would content
and satisfy them, so as they would not desire to reach any further, Note.
(as some man will say, If I were worth but thus many hundred pounds, etc. I
would rest content) yet this were a gross bewitching of us to think so,
seeing without Gods special grace, as money increases, so does the love
thereof also; yea it were the next way to bring us into utter and extreme
bondage, and to provoke us further to endless engaging of our selves
thereunto. Nay, rather join we prayer with watching, and that we fall not from
Mar. 26. 41.
our uprightness, so shall we be sure not to fall into any such tentation. I
say the less of this, because I have handled it in the speech of Adonibezek,
in cap. 1. verse. 4.

THE EIGHTY THREE SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
TO go forward where I left, here note we another thing; to wit, what use
and benefit we commonly 2
make of Gods long sufferance and patience, and that is this: even to go
forward by spiritual delusion, in our sins, without making any question,
that God will call us to any account for them; but flatteringly to tell our
selves, and to be persuaded that all is well, as long as God lets us go
unpunished. Whereas, who should be ignorant of this, that the patience of God
toward us is to the end we should acknowledge it with unfeigned thanks: (for he
might justly have punished us, as he has done others, when he spared us) and
that to the end we should turn again to the Lord by true repentance, rather
wondering Romans 2. 4.
at his lenity in so doing, then with much ado enduring the penalty. and when
we be enlightened, and come to our selves, and see that we have tempted God,
we should in no wise flatter our selves, lest the Lord be forced thereby to tie
us shorter, and use more sharpness then we shall like well of. The like I
spoke of Samsons escaping in the former verse. Only this I add, that it is a
fearful thing, when the love and conniuence of God, which is a Note.
chief bridle to contain his faithful people in obedience, is become an
occasion of the greatest licentiousness in them. It argues that their tender
nature and filial affection is waxen hardened, and degenerated into slavish
and desperate boldness. Like to him who presuming himself sure enough of his
master, fell to wax weary of work, and to take upon him iollity, as they do
who reckon without their Host. But there shall no one thing so much sting them
at the heart when God is come to take correction on them, as this; that they
were never well, till they had turned the love of a father, into the jealousy
of a foe: whose swift wings in taking revenge shall be sure to recompense the
delay of his leaden feet, slow to punish, as Samson himself in the sequel
found to his cost.

Thus much of Samsons sin: now it is showed how the Philistims took Verse. 5.
occasion thereby to get him into their hands, and that was, by dealing with
the woman whom he loved, to entice him to tell her where his great strength lay,
that so they might do to him as they desired; but withal, to the end they
might draw and persuade her thereto, they offer her (the chief Princes of
them, I mean) a large sum of money. By this we may see the wisdom and
readiness of the men of this world in going about to remedy any bodily
mischief that is coming toward them. As soon as they heard where Samsons
haunt was, the chief of them went thither, and took order for the suppressing
of him, and that not without their great cost and charge. Oh this were
commendable indeed, if it might be seen in us, yea and so much the more,
where greater mischief hangs over us, I mean, if we could offer like
violence to our sin, and give it no rest, till we had rooted it out, as they
here effected that which they went about. The which (yet) all may see, that we
have greater cause to do, then they that are in the most emminent danger of
any temporal or bodily evil. But here to see both our sloth and our folly,
it is both admirable and lamentable. But of their providence, together with
their cost, consent, and diligence I have noted more by the like occasion in
the former verse.

It is no marvel that they counsel her to deceive him by inticements and 2
allurements, such as harlots have good skill in, and fools that are woond in
with them, are easily deluded by. For Samson by the strongest reason and
persuasion of the wisest carnal friend, would never have been drawn to this
slavery and shame, which a base companion brought him to, by delusion Note.
and deceiving of him. Whereby we may learn, that when we are carried away to
sin, and are given over to our lusts, we depart not only from religion, but
also from sound wisdom and reason, and are not in our right minds, (as they
say) but are deluded, mocked, disguised, even made very fools, as Samson was
here, if not mad and beside our selves; as it was said of the prodigal son
when he had spent his goods with harlots, he came to Luke 15 17.
himself at length, whereby it is clear that he was before beside himself:
and as we read of the fool in the Proverbs, that he followed as an ox to
Prou 7. 22.
the slaughter.

And if we be such, then it is our due to be shoaled among such, and to be
driven from the company of sober and wise men. Yet thus was Samson deceived
and deluded, when he was drawn and enticed by that wicked woman, to utter this
secret, namely where his great strength lay. The use that we should make of
this, is to abhor that sin, and all fellowship with such persons, and
labor to retain godly wisdom, to guide us in holy fear of offending,
rather then to take part in the pleasures of sin for a season, so shall we
not be deceived and deluded, as otherwise we cannot choose but be, yea and that
in most sottish manner, as Samson here was by her enchantment brought to be.
Let this be sufficient to show, that there is enough in the corrupt heart of
man to humble him in the sight of God and the world, if he were not in the
depth of darkness, yea though there were no more but this, that there is such
a rebellion and deformity in the inferior appetite of the soul, through
original sin, that whereas it was created most obedient and subject to the
pure light of the understanding in all things, now it is so infeebled and
infatuated, that it resists the judgment of the mind, and led away by the
strength of any allurement, even contrary to that knowledge, which still
remains to guide it. So that it is degegenerate and become most brutish and
sottish, and so bewraieth it self even in them that otherwise go for none, of
the simplest, or uncivil sort.

This offering of her money by these Princes of the Philistims, and that also
in such liberal manner, which was as much as an hundred pound a piece Doct. 3.
of our money well nigh, by the estimation of the shekell, which they reckoned
by, [for a common shekell was as much as twenty pence with us, and therefore
eleven hundred want little of an hundred pound at that rate.] This offering (I
say) of so many hundreds to her, according to the number of the Princes that
came to her, might easily draw on to their purpose such an one as was but
light, inconstant, and false-hearted to Samson, (as harlots are) without
respect of the money.

Which teaches us, that this hireing of people for money, has bin, and Doct.
is as ready a way to draw them to any lewd practice, as it is commonly
offered, and has bin in all ages, but never more then in this, and especially
by the Popish crew in the attempting of desperate murders, etc. The like has
bin noted in the fact of Abimelech, chap. 9. who hired lewd fellows with the
Judge. 9. 4.
money of the Shechemites: and that woeful example of the Priests prevailing
thereby with Judas one of the twelve Apostles, to betray his Master, and in
hireing the watchmen, Matthew. 28. to defame the Resurrection, may be notable
presidents hereof. And I mention this point to this end, that seeing it Mat.
28. 12. 13.
is as common as odious, that it may not reach also to Gods faithful servants,
to do either the one or the other, either to set a work others, or to sell
their help either to corrupt, or to be corrupted by money, (for they go
together, and are mutual causes and effects of each other) to bring wicked
purposes to pass; which in so evil an age as this is, (far more subtle and
skilfuller then the former to do mischief) may too soon prevail by custom
even among them. Touching the cost they were at, see more in chap. 17. 2.

Thus we have heard how this wicked woman was hired by the Philistim Verse. 6.
7. 8. 9.
Princes to this woeful work of deceiving Samson, which was the first point of
the two, (as appears in the fourth verse) in the second part of this chapter.
Now it follows, how she went to work, and prevailed, and this is the second.
This is declared and laid forth in the verses following, to the 21. But she
not obtaining at one time that which she sought, she set upon him fundrie
times. Four several attempts are expressed here to have been made by her to
this end; and the first of them is to be seen in these four next verses. Of
these therefore as they follow in order.

In her first attempt, we must not think that she went about it simply by
Doct. verse. 6.
asking him the question, where his strength lay; but as they had taught her to
deceive him, so there is no doubt but she flattered him, pretending that she
marueiled at his so great strength, and that she rejoiced not a little, for
that she had a lover endued with such an excellent gift and quality; and
therefore that she, as one loving him again, and trusty to him, for his
kindness toward her, desired of him to know where that great strength of his
did lie. By this we see, what boldness, men (though furnished with excellent
gifts) do cause and cherish in harlots, by having fellowship, and keeping
company with them. Samson was a man so spoken of for his manhood, that such as
were of good courage, durst not be bold to look him in the face, yet she a
base housewife, dares boldly demand of him weighty matters, and the greatest
secrets. So the whorish daughter of an whorish mother, Herodias I mean, being
so far admitted as to dance before Herod Matthew. 14. 6.
the King, and being permitted to demand what recompense she listed, even to
the half of his kingdom, shamed not to ask the head of John Baptist: whom
not only all the people, but even Herod himself reverenced and Mark. 6. 20.
stood in fear of. And these are the wares which the strumpets fardall is
stuffed withal, even subtlety, cruelty, falsehood (all so tempered together in
this demand of Delilah, that a man knows not which quality of them all is
predominant) and among the rest, this (whereof we now speak) insolent
impudency and shamelessness. It is the practice of this cursed kind even at
this day with their Paramours, to demand of them unreasonable pledges of
unclean love, as appears by the embezeling of their patrimony for their
maintenance, and sometimes causing them to spend even their blood in their
quarrel, or by their occasion.

It is a true saying, that too much familiarity breeds contempt. But much
more if it be in evil, and in no evil sooner then in this kind, I mean in
whoredom. A thing notoriously exemplified in that harlot Iezabel, Note.
who so much abused the remissenes of Ahab, as to insult over him, as her 1
King. 21. 7.
underling. It is the common phrase of them that are the companions of harlots,
to call themselves their servants, and them their mistresses. But in deed they
are their vassals and slaves, and yet their bondage, as great as it is, and
joined with misery, is sweet to them, although (indeed) but a sweet poison:
but it is a reward good enough for such employment. And yet many choose this
kind of life, as a liberty, rather then honest marriage. But to return to
that which I said of familiarity, it is not meet for the best to swell (I
confess) and to be high minded, but humble and meek toward all; yet with
gravity, whereby the bad may be afraid of them, and not think them fit
companions for them, except they change their qualities, and the Note. Tit. 2.
7.
good may cling and join to their company and acquaintance, without fear.
But to have familiarity with the bad in evil, is utterly unlawful, and
serves only to confirm and make them bold in wickedness. Thus is many a man,
otherwise worthy, as Samson was, brought into mean account by indiscreete and
unseasonable laying open his mind, where he should not: even so did he
imbolden this woman thereby to ask him how he may be bound and hurt; the
which how absurd a thing it was either for him to encourage her, or for her to
propound to him, who sees not?

Samson in answering her, who should not have admitted her to speak to Verse. 7.
him of any such matter, and telling her how he might be bound, did make way
to all the evil that followed. For if she had been repulsed and beaten back
from such boldness at the first, she should have had no encouragement, or much
less (no doubt) to have proceeded further, as she did afterward. It was as
great wisdom in Samson to answer her in this, as it was in Balaam, when he
answered the words of his Ass. It was time (he should have said Numb. 22. 29.
with himself) for him to think that he had gone far enough in provoking
God, when he opened the mouth of the dumme beast to reprove him.

So should Samson have thought, that when he had imboldned a wicked woman to
tamper and meddle with him about that which touched his life, and concerned his
soul, to bereave it of the furniture of the graces of God, he should have
thought (I say) that it was time to cease speaking to her, or to admit her to
speak of any such matter to him: yea to turn utterly away from her rather,
and utterly to give her over. Joseph, when his whorish Mistress lay at him day
by day to yield to her wicked request, the Scripture Genesis 39. 10.
testifies, that yet he hearkened not unto her, neither would be in her
company.

So if any of us have made vagaries and outstrayings, yea though not so
grossly as Samson did, neither in fellowship with lewd women, (which were
horrible) but if it be but in fond and filthy lingering after them, and their
whorish company, when our consciences shall accuse us for so doing, Note.
and warn us to desist and break off betimes, from such longing and lingering
after them, as they who have nothing to do with them, and when withal we set
before our eyes the shame and sorrow that will fall on us by that which we long
for, and have after: then (I say) let us think, it is high time for us (if we
have unhappily gone so far) to break the brood, and scatter the mists of
such idle and filthy thoughts and wicked lusts, and with astonishment ask of
our selves, what have we done? and by the help of our faithful and seruent
prayers to throw them all in the dust, and not with Samson to dally with them,
as he did with his Delilah, but mark and think seriously upon the end
thereof. And so doing, we shall to some purpose make our benefit of this
example of Samson: otherwise we may with the common sort wonder at, and
condemn his folly, and our selves play the fools in the like or a worse
kind. It is not strange, that he who purposely had prostituted himself to the
will of an harlot, and was now in the pursuit of his lust, could not then
break the bands of his sinful desire, when it had snared him: for the time of
preventing this mischief was, when he was first enticed: now the matter was
gone so far that being under feet, he had small list or strength to rise up,
and call himself to a serious remembrance Note.
of his offense. And Delilahs lap and arms was no fit nor likely place or
occasion of such thoughts or meditations: wisdom was driven out of his breast
by corrupt affection: the blow was smartie enough, but he had lost his
feeling. So that there is no more miserable a sight, then to behold a man when
he is entangled with the snare of his own lust, or any sin that wastes the
conscience, for then is he shiftlesse, and cannot help himself, but is
ready to bear any burden which shall be laid upon his shoulders, rather then
to rise up from under it. Therefore great is the love of God to that man, who
not having at first prevented the beginnings of sin, but been overtaken with
the deceitfulnes of it at the first view, yet upon more advised consideration
of the danger which it leads unto, shall awake and rouse up himself, and
fly from it as from a serpent.

And for his shifting her off with a lie, as though he would both satisfy 2
her, and yet keep himself in safety, by not bewraying the secret; his
wisdom and commendation was alike in both. For as he dealt foolishly in
answering her at all, so did he as ill in looking to stop her mouth with a
lie. Which forewarneth us, not to shift for our selves, nor look to make our
part good by lying, though the way lie open thereto, and is then too ready at
hand, when we see no other way; which sin in all kinds thereof is condemned,
howsoever little account be made of it. And the rather it is to be taken heed
of, seeing we often times run headlong into it, (as I have said) when we see
no readier way to shift for our selves, and (as we think) to save our credit,
and avoid greater danger. And seeing there was no other to be looked for, then
that Samson (being in the case he was at this present) should provide for his
own safety by a lie, (a poor shield for him, whose innocence and
watchfulnes should have been his defense) let us beware of entering acquaintance
with any sin, for it will be costly in the maintaining, and draw a man by a
wretched necessity to add thereto many other sins: even as Samson must seek
covert and safeguard to himself by a lie (for want of better) except at first
dash he would have gone through stitch, and have told her the matter. Touching
his dallying humor, and his playing wily beguily with her, as if he had had
wisdom and skill enough to shift her off with trifling answers, if the hardest
should come; although it sauoured somewhat of confidence and conceitednes of
his supposed strength, (much like Peter's rashness, when he was told by his
Master that he should deny him) Luke 22. 34. Mat. 26. 34. 35.
yet in the sequel it bewraied his more then common folly, as he that had had
but one eye, might easily have seen that no less evil could follow: which
also shall appear in due place hereafter.

She, as if he had told her the truth, as she verily thought he had, went
Verse. 8. 9.
about forthwith to make proof of his words: for whereas he told her he
should be weakened, if he were bound with seven green withes or cords, she
caused them to be brought to her forthwith, and she bound him with them,
though indeed he brake them: (oh wonderful sottishnes in him to suffer it!)
and she had certain of the Philistims lying in wait in a chamber thereby; who
should be ready to take him, if he had been weakened indeed, as she supposed he
was, and looked for it. Thus we see whereto her flattering words tended, even
to seek his life. And this is as good as they may look for, who have near
fellowship and secret company with such companions.

For though as Solomon says, her lips drop as the honey comb, even as if she
were pleasure it self to a man, yet her paths lead to destruction, and Prou.
5. 3.
an whore will hunt after the precious life of a man. We have read of many, who
partly have been most woefully handled of the strumpets themselves, whom they
have trusted with life and goods, and partly have bin delivered by them into
their enemies hands to be slain. And what marvel? For she that has sold her
self; will much easilier sell her Paramour. And therefore well did the same
Solomon give warning, that she is to be shunned as hell Prou. 7. 27.
mouth. But though bodily danger be so much to be feared by her, yet that is
the least; spiritual hurt is far greater. But by the occasion of this which
I say, I add; that the sin of them is far more grievous, who abhor common
harlots, who might easily bewray them, yet will not refrain from making those
(or going about it at least) who were honest before, to stoop to their lure,
and so become whores and dishonest; which thing of the better sort is more to
be feared. Of this falsehood and treachery I have said somewhat in the former
Chapter.

Thus much of the first attempt of Delilah, by the which though she prevailed
Verse. 10.
not in that which she sought, yet this she gained, that she was the more
imboldned to set upon him again, as having received no check nor discouragement
by him, for that which she had done already. Therefore she is not discouraged,
but attempteth the matter the second time, as in these next three verses is to
be seen. And she boldly said to him, that he had deceived her, and told her
lies, which might justly cause her, she said, to doubt of his love to her, and
therefore now she required better dealing at his hands, or else she should be
much grieved.

This shameless behavior of hers should teach us, that all boldness in evil
1
is an high degree of sin, and we should keep our selves far from it: as
not even to dare open our mouths to a woman to hearken and consent to a filthy
and unclean demand or motion, whereby also she may know and be privy to the
wickedness that is in us. The same I say of boldness in any other sin, as
boasting, threatening, slandering, lying, swearing, challenging of any to fight,
or any other like unto these, and it is fearful to hear any of these, or to
see them committed with such boldness as they are. Oh modesty and bashfulnes,
what seemly and comely ornaments are they, even where conscience is as yet
wrought by the word, but wanting? for they do keep and preserve many from
shameful evils oftentimes, who have no religion to guide and defend them. But
boldness is and ought to be used in the defense, commendation, and suit making
for good things, and therein to be showed, Note.
and when it is so employed, it is then in kind. This point I will not here
enlarge, seeing it often comes to hand.

Now follows Samsons answer to her suit in the second attempt. And Verse. 11.
that was much like the former. If, says he now, I be bound with new ropes
that never were occupied, I shall be weak, as another man. Wherein we see he
dallies with her still, and suffers her to demand that of him which was not
meet in any sort for him to have suffered, yea and answers her also about it.
For what though he held her off with a lie? yet seeing he did not refuse to
answer her about it, and charge her to speak no more of it, (being a secret
not to be uttered) and also in that he does so the second time, when he had
tried already, that she sought to know it only to the end she might deliver
him into the Philistims hands; in these respects, I say, as it was palpable
dotage in him to do so, even so it was the next way to set her forward in
soliciting and importuning him, till she got it at his hands. It was therefore
a further degree both of his sin, and also of the bringing on of his misery.
He might have been made wise enough to have refused to hear her any more about
that, having seen before, that the Philistims lay in the chamber just by, (if
opportunity had served) to bind and take him.

And this may teach us, that it is no better then sottishness to be so
impotently Doct.
given over to a man's appetite, and either this way in lingering after, or
clinging to a wicked woman, or in pursuing hotly any other sin, seeking the
fulfilling of a man's desire, so that he can no way be removed from it; and
that especially when neither proof of former danger thereby, nor fear of
present evil, nor the foreseeing of any to come, (and yet all certain and
apparent) can hold him from it. And though in this gross manner Gods servants
be not commonly enchanted and bewitched (which were monstrous) yet let us not
rest in that, nor in any like impotency, as in hunting greedily after the
wealth of this world, and ioying in the pride of life, etc. but so bridle we
and keep under our wicked hearts, especially when we have had fair warnings
before, as he had, that they bring us to no such like slavery and bondage, but
that we abhor them more then at the first, (if we did then entertain them,
especially we having had proof, as he had, what woe will follow.

The more I consider this fact of Samson, the more I think of that phrase
which the holy Ghost uses to describe sin by; I mean that of drunkenness.
And as by other occasions I note other properties of a drunkard, wilfully
rushing into it; so I observe this one of venterousnesse and boldness. Well
said he that described drunkenness (among many other properties of the disease)
that it puts into man a marvelous confident hopes, so that it dares fight
with any man without weapon, whom sobriety durst not encounter with, though
well armed. And no wonder, for when the brain is ouercharged, and nature
oppressed, in stead of the purelight and understanding of mind; there is
engendered a frothie conceit and appearance of that which is not, and in stead
of the spirit and vigor of the affection, succeeds a degenerate boldness
and foole-hardie ventrousnesse: as all men can judge that the boldness of a
drunkard comes rather for want of wit, then presence of courage. Even thus
fares it with Samson in this distemper and spiritual drunkenness of his.
Still he makes his companion answers, fair and far off, flourishing and
casting about, as if he had skill, and strength enough to match and go beyond
her; whereas alas it fares with him as with the man I spoke of, who thinking
himself strong enough to go alone and upright, tottereth and falls at every
turn. For although the secret was not yet uttered, yet these preambles of
dalliance and trifling, what were they but as the nibling of the fish, or the
hopping of the bird about the bait and snare which she hasteneth, and yet would
not seem to hasten unto? Doubtless, if Samson his grace had not been in great
part imbezeled and feebled, ere his locks were cut off, he had carried a truer
measure of himself, and better judgment of his own case, then to think
himself his own man, and able to resist, when his mistrisse, or rather his
lust, had him bound in chains, and laid under feet, as foiled and vanquished.
Ah poor Samson, (it may be said) thou were strong enough to match Lions, and
thousands of men: but grace stands not in the bigness of bone, and strength of
arms, or greatness of stomach: thy lust and thy harlot are stronger then the
Lion, or mighty men. Therefore let this be enough to convict all such of
folly, as are of Samsons humor. Tush, ye must not tell them of bad company,
nor stealing of liberty which God denies them; they would not have you think
they have shaken hands with the fear of God, they would be as loath to part
with a good conscience as others: yea, (it may be answered) so thought Samson;
he would haunt the harlots house, and yet secretly keep his goodness too, for
all that. But how, and where lay the strength to effect this? Poor soul,
only in his foolish conceit and boldness, and indeed only there lay the
foundation of his woe. For if he had felt his declining and weakness, then
had he with astonishment shaken off his lover, and departed. But now he
fears nothing till all be too late, and this makes him to sport and play in a
matter of the greatest importance and danger. Therefore to all such bold persons
as say, Turn me loose to any company, and the strongest enemy; If I be
foiled, laugh at me: To such I say; yea, we shall be sure you shall be laughed
at, though the wise will pity you rather: but who shall give you counsel to
escape it before? truly he that can persuade you to walk humbly, and with
fear of your own frailty, and to watch against, and suspect your own frailty
and falsehood of heart: he (I say) may keep a mischief from you, and hold you
from venturing and dealing with such an adversary, as you know will master you.
But if you look to escape danger, and yet reject this grace, then know for
certainty, that these kinds of Merchant-venturers always make shipwreck, and
bring in no better gain. All the grace that a man has, is little enough to
quench the dart of tentation suggested; which yet is but the beginning of the
sin: and shall thou, adding fuel to the fire, and helping the devil
forward by inward provoking thy self to sin, think to quit thy self well
of it in the hottest assault? If God try thee, his grace shall be sufficient
for thee: if thou will tempt him, and trouble thy 2. Cor. 12. 9.
self, know thou have no promise of safety, or to be kept harmeles, but may
look certainly for thy downfall: as for thy own wisdom, grace is not
propped up by such pillars, but shall totter and reele as an house which has
lost her foundation: yea they that go to work thus on their own head, most
assuredly with Samson shall fall, and bewray their folly at last, to teach them
by the experience of fools, that wisdom, which the word and other unhappy men
could not do. Then shall they see there was odds betwixt keeping innocent,
and wilful offending; they shall find, that the strength of the one is not
like the other, though they were little aware of any such matter.

The issue of this second attempt was altogether as it was in the former: Verse.
12.
for she bound him with ropes again, and had company lying ready for the
purpose at hand, (if there had bin any work for them to do,) though as yet he
fell not into their hands. And let this teach us, not only to fear and
suspect treachery and unfaithfulness in leaud women which we know; (as this was
such an one;) but generally also wherein soever we have to do, beware we that
we defile not our hearts and hands in any wicked actions and practices,
whatsoever shows and promises are given and offered us. Remembering the words
of our Savior, Be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Mat. 10. 16.
Doves, and beware of men.

Which I do not say, as though I would teach men uncharitableness, (charity
being not suspicious) but to give warning to Gods servants to beware 1. Cor.
13. 5.
how we put our selves into men's hands, and trust their faithfulness upon a
fair word or countenance, which our Savior wills us to take Ioh. 2. 24.
heed of, and gives us example also, in that he would not commit himself to
men, though they speak him fair, and gives his reason thereof, For he knew
what was in man. But while we do thus, we do not judge of men what they are,
(but are wary, as we be counseled) or what religion is in them, further then
we have proof thereof by their words and deeds, and yet that we do not so,
finally neither, but for the time only, while they lie in known evil, or not
known to be reformed. So that neither are we on the one side, to judge men
without ground and warrant, neither yet are we on the other side, to commit
our selves into their hands, (having that knowledge and experience that we
have of men's unfaithfulness how common it is) upon a bare show. But here an
end for this time.

THE EIGHTY FOUR SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
THe third attempting of Samson by Delilah follows in Verse. 13. 14.
these next two verses: For she seeing he dealt so slightly in the matter,
and that he did not in good earnest forbid her to meddle any more about it, but
still dallied with her, she took his denial but in sport, and therefore sets
upon him again, not despairing, but that by importuning him, she might in
time prevail and overcome him. By this we may learn, that if we resist finne
houerly, (and in Doct.
that so weighty a matter as this was, as striking at our happiness) and deal
slightly and loosely about it, when all that we can do against it is little
enough to withstand it, we can give no further token that we will fall into,
and commit the sin it self, and that shortly.

For the devil and his wicked instruments that lie in the way to deceive us,
and to draw us into the snare; they are wise in discerning, and artificial in
marking how we go to work, and how far we hold back from yielding to
tentations: If we do it earnestly with strength of reason resolutely to
dissuade our selves from the same, and be fervent and constant therein, we put
them to their shifts to invent arguments of greater force, whereby they may be
in better hope to prevail with us. As the devil dealt with our Saniour
according to his resolute and strong denial, in most sly and subtle Mat. 4.
4, 5.
manner. But if we refuse the bait but faintly, as Balaam did (for all the
shows Numb. 22. 38. 2. Pet. 2. 15. Iud. 11.
he made) the wages of iniquity that was offered him; or if we show that we
fear not the danger greatly which is like to ensue, but stand strongly in our
own conceit, that we can easily withstand the sin in the vpshot, and that we
have no need to be counseled about or against it, as the most at this day do
so deceive themselves; the devil has what he would at our hands, and doubts
not but to draw us into the snare to commit the sin shortly, even as these
that I speak of do find and feel to their cost, for all the confidence that
they seem to have.

Samson in this third attempt, was so far off from giving her over, having
twice tried that she sought his life and utter undoing, that yet he answers
Doct. 2.
her the third time; such was his effeminate sottishness: so that howsoever
he thought still to conceal the secret from her, and to keep himself free
from uttering it, even as before thitherto he had done; yet he began now in
this third attempt, to slide and slip in further, and to stagger as a drunken
man, little considering what he did. For he was tampering about his locks now
before he told her the very thing that she asked, and so came nearer to the
bewraying and uttering that which she sought of him: as if he could hardly
conceal it from her; saying to her, that if his locks were fastened to the
threeds of the woofe with a pin, he should be weakened, and be as another man.
And she, thinking indeed that he came now more near the very point, seeing he
spoke of his locks; she by and by made trial of his words, and having done
so, she called the Philistims again to set upon him; but as yet he held back
from yielding to her, and once more withstood and deceived her, although he
had much ado (as we see) to keep it from her.

Whereby we may see, that when men give themselves liberty and full Doct.
scope to talk too and fro of things dangerous and hurtful, and take liking
therein, and will avoid no occasions, nor resist no tentations drawing and
leading thereto, they shall not choose but be snared and caught therewith,
though they intend no such thing, (as it came to pass to him) and so they Note.
shall hardly forbear and contain themselves from running headlong, and being
given over thereto. For when they are led away of their own concupiscence, as
Saint James says, they are enticed also, and snared, so that they Iam. 1. 14.
cannot well go off nor on, but more ready to consent, as we see Samson did
afterward, telling his whole heart unto her. Even so I say, men shall by often
and long tampering with the sin whereto they are too nearly affected, come
more readily and speedily to the consenting to it, and the committing of it,
who should rather turn away, and weane themselves, and that betimes, from the
least liking or longing after it, much less should they hasten it on by
liberal talking of it. For if we will suffer our selves to be importuned in
all cases, meddling with them when we need not, who doubts but that we shall
much easilier yield thereto. Those whom commonly we call men of good natures,
being once tainted by leaud company, grow first dissolute, and by degrees
desperate: but they wax rotten by degrees, as we see fruit by long lying does.
And as we see in the running out of the houreglasse, that every part of the
sands course is the hastening of the hour to an end, though the last passage
of it be the actual ending the reof: so may we say of Samson his dallying, and
houering replies, that even the first, second, and third were the preparations
to the final bewraying of the secret, though the fourth only confessed it
actually. If the fourth had been away, the matter had been whole, but the
fourth was in the first, in the second, and in the third (though more
obscurely) enfolded. Alas, at his first shifting he thought he might have
proceeded still. But as the secret at the first dash was too weighty to utter:
so after two or three dalliances, the tentation prevailed, and was too strong
for him any longer to shift off, withhold, or resist. And the like let us know,
even as this also is, to be spokon unto us.

The fourth attempt follows, in the which she gave him the deadly Verse. 15.
16. 17.
blow. For when no warning will serve, how can a man choose but fall into the
danger (how great soever it be) which he would by no means avoid while he
might? But let us hear the dealing of them both. She is grown now more
subtle then before. For we are not to think that these things were done
betwixt them on one day, or on four days together, (as the acts are here set
down to be in number four) immediately following one another; but with some
space betwixt them, that she might take fit occasion in a more subtle manner
to renew her suite and request again. She begins therefore with him in
this manner; that whereas he had told her he loved her, she subtly
answered, she saw he loved her not, because his heart was not with her, but
he had mocked her now three times, and had not told her that which she asked
of him. And through her subtle and secret winding into him, and her impudent
importunity, and earnest urging of him, for all his wisdom (as he thought) in
holding her off with lies and delays, in jesting manner; yet he thinking by
her following of the matter, that she was in good earnest with him, in saying
he grieved her because she saw he loved her not, he was brought thereby to
pity her, and to be so wounded with her subtle flattering of him, and
dissembling with him, that he was sore vexed to see her so grieved: and
therefore as great woe as it was like to bring to himself, he never duly
considered it but was overcome and told her according to her desire, all his
heart, even how he might be brought to lose his strength. This for the sum
of these three verses.

But now let us weigh these things more particularly. In the 15. verse, by
Doct. verse. 15.
the subtilty the woman had learned now at the last (who told him he loved her
not, when yet she knew he doted on her) we see how artificial the wicked do
easily grow, (for herein we need not doubt but that ye like offenders now, are
like her) and how soon the deceivers in their attempts do wax worse and
worse, and more ripe in subtilty and deceiving, then they were before. So says
Paul to Timothy. So that if there were any to observe it, how 2. Tim 3. 12.
(for the most part) men are fitted to this trade; to wit, that how meanly and
bungerly soever they go to work in comparison, when they begin the world, I
mean for subtilty, over they do afterward: but how soon they grow ripe in
this faculty, and that in every kind of evil dealing, as experience shows
too clearly; I say if men observed it, they would confess no less then I say.

Whether we speak of them that begin in unlawful trades and courses, as in
whoredom, oppression, flattery, beguiling, or in any such; or in those which
are lawful; as buying, selling, letting house and land, or other earthly
dealings, (as may be seen in the unjust Steward, what evil practices are
Luke 16. 3.
used in all these,) and what cunning and craft are found out and invented, to
go one beyond another, otherwise then in times past, for the most part they
have done; it is admirable to consider it. In all which they show plainly, that
they do not to any purpose, mind nor set their hearts upon any better things,
howsoever some of them will bear us in hand that they do, and that they will
serve God as well as the best. And not only so, but (that which would less be
thought) how long is it, before they that embrace the Gospel grow to be
experienced, and well seasoned with such true and saving knowledge of holy
doctrine, as whereby they abhor such dregs and doings, and attain to the
finding of the Christian life to be meat and drink to them. And how few are
there that do so? So that it may worthily be complained of, yea lamented with
tears, if there were every where such as could do it, to see both the
fewness of this latter sort, and how many there be every where swarming of the
former. But of this ripeness of sin elsewhere. Yet this I add, (that which
I utter with grief) even these ripe headed and nimble fellows, who grow so
soon masters of their trade before they have served half a Prentiship, shall
rise up and condemn many of the better sort for their block-headed
backwardness in matter of religion and Christianity, after so long training up
in Gods school. This age should be ripest in grace and skill how to pass the
time most fruitfully and joyfully: and never age had such dullards and dunces
in searching into themselves, and trying whether they be in the state of
salvation or no, and in seeking acquaintance with God, considering that it has
the helps of all former examples, and present means to this purpose, greater
then ever age had since the Apostles time. If it be, who shall domineere over
others, and set up himself, who shall cogge and cosen, or go beyond his
neighbor to deceive him, and who has more strings to his bow to shift,
scrape, and rake pelf together howsoever; then our age may commence the
highest degree in this profession. Skill and ripeness in mischief is not
bounded only within them of Delilahs trade (though doubtless the strumpets of
old ages were punies to them of ours for all subtilty and villainy) but extends
as far as the Prince of this world has any subjects. But if ye go to enquire
who has made the Christian life easy, by constancy in obedience, who lives a
sweet life and void of sorrow by resolute purpose and endeavor of abstaining
from all evil, and by watching over his heart and life always, also who
enjoys that liberty which God allows, to rest assured of his love, and so
to go in and out before him, from one duty to another, without unsettledness,
wearines, Note.
and disquietnesse. In a word, if ye enquire who is the man that has so
improued the doctrine of the Gospel, as that he has found that hundredfold
Mat. 19. 29.
measure of contentment for rejecting lying vanities, so that he is become a
light and example to others, like those Thessalonians whom Paul 1. These. 1. 7.
calls paternes, and those Saints whom David calls excellent: If (I say)
Psalm 16. 3.
inquiry be made after these (which yet are the best of all other) ye shall
find or meet with few, that see into them, affect them, or can answer any
great matter about them: Oh, every little is enough in godliness, men are
content with mediocritie here, which in godliness is a vice, and no virtue.
So that there is a perfection and mastership in Gods trade also, and without
comparison the greatest gain: but the work is tedious, or men unhappy that
cannot hit upon it.

Samson being so blindfolded with her beauty, that he was now become sick
for seeing her grieved, so that now he must rest no more with her, but in good
earnest he must utter his secret to her, or else he loved her not, as she
charged him; and how could she bear that unkindness at his hands, that she
loving him so dearly, (as she made him think she did by her subtlety) he on
the other side should not care for her, he being (I say) thus blindfolded, this
often and importunate urging him by her, so wounded him, that rather then he
would have a thought that he was cut off from her love, (which was death to
him to think) he could hold her off no longer, but told her that which she
asked of him, till he felt too late that he was undone, to make all others
afraid by his example, to make a sport of sin, and to trifle in matters of
such consequence.

Here this may be learned by Samson, that they who will be companions Verse. 16.
in sin iestingly, and in dalliance (thinking yet with themselves, that they
will go no further) they shall fall to it in good earnest, and shall not be
able to avoid it. This might be exemplified in many particulars. I pray give
us leave to be merry, says the wanton, we mean no harm: No, but harm
waits you by your dalliance. An angry and moody person (who yet knows how
dangerous a sin anger is) giving reine to himself; and resisting no
occasions, in time strikes and wounds, and at length kills in his rage; yet ye
must let him alone, he cannot but be angry, he says, being provoked, but when
he has spoken he has done. Nay, many a man has undone himself ere he has
done, and all by dallying with his sin. It is ill playing with Bears, and
Lions, or fierce creatures, for there is no amiable Note.
quality in them: but sin of all other is the most hideous monster, and no
man is more in danger to be devoured of it, then he that plays with it.
This, not only the profane of the world do prove to be true, to the shame
of many of them which would be better thought of, but even the godly do find
it so, when for yielding to their lusts and bad desires too far, they have no
power over themselves, but are brought to that point, that either their
consciences disquiet and sore torment them, or they bring forth in the sight
of all men the sin, which they too much gave over themselves unto, and
delighted in; as we have heard of David. Let it be a warning to all how they
dally with sin, and jest about it, he is nearer them then they are aware,
Satan I mean, who drawing them to go on the brim and banck of the river, will
plunge them headlong into the bottom and depth of it; but let men rather be
far off from treading in the steps that lead thereto: as I have before
observed out of his threefold dallying answer, and therefore in this will be
briefer.

Another thing here of Samson let us learn, that it is even death to men to
be put from their unlawful delights and pleasures, when they have once given
over themselves brutishly and sottishly unto them, as he was vexed almost to
the death to hear her to tell him, she must forsake him, and could not love
him, if his heart was no more toward her, then she saw; which yet she spoke but
in gross dissembling. All bondage is grievous; but what is greater then
bondage to an whore? when a man cannot but cling to her, and be at her lure,
whose heart is false toward him, and seeks his destruction. We must take heed
that we rest not in the best things that are subject to change, but much more
that we hang not our security upon deceitful pleasures, and especially of
all other, upon a wicked and alluring woman, who^ rather then Samson would once
think of forgoing, behold, he shameth not to abandon God; conscience and all,
not to speak of the outward mischief Note.
that ensued. And surely if this be true of Samson, who sinned against
conscience all this while, what shall we say of them who commit secret
filthiness with greedines, and yet without remorse? What a death is it to them
(think we) to be plucked by violence from their old acquaintance, which by
custom is become as the poor man's lamb, whom Nathan describes to David, even
2. Sam. 12. 3.
as his son? Therefore when men have lived a long time in a lewd course
without let, how welcome is death to them that makes an utter separation
between them and their lusts, which lived before in as straight league and
union as the soul and body together? Oh bondage unspeakable! to be inwardly
Note.
linked to the love of that which can neither be enioied but with extreme
misery, nor forgone but with intolerable vexation. Let this be one motive
among others to humble the sinner before God, and to show him how out of
measure sinful his corrupt nature is: as also to teach him not so eagerly to
pursue his lusts, except he will bring a world of sorrow upon himself, when
the time of forsaking them is come. For what though at the last cast many a man
renounces the old courses of ungodliness, and repents him, yea and is ashamed of
his doings? this is when the conscience is terrified by some violent fear or
grief: not while he has his will, and prospers in his evil. And yet, alas,
who sees not that these terrors when they seize upon any, (for we must not
think they seize upon al, many dying sots as they lived without feeling) for
the most part vanish away and come to nothing; so that those great penitents,
if they get up and recover their malady, how far do they put from them the
remembrance of the former trouble, and show, that it was distasteful unto them,
and forced them in the bitterness thereof to Note.
say any thing; but now they are at liberty they return again as naturally
to their byas, as the stone falls downward. Oh therefore pray and labor that
it may be good, which ye set your hearts on and delight in, being accounted of
you as most precious: for the end else will be more bitter in the parting, then
ever the love was in enjoying. Love the best things and fear not to exceed
measure; for besides the unspeakable and sound joy they afford, this they also
yield, even a perpetuity, they shall never be pulled away, as our Savior
says, this joy shall no man take from you. John 26. 22.


Now he was so wrought on by her, that as wise as he thought himself, in
purposing that she should never know that which she sought at his Verse. 17.
hands; yet because he gave place to his wicked affections, he was not only
snared and in danger as before, but now told all unto her: to wit, that there
never came rasor on his head: but if his locks were cut off, he should lose
his strength; which was as much as if he had told her, how they might take his
life from him, and bring all shame and sorrow upon him, as they did in deed:
and yet more then this, he might (though to small effect) have said to her, to
wit, beside all this evil which I shall sustain hereby, I do also set the
Lord against me, to deprive me of his grace, and all this for thy sake: for
thus much (doubtless) he suffered for her.

By which, so many good observations arise, as a wise man may be to seek Doct.
1.
with which to begin first. But briefly of two or three. One is this: that we
shall not need to complain of the hurt and wrong that other do unto us, which
how common it is, all places do witness; for none are greater enemies to us,
then our selves. Were he not a monster of men that should offer Note.
but the one half of this unto us, that Samson did to himself, as here may be
seen? But behold, all this, and no less, do some, nay very many, offer to
themselves. We storm, rage, and cry out of other, if they hold but a little
of our due from us: and much more, if we sustain greater hurt by them;
whereas we by our sins, work our own woe, and yet through blind selfloue we
are never angry with our selves, when yet we could find in our hearts to
pursue others unto death. Oh rend we our hearts for our sins, and be deeply
displeased with our selves for them. All these Philistims could not have done
Samson the mischief which he did himself by his own folly, or rather
madness. But if they had attempted any such matter against him, as to make him
infamous, as he made himself, would he not straight have revenged it? Nay,
did he not revenge it in the sequel? But, to leave him (who sinned not in
revenging) and come to our selves; who is he that dare but justly reprove us
for a fault, (be it never so gross) but he shall have our badge and liuerie
presently, and we think him our enemy, and watch our season to be even with
him, as Esau dealt with his brother Jacob. And yet Genesis 27. 41.
so far is a loving reproof from hurting us, that if we were the men we
should be, it might keep the hurt we speak of, from lighting upon us, and be
as a precious balm unto our heads. Well then (will a wise man say) I Psalm.
141. 5.
see these men are i alous of themselves, and their own hurt, if they can
endure no other to touch them but they will flee in his face, they will be long
enough (it is to be hoped) ere they wrong themselves willingly. Indeed the
reason is sensible, but the proof is most preposterous. For that man that will
not take the loss of a penny at another hand without storming, will spend
many a pound to have his wicked desire satisfied; nay he will undo himself
and strip himself of all he has; and yet think never the worse of himself
when he has done; nay, no man may tell him of it neither. Therefore if we
will prevent outcries and late repentance for time to come, (for there is a
time when such fools cry out; I am lost, I have undone my self) let us
learn that the way to become our own best friends, is to be greatest enemies
to the sin which most prevails in us, as that which threatens our greatest
desolation. God will take that man's part against Note.
himself, who most strives to hate himself, I mean the corruption within
him, which is as dear to him as himself. And till we be come to this point,
that we can have as hearty indignation at our sin that we have most delighted
in, as we have against others for no cause, or sometime against Note.
our selves for being circumuented and ouershot in a bargain by a cunning
cosener; we are far from repentance, or from that estate that a wise man
should rest in, though the work be difficult (I confess) which I speak of.
But about this business though a man have many, and those great enemies to
hinder him; yet his sinful heart is more dangerous then all, and by the
treachery whereof only, all other enemies do him mischief. And doubtless
the devil and the strongest allurements rebound back, and hurt not, neither
enter, where the heart lies not open to evil, and unfenced against it. The
evil that remains in the best, occasioneth all external evil enemies to
stir it up and increase it. The pure Angels have the devils their envious
enemies. Nay, sin makes God our enemy, (not for ever, if ever we were
reconciled to him) while it lies harbored and unremoved: but otherwise,
though he correct us, yet he loves us, as a father his children. The cause
is much more the enemy, I mean sin, then the effect, which is Gods enmity.
And therefore when he afflicts for sin, count not him our enemy, no nor
the cross which he inflicteth: but patiently bear it, and say, I will go
under my trial willingly, seeing I have sinned, and turn my grief against my
chief enemy, knowing that except that, which is my sin, undo me, no other
thing shall, but turn to my good rather.

Also by this that Samson was brought to that which he never meant to 2
be, to wit, to utter his secret to a base housewife, by the following him on
with her importunity; note what force is in it. The widow by importunity Luke
18. 5.
overcame the wicked Judge, to grant her justice, though he had no mind so to
do. But let us see that it be for good, when men be importunate with us for
any thing; or else turn we away from hearing them, as Joseph did from his
alluring Mistress. And let us specially use this importunity and Genesis 39. 10.
earnest suite, as our Savior has willed us, that is, to God in our prayers:
for if the wicked Judge would be moved (says our Savior) to hear the poor
Luke 18. 7.
widow, lest she should make him weary, shall not God avenge his elect that
cry to him day and night? Of this more largely in the 14. Chapter by the like
occasion.

Again, me thinks this answer of Samson to such a strumpet, [I am a 3
Nazarite, etc. if my locks be cut off, I shall be as another man] sauoureth of
incredible sottishnes, and argues plainly, that a wretched sinner, who
breaks not off his course, till he be in the heat and power of his sin,
can no other do then yield to the tyranny thereof; as he that is bound hand
and foot is carried whither his creditor or adversary, not whither himself
lists. It cannot be enough to excuse Samson, that if he might have had his
will, he would rather have chosen to have kept his secret: So it is like, but
who brought him into the stocks, and set him by the heels, who brought him to
this straight, that he would not but do that which he desired to shun?
Himself, his headstrong lust, which having once got the hand over Note.
him, used him impotently, and made him a stark beast and slavish fool. He
knew the sorrow which must ineuitably ensue upon his betraying himself, yet
has he (I say not the grace, that was now under board) but not the strength to
contain himself. I said my mind touching this upon the 4. verse, [Entice
him, etc.] but now the execution of the plot does more lively present to our
eyes the nature of sin, that it takes wisdom from a man first, and then
imposes what conditions it pleases: knowing that a man would never be such a
vassal, so long as he is in his right mind, and not out of his wits. As
Samson could say, I am a Nazarite, etc. so he could have said, By this sin, I
shall make my self of the purest worshipper of God, the most profane creature
and execrable. But Samson would not say so, at least not weigh it, but
desperately runs upon the pikes. Doubtless he had not had the power, though
his salvation had lien upon it, at this time to prevent it: (but blessed be
God who holds his election, when men have lost their grace in their feeling)
Samson had lost his eyes, ere the Philistims put them out. This let me a little
more enforce upon so just an occasion, then I did in the fourth verse. Who will
not boldly auerre and affirm this, and say; Tell me what sin is, and prove
to me by good evidence, that it will bring such sorrow as Samsons, Peter's,
David's, Salomons, did to them; and then if I commit it, count me a fool
indeed? Put in one thing more, and I will believe thee; If, when the occasion
is offered, Gods grace be stirring and effectual in thee by watchfulnes and
jealousy over thy self, then thou will abstain upon that meditation. But
(alas) who finds that grace in the strength oftentatio^ who sought it not
before? without which, yet thou may have matter enough in thy mind to
dissuade and flaite thee, (I will not deny) but thou shall have small list or
power to weigh and ponder it, nay thy entangled and drunken heart will make a
sot of thy mind, and a most disguised beast of thee. An heart infatuate with
lust, stops and freeseth up the passage of the knowledge, that it cannot
succor the poor distressed and embondaged soul, but leave it to shift. We
conclude then, Samsons sin was not presumptuous, but impotencie, yet
unavoidable, the case standing as it did. Oh then still learn; men have not
quit themselves well, as soon as they have spoken a bold word against sin in
general. For when it comes to particulars, what do men? I will have his blood
(says a cursed Cain) though I be hanged presently, yet he knows the shame
and woe thereof. Of some Jews (not all, for some knew well enough) the
Scripture says; If they had known, they would not have crucified the Lord of
life. And sometimes, I deny not, civil men are kept from crimes by this
mean, and good men from offending, though strongly tempted to go through
stiffly. But this is no rule. And I still say to thee, (that shall read this)
beware of dalliance, and venturing far: for thou shall have no power to
withdraw, when thou would, who would not when thou might. Trust not
thy self, thy strength in this case will be a bruised reed. The best laws
leave as little to the Judge as may be, because man is subject to corruption:
and except Gods grace be a law within thee, suspect that in a strong pursuit
of lust, thou who art as Judge to advise thy self, wilt hardly be a law to thy
self to govern thee. But if thou be fearful to give a little liberty to
thine heart in evil, a great Note.
shall not master thee: if thou fear anger, thou shall be no murderer: if
thou flee from the bait, the snare shall not catch thee. Ever bear this in
mind; Sin as it grows, it will be predominant and get the masterie. And a
man may as well be mad with reason, as sin with reason, and think to moderate
himself when he will yield once, and be ever a slave: for sin will force thee
to yield after, even as a strong fit of an ague makes him to do, whom it
strongly shakes. Thus much for this time.

THE EIGHTY FIVE SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to proceed in the story, because we see how Samson, though otherwise
endued of God with singular Doct. 3. in verse. 17.
graces, yet was most impotently given over to the love of women, when we do
not read, that he was else tainted with other sins; let it admonish us, that
we may possibly be more weak in resisting, and more prone to the committing of
some one sin, then of another, and it shall not be amiss for us to think,
seeing we have so many examples of it in Scripture, that this sin of his is
more common among the most then other. The which I say to this end, that every
one of us should observe our selves, where we see our selves weakest, and there
to use most means to strengthen our selves against the same, as watching,
prayer, reading, and this not houerly but heartily, if we seek to be the
better thereby, and in no wise to dare be bold to commit it, seeing we cannot
but be as sure of ill success, as Samson was before he did it. When the
husbandman suruaies his ground, he uses not to fence where the quick set is
strong and thick, but where the hedge is thin or trodden down; we love to lay
on load where there is no need; but if there be a blemish in our lives which
makes all the rest disgraceful, and therefore requires more labor to blot it
out, we cannot abide to set our selves to amend it, nor so much as to take
knowledge of it. And yet one dead fly corrupts a whole pot of the sweetest
ointment, and the sweeter, the sooner. How did Salomons Eccles. 10. 1.
excessiveness in this kind, defame all his other excellency and gifts? And
do we not see by experience the truth hereof? He is an honest man (says one)
but a covetous, an hasty, an uncharitable, a breaker of promise, and one or
other interposition there is to eclipse his light and credit. Yea and (as Paul
in the like kind spoke of the house of Cloe) there is cause. Now in this so 1.
Cor 1. 11.
weighty a case what do we? even tush off the matter, and say, One infirmity is
none: and we hope that our many good qualities (in our conceit at least) must
privilege us, and license us for a few scapes? Alas we err foully, one secret
lurking companion is enough to betray the house: and when we are espied, what
say men of us but this, Nay, he that will do thus, or thus, will do worse, I
dare not trust him in any kind, if occasion serve. Oh, cast out that devil by
watching, fasting, prayer, and often renewed covenant, which lurketh behind to do
mischief, when many others seem to be cast out. And till then, bear not thy
head on high, for doubtless God will not suffer such a one to prosper: and
what do we professing, if we take this liberty, except we will have our good
deeds shame our evil, and become execrable because of their company, as Israel
was for Achans sin. We will not keep a servant Josh. 7. 12.
in our house (otherwise none of the worst, but painful) for some leaud
qualities sake, though he would give us his service, and shall God endure us? A
man may feel what the sin is, which he cherishes, as well as the meat he
loves: and he that does know it, let him know God is not mocked: let him not
suffer that sin to rankle and fester in him, but labor to purge out every
superfluity of flesh and spirit, and to sanctify the whole lump, that it may
be seasoned in every part, and the conscience may be good in all things.

Now we have heard that she had brought him to tell her where his great Verse.
18. 19. 20.
strength lay, let us shut up this second part of the Chapter, and see what
followed upon this, which is set down in these next three verses. First, she
The sum.
caused the Philistims to come yet again to her, in better hope then they did
before. And then causing Samson to sleep upon her knee, his locks she caused
to be cut off, and the Philistims were there ready to take him, and he thinking
to do as he had in times past done, and to free himself out of their hands,
he found too late, as Adam after eating the fruit, that the Lord was departed
from him.

Here in that she and the Philistims having been disappointed and deceived
Doct verse. 18.
so often, even three times at the least, yet for all that are not discouraged
nor wearied, but go on still, yea and prevail at length, we may see how evil
persons are not withheld nor discouraged from their bad attempts, but take
heart, and go forward after many repulses. The reason is, they have hope to
prevail, and do not commonly miss of their purpose, following it so
earnestly, and going so substantially to work as they do; God suffering them
to go forward, seeing he is purposed to destroy them. This is most clearly
to be seen in the spiteful and shameless attempts of the Priests against
our Savior in seeking his life.

Though Pilate had three times alleged his innocence to them, and given them
Luke 23. 22. 23.
their answer to desist, yet could they not be made to leave off, but
procured by themselves their false witnesses, and other confederates, in such
wise that they had that which they sought before they made an end. But if this
diligence and vnweariednesse in good causes be sought for in them, who yet are
such as would gladly effect them, where shall they be found? Nay, they are
soon answered and put off, as faint suitors. Ester indeed, Ester 4. 16.
and some other did ieopard their lives, in and for a good cause, to preserve
the Church of God in their time: but how many followers of them may be seen?
Indeed many logs are in the way to hinder goodness, and much discouragement is
given to such as would be forward, but yet men's backwardness for all that,
may in no wise be excused: For what know we whether the Lord may one time or
other, give success, and are we too good to tarry his leisure? But of this
often before.

The Philistims having better hope to prevail then in former times, as 2
she had given them to understand, they came with their money in their hands,
ready to be paid according to their promise. Where besides that we may see,
that the wicked spare no cost to bring their bad matters to pass, while we who
follow better causes, look upon our penny and draw back, who shall begin: I
say, beside that, ye may see, that they will not break promise, but be
liberal to such as further their business, when they like well the success
which they have therein. But I would I might not truly say, that in better
attempts there is often times a drawing back even of that which was promised; so
far off are men from furthering goodness: but they deal herein, as the most
do in other promises, though advisedly made by them, for therein the like is
done. Which elsewhere I have also bewailed.

When this impudent and shameless woman had brought the Princes Verse. 19.
of the Philistims together, as we have heard in the former verse, it is showed
in this, how she made him sleep upon her knees, and caused the seven locks of
his head to be shaven off, and that she began to vex him by calling the
Philistims when that his strength was gone from him.

This was a most base thing and utterly unbeseeming him, that having excellent
Doct.
gifts of God, he should become a slave to such an whorish mistrisse, as to be
made to sleep upon her knees. He that would not turn his face from a
thousand men, now to lie down at the feet of a leaud woman. Oh sottish folly
almost incredible! Thus they who for their gifts might be reverenced, (that I
say no more) and for such good graces as are in them, might go before many; are
brought to shame for their abusing of them, and the sins which are come in the
place of them, and no way more commonly, then by a base housewife. For as a
man's gift brings him to honor, even Note.
so the same person, if he deface his gifts, is despised, as a fair and comely
garment, A simil.
when it is soiled in the filthy and loathsome channel of mire and dung. For
he that cannot keep credit and honor when God has given it him, is worthy
to be without both, and be had in derision.

This is memorable which the Lord spoke of Hophni and Phinees, for this sin
among others: Them that despise me, I will set light by. Men's good 1. Sam 2. 30.
parts never set them up so much, as their lewdness defaceth them. How vile
did sin make that traitor Judas? What contempt was cast upon Demas, 2. Tim.
4. 10.
when he had forsaken Paul? How base, and what a by word does many a man's
uncleanness make him? nay many a professor of good hope, though he have
repented, yet what a brand of contempt and disdain does he carry about him
to his dying day? As Ruben, in Genes. 49. his dignity Genesis 49. 4.
being gone? But we are not yet come to Samsons punishment, the baseness we
speak of, is a companion rather then a fruit of sin. But doubtless, it would
never appear to many a man (who thinks his sin his orname^t) how vile his
occupation is, if sometimes he saw it not in the base service it puts him to.
Note.
Very heathens saw no less, who describe it by the shadow of a mighty Giant,
enamored with a strumpet, who made him lay aside his harness, and sit spinning
with the distaffe between his knees. And yet many a civil man, out of his
discretion, would shun many a sin for shame. As for example: Seeing a man of
good quality and sort, given to drinking and gaming, and so far given over to
them, that he will rather make the basest fellow in a town his companion then
sit out, which he thinks he may do, yet he will loathe the baseness of
that sin and such like in other, and count it as repugning to common honesty.
But to return to them, who being men of good parts otherways, do shame
themselves with gross sins, they are well enough served, who will needs
venture so far, and for their own lusts, will forsake the services of Gods
house, the meanest whereof is honorable.

The next thing that followed was this, that she caused one to cut off his
locks, that is, the hair that covered his head. And this is the deadly wound
that she gave him. For therewith his strength failed him, and grace likewise
forsook him.

Here we may see, that by degrees a man shall be brought to the lowest ebb
and depth of sin, as Samson now was, he broke the law of the Nazarite, Doct.
2.
which was solemn, as the law of wedlock betwixt couples; and thereby made
himself profane and loose, who had lived in the most holy estate of other. Yea
this sin, if comparison should be made, was far greater then the breach of
the law of wedlock, seeing that is but one particular, but this is a general
setting open the door to many sins. Oh, how little thought he, or think we,
that we shall ever commit them, before we begin to tamper with odious and
fearful sins? (as Hazael, when the Prophet told 2. King. 8. 13.
him the evil that he should do, answered, Am I a dog, that I should do
this great thing? Yea and after we have begun also to dally with the means
that lead to them, we yet think to keep far enough from them. But yet we
see here what follows in the end. But wherein this abasement stood shall
appear in the particulars that follow, the loss of strength, and Gods
presence, when his locks were cut off. For the former of these, it is said,
after this, that his strength failed, and was gone. And hereupon some may
object and say, Did his strength lie in his hair? I answer no: but he lost
that, because it was the commandment of God to the Nazarite, (such an one as
Samson was,) that no razor for the time, should come upon his head. Which
commandment Samson now brake, by telling her so much, as caused the cutting
off of it: and by that he going from Gods ordinance, the Lord departed from
him, and left him to himself, which he found to be weakness, and therewith
woe enough. The objection being thus answered, this teaches what follows
such outrage, and contempt of Gods ordinance, to wit, the losing of such good
things as we enjoyed before. So that such actions Ier. 5. 25.
do not only hold many good things from us, but also they deprive us of those
which we had. Some sins deprive us of one benefit of God, and some of
another. As riot, ill company, spend our goods: drunkenness and whoredom
waste our bodies: cares of this world, and vo^uptuous delighting in riches, do
as a moth eat up our religion; and our Sabbaths are lost by ill using them:
even as Samson lost his strength, whereby he had slain a thousand at one
time, without either help of any man, or use of warlike instrument. All have
not Samsons strength to lose, but all wilful sin wastes a Christians
strength, alacrity I mean, and cheerfulness of spirit to the duties of Gods
worship. I said enough of this point upon cap. 5. in the complaint of Debora,
that there was not a spear found nor courage to use it among Judge. 5. 8.
the forty thousands of Israel. Let the reader look back to that place.
Here this I will say; The faithful use and employment of God his heavenly
graces and gifts is the only way to keep and augment them: use Note.
a gift and have a gift: employ it not, and lose it. If this be the fruit of
bare sloth and neglect, how much now of contempt and wilful sinning against
knowledge? So that we shall not need greatly to care how we may lose our grace,
for not only the quencher, but even he that nourishes it not (as fire) shall
soon enough lose it. Adam and Eve had strength given them to stand in their
good estate; and seeing they wilfully spoiled themselves of it, they brought
upon themselves a weakness, so that they could not but sin. So they that have
had better things in them, and are now become lukewarm professors, or secure,
sottish and sleepie conscienced, and covetous; how decline they in their zeal,
and lose their gifts, and savor not at all religious Note.
exercises, but wax barren of grace, and at length fall to leaud company,
follow the common fashion of the world, nay become disgracers of the truth, and
of the lovers thereof, as most repugnant to their practice? Never was a poor
unarmed traveler falling among thieves so bereft of money, of apparel and of
all comfort: or a gamester shrigged of all, being ouer-reacht by a false handed
cosoner: or a tree so stripped of her beautiful leaves and fruit, by the violence
of a tempest; as poor Samson here was of the gracious furniture of the
spirit, by the unkindly assault of his sinful lust. Oh what a difference was
there between Samson when he was himself; and betwixt his disguised
nakedness which his sin caused? The use hereof is, to teach us, that seeing
he grew to this low ebb by the degrees forementioned; therefore we promise
our selves no privilege beyond him, otherwise then by preventing the means
leading thereto. And let us not think that the grace we have, seeing it cost
us much pains to obtain, much hearing, long practice, use of many good
means, with watchfulness and prayer, let us not think (I say) that therefore
we need fear no such sudden loss of it. Ah fool, it comes in a day that
came not in seven years: and as the houses of Jobs children were blown down
all at once, so may a man's goodness and strength be all wasted suddenly by a
dangerous fall, yea the fruit of many years growth and gain may perish in a
day; though I deny not, but usually it paireth by degrees rather through
sins committed daily, and duties neglected. The strength of a Christian lies
in his faith, as truly as Samsons did in his locks: and if faith be quailed by
wilful sinning, (as how can a man feel God loving him, when he gives leave to
himself to offend him,) then how much more if the fruits also decay, as
feruency, care, fear, diligence in good duties, etc. As the one grows to
unbelief, so the other degenerates to deadness, carelessness, and looseness,
etc. Now whereas some cauiller lying in the wind for advantage, might say, I
see Samson is condemned for shauing of his locks, therefore long hair is no
such blameworthy habit, as some would seem to make of it: I answer him two
ways. First, that this guise of Samson was not common, or general; for then
it had been only permitted as indifferent to all, but personal and belonging
to the vow of the Nazarite, which now is abolished. As that other of abstaining
from strong drink was; which I suppose the greater part of them that plead for
long hair will not so easily yield to abstain from. Secondly I say, though
this liberty were to be further extended, yet in all equity, those might
challenge it of most due, who are most proportionable to the Nazarite in the
pure worship ping of God. Now these in the former respect see small cause to
use any such habit, but condemn it as most unseemly. The wearers thereof are
most of them profane, no worshippers; and the best of them (I suppose) are
none of the most pure worshippers of God. Therefore let this abuse return to
the heirs of them that first invented it for a cover of the shame, which their
lewdnes first brought upon them. But enough to a wise man was said of this upon
the thirteenth Chapter: as for the fool, though he were braied in a mortar,
yet would not his folly depart from Prou. 27. 22.
him.

It is said further in these two verses, that when his strength was gone, she
Verse. 15. 20.
began to vex him, by calling the Philistims, who were at hand, to fall upon
him, and handle him at their pleasure; and so they did. Oh, we see it is an
easy matter to bring misery upon one, when he shall not only be destitute of
earthly help, but have God against him also. Even so it was with Judas, when
the time of his visitation came, that he was utterly forsaken of God: but
beside, he had cast off his Master, and the Disciples who had been his
fellows; and the Priests, his pretended friends had cast off him. So Samson
was forsaken of his lover, hated of the Philistims, and the Lord had left him;
and therefore how nearly was the proverb verified in him, Woe to him that is
alone. Not unlike to that thriftlesse debtor, who by his folly is come upon by
his creditor, haled to prison, forsaken of his friends, and destitute of all
comfort; who might have lived in a comfortable manner, and have been a comfort
to others, if he had been wise and careful in managing his business. The use
of this is thus much, that if we should fall into this danger, as to have men,
yea and friends against us, (as sometimes it may befall us for a good cause)
yet to lay this foundation strongly; that the Lord forsake us 2. Chron. 15. 2.
not, which (doubtless) he will not do, if we forsake not him. Touching her
cruel treachery in betraying him thus, when he had reueiled himself to her,
it detecteth the like unfaithfulness (wheresoever it be found) in Christians to
be more then monstrous, and such false-hearted ones to be far worse then
Philistims.

Samson being awaked by her, did not by and by see what was done to Verse. 20.
him, but thought he would do as he had before done, namely by his strength
to shift for himself, but he could not: for the Lord was departed from him,
leaving him (as has already been said) both without strength of body, (which
he had before) and the use of all grace to guide himself, or comfort his
mind. By this we see, that when God has delivered men Doct.
often times out of danger, they look still that he should do so, never
thinking how justly he might have plunged them deeply into the same long
before, neither weighing their own security, who little regarded to profit by
their deliverances past.

This is the exceeding blockishnes and senselesnes of men, who (as the Prophet
says) are wise only to do evil, but not any good. They look Iere. 4. 22.
they should do as they have done in all things that like them, and they will
do as they have done in all that please them. But in all this, what allowance
Note.
have they from God, or liberty to do so? Nay rather, why do they not consider
that God is against them in that their bad course, and therefore have out of
it, and they seeing the plague to hang over their heads, why do they Prou. 22.
3.
not have out of it, and with the good Captain, humble themselves to God, as
he did to Elias, and crave pardon? 2. King. 1. 13.


Oh! let the best of us know, that we may not nestle our selves in any ill
course, though we have been bold with the Lord in times past that way, when
we were as yet less experienced, to tempt him far, and deceive our selves,
(as we have done) imagining that we shall do as well as in former days. For
in this changeable world, such changes come oftest to them that change not from
their evil courses, and besides, God will not be mocked. As for the bad who
cry peace; their case is much worse. Thus Corah perished and his company,
when yet he thought that all should have been with him still, as it had been in
times past. And by this was Iezabel deceived, 1. King. 19. 2.
that threatened Elias should lose his head on the morrow, little weighing what
one day does bring forth: but she a little after lost her life, and 2. King.
9. 33.
that in a fearful manner. For why? There is no peace to the ungodly, says
Isai. 57. 21.
God. And thus Samson, though no reprobate, yet now a miserable reuolter,
fared; who knew not that God was gone from him, and looked to escape as he
before had done, but was disappointed and deceived.

And this palpable deceiuablenes is bred in us, to dream of God as he did in
the Psalm, who said, that seeing God did as it were wink at him and held his
peace, when he did evil, therefore he was as he himself, and approved Psalm.
50. 21.
his bad course, and would do neither good nor evil, so that there was no
change of his prosperity, as he thought, to be feared. And (I confess) God
suffers long, and in this his administration here below does often times let
such as he means to destroy, go on without stop, and prosper, as the ox
fatted to the slaughter: whereas he meets with his own children in mercy,
(though with smart and bitterness) rather then that they should perish. Howbeit,
neither is this course general, (as appears in the many examples of them in
Scripture and experience, whose sins have gone before hand) and where it does
hold for this life, yet it fails at death. Then to be sure their course is
altered. The wicked man, as the Prophet says, Isai. 65. 20.
(though an hundred year old) is accursed: and a day comes, whereof it shall
be said, It is not as yesterday. Let this terrify all ungodly ones, lest God
come upon them at unawares, and alter their condition to their most
intolerable vexation. Let the^ rather as men amazed by the terrors of God,
shake hands with, and renounce their stale course, wherein they are settled, and
as it were frozen. And let them try whether by unfeigned humbling their souls,
and obtaining mercy with God, they find not that it was happy for them that
ever they changed their estate. For I do them to understand, that there are
persons who make a far other use of Gods sparing them, then Samson did here,
and do not occasion themselves to sin more boldly still, and yet to promise
themselves peace as in former times. And further, I say, that there are men to
be found, I say not, who may, but who ought to look for, and build upon it
for certain, That it shall be well with them as at other times, and so faith
teaches them to speak; and they are such as have obtained favor with God,
that they might believe in him, and in token thereof walk in his ways: even
they to wom God has given such an heart as to fear him, and endeavor to obey
him in all his Commandments, they (I say) may assure themselves, and shall
find it to go well with them always. Mark that I say always; to day as
yesterday, and now, as in times past. And so had Samson found, if he had
walked according to this rule. For, be it known to all such as have fully
purposed to cleave unto God without warping or falling off, (which he did not)
that it is their sin if they do not fully account of it and believe it, that
their souls shall be always Note.
liking, and they to be in favor with him, and blessed of him. So that if men
desire to have to morrow to be like to day without change, (I mean any
substantial change, though otherwise their faith and comfort is intended or
remitted through their weakness) let them be reuited by faith and care of
obedience, unto him, who is the unchangeable al sufficient God of his elect.
But let them not think this promise entailed to them by the bare bond of their
election, or adoption, but by their constant care to keep both, by holding
fast a good conscience: but if they wax dissolute, let them look that their
good days shall be changed into sorrowful. God gives no man any certainty
of his outward estate, peace, health, wealth, friends or prosperity; much
less grants any man security in an impenitent course.

And lastly, whereas it is said, that the Lord was gone from him, the meaning 2
is this, that he had taken his strength from him, and the graces which he had
enjoyed, were so feebled, darkened, and drowned in him, as if he had lost them
altogether; and so (doubtless) he had, if it could have been. A fearful
spectacle to behold; such an one as he had been, to wit, before the most in
gifts and grace, to be brought to this point, by his sin, as to cause Note.
the Lord, who had loved and done so much for him, so to leave him in the hands
of his enemies, to use him at their pleasure. But what he was brought unto, I
mean, to what depth of misery, sorrow, and shame, it shall better appear in
that which follows.

But yet God forsook him not finally, but after, he returned to him again, and
brought him to repentance, as shall be further showed in the end of the
Chapter. Now to finish this second part of it: let us consider of Samsons
estate by Saul's doleful complaint, when he used the same words, which the holy
Ghost does here of Samson: namely, that the Lord was departed from 1. Sam. 28.
15.
him. By both which, though the difference (I confess) in the persons was not
small, nor in the issue of their troubles like: behold, to what woeful estate
men's sin brings them; and that Gods own children are not free; but if they
will follow the sins of other men, they shall be punished here Psalm. 89. 31.
like other men. Oh! how do many verify this, who have in their time shined
as lights, and been the supporters of many weak ones, who have blessed God for
their counsel and example? whose flower was never so Note.
glorious, as their fade and decay was ignominous. They have wished themselves
in the state of the meanest of those, who have admired them in their welfare:
their conscience has played the hangman within them, they have to the
astonishment of their beholders, called themselves outeasts from God, who has
hidden his face from them, withdrawn all confidence from them in their
prayers, all savor in hearing, and sense of his goodness which in times past
they enjoyed plentifully. And why this? Themselves have bewraied, some by pride
and conceit of a perfection obtained, separated themselves from the fellowship
of their brethren, as hearing the word, and use of other means, and so by
degrees waxt loose and hardened. Others beguiled with the snares of the world:
others with pomp, not a few with voluptuousnes, or other sinful lusts, have
cried out of their estate, not for their loss of some outward blessings, as
Naomi did, but even the chiefest, I mean inward peace toward God, and hope of
pardon. And yet such of them as were not hypocrites, God has made that very
affliction under which they have groaned, to break their hearts and to reclaim
them, though their former grace and honor they never recovered. And the like
danger lie all open unto, who dare tempt God as they did, and wax wanton, as
if grace should abound by the abundance of their sin. Such as are in this
case I shall say more to, in the handling of Samsons sorrow and afflictions
that followed his fall: but happy they, that by preventing this disease, need
no such physic. The means I observed and set down at large in the first
verse.

Now it must not be omitted that is added, to wit, that he knew not that the
Lord was departed from him. No wonder, he felt not the smartie effect of it as
yet: he fared as he who is robbed in the night of all his treasure, or wares of
his storehouse; but till the light of the day he misseth nothing. A similitude.
Note.
But then, oh what an inventory makes he of his several losses? And so did
this poor selfe-robber in this place. When the Philistims came upon him, there
was no power to resist, then it appeared indeed that he was robbed to purpose:
and he might with sorrow his belly full recount his damages at leisure. I fear
me, it is the case of many, (who lie as Samson did without his locks on
Delilahs lap) to consider little what their own sin has brought upon them.
It was thus with David and Jonah in their slumber, as with Samson, that they
were robbed: but it was night with them, they could for the time see no harm
done. Men's relapses from God are dangerous and frequent, and their repentances
rare and few: how escape they then? Can they keep the Lord close unto them,
retain their zeal, joy, and comfort in his promises, more then poor Samson,
committing either the same or as great offenses? No, no, they have evil
consciences, cold comfort, few (and those faint) prayers, and less fellowship
with God: yea in their sense they feel no election, no assurance of salvation.
In their sense, did I say? They have none: they go on and on, and miss none
of all these, during this obstupefaction and benummednes of conscience; but
bear off all without remorse or complaining. Oh woeful people! And yet in
times past, while they had life and a working conscience in them, a less blow
then this would have gustered and flaited them, and they could soon have
grieved for the decay of the least grace, the want where of now little troubles
Note.
them. It is woeful to lose grace, but more to feel no such loss. And yet yet
this and such like, men's wilful sin causes to the^. The use is, to teach us
not only to abhor the cause hereof; but to esteem it a mercy of mercies,
to have a tender conscience, a watchful heart, and effectual and operative:
which may make our lives both plentiful in good duties, and in sound comfort
arising therefrom. And a further use is to cause us to feel and abhorne the
least temptation to that sin which most certainly will procure a senselesnes
herein, and an unprofitable lying under that burden. And this of the second
part of Samsons apprehension, and the several worthy instructions arising
therefrom, be spoken. Now of the confequents thereof in the next Sermon God
willing.

THE EIGHTY SIX SERMON, ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The third part of the Chapter.
Verse. 21. Therefore the Philistims took him, and put out his eyes, and
brought him down to Azzah, and bound him with fetters, and he did grind in
the prison house. 22. And the hair of his head began to grow again, after he
was shaven. 23. Then the Princes of the Philistims gathered them together, for
to offer a great sacrifice to Dagon their God, and to rejoice: for they said,
Our God has delivered Samson our enemy into our hand. 24. Also when the people
saw him, they praised their God, for they said, Our God has delivered into our
hand our enemy and destroyer of our country, which has slain many of us. 25.
And when their hearts were merry, they said; Call Samson, that he may make us
pastime. So they called Samson out of the prison house, and he was a laughing
stccke unto them, and they set him between the pillars.
IN these five verses of this third part of the Chapter, it is The sum.
showed what manifold outward vexations were brought upon Samson through his
many sins, (though the Philistims, who were the instruments thereof, intended
no such thing) but yet it is showed, that in these tribulations he did repent,
as we read Manasses to have done in his afflictions. 2. Chton. 33. 12
Here is showed also what great joy the Philistims had, (both Princes and
people,) for that they had got him into their hands, (though that their joy
lasted but a while,) and how they praised their Idol Dagon for it: and
gathered themselves together a great number of them, to make themselves
pastime, by bringing forth Samson at their pleasure to that end, even to be
laughed at. These things are set forth in these verses: and in the last of them
is showed, that they set him betwixt the pillars, whereby Samson made
preparation to the mischief that he brought upon the Philistims by and by
after, in casting down the house upon them.

And first, in that God thus gave Samson up into the hands of his enemies, Doct
verse. 21.
and punished him as we see, it was just that the Lord did to him, (be so
provoking him as he did) by the uncircumcised Philistims; by this (I say) we
learn, that if need be, and if they break out boldly against him, he must
make his own dear children to smart, as well as he loves them, as the
Apostle Peter speaks. For as he brought them into the hands of his enemies,
1. Pet. 1. 6.
as is here to be seen, even so he uses to do to other of his; when there
is cause, and he sees it meet. The reason is, to the end they may rise up
again out of their falls, and repent: for the working of the which,
affliction (through Gods blessing) fitteth them rather then prosperity (which
they are so ready to abuse,) as presently shall appear in this story; and in
the mean while the wicked, going on in their sins, are the readier for
judgment, which one time or other meets with them, and takes hold of them.
And if he should not thus take down the pride and boldness of his in tempting
him, they could not be brought to good. This being known to be so, there is no
cause why we should discontentedly bear our afflictions, especially we our
selves having given just cause thereof. And as for them that rejoice in our
troubles, or (which is more) do themselves trouble us: I say no more but this,
that except they repent, and so become true worshippers of God with us, the
Lord shall trouble and vex every vain in their hearts, so far their troubles
shall exceed and go beyond ours: as God threatens in the second Epistle to
the Thessalonians, and we may see in the calamities of Dives, 2. These. 1. 6.
and especially if they be compared with Lazarus his comforts. But before I
come to lay out his troubles in particular, let us see this one thing which is
not to be omitted, which is this: In Samsons punishment we may discern a more
evident proof of Gods just and equal proceeding to revenge, then in every
relapse mentioned in Scripture, (which I note that we may be the more afraid to
tempt him:) For as we see Samsons disease was very gross and grievous, and
his sin began to be seated and habited in him: he had escaped once before,
when the Philistims laid wait for him at Azza, verse 2. and 3. and then God
spared him, and gave him a safe conduct, putting him to further proof. So now
behold his sin not being subdued and abhorred, as an unkind itch that is not
killed by a mild medicine: he provoke God a fresh by the same sin that he
did before; and the fire (being but raked up as it were in hot ashes) catching
hold of new and fit matter to work upon, flameth out amain the second time.
Therefore much water will not now quench it, much less the letting it alone was
like to heal it. What then? does God deal with him as before? no: now he
takes him in hand, and paies him home, and makes him see he dallieth not with
the dallier, and so he is feign to bear the penalty of this, and the former
too. So he dealt with David. It was no very extreme dealing for two so great
and so rebellious sins, as Adultery and Murder, to take away the child borne
in adultery, especailly after so patient a respit all the while between. But
David had forgot that gentle correction, for so heinous offenses; and therefore
waxed he bold once again with the Lord who had showed him such lenity: and so
provoked him again in grievous manner, by his ambitious numbering his subjects.
But did he escape as clearly then, as before? No; God remembers both: and as
the story well witnesses, sets himself to a resolute course of revenge, and
so he did, till he made David's heart ache, so that he saw his boldness in
tempting God, how little it gained him. For he stayed not till the Angel had
well slaked the matter of his ambition, by slaying seventy thousand of his
people. Let it be a watchword to us, that if God have once mercifully passed by
some wilful offense of ours, by sparing us, that (I say) we count it for a
great advantage and favor; for if we will dare to be bold to provoke him
again, we may justly fear that his scourges will be smartie, as Samson and
many other found them to be. That I say no more.

We have heard of the many sins that Samson committed, and of the Doct. 2.
inward vexation of his mind, in that God was departed from him, though he saw
it not by and by: Now I will (as I purposed a little before) lay out more
particularly his outward miseries, as they are set down in this verse, and
that is done by heaps one after another. First it is said, they took and
apprehended him, who was before at liberty, and yet they did not then forthwith
put him to death, they would not be satisfied with so short a revenge, nor so
be rid of him, that he should suffer no longer pain then so; but they meant
to keep him alive, and so hold him as upon the rack, in much torment and
vexation, which might be worse then any death unto him; therefore they then
plucked out his eyes, and thereby they provided, that he should not see any
more to do them mischief: then they lead him to one of their chief Cities,
and put him among their rascal prisoners, and made him grind there as an
horse. All these with their apurtenances duly considered, it may easily be
seen what a depth of miseries he was plunged into. And yet all this they did
to him, beside their mocking and laughing at him, when they were disposed to
make themselves pastime thereby, and to bring him forth to that purpose.

By this we see, that where many sins are committed, there it is certain, that
many judgments of God are to be looked for, to be heaped upon the persons
that do commit them, even heaps upon heaps, if we have eyes Psalm 32. 10.
to behold it, as the Psalmist says, Many sorrows compass such about, on
every side; and what cause their many sorrows and troubles, but their many
sins? Saul though a King, yet found it so, and seeing his life was full of
iniquity, he could not be free from many plagues, till the last of all made an
utter riddance of him. The Scriptures are full of examples, both of the godly,
who have turned aside, and of other who transgressed many ways, and how both
sorts were punished accordingly. And although many escape long, and other
flourish and prosper in the world for a while, yet are they not altogether void
of them; for those which are inward do sting them for the most part, and the
other are in a readiness, and shall be thought to come too soon, how far
off soever they seem to be; and the greatest judgment of all is, (to whom
soever it shall so fall out,) that they are suffered to go on without any. But
when destruction comes upon them, happy shall they be, who have kept their
hearts pure and good.

But further here let us note, that our sins do not only keep many
benefits from us, but also bring many judgments, as shame, poverty, sorrow,
Doct. 3.
bondage, prison, and any other misery upon us, and beside them all, they do
quench the graces of God in us: as faith, hope, a good conscience, the fear of
God, and the rest; which men make little matter of, because they see they are
in little account and price in the world. But to be short, he that hastes
after his wicked hearts desire, and will give himself liberty any way which he
knows God does not allow him; though it be not altogether so gross and
shameful as Samsons sin was, he hastes his own misery,) as in time
appears to himself, and is always to be seen of him, that will observe and
consider it. Samson was deeply drunken, and therefore his vomit was the
stronger. One or two ierkes makes a sturdy body but to dance: but when he is
stung to the quick, his stout stomach comes down, because he sees no
remedy. The hardened heart cannot repent, neither without Romans 2. 5.
this violence will it be meekned. A subtle traitor, Jesuit, or other, at
first examination is as far off as the Moon, and will be known of nothing:
but being held well to the rack, he will confess all. If there be so much
good to be done by severity, God will use it rather then fail of his purpose.
Let it teach men to try God no further then they think themselves well able to
stand out in it, and to bear his angry countenance, and if by venturing too
far, they find their opinion of Gods lenity confuted, and themselves laden
with sorrow; let them rather use the same to meeken their hearts, then to cry
out of their misery. For great trouble commonly argues strong rebellion, and
long trouble an hard heart. It is a singular mercy of God, to have it tamed by
the continuance of the punishment, but small cause of rejoicing, to have it
removed, and the heart left in obstinacy. The more we hasten this cure, the
shorter shall be our sorrow: for God delights not to punish long and much
together. But to return Samson, be it granted that Samson needed whipping.
Must it therefore needs be with a whip Note.
of so many strings, and were there none meet to see execution done, but they
that had no measure? who (as the Prophet complained of the Edomites) Psalm. 137.
aimed at nothing less then the punishing of his sin, but wholly at the
satisfying of their revenge. Did God bring upon Samson the personal hatred of
the Philistims, for the public good and his honor, in doing his own work
upon the enemies of the Church; and now is he made a prey to their teeth, and
an object of their fury? Oh! consider thou that obiectest, while Samson simply
went about God his work, God bound himself to shelter him from his enemies,
to the which end he furnished him with extraordinary strength, so it was
literally verified in him, One shall chase a thousand. Deuteronomy. 32. 30.
God stood to the making good of all harms that could befall him in his own
quarrel, and else Samson might justly have complained. But he Note.
would have his own work go forward, and Gods too: he had other business
that required hotter pursuit then his masters: even wicked and leaud business,
which crossed the other, and therein he was his own man, and not Gods
servant, look what charges or damages befell him in that employment, he was
himself to defray and stand to. And so we see, that as he used not his gift,
but abused it to his own lust; so God bereaved him of it, and sent him among
other masters to pay him his wages for his own work. For this, God took
himself highly wronged, and therefore he takes Samson in hand to purpose,
making his worst foes the arbiters. I deny not, but even herein he showed him
favor; but I speak of his physic, which procured his recovery. And if we
think that God is fittest to minister that which is fittest for quality, let
us ascribe this to him also, that can do it as well in the quantity as he
lists. In bodily diseases this is in the second place one chief thing: for
the same measure works not upon all. The tenth of this would have killed
Peter, yet less then this would not have stirred Samson. He had returned to
his filthiness without doubt, if the restraint had not been so forcible. God
is merciful, and delights not in extremity; but he is Lam. 3. 33. Exodus 34. 7.
just, and cannot be faced out with boldness.

Now in that Samson was thus led away in pain to such base work, in so Doct
4. in verse. 21.
reproachful a manner; we see that withal this, he was constrained to leave
and go from his lover also, to whom he was so nearly knit, and for whose sake
he suffered all this woe, and much more; which how sore and hard it was to
bear, who does not see? All which he might have been free from, and have
continued in the happy estate wherein he was before, if he could but have
shaken her off, and alienated his mind from her, and yet now must leave her
whether he would or no; and who sees not what cause he had, and what fair
warnings so to do before?

Even so, observe we, that if no persuasions will serve to draw us from some
special sin, (whether this which Samson was deluded with, or any other) yet
that God knows ways enough to scare us from it; and this one among the rest,
that as he was, we shall be plucked from it by violence, though we would not,
and that also as he was, with shame and sorrow our bellies full, and shall wish
too late that we had been wiser in time. So says Solomon, There was a young
man among the fools, destitute of understanding, Prou. 7. 6.
going toward the house of an harlot in the evening, when the night began to be
dark, who with her subtlety enticed him, and he followed her straight ways,
as an ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks for
correction, till a dart struck through his liver, as a bird hastes to the
snare, not knowing that she is in danger. And this is the best end that comes
of following our wicked hearts desire, to the committing of sin, when by no
means we can be reclaimed from it. And it is a great matter worth the marking
which I say, that when the Lord pulls not the ungodly from their filthy
pleasure wherein they lived, and does not restrain them, it is the immediate
forerunner of their final woe. But when he plucks the godly from those baits,
by which they are allured and endangered, he deals kindly with them,
recalling them from woe to repentance, and the enjoying of many good things.
For he is wont to deny that in favor to his children, which he grants to the
wicked in wrath. One point hereof we see in those two (who died one death both
bodily and spiritual) Haman and Judas I mean: the other in the eleven
Apostles, as we shall see by and by. Concerning the two former, when the one
was taken from his pomp, the other from his pieces of silver (which he rid
himself of, as hastily as ever he coueted them greedily:) the next news we
hear of them, after they had given Ester 7. 10.
over themselves to the sin intended, is, that they both were hanged, Mat.
27. 5.
and ended their cursed life in a cursed death. To whom we may add that fool
in the Gospel, with Achitophel and infinite others. When they were Luke 12. 20
2. Sam. 17. 23.
in the top of their wickedness, and were not held back by God, then was
their end nearest at hand. But the other, to wit, the good Apostles were
graciously weaned from the pursuit of that which would have bin their bane.
For when ambitiously they sought and that with striving, who should be the
greatest and chief among the rest, our Savior held them from it, so as John
13. 14.
he made them ashamed to think that they had gone about it. And what lost they
by it? Nay what gained they not rather? for they learning humility, found that
savor and sweetness in his service afterward, and in his love, (as appears by
their great lamentation that they made for his departing from them) that it
made way to their enjoying of most worthy and precious benefits after their
Masters ascension. Even so, as he wrought in the Apostles, he does the same in
his other elect people: who when they Note.
see they cannot enjoy their desired unlawful liberties without their utter
undoing, then they begin to think it is high time to look about them, and do
see that it were depth of folly to refuse and forsake their own mercy, (as
Jonah speaks) for looking after lying vanities, and so they resolve to renew
Jonah 2. 8.
their old acquaintance with their God, and to return to him their first
husband, and to fall to their old diet again. But oh mercy of God inualuable,
that they may do so. And though it be with some bitterness to the^, because the
flesh sauoureth no goodness; yet it is favor on Gods behalf toward them
unutterable, and that which could ill have been spared, even themselves being
judges. Therefore, to return, let all such as must be thus roughly used, as
Samson was, I mean, to be bereaved and plucked from their sin so dear to
them and that with violence ere they will give it over, let all such (I say)
beware, lest when God shall thus cross them, they like blind idiots and
wilful rebels fight not against God, and increase their own misery by
renewing their old sins, and seeking forbidden pleasures or gain, which is
little better then with swine to return to their mire. And such as 2. Pet. 2.
22.
neither forbearance, nor violence will do good upon, they may fear their
case to be bad, (or others for them may) seeing God uses commonly no other
remedy that will cure their malady.

And by this we see, that the end of sin is not as the beginning and entrance
into it. For then the devil most slighly and cunningly shows a fool all the
pleasure and profit that it brings, (as he judges it to be) yea and offers
more to their conceit then they shall ever find, as it may be fittest to allure
and blindfold them; but in no wise suffers them to think of that which will
in the end, that is, their undoing; for such wisdom Note. Prou. 24. 7.
is too high for a fool. And so the devil, to wind us into the sin,
comes as a tempter; but when he has brought us to commit it, and we then
begin to see what we have done, and in what woeful case we be left, then he
comes as an accuser, leaving us in the briars, as he did Judas, when we are
merely destitute of all help, to shift for our selves. Of which all the
former stories of these Israelites are a plentiful witness.

And here, because I am showing the miserable ends of sin, when men will
needs follow their wicked lusts, it were (and so I have thought good to
admonish the reader) it were good (I say) for him that is enticed strongly with
the baits of any sin, whereby he sees himself in danger, to set before
Note.
his own eyes, as particularly as he can, the woeful effects of his former
yielding to, or dallying with the deceitful allurements thereof, the holy
Ghost here does set down four or five which followed Samsons sin. As if a
professor should forcibly be haled to uncleanness with any woman, and that he
sees not likelihood to turn away from her; let him answer himself thus:
This my sin it is abhorred of God, who is my delight, and it will set him
against me, and make him mine enemy: it will be a most grievous reproach to my
profession, if I yield to it, it will be a burden of conscience importable:
the loss of grace by it will be unspeakable: the grief of the godly
unutterable, the fleshing and ioying of the wicked insatiable; and besides all,
utter undoing to me it will be for ever: and the injury to the party, to whom
I should offer such discurtesie, never to be recompensed. And let him often, as
he shall see cause, twit and cross his carnal humor, and answer himself,
what got Eve, when she had tasted that which being forbidden her, was yet in
her deceitful fancy, for many causes to be desired? And let him say further:
Do I think long, till I cry out with her, that the thing I so impotently
have after, has been my great sorrow and undoing? All means shall be found
little enough to obtain deliverance from such bondage. And seeing it is no
speaking to us at the very instant of going about the committing the sin, let
this and such like meditations be usually and seriously thought on by us
before, if we be wise.

Lastly, in this verse, one thing more I think good to note: and that is,
Doct. 5.
the care that these Philistims had to set their prisoners to work, as they
set Samson to grind at the mill among the rest, as they did the other: which
were worthy the following them in by us Christians, (though I would they
shamed us not herein) that knowing how ill occupied the malefactors be in the
prison, they might by good employing of them in some honest labor, not only
get somewhat toward their keeping, (many of them being starued for want
thereof) but also be stayed and held from much idleness and mischief, which
they otherwise will do, as at this day is to be lamented and seen in most
prisons. We see the commodity of setting them to work in prison, by
appointing work to the poor who live among us at liberty:) who being
diligently set to work, do both maintain themselves, and many of them a
great charge, and also are kept thereby from many offenses and sorrows. Nay
further, if heathens have gone so far in civil policy (though not for hatred
of the sin, themselves being as bad in other kinds) as to provide for order in
so confused a company of prisoners; then might it well become Christians not
only to do the same, but to go a little beyond them, and regard the welfare
of their souls also, both during their imprisonment, and before the time of
their execution. As that godly Captain Joshua did to Achan, chap. 7. My son
(says he) give glory to Josh 7. 19.
God, confess thy sin, and disburden thy conscience, that though thy hodie
be punished and destroyed for a season, yet thy soul may be saved in the day
of the Lord. A pitiful thing to consider, that such should be left to
themselves, to fulfill the measure of their sin, till death approaches, and
not to be labored nor dealt with about the most weighty matter of their
salvation. Which thing would move us more then it does, but that we see so
little care had by many Ministers, to teach painfully their people who walk at
liberty, and are well paid for their labor.

In this verse it is showed; though not so clearly, (that all do see and Verse
22.
understand it at the first view) how Samson sitting in the irksome prison in
pain of body, but greater of mind, did think of his evil course, and from what
estate he was fallen, and what misery he was in, and repented for it, after due
consideration of it, as the prodigal son did. But ye will ask how that
appears, that we may rest persuaded of it, seeing it may be doubted of as
well as of any other part of the story? I answer: seeing it is not so clear
in this verse, I will say the more about it, fetching light heereto from other
Scripture. And first in this verse, thus much may be gathered, that the holy
Ghost setting down this growing of his hair again, gives us this to learn
by it, that it was a manifest token that he returned to the estate of a
Nazarite again also: (for it being a common thing for the hair to grow
again, there was no other end of mentioning it) which was the most perfect
serving of God, and that we may know he could never have done, except he had
repented.

Secondly, it appears to be so, by his prayer to God afterward, verse. 28.
whereby we understand, that he believed in him, (even as Jonah did the like
Iona 2. 2. Rom 10. 14
in the Whales belly.) For as the Apostle says; How can we call upon him, in
whom we believe not? And if he believed, then he also repented: for faith and
repentance cannot be separated. The third proof of his repentance, is, that
he was a Nazarite of Gods own ordinance, and therefore the elect of God, and
one that must of necessity return again after his fall, or else he could not
have been one of the Lords, as it is certain he was, being a Nazarite. The
fourth is, the testimony that is given of him in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
where he is reckoned among them who lived, and died in Heb. 11. 32.
faith. And now that it is proved that he repented, let us make our benefit of
that his example.

In him therefore, as in a glass, we may see the unspeakable mercy of God, Doct.
to great sinners: for who in all likelihood would have said that he should
have come to repentance, whom we have heard to have so odiously, so long, and
so many ways gone from God, and to have followed his own Note.
wicked lusts? But he being one of Gods elect, it was impossible that he
should perish, though he must needs sustain much woe in this present world,
even as we have heard he did. Which also is to be said of David, Solomon and
Jonah, with other. And as such an one is to be pitied much, whom God has
called and reclaimed from his old bad course to faith and amendment of life,
when we see him afterward to wallow in the filthy mire of his former evil
life again; for we know his punishment is like to be most fearful and
heavy; so the offending party must know, that such an one should, as Manasses
did by the tribulations that he fell into, be broken hearted and repent, and
believe, and should have no peace, until he can do so. And therefore justly
are all such to be complained of, who having so Note.
fair warnings from God when they have fallen, are not for all that brought
home again, and humbled. So then, the consideration of this point ought little
to nourish the conceit of presuming to offend God upon hope of impunity. They
that plead this, and the like example of Samson, David, Solomon, and others
such, do show that they sin with boldness, and presumptuously bear
themselves up in hope of forgiveness, because those forementioned servants of
God obtained it, who sinned not of presumption as these do, who reason thus,
neither do they know therefore that they shall find the like mercy in their
need. For how monstrous and irregular a conclusion is it, for him whom the love
of God should keep from sinning, to presume to sin, because God loves him,
and will never dampe him? Thou that make such conclusions, fear that mercy
belongs not unto thee. But know it for certain, though thou have thought thy
self sure of salvation, having sought after it, and have begun to reform thy
self, yet if thou degenerate and offend wilfully, (for thy unavoidable errors
and weaknesses I speak not of) the Lord shall fill thy life, thy soul, and
conscience, with such perplexity and distress, that thou shall never enjoy
good day after thy satisfying of thy rebellious will: and if thou die so
(whosoever thus sinnest) thou never were a son, and beloved of God, but a
bastard and counterfeit. Do we not see what death has befallen such impudent
cosoners, as (being vile and base borne) claim to themselves the names and
inheritances of great persons dead long since, as if they were yet living? The
like penalty and far greater shall lie upon thee, (oh foul imposter and
deceiuer) that pleadest the name of a regenerate one, being an arrant deceiuer
and hypocrite. But to return, as for the better sort, let them often cool and
quench the dart of such a tentation with this, that as sweet as liberty seems,
God will find Note.
a way to make it bitter enough ere he leave them, though he mean not to cast
them off: witness hereof be this famous example of Samson. And on the other
side, if they have thus fallen, let them follow the example of this man in his
repentance, and so doing, let them apprehend him, and comfort by his recovery,
(for to that end the Scriptures were written) in their own 1. Tim. 1. 16.
particular case. And beware they, lest the devil (who is ever an accuser in
the end, though a tempter in the beginning,) draw them to run further and
deeper in, because they have already adventured so far. And so having escaped
both rocks of bold, or secure, or of desperate proceeding in sin, they shall
be encouraged to seek till they find mercy: the which (lamentable it is to
see) few do, though the number of reuolters be many, the greater sign that
they never were of the number of them whom they seemed to go out from, and
therefore return not, as Saint John says. For of 1. Ioh. 2. 19.
the other it is verified, They go far that never return.

But to leave this point concerning reuolters, this doubt is as hardly
answered, whether they who never were converted unto God as yet, may be in
hope to obtain mercy of him, in such depth of sinning. For as such go far,
and lie long in their sin before they think of any such matter; so when they
go about it, they are cast by a deadly fear, almost into desperation.
Therefore what shall such do? I answer as they in the Acts did, who Act. 2.
37.
came, being pricked in their hearts for crucifying the Lord Jesus, to the men
and brethren, even the Apostles, and asked counsel of them what they should
do, and so obtained remedy. For there being great likelihood and hope that
they are of Gods elect, when they grow weary of their wicked lives, they have
great cause to be encouraged, (if they know their liberty) in broken and
melting hearts to seek mercy at Gods hands, and not to give over Iam. 4. 9. 10.
their hope, neither despair.

In which case, Mary Magdalene, out of whom were cast seven devils, did saty
her self, and the penitent thief did obtain mercy, and Paul himself, as
far gone in a Pharisaicall conceit of his own righteousness, as the rest of
the Pharisees, who never repented, and was even mad in persecuting Gods
saints, and therefore in no mean danger: yet he (I say) who had bin a
persecutor, an oppressor, and a blasphemer, was received to mercy, and obtained
pardon. And why was this? Surely not only for his own comfort, 1. Tim. 1. 13.
but also to magnify Gods goodness, for the encouragement of other great
sinners, that should come after him, such as (of whom I now speak) that they
(I say) might be heartned and encouraged to look for the same upon the like
humiliation. The rest I refer to the next sermon.

THE EIGHTY SEVEN SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to go forward with Samson: it is to be considered in this verse (it
having been proved that he repented) in what place and estate he was in, when
God brought him back to repentance. And that was, in the irksome prison; when
he was blind, and laden with pain, and sorrow enough. But oh will some say,
what encouragement could he have to mind repentance, in that loathsome place,
and irksome condition, where rather all was against him, that might have been
an help thereto? Indeed I confess that his so coming home to God in humbling
himself, and looking for mercy in that uncomfortable estate that he was in,
is a thing almost as admirable even as his fall was, and the depth of Note.
misery that he fell into.

But by this and other such examples, we see how God does often work, as before
we heard he went about to do in him, that he works (I say) that Doct.
grace in a man, while he is in misery, which in prosperity is rarely seen and
found to be in him: as I have occasion to say often: And it is the more worthy
our noting, seeing he deals not so with all in their trouble, nay it is rare
to behold, and the case but of few. For the most are carried to impatience and
cursing, when they feel Gods heavy hand upon them, and to bitterness,
against God himself, for his so handling them; never looking to their own
deserts, for so there were hope that they might be easily brought to confess
that God did all justly, yea and showed mercy also in justly punishing them.
And thus he deals with men that are brought to good by trouble, I mean he
brings them to a due and through consideration of their vileness and
provoking of him, that they are glad to seek reconciliation with him: even
thus, I say, he draws and persuades them to take up their thoughts, for
their exceeding benefit, when he means that they shall take good by their
affliction.

And he it is (being only able) that pulls down their proud and lofty
looks, by the remembering and considering what they have done, (his holy spirit
directing them) and makes them ashamed thereof, and breaks their stomachs,
and makes them thirst for mercy, after that they can think that there is
mercy for such, and loathe their leaud lives, unto the which gracious work
they were before most opposite. Thus in sickness some are brought home, that
in health could not abide to hear of such a return. Thus Joseph's brethren,
Manasses, and others bewailed their sins in trouble, who when Genesis 42. 21. 2.
Chron. 33. 12.
they were void of it before, could by no means be brought to the least
consideration of any such matter. Let none therefore marvel, though God pursue
them hardly, after wilful transgression, and turning from him, and bring many
troubles upon them, for he intends their good thereby, which is a great
matter; and sees that they will not be brought to repentance otherwise. And
what a mercy of God is it, that when we are in the way to utter undoing, and
we think little that the end of such afflictions will be any better, but
rather the hastening of our misery? yet that he intends to draw us thereby to
greatest happiness, as in the former examples may be seen. And though this
fell not out at the first, yet let us humble our selves under Gods hand, and
not harden our hearts in the least manner against him, and in time we shall
most certainly find it so, even as Samson found the prison, hunger, and shame,
far better companions for him then his so much desired Delilah, as great
odds as there may seem between them. Enough has been said hereof in the
like stories, and particularly upon chapter 10. verse. 10.

Now to return to the Philistims a while, and to leave Samson in his sorrows,
Verse. 23.
we see how they give thanks to their god for victory over him. I say the
less of these Philistims, because the light they had reached not so far as
to condemn them herein: their enemy they got, and him they paid home to the
full: no wonder: they took Samsons vexing of them, a great piece of wrong done
to them, if they should not now they had vantage over him, have done their
uttermost to destroy him that sought their ruin, they should have dealt
foolishly. And therefore they little regarded by what means they came by him,
or how cruelly they dealt with him. But to let their cruelty pass, not to be
marvelled at; what shall we say of many professors, who show little better
practice in the like cases: who having by most ungodly means and devices
obtained their desires and purposes against such as they spitefully pursue and
hate, are so far from repentance for it, that they exult and triumph as
conquerers, with praising God for that they have bin avenged of their enemies;
herein declaring that they give thanks for those things, for which they should
have been much grieved. And as these Philistims got Samson into their hands,
but by an harlots means, and by fraud and subtilty most shameful: Even so,
wherein glory many of the other, but in that which is their shame? as in
revenge had of their enemies, in oppressing and peeling the innocent, in
humbling and abasing most vilely chaste Matrones and Virgins, in getting their
will upon the dear servants of God, (as the Priests did against our Savior)
and other such villainy. Thus men joy in things which they should be ashamed of,
as the Apostle says of worldly minded men, that their glory is their shame:
but to rejoice and glory Phil 3. 19.
in the Lord, who should be our only glory, they have no desire that way.

Another thing in the Philistims note, that they praise Dagon their god, Doct.
2.
offering a great sacrifice to him, and making a solemn rejoicing together, for
delivering Samson into their hands. Thus they were blindfolded, as Idolaters
that knew no better: This they learned of the Israelites, who did praise the
Lord Jehovah. Hereof, (not to be tedious in saying that which has often times
been taught) let this be sufficient to say, by their example to our shame, that
if we should not be fervent in setting out the Lords mercies and deliverances
with praises and thanks, and that joyfully, we shall have the Philistims, who
were Idolaters, to rise in judgment to condemn us.

This verse shows, that as the Princes did, so did the people, in all things
Verse. 24.
they followed them. Where we see, that the examples of our superiors and
betters are of great force to draw us after them. It is a truth whether in good
or evil, but specially in evil, whereto we are prone enough of our selves,
without any to draw us: and therefore much more when we have them also, as
patterns to go before us. When the people had taken them strange wives of the
Idolatrous nations in the days of Ezra, it was told to Ezra, Ezra. 9. 2.
but with this addition, that the hands of the Princes and rulers was chief in
that matter. Good cause there was therefore that the Apostle required, that
there should be supplications and prayers made for such to God, who being 1.
Tim. 2. 2.
set in these places by him, to the end we may live an honest and peaceable
life under them, they shall the better perform it, and give us also the better
example, when the people do fervently crave it of God. The same is to be said
of the Minister, governors of families, and of other superiors. See more
chapter 9. 48, 49. and other places of this work.

But while I am speaking of the Philistims, I will here, as in the fittest
place note another of Samsons punishments; for as it was his great sin, so it
was also a punishment of sin, that he opened the mouths of the
uncircumcised, to praise Dagon their Idol, as though he had been able to have
taken him out of the hands of the God of Israel, and to deliver him to them to
use him at their pleasure. And so did he likewise highly dishonor his own
God, as though he had not been able to save him from Dagon. And this (no doubt)
troubled Samson when he came to himself, as much as the other punishments
pained him. So it is certain, that David was sore troubled, as appears in
the Psalm, when he remembered and thought upon his sins, when among other
things, after he came to repentance, among the which, Psalm. 51. 1. 2.
this was none of the least, that he had caused the enemies of God to
blaspheme. For he being threatened of God by the Prophet, for that offense 2.
Sam. 12. 14.
very sharply, does yet acknowledge, that God should deal justly in punishing
him for it; thereby declaring that it much grieved him. And that evil servant,
which having buried his talent in a napkin, was arraigned for it, and answered
for himself, that, He knew his master was an hard man, reaping where he sowed
not, and gathering where he strewed not; hereby defaming his masters work, and
discouraging his servants: what reward had he? For as a starued and ill
thriuing and ragged servant makes all men think Luke 19. 22. 24.
that his master is a bare man and miserable, and therefore they shun his
house: so do these. And the dishonor here is the fouller, because the diet
and wages of his attendances is infinitely greater then any other. And let both
these warn us, that we have our conversation honest before men, that they may
not justly speak evil of us, as of evil doers: for if they do, it will 1.
Pet. 2. 22.
go to our hearts when we shall come to repentance, to think that we have
caused our holy profession, and the Gospel it self to be ill spoken of. For
we are not set here by God to lay stumbling blocks in men's way, and so to
cause them to fall, (woe be unto such) but to convert sinners from their wicked
course, (as David promised to do) and so by our good works which Psalm. 51. 13.
they shall see, to cause them to glorify God for us, when he shall visit and
have mercy on them.

This verse shows, that all the indignities and injuries that the Philistims
Verse. 25.
had offered Samson, with the grief that God brought upon him, were not
thought to be enough of them to make them satisfaction, but when their hearts
were merry with feasting, they must needs have him brought into a solemn
place before them, to laugh at him, being so disguised, and laden with miseries
as he was, and to be scorned by them, that so they might satisfy themselves
with sport and pastime thereby, even as they desired. And they were above three
thousand of them (according to the receipt of the room) and they of the
chiefest that did thus meet there. And to this end it is said here, that
Samson was fetched out of the prison house, and set before them.

Here we see the unnatural cruelty of the Philistims, who could not be
satisfied with all wrongs offered to Samson, but they must make him a laughing
stock, and load him with taunts and reproaches also. Which though it be a vice
so foul, as by the light of nature some Heathens abhorred it, I mean to show
immanitie to the miserable; yet it is of that sort of vices as might easily
prevail with such as put out this light by brutish passion, and impiety. As
appears by the monstrous cruelty of the Romans, who used to behold with great
pleasure, the single combats of malefactors condemned, and their Sword-players
shedding each others blood. Therefore it is the less to be marvelled at in
the Heathens: but by occasion of it, let us Doct.
know who are Christians, that it is to be reckoned among us as a most cruel
thing to add affliction to the afflicted: And when punishment is inflicted,
that is itself answerable fully to the trespass, yet for all that, to be
insatiable in the desire of revenge. A fearful example is that of the Priests
against our Savior, whom when they should have highly honored for the great
works that he did among them, not only preferred a murderer before him, and
unjustly got liberty of Pilate to crucify him, being Lord of glory, but Mat.
21. 17. 1.
also railed and spitted on him, and most shamefully reviled and mocked him in
the midst of his agonies: and indeed herein they resemble their father the
devil, who then most insulteth when he has a man under: but the Lord is
always nearest to his, as he was to Jonah, in their extremities. Jonah. 2. 9. 10.


Now although God for his evil doing do justly punish such an one; yet we
should be moved with some pity toward him, and not to add vexation to such as
God smites. And therefore we read, that the Lord afflicting Israel for their
just deserts, by sending them through the long and vast wilderness; yet when
the King of Edom would needs vex them also, by for bidding them passage
through his coasts, was displeased with him: And therefore the Prophet Amos
writes thus; For three transgressions of Edom, Amos 1. 11.
and for four, I will not be entreated, neither turn to him, and adds that,
as the reason, because he did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast
off all pity toward him. And for that cause says, he will not leave him
unpunished.

The use is to us, to beware of all cruelty, and especially if it be mixed
with envy: for which cause Solomon says, Anger is cruel, and wrath is
raging, but Prou 17. 4.
who can stand before envy? Thus David prays against him, who pursued the man
whom God afflicted, saying; Let his days be few, and his prayer be turned
Psalm. 109. 15, 16
into sin, because he remembered not to show mercy, but he persecuted the
poor man, and him that was contrite in his heart, etc. But these things we
read and despise, as if God would be mocked. See more of this in other places
of this book, and by name upon the fourth verse of the first chapter.

And here consider again, notwithstanding such disguising of Samson, as 2
we have now heard, and that he was thus brought into an high degree of shame,
contempt, and misery, whereby it might be thought that he was no better then
an abject and castaway; yet consider we (I say) that he was even now reclaimed
from his forementioned sins, and reconciled to God again, as I said before,
and say it again; that none may mistake me in so saying; and by that which I
have set down of his repentance, God shows how dear he was to him, for all
that has been said of his fall: not that he had merited, by his patience in
the prison, forgiveness of his sins: but he acknowledged them there, believed
the pardon of them, and, as it became a godly man, he repented, as before has
been proved; else these had turned him quite off from God. This did greatly
extenuate and assuage his misery, over it was with him before he thus turned
to God. So that the Lord who provided for Ionahs body the shelter of a gourd,
lest the extremity Jonah 4. 6.
of the heat of the Sun might have added affliction to his disquieted mind:
even he (I say) did much more graciously prevent this poor prisoner his
servant, with mercy and favor, against the time that his enemies grew to the
height of their malice; lest it might otherwise have been intolerable. Yea and
hereby the Lord animated him to bear the indignity the more quietly, because
his strength was now also renewed, and thereby he knew God had called this
despitefull rabble together, to be avenged of them.

Hereby let us learn, that whatsoever men have been in their evil lives
heretofore, and howsoever they have brought upon their own heads much misery
thereby, yet there is much comfort to be taken in them, both by themselves and
by others, when they have truly renounced and cast from them the works of
darkness, to have no more fellowship in them, but do shelter themselves under
Christ's wing, as the poor chicken under the hen, that he may cover and remit
them. And this only is able to make them hold up their heads, when so many
sorrows and troubles do otherwise oppress them. But oh then, how happy and
sweet is this uniting of us to Christ by faith, when we are so resolved that we
may abide in his love, that John 15. 11.
we carefully seek to enjoy and preserve it, and do wisely decline other
things which do make that benefit seem far less gainful and beautiful
unto us then it is. It is truly said by Solomon, that it is the wounded spirit
Prou. 18. 14.
which makes the trouble weighty; and the spirit of a man, free and cheerful
through a good conscience, and supported by God, which bears him up in his
affliction. And howsoever the proof hereof is sweetest in affliction sent upon
us in our innocence; yet it has place also even in crosses which are drawn
upon us for some sin, when we have humbled our selves truly for them, and
have not delayed to seek reconciliation with his Majesty for them. For then a
man recouereth his particular confidence in God, and sees that his affliction
having done that for which it came, shall speedily be removed, and a supply of
patience given the whilst, to undergo the trial. Therefore oh fools, that
cause God thus to punish them: but double fools, who abuse their correction,
and lie under it impenitent; Note.
for these shall need no Philistims to add sorrow upon sorrow, seeing they
make their burden double and treble by their sin aggrauated, and by a
conscience hardened against God.

Verse. 26. Then Samson said to the servant that led him by the hand; Lead me
that I may touch the pillars that the house stands upon, and that I may leave
to them.

27. Now the house was full of men and women, and there were all the Princes of
the Philistims: also about the roof were three thousand men, and women that
beheld while Samson played.

28. Then samson called unto the Lord, and said; O Lord God, I pray thee think
upon me: O God, I beseech thee strengthen me at this time only, that I may
be at once avenged of the Philistims for my two eyes.

29. And Samson laid hold on the two middle pillars whereupon the house stood,
and on which it was borne up: on the one with his right, and on the other with
his left.

30. Then said Samson, Let me lose my life with the Philistims: and he bowed
him with all his might, and the house fell upon the Princes, and upon all the
people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at his death, were more then
they which he had slain in his life.

31. Then his brethren, and all the house of his father came down and tocke
him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol, in the
scpulchre of Manoah his father: now he had judged Israel twenty years.

NOw it follows in the end of this third part of the Chapter, to consider The
sum.
the issue of this their dealing with Samson, and that is, the destruction of
many of the Philistims, brought upon them by his means: he himself Verse. 26.
losing his life with them. But before he did it, he took his best opportunity
to bring it to pass. For he being set betwixt the pillars, as was said in the
former verse, he asks of the servant that led him, to set him so, as he
might feel them with his shoulders; which he spoke, as though he would have
eased and rested himself, being wearied with grinding in the prison, and by
bearing his chains and bolts: but intending indeed to seek the best
opportunity to cast down the house upon the Philistims.

Here first mark this, that he notwithstanding he had lost his eyes, which
Doct.
should have guided his body, yet he was not unmindful of the work of his
calling, namely, to plague the Philistims, Gods enemies, and therefore he used
the help of the servant to further him thereto. We should all learn to
remember and consider (for all our troubles and discouragements) those weighty
charges and duties which are in our power to perform, that we Note.
leave them not by occasion thereof, neither lay them aside, as we are easily
brought to do thereby. So that although we have not all encouragement and
ability thereto, as were to be desired; yet we should use that which we have,
and may come by. Rare is the example of Jonah in this behalf, that being in
the Whales belly, where for streightnes of room, noisomenes and stinch he
could (a man would think) do nothing; yet even there made his faithful
prayer to God, and vpheld himself by faith.

For notwithstanding we are disabled altogether to perform some duties by
necessity; yet those which we may, we should with Samson labor to perform,
and have a care to discharge them. I speak this, for that many professors of
the Gospel having received a check from some of their betters, for being more
forward in religious duties then other, or then is well liked, and for making
more conscience of their ways, then the most; I say, they sustaining a rebuke
for the same, are discouraged, and are ready to leave off their Christian
course altogether, at least their feruencie and forwardness: which is utterly
unmeet for them to do; for so they show that they fear man more then God,
and so they cut him short of his due, as they think good, which is in no wise
tolerable. Whereas if they were servants, tenants, or otherwise inferiors to
such superiors as should abridge and deprive them of some helps and
liberties, which might further them to the discharge thereof; yet ought they
not through fear to give over the duties which they may perform, but the
rather constantly to hold out therein, and practice the same in all points as
they may. For what shall all help of man be to them, if God be against them?
Moses would not leave the least duty Exodus 10. 26.
undone, to please Pharao. I remember what I have read of a valiant Roman
Captain in a fight by sea, that first he aduenturing to put forth his hands
to catch at the gable of the enemies ship, with eagernes to surprise her, and
draw her to his own Navy as prisoner, lost his right hand by the sword of the
enemy: which being cut off, he haled again with the left hand, thinking to
pull her away, but in the attempt lost his left hand also; when he saw himself
disarmed of his hands, he (being near) fell down, and with his teeth drew the
ship with such violence, that he won her in the despite of the defenders
thereof. I bring in this as an allusion, to show the exceeding resolution of
carnal men in the advancing of their purposes for honor, wealth, or fleshly
proiects: but in this matter of our holy profession, wherein God is highly
honored, if we bring forth much fruit, who takes not a repulse by the
smallest discouragement, either from being zealous therein, and an ordinary
worshipper of God, or for being careful over his family, or a liberal relieuer
of the distressed Saints, or from walking in his particular calling with a good
conscience, or to be short, from serving God inwardly and outwardly, with
labor, and attendance as the cause requires? Also who being shut out one way,
seeks passage another, trying all means rather: yea and though disappointed
in part, yet to do somewhat, rather then nothing? Paul indeed being restrained
from public preaching sat not still, but did what he could in prison, so that
his bands were as famous as his liberty: not saying with Elija (therein weak,)
Take my life now (Lord) 1. King. 19. 4.
for Iezabel gives no permission to thy Prophets to teach openly, but makes a
racket of them. If we may honor God in public, let us: if not, then among a
few: if not so, yet in our family: if we be sequestered from al these, Note.
yet in our spirit, and that shall be our discharge before God. But if any
shall say, I have offered God my service in his Church, and he refuses it,
therefore he must pardon me if I have the smaller list to be otherwise
occupied: this is madness and folly, or else sloth and hypocrisy. Oh, says
many a son, wife, servant, ye little know what a father, husband, or master, or
landlord I have, to discourage me; otherwise I can tell what I could do in
serving God, as well as other: Well, mark what Paul says; If thou be a
servant, 1. Cor. 7. 21.
(though streitned) do as thou may: (the worst master cannot make thee cold
without thine own consent) although if thou be free, use it rather. And
therefore it was a great sin in David when he was driven to his shifts by
Saul, to offer his help to Achish against the Church; make the best of it that
1. Sam. 27. 2.
we can. For, want of encouragement must not cool our affection (though it may
hinder action) much less may it excuse coffeehouse, or that which is worse.
And seeing such sullennes argues that there is no resolute purpose indeed, to
duty; therefore many such grow loose and consciensles in their trouble: (for
affliction will search a man) and others being in time enlarged and set free;
are as barren hypocrites after, as ever before they were plentiful in their
complaints of their misery. We must think Zachary and Elizabeth had as many
dismaiments as we, under Herod, and in so corrupt a time: let us be as they,
and we shall be borne with for being no forwarder. But here an end for this
time.

THE EIGHTY EIGHT SERMON ON THE XVI. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
HEre to go forward, as Samson was preparing to bring Verse. 27.
to pass that great slaughter of the Philistims, so the Lord had prepared the
persons for him to execute it upon them. Therefore it is said here, that the
house was full of men and women, and all the Princes of the Philistims were
upon the house, provision being made where they might best see: above three
thousand men, to behold Samson, and please themselves therein. Which clearly
lays out the folly, yea the vain and deceitful folly of the ignorant and
irreligious, who have been, and still are so ready to flock together by
hundreds and thousands to satisfy their eye, and to behold that which may
provoke foolish laughter, with what danger soever.

And yet if this be so to be disliked (as who of sound judgment will not Doct.
1.
affirm it so to be) what may be said of them who now long after, as also in
years past and yet still in the light of the Gospel, have invented other
manner of spectacles to delude the simple withal? even shameless shows, and
most dangerous stage plays, omitting none to play a part in them, that may
increase sin; as some to play the vice and fool, so disguising themselves,
as if they were void of reason: some to resemble the devil, by which
counterfeiting they make the mentioning of devils in the Scripture, to be only
a ridiculous jest, and matter to laugh at, that so they may be the bolder to
sin, and the less fear devil or damnation: and some are brought on the
stage in women's apparel, God having commanded the contrary, and said, Deuteronomy.
22. 5.
It shall not be so. In the which meetings they do not only with the
Philistims please their eye, but also strongly are incensed and provoked to
lewdnes and lust, which some of them were nothing so much acquainted with
before. Whom if God should show some such strange judgment upon, as upon these
here, (as we have heard that some of them have had lately fair warnings in
that kind, while they have been in the midst of their pastimes) I deny not
but it were lamentable; but doubtless not less (what do I say? nay by far
more) deserved then this. But these must be left to the Magistrate, who should
not in vain bear the sword, but to the terror of offenders.

Of like sort to the Philistims meetings to laugh and please themselves in
beholding Samson brought forth to be a gasing stock among them; of like sort,
I say, are the brutish flockings together of some parts of our country, who on
the most Sabbaths through the summer have used, and that very lately (I am
sure) and still they may, for ought I know, to feast, drink and dance, with
much misrule accompanying them: misrule, ye may well guess what, by that which
I have mentioned; as if God had never commanded better things, saying yet aloud
in their ears, Remember that ye keep holy the Sabbath. All which profane
customs with the like, let them perish and come to naught, and holy assemblies
to hear sermons and to pray, rise up, and be duly and reverently frequented
and used on the contrary. Of these lewd customs I have elsewhere spoken.

I noted before the slauishnes which Samsons sin brought him to, while Doct.
out of verse. 26. 27.
he committed it, in the 17. verse, reserving the other, to wit, the baseness
and shame which followed after it, to this place, as more proper for it. That
which God threatened to the whole body of his people for renouncing his service,
that they should lose their headship over the nations, and become the tail,
that befell this one man Samson for his wilfulnes. Not unlike to that which
Noah (by implication) prophecieth of the Church in the two heads thereof, Shem,
and Iaphet, that Cham should be under, and a servant unto them, while they
dwelt in the tents of God, but otherwise Cham should hold his dominion over
them. Samson was made a Lord in some sort over these Heathens, to rule them,
and so he did while he held his honor in the service of God: but being weary
of it, lo he is made the most vile underling to them, and laden with all
despite that malice could lay upon him. We Note.
will neither believe that there is honor in serving God, (whereas yet the
Angels have no greater, and the greatest Kings upon earth hold their Majesty,
Heb. 1. 14.
in serving the Lord and maintaining his truth inviolable) nor shame and
misery in the contrary. But Samson (doubtless) saw the former, the more
clearly, when he was so oppressed with the latter: and that in so foul a
manner, as that he who weighs the story, shall need no further proof of
the deformed and vile nature of sin. Even thus was it with Adam when he had
sinned: whereas before he was the sovereign Lord over the creatures, he
became the vilest and worst of all, if God had not restored him. Thus the evil
Angels not content with the highest honor, became devils, abased to the lowest
and cursedest ebb of shame. And this particular I thought good not to omit,
(though I have said meetly enough of the other parts of misery which this
sin of his caused) to the end that such as like Samsons diet so well, may
know by that time God has tamed them so, and fetched them about as he did this
poor offender, he will make them buckle and stoop to his lure, and be glad of
the meanest room in his house, as the prodigal that wished himself an
hireling of his fathers, in his wretched penury, Luke 15. 19.
whom the place of a son before liked not. As for them who think it their
reproach to wear Gods liuerie at all, they are rather to be hissed at, then
confuted by this text, let them go like vagabonds and Cains upon the face of
the earth; but as their true shame is herein, that God vouchsafes them no room
in his Church, so the time shall be, when their shame shall break forth to
their confusion, then when there shall neither be place for them to hide their
heads in, nor cloakes left them to cover their shame, much less to have
entrance into his kingdom. Let rather such as go for Christians, who enjoy
the honor of good report among the best for their religion, and have been
hitherto kept from reproachful crimes, and the fruit thereof, that is shame
among the godly, and from being a byword to the wicked: let such, I say, look
about them by this example, and beseech God to show them yet more clearly the
privileges of their sincerity, and godly care of obedience, (which even here
are glorious, ere glory it self be obtained) that so they may cleave fast unto
him still, and beware, lest catching at some other shadow of glory, by
forsaking their zeal, and following the common sins of the time, they become
most ridiculous pageants of scorn to them, whom before they held in awe and
reverence, by the admiration of their virtues. Sure it is, that if they will
venture with Samson to break out to do evil for the having of their own
pleasure, or to avoid a little trouble, they shall as he did, reap a great
deal for it.

Before Samson set upon this work, he besought the Lord to enable and Verse. 28.
assist him, and we must know, that his prayer was fervent and effectual,
offered up in faith, and obtained that he sought. And whereas he may seem to
seek revenge in his prayer, we must consider, he was the Lords instrument to
bring to pass his work; and for good success in that, he entreats God to
assist him: Even as the Apostles did in the Acts; when the Act. 4. 29.
Priests had forbidden them to preach in the name of Jesus, which he had
commanded them, they besought God to stop and hinder their threats from having
effect, and prayed, that with all boldness they might utter and preach his word.
The same did Samson against these enemies of God, and God heard both alike;
both him, and the Apostles. Though God had promised them both all necessary
assistance, yet his grace was not so pinned to their sleeue, as that they might
always make account of it, without seeking of it by the prayer of faith, as in
Elia and Elisha appears, and we have touched it in the prayer which he made
for supply in his deadly thirst, when he was about Gods work in chapter
fifteenth, where I also observed the ground of that liberty which Gods
faithful servants have in their access to God by prayer.

And in effect Samson prays thus: O Lord, seeing I am brought now into so
great a company of these Philistims, whom, I being blind, shall never be able
to pursue, as thou had commanded me, they being enemies to thee and thy
people; and seeing thou have restored my strength to me in this so good an
opportunity; seeing it is thus, says he, in token that I believe no less, I
beseech thee to grant, that I may now be avenged of them, and that they may be
paid home for the injury they have done me, by plucking out mine eyes, and
other woe which they have wrought me thy servant, whereby I have been hindered
from doing thy work among them. Thus we see how it fares with Gods people,
and what their behavior is in their affliction: to wit, that they testify
their believing in him, by fervent supplication to him in such time of their
need; showing thereby, that they make him their only refuge and stay.

And by this we are taught, how earnestly and diligently we should go about
Doct.
the Lords business, when we may, and have opportunity, and chiefly in our
tribulation; namely, with fervent prayers suing to him for help in the one,
and success in the other; which seeking to him, the Lord does much regard and
commend: and (as he here did) to oppose our selves against his enemies,
wherein we find and can prove that they be so. For as the Lord loves a
cheerful giver, so he loves a cheerful doer of his business. 2 Cor. 9. 7.
And so should we be also, and the rather seeing there are but few that are
forward and readily minded in Gods matters, howsoever in other attempts they
run when they should draw back. But of this latter point, every where almost
through the book.

In these two verses is showed, how Samson setting his shoulders strongly Verse.
29. 30.
to the pillars of the house, he said; My life perish with theirs. And the
house fell on the Princes and the people, so that many more were slain by him
at his death, then he slew in his life, and he died with them.

Here we see for one point, the momentanie and flitting estate of the joy Doct.
of both.
of the wicked. And this is their bane, their vexation, and chief heart smart,
that when they have feathered their nest, as they say, and provided great
wealth, pleasure, and honor, whereby they give show to fools that they have
gotten a petty paradise here on earth, yet when they have done, they want one
chief thing to help them to hold and keep still their deceitful Note.
and pictured felicity, and that is, length of time and days: that they may
contain the enjoying of it to themselves. This they cannot buy nor compass,
as they can all other things to their liking, and for want of this, all the
other leave them, fade, and give over their use, as if they had never been
theirs, and yet withal, send them also to a far worse conditon. What
provision have many made in sumptuous and goodly buildings, with fat pastures,
and commodious grounds laid thereto, and all commodities more nearly adjoining,
as fish ponds, burrowes for coneyes, doue-houses, parkes, orchards, gardens,
and what not, that may be devised for their pleasure? as Solomon speaks of
himself. Eccles. 2.


And herein one follows another, as far as by their wealth they can Note.
reach, and when they look now to enjoy them, and so to show their happiness
thereby to other, then, or after a very little while, Time denies her service
to them, and will perform it no longer, without which all the rest are to them
as nothing, nay vexation of spirit also. Thus death the Lords messenger comes
often on the sudden, as the sergeant or bailiefe arresting, and taking them away
from all their pleasant delights, as Samson was violently from his Delilah,
until they cry out again, when they see how they are plucked from them, but
all in vain, seeing there is none to rescue them. The same may be said of
those, who have provided yearly revenues, to avoid dangers, and maintain
fleshly reioycings. All which though they be Gods good benefits, and may be
lawfully enjoyed, yet when they are set in Gods place, and made the delights of
men, in stead of his favor and government, they are cursed with the users of
them.

And thus when they must be taken from them against their will, and they can
enjoy them no longer, they say in themselves, O death, how unwelcome art thou
to us, who have taken up our pleasure here? And have they nothing else to say?
where is now their wisdom, (who went for the wisest of other in their
prosperity,) that has bewrayed them to be mere fools, and left themselves
then nothing? Why did they not rather obey God therefore, who charged them that
they should not lay up their felicity here below? Why did they not give credit
to him, who told them, as he told the Note.
rich man in the Gospel, There is no certainty of any earthly thing till
tomorrow? Luke 12. 20. 21.
Therefore must such become by words for their folly and wilfulness, in every
common man's mouth, (as I know not wherefore their doings Note.
serve, but for matter to talk of,) who looked to have been famous here for
ever by their vniatiable gatherings, and great provision making of earthly
abiding and prospering.

For he that has said to him, who was as well settled in momentany rest as
these, when he thus comforted himself, [Soule, eat, and drink, and take
thine ease, thou have much good laid up for thee for many years,] He I say
that Luke 12. 19.
spoke thus to him; Thou fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from
thee, and whose then shall be the things which thou possessest? He says as
much daily to these; and who can then pity them, if they will not be warned?
Much like a great man that died a few years agone, who when sickness grew
fast on him, and would not be shaken off, as he hoped it would have been, at
the first coming of it, when he could get no help against it, but that death
approached and drew near, he uttered these words now at last; whereby it is
clear that he had little thinking of any such thing before; Why? now I see
that all is vanity. Another having builded a goodly house, when he had showed
the commodities and pleasantness of it to a plain country man, asking him
how he liked it; he answered: I like it well, if a man might keep it always.
Thereby marring the joy of it, who could not commend it* but together with the
deadly and unwelcome remembering the momentanie and flitting estate thereof, and
the uncertainty of enjoying it.

And all the joy of the wicked is no better then I have said; and yet that none
may think the Lord to deal partially, be it known that if his own people
degenerate, and partake with the other in their sin, and play the fools with
them by rejoicing in evil, and things transitory, as their paradise, they
shall smart with them likewise, and for the time enjoy no better privilege
then they do. Therefore let us be wiser, and embrace and prosesse that joy
which cannot be taken from us, neither shall ever be repented of, that we have
sought it, and that is our rejoicing in the Lord, in his word, in his service,
and in his Saints; and to be short, in his all sufficiency. And this be said
more fully of this point which yet I handled by the like occasion in chap. 15.

Again here let us mark at what time and when the joy of the Philistims 2
was damped and taken from them. And that was, when they were met together to
sport themselves, and be merry, and when they were furthest off from any
thought of trouble or death, or of losing and disappointment of their pastime,
even then was the house thrown down by Samson upon them. Like to that which
the Apostle speaks; When men cry peace, 1. These. 5. 3.
peace, and al things are safe, then shall sudden destruction come upon them, as
travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not be able to escape: even as
Baltazar also was most fearfully threatened the loss of his kingdom Dan. 6.
25.
in the midst of his banqueting.

This doctrine does mauellously cross our vile nature, who give our selves
leave, when health and welfare meet together and abide with us any time; to
make our selves drunk with them, and to take our fill of them. And therefore
we cannot away with this, to hear of any change, nor to be awaked out of our
carnal drowsinesse: and for this cause, seeing men will not hearken to the
Lord, bidding us watch, and beware of such surfeiting Luke 21. 34.
and spiritual drunkenness; therefore he leaves many in the snare often times,
wherein like fools they be taken. And by this we may see, when God has Prou.
22 3.
begun judgment before with his own, so that they escape not, that it shall
much more grievously meet afterward with his enemies; and therefore that their
judgment sleeps not. This I enlarge not, having spoken of it in 1. Pet. 4.
18.
the place before mentioned, chap. 15.

The casting down of such an house, (we know all) it passed the strength 3
of a common man. And as he had his strength restored to him again, as we see,
so had he also his inward grace, as appears by that which has been said of
his repentance, and his prayer of faith. Now therefore since that, the case
being thus altered with him, we must behold him as another man, then when he
was besotted and made drunk with the wicked woman. And here let us mark what
a difference there is betwixt the time of grace in a man while God guides him,
and the time of bondage when God lets him follow the devices and desires of
his wicked heart, as may be here seen in Samson. Oh, grace if it could be
seen with eyes, as we can see but a dark resemblance of it by some outward
shows thereof, it would in an admirable manner draw us to love it, as the
meekness of Moses, the love of Jonathan, the zeal of David, and the like:
and so would the foulness, loathsomnes and terriblenesse of sin, cause us
to abhor it, as the devil: as in Iezabels cruelty, Ioabs malice, Hamans
murtherous mind is to be seen.

Oh what a shame it is for a man that has been reverenced and highly regarded
for his approved innocence, faithfulness, and constancy in good carriage, to
become a fool in Israel, a base, ridiculous, and contemptible person! And
again I say, oh how glorious and worthy a thing it is, to see Note.
such an one to be reformed, and cast into the mould of the Gospel! Look upon
thy self, if ever thou did serve God uprightly, these virtues here set
down, had place in thee, yea prayer was sweet to thee; and hearing, with such
like fruits of amendment were pleasant: but when thou have suffered thine
heart to carry thee after the corrupt inclination thereof, thou art then
become utterly disguised, as if thou had never been the same person.

I will here only add this, how sin makes men impotent, and takes heart
from the committers of it, as I have showed other ways, how loathsome and
odious it is. Read that one example to this end, in this book. When the Lord
brought war upon his people for their Idolatry, by the Judge. 5. 8.
Canaanites, it is said that the people were so put out of heart with the
thinking of their sin, and so appalled in their consciences, remembering how
they had transgressed, that among forty thousands of them, there was not one
that durst take up spear or shield against the enemy. But of this point
plentifully before, and particularly upon those words, [That he thought he
would do as at other times.] But here an end.

THE EIGHTY NINE SERMON, ON THE XVI. AND XVII. CHAPTERS OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to proceed with Samson upon this, that he casting down the house upon
the Philistims, died also with Object. Verse. ^0.
them: it is demanded, if he did not kill himself, which if we find that he
did, then all the commendations of his renewed repentance falls to the ground,
and is washed away by this his last so woeful a fact, and that also advisedly
done. Hereto I answer, that it cannot be said he killed Answ.
himself: indeed he died with them, but the end that he propounded, was not
that he might die, neither did he desire it; but he sought revenge upon Gods
enemies, which was the work of his calling, and that which was like to bring
and procure it: but what was that but a faithful serving of God, though with
the loss of his life? even as the Apostles did. If they preached Note.
Christ, they saw it would cost them their life, and that they should be slain
if they would needs preach him: now when it fell out so indeed by their
preaching, shall we say therefore that they killed themselves, and that they
sought their own death? No, no more then a zealous and diligent Preacher, who
by his pains in study and his ministry, empaireth and spends his strength
and health, can be said to be the procurer of his own untimely death, for he
has spent his strength in his calling, to which end God gave it him.

And as Paul said, he was ready to be bound, and to die for the Lord Jesus,
Act. 21. 13.
so Samson said, let me lose my life with the Philistims. He runs not rashly
to death, but follows his vocation, and if death come therewith unto him, he
yields to it willingly, and the rather because he had brought this necessity
upon himself by his own sin; and he could no otherwise pursue Gods enemies
then with hazard of his own life. Even as valiant soldiers who seek not
death, but yet look for no other. The use of this The use of it.
to us is this, that as we should abhor the least sin this way, yea the
very speech or thought intending and seeking our own death, so yet it is our
duty to walk in the estate in the which God has set us, in such wise, that we
be not only ready, fit, and willing to die; but also if God will in our
faithful discharge of our duties, meet with us by death, as he did with the
Apostles, then to be ready to yield to it, and to remember, That he who Mat.
16. 25.
loses his life for Gods sake shall find it. And therefore let neither our
life, nor any thing we have, be thought too good for him who requires it. And
though all lose not their lives, yet many do forgo other commodities, which
were not commendable in them, if it were not for Gods cause. Very Heathens
(when they spoke according to their light) saw it to be unnatural for men to
devour themselves. And as the soldier may not disranke himself or forsake
his station, without his Emperors permission who has set him in his place; so
neither ought any to destroy his own life and soul by wilful death, but
wait the time that God has appointed. Indeed the Heathen saw not thus much,
that a man might not avoid apparent peril of violent death, whether by an
incurable disease, (as one of them starued himself to death to free himself
from the stone) or by the pursuit of their enemies. Plinius.
This they made themselves erroneously believe to be magnanimity, and the
waiting for death (in that case) cowardice. And like to them are many brutish
people among us, who in some great distress of mind or shame which their own
sin has brought upon them, bereave themselves of their lives, like Judas,
and Abimelech. And others being crossed but in a small matter, are ready to
wish themselves as deep in the ground as they are high too. And even
Christians often forget themselves, and have this pang upon them to curse the
day of their birth, and to desire death. I doubt not, but many do it in
rashness, (for if death came and offered it self, they would recant,) but
howsoever it be, both this rashness, and the other madness is utterly
unbeseeming Christians, and a token of an unsavory heart, little seasoned with
the doctrine of confidence, and patience. And if a wise man weigh it, there is
more cowardlinesse in preventing trouble or crosses by violence, then enduring
them patiently. And let such as the devil has woond in withal so far, as
to work upon their melancholy, and terrors of conscience, or weakness of
nature, by such dangerous tentations as these; to drown, hang, stab
themselves, abusing the Scripture, and such examples as this of Samson, to that
end; let such (I say) be fenced well against his malice by this instruction,
answering with our Savior in the like case; Avoid Satan, I dare not tempt the
Lord my God. Mat. 4. 7.


But to return a little to Samson: It is so far off from equity to condemn
2
that last act of his, in losing his life with the Philistims, that it was far
to be preferred before his other annoying of them, and even his greatest
auengings of them. For he slew many more of them now at his death, then he did
in his life. And was therein a lively figure of our Savior Christ: who though
he destroyed the works of the devil in his life, (even as he came to the
same end) and foiled him shrewdly many ways; yet at his 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
death he triumphed over him, and led him captive. Both their acts, I mean
Samsons and Christ's, do show, as in a glass, what we all should do: namely,
endeavor to do the best good at our death: which shall the better be done, if
we lay for it in our life. For, live well, and dye better: because we Note.
ratify and confirm all the good we did while we lived, when we justify it
at our death. And this is one fruit and piece of honor, that a good life
receives, that a good death follows it. Oh therefore begin we betimes to
fear God, and as we are commanded, remember we our maker in the days Eccles.
12. 1.
of our youth, and let it not be tedious to us to nourish those good
beginnings, that our last end may be like both; or else an hundred to one, that
we shall have small cause to rejoice in our end, that I say no more.

And the like (in this particular) may be said of the death of the righteous,
which is said of Samson, yea and much more. And it affoordeth no small
encouragement to al such as are faithful in the work of the Lord; I mean, in
rooting out and destroying the enemies of their own souls, especially the
corruption of their nature, and the fleshly lusts which issue from thence.
Their watchfulnes and diligence in suppressing them ought to be daily, their
prayers constant, their faith in Gods almighty power, (to which nothing is
impossible) as armor, ought continually to be exercised in the assaulting of
their concupiscence and the fruits thereof. And though they yield not at the
first, because they are strong and mighty; yet having received their deadly
blow at first, by the death of Christ, they shall decay sensibly, and at death
be quite abolished, as the walls of Jericho fell down the seventh day of the
compassing thereof.

Thus Samson dies with the Philistims, but in a most contrary and unlike
manner. For they dyed in riot, idolatry, cruelty and impenitencie; but he in
faith, and (as Stephen did) in calling upon the name of the Lord. So let it
Act. 7. 59.
be well laid for, and looked to, that though we must dye with the bad, yet
Eccles. 3. 19.
we may in no wise dye as they do. And so the outward manner of death, though
in pain, disease, and kind of death, it be one, and the same, to us and
them, (as the Wise man says, to wit, As the fool dies, so dies the wise)
yet all that can judge will say, that we must not measure the godliness and
happy estate of men by outward things, though they fall out alike to both. And
by this let us beware, that we fear not death with the wicked, who say in
token thereof, we must dye; but wait we for it, saying: Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, rejoicing to think we shall dye.

This is a privilege bestowed upon the faithful, who provide to dye in faith,
(as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews says of the Patriarchs, Heb. 11.
34.
and among the rest of Samson) to wit, that God puts a difference betwixt
their death, and the death of other; though the world cannot discern it in the
general and common abasement of the body and flesh; yet I deny not, but
sometimes this difference appears also even in the manner of dying. For
though some are so bereft of sense and reason by the force of their disease,
and others by Gods disposing so of them, that even the best are either much
disguised in their sickness, or at least give no great testimony of that
excellent grace which is in the^; yet in the grace they lived, therein they
die: and usually, and for the most part, it may be observed, that a well passed
life Note.
brings a good death, and often times shows plentiful and apparent
signification Psalm. 37. 37.
of confidence, comfort, and spiritual triumph in death, which it is
impossible to find in the other. Witness hereof is the death of the Martyrs,
(a thing at this day much sticking in the stomach of the Papists, if they
would speak the truth) compared with the desperate or diffident death of their
Jesuits, and Seminaries. I instance in these, because they arrogate most to
themselves in their sufferings for the Catholic cause, as they call it. But as
for other bad persons, (except deeply deluded) we shall behold in them
manifest signs of distrust, fear, impatience: and the best is, crying out of
their dangerous estate. Therefore let this be a comfort to all such as hold
their purpose entire of cleaving to the Lord in believing his promises, and
obeying his will; that as their dying may differ from the ungodly, so they (in
Gods account) shall differ, though their death differ not. A great stay to them
against temptation to the contrary, and against the base and common condition
of their bodies, and the dishonor thereof, lying on their deathbed, laid by
the walls, or in the grave. He that has put first a difference between them
and others, by faith purifying their hearts, and then by his precious account
that he makes of them; shall eminently testify that difference Psalm. 116. 15.
after he has raised them out of their vileness and ignominy, and clothed them
with incorruption and glory.

And lastly, to make an end with Samson, we have seen in this story, how 2
grievously he fell, and withal, that he turned again to the Lord, and called
upon him, and was heard. To gather the story therefore into a short sum,
according to my usual manner of dealing in continued histories, let us learn,
that if at any time we have sinned against the Lord more willingly and
wittingly, then by mere infirmity in our ordinary course of life we use to
do; (for Gods servants, though they attain not to that measure of grace in
the service of God that they desire, yet neither do they often or commonly go
against their knowledge, and smother it, but yet the devil that lays a snare
for them, and lies in wait continually to catch them therein, may easily, and
is like sometime to find them worse provided.) Here therefore if it fall out,
that they be taken in such a trippe, and outstraying, and met withal by God in
pursuing them; let them not lie still, as the horse in the mire, as making
light of their sin, and putting the due consideration of it far from them;
but as soon as they can, labor they to come to themselves again; and
consider seriously from whence they are fallen, and how it is with them in that
estate, and how they are estranged from God, and give no rest to themselves,
till with the prodigal son they resolve with broken hearts to go again to
their father who is their refuge, and say: We have sinned, receive us
graciously: and so God, who offers to raise up such as are fallen, will, with
the father of the prodigal, receive and welcome them joyfully. And so with
Samson, and others, who have slidden as he did, let them renew their covenant
more strongly with the Lord, that it may hold firm for the time to come, even
to death, as his did, against all sin, and especially that which has foiled
them most, lest it return back more strongly upon them, as waters which were
ill stopped. And lastly, let them return again humbly and penitently for
mercy, and it shall be, according to their faith, granted them. But I trow,
they are most happy, who feeling and finding how sweet the Lord is, and how
gainful his service is, will provide, as they are taught, to abide constantly
in his love, as he wills them to do, not putting Ioh. 15. 11.
the matter upon a venture, nor urging the Lord to such a sharp manner of
discipline, through their boldness, as this of Samson was; all this (I say)
they will do and that gladly also, except they long for woe, and stand upon
thorns till they have brought sorrow upon themselves, and doubled at least
their own labor, and trouble in recovering their welfare again.

By this verse it appears, that at this strange spectacle of the casting
Verse. ^1.
down the house upon the Philistims and their Princes, the rest of them were
so amazed, that they suffered the kinsmen of Samson to come thither and carry
him back again unto their land and inheritance, and to bury him there. Which
if they had considered advisedly, they would have taken them and the rest,
being under their power, and have put them to the most cruel death; as the
Gibeonites desired of David certain of the kindred of 2. Sam. 21. 5, 6.
Saul to be hanged up to revenge themselves on him, (on Saul I mean) who slew
sundry of them, contrary to the league that Joshua made with them, Josh 9. 23.
which was, that they should not dye, but cut wood and draw water for the
service of the Tabernacle.

Thus we see God sometimes appalles the wicked, so as his people may fare the
better by it; as by casting them to the ground who sought Christ Ioh. 18. 6.
to take him, we see he might easily have escaped their hands, if he would,
and that he had seen it expedient. And even so, by their fears, or multitude
of business, as also many other ways, the Lord puts his hook in the
nostrils of the wicked, so that they desist and leave off from molesting and
vexing his faithful servants, though it be sore against their will: even as
Saul was called away from pursuing David, when he was in great danger. 1. Sam.
23. 2.
But if the Lord should revenge their wrongs upon their adversaries, as he
sees it not always expedient to do, he should make a riddance of the wicked
from the earth, and so the innocent and righteous should not have their faith
and patience tried by them, as he has appointed them to be. But seeing he is
patient toward them, therefore they should be much afraid to go on in their
cruel course against them, as we see the Priests by the counsel of Gamaliel,
thought good, and saw cause to be ruled by him in letting Acts 5. 35. 40.
the Apostles go, who had before intended most cruelly against them; what was
it, that hindered them from their purpose, but this, that they feared that the
Lord would have resisted them, who (indeed) so terrified them, that he
constrained them to let them alone. Thus as well as by the death of some that
are maliciously minded against the faithful; other of their company are so
astonished and appalled, that they desist from their wicked attempts, and are
in such fear, that for the time they cannot tell what they may do. Thus (to
conclude) God eases the shoulders of his servants many ways, as we see, of
the burdens that oppressed them, and many other ways, that cannot be
expressed, and not in the least manner by taking their oppressors away in the
midst of their flourishing and cruelty, that we may see he knows how to
deliver his, and shows accordingly in due season, that he does not forget
them; and all to this end, that they may not faint from their good beginnings,
nor be discouraged in any good course, but hold it always best to depend upon
him, as Israel by Pharaos drowning, Exodus 14. 28.
and Shushan and the Provinces by Hamans abasement, with the like, found Ester
8. 17.
it. And though in some hot and fiery trials this be hard for the faithful to
go under, yet after they have borne the brunt, they would not for any good Note.
have done otherwise. But of the sundry ways whereby God uses to succor
his, and joint their enemies, I have in another place discoursed at large.
Therefore thus much be said of this point, and of the whole history of Samson.

THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER.
Verse. 1. And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was Micah. 2. And he
said unto his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver that were taken from
thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of also in mine ears, Behold, the
silver is with me, I took it. And his mother said, Blessed be thou of the
Lord, my son. 3. And when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of
silver to his mother, his mother said, I have wholly dedicated the silver unto
the Lord, from my hand, for my son, to make a graven Image, and a molten
Image: now therefore I will restore it unto thee. 4. Yet herestored the money
unto his mother, and his mother took two hundred shekels of silver, and gave
it to the founder, who made thereof a graven Image, and a molten Image, and
they were in the house of Micah. 5. And the man Micah had an house of gods, and
made an Ephod and Teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons: who became his
Priest. 6. In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes.
IN this Chapter, before I enter into the handling of it, as I use to do in the
other, I must stay a while, and say something for the satisfying of the reader;
and that not only about this Chapter, but also all the other that follow to
the end of the book. That which I mean, is this: Whereas it may The acts
mentioned in these five next Chapters, follow not the former in order of time.
be, by the ignorant, thought, that the things mentioned in these five Chapters
following were done in order of time, after those things which go before; I
find by conference of Scriptures that they were not, neither can it be that
they should. But it appears that the acts set down in them, were done long
before. And because it may seem strange which I say, I neither will nor dare
affirm it barely because any other man says so, but I will show my reasons
out of the Scripture.

I affirm therefore, that the things that are said to have been done in these
Chapters following, were done before the times of any of the Judges, or at the
least at the end, and after the death of Othniel, mentioned in the first
Chapter, or in that vacation of those eighteen years under Eglon, while there
was no Judge in Israel. And they may not inconueniently be reckoned to the
second Chapter, and the eleventh verse, and those that follow it, which do
mention the horrible wickedness of the people of Israel after Joshua was dead,
and the chief rulers who ouerliued him. My reasons that these things were done
before the times of the Judges, or thereabout, are these.

The first is, that it is said in the next Chapter, that the Tribe of Dan,
being Reason 1.
a populous tribe, did enlarge their borders at that time, which (if it should
be understood to follow the story of Samson in the former Chapter, a reckoning
being duly made, must be full three hundred years from the division of the
land. Against the which therefore (as nothing like to be so) that in the 19. of
Joshua is opposed, where it is said, as here it is, that the border of the
Josh. 19. 47.
children of Dan was at that time less then sufficed: therefore the children
of Dan went up and fought against Laish, even then; and taking it, smote it
with the edge of the sword, and enjoyed it for their inheritance, and dwelt in
it. So that if they of Dan then took it, it follows that the story in the
next Chapter, where they are said then to have taken it, is to be referred to
that time mentioned in Joshua 19. which was three hundred years before, and
not to the time following immediately after Samson, according to the order of
the Chapter as it is set. And this is my first reason why these five Chapters
follow not the order of time, as they be placed.

Another reason why these Chapters cannot be understood to be set 2
down according to the order wherein they stand, and the time in which they
are thought to have been done, to wit, immediately after Samson, but are to be
referred to the former times, that were three hundred years before: another
reason for it, I say, is this; that Jonathan the Leuite, mentioned in these two
Chapters, is said to have been the nephew of Manasseh the son Judge. 18. 30.
of Moses, and the son of Gershom nephew to Moses, who were dead well nigh
three hundred years before the death of Samson, and therefore unlike, or
rather impossible that he should live after Samson.

Thirdly, whereas the acts of these five Chapters followed one another 3
at the same time, it is manifest that at the war of the Beniamites, chapter
20. Judge. 20. 28.
Phineas the son of Eliazar the son of Aaron ministered before the Lord at
that time, and asked counsel of him, if they should go against Benjamin to
war. And the same Phineas above three hundred years before the death of
Samson, appeased the wrath of God by thrusting through Zimri and Cosby Numb.
25. 8.
in their tent, while the people of Israel were on the other side Jordan, and
were not as yet come into the land of Canaan. Therefore the acts mentioned to
have been done in these five Chapters, could not be done after the death of
Samson, as they by their placing may be thought to have been; but long before:
unless we grant that Phineas and the rest, as Jonathan, and the Danites that
went to Laish, lived three hundred and more years, which none then did: for
three or four generations before that, in Moses time, the Psalm. 90. 10.
days of a man were reckoned but threescore years and ten, or fourscore at
the most, to speak of, and those also with pain and weariness.

To these may this be added, that the City Jerusalem, then called Iebus, 4
part whereof fell to the Beniamites, at the peoples first coming into the
land of promise, and part of it was in the hands of Judah: this Iebus was now
said to be possessed of the Iebusites, in the 19. Chapter. Now that Judge. 19. 10
which was given to Benjamin three hundred years before, and enjoyed of them.
Josh. 18. being taken from the Iebusites, could it be in the possession of
Josh. 18. 28.
the Iebusites so long after, being driven out so long before? And though Josh.
15. 63.
they were not wholly expelled, (as Josh 15.) yet part of them was, Judge. 1.
And the men of Judah who took it, slew the inhabitants with the edge of Judge
1. 8.
the sword, and burnt the City with fire. The other part of it was, as I said,
pertaining to Benjamin; and though some remained to the time of David, yet they
enjoyed not the City, though they could not be wholly cast out; but were only
in holds, as may be seen, 2. Sam. 5. Therefore that which 2. Sam. 5. 6.
is said of Iebus in the next Chapter, that it was called the City of the
Iebusites, is not to be understood to have been so called now after the death
of Samson, but three hundred years before, when it was not yet given to
Benjamin, nor taken by Judah.

I say therefore, that in this and the other 4. Chapters following, is showed
that the Commonwealth of the Israelites was most corrupt both in religion and
manners, after the death of Joshua, and the other good rulers that ouerliued
him: for in a short time after, by little and little, another generation arose,
which knew not the Lord, and the whole tribes fell to Idolatry, and horrible
wickedness, of both which an example is set down here; one Judge. 2. 10.
of their Idolatry in the 17. and 18. Chapters; and another of the monstrous
life that was then in use among them, which is set down in the other three
Chapters following.

This being said of the time when the acts of this and the Chapters following
The sum of the Chapter.
were done: I proceed now after the manner that I use in the former Chapters,
to set down the sum and parts of this. The sum of it is this: That a
woman, mother to one Micah in this Chapter mentioned, lost a good sum of
money, (as it might be, about an hundred poudd after our reckoning) which her
son Micah had stolen from her. This money when he (hearing how she cursed
for the loss of it) had restored to her again, she bestowed it upon
idolatrous uses. For she procured a molten and graven Image to be made with
part of it; and her son made other Images and ornaments for them both, of the
rest of it, and hired a Leuite for the better furnishing and setting out of the
matter, to be in his house, as his Priest with him. The parts of the Chapter
are two: the one, concerning the Idolatry The parts, two.
of the woman and her son, unto the 17. verse: the second, how Micah hired
himself a Priest for the purpose, to the end of the Chapter. And by this
example we see how Idolatry in those bad times was first brought into a
private family, which after spread into a whole tribe.

The first part of the Chapter.
IN the first part, we are to consider of the woman, in the six former verses.
The sum of the 4 first verses.
And here first of the things which are spoken of her before her Idolatry, as
they are laid out in the text. Where (after that she is said to be the mother
of this Micah, a man of mount Ephraim) it is added, that certain money which
she had vowed to the Lord, was stolen from her by her son: whereat she cursed
the thief, not knowing who he was that had taken it away. And when he
confessed his fault, and that he had it, she blessed him: who restoring it to
her again, she answered him, that she had vowed it to the Lord for his use,
and therefore bad him take it again. So she took two hundred shekels thereof,
to make a molten Image of it, and put it in the house of Micah: and (as it may
be gathered by her own words) added the rest to other like apurtenances
thereunto.

Many things offer themselves to us here worthy the noting. And first Doct.
ver. 1. and 2
this: that this Micahs mother had of her superfluity and great wealth, well
nigh an hundred pound to vow to superstition and idolatry, (for so it
appears) and that they were both very wealthy, in as much as he was able to
make, maintain, and furnish an house or chapel of Images, (not of the
meanest metal) and to adorn them, and she to increase them. This shows,
that howseuer many want and are in great need, (whose penury should be
relieved with the superfluity of others) yet in the mean while there are, who
have more then they can tell well how to bestow or employ. But alas, they have
no heart to do good with it, especially to others, neither will 1. Cor. 16. 2
be taught to lay aside, as God blesses them, to good uses and ends: nor to
themselves to do the best good, namely, that they may bring forth much
fruit, that so their souls may fare well. Yet this was not the fault of these
Ioh. 15. 9.
two, that they had no heart to lay it out, for that they were ready enough to
do, but they did it amiss, and to idolatrous uses. For though they thought
they did well employ it, yet they were superstitiously and blindly led to that
which they did. And as it was the sin of these, that their zeal was carried
amiss, through want of knowledge, (which yet excuses them not, seeing they
were the posterity of the visible Church, and in likelihood themselves lately
of it) so others, whose knowledge is greater, offend in their kind as grossly.
For, either they cannot depart from it at all and forgo it, I mean, any
portion of their superfluity, (which is one extremity) or they lash it out
unlawfully upon their lusts, either in voluptuousnes, as adultery,
drunkenness, and such like, which is another and more dangerous extremity:
and to one of these, though not all in a like measure, tend the most men's using
of their goods. Few aim at the best manner of disposing them. If they did, God
has given enough; that as it was in gathering the Manna, he that Exodus 16. 18.
gathered less then a homer, wanted not, and that he who gathered more, had
nothing over: So for the condition of every man, God has given sufficient:
yea, and for the sin of men, causes the sea to drown much wealth, and much to
be lost on the land; as if he would have us thereby take knowledge, that he had
rather it should be lost, where only it does no good, then Note.
to be in the hands of wicked men, where it should do much evil and hurt.
Therefore let us be ready to employ our goods to the comforting of other ever
way, and so, as we also may have all possible good, by the well using of them.
But a fitter place for the pursuit of this point, will be that which is said
after in the third verse.

Now it is said, that all this money, while she had it in her possession, was
stolen from her. Nothing is said of the manner of this fact, but barely and
simply it is set down that it was so. To teach us, among other things, how
fickle and uncertain the having and enjoying of worldly goods is, and how
soon they be lost, and how many ways, (for who suspecteth his own children)
they being one man's today, and another man's tomorrow. As Benhadad said to Ahab
by his servant, Thy silver and gold is mine: and a very 1. King 20. 31 32
little while after, all that Benhadad had, and he himself was at Ahabs
pleasure, and he was driven to beg his life of him. Thus it has bin with
good and bad in all ages. Which yet I say not, as though we should set all at
six and seven, and not labor for commodities, (for God has commanded us so
to do) and make small account of Gods goodness in giving these earthly
benefits unto us, (for they are his great blessings for singular uses) and we
are commanded to be occupied in our callings for the obtaining necessaries for
Ephesians. 4. 28.
our life thereby.

But to such changes has God made the condition of earthly substance subject,
that we may learn not to trust in uncertain riches, (as we are most 1. Tim.
6. 17.
prone and ready to do) but in the living God, that we may live with him; and
that we endanger not our selves by wronging or offering violence to any for
coming by them, which are so soon lost; but do good with them rather, and be
rich in good works, and not follow the example of the wicked world, who commit
all mischief to get them, and in using them. Therefore our Savior charge us,
saying: Lay not up treasure for your selves upon earth, where the rust and moth
does corrupt, and where thieves break through and Matthew. 6. 19.
steal: but lay up your treasure in heaven. We have said enough of the
ficklenes of outward things, by one occasion or other, in the most of the
former chapters.

Her money was stolen by her own son. For many children make a light matter
of stealing and plucking from their parents, as though it were 3
their own, even while their parents live. But such make no conscience, who
dare so do, to defraud their parents. This aggrauated Micha his sin in that he
robbed his own mother, who yet of himself was rich, and needed not to fall to
such practices, and she was in house with him, and (as it is most like) they
used all things in common together, and at least the money was like to fall to
him for his share: and yet all this notwithstanding, behold his sin, that he
could not forbear, but that he must needs put his hand to it before the time.
This shows sin to be out of measure sinful, in that they who commit it
(setting aside a lewd and wanton humor, and an heart so full of naughtiness,
that it must have vent some way) often times have no more need to do it, then to
put their hand in the bears mouth. Of this sort are the waily, idle, and
needless oaths and speeches of some, the medlings of busy bodies in other
men's matters, and (that which is more dangerous) in things that are too high
for them; also the stealings of rich men; as this Micha was: with Note.
the whoredoms of married persons, and those lies which we call jesting lies
for pleasure sake, and the drunkenness of such with their lewd companions
abroad, who yet may be well and with sufficiency satisfied at home, with an
hundred more of like sort.

Though al sin be vile and odious, (for no sin is necessary because some are
needless) yet to be sure, he that sins, when he has no need, and therefore
wants excuse even to God and man, as he that commits adultery, or the
like, to be sure (I say) he troubles and destroys his own soul. Remember
how Nathan inlargeth the sin of David by this circumstance, that 2. Sam. 12. 8.
he having many wives, robbed his poor neighbor of his only wife, and killed
her husband also, for the better concealment of his adultery. And this was so
inexcusable even in the censure of the offender himself, that he abhorred it,
and condemned it most deeply: and therefore think not that God will take such
by the hand. Besides, this teaches parents to train up their children
religiously, and to disgrace and make odious all sin to them, as well as to
follow them with other instruction, and good example; that lying, swearing,
stealing, and the like, may, through Gods blessing, be far from them; which,
with such other like sins, will easily and soon fasten upon them, unless by
good education they be weaned from them: as shall appear in the next point
save one more clearly.

Now in that he being an Idolater, was also a great thief, we may note, 4
that they who dare fall to Idolatry and false worshipping of God, are not to
be trusted in duties doing to men. So Abraham said to the King of Gerar, Genesis
20. 11.
of all, as well as Idolaters, that where the fear of God is not, there is
small likelihod that the fear of man will prevail: and so he will say, that
does rightly consider it. For howsoever a deceiuer may for a time, and while he
is not greatly provoked, neither has any occasion offered him, or is held in
by strong outward bridles or inducements from outrage, may (I say) show good
example among men, and walk without offense toward them; yet when he shall see
his time, he will show what he is, as we see in servants, in children, in
friends betrusted with great matters, bewraying at length an unfaithful heart:
and the reason is great: they are false to God, and what man then shall look
for any better at their hands? even as the holy Ghost Luke 18. 2.
says of the Judge, that he neither feared God, nor reverenced man. And much
the rather is this true in Idolaters; seeing that even he who is of sound
religion, as I have said, yet if his heart be not upright, may possibly be a
deceiuer.

Among other uses of this point, this is one, and not the least that we pray
for such as are in authority, that they may religiously provide, that their
people may fear God, (at least want no ordinary means that may draw them
thereunto) and therefrom be conscionably carried to obedience outwardly toward
men. Seeing the most forcible mean to contain men within compass, is the
fear of him, who can cast body and soul into hell, Matthew. 10. 28.
rather then him who can but destroy the body. Besides, that nothing is secret
to God, before whom all things are naked and manifest. Whereas the seuerest
Magistrate can proceed no further then by witnesses, himself not being privy
to the conscience or fact of the offender. But of this elsewhere. Concerning
Idolaters in particular, even the devout and especially Papists, this president
of Micah is sufficient to stop the mouths both of them, and of their abettors,
who justify their innocence and good behavior toward men. Whereof there
were more cause and color, if the rotten hollownesse of their hearts brake not
forth into hideous and horrible unrighteousness, as uncleanness, cruelty,
murders, treasons, lyings under the mask of ambigious speeches, and most
slanderous defamations not of mean persons, but of Princes, and their
government, besides periuries, breaches of league and promise with many more,
and some of them maintained by them in Schools, as well as practiced. The
deuoutest of them are the least evil persons, but the rest are little better
in their judgments then in their practice, even Atheistical and damnable in
both. For who sees not, but that the late monsters of opinions and positions
which they have broched, flow from no other fountain, but a resolute and
malicious purpose to serve their own turns, and hold up their tottering
kingdom, though with the ruin and overthrow of all their opposites? So
destitute they are of all ground of Scripture or sound reason.

These eleven hundred shekels, when he heard his mother curse for the Doct. 5.
loss of them, he confesses he had them: but lest ye should think, that
confession went with any sound repentance, ye may see him bewray the contrary.
For as though he had been ashamed to be taken for a thief, (whereas the
penitent thief, like him, in the Gospel, did freely acknowledge it, and Luke
23 40. 41.
to the full testify, that he was out of love with the sin) he here exten
uateth his sin, saying: The shekels which were taken from thee, it was I that
took them: but ye must mark that he says, he did but take them, but not
steal them; which extenuating of the fact, was far from one that repented:
let it be a warning to us, that we make not light of sin, for then we will
fall to commit it; neither confess we it slightly, for then we will return
to it again. He that means to turn utterly from it, will with Daniel in the
ninth Chapter, aggrauate and deface it, and with the people in Samuels Dan. 9.
5.
time, make his special sin which he is guilty of, and confesses; he
will, I say, make it more odious, then all his other sins: so did they say to
the Lord, Forgive us our sins, especially this that we asked for our selves
1. Sam. 12. 19.
a King. But of this, to wit, the danger of extenuating sin, and the nature
of true repentance, I have distinctly spoken in other places.

THE NINETIETH SERMON ON THE XVII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
NOw to proceed with Micah and his mother, this is further Doct. 6.
to be marked in him her son, that when he saw his mother so troubled for the
loss of the money, and heard her curse for it, he did not suffer her to lie
still in that estate, but made haste to quiet her, by telling her that he had
it. Which I note of him, though a bad man, to the just condemning of those, who
seek to vex their parents, and to do that which they know will grieve them
at the heart, when yet they can do otherwise. If ye ask how: I answer,
besides many wilful parts played by them otherways, they do it by their
irreligious, profane, and unthrifty course, in spending their goods wastfully
and riotously: whereas not only children should not grieve their parents, but
neither one neighbor or stranger should vex or disquiet another. But all
should procure the peace and welfare of other, and not seek to vex them, which
a man would Note.
think were a goodly sight to behold, and that because God is bountiful and
rich in mercy toward us, who have ten thousand times more provoked him to
revenge, then the worst enemy we have has proked us. And therefore cruel and
rigorous are they, who are so hard hearted that they can rejoice in other men's
harms, and laugh at the shrewd turns that befall them, (provoking thereby the
like to be done to themselves) so far is it off, that they either pity or
seek to rescue them in their oppressions.

Further he says, that when his mother missed the money, she cursed. By Doct.
7.
cursing so, she might mean as well her hard hap, (as such count it) as well
as him that had stolen it. Both she might do: but whether of both soever it
was, unsavory and ungodly it was. And yet hearing news of it again by her
sons confession, she is in another extremity, and blesses him, as fast as
she cursed before. These distinct points let us a little consider of, ere we
go from this verse. And for the first of these, we see in this woman, as in a
glass, the cursed nature that is in most people, (except corrected by grace)
that when any thing crosses them, or befalles them otherwise Note.
then they would, it drives God out of remembrance and the consideration of his
providence, or of their own just desert which has brought it upon them, and
so they let pass their duty, which in such accidents God calls them to
practice. That which is presentest with us, is wrath and revenge; which seeing
we cannot have to the full upon the supposed wronger of us, therefore that
tool which is readiest we draw; even a venomed arrow out of the quiver of a
poisoned heart, cursing, banning, and swearing and such like. Not that men
content themselves with this, (save only to vent the some of their wicked
hearts presently, which else they think would burst) for when they come nearer
the party, they will requite him ten for one, and hit him home to purpose, as
the Philistims did Samson. But till this come, they will be doing with the
other. And the greatest impotencie men bewray in this kind, when the casualtie
is such as they see not how they can redress it, but it must be stood too
howsoever. Thus did the laylor, when Act. 16. 27.
his prisoners were fled. Thus men do when their goods are impaired by ill
debtors, suertiship, cosonage, ill bargains, robbery, nay even when Gods more
immediate hand crosses them, as in travel by sea or land, in their haruests
and commodities, by unseasonable weather, bad success or the Note.
like. And then they let the arrow fly, light where it will, sometimes upon
God himself, (for he that curses his lot, curses God, and if he were within
his reach, he would surely challenge him) and sometimes upon men, nay sometimes
upon the senseless creature it self wherein they are crossed, or which
crosses them, by the side whereof, they wound God himself. Whereas Job spoke
not foolishly, neither charged God in all the evil that befell him. Job 1 23.
And David looked up to God, when all Ziglag was destroyed by enemies, 2. Sam.
16. 10.
and in Shemies gross abusing and wronging him. Let such behavior therefore
be far from us, being fitter for Heathens or Idolaters.

But besides this, we see, that it is a very bad thing for parents and
governors to show ill example any way by cursing, swearing, or any like in the
presence of children or other. For that greatly aggrauateth the sin that was
too odious of it self, though done of them in secret. As all open sins are
more dangerous then covert faults, because of the extension, and offensive
example; so no examples so noisome as the sin of parents before their children.
No example is so forcible to draw, both because nature helps the conueiance,
and besides, causes the child to think it becomes him to resemble his
parents, and besides it gives hope of impunitie. And yet this is the trade and
way which most teach their children in their youth, to the end they may be ripe
and masters thereof in their age. For though sin often do run in a wicked
blood, (as I have said before, chap. 12. 1.) yet by daily practice and
observation children are more rooted in their parents vices by imitation. The
like (if not worse) is the breaking out of husbands before their wives, Masters
before their servants, Magistrates or Ministers before their subjects and
people: these examples descend and soke into the inferiors far more deeply
and infecteously, (I say not then good examples do profitably) but more then
from equals or meaner persons. Hereof a show was that of Lameg, raging and
playing the mad man before his two Genesis 4. 23. 24.
wives. How shameful also was it for Saul to show such wrath and revenge in
the presence of Jonathan? For a parent to lie, rail, swear in the hearing 1.
Sam. 19. 1. 11. and 1. Sam. 20. 30. 33.
of his children? Nay to patronage such sins in their presence, as some will
tell their young ones, if they thought they would prove precise seruers of God,
they would never give them penny: what is this, but to spur them to that
which the strongest bridle can hardly keep them from? It is as goodly a sight,
as Noah's uncovering himself before his children. Oh Genesis 9. 21.
men think, their children can spy nothing amiss in them, they may sin by
authority, and shall they stand in awe of their children? No, stand in awe of
God, and then your children shall see that in your godly speech and behavior,
mixed with sobriety, that shall make them stand in such awe of you, that they
dare not disguise themselves before you, or behind your backs; which else no
terror will drive them from, though severity may make them simper and
dissemble in presence. And this I add, because men think to bind bears, and
will say, Though I do so, or so, I will make my child do thus and otherwise.

But to end these verses with the other point, we see by this what is the
goodness of those who would be taken for good people, but yet are not guided
by God: Even that which we see in this woman; and that is, cursing going with
blessing: and so it is with the most; in taking their troubles, or upon the
news and hearesay of any cross befalne them, they are ready to curse; and
when their humor is served, and they pleased, then on the other side they
bless; so from one mouth comes cursing and blessing, as the Apostle
speaks, in such the case being altered. If an affliction meet Iam. 3. 9.
with them, they could find in their heart to charge God for it; and if the
contrary thing befall them, they can change themselves into new colors, and as
if they had not abused their lips so foully, they fall to blessing of God:
but they please him as much in so doing, as in the other; so that, as such
blessing with the tongue brings no blessing from God, so such cursing falls
often upon themselves and theirs, who stick not in their rage to wish and call
for it upon others, who shall be free from the curse that is causeless,
neither shall it come near them. It is not to be wondered at, that men unsettled
and unsavory should run into such extremes; for if their doings were laid
before them, they would answer for themselves without blushing, that they do
well herein. When we see sweet seasons (say they) and good haruests, and all
to our liking, what should we do but bless God, and be thankful? Indeed when
we cannot plough the ground, because it is so steely with droughts, nor sow by
reason of immoderate wet, or when we see the corn and grass come to his
perfection, then to be in hazard by weather, who can bear it or behold the
loss and destruction of the creatures without grief? No, it is true, if there
be no more then corrupt nature in thee, thou will find some excuse or other to
salve thy cursed and ungodly doings withal. But if grace had once seasoned thy
heart, or purged old Adam in any measure out of thee, thou should find no
such distemper of affections, nor inconstancy in thee, but presently thou
should take thy self in the manner, and say; Oh what fountain is this
which sends forth bitter and sweet out of me? shall I receive good things
from Gods hand Note.
and not evil? shall I serve him for advantage? but if he touch me, shall I
then curse him to his face? That which were gross to offer to a base man shall
I offer to God, to count him my friend only then when he pleases me, but if
he cross me never so little, then to count none so great an enemy? I abhor
such dealing: If I did well in blessing him, I do shamefully in the contrary,
and my thanksgiving is a stinking offering in Gods nostrils, in stead of a
sweet savor: for God hates a man of a double tongue, as well as a double
heart, out of the which the tongue speaks. And if men would by such qualities
as these, learn to search out the rest, (for these go not alone) and by all
laid together, would give just judgment upon themselves and try their estate;
they should make good use of such instructions. And to be sure the lewd and
profane never hear any particular sin reproved, to purpose, till it drive
them quite out of conceit with themselves Act. 2. 37.
for the superfluity of evil that lurketh in them, and the world of woe and
desolation which (without mercy obtained from God) it will at length bring
upon them.

Now to proceed to the third verse: The woman, when her son had Verse. 3, 4,
5, 6.
restored the silver, answers him, that she had dedicated it to the Lord,
even for her son to make a molten and graued Image. And she took part of it,
and gave it to the founder, and he made such an Image as she desired, and she
put it in the house of Micah. And he had a house of gods, and made with the
rest of the money all garments and ornaments fit for a Priest, signified by the
Ephod, the upper garment of the Priest, which was ye chief; and when all other
things fit for Idolatry were provided, then he brought the Images, which are
here called Teraphim, into the house of his gods, (as he called them) and made
his son his Priest. And whereas it might be said, Was all this abomination
done in Israel? how could that be? It is answered in the sixth verse, as the
reason of all; there was then no ordinary Magistrate in the land to see good
order, and put down the contrary, and that was the cause.

Whereas she had dedicated the money to the Lord, all that hear what Doct.
verse 3. 4.
she said, would think her meaning was, that she had vowed it to the use of
the Tabernacle, and service of God, which had been commendable in her; but she
did so dedicate it, to the making of an Image, not to the intent to worship
false gods, but the true God, even Jehovah, though in an unlawful manner.
Whereby we see two kinds of Idolatry have been, and are practiced in the
world: one, when a strange god is worshipped, or made for that end: another,
when the true God is worshipped therein, but not in such manner as he has
commanded, but by and in Images, or some other way that men have invented: and
of this second kind was this woman's sin. So when an Image is made by any and
set up, to bring God to remembrance, we must understand, that although they do
it of devotion, intending no other thing then to worship him thereby, yet all
such doing of theirs is but mere ignorance, and superstition, and that which
God does utterly abhor.

Such as that was of the children of Isreal's devising, in making a Calfe to
worship, mentioned in Exodus; and such as now is practiced in Popery, Exodus
32. 4.
who profess when an Image is set up before them, they pray not to it, but to
God, whether it be the Crucifix, or the picture of the Virgin Mary, (as they
call it) or any other, neither worship they it, (if ye will believe them) they
say, but they do so, to put them in mind of their Savior, which is little
better. But whatsoever they mean or intend in such their doings, their work
is accepted of God, even as this woman's was; and that is, that he takes and
counts it for Idolatry. But let us all, as well as Idolaters, beware that we
offer not to God any service or sacrifice, whereby we should but mock him, as
Micahs mother did. Whether it be will worship which he never allowed, or done
in hypocrisy, which he detesteth, as well as Idolatry most of all condemned:
but let us always be guided by his word in the worship which we offer him.

As she had dedicated the whole sum of the money to the Lord, which 2
she took again of her son, so accordingly she put to the founder a part of
it, to make a molten Image, and the rest of the eleven hundred shekels she gave
back to her son for the like use, to wit, for the maintenance of his
Idolatry. The which doing of hers (seeing she was so frank in bestowing, and
yet reaped no fruit of all her cost) does give just cause of wondering, and
lamenting, that such Idolaters as they were, and as they of our time be, can so
readily lash out their money upon that for which they shall never be the
better, (for in vain do all such worship God) and yet many of us are Esaias 55.
2.
so slow and backward to lay out our money (that may be well spared) to
comfort the hearts of Gods people, and to other good uses, when we yet may
reap and enjoy most certain yea and that unspeakable fruit thereof. I mean
when we believing that we are beloved of God, do show this fruit of our love
and thankful heart to him again, that we maintain his true worship with our
goods, and also pity and encourage the true worshippers of him, I mean his
poor members, as he requires, of which poor sort he might have made our
selves to be. But oh, it grieueth me to speak it, that for such good uses, to
wit, for the refreshing of Gods poor Saints, and the furthering of the true
preaching of the Gospel, men have so small devotion, Iere 48. 10.
that they think all too much that is bestowed that way. But they shall
receive their reward accordingly: though they hold the truth in the letter, as
long as they serve God negligently and pinchingly: whereas we have learned of
our Savior, that his heavenly father is not honored of us, (neither Ioh. 15.
9.
then shall we of him be) except we bring forth much fruit. And because in
the entrance upon this chapter I referred the reader to this place, as a fit
occasion of urging so important a duty: therefore I will here add somewhat to
the former. This I say therefore: there is not that lavish expense and
needless lashing out of men's money in some kinds through the land (God be
thanked) which has been, I mean in bestowing much meat and drink upon idle
ones, and gamesters, and rogues; but wherefore is it spared, which was wont to
be ill spent? To clothe the poor naked members of Christ, think we? or to
feed their hungry bellies? to relieve either poor students in the
University, or Christian poor and distressed ones in the country, or any
other good way? This were a good change indeed, and a wise frugalitie, to spare
from the wicked and vile uses, to the making of friends that may receive men
into eternal habitations. No, no, but the Popish rout spares for the
maintenance of fugitive Jesuits and Seminaries, and the upholding of the Popes
kingdom: the other, that they may the better defray the great charge which the
service of their lusts puts them to, I mean pride of life, the lust of the
covetous heart, and unclean eye, all which never so swarmed in this land as at
this day, and yet never so great and general complaints, and penury, nor so
many and daily uses of relief as now, in so great increase of poverty, as the
people is increased. Well, gorgeous apparel, royal feastings, costly
pleasures, great sums laid up, and purchases made for the use of posterity,
may presently give contentment to the flesh; but Note.
when the Lord shall call for a reckoning, these expenses will not be allowed,
nor this account taken for current, but a woeful back reckoning shall be
exacted at the hands of these evil stewards, for such wasting of their Masters
goods. And that pinching and niggardly contribution to Christ's use, being laid
with the huge sums that men bestow upon their lusts, shall be an indictment
sufficient against them, to their condemnation. Few there Matthew. 25. 26.
are alas, able to do any thing to purpose toward the easing of the general
burden: and therefore that among those few, the most should want an heart (as
a woeful miser confessed upon his deathbed) oh how lamentable is it? Till
better provision be made by the Church, I grant it is no easy thing to be
brought to pass (most men being so wedded to the penny) but in the mean time
let us know the law of God binds all his people, that as they are freed from
Ceremonial cost in sacrifices, Temple and the like, so the Lord Jesus himself
has substituted in their room his poor members, undertaking the payment of
all which they take upon his score, to the infinite advantage of their
creditors. And this should be enough to persuade them that be not desperately
covetous, to enlarge themselves in mercy and love to Christ, by comforting the
bowels of the religious poor, except they will proclaim that if Christ
himself were present, they would suffer him to pine and starve for any help
he were like to have from them, when yet they are well able to help. They that
are rich in good works, I wish them the true fruit of their practice, as I
nothing doubt but they shall enjoy it, even mercy with God in time of need:
And for other, seeing every penny to good use comes so hardly off with the
most of them, I advise them to take a better course with themselves against
their own vncheerefulnes, by a solemn setting a part of somewhat, as the
Apostle wills, (according to 1. Cor. 162.
their ability, or yearly receipts) when it comes to hand, for the several
uses, which by their own observation, or the information of others, they shall
see to be most needful to bestow upon.

To conclude, let many of us Protestants beware, that the bounty of many
carnal or Idolatrous persons, rise not up in judgment against our
niggardlines. They having nothing to set them on work, save civility or blind
devotion, are bountiful to others, and yet themselves not a whit the betret
for it. But we (though we pretend that we have obtained mercy at Gods hand,
which should set us forward to show mercy to others) are so shut up in our
selves, that if we may fare well, little care we what becomes of others. Let us
amend, by being wise for our own good, in showing mercy, and that with
cheerefulnes.

But I proceed in this first part of the Chapter. When Micahs mother had Verse.
4. 5.
caused the Image to be graven, and then covered it with silver, she put it in
her son his chapel or house of gods, (for he had such a place, as we have
heard, where he did his devotion) and furnished it with such manner of stuff,
as with Priests garments, the Ephod, and other ornaments; and there he put
Teraphim, that is, Images which he made with the rest of the money of his
mothers. And that he might want nothing for the purpose within his own
doors, he made his own son, who was neither of the order of Aaron, not yet
of the tribe of Leui, (who only might minister before the Lord) yet he made
him his Priest rather then he would want one. And in deed the Priest was good
enough for the service he was put to, both being abominable. In this mirror we
may behold what confusion was grown after the good governors Joshua and the
rest were dead. It may well be said in the second chapter of this book, verse
10. that then another generation arose after them, who knew not the Lord, but
served Idols; in which times these cursed doings of Micah and his mother had
place in all likelihood, as in the entrance of the chapter I have declared.

So that we see how it was there and then, when the people declined and turned
away from the religion of their forefathers, and when the times grew to be
corrupted, we see what shameful examples there arose of such things, as a
little before could not have been abidden; among whom this Micah is to be
reckoned, who was already come to be one that had brought strange and false
worship into his house, and was fallen far from Ioshuas practice, who said
in his time, whatsoever other did, he and his house would serve the Lord. And
let it teach us (if we be wise) that if some good means fail among us,
disorder will soon wind in, to our great discomfort. Whereby let us be warned,
we I say, who desire to please God in the vprightnes of Note.
our hearts, that while we have the light, we walk in it: and that not only
we do so, while the light is among us, and good examples remain to encourage
us, but let us then, even before the times of danger come, strengthen and under
lay our selves in such wise with resolutions and purposes daily renewed so to
continue; that if declinings from good courses arise among us in our days
either in religion or manners, yet we may abide steadfast in both, and turn not
aside with the unstable and inconstant multitude, and those that degenerate,
that so our old age, by a constant walking with God, may Note.
be crowned with honor, as (no question) it shall by so doing. We little know
what may fall out to be done, yea even of us who intend against all evil, if
the times grow corrupter, and wax worse and worse, except we make fair work
before hand by clinging close under Gods favor and government.

And although by Gods mercy we are freed from the greatest yoke of bondage, I
mean Idolatry; yet as they that touch pitch, cannot choose but be defiled, so
they who have to do, and converse with the profane and filthy ones of the
world, where they may do what they list, how can they keep their garments
undefiled? I mean their lives unstained, and their consciences pure and good?
We have too much proof of that which I speak, in our own parts of the
country, how many of good hope and forwardnes, have by bad examples, yea and
by their own declinings in the midst of so many prouocations, been brought
to be disguised in their lives most shamefully: and yet I am certified, and I
easily believe it, that there are far worse people in countries further off.

But to go forward, in that it is said, that he being but a private man, had 2
yet an house of gods, and all furniture for the same, (of which point I spoke
in part before in the second verse) we may see in what base things men take
their delight, to wit, in such as do not profit them, (as the Prophet Esaias
Esaias 55. 2.
complains) yea and in such as bring great hurt and annoiance unto them. He
complains in his time thus of the people: Wherefore do you lay out your
silver, and not for bread? and your labor without being satisfied? And what
better may be said of the most in these times? but if they be such as
profess any religion, (the rest are (I confess) further off from God then
they) how is their care and cost bestowed, with their labor and travail, but
upon the false worship of God? whether we regard the substance, it is with a
great many Popery, superstition, or such like: or the manner of it, it is
lip-labor, and hypocrisy. But such serving of God though he abhor it,
agrees well with their profane humor, and crosses not their carnal
corruptions. But for the variety of good books, whereby they may do
themselves much good in deed, how many rich men be at cost, or take up their
delight that way, to furnish their houses with such precious ornaments, as
Micah filled a chapel with Idols and all furniture for them? Is there not
(think we) good encouragement given to students and Preachers, to set Note.
forth their godly labors, to be buried in the dust, and covered with
cobwebs, and to lie unoccupied? But to leave them, and to come to men of meaner
estate, who cannot do much that way, in being at cost with good books; yet
what pleasure take they in keeping some constant course in serving of God, by
prayer, recording such good instructions as they have heard in public, or in
reading good books of smaller price, which they may easily come by? No, no:
these are wearisome and unwelcome: and why so? even to the end that they may
trifle out their precious time, and so lose their part in the happiness which
is both promised by God, and preached.

Furthermore by this that Micah and his mother, being both Idolaters, had
trained up his son after the same manner, and more then so, had 3
committed another great sin, to wit, to make him Priest to serve in his
house of Idols, contrary to Gods commandment in a double respect, we may see
the heavy estate of the children of Idolaters, and of such as have no
acquaintance with God, whose lot is for the most part, to be trained up (poor
innocents) under such as they are, which is a very deuoting them to the devil.
Whereas men's posterity should be through their many generations, consecrated
to God and his service, as Samuel was by his mother; 1. Sam. 1. 27.
and Timothy was not only brought up by his virtuous mother to know the
Scriptures from a child, but he had also his grandmother commended by 2. Tim.
1. 5.
Paul for her religion. Whereas they who are Idolaters, or wicked in their
life, deprive their children of their due, I mean godly education, and as much
as in them lies, corrupt and spoil them betimes. To teach the children of
religious parents, to count their portion great, when they see that by
submitting themselves to the godly education of their parents, they in so doing
submit themselves to God also, and please him in the same, wherein they please
them. And for the other, they receive their deadly wound by their bad bringing
up for the most part, observing the superstitious precepts of their parents, as
of Omry, or beholding their bad examples and abiding in their religion and
steps, (for so they must do, they say, yea and will do, as their fathers did)
even to the day of their death. Now touching this inormitie of making a common
man a Priest, it was as monstrous under the Law, as if in our time a man of
occupation without gifts should boldly take upon him to discharge the Ministers
office. And the like corruption crept in when Jeroboam suffered every base
person to thrust himself 2. Chro. 13. 9.
into office to serve at Dan and Bethel. Of which more God willing in the next
verses. In the mean while, note we that a base and ragged shift will serve
men's turns, for fault of a better, if they beset to commit any sin which is
for their profit or pleasure, or the satisfying of their corrupt affection. As
in most sins we see it verified, and such patcherie well becomes such
tradesmen. If a man of worship be addicted to his pleasure, riot, gaming,
uncleanness, or the like, it is a base and unseemly companion that will not serve
the turn with him for a need, rather then the business should be hindered. And
whereas this Micah having broken the maine Commandment which concerned the
substance of Gods worship, made no bones of breaking the secondary law of
Ceremony, touching the quality of the person who was to minister: let it
teach us to beware how we pull out any maine stone of Gods building, lest
therewith we pull it down upon our heads, and many smaller with it out of the
building.

The reason is added in this verse, why such strange and gross abuses Verse. 6.
grew up so soon after good order in the days of the good governors Joshua
and the rest: namely, for that now there were no such in the days of Micah,
that is, no ordinary Magistrate, for so the word is taken, Genesis 36. and Genesis
36. 31.
therefore every one did what seemed good in his own eyes. And this shows
(beside that which I have said thereof) that it was an horrible part which that
Micah and his mother wrought. Now this is that which this place does does
clearly show us, and gives occasion to be noted among other things, to wit,
what confusion grows when good governors fail and are wanting: of which I
have spoke at large in the beginning of the peoples declining after the death
of Joshua, in the second and the Chapters following.

But that which I will now say, is this, that although there be Christian
Magistrates, yet except they execute the laws carefully and conscionably,
defending the good, for which end they are set in place, and pursue the
ungodly, Romans 13. 1.
without partiality, it will be by the many foul inormities which may lie
unpunished, that much iniquity will swarm, though it cannot be compared to
the having of none. And what the people will then do, we may see here: that
every one does that which likes him, following his own mind and will. And
what is more dangerous then so to do? Therefore howsoever it be with others,
our Savior has taught us to deny our Matthew 7. 21.
selves, to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, and to
renounce our own will and to be subject to his; the obeying whereof Ephesians. 5.
11.
is the direct way to happiness: for so he teaches, He that does the will
Luke 9. 23.
of my father which is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew. 5. 22.


THE NINETY ONE SERMON ON THE XVII. CHAPTER OF THE BOOK OF IVDGES.
The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 7. And there was a young man out of Bethlehem Judah, of the family of
Judah who was a Leuite, and he soiourned there. 8. And the man departed out of
the city from Bethlehem Judah, to soiourne where he could find a place: and he
came to mount Ephraim to the house of Micah, as he iourneyed. 9. And Micah said
unto him, Whence come thou? And he said unto him, I am a Leuite of Bethlehem
Judah, and I go to soiourne where I may find a place. 10. And Micah said unto
him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father and a Priest, and I will give thee
ten shekels of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals.
So the Leuite went in. 11. And the Leuite was content to dwell with the man,
and the young man was unto him as one of his sons. 12. And Micah consecrated
the Leuite, and the young man became his Priest, and was in the house of Micah.
13. Then said Micah, Now know I that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a
Leuite to my Priest.
THis second part of the Chapter shows that this Micah The sum of these
verses.
having brought that new and strange worship, namely Idolatry into his
house, so pleased himself therein, that now wanting nothing to the setting of
his new trade on work but a work man, I mean a Priest; now (I say) he took
the opportunity offered by a Leuite, who sought a service, and takes and
entertaines him. Before he was content (as we heard) with his son to serve for
a Priest, though none might be by the law, but such as came of Aaron: whereby we
see, that the law of God is little regarded where men are set to have their
own will. But now behold, accordingly as he wished, there is offered him a
Leuite, as little to his commendation, which he much better liking, (as the
taking of his son before for that business) and him he took, and therefore
received him into his house, never examining him, nor proving him by inquiring
about him further, that he might well and thoroughly know his behavior, but
makes him his Priest forthwith, applauding himself in his success, and
rejoicing not a little in his supposed well doing.

But first in these two verses it is further showed, how Micah got him a Verse.
7. 8.
Leuite to be his Priest in his sons room, and that was thus: This young man
Jonathan, who is here described by the place where he dwelt, and the family
he was of, and by his tribe, (for the Levites were scattered, through all their
tribes, in their dwellings) went about to seek a place where he might stay
himself, he wanting maintenance, and (as it fell out) came in his travel to
this Micahs house, and by that means he stayed and abode there. Where first
we may see another note of the badnesse of the times which then were; in that
the Levites, which were appointed by God to serve in the Tabernacle, and were
also provided for by him of maintenance (of whom this man was one) they, I say,
(many of them at least) were now (as appears by him) left destitute of both.
So this man had neither employment, dwelling, nor maintenance, but went about
to seek them all.

By this we see, when it goes ill with the Magistracy, that it goes not hard
Doct. verse 7.
with the Commonwealth only, as we have seen in part, but with the
Ministry also. For when there are either none, or when they be not careful in
their places to do the good they are set for, the Ministry which should bring
forth many children to God, makes his house but a barren family: for some are
driven to seek a place, as this Leuite did, which is a very base and unmeet
thing, and unfit for those that are to serve God in so holy a calling: some
come into their places by money, which causes them to be less regarded of the
people, neither do the most of them any good among them: although they have
some gifts: and many of them are not able for want of fitness, to direct the
people aright, I mean soundly and plainly, unto true happiness, and many are
offensive by their scandalous life. In stead of all these, and many other
abuses, good governors will seek for, and encourage those that be worthy
only or of good hope, and provide that they may preach and attend on their
charge with cheerefulnes; to the which end they are appointed by God, and see
that they may not go about to seek a place, as wandering persons; whereas they
who are best backed and encouraged, do good little enough. And as the Church
and Commonwealth are knit together as the soul and body into one, so that
they (like enemies) laugh and weep, fare ill and well together, as two in one
ship either enjoy safety or miscarrie alike; so ought they to consent and
accord sweetly together, for the preservation of each other. The soul we see
follows the temper of the body: and the body is as much affected with the
distemper of the soul, neither of both well; if either be out of frame. And it
is as true, that seldom that Commonwealth is happy, wherein the Church and
Ministry hangs down the head. And that is, partly by the providence of
God, justly punishing the neglect of his service, and partly by a natural
reason: namely, because the light of knowledge not restraining, and the rule of
conscience not governing; the corrupt nature of man can not but break square,
to commit all unrighteousness with greediness, although there be law and
penalty to keep men in awe; much more where Anarchie and confusion is.
Therefore let the Magistrate back the Minister with authority, and by the
sword of justice, sharpen the edge of the sword of the word, that it be not
despised and made unprofitable; and let the Minister requite him again, in
forcible persuading the conscience, and working upon the soul, till he have
brought men's thoughts into subjection to God, so that they neither presume to
despise authority, nor forbear to transgress for terror so much, as for Gods
sake, and conscience, which is no small vantage to the Magistrate, as some will
themselves confess. But some will ask perhaps, Why? what confusion was there
in this, that the Leuite thus travailed to seek living and work? Indeed I
think well, there be some that think no otherwise of the Minister then of
another tradesman, who goes about the country to enquire for work: and they
are such as think that a Minister should do like Paul, that is, work with
his own hands, that they might be the less troubled to maintain him. But to
leave such Gargarites, I answer to the point, first this disorder there was in
it, that as I have said, the Leuite was not employed (if he had been worthy)
in the private instructing of the people, and the public at the Alter, or the
like. The like disorder it were that the Minister should, as this Leuite, go
seek himself a place; it is sufficient that he is willing to give the Church
an account of the gifts which God has given him for her use, (being demanded
lawfully) but a place must seek up him, (and not he it) and approve, welcome
and entertain him in the best manner fit for the well discharging and
executing of his duty. Such as call themselves, let them shift as they can:
Gods ordinance they have violated, if discredit, discouragement, or Note.
ill success befall them, the mends is in their own hands. If God had sent
them, he would have seen to them. But secondly there was confusion in this,
that the Leuite was compelled to run about to seek relief, although he had
been settled. For what a shame is it for the people, (if their neglect be the
cause) or for a Minister (if provided for) that he forsakes his study, public
teaching, and watching over the people, and roues about the country, tendering
his service to preach here and there among strangers for money, as some base
straglers do? Whereas the Lord has wisely provided an exemption not only
from rouing, but even from ordinary domestical employments, buying, selling
commonly, marketting also and traffic in the world, and all to the end that
he may be wholly taken up in the work of God; whereto who is sufficient? as
the Apostle says. But 2. Cor. 2. 16.
we have them that are sufficient for all things now adays, which makes them
sufficient for little or nothing (God help) that they should be.

This young man is here described by the place of which he was, to wit, Doct
2. verse. 7.
of Bethlem Judah, as being borne, and brought up in a family there: as also by
his stock, tribe, and profession, that he was a Leuite: As if the holy Ghost
would tell us, it was no strange thing, for in likelihood there were in other
places that went wandering up and down without calling, and maintenance (Levites
I mean) as well as he. For it was at this time as in the days of Nehemiah;
that is, when the Levites had not that sufficiency (which by the law I have
before showed they ought) to maintain them, they went (by Nehem 13. 10.
an unwelcome necessity) from their service, seeking where they could be better


