Gloucesters MYTE, DELIVERED WITH the mournful Records of GREAT BRITAIN,
into the Worlds Register.

For the inrolement of the everlasting Fame and perpetual remembrance of our
late most gracious Prince HENRY.

With Motives to Repentance. The material points touched, appear in the next
Page.

LONDON Imprinted by William Hall, for Jonas Man, 1612.

The Contents.
OF the inseparable perturbations annexed to this our mortal life.

The shortness of our earthly pilgrimage.

The unspeakable grief of the State, City of London, and other parts of the
Kingdom, upon the dangerous sickness of our most gracious Prince.

Our feeble strength to repulse Death.

That the greatest Princes of the world (notwithstanding their Treasur^s and
commands in the world) are subjects.

The departure of our most dear Prince out of this life.

Our unworthiness of him.

His estimation and value.

His love to us, our zeal to him.

His everlasting remembrance.

With other Additions leading to Repentance.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, SIR RICHARD TRACIE Knight.
AS a Wheat Corn or other grain (Right Worshipful) lying long buried in the
bowels of the earth, does in the end notwithstanding, spring up and yeel^e that
increase, that eit^er the weaken^sse or strength of the body can afford. Even
so the interior zeal of man's heart (though it lie long shr^wded in the breast
with the veil of res^raint) will at last (neuerthel^sse) come forth and show
the affection therein conceived and nourished.

At what time your Wo^ship came in great Post to your neighbor Town of
T^wkesbury in the County of Gloucester (opened the late Queens death) and
proclaimed the Kings Majesty: where (at your first entrance) another and my
self (upon strait charge given by the Officers of the said Town) stood as it
were Centinell (though little expecting such an alarm) I conceived a kind of
grudge toward you for news on the one side, but honored you (and still do,
and great cause) for the other. To hear of her death did kill the heart: but
intelligence of so gracious a King did raise it up. The assurance of the
Gospel war life to the soul. And that the expected danger at the Queens
death, was even with her death stifled to death, did augment the astonishment.

In what perplexity would that loving son stand (I beseech you) that should
at one instant hear of the sinister death both of father and mother? and while
the tale were yet in telling, the father living, and in health should present
himself in presence, but withal assuring of the death of the tender mother.

Jn what perplexity (I say) would that son rest, in what confusion of mind and
spirit, between joy on the one side, and grief on the other? comforted by
the life of the one, dismayed by the death of the other? Joy and grief at ^ne
instant equally weighing in the balance of the heart, striving for victory.

Such was the sorrow of many thousand loving Subjects at that day, and the same
also among the rest was mine (Right Worshippefull) The which, by how much the
more was great, by so much the more it made a deep impression of zeal in my
heart toward you. The print whereof has ever sit hence lien hidden therein:
and even now (with the grain) has found passage to creep out and yield you
this poor fruit, as a manifestation thereof. It is small I confess, and
blasted in coming up (and great cause too, for the root in bringing it forth,
has been nipt with many unkind frosts which hindered the growth.) Yet, as it
is I present it. For good reason is, that you sowing the seed should reap the
croppe. You cast the grain into the ground of my heart in a time of grief,
and now reap in a like season.

Receive it therefore as your own I beseech you, and in so doing, you shall
add life to the Tree, hereafter to yield you fruit of more pleasing relish.
In the mean time, I leave it to your favorable acceptance, and you and yours
to the Lord, who in mercy so bless you in this life, that in the life to come
you may attain that happiness which is prepared for the elect of God. At my
lodging in S. Giles in the fields, in Middlesex (where the hand of God has set
me) December 14. 1612.

Your Worships for ever most humbly devoted and at command THO: ROGERS

Gloucesters MYTE,
SAd discontent, inuites us to her feasts,
And we copartner-like, attendance make,
Feed on her fruits, drink of her flowing breasts
And every task of hers we undertake.
She welcomes us, we imitate her guise,
She walks with us, and in our lodging lies.
And as the shadow does the Sun pursue,
She follows us (her feeble shady sun)
As we one lesson learn, she gives a new,
Still tut'ring us, till mortal race be run.
We need not seek her, she our footing finds,
She wreathes about us, as the yuie winds.
And as the head is to the body ioynde,
Or wine with water equally commixt,
Or as the Carracters on copper coinde
Inseparably; even so are fixed
Woes, perturbations, and growing strife:
Unto our evil, short and wretched life.
Thus pilgrim-like, as strangers on the earth,
We through the Sea-waues of this world wade
Still at unrest, even from our naked birth,
Three woes ensue, for one woe that does fade.
If at some time a little Sun does show,
Anon the rugged gusts, does it ore-blow.
Our smoothest walks, are but as Rocks of stone,
Our softest rests, are as the Bramble sprayes:
Our best delights are chock'd with woeful moan
And all our earthly hopes disturbing frayes.
Our lease of life at such uncertain taken,
Ere at the full it dies in the wane.
What are our paths, though pleasing to the foot
What is our rest, though Down our bedding be?
When lo, the Axe lies hewing still root,
What pleasure take we in our dying ttee?
Our longest life, is as a minutes breath,
For in the midst of life, we are in Death.
The present State an instance now does yield,
For, when our ioys were full (our Pearl we lost)
Pale Death in arms, intruded to the field,
Brake the array, discomfited the Host.
So thus our little sweet, still mixed with gall,
Shows, whilst we rise in joy, in grief we fall.
With dear Elizaes joy did woe insinuate,
And more and more did rule, as grew the doubt:
The doubt increased, and did our joy extenuate,
In Court, in City, and the Realm throughour:
Who could restrain, but tears of grief to shower
On the sad fading, of so sweet a flower.
A King most humbly su'^, with tears of woe,
A Queen deep plunged in floods of equal strife,
A Prince and Princess (and a Million mo^)
Ma^e supplication for a Peerless life.
And as they used were, be su'de unto:
Themselves as others did, most humbly do^.
They th^n on bowed knees, sad suitors wer',
And thoughts were words, for to express the mind
(For thoghts are most of force, when grief does bar
The tongue to speak, and ey^s with tears are blind.)
Then sighs and groans, the Orators of grief,
Were the Post-messengers to seek relief.
Who number can the sands upon the shore?
Or in the clearest night, tell heavens stars?
Such one may count, the many did deplore,
And spread their colors, in thos^ mournful wars.
Whose hearts with sorrow swelled, abridg'd the tongue
Use of the office did to it belong.
The woeful heart, that bu^t^^n underwent,
Distilling moisture, till the wels were dri^,
Which did dissolve in tear^s the speech, and s^nt
It dropping down, in silence from the eye.
Yet eyes not silent, for they did unfold,
The woes which lay within the heart inrol'd.
Heart, tongue, and eyes, and every sense did join,
In equal simpathie, of equal sorrow:
And with one stamp, their ^quall grief did coin,
Each one of other, equally did borrow.
And (as the Apothecary) they were found,
Of manies sorrow, to make one compound.
But as a little boat, upon the seas,
Be'ing ouercharged, with too large a sail
Or to the simple str^ngth of silly fleas,
Or poor weak courage of a feeble Snaile,
To withstand storms, or w^ight of laden wheel,
Is ours against Death, when we his arrow feel.
The great^st Monarchs that do breath alive,
Who for their high degree, the r^st excell^
And in the field of Mars, as chief do thrive,
And by the Mines of gold and treasure dwell.
They all are subjects, though they reign as kings
They must obey, when Death his message brings.
What is their birth when he does Summons give
What is their Discipline of Mars in force.
Though they surrender would their State to live
For to repel the strength of feeble Mors.
Yet (lo) the worlds wealth cannot avail.
Who can against the hand of God prevail?
Sweet Prince, his soul is fled, and now does rest,
In immortality with Christ on high,
Among'st the holy Saints, in glory blessed,
To live and reign with them eternally.
And as his Soul is thus, to joy preferred,
So is his body, as a King interred.
For why should we, a pearl so rich detaine^
Who is deserving him, are found so poor:
Why should he on this wicked earth remain.
That was a Jewel of so rich a stor^?
Since we unworthy of so great a bliss,
In being to our loving God remiss.
To think of him, our hearts with sorrow bleed,
Our loss by him, the world cannot count,
A Pearl, a Diamond, a Gem, a Seed,
That for his va^ne, did the Earth surmount.
Adieu sweet Prince, yet when we bid adieu,
The tears with grief, do in our eyes renew.
Loves zeal commands, we shall not leave thee yet
Thou like the Loadstone, do draw the mind,
Who can thy dear and worthy self forget,
A Prince so virtuous, and loving, kind
Although our bodies here, on Earth we have,
Our hearts interred lie with thee in grave.
Our Souls are siluer-plates thy Fame to hold,
Our zeal ^ich Diamonds to make the impression,
The Characters we print, refined gold,
To keep thy name, all ages in succession.
Th^n sleep sweet Henry, Prince of endless Fame,
Whilst we record, thy everlasting Name.
A Motive to look into the frailty of his life.
Look back O man, unto the fickle stay
Of thy short race, which here thou have to run
View how the Flowers of the field d^cay,
Which for the smooth, and fin^st web are spun.
Since thus the Gardener felles the Olive tree,
What store or reckoning will he make of thee?
FINIS
The manner of our sorrowing for sins. Satan's subtleties in betraying us. A
disswasion from the love of the world. The continual mercies of our loving God
proffered by his word and Ministers. Our hardness of heart (notwithstanding.)
Our punishment by loss of our ver^uous Prince.
LOok how the dews, lie sprinkled on the grass
Which sable night begets, and leaves behind?
And how on sudden it away does pass,
(When the Sun (rising) from the cast dothwind)
And sinking down does in the Earth remain,
Till Sun be set, and then returns again.
Like so, repentant dewes hang in our eyes,
When we night threatenings of our God do see,
Which ouerpast, our dewie sorrow di^es,
And we unmindful of his mercy be.
No longer then his judgments are in view,
We are repentant, (but in sin renew.)
Thus with the Dog, we to the vomit turn*
And with the Swine, into the filthy mire:
We freeze in piety, in sin we burn,
The pampring of the lusts, is our desire.
These silly beasts excel us in their kind,
They reason want, we have, and yet more blind.
For, as the venem'd dart within the skin.
Does more and more infect, and p^rill breed:
Till it the Mastership at last does win,
To end the life of Adams wretched seed.
Even so Satan by his sub^il^ w^ies
Wades in, dives deeper, and the soul beguiles.
Why fix we then our thoghts on melting treasur?
Why do our hearts incline to earthly vanity?
Why build we on the Sands, and leave to measure
The sinking ebbes and falls of our mortality?
Why do we pleasure take in fading shows?
Which die and vanish as the summer dewes.
Oh, since these earthly things, our hearts attract,
And steals them from the favor of our God:
(Whilst our transgressions, on heaps are packt,
And as our mortal foes against us plod,
Why wed we such a Strumpet then to wis^?
That wounds the soul, betraies, and kills the life.
We daily by the rules of truth are taught,
And daily instances by death do see:
How that our rended ships with sin are fraught,
And in what peril, on the seas we be.
Yet hoi^e we sails, respectlesse of our guide,
And so in danger thrust into the tide.
The loving Pilot of our safe transport,
(To shun our wrack upon the raging deep,)
Stands on the shore, and mildly does exhort
Us to return, and in the calm to keep.
Within the Haven where our ship may ride,
Out of the danger of the drowning tide.
And farther (for his voice too low is found,
For us that Addar-like are d^afe to hear.)
He sends out his Trumpeters to sound,
That we draw in, unto the land more near,
To An^re in the Road where he does he,
Where peaceful calmes abide eternally.
Yet like the Heyfer that untamed is,
We pull our stiffed necks from out the yoke:
Our hearts of Adamant, is our amiss,
We still to anger do our God provoke.
Which sin of ours d^nying to obey,
Has caused him thus to take our hope away.
Since disobedience is a sin so high,
To draw down judgments from the hand of God,
Oh let us by repentance draw more nigh,
To shun his wrathful ire, and fearful rod.
Lest as he now has plucked the O^iue spray,
He take the Tree, and other Plants away.
Our Happiness under the late Queen. Fears expected at her death. Prai^rs
and Supplications to God. Gods unspeakable Providence and Mercy in preserving
us by his Majesty. Our Thankefulnes for the time. Our remisn^sse afterward. Our
punishment by loss of (the worlds treasure) our most gracious Prince.
Poor Creatures reasonlesse, when they do war
Will back retire, to gain a further force,
Then Man may not be justly said to jar,
That looks back, from Man to g^ine remorse.
Oh blame him not, that turns back and reads
A princel^ Motive that to virtue leads.
When the admired Queen of high renown,
Did guide the Scepter in her worthy hand,
And on her Royal head did wear the Crown,
And reigning ruled in peace this famous land.
No night was seen, our day did not decline,
The word of light did in the darkness shine.
The tongue nor pen, by art cannot unfold,
The supplicat'ons that pr^f^rred were,
Unto the Lord of life, (our strength our hold)
To stir him up, our humble suites to hear:
That when this star should lose her earthly light
Another happy Sun, might shine as bright.
And lo, such was the mercy of our God,
That he our prayers did not then despis^:
But cast aside his just deserved rod;
(For as our old Sun set, our new did rise.)
And still kept day, and c^a^d away the night,
Without abridgement of a minutes light.
Where are the eyes that dazeled with the luster?
Where are the hearts that praises then did yield?
Where are the flocking troops that the^ did muster
With ravished souls, into that peaceful field?
They are decade, the day was soon forgotten,
Our thankful praises in the dust lie rotten.
But why are we thus to our God vngrateful^:
Why are we still so blindly led astray?
How can we be unto our souls so hateful?
Or unto him our light, our life, our stay?
Who (as the Compass does the shipmen guide)
Prese^u'd us then in midst of roughest tide.
Oh blessed Lord, why was thy mercy such
To give us life when we deserved to die?
Why was thy love and favor then so much,
Our bleeding wounds with Balm^ of lif^ to dri^?
More justice were, if justice thou had shown,
Into the lake of Death, we had been thrown.
And now were thrown, such is our froward wickedness
In pulling down thy wrath upon our heads
In that we do neg^ect thy proff'red blessedness,
Which to the end of endless glory leads.
If we of duty unto thee could boast,
The worlds hop^full Prince we had not lost.
LOrd turn our hearts that we our sins may see
And henceforth labor to appease thine ire;
And by repentance join our souls to thee,
As thou in love and mercy do require,
That with the Virgins wife, we enter may,
(Before the gate be shut) into thy joy.
Oh bless likewise most humbly we thee pray,
Our King and Queen, and all their Royal race,
^o thou their strength, their fortress and their stay,
Support, defend, and shield them with thy grace.
(And though our sins have caused a branch to sever)
Preserve the trees and other plants for ever.
FINIS

