Imprimatur. Pride. Id. Jul. M.DC.XL.

Tho. Broun.

A TREATISE OF THE INTEREST OF THE PRINCES AND STATES OF CHRISTENDOM.

Written in French by the most noble and illustrious Prince, the Duke of Rohan.

Translated into English By H. H.

Printed at Paris.

M.DC.XXXX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN LORD FINCHE, BARON OF FORDWICH, Lord Keeper of
the great Seal of England, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council, etc.
MY LORD,
THis little Book being written by so excellent a person as the Duke of Rohan,
and treating of so weighty a Subject as the Interest of the Princes and States
of Christendom, being received also with good esteem by some judicious men, I
thought it not amiss to communicate the same, employing the advantage of so
many spare minutes (during my abode in France) as to make it speak English.
Then being invited to expose it to the light, to the public view, the public
voice taught it to implore your Lordships protection, whether be considered the
quality of the Author, the gravity of the Matter, or Knowledge in the Original
wherein it was penned. For as the Author was noble, and eminent in his place;
in like manner is your Honor, shining in your orb as a star of the first
Magnitude, lending a most benign and gracious influence to the just causes of
the oppressed, distressed, fatherless, and widow. The Matter is of politic
maxims, and diverse remarkable occurrences in sundry Republikes: and to whom
now can this be more aptly addressed then to a principal Minister of State, in
whom Prudence, Science, and Integrity (in a sweet harmony) do all concur to
make a perfect conduct of affairs, for the glory of God, the honor of the
King, and the good of this Church and Commonwealth? Lastly, the Original from
whence it was derived, being French: your admired knowledge, and unparalleled
expressions in the same language, may speak you as well a pattern in the
original, as a Patron in this translation. For my own part (if it may be
permitted to say any thing of my self) I speak confidently (My Lord) with your
permission, that albeit I had not so much vanity as to persuade my self that
any thing could proceed from me, worthy your reception, or advantageous to your
Honor, (since that my act herein showed more of duty then merit, and its
insufficiency demanded rather pardon then remuneration;) yet had I some kind
of assurance, that a favorable acceptance would entertain what I most humbly
present, seeing the most heroic mind disdaines not the meanest services, but
like the Sun (that nobler Planet) spreads his indifferent rays upon all, as
well on abject, as glorious objects. These and such like considerations made me
adventure (but with all reverence and humility) to prefix here your most
Honorable Name, that thereby this Book might live; and withal incessantly
beseeching him whose name is I AM, to preserve and continue Yours in perpetual
being, in all honor and prosperity, and to write your name in a larger volume,
the Book of life. For which end the Lord be still your Keeper, and Seal you
with that great Seal, the holy Spirit of promise, to the day of redemption. So
prays

My Lord, Your Lordships most humbly devoted HENR. HUNT.

THE CONTENTS OF THE INTEREST OF THE Princes and States of Christendom.
THe preface page 1. Of the interest of Spain page 4. Of the interest of
France p. 13. Of the interest of the Princes of Italy. page 18. Of the
interest of the sea of Rome. p. 22. Of the interest of the Duke of Sauoy. page
24. Of the interest of Germany p. 26. Of the interest of the Suisses and of
the united Provinces of the Low Countries p. 31. Of the interest of England. p.
34.
THE SECOND PART OF The interest of the Princes and States of Christendom, the
Preface. p. 38.
THe first discourse upon the affair of the League. p. 40. The Second
discourse upon the war of Sauoy. p. 58. The Third discourse upon the
difference that happened betvveen Pope Paul V. and the Republike of Venice, the
year 1605. p. 64. The Fourth discourse concerning the Truce of the
Low Countries with the King of Spain page 81. The Fifth discourse upon the
affair about the succession of Cleues and Iulliers. p. 93. The sixth discourse
upon the Election of the Count Palatine to the Kingdom of Bohemia. page 103.
The Seventh descourse upon the commotions that happened in Italy, for the
succession of the Dutchies of Mantua and Montferrat. p. 117.
FINIS.
OF THE INTEREST, OF THE PRINCES AND STATES OF CHRISTENDOM.
THE PRINCES command the People, and the Interest commands The Princes. The
knowledge of this Interest is as much more raised above that of Princes
actions, as they themselves are above the People. The Prince may deceive
himself, his Counsel may be corrupted, but the interest alone can never
fail. According as it is well or ill understood, it makes States to live or
die. And as it allwaies aims at the augmentation, or at leastwise the
conservation of a State, so likewise to get thither, it ought to vary
according to the times. So that to consider well the interest of the Princes of
this time, we need not remount very high, but only take the standing of the
present affairs. For this purpose one ought to lay for a ground, that there be
two Powers in Christendom, which are as the two Poles, from whence descend the
influences of peace and war upon the other states, to wit, the howses of
France and Spain. This of Spain finding it self augmented all at once, has
not been able to conceal the design she had to make her self Mistress,
and cause the Sun of a new Monarchy to rise in the West. That of France is
forthwith carried to make a counterpoise. The other Princes are annexed to the
one, or the other, according to their interest. But for so much as this interest
(as it has been well or ill followed) has caused the ruin of some, or the
greatness of others, I have purposed to publish in this present Treatise.
First what was the true interest of these two mighty Powers, and then of the
other which seem in some manner to depend on their protection. Next of all I
shall show how much has been the digression from this true interest, either
because the Prince has not well understood it, or else for that he was
disguised by the corruption of his Ministers.

OF THE INTEREST, OF SPAIN.
SPAIN is at the head of Europe, where the Ocean serves her for bounds, upon
the entrance of the Mediterranean sea, which separates the same from Affricke,
having the Pyrenean mountains for barriers against France. On this great
Country so well situated, do depend many States spread in diverse parts of the
world. Philip King of Spain who attempted to extend this vast power to the top
of all greatness (finding himself less sit for war then civil
businesses) judged that Monarchies got as it were in post, by the valor of
warlike Princes, are not of like continuance as those which they get by
establishingh a good Counsel, and which are founded upon good maxims.

Because that these great Conquerrours, (who think only of vanquishing, and
extending their dominions, and not of founding Laws for their subsistence)
being not ordinarily succeeded by such as equal their courage, and the
vanquished people having not yet lost the memory of their liberty, or of
their ancient Lords, are easily carried to any change, seeing themselves
delivered from the fear of him that had subjected them, Which made this wise
Prince resolve to follow his own disposition, and choose a course most
agreeable to his impenetrable humor, that is, to prosecute his designs under
a profound dissimulation.

To this end, he fixed the seat of his dominion in Spain, that he might from
thence conueigh warmth to the members loosened from this body, and might with
more ease (conseruing peace by his presence) trouble all the rest of Europe by
his subtilties. But the time failing him to accomplish so lofty a design, he
left it nevertheless so far advanced, that it has been easy for his
successors to prosecute the same. See now the Maxims observed hitherto as
Oracles, which are properly the true Interest of Spain.

The first is grounded upon Religion, as that which for conscience sake does
make people undertake any thing. There ought to be testified by the Spaniard, a
great zeal to the Catholic Religion, that he might serve himself of it in
his designs. And he ought to make the Pope conceive, that to favor the
greatness of Spain in ruining the Protestants, is the support of his own
authority, and puissance. It behooues him to persuade the other Princes of
Italy, that on the protection of Spain depends the upholding of the Church
against any other power. And that the entrance of Strangers into Italy be
barred, to conserve the Religion, which could not but be soyled by such a
commerce.

In France, where there be Protestants, and where the Catholics are the
Masters, He should incite the King to banishe those, and solicit the Pope to
urge the same, yet giving underhand courage and assistance to the said
Protestants to stir up there a Civil war, which might so much the more
weaken the Kingdom. If the King pereiuing the subtlety of this counsel, will
not give ear to it, He ought then to stir up the Catholics themselves
against him, as against a fauourour of Heretics: to assist them also
powerfully, and therein likewise to engage the Pope, if he can. For in what
manner soever, he should procure that this Realm be destroyed of it self, as
that which every where sets it self against the design of the Spanish
Monarchy.

In England where the Protestants are Masters, where they bear the sway, he
ought to make peace in any wise with this Realm, to the end that through the
power it has at Sea, it do not incommodate the Indies, where his chief
treasures are. And that under this apparent amity he may the more easily
render himself Protector of the Catholics of England. Wherefore he ought to
advantage himself by the Colleges founded of purpose in Flanders and in
Spain, to instruct the English youth in the Catholic Religion, inciting them
to come thither by the liberality there used, and to follow their studies
there, without paying any thing. Where the Divinity they learn, is to acquire
Martyrdom, and merit heaven, in serving the greatness of Spain, at the cost
of their King and Country.

In Germany, where (though the Emperor be a Catholic) the Protestants share
so well the authority, that he needs to maintain the Empire in the house of
Austria, (being the same with Spain) as the sole bullwarke against the
Protestants, and he should augment it from their spoils, under pretense of
Religion, and a desire thereby to defend Christendom against the Turk.

In Switzerland, where the power is shared between two Religions, he ought to
animate one side against the other, giving hope to the Catholics of the
spoil of the Protestants, and holding them in breath, to make them break as
occasion shall serve.

In the Low Countries, where the Catholics have not any power, and where so
long and bloody wars have not been able to reduce this people under the
yoke of Spain, the endeavor should be, to make them lay down their arms
through a long truce, and in this repose, to foment a Schism there, which may
divide them betwixt themselves.

To manage well these affairs, one must come to the second point, that
consists in the manner to maintain such intelligences as shall be necessary
in all other States, which he must do by the means of Ambassadors as persons
toward whom respect is borne. Likewise by Monks and Preachers that have great
power in their pulpits and also in particular families, by Money, whereby men
acquire Confidents, such on whose trust one may rely, and herein he must not
be sparing. Above all, he must essay to gain the principal Ministers of
Princes, to divert the dangerous designs which they might have against Spain;
Or else to render them odious who are found too faithful, and ruin them in
any wise howsoever.

The third point touches negociations and treaties, wherein he must employ
persons secret and patient, He must all way show a desire of peace, thereby to
cast others asleep, and in the mean time prepare himself to war, for to
surprise them unprovided.

If there happen any difference between two petty Princes, he ought to
interpose himself for their agreement, either as Judge of Arbitratour, and to
have in deposito, in trust (if he can) that which is in debate betwixt them,
incensing them (if he can) in stead of appeasing them, consentig with the one
to divide the spoils of the other, and upon the division dispossess both two.
He ought, not to loose any occasion of intermedling in the affairs of his
neighbors, but yet exclude others from meddling with his. Especially the French
from the affairs of Italy, hindering them from having any entrance there,
because they are the only men that may frustrate the designs of Spain in
that Country.

The fourth point consists in being allwaies powerfully armed, which is an
assured means to keep his Subjects in obedience, and his Neighbors in
respect, to prevent the designs of his enemies, to surprise them if they
sleep, and to take his own advantage from unexpected occasions.

The fifth point is reputation, and although that it depends on the four
first, never the less being simply considered, it establishes a fifth maxim,
whereby Spain gains as much, as by any of the rest. Considering that the
opinion conceived of her great zeal for the maintenance of the Catholic
Religion, couers with the cloak of piety, all her other designs, and holds
the people in a wonderful awe. The fear of her profound intelligences
throughout, causes other Princes to have a care that they engage not
themselves lightly against her. This assurance confirmed in men's
understandings, by so much experience of her prudent dexterity, (knowing how
to advantage herself in Treaties) inuites her inferiors to enter more
forwardly in league with her, and to set themselves under her shade. The estate
of her arms allwaies on foot, consumes those that are suspicious of her, and
assures others that depend on her protection.

From all these things results the reputation of Spain. Her interest is, to
manage well this piety. And though all Princes hold for a general maxim,
that they should carefully conserve their reputation, Spain ought to be so
much the more jealous thereof, as her designs are greater then those of other
States.

This huge frame composed of so many parts, and as it were incumbered with its
own weight, moves by its secret springs, which loose their force even as they
are discovered.

OF THE INTEREST OF FRANCE.
FRANCE being seated between the Alps and the Pyrenean mountains, and
flanked by two seas, seems to be invited by nature to oppose it self against
the proceeding of this puissant Neighborhood. For she appears like a bank
against this torrent, and the opportunity of her situation is such, that she
may hinder the distribution of the head to the members of the Monarchy which
does oppugn her. But this being not sufficient to cross the proceedings of
Spain, the interest of France is, to take all the counter-course (to impeach
all she may her designs) by maxims, which we come now deliver unto you.

Henry the fourth, (upon whom the actiuitie of all these subtilties has been
exercised even to the utmost point) having better understood them then any
other before him, (for that he proved them more) he first confirmed the true
interest of France, which is to thwart or counterpoint Spain in all these
points.

In such wise that if the first maxim of the interest of Spain be, to
persecute the Protestants, for to grow by their spoils: the first of the
interest of France is, to make the Catholics perceive the venom hidden vndes
the same. Especially to let the Court of Rome understand that the hopes which
Spain gives her to augment her treasures by the ruin of Protestants, is not
but to further her design toward the Monarchy, where she can no sooner
arrive, but the Pope must become her Servant, whereas his authority never has
more luster, then when the power of Christian Princes and States is balanced.
Moreover France should make show to the Protestant Princes and States that
allthough she be of a diverse Religion to theirs, yet she would rather their
conversion, then their destruction, assuring them that this shall not at all
hinder her that she contribute not of her own to conserve them, and to aid
them freely against all those that would trouble or change any thing in their
States and liberties.

Likewise as the second maxim of the interest of Spain is to advantage her
design through intelligences. The second of the interest of France is, not to
sleep at all in hers. Nor to spare money in spies and pensioners, to the end
to know what passes amongst her neighbors, and that as occasion serves, she
strengthen the weak, assure the fearful, stop the engagement of those that
are moved to decline, retire those that are already engaged, and that she
cross in all places and by all means the intelligences of Spain.

To the third maxim, which concerns negotiation. It ought not to be suffered,
that Spain meddle in any Treaty, but that France also step between on her
part. Especially in Italy, where she would be sole judge and vmpire. That
which she will be, if France were not assured of one port to enter there,
which she ought to keep, even so long as she will oppose the others
greatness, and be considered as the bullwarke of the Christian liberty.
Moreover flegmaticke persons ought to be made choice of (for to treat with
Spain,) and such as have not any impatient humor, whereof the French nation
is accused, to the end, to take away their hope of profiting by delays,
wherewith Spain has been accustomed to weary all the world.

To the fourth Maxim. There ought to be opposed force to force. For neither
persuasions, nor the Justice of arms will awe him that's armed. So as that
France ought to cut off all unnecessary expenses, and be allwaies powerfully
armed, having sufficiently to do the same, without borrowing elsewhere
soldiers, munition, and money.

If so be that the above named maxims be well observed, the reputation of
Spain, (whereby she does so aduantageously prevail) will be abated: that of
France elevated: and the other Christian Princes and States seeing such a
counterpoise to affairs, will again take courage, and without apprehension of
future danger will voluntarily embrace the cause of their conservation.

OF THE INTEREST, OF THE PRINCES OF ITALY.
ITALY, which is enuironned with the Alps, and the Mediterranean sea, (after
the deluge of those barbarous nations that so long time afflicted it) seemed as
if she ought to think of nothing more then to benefit herself by the
opportunity of her situation, to keep her self close and secret, being as
well separated by the interest of Provinces, as divided by her situation. And
truly it was then the maxim which she ought to hold. For these little Princes
might live preaceably under the shadow of the greater, when having amongst
themselves their just counterpoise, they cannot attempt any thing upon their
inferiors. And the principal Powers sharing amongst themselves the dominion
of such a Country, had reason to exclude their neighbors from the Knowledge
of their affairs.

But since that the King of Spain has set footing in Italy, and that finding
himself Master of both ends thereof, he has made the balance incline on his
own side, the true interest in general of the Italian Princes has been to
keep ever one gate (at least) open, to guard themselves from the oppression
which such a formidable Power might make them fear.

And although that for this effect they ought to hold intelligences with other
Princes, it behooues them notwithstanding, to do it cheifely with the King of
France, for three reasons. First, for the neerenesse, and opportunity of being
able to succor them, either by sea or land. Secondly, for the great forces
that this great Realm can set on foot. And lastly, by this bridle to
restrain the Spainard, who otherwise would carry himself toward them with
less moderation.

The other maxim which Italy ought to observe is, to conserve her self in
peace, First, because there can be noe war, but the Kings of France and
Spain will there take part, either as favoring one of the parties, or else as
Arbitrators. Besides it ought to be considered, that war cannot be enkindled
in this Country, without great danger of stirring up diverse humors, which do
now lie still.

These are the two points wherein lies the interest of Italy in general. And
although that every Prince ought to have the same aim, there are
notwithstanding certain particular interests in each State. The Commonwealth
of Venice in regard of the extent of her dominion both by sea and land,
likewise of the firmness of her establishment for twlue ages entire, and of
the prudent conduct of so wise a government, is without doubt the chief Power
of Italy next that of the King of Spain, And she also has been the first
Commonwealth that has settled the rules of her conservation, and that has most
punctually observed them, in taking for her particular interest, that of Italy
in general. Moreover for particular respects she makes it a maxim, to hold a
strait intelligence with the Turk, and for the same she spares not any cost.
She belieues also that her interest is, to maintain war abroad and foment
the same with money. That which the other Princes of Italy ought also to do,
if they had strength and courage to undertake it.

She looses noe time for to hinder the King of Spain and the Pope from waxing
great. The State of Venice seems extraordinarily jealous of these two
Potentates, though it be a maxim common to all Princes to hinder the growth of
their Neighbors. As for the other Princes of Italy, she vpholds them
according to her own benefit.

OF THE INTEREST, OF THE SEA OF ROME.
THE interest of the Sea of Rome is, first to procure by all manner of means
the diminution of the greatness of Spain, because the Church lands ly so fit
for her, that if once the King of Spain come to quitt the specious pretext
that he has taken to protect the holy Sea, certainly he will easily
appropriate all this goodly demaine, for to join together the two ends, which
already belong unto him.

The puissance of the Venetians and of the great Duke does much enfeeble that
of the Sea of Rome, which without these obstacles would command the two
Gulfes. So she ought to desire that these two Princes remain at least as they
be.

But all these are but general maxims. There be yet three particular of the
Sea of Rome. The first is, to maintain her credit throughout, by the means of
Eeclesiasticall persons, as the sinnewes of her greatness, whom she ought to
protect against the secular Powers.

The second is, to make Princes dread the thunderbolt of excommunications, But
not to use it too often, for fear they come to contemn it.

The third is, to restrain the Popes as much as may be, hindering them from
making great their houses at the Churches cost, or committing any extrauagance
by their passions, prejudicial to the common good of the Ecclesiastical State.

It would be to no purpose to touch the interest of the other Princes of
Italy, for that they are either so little considerable as they can do nothing
of themselves: or else so subjected as they dare not make show of any other
interest, then that of those on whom they depend.

OF THE INTEREST OF THE DVKE OF SAVOY.
IT remains only for conclusion, to speak of the Duke of Sauoy. The Estate
of this Prince is in such manner situated, that to which side soever he turns,
he is of great importance to the party he embraces. CHARLES EMANVEL (who was
first willing to make known that a Duke of Sauoy could make peace and war in
Italy believed, that the interest of his Estate was, to side one while with
France, another while with Spain, according to the occurrences and good of his
affairs, which was the sole but of his designs, without thinking of Treaties
made either with the one or the other. But this Prince, full of vast thoughts
(and who could not bound his ambition by the barriers that Nature had set to
his Estate) was glad that the situation of his Country might serve for a
pretext to his disquiet.

For indeed the true interest of the Duke of Sauoy is, to have allwaies a good
correspondence with France, because she can assist him with the whole mass of
her forces, against one member of the power of Spain, who has more jealousy
of her Estates in Italy, then (to say in a manner) of all the rest together,
having also a vehement desire to join Piemont to the Duchy of Milaine. So
as, the Duke of Sauoy should believe, that what amity soever he has with
Spain, it is most dangerous to him. He ought nevertheless to entertain it,
in so much as it is needful to guard him from France.

OF THE INTEREST OF GERMANY.
THIS huge mass of Provinces joining together, inuironned with three Seas, and
divided by so many mighty rivers, has been heretofore the terror of the
Roman Empire, which at length she has transported to her self. And as
before, she had noe other interest but her liberty: so since, she has no
other design but to conserve the same. For truly if the name of Empire has
brought splendor and reputation to Germany, it has given her in recompense
much jealousy and distrus. She presently discovered her Emperors, and
essayed to limit their power for fear that from Chiefs of this Country, they
come to be Masters thereof. Dominion being such a dainty morcell that the most
temperate cannot forbear it. This notwithstanding, by the continuance of
certain successions, the Empire being established in the house of Austria
(that of Spain, which is the principal branche thereof) knew to manage this
beginning of establishment with such dexterity, that now it seems as
hereditarie in that house. The maxim of Germany was to hinder the progress
of this usurpation. And now her interest is, to reduce things to their former
estate, by distributing this honor intercha^geably to the principal houses,
and restraining the power of the Emperors, whose counsel ought to be the
general Diets, to consult altogether of the means to conserve the common
liberty, and to resist the Turk, who is the only force that Germany should
be afraid of.

The diversity of Religion ought not to cause any diversity of opinion in
things that concern the common good. The interest of all the Princes in
general and of every one of them in particular is, mutually to defend and
jointly to hinder that the Emperor make not an attempt upon the liberty of
any, under what pretext soever it be. They should likewise take heed that the
stronger amongst them oppress not the weaker, whereto the Emperor will
allwaies lend a hand, for to gain by the ruin both of the one and the other.

The Catholic Princes ought from henceforth to disabuse themselves, and to
hold for certain, that under the color of Religion, they serve the design of
the house of Austria, and forge by little and little the irons of their own
bondage, being not able to hope for any other advantage then to be the last
ruined.

The Protestants (since they alone cannot withstand so great forces) should
make it a maxim, to be first well united at home, and afterward to hold
necessary intelligences abroad, for to counterpoise the Catholic league.
Their chiefest aim should be, to abide straightly conjoind together, and to
believe, that their assured ruin lies in their disunion.

All the advantages proposed unto them for to disunite them one from another,
ought to be the bands of their concord and good intelligence.

This is the true interest of the Princes of Germany and of the Imperial
towns, which they never ought to relinquish, For without this support, they
will become the prey of the first Usurper, and their great magazins and stately
Arcenalls will serve for a lure to entice those that are Masters of the field.

There are four Kingdoms which depend in a manner upon Germany and are
obliged to follow the fortune of this Country.

Poland and Hungary for diverse interrests remain tied to the house of Austria.

Denmark and Swedeland embrace the party that maintains the liberty of
Germany, fearing their own may be in danger, after this comes to be oppressed.

It is requisite that Germany remain strictly united with both these Realms,
But the latter she can never forsake, without an eternal blot of ingratitude,
having received from thence even that which was beyond her hopes, seeing her
self allreadie swallowed in the very gulf of so hard a bondage, when this
King (showed only to the world through so many dark clouds) made the Sun
of her deliverance appear to this desolate Country.

OF THE INTEREST OF THE SWISSES AND OF THE UNITED PROVINCES of the
Low Countries.
ON the two sides of Germany, at the entry of this large Country, there are
formed two Common-weathes dreadful amongst the other powers of Christendom,
both for the valor of their people, and for the form of their situation. So
that very rightly one may call them the two arms of Germany.

The right arm is Switzerland, the left is the United State of the Low
Countries. The one is amongst the rocks and precipices; the other amongst the
Seas and marshes. The one domineers in the Alps: and the other in the Ocean.
The natural disposition of both these people is so agreeable to the nature of
the Countries which they inhabit, as that the Swisses seem made for the
Mountains, and the Mountains for the Swisses. The Sea for the Hollanders: and
the Hollanders for the Sea. In Switzer-land every Canton, in the Low Countries
every Province is a Commonwealth. The Swisses sell the liberty of their bodies
to others, and do guard the liberty of their country: the Holla^ders ga^d
their own liberty entire. Long peace has enriched those: but these flourish
by the continuation of war. The interest of the Swisses is Peace: but the
Hollanders should hold for an assured maxim, to be always in Arms.

These two Republikes cannot make better alliance for their subsistence then
with France, who (to oppose Spain) does enrich the Suisses with her money, and
supports the Hollanders with her Counsel and Arms.

These two Powers should never be divided betwixt themselves, either through
jealousy, or Religion, since these are the sole maladies that may extinguish
them.

OF THE INTEREST, OF ENGLAND.
ENgland which is as a little world apart, had not any thing to do with other
Princes, but only so far as the necessity of commerce did oblige her, which
was then her true interest. For thereby she gained great riches, which
together with her situation, have made her of very great account. But since
that under the shadow of that misterious marriage between PHILIP and MARIE, the
practices of Spain are insensibly slipped in, England (which before had
maxims conformable to her own self) is by little and little accommodated
sometimes to the interest of France and sometimes to the interest of Spain.

Queen ELIZABETH (who by her prudent government has equaled the greatest
Kings of Christendom) she knowing well the disposition of her State, believed
that the true interest thereof consisted, First in holding a firm union in it
self, atcheiuing to smother the relics of precedent factions, deeming (as it
is most true) that England is a mighty Animal, which can never dye except it
kill it self.

She grounded this fundamental maxim, to banish thence the exercise of the
Roman Religion, as the only means to break all the plots of the Spaniards,
who under this pretext, did there foment Rebellion. And allthough she
professed her self very much obliged to Philip, toward who^ she bare ever a
special regard, nevertheless she had so careful a consideration of the
interest of her State, that she believed it was never fit to conclude a peace
with him, for three very evident reasons. The first was, for to weaken the
power that she suspected in the Indies: The second, for to enrich her Realm
by depredations: The third, thereby to make her Subjects warlike, and keep them
in perpetual exercise for Sea Fight, which is the defense of the Kingdom.

She believed that the interest of her Estate was, to aid France, and relieve
it, least that by the fall thereof she suffer those to wax great, from whom
she had cause to defend her self.

By the same maxim, She supported the springing liberty of the
Vnited-Prouinces, whose protection against the puissance of Spain, is one of
the principal points of Englands interest, as well because she thereby
weakens a too powerful Neighbor: as for that Protection serves sometimes for
a step to reach some higher matter.

She held most strait intelligences with the Protestants of France, for
reasons altogether peculiar to England.

She did the same (though for other respects) with the Protestants of Germany.

By all these maxims this wise Princess has very well made known to her
Successors, that besides the Interest which the King of England has common
with all Princes, he has yet one particular, which is, that He ought thoroughly
to acquire the adua^cement of the Protestant Religion, even with as much zeal
as the King of Spain appears Protector of the Catholic.

For this effect, England should have intelligences throughout, where soever it
is fitting, and take part in all the Treaties that are made with Protestant
Princes. She should likewise be allwaies armed, to become thereby considerable.

Here is the true interest of England, which being well followed will establish
a third Puissance in Christendom.

THE SECOND PART OF THE INTEREST OF THE PRINCES AND STATES of Christendom.
AFTER the stablishing of the true interest of each Prince and State, it ought
to be made appear by the recital of the principal affairs agitated in
Christendom for the space of fifth years past, how the ill successes that
have therein happened, proceeded not from any other cause then the neglecting
of the said interest. For to teach us that in matter of State one ought not to
suffer himself to be led by inordinate desires, which carry us oftentimes to
undertake things beyond our strength: nor by violent passions which do
diversely trouble us, according as we are possessed therewith: nor by
superstitious opinions, whereby ill-conceiued scruples are ministered unto us,
but rather by our proper interest guided by reason alo^e, which ought to be the
rule of our actions, to the end that by such examples, we seeing (as in a
mirror) the faults of others, may thereby benefit our selves.

THE FIRST DISCOVRSE UPON THE AFFAIR of the League.
UNDER the Reigns of Francis the second and Charles the ninth, France was
exceedingly molested with civil wars, the youth of these two Princes was the
principal cause thereof. Each would have the managing of affairs. A
contestation was betwixt Queen Catherine their mother, and the Princes of the
blood, and under them, the houses which had most power, were those of Guise and
Montmorancy, which had quietly ruled Henry the second their Father. Francis of
Lorraine Duke of Guise bore the party of Catherine. Annas Duke of Montmorancy
took part with the Princes of the blood. Likewise there was amongst them
difference of Religion. The wars about Religion were great and bloody, and
lasted even to the death of Charles the ninth, and his brother Henry the third
succeeded him. He was of age capable to govern, he had goodly qualities, and
gave hopes of a happy Reign.

At his coming to the Crown Henry testified a desire to lead a peaceable
life, but it was rather for to plunge himself in idleness and pleasures, then
to reign well.

Henry Duke of Guise (son of Francis) a Prince endowed with great qualities,
and full of lofty thoughts, seeing the King and his Brother without children,
and the first Princes of the blood to make profession of the Protestant
Religion, is bold to aspire unto the Royalty, and to get thither, makes
himself Protecteur of the Catholics, and the Persecutour of the Protestants,
against whom he stirred up diverse wars.

Henry of Bourbon, King of Navarre, first Prince of the blood, Chief of the
Protestant party and a Prince adorned with an heroique virtue, successfully
waged diverse wars in favor of the Protestants.

Here be three Henry's, Chiefs of three several parties in France, who have
every one their interest. The King to maintain his lawful authority. The
Duke of Guise to possess the Kings place, and the King of Navarre to hinder
the King of France his ruin, which was indeed his own, and of his party
which made him subsist in reputation. The first of these through weakness
lets himself be induced to make war upon the King of Navarre. The second
makes himself Head of the Catholic party. The third becomes Protector of
the Protestants. So that as he who ought to have commanded others, is very
happy to have place only in the party of the Duke of Guise, who therein came
so far with him, that when he was killed in the year 1588. he was upon the
point to make him be declared to the States of the Realm, incapable to reign,
and the Princes of the blood to succeed him.

Philipp King of Spain, who had allwaies an eye open to his great design,
foments this business, favors the Duke of Guise at Rome, helps him with money
in France, lets him not want for any thing, and even after his death continues
his assistance to his Brother Charles Duke of Main.

The King seeing himself abandonn'd of all the great Towns of his Realm, and
of the most part of his Nobility, casts himself into the arms of the King of
Navarre, who by his assistance retireth him almost from the hands of his
enemies, which held him besieged within Tours, he brings him as triumphant,
before his Capital City of Paris, where by the stab of a knife he dyed and
left the Kingdom to the King of Navarre, in the year 1589.

This Prince seeing himself elevated to so high a dignity, was invited by the
change of his condition to make change of his interest, and quitting that which
he had held even till then, he embraced that of France. He had great
oppositions caused by Philip, as well by his practices at Rome, as by his
assistance to the League of France, allwaies under pretext of his great zeal
for the Catholic Religion. During the time that Henry is a Protestant, Philip
maintains that he cannot reign, causes him to be excommunicated, his
Subjects to be dispensed from the oath of allegiance, sets his kingdom in
prey, that by this means he might get it as easily as Ferdinand got the
Kingdom of Navarre from his Predecessor. When he gives hope to turn
Catholic, Philip declares that he is an Hypocrite, and that having been
relapsed, he can never lawfully reign, he aideth his enemies with money and
arms sufficient to weaken both parties, but not to ruin the one in such sort,
as that the other might subsist without him, willing to weary them whom he
maintained, to the end that they should be constrained to give themselves up to
him.

Henry on his part shows unto Queen ELIZABETH, and the United Provinces, with
the Protestants of Germany and the Swisses, what interest they had all in the
cause, He received great assistance from them all, and even secretly from
Ferdinand great Duke of Tuscanie, a Prince of great understanding, and who
judged that the acquisition of France to the King of Spain, was to subject all
the other Princes. But the Republike of Venice only amongst all the Catholic
States, did without delay acknowledge him King of France, after the death of
his Predecessor. So wellas with all these aides, and his own valor, he
resisted in the very beginning, and afterward having obtained diverse
victories, and his affairs beginning to prosper, he was considered as a great
Prince.

From thence forward the People weary of their miseries, began to disabuse
themselves, and to give no more such credence as they had done, to their
Preachers: the Nobility to think upon the side that prosper'd: the Governors
of Towns to assure their affairs with the strongest: and the Principalls of
the party to conserve what dignity soever they had been raised unto. All
these commotions caused the Leaguers to assemble the States.

Philip takes occasion from such an extremity, for to persuade them, that the
only remedy to restablish their affairs was to choose a King, and offers his
daughter to him whom they chose. This was the apple of discord. The Duke of
Main, principal Commander, could not pretend to have her, he being allreadie
married, nor would suffer that another should, lest himself from being Master,
should become a Servant. His Nephew the Duke of Guise was enticed with this
dainty bit. The Duke of Nemours his Uncle had as good an appetite as he. The
Duke of Mercueur pretended the Duchy of Britanie to belong to him by his
Wife. The eldest son of the Duke of Lorraine, as head of the family, was
also mentioned. So that Philip thought by this discord to draw them to make
choice of him. While these things were a doing, Henry turns Catholic. This
change made some of the principal Towns and Governors to declare themselves
on his part, and the other began to treat in the Court of Rome. Philip
neglects nothing (no more then the chiefest Leaguers) for to impeache that
Henry be not acknowledged a good Catholic, and a long time hindered his
Ambassador from having Audience.

At the length Clement VIII. (then Pope) seeing well that he was establishing
himself without him, resolved to grant that which he could not hinder, and to
acknowledge him for King, it being a maxim of Rome, to govern according to
events, to the end that she loose not that reverence and respect, which She
endeauours thoroughly to preserve, and without which her authority would be but
a small matter.

Philip fallen from such an hope, continues his assistance nevertheless to the
residue of the Leaguers, Besides he inciteth Emanuel Duke of Sauoy (at that
time his sonne-in-law) to set upon Prouence, thereby to divert him from the
pursuit of his claim to the Duchy of Milaine in right of his wife's dowry.
Henry seeing this obstinacy, declares himself openly, and denounces war
against Philip. The success thereof was various, and yet after the recovery
of Amiens by Henry, Philip seeing himself very near his grave, his Son
young, and Henry in the vigor of his age, he resolved on a peace, which was
concluded at Veruins, the year 1597. wherein he restores all that he held of
France, and then died.

It behooves now to consider the interest of the Princes inueloped in this
affair, what faults they therein committed, and what were the events thereof.

Henry the third, whose interest consisted, in not suffering diverse factions
in his Kingdom, in preserving the Princes of the blood since he had noe
children of his own and in keeping under those which lifted up themselves to
the prejudice of his Royal authority, yet he did quite contrary. For he
fomented the said factions in stead of extinguishing them, and even joined with
the one to destroy the other. He made continual war upon the Princes of the
blood, at the persuasion of those who desired to see their ruin for to raise
themselves in their places, and he authorized in the command of his armies
those that aspired to the usurpation of his Kingdom. He did yet worse, for
when he began to perceive their plot, he would prevent it by a remedy which
wrought his own destruction, to wit, by casting himself into an affected and
unusual devotion, not stirring from the Cloisters of Monks, thinking by this
means to take from the Duke of Guise the credit that he had gotten amongst the
Catholics, who held him for their Chief. But there arrived the contrary, for
he became contemptible to his people, who chased him from his capital city of
Paris, and all the great Towns of his Kingdom revolted from him, they also
reduced him to such a pitiful case, that in the end a Monk had the boldness
to kill him, which was the fruit of his negligence and ill conduct.

Henry Duke of Guise succeeding a Father and and Uncle, both great personages,
and who had had in the precedent Reigns great part in the command of Armies,
in the conduct of affairs, and he thinking himself no whit inferior to them
neither in courage nor in virtue, conceiues the most haughty design that a
man (borne the Subject of a Prince) could undertake, that is, to usurp the
place of his Souueraigne. The occasion seems most favorable to him. He has
already this advantage of gaining by the labor of his Father, it being a thing
most difficult, that the life of one man alone should be able to work such a
change. He incountereth a King without children, and of the humor of those,
under whom such projects might be attempted. He finds a Kingdom rent by
factions, and assaulted with the most dangerous of all Civil wars, which was
for the difference of Religion. He sees the first Princes of the blood in the
weakest faction, the King of Spain ready to assist all those that trouble
France, and the Popes interessed every way to persecute the Protestants. The
matter standing thus, he (full of hopes) neglects nothing to accomplish his
design. He was a goodly man, graceful, courteous, liberal, and valiant. He
imployes all these gifts of nature to insinuate himself amongst the Nobility,
Gentry and Commonaltie. He shows himself very zealous of the Catholic
Religion, not by haunting the Cloisters, and walking thorough the streets in
Procession: but by persecuting the Protestants, and declaring himself their
mortal Ennemie. He maintains his intelligences at Rome and in Spain allwaies
under the pretense of Religion. He works the Preachers to set him in
veneration amongst the People, and to make the King be declared a fauorour of
Heretics, hypocritical, vicious, and idle. So as by such means he had
elevated his design even to the last step, when upon the very point of
execution, he was grossly wanting, both to his interest, and to his own
self, which was in this, that after having chased his King from his chief
City, levied arms against him, made public declarations thereof, and then
made peace with him as with his equal, yet even then he entrusted his life to
him, when he would have made him be deposed* his business being not of that
sort, as it might be permitted to fail twice.

Henry the fourth had two parts to act. For whilst he was only King of
Navarre, first Prince of the blood, and Protector of the Protestants of
France, his interest was, to employ all his industry and credit, both within
and without the Kingdom, to defend the said Protestants, to the end that they
might defend him. For which purpose, he did what he could to hinder the Duke of
Guise from seizing the Crown, whereunto he had interest as presumptiue heir
thereof, and to make himself known to Henry the third, not only in quality
of Chief of the Protestants, but also as first Prince of the blood, to whom the
interest of preserving the Kings person and Estate, was as dear to him as
himself, to the end that at his need he should make noe scruple to have
recourse unto him. Which succeeded so well with him, that after the Duke of
Guise his death and the revolt of his Kingdom, he had not a more assured
refuge then to put himself into his hands.

When he was King of France, there behooued a great dexterity to demean
himself discreetly both toward the Catholics, and the Protestants, incensed
one against the other by so long and bloody Civil wars. These gloried in
having a King of their Religion: but those could not endure the same, and
threatened to abandon him, if he did not turn to theirs. His business now was,
to preserve his old friends, and not to loose the new. He promises the one not
to refuse instruction: and continues with the other, in the exercise of his
Religion. In the mean while, he serves his own turn of both together, to
fight against his ennemies. In the tediousness of these wars, every man was
wearied, Many of the Leaguers like not a Spanish King, but yet they would not
have a Protestant King. The Catholics that served Henry, growing impatient to
see him continue in this Religion, press him to embrace theirs, and come so
far as to make a third part against him.

These considerations made him resolve at length to turn his Religion. And by
this means he kept the Catholics that followed him, thereby also he gained
new ones from the party of the Leaguers, and he lost not the Protestants, who
he well knew could never be taken in the number of his enemies, without
destroying the pretext of Religion which alone maintained them. So as that this
Prince complying with the time, knew how to take his advantages so fitly, that
he had good success in his affairs.

Philipp who had a design to the Christian Monarchy, and imagining that the
maine obstacle which he should therein meet with, was the puissance of France,
he embraces the occasion offered unto him for to ruin the same. He aptly
serves his purpose by the ill government of the King, and by the ambition of
the Duke of Guise. He inciteth the first to expel the Protestants out of his
Kingdom by which way so ever, gives him his own example, offers him his
assistance, publishes his great zeal at Rome, exhorts the Pope to join with
him in such a pursuit: On the other side, he underhand exciteth the second to
continue courageously his design, assists him with money and Counsel. And by
such devises he makes himself esteemed in France, as the chiefest prop of
their Religion. He makes a division betwixt the King and the Protestants of
Europe, he authoriseth the Duke of Guise amongst the Catholics of France, he
incenceth the people against the Princes of the blood, and remoueth (so much as
he can) the the children of the Family from the government of the Realm, for
to introduce Strangers there. No other consideration diuerteth him from his
profound design, he holds that allwaies covered under the veil of Piety, and
of his great zeal to the Catholic Religion. He trauelles there step by step
without being impatient through the length of the way, or precipitated through
any accident. After the Duke of Guise his death, in stead of leaving off the
work, he became more resolute. He assists his Brother and the whole party so
much the more vigorously, as he believed there was more need, and even thought
assuredly, that it would be more easy for him now to make an aduantageous
gain thereby, then in the life time of the said Duke. Because that the whole
faction having more need of him, he could more easily reduce them to his own
will. In so much as he advanced the business so forward, that the Kingdom of
France escaped not his hands, but by miracle. And if he had been content only
to dissipate it, in stead of getting it entirely, he had therein obtained his
ends. And this is the only fault that he committed against his interest in
this Affair. For had he considered the affection this Nation bears toward
her Kings, the detestation she has of the Spanish dominion, besides her
natural sicklenesse, as also the reputation of the clemency of Henry IIII. he
would not have been so obstinate as to go about to surmount things
impossible, and would have contented himself to part the Realm among several
persons. And aftewards upon the differences that are wont to happen between
usurpers, it would have been far more easy for him to get by peece-meale,
what he would have carried all at once. Howsoever it would have been a gain
great enough to him, to divide this mighty Kingdom, the which being United,
does every where impeach the amplification of Spain.

THE SECOND DISCOVRSE UPON THE WAR OF SAVOY.
IT seemed that the Peace of Veruins had restabished a solid tranquillity to
Christendom, and that these two mighty Powers of France and Spain wearied of
troubling each other, had been glad to taste of rest. But as it is ordinary,
that in all accords which are made between Princes and Sovereign States, there
men leave undecided the Claims about Which they cannot agree: So likewise in
this Peace, the restitution of the Marquisate of Saluces was remitted to
another season, in such wise as Henry, afther having employed some years to
setle again the affairs of his Realm in good order, he resolved to question
the Duke of Sauoy, for the invasion of the said Marquisate, insomuch as he made
him plainly understand that he would have it restored. This piece (although
little) is of very great importance. It is the Port of Italy whereby the
French might pass, either to assault, or succor it. Those that feared their
power, had reason to withstand the design of Henry, but those that feared any
other, favored him. So the interests of Italy were divided. Emanuel Duke of
Sauoy (as the most interessed of all in the business) uses all means to
divert this Tempest. He solliciteth the King of Spain, not to forsake him, and
gains the Popes Nephew, Cardinal Aldobrandin, to procure the Popes favor.
But being exceedingly confident of his dexterity and adresse, he resolved to
go into France, to the end that under the pretense of treating this affair,
he might gain some of the principal Ministers of Henry, and raise a broile
within the Kingdom, herein he was at great cost, and used such sleights, that
he failed but very little of his purpose. Nevertheless being too confident of
a thing uncertain, and having too much neglected the means of his true
assurance, he became so surprised, that within three Months he was dispoyled
of all Bresse and Sauoy. This rude beginning awaked him. He continues his
practices in France, he hastes the succor of Spain, and seeks the
intercession of the Pope, who to this effect sends the Cardinal Aldobrandin
toward Henry for to treat the same. In the mean while every one armeth, some
to assault Piemont, others to defend it. but the mediation of the Peace was the
strongest. For it was concluded in the year 1600. wherein Sauoy was rendered
to the Duke, and Bresse remained to Henry for exchange of the Marquisdome of
Saluces.

That which made Henry commit this error against his interest, was the desire
he had to taste of repose, it being a thing certain that a man ordinarily
flatters himself in that whereunto his fancy carries him. This Prince
naturally loved his pleasures, and the necessity of his affairs allwaies
engaged him to labor; So as now seeing himself at peace in his Relme, and
believing he had done enough for his honor, he chose rather to take a
recompense for the said Marquisate, then to imbarke himself in a long war.

This Peace touched Ferdinand great Duke of Tuscanie so much to the heart, (for
the prejudice that it brought to the liberty of the Princes of the Italy)
that he offered to break it, by the means of 200000. crowns, wherewith He
and the States of Venice should furnish the Cardinal Aldobrandin. But Henry
would not hearken to it.

In this affair, and the sequel thereof, there are two things remarkable.
Viz. The loss which France has sustained by leaving the Marquisate of
Saluces: and the advantage that one gets by gaining the Nephews of the Pope.
By the first, the Frenchman has lost all credit in the affairs of Italy, and
the Spaniard remains Master there, having noe more to contradict him. And by
the second, as it is a thing well known that the approbation of the Pope (on
the Catholic party) is of great consequence: So likewise is it certain, that
to acquire the same, one must gain his Nephews, who cannot be won but by
ready and real benefits. For the establishment of their house being founded
upon the life of their Uncle, who is commonly old, they will not wast the time
in vain. So as he that does most readily gratify them, carries them on his
side.

Whence I conclude, that the true interest of the Spaniard is, to hinder the
entrance of the French into Italy, to the end that he have not there any
opposition.

The true interest of the Frenchman is to have there one Port open, thereby to
maintain his reputation, and to share in the affairs, with the Spaniard.

And the true interest of the Italians is, thoroughly to expel all Strangers
out of Italy, but not being able to do the same, their interest is, to
conserve their liberty by the counterpoise of these two Powers, of France and
Spain.

THE THIRD DISCOVRSE UPON THE DIFFERENCE that happened betvveen Pope Paul V.
and the Republike of Venice, the year 1605.
SINCE the Sea of Rome seems elevated to that high point of Majesty, wherein
we behold it at this present, it is certain that it had designs proportioned
to its greatness, which have appeared sometimes more, sometimes less,
according to the Nature of those who enjoyed the Popedom. For those Popes that
were endued with sufficient wisdom to sustain the weight of such a
greatness, have allwaies much indeauoured to make some progression for to
approach this mark. But nevertheless they have so cunninghy dissembled theit
enterprise, that from thence there is not arrived any scandal unto
Christendom, nor any dishonor to the Church: Some others thrust on by an
inconsiderate zeal, or inflamed with a desire to get themselves a name to
posterity, or else hurried by the violence of their passions, are come so
far therein as to discover this mystery of the Roman Hierarchy, which by
all reason of prudence and wise government should not have been revealed, till
after it were accomplished.

Of the number of these last was Pope Paul V. who even from the beginning of
his Papacy, blaming the moderation of his Predecessors, resolved himself to
take a contrary course, and to do that (during his life, and out of season)
which could not be brought to an end in many ages, nor by a long succession of
favorable occasions.

But for as much as our intensions remain liuelesse, when they have an object
whereunto they cannot attain. Paul considering that he should not have to
deal with Kings so easily as with Commonwealths, (which being governed as by
private persons, seem to have less power, because they have less luster,)
he determined for this effect to begin by them. He quarelled first of all
those of Luca and Genoa, and made them obey, either by triumphing upon their
weakness, or by interessing himself in the differences of particular
persons, who had received, or hoped to receive some advancement by the Court
of Rome. But not being content with this, he would set upon the Republike of
Venice, concerning whom the Sea of Rome makes show, not to have had (for
certain time) the satisfaction from thence, which she did expect, for two
principal reasons. The first because she excluded all Ecclesiastical
persons from the participation of her government. The second because she
gave not any pension to the Court of Rome.

The Pope was diligent to find a plausible ground to make this Common wealth
feel the effects of his indignation, when in the year 1605. There was
presented such an occasion as he desired.

An Abbot, and a Canon (after many scandalls committed) were accused of heinous
crimes, and brought to Venice, where they were imprisonned.

Much about the same time there, the Republike renewed two ancient Laws, for
to make the same observed in all places of her dominion. The one forbidding
that any e^cular goods should be alienated to Ecclesiastical persons: The
other, whereby it was prohibited to build any Church without the permission of
the Senate.

Paul became offended thereat, and said: he might not endure that
Ecclesiastical men should be judged by secular Authority, for any crime
whatsoever, and that it belonged to him alone to condemn, or absolve them,
according as it should seem good unto him. As for the two Laws, he said: they
could not subsist, being contrary to the Counsels and Imperial Constitutions.

The Venetians after mature deliberation upon the matter (having weighed on the
one side the indignation of the Pope, and on the other side the Common
liberty) answered; That they might not deliver the Churchmen justly
imprisoned: nor abolish the Laws justly established, without prejudice to the
liberty which God had given them, and which they had maintained for so many
ages, by the blood of their Predecessors That their State having prospered by
such Laws, they thought they could not change them without incurring an
everlasting brand of infamy to all postcritie.

The Pope grows more and more obstinate, and takes a firm resolution to make
them obey. The Venetians endeavor by all manner of means to order the matter
handsomely. They allege their reasons with more then ordinary submissions,
they send an extraordinary Ambassador to Rome, that by this demonstration of
a reverent regard, they might take from the Pope the opinion (which he had
conceived) that he was neglected, and also thereby give him a fair pretext to
retire himself from the precipice where he lay. They receive the Pope's Briefs
(which were so many thunder-stroakes against them) with all honor and respect.
They humbly show the desire they had to content the Pope if it were possible
without doing wrong to the common interest of all Princes, and to the
fundamental laws of their government, which binds them to take notice of the
buildings that are erected within their Towns, to the end that from thence
arrive nothing dammageable to the public good. As for the alienation of
Church-goods, they cannot permit the same without wholly ruining the forces of
their State.

As for the impunitie of Ecclesiastical persons, they say: That in
permitting the same, they should not only derogate from their Sovereignty,
and the power they hold immediately from GOD, but also introduce in the State
examples of dangerous consequence.

The Pope answers: That he regards not their Laws whether old or new: and that
it appertained to him, to change them at his pleasure. That he would not allow
any treating of the business, but an absolute obedience.

In the mean while, he goes about to nullify the election of the Duke of
Venice, because it had been made since the beginning of this difference, And
whilst that he proceeds in this sort, the Duke of Venice gives him part of his
Election, with the accustomed reverence.

The Venetians (to make known the Justice of their cause) do consult this
affair by persons well versed in such matters, and therein they demand the
advice of the most famous Doctors of Europe: They punctually relate the
Controversy to all the Kings and Princes their allies; And to the end that
their right might appear even to posterity, they deliver their answer to the
Pope, because that if the difference were reconciled, all the world might know
that they were justified. The same is to be noted, that they never called home
their Ambassador, before the Pope had retired his Nuntio. For although the
Extraordinary went back to testify some ressentment after the receiving of
so many distastes: the Ordinary nevertheless continued there, to show that
they had allwaies an ear open to agreement. Lastly when they could no longer
hold from breaking off, they take a resolution to defend their liberty, with
such an unanimous consent, that in the whole Senate there was not one voice
contrary. Thereby frustrating the hopes which the Pope had of disuniting them,
according as the Jesuits had promised him.

The Pope took a clean contrary byas, for (men believed) he cared not a jot
whether he went upon good, or ill grounds. He imparted not this business to
other Princes till very late, neither did he demand the advice even of the
Cardinals, but for fashion's sake.

Here is that which passed before the breach betwixt the Pope and the
Venetians, wherein the Venetians exactly followed that which belonged to their
interest. For their State being founded rather by Peace, then by War, and
being more considerable for Counsel then for Arms, they ought ever
dexterously to avoid any rupture whatsoever.

During the time of the breach, the Venetians surmounted even their own
selves, having given in this affair a perpetual example of perfect conduct.
showing as much constancy and courage in their ressentment of the injury
which they pretended was done them: as before they had showed submission to
prevent the same. They ever answered those who spoke to them of agreement: That
the remedy ought to be applied to the part whence the disease proceeded: That
the Pope had received a voluntary displeasure, the remedy whereof was a
voluntary repentance. This notwithstanding, they rejected not any proposition,
but much insisted upon this point: That they had done only what they ought:
That the Pope in withdrawing his Nuntio had barred the way to agreement: That
it belonged to him to make good again, what he himself had spoiled: and That
when he shall have taken off his pretended censures, they will not seem
estranged from Peace. But that which had been most remarkable here was, that
they were not a whit moved for all this tempest, providing with so much
prudence, (both within and without their State) all that was necessary to
sustain such a shock, that noe alteration at all was perceived. The people
remained in obedience: the Towns of their Dominion offered their means and
forces: the Religious obeyed without constraint: there was not shed one drop of
blood.

The Pope, in stead of showing constancy in his resolution, began to relent
so soon as had wrought his indignation by the interdict, leaving to be
understood underhand, that he would lend an ear to agreement, provided that
he might save his credit. But when he saw the inflexible steadfastness of the
Venetians, he resolved to have recourse to force, and to interest the Catholic
Princes in the same.

France had noe other scope in this affair then to arbitrate the difference,
and to have the honor of deciding so important a question between two Princes
so considerable in Christendom. For this effect she showed not any
partiality, although it be true that Villeroy (through his ambition to rise to
a Cardinalship) inclined at first to the Pope's side, serving his turn therein
by the ministration of his son, then Ambassador at Rome. But seeing himself
disappointed of his hope, he returned to the temper which a just Mediator
ought to have. So it is, that oftentimes a private interest does prejudice the
public. Happy are the States, wherein those that sit at the helm of
government, have so noble a spirit as not to aim at any other greatness then
that which is inseparably conioint with the glory of the Prince whom they
serve.

The Spaniards conceived it best to foment the discord between the two
parties, thinking that is was in their power to hinder the war, if their
profit so required: or else to make it serve their own advantage. They
therefore let the business run its course without prescribing any thing to
their Ambassador which was at Rome. who handsomely entertained the Pope in his
opinion, with intent to obtain a Cardinalship for his Brother by this means.

The Emperor was a Mediator; the King of Poland favored the Republike: the
Princes of Germany meddled not all in the matter.

The King of England was glad to see this business daily wax hot. He promised
all assistance to the Republike of Venice, as by all reason he was obliged to
deal in this manner. For he believed that this would rowse up the other
Catholic Princes which were interessed to maintain their Laws. And that it
would be an occasion to deliberate of a Council which may determine so many
Controversies.

The States of the vnited-Prouinces offered to the Venetians succor of arms
and munition.

The Princes of Italy, since they saw the Pope remain confused and wavering
in himself, as if he had manifestly repented, they appear all newters in this
affair, follwing that which belonged to their true interest.

Only the Duke of Sauoy let himself be transported by his passion. For the
Republike having written to his children with the title of Excellence, as she
had accustomed to do, He in despite kept Chapel without admitting there the
Ambassador of Venice, and this at the instance of the Nuntio residing near
unto him. It is not in this affair alone, that this Prince has carried
himself rather capriciously, then after the true Maxim of his interest.

France continued to solicit the Accord, without showing any passion for the
one party, or the other, following herein her true interest. For because one
shall hardly see an open war betwixt two so pacifique Princes, She could not
reap any other profit by this Difference, then the honor only to have
reconciled the same.

The Spaniards perceiving this, began to recoile, and desire to have a hand
in making peace, since they could not have it in war, They judged well that
the Pope was disposed to cast himself into their arms, and to go which way
they would, because he had a mind to agreement. But they saw also the Venetians
so firm in their resolution, as they had noe hope to bend them. Wherefore they
essayed to trouble them with the Turk, to the end they might be constrained to
have recourse unto them, and that by this means it should be in their power,
to bring the Senate to accept such conditions as the Pope pleased to allow
them. But they failed so much in that which they endeavored to do by the
means of the Turk, as (on the contrary) it became aduantageous to the
Republike. For though the Marquess de Saint-Croy having ransacked Duras,
believed that the Turks (to take revenge) would turn against the Republike, as
being nearest, or at least enter within the Gulf. Yet it happened that the
Turk perceiving the Spanish wiles, commanded the Admiral of his Fleet to aid
the Venetians against the Pope and the Spainards. But the Republike judging it
not fit to make use of such a help, (for fear the remedy should be worse
then the dissease it self,) she put it off so handsomely that the Grand
Signior received not any distaste thereby. Nevertheless making the Pope
understand, that in case of necessity, she well knew whither to have recourse.

The Spaniards, out of season offered a whole entire Army to the Pope, Some
believed that it was for to reclaim the Venetians by this way, but it was
nothing less. For all whatsoever the Spaniards did then for the Pope,
proceeded only because the Duke of Lerma was tickled with vainglory, for
that the Pope in his Briefs had given him the title of Excellence.

Lastly they perceived in Spain that this business would be ended by treaty,
and that France, was to have all the honor thereof. This made them about to
send extraordinaire Ambassadors from one side to the other, but it was too
late, the negotiation being so far advanced by the French, that it was
impossible to get it out of their hands. Insomuch as whatsoever the Spaniards
could do to cross the Treaty, the honor thereof remained full and wholly to
Henry, who ended the business by the dexterity and prudence of the Cardinal
de Ioyeuse, and of Frenes-Canaye, ordinary Ambassador at Venice. The
Prisonners were delivered into the hands of the Ambassador: The Laws of the
Republike continued without alteration: and the Pope was forced to take off the
Interdict without any token of submission from the said Republike.

This has been a war of Negotiation, wherein the Venetians full and wholly
carried the victory. Likewise one must acknowledge, they were engaged to deal
in that part wherein they were most able.

They followed therein all the maxims of their true interest: The Pope did
quite contrary: Spain was amusing after Chymeraes: and France had the scope
which she ought to have, wherefore she likewise had the glory.

THE FOVRTH DISCOVRSE CONCERNING the Truce of the Low Countries with the King
of Spain.
THE Truce of the Low Countries with the King of Spain, is an infallible
proof of the excellence of the Spaniards in matter of Negotiation.

The King of Spain seeing that in forty years Space, the war had augmented
and enriched this State, in stead of overthrowing it, and that it would greatly
diminish his reputation to treat of Peace with those, whom (even till then) he
had treated as Rebels, he therefore resolved to do his utmost to enter into
their Country, and to make them feel (even within their intrailes) the
discommoditie of War. For which purpose, he employed the two last Summers
under the command of Marquess Spinola, one of the renownedst Captains of the
time, Who with powerful Armies endeavored to enter, the first year into
Frisland, and the second into Holland. Nevertheless Maurice Prince of Orange
(a Captain to whom we owe the restoration of the ancient military
discipline) all though he was much inferior to the forces of Spinola, yet he
made so good use of the situation of his Country, that he frustrated all his
endeauours. This having deprived the King of Spain of all hope to conquer by
force, he resolved at last to make trial of a Treaty, at the cost even of his
reputation. But his end herein was, 1. to secure the traffic of the Indies:
where he was endammaged by them, 2. to divide them in the time of peace: and
lastly to bear arms more aduantageously against people less trained in
war, and more easy to subdue being confident that any good success in some
affair would make him recover that reputation which he then hazarded, and
whereof he has been ever jealous. A Monk did first lay open the matter to a
Holland Merchant. The hope given to the States that in this Accord, the King of
Spain would acknowledge them for free States, made them give ear, whereupon
followed a suspension of Arms for to treat more at large.

This intermission awaked the interessed and neighbor Princes. Henry's mind
was troubled with the true intererest of his Estate, which he best of all knew,
and also by his particular affections. The States (by reason of their interest)
had succored him in his necessity: He (for the same reason) powerfully
assisted them in his prosperity. He willingly would have them continue The
war, provided that he augme^ted not his assistance: They offered to continue
the same, on condition that he would double the money which he gave them
yearly. The desire of doing thriftily, made him seem to incline, and not
altogether aba^don his true interest, thinking it should be a great advantage
for him to remove from his frontiers such good Arms which a Peace or long
Truce might dissipate, and that it should be a great honor for him to cause
the Low Countries to be declared a free State, Insomuch as He bent his thoughts
to become Arbitratour of this negotiation, and to make it succeed
aduantageously for the Low Countries.

JAMES the first, King of England, whose strong inclination to peace did not
also permit him to follow the true interest of his Realm, which was to nourish
War in the Low Countries, for to consume the forces of Spain, and hinder
their entreprise upon him, he contents himself to have part in the Treaty by
his Ambassadors.

Diverse Protestant Princes of Germany (imagining well that the Arms of Spain
being no more employed there, might fall upon them) do likewise send their
Ambassadors, of purpose to divert this Accord, os else to procure the
protection of those that intermedled in the business.

Maurice whose particular interest was joined with the true interest of the
States, wholly withstood the Accord. Bernaueld who had most ability in the
State-affaires of the Country, seeing that his owe credit grew in Peace rather
then in War, he would have the interests of the State to serve his own ends.
Here is the true pourtrait of those that dealed in this affair.

But for the better understanding of the true interest of the States, we must
remount higher, and come to the original. William of Nassau Prince of Orange,
who alone in this Age had the honor to found a State, (although neither his
disgraces received, nor the endeauours of Philip, the most puissant and able
Prince of his Time, could have hindered him,) was constrained to assemble the
pieces for to compose a body thereof, with such conditions as each Town and
Province required. For, having met with people that have ever affected their
liberty more then their very lives, he could not alter the conditions
whereupon they first joined themselves unto him. This same has caused in this
State so many Republikes as there be Towns, amongst whom (in a general
decree) plurality of voices has noe place, because that if any one Town
approve it not, she is not bound to observe it. So as he devised rather to
flatter them in their liberty, that he might wholly take off their desire to
complie with Philip, then to propound unto them good Laws, for to maintain
them in the time of Peace.

His son Maurice, brought up from his infancy in Arms, thought principally
of the establishing of military discipline, as the thing then most necessary
to uphold the State, wherein he surpassed all the Captains of his time.
Insomuch as this State being exceeding well grounded for to subsist by war,
and as ill to maintain it self in Peace, it is evident, that the true
interest thereof is to continue the War.

According to the interest of each Prince, their Ambassadors being assembled
at the Hague, did work about. The Spaniards make a great difficulty to
ratify the declaration of the Archdukes, (who acknowledged the States free,
and sovereign) to the intent to make them better relish the same, and that in
yielding they might obtain of them, conditions that would work their ruin.
As, the grant of liberty of conscience to Catholics, thereby to make
divisions among them: The privation of traffic in the Indies, and so to make
a mutiny by the Marchands, the most considerable corporation amongst them:
Besides the exchange of certain places most aduantageous to the King of
Spain, and most prejudicial to the said States.

Maurice earnestly opposed such conditions: Bernaueld durst not countenance
them. France and England (perceiving the venom hidden under the same) could
not digest them. In such wise as all Treaty of peace being broken, they renew
that of a Truce for many years: Maurice does his best to hinder it, but
Bernaueld backed by France and England, is the cause they did hearken to it.
The work begins anew, and the Spaniards seeing they could not obtain the
conditions which they desired, imagining also their repose to be very
necessary, at length they gave over, saving that the Article, which declared
the States free, and that of traffic in the Indies were couched so obscurely,
as they might save their reputation, and interpret them to their own
advantage, as occasion should serve.

On the other side, the French for to induce the States to conclude, make a
league with them, wherein they oblige themselves to give them pay for ten
thousand Soldiers. Specially for to make them keep the Truce, in case it
should be broken on the Spaniards side, whereupon the Spaniards complaining,
they were answered, that whatsoever was done, was for their good, and that
without doing the same, nothing could be obtained. Maurice for his part yields
unto that which he could not hinder, conditionally that the Army might be
maintained for the security of the State, Henry approves this condition, and
contributeth to the maintenance of 4000 Foot, and 200. Horse. So as, the Truce
was concluded for twelve years: the States acknowledged free and Sovereign:
and their Ambassadors received in this quality by Princes. Thus ended this
negotiation which lasted two years, where each one endeauours to deceive the
other, and also flatters himself with the persuasion of having gotten that
which he had desired.

In effect, Henry had the most honor in this affair, and the States (by his
means) the most profit. But he being dead, and Louys upon the Throne at nine
years of age, there was an universal alteration in France. For, Marie had
obtained the Regencie, and willing to strengthen her authority against the
Princes of the blood, and great ones of the Realm, she procured a disunion
amongst them, and cast herself into the arms of Rome and Spain, believing
that she had then need of the former Power, and allwaies of the later,
insomuch as during the time of her government, the true interest of France
being abandonned, there was taken the contrary course.

The Spaniards lost not so good an occasion, especially upon the Low Countries,
in the business of the Arminians, the which Bernaueld (seeing himself vpheld
by France, through the practices of Spain) undertook to maintain against the
Prince of Orange, in such wise as that from a dispute of Religion, there was
made an affair of State, so pernicious, that it was like to ruin this
Commonweath. Here it was where the Spaniard displayed all his cunning, for to
make Marie work in this Country according to his interests. He persuaded her
that her disunion was aduantageous to her to maintain her authority. To the
end that she might not assist the Princes of the blood disontented with her,
nor the Protestants of France which might join with the said Princes. He makes
her to act a superstitious zeal, which is an evil counselor to those that
entertain it. So as the Ambassadors of France) under the pretense of zeal to
Religion) become sollicitours of the affairs of Spain in Holland. They favor
the cause of Bernaueld: they foment the division within the State: they bring
it upon the very brinke of its downfall, and had it not been for the
patience, and constant courage of Maurice, assisted by the soldiers, this
Republike had run the hazard to seem as son extinct, as borne.

By that which is aforesaid, and by the sequel of affairs, one may judge that
the true interests of the State of the united Provinces are to maintain war
against Spain, otherwise it would be ruined of it self. The interests of
France and England are to assist the said State, for to give Spain this bone
to pick. The interests of the Germane Princes are to foment the same, to the
end that by the fall of this burden, they likewise be not overthrown. And the
interests of Spain are to keep all the other in broiles amongst themselves,
or else set them one against another, least they should all accord against her.
Therefore so soon as any of them have abandonned these maxims, their affairs
fall to the ground.

THE FIFTH DISCOVRSE UPON THE affair about the succession of Cleues and
Iulliers.
SINCE the time of Charles the Fifth, Germany lived very happy, so long as
she kept her true interest, and whilst that the Emperor did contain
himself within the bounds of the laws of the Empire, which ballancing the
power thereof with that of the Princes and Republikes of Germany, suffered
them not to usurp one upon another.

The first that forsook this interest were the Princes Electors, in having
continued the Imperial dignity without interruption to many of one and the
same family, who in tract of time have raised the same to the prejudice of the
Imperial Laws, the which has chiefly happened to the house of Austria,
specially since this house and that of Spain have been both the self same
thing. For, seeing her self established in so high a dignity, and supported
by such a Power, she was willing to be there perpetuated, and because she
would not be violently incountred hereafter, she has essayed to put down
those who had lawful right to interrupt that course, endeavoring likewise to
lift up her self by abolishing the laws of the Empire, and by usurping the
principal States, and Towns thereof.

The first evident occasion that has manifested in our time this design, was
upon the succession of Cleues and Iulliers, which happened in the beginning of
March, the year 1609. occasioned by the death of John William, who having noe
children of his own, left this goodly heritage to his four sisters married,
to the Elector of Brandebourg: to the Duke of Neubourg: to the Duke of Deu
ponts: and to the Marquess of Turgaw. The first of these laid claim to the
succession entire, as indivisible, having married the eldest. The second makes
the same claim, because the eldest sister died before the brother, and his
wife was the eldest of the sisters living. The two other say that it ought to
be equally parted betwixt them all four. Moreover the Electour of Saxony
revived an old title, and also the Duke of Neuers another. Brandebourg and
Neubourg enter in possession, the Emperor becomes offended thereat, pretending
that the whole heritage ought to be sequestered into his hands, and each of them
to undergo his ordinance. He sends thither Leopold a Prince of hie own House,
who seiseth on Iulliers the principal fortress of the Country.

The Princes that were in possession, seeing such an obstacle, judged well that
this sequestration tended to an usurpation, and not thinking themselves able
enough to resist, in regard of the neighborhood of Flanders, and of the best
forces of Spain, (who in an occasion so aduantageous for the House of Austria
would not fail to help her kinseman) they have recourse to those, who were
principally interessed to impeach the amplification of the said House. They
rallie to their defense, France, England, and the Low Countries, with the most
part of the Protestant Princes of Germany, who made such a mighty warlike
provision to recover Iulliers seized by the said Leopold, that notwithstanding
the unexpected death of Henry, which happened before the execution, yet the
design was happily accomplished, Spain not daring to oppose it.

One may see in this affair, every one's true interest. That of the Emperor
was, to make use of the occasion to catch hold of such an Estate in Germany:
That of the King of Spain, to assist him therein, as well for the principal
end, which is, the advancement of the whole House, as for the neighborhood of
the said State to Flanders: That of the lawful successors, was to maintain
their own right: That of the German Princes, not to suffer that Power
whereof they were jealous, to be strengthened by their own weakening: And the
interests of France, England and Holland were, not to permit the amplifying of
all the House of Austria. Hitherto every one played his game aright; but Marie,
for to support the interests of Spain that promised her to maintain hers even
to the end, abandonneth those of France, and again secondeth the trouble about
this succession.

The occasion was offered by the imprudence of the Princes that held the
possession, which caused the King of Spain to reattempt the business. The
sons of Brandebourg and Newbourg did jointly govern this fair Estate, The
forteresses were guarded by equal garrisons: they dwelt in the same Palace,
and managed their affairs with one common hand. But this lasted not long, it
being no easy matter to govern a State long time after this manner without
dissension, especially between two Princes of diverse houses, where there is
also diversity of Religion. They began to enter into jealousy one of
another. Those that were friends to them both, and interessed in their
subsistence, perceiving the same and fearing least their misintelligence should
increase, persuaded them to make an alliance together. Newbourg agrees thereto,
goes to the Electour Brandebourg, and requires of him his daughter in marriage.
But as the best meats being corrupted turn into the strongest poison: so in
the most wholesome counsel given to these Princes to confirm their amity,
there was found occasion of a most implacable hatred, which caused the ruin of
them both in the said succession. For, whilst they were in the deboshes of
their feasts, the Electour upon some discourse that did not please him,
offended Newbourg so far (even in his own house, and at the table) as to
give him a box on the ear, for which he would not afterward make him any
teasonable satisfaction, In such wise, that in stead of a wife, he carries
back an offense so engraven in his heart, as he admits noe other counsel
but that of revenge. This spirit thus exasperated, being upon return to
Cleue-land, it was easy for the Spaniards to gain him to them. They made
means to marry him with the sister of the Duke of Bauaria, persuaded him to
turn Catholic, for to make all the Catholic league of Germany to be on his
side; they take him into protection, and give him a pension,

The united States seeing how prejudicial this change would be to them, they
supported Brandebourg. These Princes from suspicions do come to attempts,
Newbourg seiseth on Dusseldorp: Brandebourg on Iulliers, from whence the King
of Spain takes a pretexte to stir, and armeth powerfully to recover the
same. The States on the other side, prepare to defend it. They furnish it with
men and munition fit to sustain a great siege. The true interests of France
being forsaken, they had nothing from thence but words, and Embassages, England
seeing France had given off, was contented to do the like, in sending her
Ambassadors. The Princes of Germany seeing themselves forsaken of these two
Crowns, and divided amongst themselves both by Religion, and by the different
affections that they bore to those two Princes, they therefore stir not at
all. Spain finding now noe other opposition, but only from the united States,
prosecuteth her intentions, and whilst she amuseth the Ambassadors of these
two Kings, she sends Spinola into the country with a puissa^t Army, who in
stead of setting upon Iulliers, (which was then but a rude entreprise,) he goes
to invade the States, he passes the Rhine, assaults and takes wezel within
four days.

Maurice seeing this exploit, he delays no longer, leaves the Ambassadors in
their negotiation, takes Rez and Emerik, and at length (a thing never before
seen) these two Armies seize upon this heritage without impeachment one of
another: without breaking the Truce: and also without making any skirmish at
all. For, when one of these Captains had possessed a place, the other still
retired, not pretending any thing there. So as he that was most diligent, made
the most progression. The reason of this gentle dealing was, because Spinola
knew well the Army of Maurice to be better then his own, Maurice likewise
well understood that the safeguard of the States consisted in the subsistence
of his Army. So as he believed he should come off with honor enough, to
divide this spoil with the King of Spain without exposing any thing to danger.

Is is now easy to judge that the ruin of the Princes which were in the
possession, proceeded from hence, viz. Because that Newbourg forsaking his true
interest to follow his passion, cast himself into the arms of Spain: Because
the Protestant Princes of Germany not considering their true interest, did not
stir at all: likewise because France embracing not the interest of Maurice
forsook her own, and for that England did the like with France. On the other
side, the advantage that Spain and the Low Countries have gotten in this
conquest proceeded hence, for that both the one and the other were entirely
fixed upon their true interest.

THE SIXTH DISCOVRSE UPON THE Election of the Count Palatine to the Kingdom of
Bohemia.
IF the quantity of set battles, or the number of the persons slain: or
the revolution of sundry States: or the quality of the Princes interessed: or
the length of the time might make a War memorable, then that which Germany
now suffers, is in the highest degree, since that there are given already more
then fifteen battles: three hundred thousand men have lost their lives in
the same: almost all the States of Germany have thereby changed their
condition and their Masters: all the Princes of Europe have taken an interest
therein: and it is now fourteen years since the war begun, without being
yet ended.

The occasion thereof happened through the rejection of Ferdinand of Austria
from the Kingdom of Bohemia, and the Election of the said Kingdom conferred
on the person of Frederic Count Palatine of Rheine.

The first would establish himself in a dignity, which he believed was
unjustly taken fron him: The second would maintain himself in the Kingdom,
as being justly chosen thereunto. The first would make it a business of
Religion, thereby to interest all the Catholic Princes of Europe in the same:
The second would show that it was nothing else but a State-warre, that he might
interest in the same all those by whom the greatness of Spain was suspected.

But for to judge well of this great commotion, one ought to remount a little
higher. It is certain that since the war which happened about the succession
of Cleues and Iulliers, Germany was as it were divided in two factions, and
(in imitation of the Catholics) the Protestants also had made a League,
whereof the Prince Elector Palatine was chosen Chief, as the Duke of Bauaria
had been of the other. The pretense which every one took for the defense of
his Religion, did agrrauate the matter amongst them. And the secure peace which
this nation had enjoyed a long time, did not permir her (following the
revolution of this world) to abide thus any longer. There wanted only an
occasion to make her bandie against her self.

The Bohemians present this occasion, whether it were by reason of their
natural fickleness, or for being ill treated in the liberty of their
consciences, or else through some coffeehouse of the principal men amongst
them, or for all these reasons together, they reject Ferdinand their King, and
choose Frederick in his place. And (for to render themselves so much the more
irreconcilable with him) in the full assembly of the States, they cast those of
his party out of the windows.

This action arrived in the year 1619. after which every one took arms. The
Protestants were the forwardest, for they were already prepared to it, and
attended only the bruit of this Election to begin the game. Amongst those
who took part with Frederick, he that brought the most powerful assistance,
was Betheleem Gabor, who from an ordinary Gentleman being made Prince of
Transiluania, and fearing the house of Austria, which had always endeauored to
appropriate this State, he put himself into the protection of the Turk for to
secure the same, and finding so fair an opportunity to depresse this House,
his interest suffered him not to loose it. The united Provinces (not to be
wanting to their interest) do here contribute on their part. The King of
Denmark for the same reason, and also for his honor and reputation, assisteth
his Nephew. King James more interessed then he, forgets his interest
concerning his Son in law. The King of France likewise draws back, and
stands newter. At this beginning Ferdinand is ill handled, and reduced to great
extremities.

Here Spain seeing that she must venture her share to, or else loose both her
hopes and reputation, she spares nothing, but uses all manner of means. In
Germany she urges the Elector of Saxony against the Palatine in point of
honor, she remonstrates unto him that he holds his Electorship of the house
of Austria, and that he cannot maintain it without her. At Rome she persuades
the Pope that her loss is the ruin of the Catholic Religion, and the means
to make all Christendom a prey to the Turk, insomuch as the Pope abandonning
his true interest takes part with her, fournisheth both men and money, and
labors to declare the other Catholic Princes for her defense. In England
she easily entertaines King James in his peaceable inclination. In France (by
the Nuntio's help) she gains the Duke de Luine, who having usurped near
Louys the authority that Marie had there possessed, he took also the same
maxims, supporting himself by Spain, which never fails in such occasions
to maintain those who distrusting their own worth, seek their security out
of the Realm. So as the interest of a Favorite being preferred before that of
the State, they assist Spain. But to the end that it might be with more profit
and less noise, they undertake an agreement: they send Ambassadors to both
parties: they amuse the Protestants with fair hopes: they make them loose the
opportunity of a victory which they had in hand, and they induce them to
disarme. In the mean while the Catholics having this time for respite,
strengthen themselves on all sides: take their advantage: prosecute their
former designs, and by gaining the battle of Prague, wholly ruin their
ennemies.

In this revolution of affairs, Spain makes good use of the victory,
continues her intelligences amongst her Neighbors, that she might not be
diuerted in her conquests, and joins her forces of Flanders to those of
Italy, for to become absolute Mistress of the Empire. Fear and corruption
interpose amongst the Princes of Germany and the Imperial Towns, Every one
hastes to submit himself to the yoke, distrusting least he should not be
time enough received there. The Counselors of Princes, and Magistrates of
Commonwealths are corrupted by money, and all contribute to forge the irons
of their own bondage.

This kind of proceeding makes the King of Denmark fear least the firing of
Germany consume him, he takes the defense thereof, and goes into the field,
but is vanquished, loses part of his dominions, and for to recover it again,
is constrained to make a dishonorable peace. The Transiluanian seeing this
disorder, makes his peace likewise, but so much the better by reason of the
Turk's protection.

Here was the issue of the second revolution of the affairs of Germany, which
proceeded chiefly from this, that France prostituted her interest to the
greatness of Spain.

We should come now to the third revolution. It is oftentimes more difficult
to govern ourselves well in great prosperity, then in adversity, because
that the one ingenders neglect, and lulles us in idleness: but the necessity
of the other keeps us waking, and makes us search the means of our
restoration. Such was the case of the House of Austria, who seeing herself
from such a heavy blow authorized beyond her hopes, absolute Mistress of
Germany, of innumerable armies entertained at the cost of her ennemies, France
not stirring against her proceedings, and besides imbroiled in Civil wars.
England yet forgetting her interest. Holland having enough to do to conserve
her own, and Italy without appearance of being able to defend it self, She
therefore fears nothing, but despises all, in such wise as without hiding
any more her design under the pretense of Religion, (wherewith she had so
well served her purpose even to the present) she openly inuades the
Territories of the Duke of Mantua, being a great Catholic, vaunting she could
not suffer a Prince that was French borne to possess any State in Italy,
which is the first remarkable error that she committed against her own
interest. For, this usurpation gave all the Princes of Italy to understand,
that the tempest would come whirling upon them, insomuch as the Duke of Mantua
was assisted by the most resolute amongst them.

Louys cannot digest this affront, and being assisted with a Counsel whose
prudence and resolution was necessary in such a perilous conjunction of
affairs, he fortunately employed his Arms in his defense, Which was the first
occasion of importance, wherein he recovered the usage of his true interest.
But seeing that diuersions in Germany were needful for him, and not finding
the same amongst the Germains being oppressed with the burden of so grievous a
subjection, he goes to seek them in the cold Northern parts. The renown of
Gustavus King of Swede-land had been carried even unto him. This Prince his
desire of glory made him easily surmount any difficulties he could imagine,
likewise his vast and great designs he surpassed as it were by such a courage
in execution, as made him not dishearken to any enterprise. The conquests of
Walstein (General of the Emperor's army) upon the Balticke sea, and the
provisions which he made to render himself Master there, made the King of
Swede-land know, that he might well be in suspicion of the House of Austria,
and that his interest was to oppose the same. He therefore allieth himself
with France, and prepares to enter into Germany, for to deliver it from the
thraldom whereunto it was reduced.

Here is the second fault that Spain committed against her true interest, to
wit, the contemning of this Prince. For whilst that on the one side he enters
into Germany, the Emperor (at the solicitation of the King of Spain)
sends his best troops into Italy against the Duke of Mantua, which welmost
all perished there without any great effect. And the success of Gustavus in
Germany was such, as that those of the Emperor's side and the Spaniards, were
feign to conclude a peace in Italy with the French (at the expense of what
they had gotten, and of that reputation whereof they make so great esteem) for
to draw back the remainder of their scattered troops to the succor of
Germany, leaving in the hand of the French, Cazal for a place of arms in
Italy, and Pignerol as a port to enter therein. So as the desire to conquer
Italy before they were well assured of the conquest of Germany, made them
loose both the one and the other.

This happy exploite of Louys, made him acknowledge his former errors, and
wholly embrace his true interest. He delivers the Grizons from their servitude;
diuerteth the united States from accepting a Truce, maintains the Swedish
party notwithstanding the death of Gustavus, defends the Electour of Tr^^^s
against the persecutions of the Spaniards, and chastises the Duke of Lorraine
for adhering to the Emperor. In a word, he does bravely recover his place,
which his ill Counselors had made him forgo.

Pope Vrb^n seeing himself delivered from the apprehension of the Spaniards
and Germains, having likewise understood by the invasion made upon the Duke of
Mantua, that they would deal noe otherwise with the Catholic States, then
with the Protestants, he thereupon opposes them. The Republike of Venice that
considers better then any other State what belongs to her true interest, and
which never fails but in too much circumspection, (as ordinarily those Common
wealths do, which are not founded by Arms.) she continues nevertheless
her assistance to the Duke of Mantua. Amedis Duke of Sauoye receiving
instruction by the danger that he and his Father were in to loose their Estates
through neglecting their true interest, does now rejoyne himself to France.
The other Princes of Italy seeing the aid of France could be noe impeachment
to them, let go the apprehension which they had of the Spaniards. The Germane
Princes and Imperial Towns seeing themselves supported by the arms of France
and Swedeland, assisted by the diuersion of their other allies, and reassured
by the prosperous success of their affairs, they take courage again. England
alone, as if she were in another world, remains without meddling at all.

On the other side, Spain fails not to animate her cause, takes up again the
pretense of the Catholic Religion, which she had as it were left off, and
perceiving the error she committed thereby, cries more then ever against the
Protestants, exceedingly urges the Pope to have of him his money, and his
fulminations, makes much of the Venetians, courteth the English, intertaineth
dissension in the house Royal of France, mightily endeavors to draw the
united Provinces to a Truce, labors to disengage the Duke of Saxony from
the Swedish party, neither is she cast off by any repulse. And yet
notwithstanding she spares neither men nor money for to raise new armies to
oppose her ennemies. In brief, necessity has reduced every one to follow his
true interest, which is the reason that in this last revolution, the
contestation about these affairs is of longer continuance.

THE SEVENTH DISCOVRSE UPON THE commotions that happened in Italy for the
succession of the Dutchies of Mantua and Montferrat.
ITALY enjoyed a profound peace, and found it self wholly exempt from
suspicio^s, which are wo^t to disturb the repose of States, when on a sudaine
happened the death of Francis Duke of Mantua, which (one may say) produced the
seeds of all those troubles that have at several times since disrested this
Country. For, Charles Emanuel Duke of Sauoye, quarrelling (in right of his
grand child Marie) for the Duchy of Montferrat with Ferdinand, so inkindled
the fire of war in Italy as since it was never so well extinct, but that
from time to time the cinders thereof have caused new flames.

Ferdinand supported rather by the justice of his cause then by his own
forces, implored the aid of all the Prince, which by common interest were
obliged not to suffer such an outrage.

Marie in whose hands at that time lay the government of France, thinking of
nothing more (during the minority of the King her son) then to maintain her
self in peace, she believed she had enough to do to smother the factions of
the Kingdom, and to appease by all means those that were capable to resist
her authority. So she regarded the commotions of Italy no further then to
endeavor to assuage them, and she employed her credit to induce the Pope to
interpose between the two parties for their accord.

The King of Spain considered the beginning of this discord after another
manner. For perceiving the advantage that might from thence accrue unto him, he
intermedled so far in all the whole course of this affair, as he failed but
very little to draw from thence advantages proportional to his designs.

The Princes of Italy, whilst the game was playing, looked on without meddling
therewith. The grand Duke undertook the defense of the Duke of Mantua,
believing he was obliged by his proper interest to assist the weaker against
the stronger, besides the particular reasons that incited him thereunto.

The Duke of Sauoye seeing the small advancement that he could hope for from
his entreprise, hearkened to an accord which was proposed to him, and letting
the business be put to a treaty; he contented himself with the glory that
he durst undertake to usurp upon his neighbor, and so all this goodly design
vanished it to smoke even as it had been plotted against all reason, it being
not the interest of a Duke of Sauoye, now of any other Prince of Italy to
imbroile himself with his neighbors, since all the advantage that can (...)
aid from their (...) is to see the difference reconciled by the power of one of
these two Kings, which cannot be without manifest danger.

This business so ended, the King of Spain who had an eye ever upon Piemont
as a piece that lay fit for him, saught a plausible pretext to quarrel the
Duke of Sauoye. For, considering France out of case to meddle with the affairs
of Italy, the Duke of Sauoye by the late war, exhausted both of men and
money, and the other Princes of Italy disunited betwixt themselves, He thought
fit to take this time to enter in to Piemont, hoping, as he had had the glory
to be arbitratour of the first controversy, without gaining so favorable an
occasion for his particular profitt, he would make amends for his default by
reinflaming a second war. He invaded then the Territories of the Duke of
Sauoye, where finding more resistance then he expected, he was in the end feign
to make peace. It is true that France bestirred herself in this second
occasion, but the principal commendation therein is due to the Marshall de
Lesdigui^et, who in all this war (albeit that he followed his particular
ends) engaged France to embrace her true interest, as she ought to have done
in the former commotion.

This second trouble being appeased, the most understanding men judged well
that Italy was not to continue long time in peace. Because they saw Ferdinand
Duke of Mantua childlesse, and his brother Vincent leading so disordered a
life, as they believed he could not live long, and the event was answerable to
their opinion. For, after Ferdinand's death, Vincent (continuing the disorders
whereunto he had formerly accustomed his body) died, leaving his cousin Charles
de Gonzague, Duke of Neuers heir of his Estates, who alone by all right could
pretend there.

The death of Vincent, although it was well enough foreseen, yet it astonished
all the Princes of Italy in such a manner as every one began seriously to
consider his affairs.

The Venetians foreseeing that the Spaniards could not endure the inheritance
should be conferred on the Duke of Neuers, and that therefore they would divert
the Emperor from giving him the inuestiture, they resolved to do their best
for to frustrate their designs, supposing it would be a cast too pre^udiciall
to them, to see a Prince depending on the House of Austria established in an
Estate set in the midst of their own. That which most troubled the
Republike, was the siege of Rochelle, where the King of France was so engaged,
that he had not any hope to be free a long time. The Pope was agitated with the
same motives as the Republicke of Venice, but he could not so openly show unto
the King the desire which he had to disengage him from thence, least he should
thereby witness that his particular interest was more preualent then that of
the Catholic Church, for the honor whereof they pleaded in depressing the
Huguenots.

The other Princes of Italy kept close, not daring to show which way their
inclination was bent.

The Duke of Sauoye only imagined that he might profit by th^s war, and upon
the good opinion that he had of himself, was persuaded that he might share the
conquest of Montferrat with the house of Austria.

The King of Spain t^king his advantage by the siege of Rochelle, and by the
presumption of the Duke of Sauoye thought fit to take his opportunity to seize
upon Cazal. We must confess that his design was well conceived, and with
great likelylood of a fortunate success. Hitherto the Spaniards had in every
thing so well taken their time, that it seemed a thing impossible to cross
their designs, nevertheless the wheel of their good fortunes began here to
stop, and from hence forward we have seen a continual company of ill
accidents befall them, which last even to this day. For Louys by an incredible
diligence and resolution takes Rochelle in despite of the English, forces the
Straight of Suze, relieueth Cazal, and so endangers the Duchy of Milaine,
that had it not been for the troubles in Languedork which he desired to make
an end of, he might have carried it away from the King of Spain at the first
blow.

The Spaniards secure themselves, and recovering the paths of their ordinary
prudence, seize upon the Grisons, cause most mighty Armies to pass that way,
send Marquess Spinola to the government of Milaine, raise an army in Italy,
and besiege Cazal anew.

Lewys sends strong forces into Piemont. The Duke of Sauoye would amuse him
with hopes of a peace: but he met with his match, with such an undaunted
courage that both in sight of him and Spinola, he forced from him Pignerol,
which will be an everlasting memorial to posterity of the Reign of Lewis.

The siege of Cazal continues. The pestilence rages in both the two armies.
The Venetians receive an overthrow toward the Mantuan. The city of Mantua is
surprised. Notwithstanding all these accidents Lewis assembles new forces, and
prouides to relieve Cazal, In the mean time he falls sick at Lions. The
Spaniard sowes dissension in his Counsel, which interrupteth the course of so
many heroike actions, and after so many storms past, one seems upon the point
to suffer shipwreck in the haven. There appeared his virtue against whom all
these devises were contrived, for at length he got out of this Labyrinth by the
clue of honor. The King recouers his health: Cazal is bravely relieved: and
the Duke of Mantua not only reestablished in his Dominions, but (which will
seem incredible to after ages) he is invested therein by the Emperor. The
Grizons are set at liberty: Italy is freed from the armies of Strangers: the
port lies open to her assistance, and for diverse defections of the Duke of
Lorraine they make sure of his Estates by which means the communication of
Italy with Flanders in barred

See here the true and lively table of these differences, where note first of
all the Duke of Sauoye his fault in having imagined that he should share
Moniferrat with the House of Austria in despite of France, it being a case most
evident, that he could not fail to be dispoyled by the one or the other, or by
both two together, if extraordinary indulgence had not been used toward him.

It is also a thing wholly manifest that the Duke of Lorraine has forsaken the
maxim of his true interest in taking by a fi^t of jollitie the party of the
Empe^our against that of France, in a season when the House of Austria was so
unable to d^fend herself, and that of France so free to enterprise.

As for the Emperor, he cannot excuse himself for having invaded Italy
before he was sure of Germany, and for having quitted the pretense of Religion
(which has so much served him) in oppressing the Duke of Mantua being a great
Catholic.

The resolution of France will be for ever memorable, which notwithstanding the
siege of Roehelle assisted by the English: and the war in Languedoc which the
Spaniard made show to foment, has not albeit ever abandonned her true maxims,
in assisting powerfully her Neigbours, and every where dashing the projects of
Spain. Whence I conclude, that the glory of the King, the greatness of his
State, and the eminent reputation that he now enjoys, will continue as long
as he shall remain constant in this resolution.

FINIS.

