A TREATISE UPON SUNDRY MATTERS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY NINE Articles of
Religion, which are professed in the Church of ENGLAND.

Long since written and published by THOMAS ROGERS.

Romans 16. verse 17. I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently, which cause
divisions, and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have received, and
avoid them. LONDON, Printed by JOHN LEGATT, and are to be sold by RICHARD
THRALE, at the sign of the Crosse-keyes at Paul's Gate. 1639.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER in God, and his Right Honorable good Lord
RICHARD, by the Divine providence Archb. of Canterbury, and Primate of England,
and Counceller to the most High and Mighty Prince, JAMES, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland.
MOst Reverend Father in God, there is no one thing in this world that of men
truly zealous and Christian, in these latter days of the world with greater
earnestness has bin desired, then that by a joint and common consent of all
the Churches rightly, and according to the Canons of the sacred Scriptures,
reformed, there might be a draught made, and divulged, containing, and
expressing the sum, and substance of that Religion, which they do both
concordably teach, and uniformely maintain.

That holy man (of happy remembrance) D. Cranmer (who sometime enjoyed that
room in our Church, Arch. Cranmer.
which your Grace now worthily possesses) in the days of that most godly young
Prince, K. Edward the sixth, employed a great part of his time and study, for
the effecting of that work; and imparted his thoughts with the most principal
persons, and of rarest note in those days for their wisdom, piety, and
credit among the people of God throughout Christendom. Mr. Calvin,
understanding of his intent, addressed his letters unto the said Archbishop,
and offered his service, saying, That might his labors stand the Church in
stead, Ne december quidem maria, it would not grieve him to sail over ten Seas to
such a purpose.

But this proving a work of much difficulty, if not altogether impossible in
men's eyes, especially in those days, to be brought about; Unity of doctrine in
all Churches reformed.
the next course, and resolution was, that every Kingdom, and free State, or
Principality, which had abandoned the superstitions, and Antichristian Religion
of the Church of Rome, and embraced the Gospel of Christ, should divulge a
Brief of that Religion, which among themselves was taught, and believed, and
whereby through the mercy of God in Christ, they did hope to be saved. Which to
Gods great glory, and the singular benefit, and comfort of all Churches, both
present, and to come (as the extant Harmony of all their confessions does most
sweetly record) with no great labor was notably performed.

This work of theirs told the Churches in those days, and does us, and will
inform our posterity; that not only in every particular State, and Kingdom,
but also throughout Christendom, Ab initio reformationis ardebant amore
veritatis omnes Politici, Ecclesiastici, Plebeii: Jezler. de diutur. belli
Euchar. page 49. Unity of doctrine in the Church of England, in King Edward the
sixth his days.
where the Gospel was entertained, the Primitive and Apostolical days of the
Church were again restored. For the multitudes of them that did believe (I
speak both jointly of all, and severally of each reformed people, not of every
particular person, fantastique, false apostles, and perverse teachers, or
professors in any Church, who were not wanting even in the Apostles days)
touching the maine, and fundamental points of true Religion, were then of one
heart, and of one soul, and did think, and speak one thing, and live in peace.

3. The said Archbishop (for unto whom better, after God, and the King, can we
ascribe the glory of this worthy Act?) wrought this Unity, and Uniformity of
doctrine in this Kingdom, in the Halcyon days of our English Josias, K.
Edward the sixth of that name: and the same doctrine, so by his means
established in the time of peace (a notable work of peace) like a manly,
heroical, and heavenly Captain under our General, Jesus Christ, he
resolutely, even with his heart blood, and in the fiery torments, afterward
confirmed in the days of persecution.

A certain learned man, Anno 1552.
(speaking of the Religion here then professed, and writing unto the Lords of
our late Queens Council) does say, he (meaning the Papist his adversary, who
charged our Church with discord, and disagreements about matters of Religion:
K. Edward the 6.
) He ought (said he) if he had been able, to have brought out the public
Confession, and Articles of faith, agreed in K. Edwards time: and have showed
any in England, that professing the Gospel, dissenteth from the same. So
esteemed he (and with him many thousands of learned, and judicious men) of the
doctrine then ratified by authority, and professed in this Kingdom.

But those days of our Churches peace continued not long (through our
unthankfulness, Q. Mary.
and sins) neither on the other side was our persecution permanent (through
the goodness of God) though for the time exceeding vehement, and violent. For
nubecula fuit, and cito transiit, It vanished away quickly, as do many raging
storms even upon the sudden: yet not through the power of Gunpowder, and
treasons, but through the force of ardent prayers unto the Almighty. For arma
ecclesiae, preces.

4. We find that Mr. Latimer (that sacred, The prayers of the persecuted Saints
for the reducing of true Religion into the Realm. F. Latimer.
and reverend Father) addicted himself very seriously in those days unto the
exercise of prayer; and his principal, and most usual prayers were first, for
himself, next, for the afflicted Church of England, and lastly, for Lady
Elizabeth, that deceased King Edwards, and Queen Mary's sister.

For himself he prayed, that as God had made him (...) (Minister and Preacher
of his truth: so he might constantly bear witness unto the same, and have
the grace and power to maintain it in the face of the world; even till the
hour of his death. For the Church of England he prayed, that God would be
pleased once again to restore the free preaching of the Gospel to this Realm
(and this with all possible fervency of Spirit, he craved at the hands of God.)
And for Lady Elizabeth, that he would preserve, and make her a comfort to his
then comfortless people in England. And the Almighty and our heavenly Father
both heard, and granted all, and every of his petitions.

Mr. Gualter (that learned, painful, and excellent Divine at Tigure,
dedicating his holy, and Christian Comments upon the lesser Prophets unto D.
Parkhurst, B. Parkhurst.
Bishop of Norwich (who in the days of the forementioned Q. Mary, voluntarily
had exiled himself so far as Switzerland, for his preservation, if it might
be, unto better times) says of the said Parkhurst, that when he lived in
Tigure, Lady Elizabeth was ever in his mouth: her Faith, her wisdom, her
magnanimous spirit, her virgineous and chaste behavior, he would ever
celebrate with high words and commendations, and that God would guard, Q.
Elizabeth.
and safeguard her person for the good of his people, was his daily prayer: yea
(says the same Gualter) orabant idem tecum pii omnes, it was not your prayer
only, but all Gods people so prayed besides. And their prayers were not made
in vain: For both Queen Mary lived not long; and Lady Elizabeth was placed in
the Royal throne; superstition was expulsed, and true Religion again, to the
singular comfort, and multiplication of Gods people in this Kingdom, very
solemnly restored.

Notwithstanding, an Uniformity of doctrine to be taught embraced, True
doctrine restored, anno 1558. and an uniformitie of the same established, and
published, an. 1562.
and professed, by authority of the Prince, and State, was not published, till
certain years after the Queens attaining the kingly Diadem; but then Articles
of Religion, to the number of thirty nine, drawn yet three years before, were
commended to the consideration, and perusal of the whole Clergy of both
Provinces, in an orderly, and lawful assembly, or Convocation of theirs at
London; and by a sweet, and unanimous readiness, thereupon by them allowed.
This was effected in the year of our Lord 1562. Ann. 1562.
(the same year that the merciless massacre at Vassey in France was committed
by the Duke of Guize, and the same very time also that all the Protestants in
that country of France, for holding and professing the same doctrine, were
sentenced unto death, and destruction by the Parliament at Paris: after which
their condemnation ensued those horrible, and more then savage murders, and
slaughters of the Religious, and only for their Religion, at Carrascone, at
Toulouse, Amiens, Towers, Sens, Again, Aurane, and many other Cities, Towns,
and Villages throughout France.)

A principal contriver of this Uniformity in Religion, Arch. Parker.
and thereby Unity among us, was another Predecessor of your Graces, even D.
Parker the first Archbishop of Canterbury in the said Queens days.

Hereupon Beza from Geneva, Doctrinae puritas viget in Anglia, pure and
sincere; Religion flourishes in England; Zanchius, from Stra^borough, Per hanc
Reginam factam, by her meaning Q Elizabeth's) coming to the Crown, God again
has restored his doctrine, and true worship; and Daneus, The whole compass of
the world has never seen any thing more blessed, nor more to be wished then is
her government.

So now again flourished those Apostolical times (as I may say) of unity, and
Uniformity of doctrine in our Church. For then were there no contentions, nor
dissentions, nor thorny and pricking disputations among us, about questions of
Religion, tantum res nobis cum satellitibus quibusdam Pontificiis (as Bishop
Jewel said) we then skirmished only with the Papists. As it was at the
building of Salomons Temple: so was it with us then. We set upon the building
of Gods House (which is his Church) without din, without noise, and stirs.
The adversaries without, heard us, and heard of our doings abroad by the pens
of the learned Jewel, Nowell, Calfehill, and such other Architects of ours; to
our selves we were comely at Jerusalem; to our enemies, terrible as an Army of
Banners.

6. Also what before, viz. an. 62. they had agreed upon, Subscription required
unto the Book of Art. an. 1^^2.
the same at another Assembly at London, an. 71. and the 13. of Q. Elizabeth,
according to an Act of Parliament then made, the said Clergy of England (the
Archbishops and Bishops first beginning, and giving the example) by their
several subscriptions with their own hands, most readily did approve.

An. 1572.
Howbeit in the year next ensuing, sciz. an. 72. (a year many ways memorable)
especially for the great, and general Massacre of above an hundred thousand
Protestants in France, chiefly in Paris, and the country thereabout
adjoining, begun on St. Bartholmewes Eve Bartholomaeus flet, quia Gallicus
occubat Atlas.
; for Pope Gregory's excommunicating of Q Elizabeth, for defending this
doctrine, and religion, which here we speak of; and thirdly, for the erecting
of private Presbyteries now first in England) diverse of the inferior Ministers
in, and about London, and elsewhere in this Kingdom, not a little disturbed
the quiet of our state, and peace: some of them by untimely, and inconsiderate
admonitions, pamphlets, and Libels; others by obstinate refusing to subscribe,
as both Law did enjoyne, and their Fathers in Christ, and superiors before them
had done. But these men speedily both by learning were answered, and by
authority censured, suspended, or deprived.

Unity of doctrine still continued.
7. And yet not one of these Recusants, and so not one of Englands Clergy,
either now, or before, did ever oppugn the received, public, and Catholic
doctrine of our Church, but most willingly approved, and applauded the same, as
the truth of God.

For even the admonitioners themselves (which said that they did strive for
true Religion; and wished the Parliament even with perfect hatred to detest the
Church of England, whereof notwithstanding they were members) even they do say
how they (meaning the Bishops, and their partakers) hold the substance of
Religion with us, and we with them. And again: We all (of us) confess one
Christ. And their Champion does acknowledge, that her Majesty has delivered
us from the spiritual Egypt of Popery.

So that for doctrine (I means still for the maine points of doctrine) there
was now a sweet, and blessed concord among us: which Unity continued all that
holy, and Reverend Fathers, I mean Archbishop Parkers time, which was till the
17. year of Queen Elizabeth.

8. Archbish. Grindall
After him succeeded in the said Archiepiscopall chair B. Grindall, a right
famous, and worthy Prelate; and for religion so sound, as in K. Edwards days
(had the Prince lived a while longer) he had been promoted unto the
Bishopric of London, upon the translation of B Ridly unto Durham (for these
things had the State then in purpose) But God otherwise had decreed for their
aduancements, as that the one of them should pass through the fire unto the
kingdom of heaven; and the other escape the dangers of many storms, and
waters, before he came unto any preferment at all. And so accordingly Ridly was
burned, and Grindall banished, and both of them deprived either of life, or
living, or both; and that for one, and the same cause, and doctrine, which they
had preached, and we profess.

But the tempest being ouerblowne, and Q. Elizabeth (her self having likewise
escaped the bloody hands of her cruel enemies, yea and Gunpowder trains, and
Treasons too, in most barbarous manner laid to have blown up her Saint like and
sanctified Body, and Soul, into the heavens; and all for her constant
favoring, and embracing this very doctrine) her Majesty (not forgetful what
he had endured for the cause of Christ, and his Church) advanced this zealous
Confessor, and tried Soldier, unto the Sea first of London (before designed
him:) next of York, and lastly of Canterbury.

The care of this Archbishop was great to further the glory of God, but through
the envy and malice of his ill-willers, his power was but small; his place
high, but himself made low, through some disgraces, by his potent adversaries:
which he meekely, and patiently endured till his dying day.

6. During the time of this man's troubles, among other, The factious increase,
and grow confident.
two things especially deserve observation: One is, the flocking of Jesuits
into the Kingdom (who before then never came among us;) the other is the
insolency, and boldness of our home faction.

The Jesuits indicted Councils; summoned Synodes; enacted and reuersed orders;
and exercised Papal jurisdiction among us: we not witting, nor so much as
dreaming of any such matter.

The Brethren (for so did they now style themselves) in their Churches and
charges would neither pray, nor say service, nor Baptize, nor celebrate the L.
Supper; nor Marry, nor Bury, nor do any other Ecclesiastical duty according
to the Law, but after their own deuisings. And abroad (as if they had bin
acquainted with the Iesuitical proceedings; or the Jesuits, with their
practices) they had their meetings both classical and Synodicall; they set
down decrees, reuersed orders, elected Ministers, exacted Subscription, and
executed the censures of suspe^^ision, and excommunication where they thought
good.

The I^su^es had for their provincial, first Robert Parsons, alias, Cowbuck
then Weston, and lastly Garnet (which Garnet) continued in that office till the
year 1605. when he was apprehended, and for most horrible and hellish
treasons, as an arrant Traitor put to death in Paul's Churchyard the fame year.
And the Brethren had their (I know not what) chief men. All of these residing
in, and about London; and in special favor both with the Gentiles, and vulgar
people of their several factions: and so continued multiplying their number
and growing strong, even headstrong in boldness, and schism, till the dying
day of this most grave and reverend Archbishop, which was in the month of
July. 1583.

10. Some four months before whose death, the said Brethren, at a certain
Assembly of their own appointing, among other things (as I find) decreed,
Unity of doctrine still holds among us. An. 1583.
that if Subscription unto the book of Articles of Religion (before mentioned,
and still meant) should again be urged, the said Brethren might subscribe
thereunto according to the Statute. Which declares that what diversity, and
disagreement soever was about other matters, yet abode there still a blessed
Unity among us touching the foundation of Christian Religion. And this was in
25. year of Q. Elizabeth.

Archbish. Whitegift.
11. Next unto him D. Whitegift, then Bishop of Worcester (a man deservedly unto
that dignity promoted, and for his manifold pains in writing, teaching, and
defending the truth, his wisdom in governing, and his well demeaning of
himself every way, worthy the double honor which he did enjoy, or the State
could advance him unto) from thence was translated unto the Sea of Canterbury.

No sooner was he confirmed in his office, but observing both the open and
intolerable contempt in many places of all Church orders by authority
prescribed; and hearing both of many secret conuenticles, and unlawful
assemblies in his Province; and of the tumults, and garboiles abroad, and even
at his very admission unto his charge, raised in Scotland, and that for the
selfsame cause, which by the Brethren here in England was maintained; and
foreseeing the dangers, and troubles likely to ensue (for which he should give
an account, if in time he sought not means to prevent them) he thought it his
bounden duty (for the preservation of unity and purity in Religion, the
preventing of further schism, and the discovery of men's inclinations either
unto peace, or faction) that all, and every Minister Ecclesiastical (having
cure of souls within the Province of Canterbury) under his own hand, and by
subscription, Subscription the second time called for.
should testify his consent both unto the points of Religion in the
Convocation, Ann. 62. approved, and likewise unto other Articles, necessary
for concord sake of all, and every man, Minister especially, to be
acknowledged, and accordingly, by due course of Law called then thereunto.
Which was done the very first year of his remoueall, and of her Majesty the
26. Anno 1584.


This of the brethren was termed the woeful year of subscription, but that
they should so do there was no cause, unless they are grieved that factious
spirits, and malecontented Ministers, and Preachers were discovered, and their
erroneous, and schismatic opinions brought into light. And surely never was
their subscription hitherto by authority urged in this land, but diverse new
fancies (held yet for truths, not to be doubted of, among the brethren) were
thereby detected, for Gods people to avoid as monsters: neither has our Church
lost, by imposing, nor the adversaries gained at the long run, by refusing
Subscription.

12. In the years 71. and 72. when subscriptiom first was required, the whole
land will witness, that many, and sundry books (as well in Latin, How basely
the Brethren conceive of the doctrine by the Bishops agreed upon, and
established by the Prince.
as English) then, and afterward flew abroad. In which we read how then, and in
those days, the truth of God did in a manner but peep out (as it were) at the
Screene, that Cranmer, Parker, Grindall, and all the other Martyrs, Preachers,
and learned men (which first in our age brought the light of the Gospel into
this Realm) did see a little, and had a glimpse of the truth, but ouersaw many
things, which in these days of the Sunshine of the Gospel, men of meaner
gifts do see, and yet may not utter them without great danger of the Laws
(through the iniquity of the times) though the said things now seen be
comprised in the Book of God, and also be a part of the Gospel, yea the very
Gospel it self (so true are they) and of such importance, as if every hair
of our heads were a life (say the Brethren) we ought to afford them in defense
of these matters, the Articles of Religion penned, and agreed upon by the
Bishops, and Clergy, and ratified by the Prince, and Parliament, in comparison
of these things now revealed, and newly come to light, are but Childish and
toys.

Thus write they (as your grace best knows, and I would have quoted the
places where they may be read, had I either not written unto your self, or did
write unto a man unacquainted with their books.) And had they here stayed,
their words had bin able (without the more grace of God) to have moved the
Parliament, and all the people of this land (as they have prevailed but too
much already with their too credulous Favorites) to think our Church, for all
the reformation wrought, and Uniformity in doctrine established, to be much
awry, and far from the truth it should profess. But setting down (as they
have done) and publishing both what the truth is, which now breaks out, and
offreth it self by their ministry to the view of the whole world (which before
did but peep out at the Screene) and what the things be, which they of mean
gifts do see, and our Fathers, and the Martyrs, Bishops, and Preachers, both
in King Edwards days, and afterward (known, and acknowledged to be men of
excellent parts either did not see at all, or ouersee: and what likewise the
points of doctrine newly now revealed, their aternum Euangelium (which without
great danger may not be preached in England, no more then the doctrine, and
Articles of the Church of England, may be preached at Rome; and for defense
whereof they ought to afford even their very lives, were they so many as the
hairs of every of their heads) is, and be, they demonstrate themselves to be
most childishly vain, and idle in their imaginations; (which they take yet to
be illuminations of the spirit.)

13. For all their doings, The uncouth doctrine of the factious Brethren.
and discourses (to say the best of them) are but to erect a new (which they
term a true) ministry, and their Discipline among us.

Themselves do say, The controversy betwixt them, and us, is not as (the
Bishops, and their wil-willers) they would bear the world in hand, for a Cap,
a Tippet, or a Surplesse, but for greater matters, concerning a true ministry,
and regiment of the Church, according to the word: the one whereof, that is, a
true ministry, they shall never have, till Archbishops, and Bishops be put
down, and all ministers made equal: the other also will never be brought to
pass, till Kings and Queens do subject themselves unto the Church, and
submit their scepters, and throw down their Crowns before the Church and lick
up the dust of the feet of the Church, and willingly abide the censures of the
Church, that is, of the Presbytery. For as the Church is subject unto the
civil magistrate in respect of his civil authority; so must the Magistrate,
the King and Queen, subject themselves, and be obedient to the just, and
lawful authority of the Church. The civil magistrate is none officer at all
of the Church. For Church Officers be non Magnates, aut Tetrarchae, not
gracious, or honorable Lords, but Ministers of the Church The Presbytery is the
Church: and every Congregation, or Church, should and must in it have a
Presbytery.

This is the Light, which indeed the Martyrs never saw; the Religion, which our
Brethren strive for, the Truth which they may not preach; not childish
doctrine, like the Bishops Articles, but the wise Gospel; the maine, and
material points of Religion, now in the days last of all (yea after the
eighth Through breaking of H. N. his Euangelium regni) revealed, and for
furtherance whereof they are to lend, and spend even all their lives, if
occasion be ministered.

14. Strange and strong delusions: First, to take these and other such
assertions for Truths, and heavenly mysteries, which are but the fancies of
troubled brains, not grounded, nor truly gathered from Gods Word.

Next, to teach one another, and all their favorers, how they should be as
ready, and prepared even for these matters, to give other their livings, and to
give their lives (were they as many as the hairs of (all) their heads) as
Cranmer, Ridly, Latimer did; and Parker, Grindall, and all other Preachers
would, and every Christian man and woman should, if they be called thereunto
for the Apostolical, and Catholic doctrine of our Church, which all Gods
people do know, and the Brethren themselves (as before has bin noted) do
confess, is originally from God, and his written Word.

These and many more (too many here to be recapitulated) such fantasies of
theirs, or phrensies rather, this first subscription brought first to light;
and yet happy had it bin for Gods Church, and people, they had never bin
broached.

Of the second Subscription urged an. 84.
15. Semblably the next subscription called for by the last Archb. your L.
predecessor, an. 84. discovered even the very thoughts and desires of those
Brethren before, but now styled faithful Brethren, which have, and do seek
for the Discipline, reformation of the Church.

Many Treatises before, but now, and diverse years ensuing, they flew about, and
abroad like Atomies; and by them the same things which before, but in a
differing sort, and in other words, they publish.

For touching Church officers, they name who, and how many sorts they be of
them, viz. Doctors, Pastors, Governors, Deacons, and Widows, no more, no fewer.

They say, every Church must be furnished with a Teacher and a Pastor, as with
two eyes; with elders, as with feet; with Deacons, as with hands. Every
Congregation must have eyes, hands, and feet, and yet neither all, nor at all
any Congregation is to have an Head, answerable to those Feet, Hands, and Eyes.

The Doctor, by their doctrine, must be a distinct minister from the pastor,
and only teach true doctrine, and neither exhort, nor apply his doctrine,
according to the times, and his auditory, nor minister the Sacraments. For
these things the pastor is to perform. Which pastor also, whenever he
administreth the Sacraments, must necessarily make a Sermon, or else he
commits Sacrilege.

And concerning discipline, by their doctrine, every Congregation must have
absolute authority, to admonish, to censure, to excommunicate, and to
anathematize all offending persons, yea even Kings, and Princes, if they be of
the Congregation. And no Prince but must be of some Parish, and under one
Presbytery or other always. Where this power is not, in their judgments, one
of the tokens of a true Church is wanting. For this Discipline with them is a
mark of the Church, and numbered among the Articles of their Faith.

16. This (say they) is the great cause, the holy cause, which they will never
leave suing for, though there should be a thousand Parliaments in their days,
until either they obtain it, or bring the Lord in vengeance and blood against
the State and the whole land, for repelling the same. The Brethrens divine
conceits of their Discipline.
The discipline is Gods holy yoke, Gods scepter; the kingdom and throne of
Christ.

Our controversy (say they) whether Jesus Christ shall be King or no. Again,
the end of all our travel is, to build up the walls of Jerusalem, and to set
up the^ Throne of Jesus Christ, our heavenly King, in the midst thereof; the
advancing whereof is a testimony unto us, that we shall have part in that
glory, which shall be revealed hereafter.

So learn we now from their said books, learned and demonstratiue discourses
(which the Fathers, and our forefathers never saw, nor had learned) both that
their Discipline established and exercised, is a visible mark of a true
Church; and to desire the advancement of the same, an invisible token of an
elect child of God: so as neither is that a Church, at least no true Church,
where their Discipline is not; neither they but titular Christians, no true
Christians indeed, which either sigh, or seek not to have it established, and
Presbyteries in every parish to be advanced.

17. The Articles of our religion (concluded upon by the reverend Clergy of
our Church) with these learned, The Br^renue and continue their base conceits
of the public Art of our religion, in comparison of their new Gospel.
and all-seeing Brethren, are but the Bishops decrees, the Articles of the
Convocation house; and reveal some little truth: but these wise Brethren (so
faithful have they bin between God, and his Church) they have not failed to
show us the whole counsel of God.

And yet these faithful Brethren, either through forgetfulness, or frailty,
(or which I rather think) forced thereunto by the power of truth, do plainly
confess, that those very decrees of our Bishops, and Articles of the
Conuocation-house, even that little, little part of the Gospel, which the said
Bishops, and Martyrs brought to light, and has enlightened the whole Realm,
contains the very fundamental points of Christianity.

Whereof I still gather, that had their newly revealed, termed learned
Discourses, and Doctrines touching Discipline, and their Presbyteries
(howsoever with goodly, and glorious titles, to ravish poor hearts with the
desire thereof, brandished, and set out) never bin divulged, or preached, we
may be saved; but without knowing and believing the Articles, or doctrine of
our Church (which yet is not ours, but Gods) there is no salvation ordinarily
to be looked for, of any man: so true, and of such necessity is this; so
impertinent, and unneedful the other.

18. Octogesimus octavus mirabilis annus: it was prophesied to be a wonderful
year, long before it came, and will never be forgotten now it is past.

An. 1588. Q. Elizabeth opposes her authority against the Br. their books,
and writings
Among the things for which the year 88. is famous, one and not of least
regard, is; that before it expired, these books of the Brethren, by a
Proclamation from Q. Elizabeth, were denounced Schismatic, and seditious;
and the doctrine in them contained, erroneous, tending to persuade, and bring
in a monstrous, and apparent dangerous Innovation within her dominions, and
countries; and to make a change, even a dangerous change of the form of
doctrine then in use. And therefore the said books were commanded to be
brought in, and delivered into the hands of authority; and special charge
given, that no more of that nature should come abroad, or be printed.

Whereby (so much as in that blessed) Queen, whose name with eternal honor
shall be recorded these new fancies of the brethren were hissed, and exploded
out of this Christian kingdom; and the articles, or public doctrine of our
Church confirmed, countenanced, and by the royal prerogative of that
Peerless prince, more strongly ratified, and commended to her awefull and
good subjects then before.

19. The zeal of learned, and godly men hereupon was inflamed, and their
courage so increased, as whereas before this time but one or two, or a very few
(the first whereof was your L. immediate Predecessor, Most learned and worthy
men set themselves against the Br. and the Presbyterian discipline.
whose memory be always honorable among the Saints) did encounter the Brethren
and oppugned their fancies: now an army of most valourous, and resolute
Champions, and Challengers rose up, which then, and piuers years ensuing
(among whom as your Grace was the first in time which gave the onset: so are
you to be reckoned with the first, and best for zeal, wisdom, and learning)
did conflict with these Brethren, defended the Prelacie, stood for the Prince,
and State, put the new Doctors to the foil, profligated the Elders, set upon
the Presbytery, and so battered the new Discipline, as hitherto they could
never, nor hereafter shall ever fortify, and repair the decaies thereof,

20. Notwithstanding what the brethren wanted in strength and learning, they
had in wiliness, A Stratagem of the Br.
and though they lost much one way in the general, and maine point of their
discipline, yet recovered they not a little advantage another way, by an odd
and new device of theirs, in a special article of their classical
instructions.

For while these Worthies of our Church were employing their engines, and
forces, partly in defending the present government Ecclesiastical, partly in
assaulting the Presbytery and new Discipline, even at that very instant the
Brethren (knowing themselves too weak either to overthrow our holds, and that
which we hold, Ann. 1595.
or to maintain their own) they abandoned quite the Bulwarks which they had
raised, and gave out were impregnable, suffering us to beat them down,
without any, or very small resistance: and yet not careless of their affairs,
left not the wars for all that, but from an odd corner, and after a new
fashion, which we little thought of (such was the cunning) set upon us afresh
again, by dispersing in printed books (which for ten years space before
they had bin in hammering among themselves to make them complete) their
Sabbath speculations, and Presbyterian (that is more then either Kingly, or
Popely) directions for the observation of the Lords Day.

This Stratagem of theirs was not observed then, neither (I fear me) is
regarded as it should be yet: and yet did, and since has, and doubtless in
time to come, if it be not timely seen unto, with unsound opinions; and
paradoxes will so poison many, as the whole Church, and Commonweal will find
the danger, and inconvenience of them (so plausibie are they to men either
popularly religious, or preposterously, and injudiciously zealous.)

Certain fruits, and effects of the Sabb. doctrine published by consent of the
Brethren.
21. In this their sally (as I said before) they set not upon the Bishops and
their calling, their Chancelors, etc. (as Popish, and Antichristian) they let
them alone, seeing and knowing they are too well backed for them to subvert: but
(which are of great, all; and almost of the same antiquity with Bishops diverse
of them, and I had almost said as necessary) they ruinate, and at one blow
beat down all times and days, by just authority destined to religious, and
holy uses, besides the Lords Day, saying plainly, and in peremptory words,
that the Church has none authority, ordinarily, or from year to year
perpetually to sanctify any other day to those uses, but only the Lords Day.

They build not Presbyteries expressedly (though under hand, if it be well
marked, they do erect them in their exercises of the Sabbath:) but they set up
a new Idol, their Saint Sabbath (erst in the days of Popish blindness S.
Sunday) in the midst, and minds of Gods people.

By the former they have opened not a gap, but a wide gate unto all
licentiousness, liberty, and profaneness on the Holy days (which is
readily, and greedily apprehended of all sorts of people every where,
especially of their favorites) to the high dishonor of God, decay of our
devotion, hinderance of Christian knowledge and wisdom in all sorts,
especially in the vulgar multitude, and poor servants, advantage of the common
enemies, and gross contempt of the necessary, and laudable orders of our
Church. By the latter they have introduced a new, and more then either Jewish,
or Popish superstition into the land, to no small blemish of our Christian
profession, and scandal of the true servants of God, and therewith doctrine
most erroneous, dangerous, and Antichristian. The sum of the Sabbath doctrine
broached by the Brethren.


22. Their doctrine summarily may be reduced unto these two heads, whereof the
one is, that the Lords day (even as the old Sabbath was of the Jews) must
necessarily be kept, and solemnized of all and every Christian, under the pain
of eternal condemnation both of body, and soul.

The other, that under the same penalty it must be kept from the highest to the
lowest, both of King, and people, in sort and manner as these Brethren among
themselves have devised, decreed, and prescribed.

The former of these is like that of the false apostles which came from Judea
unto Antioch, and taught the Brethren, that unless they were circumcised after
the manner of Moses, they could not be saved. Whom the Apostles, Paul and
Barnabas first, and afterward Peter, James, and the rest at Jerusalem both
zealously did resist, and in their Synod, or Convocation powerfully suppress.

The latter, as bad as that, has bin the mother of many heretical assertions,
and horrible conclusions.

I have read (and many there be alive which will justify it) how it was
preached in a Market town in Oxfordshire, that to do any servile work, or
business on the Lords day, is as great a sin, as to kill a man, or to commit
adultery. It was preached in Somersetshire, that to throw a bowl on the
Sabbath day, is as great a sin, as to kill a man. It was preached in
Norfolk, that to make a Feast, or wedding dinner on the Lords day, is as great
a sin, as for a Father to take a knife and cut his child's throat. It was
preached in Suffolk (I can name the man, and I was present when he was
convented before his Ordinary for preaching the same) that to ring more Bells
then one upon the Lords day to call the people unto Church, is as great a sin
as to commit murder.

When these things I read, and heard, mine heart was stricken with an horror,
and so is it still, when I do but think of them, and calling into mind the
Sabbath doctrine, at London Printed for I. Porter, and T. Man. An. 95. which I
had read before (wherein very many things are to this effect) I presently smelt
both whose disciples all those preachers are; and that the said doctrine had
taken deep impression in men's hearts, and was dispersed (while our watchmen
were otherwise busied, if not asleep) over the whole Kingdom.

The Br. Doctrine of the Sa bath called in by authority, and forbidden any
more to be printed.
23. It is a comfort unto my soul, and will be till my dying hour, that I have
been the man, and the means that the Sabbatarian errors and impieties are
brought into light, and knowledge of the State, whereby whatsoever else, sure I
am, this good has ensued, namely, that the said books of the Sabbath
(comprehending the above mentioned, and many more such fearful, and
haereticall assertions) has been both called in, and forbidden any more to be
printed, and made common. Your Graces predecessor, Archb. Whitgift, by his
letters, and Officers at Synods, and Visitations, An. 99. did the one: Ann.
1559. 1600.
and Sir John Popham, L. chief Justice of England, at Bury S. Edmons in Suff.
An. 1600. did the other.

And both these most reverend, sage, and honorable Personages by their
censures have declared (if men will take admonition) that the Sabbath doctrine
of the Brethren, agrees neither with the doctrine of our Church, nor with the
laws, and orders of this Kingdom; disturbeth the peace both of the
Commonweal, and Church, and tends unto Schism in the one, and Sedition in
the other: and therefore neither to be backed, nor bolstred by any good Subject,
whether he be Church or Commonweal man.

24. Thus have errors, and noisome doctrines (like byles, Purity of doctrine
all Qu. Elizabeth's reign maintained in England.
and Botches) ever, and anon risen up (to the overthrow of our Churches health,
and safety if it might be) but yet (such has been the Physic of our
discipline) as what by launcing, purging, and other good means used, the Body
still has heene vpholden, and preserved from time to time.

And well may errors (like gross humors, and tumors) continue among us (as
never Church was, or will be quite without them while it is militant here upon
earth) yet are they not of the substance at all of our Religion, or any part of
our Churches Doctrine (no more then ill humors, which be in, are of the Body;
or dregs in a Vessel of wine, be any part either of the Vessel, or Wine)
which remains, as at the first, most sound, and uncorrupted: and so continued
even until the dying day of that most illustrious, and religious Princess
Queen Elizabeth.

The very Brethren themselves do write, that

In regard of the common grounds of Religion, and of the Ministry, We are all
one. We are all of one Faith, one Baptism, one Body, one Spirit, have all one
Father, one Lord; Ann. 1601.
and be all of one Heart against al wickedness, superstition, idolatry, heresy;
and we seek with one Christian desire, the advancement of the pure Religion,
worship, and Honor of God.

We are Ministers of the Word by one order; we administer Prayers and
Sacraments, by one form; we Preach one Faith and substance of doctrine. And we
Praise God heartily that the true Faith, by which we may be saved, and the true
doctrine of the Sacraments, and the pure Worship of God, is truly taught, and
that by public authority, and retained in the book of Articles; Hitherto the
said Brethren. And this was their verdict of our Churches doctrine in the last
year save one of Q. Elizabeth's reign, then which nothing was ever more truly
said, or written. And this Unity, and purity of doctrine she left with us when
she departed this world.

K. James.
After Elizabeth, reigned King James.
Who found this our Church (as all the world knows) in respect of the
grounds of true Religion, at Unity; Anno 1603.
and that Unity, in Verity, and that Verity confirmed by public, and regal
approbation.

These Ecclesiastical Ministers therefore (though a thousand for number) who
at his Majesty's first coming into this Kingdom either complained unto his
Highness of (I know not what) errors, King James abused and troubled with
false informations and petitions of the Brethren.
and imperfections in our Church, even in points of doctrine (as if she erred
in matters of Faith) or desired that an Uniformity of doctrine might be
prescribed (as if the same had not already been done to his hands) or (as
weary belike of the old, by Queen Elizabeth countenanced, and continued)
desired his Majesty to take them out a new Lesson (as did the 71 Brethren of
Suffolk) are not to be liked.

Neither can we extol the goodness of our God sufficiently toward our King,
and us all, for inspiring his royal heart with holy wisdom to discern these
unstayed, and troublesome spirits; and inabling his Highness with power, and
graces from above, to decree orders, and directions for the general benefit,
and peace of the whole Church; neither suffered he his eyes to sleep, nor his
eyelids to slumber, nor the temples of his head to take any rest, till he had
set them down (before all other, though never so important, and weighty
affairs of the Crown, and Kingdom.)

King James patronizeth the Doctrine and Religion countenanced by Queen
Elizabeth.
26 My self have read, and thousand thousands, with an hundred thousand of his
Subjects besides, have either read, or heard of Proclamations after
Proclamations (to the number of six, or seven at the least) of books, and
open speeches of his Majesty, uttered in the Parliament House (and all of them
made vulgar within a year and little more, after his happy ingresse into this
kingdom) and taking the administration of this most famous, and nourishing
Empire upon himself (whereby the doctrine in this Land allowed, and publicly
graced and embraced of all sorts at his entrance into the Realm) has bin not
only acknowledged to be agreeable to Gods Word sincere, and the very same,
which both his Highness, and the whole Church, and kingdom of Scotland, yea
and the Primitive Church professed; but also by his authority Regal, and
paramont (as one of the maine pillars supporting his Estate) ratified to
continue; and all hope either of allowing, or tolerating in this kingdom of
any other doctrine, religion, or faction whatsoever, opposite, or any way
thwarting the Faith, and confession of the Church of England, in most plain,
pithy and peremptory words, and speeches, cut off.

The year 92. was not more famous for the Uniformity of doctrine in religion
then concluded, then the year 1604. Domii incarnati. An. 1604.
is memorable, and will be for seconding the same: neither got the Clergy in
those days more credit in composing the Articles of our Unity in Faith, then
did the last Convocation (whereat your Grace, then Bishop of London. was
present and President) in ratifying the Acts, and Articles of their
Antecessors; neither was Q Elizabeth more honored in establishing them at the
first, then is our K. James renowned, and more and more will be for approouing
under the great Seal of England, the late, and last Constitutions, and Canons
Ecclesiastical.

27. Subscription, the third time urged.
Whereby no person shall hereafter be received into the ministry, nor neither
by Institution, or Collation admitted to any Ecclesiastical living, nor
suffered to Preach, to Catechize, or to be Lecturer, or Reader of Divinity in
either University, or any Cathedral, or Collegiat Church, City, or Market
town, Parish Church, Chapel, or in any other place in this Realm, except,
etc. and except he shall first subscribe to these three Articles, etc. Whereof
the third is, that he allows the book of Articles of Religion, etc. Nor any
licenced to Preach, Read, Lecture, or Catechize, coming to reside in any
Diocese, shall be permitted there to Preach, Read, Lecture, Catechize or
minister the Sacraments, or to execute any other Ecclesiastical function (by
what authority soever he be thereunto admitted) unless he first consent, and
subscribe to the three Articles.

Neither shall any man teach either in public school, or in private house,
except he shall first prescribe to the first, and the third Articles simply,
etc.

Neither shall any man be admitted a Chancellor, Commissary, or Official, to
exercise any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, except, etc. and shall subscribe to
the Articles of Religion, agreed upon in the Convocation in the year 1562. etc.

And likewise all Chancellours, Commissaries, Registers, and all other that do
now possess, or execute any places of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or
service, shall before Christmas next in the presence of the Archbishop or
Bishop, or in open Court, under whom, or where they execute their offices, take
the same Oaths, and subscribe, as before he said; or upon refusal so to do,
shall be suspended from the execution of their Offices, until they shall take
the said Oaths, and subscribe as aforesaid.

28. In which Constitutions the wisdom of his Highness shows it self to
be excellent, who indeed (as exceeding necessary, both for the retain of peace
in the Church, and preventing of new doctrine, curious speculations, and
offenses, which otherwise daily would spring up, and intolerably increase)
calls for Subscription, in testimony of men's cordial consent unto the
received doctrine of our Church, but exacteth not their Oaths, as some do;
much less Oaths, Vows, and Subscription too, (but only in a particular
respect, and that of a very few in public office) as our neighbors have done.

Again, he requires Subscription, but not of civil Magistrates; not of the
Commons (as else where some do;) not of every man, yea of women, as well as of
men (as did the persecuted Church at Franckeford in Queen Mary's days) not of
Noble, Gentlemen and Courtiers, as in Scotland was Enacted in our Kings
minority;) but only of Ecclesiastical Ministers, Teachers, and spiritual
Officers, or of those which would be such, Of the Subscription called for.
and so do the reformed Churches in France, and Germany at this very day.

Last of all, his Majesty calls for Subscription unto Articles of Religion,
but they are not either Articles of his own lately devised; or the old newly
turkened: but the very Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops of
both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, and
that in the year of our Lord God, 1562. Cant. 2.127.
and unto none other; even the same Articles, for number thirty nine Ibid.
, no more, no fewer; and for words, sillables, and letters, the very same,
vnaugmented, undiminished, unaltered.

29. And being the same, the whole world is to know, that the Church of England
is not in religion changed, The Church of England settled, and constant in her
Religion.
or variable like the Moon; nor affects novelty, or new lessons, but holds
steadfastly, and conscionably that truth which by the Martyrs, and other
Ministers in this last age of the world has bin restored unto this kingdom;
and is grounded upon Gods written Word, the only foundation of our Faith.

And being the same, all men again may see that we are still at Unity both
among our selves at home, and with the neighbor Churches abroad in all matters
of chiefest importance, and fundamental points of religion, though our
adversaries, the Papists, would feign beat the contrary into the common
peoples heads.

And being the same, there is now (as also from the first restoration of the
Gospel among us there has been) an Uniformity likewise of doctrine by
authority established, which at the Kings first arrival among us, was so much
desired by the Brethren.

And finally being the same, let us not doubt, but persuade our selves, that we
shall find the Antichristian Church of Rome too the same, which for the same
doctrine, and for none other cause, persecuteth al Christian Churches, but ours
of England especially, with sword, fire, and power in most horrible, yea and
hellish manner: the effect of whose hatred against us, as we have often seen:
so especially had we felt the same the next year after our Kings ratification
of these Articles, had not our ever merciful God most miraculously detected,
both the Treason, and Traitors. Ann. 1605
For which his favors his holy Name be glorified of us, and our posterity,
throughout all generations.

The Brethren no changelings.
36. So our Church is the same. But the Brethren, the faithful and godly
Brethren too the same now, which they have also been. If they be, then will
they not deny (which An. 72. they writ) that we hold the substance of religion
with them, nor which An. 602. they published, and is before remembered) that the
true Faith by which we may be saved, and the true doctrine of the Sacraments,
and pure worship of God be truly taught, and that by public authority, and
retained in the book of Articles. And in this Confession I pray God they may
constantly persevere.

Howbeit even these men (which in a generality do allow the doctrine of our
Church) being called by authority to acknowledge their assent unto every
Article thereof in particular, they do not a little debase the estimation of
this doctrine of ours, and show themselves but too apparent, and professed
dissentors from the same. And though all of them do, and will approve some:
yet not one of them will subscribe unto all, and every of the Articles.

For unto the articles of religion, and the Kings supremacy they are willing to
subscribe. And they may subscribe (as before has been noted) unto such of
them, as contain the sum of Christian Faith, and the doctrine of the
Sacraments. But unto the same Articles, for number 36. agreed upon in this
Convocation at London, an. 62. they neither will, nor dare nor may subscribe.
For neither the rest of the Articles in that book, nor the Book of common
prayer, may be allowed, no though a man should be deprived from his ministry
for it (say the said brethren in a certain Classical decree of theirs.) The
late Politician is not afraid to move the high, and most honorable Court of
Parliament, that Impropriation may be let to Ferme unto incumbent ministers,
viz. which faithfully preach in the Churches the true doctrine of the Gospel,
according to the Articles of Religion, concerning faith and Sacraments: meaning
that such Ministers as preach the same doctrine, if they proceed to the rest of
the Articles, concerning either Conformity in external, and ceremonial
matters; or Uniformity in other points of doctrine contained in that book,
should not be partakers of that benefit, or of Benefices Impropriate.

31. If it be demanded, what the causes may be, Why the Br. will subscrib unto
some, but not unto all the Articles.
why they will unto some, but will not unto all; or why they will unto those
Articles which concern Faith and the Sacraments, but will not unto the rest
subscribe? The reasons thereof be two, whereof

The one is, for that in their opinion, there is no Law to compel them to
subscribe unto all: For (say the Brethren resiant I know not where,) We have
always been ready to subscribe to the Articles of Religion concerning the
doctrine of Faith, and of the Sacraments, which is all that is required by Law.
Also the Brethren in Devonshire, and Cornwall: We are ready (say they) to
subscribe to the third (which concerns the Book of Articles of Religion) so
far as we are bound by Statute concerning the same, viz. as they concern
the doctrine of the Sacraments, and the confession of the true faith. And the
22. London Brethren tell King James to his head, how the Subscription which he
calls for is more then the Law requires.

Their other reason is, because (as the Lincolnshire do say) sundry (as the
London Brethren affirm) many things in that book be not agreeable, but
contrary to Gods Word.

32. If these things be true which they do allege, surely then are those men
to be chronicled for the Faithful, the godly, and innocent Brethren indeed,
whom neither present Benefices can allure; nor the angry countenance, and
displeasure of a King, even of the puissant, and powerful King of great
Britain, can force to do anything at his beck, and pleasure, either against
Law, or for which there is no law, and who had rather to forgo all their
earthly commodities and livings, yea and to go from their charges, and
ministry, and to expose themselves, their wives and children, to the miseries
of this world (grievous for our flesh and blood to endure,) then to approve any
thing fob true, and sound by their hands, which is opposite, or not agreeable
to the revealed will, and Scriptures of God.

But if these allegations of theirs be but weak, and sinful surmises, or
rather apparently most false, scandalous, and slanderous imputations to their
Prince, their mother Church, and this State, then doubtless, as they even
Christians now living cannot but take them: so ages to come will everlastingly
note, and censure them both for disloyal Subjects that so traduce a truly, and
most Christianly religious King, ill deserving children, that so abuse their
honorable, and reuerand Fathers, and superiors of State, and authority;
turbulent spirits, not peaceable men, which raise such broiles, troubles, and
divisions in the Church and Kingdom (the issues whereof no tongue can
foretell, and are fearful being thought of) without cause and finally neither
faithful, nor godly Preachers, but ungodly broachers of untruths, and
slanders, and the very authors and fautors of horrible confusion, and faction
in Gods Church, whose peace they should seek, and promote even with their
dearest blood.

33. Since the Statute for Uniformity in rites and doctrine was first enacted,
more then 35. years have passed, in all which space, neither the Brethren now
being, nor the Brethren before them living, have hitherto shown, of the 39.
Articles, for names and titles: Which, for number, How many the Articles be
which Ecclesiastical Ministers necessarily must, how many which they may not,
or need not, unless they list, subscribe unto (which I am sure they, or some
of them, at one time, or other would have expressed) had the Law favored there
recusancy, and they bin able to have justified their Maxim, which is. That
they are not compellable by subscription to approve them all. Again, since
the first establishment of that Statute Law, the most reverend Fathers, and
truly reformed Ministers of this Church (sound for judgment, profound, for
learning, zealous for affection; sincere, for religion, faithful, in their
Churches: painful, in their charges: more profitable many ways: of as tender
consciences every way, as any of these Brethren combined) according both to
their bounden duties, and (as they are persuaded) to the very purport, and true
intent of the said Statute, have always both with their mouths acknowledged,
and with their pens approved the 39. Articles of our religion for truths not
to be doubted of, and godly.

Yea, and the Brethren too themselves (which now so scrupulously, when they are
orderly called thereunto, do hold back their hands, and will subscribe but
choisely unto some of them) even they with their mouths (which is equivalent,
and all one) have, and that according to the Statute (or else their livings be
void) upon the first entrance into all, and singular their ecclesiastical
benefices, openly both read, and testified their consent unto the said
Articles, for number even nine and thirty, acknowledging them, I say, all of
them to be agreeable to Gods word: whereof the people in their several charges
be ready witnesses to testify so much before God and the world.

34. Again, of these Brethren (that will subscribe but unto which they please
of these Articles) there be some who feign would beat into men's heads, if they
could tell how to make it credible) that the Doctrine of our Church is altered
from that it was in the reign of Q. Eli. But this assertion being too gross,
egregiously untrue, A late device of the Br. to shun subscription.
and no ways justifiable they secondly give out, and report (so industrious be
they to invent new shifts to cloak their inueterate, and rooted pertinacy) how
the purpose, if not doctrine of our Church is of late altered from that it was.
And therefore though they can be well content to allow of the old doctrine, and
ancient intention: yet unto the old doctrine, and new Intention of our Church,
they cannot subscribe, might they either gain much, or lose whatsoever they
have thereby. Besides, this new Intendement, contrary to the old purpose, if
not doctrine of our Church, is become now the maine, and principal obstacle why
they cannot subscribe unto the book of Common prayer, and book of Ordination,
as erst they (some of them) four times have done, when as well Intention, as
Doctrine of our Church, was pure and holy,

Lastly, they seem not obscurely to intimate unto the State that were they
sure, or might be assured, that the purpose of our Church were the same which
it was, neither varied from the doctrine; they would be pressed, and as ready,
even four, if not forty times more, to subscribe unto the forementioned books
of Common prayer, and of ordination, as aforetimes they did, when they were out
of doubt the Intention of our Church was correspondent to her Doctrine, that it
was found and good. I have four times subscribed (says a Brother) to the
book of Common prayer with limitation, and reference of all things therein
contained (not unto the purpose only, or doctrine only,) but unto the
purpose, and doctrine of the Church of England. Yet cannot the same man with a
good conscience so much as once more subscribe (which formerly, and that with a
good conscience had subscribed four times.) His reason is, Because the
purpose, if not doctrine of our Church, (to which he referred his subscription)
appears to him, by the late Canons, book of conference, and some speeches of
men in great place, and others, to be varied somewhat from that which he before
(not without reason) took it to be.

The purpose, and Doctrine of our Church continue the same.
35. The purpose of our Church is best known by the doctrine which she does
profess, the Doctrine by the 39. Articles established by Act of Parliament;
the Articles by the words, whereby they are expressed; and other purpose then
the public Doctrine does minister, and other Doctrine then in the said
Articles is contained, our Church neither has, nor holds; and other sense
they cannot yield, then their words do impart. The words be the same, and none
other, then erst, and first they were. And therefore the sense the same; the
Articles the same; the Doctrine the same; and the purpose, and Intention of our
Church still one, and the same.

If then the purpose be known by her Doctrine, and Articles; and the true
sense by their very words: needs must the purppose of our Church be the same,
because her Doctrine, and Articles for number, words, syllables, and letters,
and every way be the very same.

And so our Churches intention in her public Doctrine, and Articles revealed,
being good at the first, it is so still. For her purpose (continuing one and
the same) cannot be ill at the last, which was good (and so believed, and
acknowledged, even by the Brothers subscription) at the first; or good in good
Queen Elizabeth, and ill, in illustrious King James his days.

36. If the premises sufficiently explane not the constancy of our Churches
purpose in professing religion sincerely, Neither the Doctrine, nor purpose of
our Church altered.
then cast we our eyes upon the Propositions, which she publicly maintains;
and if we find them the same which ever they have been, then need we not doubt
(the Brethren themselves being Judges) but the Articles again, their sense,
the Doctrine, purpose, and Intention nf the Church of England (the Proposition
interpreting as it were, the said Articles) is the very same it ever was.

Now that Propositions (pregnantly, and rightly gathered, and arising from the
articles) be the same, and for substance unaltered (though upon good
considerations, some few be added to the former) and all of them approved for
true, and Christian, by the lawful, and public allowance of our Church, the
Book here ensuing plainly will declare, and so demonstrate withal not the
Doctrine only, but intention also of our Church, to be the same, and not
changed: and being unchanged, the books then of common prayer, and of
ordination too, considered in the purpose and intention of the Church of
England, and reduced to the Propositions (as the Brethren would have them) be
well allowed, and authentically approved; and the said brethren with as good
conscience now again, and afresh may subscribe unto all the Articles, even
concerning the Book of common prayer, and of ordination, as well as of the
kings supremacy, and of Religion, as before, often, and always they did.

37. For my self (most reverend Father in God) what my thoughts be of the
religion in this Realm at this instant professed, and of all these Articles,
if the premises do not, that which here follows will sufficiently
demonstrate. Twenty, yea 22 years ago, voluntarily of mine own accord, and
altogether unconstrained, I published my subscription unto them, my Faith is
not either shaken, or altered, but what it then was, it still is: years have
made those hairs of mine gray, which were not; and time, much reading, and
experience in Theological conflicts and combats, have bettred a great deal,
but not altered one whit my judgment, I thank God.

Nothing have I denied, nothing gaine-said, which before I delivered.

The Propositions are (and yet not many) more; the method altered, quotations
added, both, for the satisfaction of some learned, and judicious friends of
mine, requesting it at mine hands, and for the benefit both of the common, and
unlearned, and of the studious and learned Reader.

The whole work expresses as well my detestation, and renunciation of all
adversaries and errors, opposite, crossing, or contradicting the doctrine
professed by us, and protected by our King, or any Article, or particle of
truth of our Religion; as my approbation of that truth which in our Church by
wholesome Statutes and Ordinances, is confirmed.

There is not an heretic or Schismatike (to speak of) of any special mark,
that from the Apostles time hitherto, has discovered himself, and his
opinions vulgarly in writing, or in print against our doctrine, but this
heresy, fancy, or frenzy may be here seen against one proposition or other.
The Sects and Sect-masters adversaries unto us either in the matter, or maine
points of our doctrine, or Discipline; to one of our Articles, or other;
wholly, or in part, which here be discovered to be taken heed of, and avoided,
are many hundreds.

38. This, and whatsoever else here done, either to the confirmation of the
truth, or detestation of heresies and errors, I do very meekely present unto
your Grace, as after God, and our King, best meriting the patronage thereof.

My self am much, the whole Church of England much more bound unto your
Lordship; yea not we only now living, but our successors also, and posterity
shall have cause in all ages, while the world shall continue to magnify
Almighty God, for the inestimable benefits which we have and shall receive
from your self, and your late Predecessors D. Whitegift, Grindall, Parker,
Cranmer, (of famous and honorable remembrance) Bishops of our Church,
Archbishops of the Sea of Canterbury; for this uniforme doctrine by some of
your Lordships drawn, and penned, by all of you allowed; defended: and (as
agreeable to the Faith of the very Apostles of Christ, and of the ancient
Fathers, correspondent to the Confessions of all reformed Churches in
Christendom, and contrariant in no point unto Gods holy and written Word)
commended unto us both by your Authority and Subscriptions.

Now the all-mercifull God, and heavenly Father, which so inspired them, and
your Lordship with wisdom from above, and enabled you all to discern truth
from falsehood, and found religion from Atheism, idolatry and errors, vouchsafe
of his infinite goodness to increase his grace more and more upon your Grace,
to his own glory, the Churches benefit, and your own everlasting comfort.

And the same God, which both mercifully has brought, and miraculously against
all hellish, and divellish practices of his and our enemies, continued the
light of his truth among us, give us all grace with one heart and consent, not
only to embrace the same, but also to walk, and carry our selves, as it
beseems the Children of light, in all peaceablenesse, and holiness of life,
for his Son, our Lord and Savior Christ his sake. At Horninger near S. Edm.
Bury in Suff. the 11. of March. Ann. 1607.

Your Graces poor Chaplain. always at Command: THOMAS ROGERS.

Constitutions, and Canons Ecclesiastical. Anno 1604.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the Church of England by Law
established under the Kings Majesty, is not a true, and an Apostolical Church,
teaching, and maintaining the Doctrine of the Apostles: let him be
excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but only by the Archbishop after
his repentance, and public revocation of this his wicked error, Can. 3.

Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that any of the 39 Articles agreed upon by
the Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the
Convocation holden at London in the year of our Lord God 1562. for the
avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the establishing of consent
touching true Religion, are in any part superstitious, or erroneous, or such as
he may not with a good conscience subscribe unto: let him be excommunicated
ipso facto, and not restored, but only by the Archbishop, after his repentance
and public revocation of such his wicked errors, Can. 5.

Whosoever shall hereafter separate themselves from the Communion of Saints, as
it is approved by the Apostles rules in the Church of England, and combine
themselves in a new Brotherhood, accounting the Christians, who are
conformable to the Doctrine, Government, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, to be profane, and unmeete for them to join with in Christian
profession: let them be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored but by the
Archbishop, after their repentance, and public revocation of such their wicked
errors, Can. 9

The Titles of the thirty nine Articles, with the Pages where to find every of
them in this Book.
Articles. 1 OF faith in the holy Trinity. Page. 1 Articles. 2 Of the Word of
God, which was made very man. Page. 7 Articles. 3 Of the going down of Christ
into Hell. Page. 15 Articles. 4 Of the Resurrection of Christ. Page. 17
Articles. 5 Of the Holy Ghost. Page. 21 Articles. 6 Of the sufficiency of the
Scriptures for salvation. Page. 26 Articles. 7 Of the Old Testament. Page. 33
Articles. 8 Of the three Creeds. Page. 39 Articles. 9 Of Original, or birth
sin. Page. 41 Articles. 10 Of Free Will. Page. 47 Articles. 11 Of the
Justification of man. Page. 50 Articles. 12 Of good works. Page. 56 Articles.
13 Of works before Justification. Page. 56 Articles. 14 Of works of
Supererogation. Page. 59 Articles. 15 Of Christ alone without sin. Page. 62
Articles. 16 Of sin without Baptism. Page. 65 Articles. 17 Of
Predestination, and Election. Page. 69 Articles. 18 Of obtaining salvation
only by the Name of Christ. Page. 82 Articles. 19 Of the Church. Page. 86
Articles. 20 of the Authority of the Church. Page. 98 Articles. 21 Of the
Authority of general Councels. Page. 112 Articles. 22 Of Purgatory. Page.
118 Articles. 23 Of Ministering in the Congregation. 131 Articles. 24 Of
speaking in the Congregation in such a tongue as the people understand not.
Page. 141 Articles. 25 Of the Sacraments. Page. 142 Articles. 26 Of the
unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the effects of the Sacraments.
Page. 160 Articles. 27 Of Baptism. Page. 165 Articles. 28 Of the Lords Supper.
Page. 170 Articles. 29 Of the wicked, which do not eat the Body and blood of
Christ in the use of the Lords Supper. Page. 178 Articles. 30 Of both kinds.
Page. 179 Articles. 31 Of the oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
Page. 181 Articles. 32 Of mrariage of Priests. Page. 185 Articles. 33 Of
Excommunicate persons, how they are to be avoided. Page. 189 Articles. 34 Of
the traditions of the Church. Page. 193 Articles. 35 Of Homilies. Page. 194
Articles. 36 Of Consecration of Bishops, and Ministers. Page. 196 Articles. 37
Of the civil Magistrate. Page. 201 Articles. 38 Of Christian men's goods which
are not common. Page. 215 Articles. 39 Of a Christian man's Oath. Page. 217
FINIS.
THE CATHOLIC DOctrine, believed and professed in the Church of England.
1. Article. Of Faith in the holy Trinity.
There is but 1 one living, and true God, everlasting, without body, parts or
passions: of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness: 2 the Maker and preserver
of all things, both visible, and invisible. 3 And in unity of this Godhead,
there be three persons of one substance, power, and eternity, the Father, the
Son and the holy Ghost.

The Propositions.
1. There is but one God, who is living, true, everlasting, etc 2. God is the
Maker, and preserver of all things. 3. In the unity of the Godhead, there is
a Trinity of persons.
1. Proposition.
There is but one God, who is living, true, everlasting, without body, parts,
passions: of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness.

The proof from Gods Word.
THat there is but one God, who is, etc. is a truth which may be gathered from
the all-holy, and sacred Scripture: and is agreeable to the doctrine of the
reformed Churches. For both Gods Word gives us to know, that God is one and no
more Thou shall have none other Gods before me. Exodus ^0 3. the Lord our God is
Lord only, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Who is God beside the Lord? Psalm. 18 31. Has not one
God made us? Mal. 2.10. There is none other God but one, 1 Cor. 8.4.
, living Mine heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God, Psalm. 84 2 Ye are
the Temple of the living God. 2 Cor 6.16. For a long season Israel has been
without the true God, 2 Chr. 15 3. The Lord is the Lord of truth, he is the
living God, and an everlasting King Ier. 10.10. This is life eternal, that
they know thee to be the only very God, etc. Ioh. 17 3. Ye turned to God from
idols, to serve the living and true God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
, and true Godc, everlasting O my God, etc. thy year endur from generation to
generation, etc. thy years shall not fail, Psalm 102.24, 26, 27. He is the
living God, and remains for ever, Dan 6.16.
: without body, parts, or passions O Lord my God, thou art exceeding great,
thou art clothed with glory, and honor, which covers himself with light as
with a garment, etc Psalm. 104 1, etc God is a Spirit, Ioh. 4.24 The Lord is the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.17 He is not a man, that he should repent, 1 Samuel 15.29. I
will not execute the fierceness of my wrath, I will not return to destroy
Israel: for I am God, and not man, Hosh. 11.9.
: of infinite power The sound of the Cherubins wings was heard into the utter
court, as the voice of the Almighty God, when he speaks, Ezekiel. 10.5. I will
be a Father unto you, etc. says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. We give thee
thanks, Lord God Almighty, Rev. 16.17.
, wisdom Great is our Lord, and great is his power: his wisdom is infinite,
Psalm. 147.5 To God only wise, be honor and glory for ever and ever, 1 Timothy
1.17. To God, I say, only wise, be praise through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen.
Romans 16.27.
, and goodness Praise ye the Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever, Psalm. 106.1.107.1 108. 1, etc.
: and Gods people in their public confessions from Ausburgh Art. 1.
, Heluetia Confess. 2. ar. 2.
, Bohemia c 3.
, France art. 1
, Flanders art. 2.
, and Wittembergh c. 1.
, testify the same.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Then impious, and execrable are the opinions of Diagoras, and Theodorus, who
flatly denied there was any God Deos (...) dubita^a^ Protagoras, nullos esse
^ma^ue D^agoras, and Theodotus Cyreniacus, pu^^v^runt M.^. Ci^ de Not Deo. l. 1.
.

Of Protagoras Protagoras Deos in dubium v^cauit. Diager a^ exclusit. Lactan.
de fall Rel. cap. 2
, and the Machiuillian Atheists, which are doubtful whether there be a God.

Of such as fained unto themselves, diverse and sundry gods, as did the
Manichies Aug. contra Manich. l. 2. c. 1, 2.
, the Basilidians Clemen. Alex. (...) l 5.
, the Valentinians Valentinus triginta Deorum praed^cator, says Cyril. Catech.
6.
, the Messalian heretics, Epiph Exodus 32.
the Gentiles, and heathen people: whereof some, in place of God, worshipped
Beasts unreasonable, as the Egyptians did a Calfe, g an Ox, Cats, Vulturs,
and Crocodils Gand. M. ^rula de mirabi. l 3. c. 56.
, The Syrians, a Fish Piscem Syrae venerantur Cic. de Senect. Merula de mirabl.
l. 3. c. 48.
, and Pigeonsk; the Persians, a Dragon Histor of Bell.
; some as Gods, have adored men, under the names of Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, and
such like Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men, and they called
Barnabas, Jupiter, and Paul Mercurius, etc. Then Jupiters priest, etc. Acts
14.11, etc Who knows not that the City of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the
great goddess Diana Act. 19.35.
; and some, even at this day for God do worship Kine, the Sun, and what they
think good: so the inhabitants of Baly in the East Indies Voyage of the
Holland ships.
.

Of the Anthropomorphites, which ascribed the form and lineaments of man unto
God Theodoret l. 4. c. 10.
, thinking God to be like unto man.

Of such as put their trust and confidence, to be reposed in God alone, either
in men living, as, do both the Persians in their Sultan Tu es nostra fides,
and inte credimus: will the Persians say unto the Sultan P. B^zarus rerum
Persic. l. 1 ^.
, and the Papists in their Pope, who with them is God Panormit. C. quanto Abbas.
, their Lord and God Extravag. Joan. 22.
, of infinite power Extravag. de transl. epist. Quanto.
: or in Saints departed this life, as do the same Papists, both in their S.
Francis, whom they term, The glory of God, prefigured by Esaias, when he said,
Holy, Holy, Holy, Alcar. Francisc. lib. 1.
etc. and in their Thomas Becket, whom they say, God has set over the works
of his hands Horae. B. virginis. Ma. secundum usum Sarum. pa. 15.
, or in Beasts unreasonable, as does the Mordwite Tartar Russe Commonweal. c.
19.
, or finally in riches, and other senseless creatures, as do the Atheists,
and irreligious worldlings.

2. Proposition.
God is the Maker, and preserver of all things.

The proof from Gods Word.
THat the world, and all things both visible and invisible therein, both where
made, and are preserved, by the Almighty, and only power of God; are truths
grounded upon the holy Scripture, and agreeable to the confessions of Gods
people.

For touching the creation of the world, we read that in the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth, Genesis 11, etc.
etc. He made heaven and earth Psalm. 124.8, 134.3.
, by him were all things created, which are in heaven, and which are in earth,
things visible and invisible, whether Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities,
or Powers, as things, were created by him, and for him Col. 1.16.
, by his Son he made the worlds Heb. 1.8.
, and all these acknowledged by the Churches Primitive Creed Ap^st and Nicen.
, and reformed at this day Confess. Helv. 2. c. 6 7 Basil ar 1. of France ar ^
Fland ar. 12
.

And touching the preservation of all things by him created: My soul, praise
thou the Lord, etc. (says the Psalmist) which covers himself with light as
with a garment, spreads the heavens like a curtain; which lays the beams
of his chambers in the waters, and makes the clouds his Chariot, and walks
upon the wings of the wind; which makes the spirits his Messengers, and
flaming fire his Ministers, Psalm. 164.1, etc.
etc.

Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on
the ground without your Father? yea, and all the hairs of your head are numbered,
says our Savior Christ Math. 10.29 30.
. God, that made the world, and all things that are therein, he is Lord of
heaven and earth; he gives life, and breath, and all things; and has made of
one blood all mankind to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has assigned
the times which were ordained before, and the bounds of their habitation, says
Saint Paul Acts 17.24, 25, 26.
.

The Son is the brightness of the glory, and the ingraued form of his
person, and bears up all things by his mighty Word k.

The Churches of God in Heluetia Heb. 1.13. Confe 20.7
, Basil Confess. Basil. ar. 1, 2.
, France Confess. Gal. ar. 18.
, and Flanders Confess Belg. ar. 12, 13.
, testify the very same.

Errors, and adversaries unto these truths.
Hereby are condemned all Heretics, and errors impugning either the creation
of the world by God; or his providence in the continuing, and preservation of
the same.

Of the former sort was,

First, Aristotle and his followers, which said the world was eternal, and
without beginning.

Next, the Marcionites, that held, how God made not the world, as being too
base a thing for him to create Tertul l. 1. co^^t. Marc.
.

3. Simon Magus, Saturninus, Menander, Carpocrates, Corinthus, who ascribed the
worlds creation by Angels ^ren. Epiph. Philaste^.
.

4. The Manichies who gave the creation of all things unto two Gods, or
beginnings; the one good, whereof came good things, the other evil, whence
proceeds evil things Epip. Aug. cont. Man. c. 49
.

5. The same Manichies D. August. de fide contra Manich c. 40.
, and Priscillianists Conc. Brac. cap. 11.
, which did affirm man to have bin the workmanship not of God, but of the
Devil.

6. The Family of Love, who deliver that God by them made heaven, and earth
Display of the Fam. of Love. H. 8 b.
.

7. The Papists, who give out how sacrificing Priests are the Creators of
Christ Qui creauit me sine me, iam creatur media^te me. Stella cleris.
.

Of the latter sort were,

The Stoike Philosophers, and the Manichies, who are the great patrones of
Destiny, Fate and Fortune Socrat. hist Eccles. l. 1.22.
.

The Family of Love, which may not say, God save any thing: for they affirm
that all things be ruled by nature, and not ordered by God Display of the Fam.
H. 7. b.
.

The old Philosophers, who thought that inferior things were too base for God
to be careful of Dii magna curant, parua negligunt, Cic de not Deor. l. 2
.

And lastly, the Epicures, who think God is idle, and governs not the same.
Of which mind was Cyprian: who held that God, having created the world, did
commit the government thereof unto certain celestial powers In exposit. Symb.
.

3. Proposition.
In the Unity of the Godhead, there is a Trinity of persons.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe Scripture says,

In the beginning God the Father The Father by the Son made the world, Heb. 1.
, the Son In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that
Word was God, The same was in the beginning with God, Ioh. 1.1, 2.
, and the holy Ghost In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth,
etc. and the Spirit of God moved upon the waters, Genesis 1.1, 2.
, created the heaven, and the earth.

By 1 the Word of the 2 Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by
the Psalm 33.6.
Breath of his mouth.

Lo, the heavens were opened unto 1 him: and (John) saw 2 the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him: and lo, a voice from heaven
saying, This is my 3 beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased Mat. 3.16, 17
.

Because ye are sons, 1 God has sent forth 2 the Spirit of his 3 Son into
our hearts, which cries Abba, Father, says the Apostle Gal. 4.6.
: and again, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
Communion of the holy Ghost be with you all 2 Cor. 13.13
.

And S. John: There are three which bear record in heaven 1 The Father, 2 the
Word, and 3 the holy Ghost, and these three are one 1 Ioh. 5 3.
.

This truth has always been Creed Apo. Nic. Athan.
, and seriously is Confess. Helv 1. ar. 6. and. 2. c. 3 Aug. art. 1. Gal. art.
6. Bell. art 6. Bohe c. 3 Wittemb. c. 1. Sucan. art. 1.
, confessed in the Church of Christ.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Then cursed are all opinions of men contrary hereunto: whereof

Some denied the Trinity, affirming there is one God, but not three persons in
the Godhead: so did the Montanists Socrat. eccle. hist. l. 1. c. 23.
, and Marcellians Theo. haer. fab. lib. 2.
, and so do the Jews Lu. Ca^ertus lib. diuiner. visor. ad Iudae.
, and Turks Pol. of the Turk emp. c. 5.
.

Some, as the Gnostikes Clem. Alex. strom. l. 5.
, Marcionites Clem. Alex. strom, l. 5. Epiphan.
, and Valentinians d, affirm there be more Gods then one, and yet not three
persons, nor of one and the same nature, but of a diverse, and contrary
dispositions.

Some think there be three Gods, or spirits; not distinguished only, but
divided also, as did the Eunomeans Philaster.
, and Tretheites Zanch de. 3. El. par. 1. l. 7. c. 1.
.

Some fear not to say, that in worshipping the Trinity, Christians do adore
three Devils, Cl. Alex. str. lib. 4.
worse then all the idols of the Papists: and such Blasphemers were Heretics
Blandrat and Alciat Calvin ep.
.

Some will have a Quaternity of persons, not a Trinity to be worshipped, so did
Anastasius the Emperor command; and the Apollinarians did hold Athanas. ad.
Epictet.
. Some do grant and acknowledge, the name of three in the Godhead, but deny
their persons, such were the Noetians, Praxentans, and Hermogenians: These did
say, how the same God was called by diverse names in the holy Scripture, and
therefore that the Father became flesh, and suffered, because one and the same
God is called the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. For which cause they
were termed Patripassians: in this number was Serverus.

Again, some do grant the names, and persons of three, and yet deprive not
only the Son, and holy Ghost of their divinity, but the whole Trinity also of
their properties. For they say, there is three in heaven, viz. the Father, the
Word, and holy Ghost; howbeit (say they) the Father only is very God, the Word
is the breath of the Father, and the holy Ghost is the Spirit created by God of
nothing, through the Word: spoiling so both the Son, and holy Ghost of their
deity, and the whole Trinity of their properties. Such were the Arrian, and
Macedonian heretics; hence by-named Pneumatomachons, because they waged
battle with the holy Ghost.

And some do bring in other names of deity, besides of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, as did the Priscilianists Council. Bra. car. cap. 2.
.

2. Article. Of the Word of God, which was made very man.
The Son, which is 1 the Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the
Father, the very and eternal God, of one substance with the Father, 2 took
man's nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin, of her substance: so that 3 two
whole and perfect natures, that is to say, the Godhead and manhood were
joined in one person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God, and
very man: who suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile his
Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice, not only for original guile, but also for
all actual sins of men.

The Propositions.
1. Christ is very God. 2. Christ is very man. 3. Christ is God and man, and
that in one person. 4. Christ is the Savior of mankind.
1. Proposition.
Christ is the very God.

The proof from Gods Word.
IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was
God John 1.1.
. This is written of Christ. Therefore Christ is God.

Christ was begotten of the Father from everlasting Psalm. 2.7. Acts 13.33. Heb.
1.5.
. Therefore very God.

This is life eternal, that they know thee to be very God, and whom thou have
sent, Jesus Christ John 17.3.
.

They shall call his name Emanuel, which is by interpretation, God with us
Matthew. 1.23.
.

Christ, he is the brightness of the glory, and the engraued Image of (the
Father) his person, and bears up all things by his mighty hand, Heb. 1.3. I
believe in God the Father, etc. and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord,
Symb. Apost. The Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is
all one: the glory equal, the Majesty co-eternall. Such as the Father is, such
is the Son. The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate. The Father
incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible. The Father eternal, the Son
eternal. The Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty. The Father is God, and the
Son is God. The Father is Lord, and the Son is Lord Symbol. Athanas. I
believe in God the Father Almighty, etc. and in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the
only begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father before all worlds, God of
God, light, of light, very God of very God, begotten, not made; being of one
substance with the Father.
Therefore very God.

And this both has been of the ancient Christians Symbo. Nicen.
, and is the Faith of the reformed Churches Confe. Helv. 1. ar. 11. ^. c 11.
Bohem. cap. 4.6. August. ar. 6. Gal. ar. 13, 14. Belg. ar. 10. Wittemb. c. 2.
Sueuica ar 1.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Miserably therefore do they err, which either deny, or impugn the Deity of
our Savior, as did certain old heretics, viz.

The Arrians, whereof some were called the Douleians, because in scorn they
termed the only begotten of God, the Fathers servant Theod. haer. fab. lib 4.
.

The Cerinthians Irenaeus.
.

The Ebionites, among whom some said that Christ Jesus was a mere man; others
acknowledged him to be God, but not from everlasting Eusebius. eccles. l. hist. l.
3 c. 27.
.

The Eunomians Basil. 5. contra Eunom.
.

The Samosatenians, who thought that Christ was not the Son of God, before
his incarnation Council Bracar. cap. 1.
.

The Nestorians, whose opinion was, that Christ became God by merit, but was
not God by nature Liberatus.
.

The Macedonians, which utterly denied the Son to be of one substance with
the Father Theodoret. l. 4. haeret. fab.
.

The Agnoites, who held that the divine nature of Christ was ignorant of some
things Gregor. ep. 22 l. 8.
.

Again, some late heretics even to the death never would acknowledge Christ
Jesus to be the true and very God, as namely:

Certain Catabaptists Zuing. lib. contra Catab.
.

Blandrat Beza ep. 19.
.

Matthew Hamant (burnt at Norwich An. 1579.) one of whose heresies was, that
Christ was a mere, and sinful man John chron. 12.29.
,

Francis Ker (burnt also at Norwich An. 1588) who most obstinately maintained
that Christ was not God till after his resurrection.

David George, sometime of Basil, who affirmed himself to be greater for power
then ever Christ was Hist. Dauidis. Georg.
.

In oppugning the deity of our Savior, with these heretics join the Jews Lud
Caret. I. divinior visci. ad Iudaeos.
, and Turks, which say that Christ was a good man: such as Moses and Mahomet
were Policy of the Turkish Emp. c. 5 p 16.
, but not God. Hence Amurath the great Turk in his letters unto the Emp.
Rodolph, the second An. 1593. termed our Savior in derision, The crucified
God, unto whom may be added the Family of Love Display of the Fam. of Love. H.
7. ar.


2. Proposition.
Christ is very man.

The proof from Gods Word.
HOlding the humanity of Christ, we join with the blessed Prophets and
Evangelists, who either prophesied of his future incarnation The seed of the
woman shall break thine h^ad, Genesis 3.15 The Scepter shall not dep^^t, etc.
until Shiloh come, Genesis 49.1^.
, and conception in the womb of a Virgin Behold, a Virgin shall con^^i^^, and
bear a Son, Esaias. 7.14
, or plainly avouched, and writ, both that the Virgin Mary was his Mother
Matthew. 10.18 2^. Luke 27, 31.34.
, and that, as very man, he grew, and increased in strength Luke 2.40.
, endured hunger When he had ^^sted 40 days, and 40 nights, he was afterward
hungry, Matthew. 4.2.
, and thirst John 4.7. He said, I thirst John 19.28.
, wept Luke 19.41
, and slept Mark 4.38.
, and suffered death Matthew. 27.50 Mark 15 ^7. Luke 23.46. Ioh. ^9.30, 33.
.

Hence the ancient Fathers, and Christians.

I believe in God, the Father Almighty, etc and in Jesus Christ, etc. which was
conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified dead and buried Symb. Ap^st.
.

The right faith is, that we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, is God and man God, of the substance of the Father, begotten
before the world; and man, of the substance of his Mother, borne in the world.
Perfect God, and perfect man, of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh
subsisting. Equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead; and inferior to the
Father, touching his manhood Sym. Athan.
.

I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, etc. and in one Lord Jesus Christ,
etc. who for us men, and for our salvation came down from heaven, and was
incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made man, etc Sym.
Nicen.
.

The very same testify Gods people in Heluetia Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 11. and
2. c. 11.
, Basil Confess. Basil. ar. 4.
, Bohemia Confess. Bohem. c. 6.
, the Low countries Confess. Belg. ar. 18.
, France Confess. Gal. ar. 14.
, Ausburgh Confess. Aug. ar. 3
, Wittemberg Confess. W^ttemb. c. 2.
, Suevia Confess. Suevica. ar. 2.
, with many more besides Harmen. Confess. praef
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore most wicked were the opinions of those men which held, viz that,

1. Christ really and indeed, had neither body, nor soul, but was man in
appearance only, as the Manichies Aug. l. 14. contra Faust.
, the Eutichians Niceph. l 18 c. 52.
, the Marcionites philast. Beza ePist. 81.
, and the Saturnians Iren. l. 1. ^ 22
,

2. Christ had a body without a soul, as thought the Eunomians Basil. contra
Eunom.
, the Arrians Theodoret. haeret. fab. l. 4.
, the Apollinarians Ruffin. lib. 2 c. 20.
, with the Theopaschites Niceph. l. 18. c. 53.
.

3. Christ took the flesh of the Virgin Mary; so did the Valentinians think
Iren. l. 1. c. 1.
, and so think the Anabaptists Confess. Belg ar. 18.
, and the Family of Love, who make an allegory of the Incarnation of Christ
H.N. prophecy of the Spi c. 19 sent. 9.
.

4. Christ took flesh only, of the Virgin, but no soul; as the Arrians
Epiphan.
.

5. Christ took flesh not of the Virgin, only, but by the seed of man too; so
said Ebion Eusebius. eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 27.
, and Carpocrates Iren. l. 1. c. 24
.

6. The flesh of Christ was spiritual, and his soul carnal; so dreamed the
Valentinians Tertul. lib. de car. Christ.
.

7. The carnal body of Christ was consubstantiall with the Father; as
published the Apollinarians Athan. li. de incar. Christ.
.

8. The humane nature of Christ before his passion, was deuoid of humane
affections; so thought the Seuerites Niceph. lib. 17. c. 29.
.

3. Proposition.
Christ is God, and man, and that in one person.

The proof from Gods Word.
THat the Divine, and humane natures of Christ, are united in one person, it
accords with the holy Scripture. For, The Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us: (and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten of
the Father) full of grace and truth, says the Evangelist John John 2.14.
, And Matthew: Jesus when he was baptized, etc. Lo; a voice (came) from
heaven, saying: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased Math. 3.17.
.

He that descended, is even the same that ascended, far above the heavens,
that he might fill all things, says S. Paul Ephesians. 4.10.
.

Again Christ Jesus, being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form
of a servant, and was made like unto man, and was found in shape as a man, etc.
wherefore God has also highly exalted him, etc. that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father Phil.
2.6, 7, 9, 11.
.

And the same Apostle: There is one God, and one Mediator between God and
man, even the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all men 1 Timothy
2.5, 6.
.

Upon these, and the like grounds,

I believe in God, the Father Almighty, etc. and in Jesus Christ his only Son
our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary Symb.
Apost.
.

The right faith is, That we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, is God and man, etc. who although he be God and man, yet he
is not two, but one Christ. One, not by the conversion of the Godhead into
flesh, but by taking of the manhood unto God. One altogether, not by confusion
of substance, but by unity of person Symb. Nicen
. I believe in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten
of the Father before all worlds, God of God, light of light, very God of very
God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom all
things were made: who for us men, etc. came down from heaven, and was
incarnate, etc. He suffered, and was buried, etc. and he shall come again, etc
Confess. Hell. 1. c. 11. and 2. ar. 11. Basil. ar. 4. Bohem ar. 6. Gal. ar. 15.
Belg. ar. 19. August. ar. 3. Wittem. c. 2. Suenica ar. 2. Harmon. confess.
praef.
: say the ancient and first Christians.

The very same is the belief, and confession of all the reformed Churches at
this present, and always has beenei.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Detestable therefore is the error,

Of the Acephalians; who denied the properties of the two natures in Christ
Hartman Schedel.
.

Of the Seuerites Niceph. l. 16. cap. 33.
, of Eutiches and Dioscorus, who affirmed the divinity and humanity of Christ,
to be of one and the same nature.

Of the Monothelites; who denied that two wills, viz. a divine an humane, were
in Christ Volater. l. 1.
.

Of Theodorus Mesechius; who said that the Word was one thing: and Christ
another Magdeburg eccles. hist. Cen. 6. c 5. fol. 319.
.

Of Nestorius; who denied that two natures of Christ to be any otherwise
united, than one friend is joined to another Niceph. l. 18. c. 48.
; which only is in good will, and affection.

Of Seruetus; who said of Christ, that he was the pattern of all things, and
but a figure of the Son of God; and that the body of Christ was compact of
three uncreated elements Beza. ep. 81. Confess. Gal. ar. 14.
, and so confounded and overthrew both natures.

4. Proposition.
Christ is the Savior of mankind.

The proof from Gods Word.
Christ to be the Savior of mankind, we find it perspicuously in the holy
Scripture, which teaches us that Christ was crucified, dead and buried Math.
27.16, etc.
; and that to reconcile his Father unto us We were reconciled to God by the
death of his Son, Romans 5.10. God has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus
Christ 2 Cor. 5.18. by his cross, Ephesians 2.16. It pleased the Father, etc. by him
to reconcile all things unto himself, Col 1.10, 20.
; and to be a Sacrifice for all sins of men He has borne our infirmities,
and carried our sorrows. Esa 53.4 He is the Lamb of God, which takes away
the sin of the world, Ioh. 1.20. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, when he was made a curse for us. Gal. 3.13. God has made him sin for
us, which knew no sin, that we should be the righteousness of God in him, 2
Cor. 5.2. He is the reconciliation for our sin, and not for ours only, but
also for the whole world, 1 Ioh. 2.2.
.

Hence I believe the forgiveness of sin Symb. Apost.
.

He suffered for our salvation Symb. Ath.
.

For us men, and for our salvation, he came down from heaven Symb. Nicen.
; say our Forefathers in their confessions: as do also our brethren throughout
Christendom Confess. Helv. 1. c. 11. and 2 ar. 11. Basil ar 4 Bohem. ar. 6.
Gal. ar. 2.16, 7. Belg. ar. 20. 21. August. ar. 3. Saxon ar 3. Wittem. c. 2.
Suevica Harmon. Confess. prae
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Wicked then are all opinions, and assertions, contrarying and crossing this
truth: as;

That the Father, in his deity, not the Son, in his humanity, did suffer: which
error the Patripassians did hold D. August. de Trin. l. 5.
.

That Christ, as well in his divinity, as in his humanity, suffered for
mankind: an error of Apollinaris of old Magdeburg Eccles. hist. con 4. c. 5.
; and of Isl^bius, and Andreas Musculus, of late years Beza ep. 60.
.

That the whole and holy Trinity was crucified; as said Petrus Antiochenus.

That Christ really and indeed, hung not on the cross: for his passion was in
show only, said the Cerdonites Iren. l. 1. c. 23
, the Euticheans N^c. l. 18. c. 53
, and the Manicheans August. con. Fa. l. 15. c. 10.
: and another man, said the Theopaschits Antonio. tit. 13. c. 5. sect 2.
, and the Basilides Theod. T^r.
, yea the very Devils, and not Christ, said the Manichies August de Fide. c.
32, 33.
, suffered, and hung on the cross.

That the whole passion of Christ is to be understood allegorically, and not
according to the letter; as the Family of Love do think H.N. Insit. ar 4.
sent 17. 29.
.

That Christ on the cross has suffered for the redemption of mankind, and
shall suffer again for the salvation of the Devil, as Jesus; (such heretics
there have bin) Witness Tho. Aquin. con. 1. ^^^r. 3.
, but shall again suffer as Jesus Christ (which was one of Francis Kit his
heresies for which he was burned;) for men: out one mother Jane is the Savior
of woman: a most execrable assertion of Postellus the Jesuit Jesuits Ca^. 1.
book, c. 10.


The fantasies of the Iacobites Niceph. l. 18 c. ^2.
, and Turks Lou^^. Tur. ^^^t. tom. 1. l. 1. ^
.

The popish doctrine touching the Mass, prayers unto Saints, pardons, and
purgatory, which make the passion of Christ either of none effect or to put
away but original sin only See art. 22. ^. 31.
.

That albeit our Savior has suffered for all men in general: yet both each
man must suffer for himself in particular Test Rh^m. in Romans 8.17.
; and the works of one man may satisfy the justice of God for another Ibid.
in Col. ^24.
: which are popish errors.

That Christ dyed not for the sins of all men; and that some sins are so
filthy, and enormious, as Christ his blood upon true repentance of the
delinquents part, cannot wash them away: which was Kains Genesis 4.
, Fr. Spiras Hist. Fr. Spir.
, and other desperate persons error.

That whatsoever is written touching Christ his sufferings, must in us, and
with us be fulfilled: the false doctrine of H. N. Prophecy of the Spir. cap.
19. sent. 3.
.

3. Article. Of the going down of Christ into Hell.
As Christ dyed for us, and was buried: so also it is to be believed, that he
went down into Hell.

The Propositions.
Christ went down into hell.

The proof from Gods Word.
Sundry be the texts of Scripture for Christ his discension into Hell.

Mine heart was glad (says David Psalm. 16.10.11. Acts ^.26.27
; a figure of Christ) and my glory rejoiced, my flesh also shall rest in hope.
For why? Thou shall not leave my soul in hell.

O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me. Thou Lord have
brought my soul out of hell.

I will thank thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart; and will praise thy name
for evermore Psalm. 30.1, 2.
. For great is thy mercy toward me; and thou have delivered my soul from the
nethermost hell Psalm. 86.12, 13
.

In that he ascended, what is it but that he had also descended first into the
lowest part of the earth? He that descended, is even the same that ascended,
far above all heavens, that he might fill all things Ephesians. 4.9.10.
.

O Death, where is thy sting? O hell, where is thy victory 1 Cor. 1^.^5
? Also that Christ went down into hell, all sound Christians both in former
days He descended into hell. Sym. Apost. Athan.
, and now living Confess. Helv. 2 c. 11. Ba. ar. 2. Aug. ar 3. Stievica. ar. 22.
, do acknowledge; howbeit in the interpretation of the article, there is not
that consent as were to be wished: some holding that Christ descended into Hell.

1. As God only, and not man; as they do which say, how Christ descended
powerfully, and effectually, but not personally into hell; and that the deity
exhibited it self, as it were present in the infernal parts, to the terror of
the devil, and other damned spirits.

2. As man only: and that as some think, in body only, as when death as it
were prevailed over him lying in the grave; as others deem, in Soul only,
when he went unto the place of the reprobate, to the increasing of their
torments.

3. As God and man in one person, as they do which affirm that Christ in body
and soul went, some think, as it were into Hell; when upon the Cross, and
elsewhere he suffered the terrors and torments prophesied of, Esaias 53. v.
6.10. Psalm. 116. v. 2. and mentioned, Matthew. 26. v. 38. or 27. v. 46 Luke 22.
v. 42. some say even into hell (the very place destined for the Reprobate)
which he entered into the very moment of his Resurrection, at which time he
showed and declared himself a most glorious Conqueror both of death and Hell,
the most powerful enemies.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
But till we know the native, and undoubted sense of this article, and
mystery of religion; persist we adversaries unto them which say:

That Christ descended not into hell at all, calling this article an error, and
a fable, as Carlisle does Carlisle against D Smith. p. 18.77.
.

That Christ being dead, descended into the place of everlasting torments,
where in soul he endured for a time the very pains which the damned spirits,
without intermission do abide. Bannisters error Treat. of Bannisters error.
.

That Christ alive upon the cross humbled himself, usque ad inferni tremenda
tormenta, even unto the dreadful torments of hell Pagets Catech Latin.
endured for a time those torments, quales reprobi in aeternum sensuri sunt,
which the reprobates shall everlastingly suffer in hell Pisc. in Luc. 12.10.
: even despaired of Gods mercy, finding God at this time, Non patrem, sed
Tyrannum, not a Father but a Tyrant: and overcame despair by despair; death
by death; hell by hell; and Satan by Satan Ferus in Math. 27.
: suffered actually all the torments of hell for our redemption; and descended
into the heauiest torments that Hell could yield Humes Rejoind. p. 38. 138. 152.
: suffered the torments of hell, The second death. Abiection from God Household
Catech.
: and was made a curse, that is, had the bitter anguish of Gods wrath in his
soul and body, which is the fire that shall never be quenched Giffords Catech.
.

That Christ personally in soul went down into Lake Lymbo, to fetch from
thence as Canisius Canis. Catech.
; to lose from thence, as Vaux he says Vaux Catech.
; the souls of our forefathers, which before his death (as the Papists dream)
were shut up in the close prison of Hell Test. Rhem. an. Luc. 16.26.
.

That Christ by his descension has quite turned Hell into Paradise: Costerus,
the Jesuits error Coster. instit. l. 5.
.

4. Article. Of the Resurrection of Christ.
Christ did truly arise again from death, and took again his body, with
flesh, bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature: 2
wherewith he ascended into heaven, 3 and there sits, until he return to
judge all men at the last day.

The Propositions.
1. Christ is risen from the dead. 2. Christ is ascended into heaven. 3. Christ
shall come again at the last day, to judge all men, even the quick and the
dead.
1. Proposition.
Christ is risen from the dead.

The proof from Gods Word.
THE Resurrection of Christ may easily be prooved from the holy Scriptures, in
which it is evident, first, that Christ should Thou will not suffer thine holy
One to see corruption, Psalm 16.10. After he is killed, he shall rise again the
third day, Marc 9.31, and 10.34. Luke 9.32.
; and next, that he did rise from death unto life, both by his appearing to
Mary Magdalene John 20.14.
, to diverse women Math. 28.9.
, to two Luke 24.13.15, 30 31.
, to ten John 20.19.
, to all the Disciples, to more then five hundred brethren at once 1 Cor. 15.6.
, to sundry persons by the space of forty days together Acts 1.3
; and by the testimony also of the Apostles, Peter Acts 1.22 and 2.32. 1 Pet.
1.3.
, and Paul Acts 17.2, 3. Romans 10.9. 1 Cor. 15.4, 5, etc
.

A truth both believed, and acknowledged by Gods people from age to age Symbol.
Apost. Athan. Nicen. Confess. Helvet. 1. ar. 11 and 2. c 11. Basil ar. 4.
Bohem. c. 6. Gal. 15.16. Belg. ar. 20. August. ar. 3. Su^vi^. ar 2. Ha^mon.
confess. praef.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Utterly false then, and unchristian is the opinion of those men,

Which utterly deny the resurrection of any flesh, as did the Sadduces The
Sadduces say there is no resurrection, Matthew. 22.23. they deny there is any
resurrection, Luke 20.27. they say there is no resurrection neither angel, nor
spirit Act. 23.8
, the false apostles How say some among you, that there is no resurrection of
the dead, 1 Cor. 15.12^
, Simon Magus Epiphan.
, and the Manichies August. contra Faust. l. 4. c. 16.
,

Which would acknowledge no resurrection of Christ, as would not, nor will the
Jews Mat. 28.13, 15. Iud. Cater. l divinor. visor.
, nor heretic Hamant Holinsh chron. fol. 1299.
, nor David George, one of which errors was, that the flesh of Christ was
dissolved into ashes, and so rose no more Hist. Dauidis Georg.
.

Which affirm (as did Corinthus) that Christ shall rise again, but yet is not
risen Philaster.
.

Which say, how our Savior, after his resurrection, was so deified, as he
retained no more the parts and properties of his body, and soul; nor the union
of both natures, but is merely God. So thought the Schwenkfeldians:

Which take the Resurrection of Christ to be but an allegory, and no true,
certain history; as do the Family of Love Display in allens confess.
.

2. Proposition.
Christ is ascended into heaven.

The proof from Gods Word.
IN saying how Christ with his body is ascended into heaven, and there sits,
and abides, we do agree with the Prophets Psalm. 47 5, 68 18.110, 1.
, Evangelists Maty 23.44.25, 65. Act. 1.9. Luk 24.51.
, and Apostles Romans 8 34. Ephesians. c. 8.
, with the ancient Fathers Symb. Apo. Athan. Nicen.
, and Gods people our brethren, throughout all Christendom Confess. Helv 1 ar.
1 and 2. c 1. Basi. ar 4. Bohe c 6. Gal. ar 15 Bell. ar. 20. Aug ar 3. Saxon ar
3 Suevie ar. 2.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
But we altogether dissent

From Hamant, the English heretic, which denied the ascension of Christ
Holinsh chro fol. 1299.
.

Also from Ket, the heretic and Apostata, which likewise denied our Saviors
ascension, affirming that his humane nature is not in heaven, but in Judea,
gathering a Church and people.

Also from the Germane Vbiquitaries, and Papists, they saying that Christ as
man, is not only in heaven, but in earth too at this instant, wheresoever the
deity is Ia. Smidelinus, Vbiquitatis Apostolus. Beza. epist. 61.
, these affirming the humane nature of Christ is, wheresoever the Sacrament of
the Altar is administered Ergo it is not in heaven, unless heaven be upon earth.
.

Also from the Montanists, Cataphrygians, and Carpocratians Phila. T^od
, who held how Christ not in body, but in soul ascended into heaven.

From the Papists, who say that Christ ascended into heaven carried with him
the souls, which he loosed from captivity, and bondage of the devil; even the
souls of the righteous, before that time not in heaven, but in Lymbo Catc^ chapter
Trid. in Symb. verba, descendit ad inferos, and ascendit adcoelos Vaux catech.
c. 1. Test. Rhem. an. marg. p. 633.
.

And lastly from those Germane divines, which think that our Savior carried
with him into heaven the faithful people, in soul and body, raised at his
resurrection D. Ma. hom. in Euang. in festo Ascen. Dom. and in ^pi. Dom. Ascen.
Dom.
.

3. Proposition.
Christ shall come again at the last day, to judge all men, even the quick
and the dead.

The proof from Gods Word.
God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost, and with power, etc. Him
God raised up the third day, etc. And he commanded us to preach unto the
people, and to testify, that it is he, that is ordained of God a Judge of
quick, and dead, says S. Peter Acts 10.38, 40, 41.
.

God shall judge the world by Jesus Christ Romans 2.16.
.

Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing, and in his
Kingdom, etc. Henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness which
the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only,
but unto all them also that love his appearing; says S. Paul 2 Timothy 1.8.
.

The Judge stands before the door, says S. James Iam. 5.9.
.

And this Gods Church and people do firmly believe, and faithfully confess
Symb. Apost. Nic^n Athan. conf^ss Hol^. 2. c. 11. and 1. a. 1. Basi^. ar. 9.
Bohem. cap. 6. Be^ar. ^7. Aug 2^3. Su^^i^a. ar. 2.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
On the other side both they abroad, and we at home, abhor them for their
opinions, which said that,

There shall be no general Judgment at all: as did the Manichies Philaster.
, and do the Athei^^s,

That the devils, and the most ungodly, some of them, and namely, so many as in
hell do call upon God for mercy, and forgiveness, say the Turks Pol. of the
Turks Emp c. 23.
, yea of all them, say the Originists Aug. cons. ar. 17.
, and Catabaptists Bulling. cont. Catabap. l. 1. tract.
, shall be saved.

That the wicked shall not be judged at all, but shall dye as the brute
beasts, and neither rise again in body, nor come unto Judgment. An error of
the Family of Love Display of the Fam. H. 6.
.

That Christ shall not be the future Judge; so thought both David George,
Coppinger, and Arthington: For that George rumord himself to be Judge of the
whole world Hist. David is Georg.
, and Coppinger and Arthington published, how William Hacket was come to judge
the world, and themselves to be his angels for the separating the sheep from
Goats Conspir. for pretend. Reform. p 47.55 Arthing. sedu.
.

That besides Christ, the Pope is Judge of the quick, and dead; An error of
the Papists Extrauag de sent Excom. C. anobis and 24 q. 2.
.

That before the Judgment there shall be a golden world; the godly, and one
besides, enjoying the same peaceably, and gloriously, as the Jews imagine
Confess. Aug. ar. 17.
.

That the Belief, touching the general Judgment of Christ, over the living,
and dead, is a doctrine mystical, or a mystery (no history) as H.N in his
Instruct praef. sent. 5.
H.N. teaches.

That the righteous are already in godly glory,; and shall from henceforth live
everlastingly with Christ, and reign upon the earth: as the H.N Ibid. sent. 1.
ar. 8. sect 35. and in his Euang. c 1 sect 1. Alent. confess in the Display.
Family of Love holds.

5. Article. Of the Holy Ghost.
The holy Ghost 2 proceeding from the Father, and the Son, 3 is of one
substance, majesty, and glory, with the Father, and the Son, very, and
eternal God.

The Propositions.
1 The holy Ghost is very, and eternal God. 2. The holy Ghost is of one
substance, majesty, and glory with the Father and the Son. 3. The holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son.
1. Proposition.
The holy Ghost is very and eternal God.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe holy Ghost to be the very, and eternal God, the Scriptures teach us. For
he is the Creator of all things. In the beginning God created the heaven, and
the earth, etc. And the Spirit of God moved upon the waters Genesis 1.1, 2.
. O Lord, how manifold, are thy works, etc! If thou hide thy face, they are
troubled, if thou take away their breath, they dye, and return to their dust:
if thou send forth thy Spirit, they are created Psalm. 10.24, 29, 30.
: Ergo the holy Ghost is God.

Christians are to be baptized in the name of the Holy Ghost Matthew. 28.19
, as well as of the Father, and the Son. Therefore is he very God.

Ananias lied unto God Act. 5.3, 4, 9.
, and Sapphira tempted God, when both he lied unto the holy Ghost, and she
tempted the Spirit of the Lord.

As God, he chooses, assigns, and sends forth men for the ministry of the
Gospel Acts 13, 2, 4.
, as God, he decrees orders for his Church and people Act. 15.28.
, and as God, he is to be invoke, and prayed unto, as well as the Father, and
the Son 2 Cor. 13.13
.

Upon this, and the like words, I believe in the holy Ghost Sym. Apost. Symb
Nicen.
, I beeleeve in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life Symb. Atha.
; the Catholic Faith is this, that we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity
in Unity, etc. The Father is God, the Son is God, and the holy Ghost is God.
And yet they are not three Gods, but one Godk, etc. say the ancient Fathers:
which also is the Faith and confession of all Gods people at this day Confess.
Helv ar. 6 c. and 2. c 2. Basil. ar 1. Bohe c. 3. I^^^ ar. 8 August ar. 1.
Wittemb. c. 1. Suevica, ar. 1. Gal. 6. Harm. confess. praef.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
This makes to the condemnation of the Pneumatomachereof, whereof,

Some impugn the deity of the holy Ghost, as did in old time, Samosatenus
Epiph.
and Photinus Vinc. Lyr. l. advers haer.
of late years, Servetus Beza epist. 1.
, Ochinus Zanch. de 3. El l. 4 c. 1.
, abroad; and Francis Ket Burnt at Norwith, 14. Ian. 1588.
, Hamant Holinsh. chro. fol. 1297
, and certain Brownists Who whisper in corners that we must not believe in the
holy Ghost, says Bredwell writing against Glouer, p. 102.
, among us at home: Some affirm the holy Ghost to be but a mere creature, as
did Arius Theod. l 5. c. 10.
, the Semiarians Philast.
, the Macedonian heretics Soz. l. 4. c 27.
, the Tropickes Athan.
, Ochinus Zanch. de El par. l. 2. c. 5.
. Some have assumed the style, and title of the holy Ghost unto themselves; as
did Simon Magus D. ^ren.
: Montanus Eus. I. 5. c. 18.
, and Manes Chry des S.
.

Some have given the title of the holy Ghost unto men, and women; so

Hierax said, that Melchisedech was the holy Ghost Epiphan.
.

Simon Magus termed his Helene the holy Ghost Epiphan.
.

The Helche said, the holy Ghost was a woman, and the natural sister of Christ
Epiphan.
.

Many Papists, and namely the Franciscanes Alcar. Fr l ^.
, blush not to say, that S, Francis is the holy Ghost.

2. Proposition.
The holy Ghost is of one substance, majesty and glory with the Father, and the
Son.

The proof from Gods Word.
THE holy Ghost eff^cted the incarnation of Christ Mat 1.18, 10. Luke 1.35.
, teaches all things Ioh. 14.26.
, leads into all truth Ioh. 26.13.
, gives utterance to his servants Acts 2.4.
, and gifts unto his people 1 Cor. 12.8.
, places Rulers in the Church, and Overseers to feed the flock of God Acts
20.28.
; seals the Elect unto the day of redemption Ephesians. 4.30.
, as well as the Father, and the Son: and these three, viz. the Father, the
Word, and the holy Ghost are one 1 John 5.7.
. Therefore is the holy Ghost of one substance, majesty and glory with the
Father, and the Son.

And this was the belief of the ancient Fathers

I believe (say they) in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, etc. who
with the Father and the Son together is worshipped, and glorified, who spoke
by the Prophets Symb. Nicen.
.

The Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, is all one;
the glory equal, the majesty coeternall. Such as the Father is, such is the
Son, and such is the holy Ghost, etc. And in this Trinity none is before or
after other, none is greater or less then another: But the whole three persons
be coeternall together, and coequall Symb. Ath.
.

The very same do all reformed Churches believe, and confess Confess, Helv 1.
ar. 6 and 2. c. 3. Basil. ar. 1. Bohem. c. 3 Gal ar. 1. Belg. ar. 1. Aug. ar. 1
Wittemb. c. 1, 2. Sucrica. ar 1.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
The premises do make

Against the Tretheites; which affirm the holy Ghost to be inferior unto the
Father Zanch de 3. E^. par. 2 l. 5. c. 1
,

Against the Arrians; who said the holy Ghost was inferior to the Son Aug.
contr. Mar. A^rian.
.

Against the Macedonian heretics, who held the holy Ghost to be but a
minister, and servant of the Father, and the Son Ruffin. l. 1. c. 25.
: yet of more excellent majesty, and dignity then the Angels Niceph. l. 9. c.
17.
.

Against many erroneous spirits which deliver the holy Ghost to be nothing else
but,

The motion of God in his creatures, as did the Samosatenians Confess. Aug. 5.
ar. 3.
.

A bare power, and efficacy of God working by a secret inspiration; as the
Turks Pol. of the Tur. Emp. 3. c.
; and certain English Sadduces do imagine Hut^^ inson. in his Image of God,
c. 24. p 112 ^.
.

The Inheritance allotted to the faithful H. N. in his In^^ruct. praef. se^^.
7.
; and the being or virtuous estate of Christ Idem in his Spir. and praef. sect.
14.
, as dreameth H.N.

The affection of charity, or Love within us; an error of Petrus Lombardus Sen
l. 1. did. sect. 5. 2.
.

Gods love, favor and virtue, whereby he works in his children; so thought
Ochinus Zanch. de 3. E. par. 1 l 4. c 1.
, and Servetus Zanch ib. l. 1. c. 2.
.

2. Proposition.
The holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, and the Son.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe proceeding of the holy Ghost from the Father, and the Son, we gather
from the holy Scripture, which teaches how

The Father sends the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, in the name of the
Son John 14.16.
, and the Son sends the Comforter, the Spirit of truth, from the Father
John 15.26.
; he proceeds of the Father Ibid.
, and is sent of the Son John 16.7.
.

So with us, say the ancient Fathers, and Christians.

He proceeds from the Father and the Son Symb. Nic^n.
.

The holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son; neither made, nor created,
but proceeding. So there is one Father, not three Fathers; one Son, not three
Sons; one holy Ghost, not three holy Ghosts Symb. Athan.
, which is the faith of the modern Christians Confess. H^^ 1. c. 3. Gal. c. 3
Belg. ar. 8. 11. Wittemb. c. 3. Sucrica. ar. 1.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
This discovers all them to be impious, and to err from the way of truth,
which hold and affirm

That the holy Ghost proceeds neither from the Father, nor the Son, but is
one, and the same person that Christ is: as the Arrians do Basi. sermon. de sp.
S.
.

That the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, but not from the Son: as at
this day the Grecians Russe Commonweal, ^.23.
, the Russians Guagnin. de relig. Moscov.
, the Moscovites Father de relig. Moscov.
, maintain.

That there is a double proceeding of the holy Ghost; one temporal, the other
eternal; an error of Peter Lombard T. Sent l. 1. distinct. 14.
, uncontrolled hitherto, and therefore well liked of the Papists.

6. Article. Of the sufficiency of the holy Scripture for salvation.
Holy Scripture 1 contains all things necessary for salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the faith, or
be thought requisite and necessary to salvation. 2 In the name of the holy
Scripture, we do understand those Canonical books of the Old and New
Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church.

Of the names and number of the Canonical books.

Genesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Numbers. Deuteronomium. Joshua. Judges. Ruth. The
1. Book of Samuel. The 2. Book of Samuel. The 1. Book of Kings. The 2. Book
of Kings. The 1. Book of Chronicles. The 2. Book of Chronicles. The 1. Book
of Esdras. The 2. Book of Esdras. The Book of Esther. The Book of Job. The
Psalms. The Proverbs. Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher. Canticles or Song of
Solomon. 4. Prophets the greater. 12. Prophets the less.
And the other books ( Hierome says) the Church does read for example of
life, and instruction of manners; but yet does it not apply to stablish any
doctrine; such are these following.

The 3. Book of Esdras. The 4. Book of Esdras. The Book of Tobias. The Book
of Judith. The rest of the Book of Hester. The Book of Wisdom. Jesus the
Son of Sirach. Baruch the Prophet. Song of the 3. Children. The Story of
Susanna. Of Bell, and the Dragon. The Prayer of Manasses. The 1. Book of
Maccabees. The 2. Book of Maccabees.
4 All the Books of the new Testament, as they are commonly received, we do
receive, and account them for Canonical.

The Proposition.
1. The sacred Scripture contains all things necessary (to be known, and
believed) for the salvation of man. 2. All the books in the volume of the
Bible are not Canonical, but some, and namely those here specified, are. 3 The
third and fourth Books of Esdras, the Book of Tobias, etc. are Apocryphal. 4.
Of the New Testament all the Books are Canonical.
1. Proposition.
The sacred Scripture contains all things necessary (to be known, and
believed) for the salvation of man.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe holy Scriptures to be sufficient to instruct us in all things necessary to
be known and believed, for man's salvation, the Word of God teaches.

Ye shall put nothing unto the Word which I command you (says the Lord)
neither shall ye take ought there from.

Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it; thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought therefrom. Thou shall not turn away from it to the
right hand, not to the left, that thou may prosper whithersoever thou go
Jos. 1.7.
.

Every Word of God is pure, etc. Put nothing unto his words, lest he reproove
thee, and thou be found a liar Prove. 30.5, 6.
.

These things are written that ye might believe, etc. and that in believing ye
might have life through his Name Joh. 20.31.
.

The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to improove, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man
of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
.

If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this book: and if any man shall diminish of the words of
this book, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of
the holy City, and from those things which are written in this book Rev.
22.18.
.

Hereunto Gods people both always have, and at this present do subscribe
Confess. Helv. 1 ar. l 4. and 20. 1. Basil ar. 10. Book. c. 1 Gal. ar. 2. 4, 5.
Bell. ar. 7. Saxon. ar. ^. Wittemb. c. 30. Suev. ar. 1.
.

The Errors, and adversaries ^^^o this truth.
Therefore adversaries be we to all adversaries to this truth: especially

To such as scorn, and contemptuously reject the book of God, as both did the
Circumcellians, which defaced, and burnt the holy Scriptures Aug. contra
P^^^ll. 1. c. 27.
, and Pope Leo the tenth, who termed the holy Gospel, a fable of Christ Apol.
Steph. fol 3. 58.
: and do the profane Atheists N^sh in Christ his tears, p. 39. a.
.

Also to such as debase the credit and estimation of the holy Scriptures, as
David George did Hist. Davidis Georg.
: and both do the Papists, who have an opinion that the Scriptures of God are
not sufficient to instruct mankind unto salvation L^^^a l. 1. c. 1.
: and the Anabaptists, which deem not the holy Bible to be the Word of God
Bu^^in. cont. Catabap. l. 1.
, with the Family of Love, in whose books nothing is more frequent then the
tearming of Gods reverend ministers, and preachers, Scripture-learned.

Also to them which with Gods Word do equal their own doctrine, Injunctions,
Precepts, and Traditions, as do the Papists. For of their doctrine, say the
Rhemists: Whatsoever the lawful Apostles, Pastors, or Priests of Gods Church
preach in the unity of the same Church (meaning the new Church of Rome) is to
be taken for Gods own word Test. Rhem. an^ 1 These. 2 12.
. To the same purpose, but more blasphemously Stapleton: As the Jews were to
believe Christ: so are we simply, and in every thing to believe the Church (of
Rome) whether it teaches truth or errors Stapl. antid. Evang in Luc. 10.16. p.
528.
.

Whatsoever by the authority of the Church is commanded, ought of all men to
be esteemed as the very Gospel, says Abbat Trithemius Tract. de propriet.
Monach. c. 4.
, of Popish precepts: and our English Rhemists Test. Rhem. an. 1. These. 4.8
. He that despises the Churches, or her lawful Pastors precepts. And of their
Traditions; He that refuses Ecclesiastical traditions, deserves to be
thrown out of the Church among the heathen, as well as he which refuses the
Gospel, says Didacus Stella Stella in Luc. 10 fol. 20.
, and the Council of Trent; with like affection of godliness and reverence,
embrace we, and worship the books of the Old and New Testament, and
Ecclesiastical Traditions, says the Council Council. Trid. sess. 4.
. The like opinion have the Moscovites of Traditions Ruff. Com. c. 23.
.

To them finally are we adversaries; which above the Scriptures do prefer
their own 1 inventions, as did the Philosophers; whereof one said of Moses,
That good man makes a trim discourse, but prooveth nothing; and the Grecians,
to whom the Gospel is foolishness 1 Cor. 1.23.
; 2 and imaginations, as did the Manichies Epiphan.
, David George Hist. Da. Geo.
, and do the Turks Pol. of the Tur. em. c. 3.23.
, and Family of Love Display. A. 6.
, 3 or Traditions, as do the Papists, who more cruelly do punish the
violaters of their own Traditions, and ordinances, then they do the breakers
of Gods Commandments: 4 or Statutes, Edicts, Judgments, Proclamations, etc.
proceeding from the brain of man, as Machiavell does, and his Scholars.

2. Proposition.
All the Books in the volume of the Bible are not Canonical, but some are.

That some books, and namely those above mentioned, are Canonical, it has
bin granted by the best learned, and most godly of long time. And as all
reformed Churches in the world are of the same judgment with us; so in their
public Confessions, some have so accounted, and judged of them as we do
Confess Gal. ar 9. Belg. ar. 4
.

Adversaries to this truth.
Therefore (to speak first of the Canonical books of the old Testament) much
have they offended, which either rejected all, or allowed but some of the
books of the old Testament: of the former sort were the Severians Trit ^ur. de
eccles scrip
, Basilides Epiphan.
, Carpocrates Epiphan.
, and the Manichies Aug. de bono pers l. 2. c. 11.
: and the Catabaptists Zuing. l. contra Catabap.
: of the latter were sundry, whereof,

Some received no more but only the five books of Moses, as the Sadduces D.
Whit. de S. Scrip. contra Bellar. q. 1. c. 3
.

Some, of all the books in the Old Testament, reject the works of Moses, and
namely his four last books, as the Moscovites Russe Com. c. 23.
.

Some embraced the Law only, and the Prophets; as the Samarites Cyril. Catech.
18.
.

Some esteemed neither the Law, nor the Prophets; as the Appelleans Tertul. de
praef. haert.
.

Some had in contempt the book of the Canticles, as Sebastian Castellio Beza
in vita Calv.
.

And some the book of Job, as the Anabaptists VVhitalt. de S. Scrip. contra
Bellar. q. 1. c. 3.
.

3. Proposition.
The third and fourth books of Esdras, the book of Tobias, etc. be Apocrypha.

That diverse, and namely those books mentioned, are Apocrypha, we are neither
the first that said, nor they alone which affirm the same. For so judge of
them did the alone Council at Laodicea Can. 59.
, and do the Churches reformed, and namely in France Confess. Gal. ar. 3.
Confess.
, and Belgia Belg. ar. 4.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto these truths.
So that they are to be held, and taken heed of, as Seducers, which upon the
Church would thrust, either other men's works, and devices, not comprised in
the Bible, as would,

Some, the new prophets, Barobas, and Barolf, or Basili^es the Heretic Eusebius.
eccles. hist. l. 4. c. 8.
.

Some, the manifestation of Marcion the Heretic Tertul. de haeret.
.

Some, the mysteries of Manichie the Heretic Magdenburg. eccles. hist. c. 3.
c. 11.
.

Others, Esaias Ascensorium, of Hierax the Heretic Epiphan.
.

Others the Gospel after the Egyptians, after S. Andrew, S. James the lesser,
S. Peter, S. Bartholomew, the 12. Apostles, Barnabas, Nicodemus, Thaddeus.

Others, the Canons of the Apostles.

Others, the Acts of S. Abdie, S. Andreas, S. Paul, Peter, Philip, Thomas.

Others, the Revelation of S. Paul, Steven, Thomas.

Others, the Books of the Anabaptists, of H. N. with Popish Legends, and the
like.

Or the books Apocrypha, within the volume of the Bible, as the Papists, who
therefore anathematize, and curse so many as take them not for Canonical
Council. Tri. sess. 4. decr. de Can scrip.
.

4. Proposition. Of the New Testament all the books are Canonical.
Although some of the ancient Fathers, and Doctors, accepted not all the books
contained within the volume of the New Testament, for Canonical: yet in the
end they were wholly taken and received by the common consent of the Church of
Christ in this world, for the very Word of God, as they are at this day, almost
in all places, where the Gospel is preached, and professed.

Howbeit, we judge them Canonical, not so much because learned, and godly men
in the Church so have, and do receive, and allow of them; as for that the holy
Spirit in our hearts does testify that they are from God. They carry a sacred
and divine authority with them; and they do also agree in all points with the
other books of God in the Old Testament.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore in admitting all and every of these books, and acknowledging them
to be Canonical, we demonstrate our selves to be against

Such as rejected all the new Testament, as did the Jews, and our Matthew
Hamant Holinsh. chro. fol. 1299
.

Such as allowed part, but not the whole new Testament; and these were of
diverse sorts, whereof

Some allowed of the Evangelists, only Matthew, as the Cerdonites Eus. l. 3. c
27.
, and Ebionites Iren. l. 1. c. 26
, others only Luke, as the Marcionites Iren. ibid.
, others, only John, as the Valentinians Idem. l. 2. c. 11.
.

Some accepted only the Acts of the Apostles, as the Tatians: others, of all
other books rejected the said Acts, as the Manichies August. l. de vtil. cred.
, and the Severites Eusebius.
.

Some, of S. Paul's Epistles, took the Epistles unto Timothy and Titus only to
be Canonical, as Marcion the heretic Iren. l. 3 c. 12
.

Some, as Apocryphal, refuse the Epistles unto Philemon Theod. arg. in epist.
Paul: ad Tit.
, others the Epistles unto the Hebrews, the Epistle of S. James, as Althemerus
Althemer. in c. 2. epist. Ia.
, others the first, and second Epistles of John, with the Epistle of Jude, as
Wigandus Wigand.
; others the Epistle unto the Hebrews, of James, the two last of John, and of
Jude, as Cardinal Cajetane See Whitak. against W. Rainolds c. 7.
.

Some rejected the book of Saint John's Revelations, or the Apocalypse, as
Heshusius Lib de 600. error pontif.
: we are also against them which allowed neither the whole new Testament, nor
those books wholly, which they embraced, as the Marcionites, who defaced all
those places in the Gospel after Luke, and in the Epistles, which concerned
either the divinity, or humanity of our Savior Christ Iren l. 2. c. 29
.

And lastly, are we against them which receive the whole new Testament, but
deface and put out such texts as mislike them; as the Turks who scrape out
whatsoever they find touching the passion of Christ, alleging how it was
added purposely by the Jews in derision of Christians Aul. l. 2. p 5
.

7. Article. Of the Old Testament.
1. The Old Testament is not contrary to the New. For both in the Old and New
Testament, everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only
Mediator between God and man, being both God, and man.

2. Wherefore they are not to be heard, which feign that the old Fathers did
look only for transitory promises.

Although the Law given from God by Moses, as touching 3 Ceremonies, and Rites,
do not bind Christian men: 4 nor the civil precepts thereof ought of
necessity to be received in any Commonwealth: yet notwithstanding, no
Christian man whatsoever is free from the obedience of the commandments, which
are called moral.

The Propositions.
1. The Old Testament is not contrary to the New. 2. The old Fathers looked for
eternal happiness, through Christ, as well as for temporal blessings. 3.
Christians are not bound at all to the observation of the Judicial ceremonies.
4. The Judicial laws of the Jews are not necessarily to be received, or
established in any Commonwealth. 5. No Christian man whatsoever is freed from
the obedience of the Law Moral.
1. Proposition.
The Old Testament is not contrary to the New.

The proof from Gods Word.
THat the Old Testament is not contrary to the New, it may be prooved by many
invincible arguments: yet it is most apparent, in that our Savior Christ, very
God and very man (as above art. 2. has bin declared) is offered unto mankind
for his eternal salvation, by them both. For

We learn that there is one and no Christ's more in the New Act. 3.25. Gal. 3.8,
10.
, and we learn the same in the Old Genesis 22.18. A Math. 16.16.
.

That Christ is the Son of God, in the New ^t. 13.33.
, we learn the same in the Old Psalm 27.
.

That Christ is very man, in the New 1 Heb. 2.14, 5, 16:
, we learn that he should be so from the Old Es^. 11.1. and 53.3.
.

That Christ was borne at Bethelem in the New Matthew. ^.1.
, we learn that he should be so from the Old M^^h 5.2.
.

That Christ was borne of a Virgin in the New Matthew. 2.23.
, we learn that he should be so from the Old Esa. 7.14.
.

That Christ was honored of Wisemen in the New Matthew. 2.11. Esa 60.6.
, we learn that he should be so from the Old Matthew. 21.1.
.

That he rode upon an Ass unto Jerusalem, from the New Zach. 9.9.
, we learn that he should so do, from the Old Luke 22.7.
.

That he was betrayed in the New Zach. 11.12.
: we learn that he should be so from the Old Acts 8.33. 1 Cor. 5.4. 1 Pet.
2.24.
.

That he suffered not for his own, but for our transgressions, in the New Esa.
53.5.
; we learn that he should so do, from the Old Act. 2.29, 31. 1 Cor. 5.4.
.

In the New, that he rose again from the grave Matthew 12.40.
; from the Old, that he should so do Psalm. 16.10.
.

And in the New, that he ascended into heaven Jonas 1.17. and 2.10.
; and in the Old, that he should so do Ephesians 4.8. Psalm. 51.18.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
We are then adversaries to them all, which reject, as of no reckoning, the Old
Testament, as did both old heretics, as Basilides, Carpocrates, and the
Manichies See (...) 6. Prop. 2.
and the new Libertines, who say the Old Testament is abrogated Builin c^^.
Anab. l. 2. c. ^
.

2. Proposition.
The old Fathers looked for eternal happiness, through Christ, as well as for
temporal blessings.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe Old Fathers to have looked not only for transitory promises, but also for
eternal happiness, through Christ, the holy Scripture does manifest.

Saint Paul says 1 Cor. (...) ^.
,

Brethren, I would not have you ignorant, that all our Fathers were under the
cloud, 2.
and all passed through the red Sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat;
and did all drink the same spiritual drink: 3.
(for they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them; and the Rock was
Christ.)

By faith, Noe was made heir of the righteousness which is by faith. Heb.
11.7*
.

By faith, Moses, when he was come to age, refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the rebukes
of Christ greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto
the recompense of the reward Ibid. 24.25, 26.
, etc.

All these through faith obtained good report, and received not the promise;
God providing a better thing for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect Ibid. 39 40.
.

Abraham rejoiced to see my day Rom 8.5, 6.
, Abraham above hope believed under hope, that he should be the father of many
nations Romans 4.18.
.

Of which salvation the Prophets have inquired, and searched 1 Pet. 1.10
.

This truth was never doubted of in the Church of God, and is publicly
acknowledged by some confessions Helv. 2. c. 13. Saxon ar. 13.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
They are not then to be heard, which think the Fathers, and faithful people
before Christ his time, hoped only for temporal, and not for spiritual: and
if for spiritual, yet not for eternal happiness; as did many of the Jewish
Atheists Psalm. 53.1.
, and Sadduces Acts 23.2^.
, and do the Family of Love, which make the promises of happiness, by
temporal blessings to be accomplished in transitory life.

Hence H.N. very strangely allegorizeth of the land of promise, when he calls
it, The good land of the upright, and concordable life; and says that, The
lovely being, or nature of the Love, is the life, peace, and joy, mentioned,
Romans 14.6. and the land of promise, wherein honey, and milk flows, spoken,
Exo 43. a 13. a. Deuteronomy. 8. b. This, and more a great deal to this effect has
H.N In his book entit. The sp^land of peace. c. 18.9, 10. etc. 2.4, 5.
.

3. Proposition Christians are not bound at all to the observation of the
Judicial ceremonies
The proof from Gods-Word.
THat neither the whole Law ceremonial of the Jews, nor any part thereof is
necessarily to be observed of us Christians, the holy Scripture teaches us by
Peter's vision Acts 10.13.
, the Apostles decree Act. 15.24, 29.
, and by the doctrine of S. Paul Gal 1.3, 4. and 4.10, 11. Ephesians. 2.14, 15. Col.
2.16, 17.
.

As all believe, so some Churches publicly acknowledge the same Confess. Gal.
ar. 13. Belg ar. 25.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
In a wrong opinion therefore be they, who are of mind, either that the law
Ceremonial wholly is to continue, and be in use, or that part thereof is yet
in force, and must be.

The former of these was the opinion of the false prophets Acts 15.1, 2,
, the Cerinthians Eusebius.
, the Ebionites Iron. l. 1. c. 26.
, and is of the Jews: Armenians, and Family; of love H. N. evang. c. 12. sect.
4. 9.
, the latter is an error of our home Sabbatarians. For say they:

The Sabbath was none of the Ceremonies, which were justly abrogated at the
coming of Christ D. B. Sab. doctrine, 1. book, p. 11.
.

When all Jewish things have bin abrogated, only (by their very words) the
Sabbath has continued still in the Church in his proper force, that it might
appear that it was of a nature far differing from them Ibid. p. 10.
.

Whereas all other things were so changed, that they were clean taken away, as
the Priesthood, the Sacrifices, and Sacraments, this day (meaning the Sabbath
day) was so changed, that it yet remains: which shows that though all the
other were ceremonial, and therefore had an end: This Sabbath was moral, and
therefore abides still Ibid p. 4 1.
.

The Commandment (of Sanctifying every Seventh Day, as in the Mosaicall
decalogue) is natural, moral, and perpetual (is their doctrine Ibid. p. 7.
.)

4. Proposition.
The Judicial laws of the Jews, are not necessarily to be received, or
established in any Commonwealth.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe truth hereof apeareth by the Apostles decree Acts 15.20, 28, 29.
; which shows whereunto only the Primitive Church necessarily was tied.

By the Apostles doctrine Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. 14
, which enjoyneth the Christians to yield obedience unto the ordinances of
their lawful Governers, and Commanders whatsoever.

By the Apostles example, and namely of the blessed Saint Paul Acts. 16.37.
Act. 22.25, etc. Act. 25.11.12
, who took benefit, and made good use of the Roman, and Imperial Laws.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This truth neither is, nor ever was oppugned by any Church. Only among our
selves some think us necessarily eyed unto all the Judicials of Moses, as the
Brownists. (For they say, The Jaws Judicial of Moses belong as well unto
Christians, as they did unto the Jews Barrowes disco. p. 127.
.)

Others, that we are bound, though not unto all: yet unto some of the
Judicials, as holds T. C. 1. Reply. sect. 1, 3.
, and Philip Stubs Anatom. of abuses, 2. part. D^b.
.

5. Proposition. No Christian man whatsover is freed from the obedience of the
law Moral.
The proofs from Gods Word.
THink not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets: I am not come to
destroy them, but to fulfill them. For truly I say unto you (says our Savior
Christ) til heaven, and earth perish, one jot or one tittle of the law shall
not escape, till all things be fulfilled: whosoever therefore shall break one of
these least Commandments, and teach men so, shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven, etc Matthew. 5.17, 18, 19.
.

If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, etc. Thou shall not
kill, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not
bear false witness; Honor thy father, and thy mother Mat. 19.17, 18, 19.
.

Do we make the Law of none effect, through faith? God forbid, yea, we
establish the Law Romans 3.31.
. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of
the Commandments of God 1 Cor. 7.19.
. The public confessions of the Churches of God in France Art. 23.
and Belgia Art. 25.
, agree with this Doctrine.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Whereby are condemned, as most wicked and unsound, the Opinions

Of the Manichies, who found fault with the whole Law of God, as wicked, and
proceeding, not from the true God, but from the prince of darkness Aug. con^.
Faust. epist. 11. and 74.
.

Of Brownist Glover, whose opinion was, that Love now is come in the place of
the ten Commandments Bredweb detect p. 119.
.

Of Johannes Istebius, and his followers, the Antinomies, who will not have
Gods Law to be preached; nor the conscience of sinners to be terrified, and
troubled with the Judgments of God Sim. Paulimeth. par. 2. de lege De^. p. 54.
.

Of Banister (among our selves) who held how it is utterly evil for the elect,
so much as to think, much less to speak, or hear of the fear of God (which
the Law preaches Bani. error.
.)

8. Article. Of the three Creedes.
1 The three Creeds, Nicene Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is
commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received, and
believed. For 2 they may be prooved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture.

The Propositions.
1. The Nicene, Athanasian, and Apostolical Creeds, ought to be received, and
believed. 2. The three Creeds, viz. The Nicene, Athanasian, and of the
Apostles, may be prooved by the holy Scripture.
1. Proposition.
The Nicene, Athanasian, and Apostolical Creeds, ought to be received, and
believed.

THis proposition the Churches of God, both anciently, and in these last days
Confess. Helv. 2 c. 11. Gal. ar. 5. Belg ar 9. Saxo ar. 1.
, do acknowledge for true.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore much out of the way of godliness are they which term the Apostles
Creed, A forged patchery, as Barrowe does Bar. dis. p. 76.
, and Athanasius, Sathanasius Creed, so did Gregorius Paulus in Polonia
Genebr. l. 4. p. 1158.
, and the new Arrians, and Nestorians in Lituania Surius chro. p. 320.
.

My self some 28. years ago, heard a great learned man, whose name upon
another occasion before is expressed (to whose acquaintance I was artificially
brought) which in private conference between him and my self, termed worthy
Zanchius, a Fool and an Ass, for his book de tribus Elohim, which refuteth
the new Arrians; against whose founders the Creeds of Athanasius, and Nicene
were devised. Him attentively I heard, but could never since abide for those
words: and indeed I never saw him since.

2. Proposition.
The three Creeds, viz. the Nicene, Athanasian, and of the Apostles, may be
prooved by the holy Scripture.

The proof from Gods Word.
THan this assertion nothing is more true: For the Creedes, I mean these three
Creedes, speak first,

Of one and the same God, whom we are to believe, is for essence but one Deuteronomy.
6.4. Mal. 2.10. 1 Cor. 8.4. Ephesians 4.5, 6.
, in persons three Matthew. 3.17. Gal. 4.6. 1 John 5.7.
, viz. The Father, the Creator, Psalm. 134.3.
, the Son, the Redeemer Esa. 53.4. Romans 5.18. Gal 3.13. Ephesians. 2.16. 1 John 2.2.
, the holy Ghost, the Sanctifier 1 Cor. 1.21, 22. 1 Pet. 1.2.
. Next of the people of God which we must think, and believe, is,

The holy Ephesians. 1.3, 4. and 2.21. Col 2.22.
, and Catholic Church Esa. 54. 2. Psalm. 87.4. Acts 1.8, etc. Ephesians. 2 14. Reu.
5.9.
,

The Communion of Saints Ephesians. 4.15. 1 Cor. 10.16. Heb. ^0.25. 1 John 1.7.
,

Pardoned of all their sins Esa. 44.22. Math. 18.23, etc. Col. 2.13.
,

And appointed to arise from death Ioh. 5.28. 1 Cor. 15. Phil 3.21. 1 John 6.39.
, and to enjoy eternal life, both in body and soul Pet. 1.4. Revel. 21.4.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore we are enemies to all adversaries of this doctrine, or any whit of
the same in them comprised, whether they be Atheists, Jews, Sadduces,
Ebionites, Tretheites, Antitrinitarians, Apollinarians, Arrians, Manichies,
Nestorians, Origenians, Turks, Papists, Familists, Anabaptists, or whosoever.

9. Article. Of Original, or Birth sin.
1 Original sin stands not in the following of Adam, as the Pelagians do
mainely talk, but 2 it is the fault, and corruption of the nature of every man,
that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very
far gone from original righteousness, and is inclined to evil, so that the
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and therefore in every person, borne into the
world, it deserves Gods wrath, and damnation.

3 And this infection of nature does remain, yea in them that are regenerated,
whereby the lust of the Flesh, called in Greek (...): Which some do expound,
the wisdom: some the Sensuality, some the affection: some the desire of the
flesh, is not subject to the Law of God: and although there is no condemnation
for them that believe, and are baptized: yet the Apostle does confess, that 4
Concupiscence, and Lust has of it self the nature of sin.

The Propositions.
1. There is Original sin. 2. Original sin is the fault, and corruption
of the nature of every man, etc. 3. Original sin remains in God his dear
children. 4. Concupiscence, even in the regenerate, is sin.
1. Proposition.
There is Original sin.

The proof from Gods Word.
IN the holy Scripture we find of Original sin, the cause, the subject, and
the effects: the cause thereof is Adams fall R^m ^.15. 1 (...). 1^.21.
, partly by the subtle suggestions of the devil Genesis 3.4.
, partly through his own free will: and the propagation of Adam his corrupted
nature unto his seed and posterity.

Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, says our
Savior Christ 2 Co^. 11.3.
. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
went over all men: forasmuch as al men have sinned, says S. Paul Ioh 3^3.
. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby, says S. Peter 1 Pet. ^.2
. And S. James, Iam. 1.18.
Of his own will begat he us with the Word of truth, that we should be as the
first fruits of his creatures. And the forementioned Apostle Paul again Ephesians.
2.1, 3, 4, ^.
: You that were dead in trespasses and sins etc. and were by nature the
children of wrath, as well as others, But God, which is rich in mercy, through
his great love where with he loved us, even when we were dead by sins, has
quickened us together in Christ, etc.

The subject thereof, is the old man, with all his powers, mind, will, and
heart. For in the mind there is darkness, and ignorance of God, and his will
Matthew 12.^4 Romans 6 7 1^ or 2.14 1 John 3.1 and. 5.19.20. Matthew 5.29
: and in the will and heart of man, there is concupiscence, and rebellious
affections against the Law of God Acts 7 39. and 15 9. Romans 1.^1 ^am. 1.13, 14.
.

And the effects of this Birth, or Original sin, are first actual sins,
and they both inward, as ungodly affection; and outward, as wicked looks,
profane speech, and devilish actions Matthew. 15.19
; next, an evil conscience 1 John 3.2^.
, which brings the wrath of God Romans 1.18. Col. 3.5.6.
, death Ioh. 8.24. Romans 5.12. Iam 1.15
, and eternal damnation Romans 5.18.
.

All Churches of God believe this, and some in their public confessions
testify so much Confess. Helv. 1. ar 8 and 2 c 8. Bassi. ^r. 2. Bohem. c. 4.
Gal. ar. 9, 11 Belg. ar. 15. August. ar. 1. Saxon. ar. 2.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Thus armed with authority, and forces from the Word of God, and assisted with
the neighbor Churches, we offer battle:

1. To the Jews Fr Laut. 2. 2. Villa nim. de forma. Second: on. l. 1. c. 13.
, Carpocratians Clem. Alex. str^m. lib 3.
, and Family of Love Display in All^ns con^.
, who flatly deny there is any original sin.

2. To the Papists, which say, that

Original sin is of all, the least sin, and less then any venial sin.

Original sin is only the debt of punishment for the sin of Adam, and not
his fault.

Original sin is not properly sin: all this has Ruardus Tapperus Tapp.
tract. de pec. Orig.
.

Such as are infected only with Original sin, are free from all sensible
punishment Th. Aquin. l. 4. ^^st. 1 ^. q ^ ar. 2.
.

3. To Florinus and Blastus, who make God the Author of sin ^onfess. He^^. 2.
c. 8. ex. l. (...).
.

4. To the Sabbatarians among us, who teach, that

The Life of God in Adam before his fall, could not continue without a Sabbath
Sal. doct. 1. book. p. 15.
.

The Sabbath was ordained before the fall of Adam, and that not only to
preserve him from falling ^^i^.
, but also that being holy and righteous still, he might have bin preserved in
the favor of God; which D. B. delivers in his Sabbath doctrine Ibid. 2.
book page 182.
.

5. We are also adversaries to the like curiously affected, who enquire,

Whether it was Gods Will, that Adam should fall?

Whether God enforced our first parents to fall?

Why God stayed not Adam from falling? etc.

2. Proposition.
Original sin is the fault, and corruption of the nature of e^^ry man, etc.

The proof from Gods Word.
Original sin is not the Imitation of Adam his disobedience: For the
Scripture speaks of no such thing: neither does Gods people so think: and
some Churches, by their extant Confessions, with us deny the same: as the
Church in France Con^^^^. Gal ^^.^0.
, and the Low Countries Conf^ss Belg^ar. 15.
: but it is, partly the Imputation of Adam his disobedience unto us Romans 5.12,
16 Confess. Aug. a^ 2. Saxon. ar 1 2 Wit. c. 4.
, and partly the fault, and corruption of man's nature Romans 3.23. and 7.18 Ephesians
1.3.
, as the Churches also acknowledge Confess Hel^ 2 c 8 Gal. ar 10 Bohe. c 4 Aug.
ar. 2. Saxon ar. 2. Wittemb. c. 4
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Adversaries unto this truth, are,

The Pelagians August de. pr^meritis, c. ^. 2, 3.
, and Family of Love Display in A^lens conf.
who say that Original sin comes not by propagation, but by Imitation.

Such as ascribe Original sin in no sort unto man, but either unto God, as
did the Hermogenians Tertull.
, or unto the devil as did the Valentinians August.
.

The Manichies, who preached that this sin is another, and a contrary
substance within us, and proceeds not from our corrupted nature August. de
haeres.
.

The Apollinarians, who held original sin to be from nature Athan de incar.
Christi.
.

The Papists, who affirm that some persons, and namely, the Virgin Mary
Council. Trid sess. 5 decr. de pec. Orig. Alb. Mig. ^. 74. super Euang. Mistu^
est, etc. Paulus de Palacio in Mat. c. 11 p. 46 3
, is free from this Original sin.

3. Proposition.
Original sin remains in God his dear children.

The proof from Gods Word.
I Allow not that which I do; for what I would, that do I not, but what I
hate, that do I, says S. Paul Romans 7.15.
.

The flesh lusts against the Spirit; and the Spirit against the flesh: so
that ye cannot do the same things that ye would Gal. 4.17.
.

Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and
is enticed Iam. 1.14.
.

Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers, abstain from. fleshly lusts,
which fight against the soul 1 Pet. 2.11.
.

Nothing is more true Confess Helv 1. ar 8. and 2. c.
in the judgment of Gods people Basil. ar. 2. Gal. ar. 11. Saxon ar. 11.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
We stand therefore in this point,

Against the Papists, who say that Original sin was not at all, much less
remained in the Virgin Mary Council. Basil. sest. 6. Test. Rhem. annot Romans 5.14.
.

Against Giselbertus, whose doctrine is, that Baptism once received, there is
in the baptized no sin at all, either original or actual Giselb. lib. alte:
cat. Synag and eccles. c. 8.
.

Against the Family of Love, who affirm that the elect and regenerate sin
not H.N. Document sent. c. 2. sect. ^. c 13. sect. 5
.

Against the Carpocratians, whereof some boasted themselves to be every way as
innocent as our Savior Christ, Iren. l. c. 24.
.

Against the Adamites both old Epiphan.
and new Aeneas. Sylv. hist. Bohe. c. 42.
who said they were in so good a state as Adam was before his fall, therefore
without original sin.

Against the Begadores in Almaigne, affirming they were, impeceable, and had
attained unto the very top, and pitch of perfection, in virtue, and godliness
Carranza summa Council.
.

4. Proposition. Concupiscence, even in the regenerate, is sin.
Concupiscence in whomsoever, lusts against the Spirit Gal. 5.1 7.
, fights against both the soul 1 Pet. 2.11.
, and the law of the mind Romans 7.23.
, and therefore (but that there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus Romans 8.1.
) it brings death, and damnation Gal 5.17, 21. Iam. 1.14.15
.

Mortify therefore your members, which are upon earth (says S. Paul Coloss.
3.5.
unto the Colossians) fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection,
evil concupiscence, etc. for the which things sake, the wrath of God comes
on the children of disobedience.

And unto all Christians, S. Peter: I beseech you, as strangers, abstain from
fleshly lust 1 Pet. 3.11.
.

To the same purpose is both the doctrine, and Confessions of Gods people
Confess. Helv 2. c. Saxon. ar. 2 10.
.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore we mislike their opinions, as unsound, which say that concupiscence
either is no sin at all; or but a venial fin: the former was an assertion of
the Pelagians, Confess. Aug ar. 2.
and is of the Papists: that latter was one of Glouers errors

Francis, the Monk of Colen, counted concupiscence no sin but said it was as
natural, and so no more offensive before God, for man to lust, then for the
Sun to keep his course.

Petrus Lombardus says that concupiscence before Baptism is both a punishment,
and a sin, but after Baptism is no sin, but only a punishment Lomb l. 2.
dift. 32. ^ Catech Trid. praecep. 9.
.

The Church of Rome both teaches that the power of lusting is not, but the use
of wicked concupiscence, is evil, and numbered amongst most grievous sins;
and decrees how Concupiscence is no^ sin, but proceeds from sin; and
inclines unto sin Council. Trid ses. S. decreto de pec. Or^g.
.

Glouer, the Brownist said that the intemperate affections of the mind,
issuing from concupiscence, are but venial sins Bred. detect. ^9.1, 9.


10. Article. Of Free Will.
1 The condition of man, after the Fall of Adam, is such that he cannot turn,
and prepare himself by his own natural strength, and good works, 2 to faith
and calling upon God, wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant,
and acceptable to God, 3 without the grace of God preventing us, that we may
have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will.

The Propositions.
1. Man of his own strength, may do outward and evil works, before he is
regenerate. 2. Man cannot do any work that good is, and godly, being not yet
regenerate. 3. Man may perform, and do good works, when he is prevented by
the grace of Christ, and renewed by the holy Ghost.
1. Proposition.
Man of his own strength may do outward and evil works, before he is
regenerate.

The proof from Gods Word.
WE deny not, that man, not yet regenerate, has free will to do the works
of nature, for the preservation of the body, and bodily estate, which thing
had, and have the bruit beasts, and profane Gentiles, as it is also well
observed in our neighbor Church Confess. Helv. 2. cap. 9. Aug. ar. 28. Saxon.
3.4, 7.
: Besides, man has free will to perform the works of Satan, both in
thinking, willing and doing that which evil is. For the imaginations of the
thoughts of man's heart are only evil continually Genesis 6.5.
; evil, even from his youth Confess. Helv. 2. c. 9. and 1. ar. 9 Bohem. c. 4.
. A truth confessed by our brethren.

Adversaries to this truth.
A false persuasion is it therefore, that man has no power to move either his
body so much as unto ourward things, as Laur. Valla dreamed Simon Pauli meth.
par. 2. de lib. Ar.
, or his mind unto sin, as the Manichies maintained, affirming how man is
not voluntarily brought, but necessarily driven to sin Aug. epist. 28
.

2. Proposition.
Man cannot do any work that good is, and godly, being not as yet regenerate.

The proof from Gods Word.
THE wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be. They that are in the flesh, cannot please
God Romans 8.7, 8. ^
.

The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned 1 Cor. 2.14.
.

No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost 1 Cor. 12.3.
.

We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is from God 2 Cor. 3.5.
.

Without me ye can do nothing, says our Savior Christ John 15.5.
. Which is the confession of the godly reformed Confess. Helv 1. ar. 9. and 2.
c. 9 Basil. ar. 2. Behem. c. 4. Aug. ^ ar. 18. Belg. ar. 14.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Adversaries unto this truth are all such as hold, that naturally there is free
will in us, and that unto the best things. So thought the Pharisees, the
Sadduces, the Pelagians August de pec. mer. l. 3.
, and the Donatists Idem contra Petil. cap 19.
: and the same affirm the Anabaptists Zuing. contra Catabap.
, and Papists. For say the Papists,

Man, by the form and power of nature, may love God, above all things Gab.
B^el. 3. sent. did 37.
.

Man has free will to perform even spiritual and heavenly things Council.
Trid. sess. 6. c. 1.
.

Men believe not but of their own free will Test Rhem: an. Mat 20.16.
. It is in a man's free will to believe, or not to believe, to obey, or disobey
the Gospel of truth preached Ibid. annot. marg p. 408.
.

The Catholic (popish) religion teaches free will.

3. Proposition. Hills quart. 13. reas.

Man may perform, and do good works, when he is prevented by the grace of
Christ, and renewed by the holy Ghost.

The proof from Gods Word.
IN a man prevented by the grace of Christ, and regenerate by the holy Spirit,
both the understanding is enlightened, so that he knows the secrets and will
of God; and the mind is altogether changed, and the body enabled to do good
works.

To this purpose the Scriptures are plentiful.

I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts Jer.
31.33.
.

No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him Matthew. 11.27 Luke 10.22.
.

Blessed art thou, Simon, the Son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not
revealed it unto thee, but my Father, which is in heaven Matthew. 16.17
.

No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; and to another the word of
knowledge, by the same spirit; and to another faith, by the same spirit; and to
another the gifts of healing, by the same spirit; and to another the operations
of great works; and to another prophecy; and to another, the discerning of
spirits; and to another diversities of tongues; and to another, the
interpretation of tongues, etc 1 Cor. 12.8.
.

God purifieth man's heart Acts 15.9.
; works in us both the will, and the deed Phil. 2.13.
; the spirit helps our infirmities; for we know not what to pray as we ought,
etc Romans 8.26.
. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God 1 Cor.
6.11.
.

Unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but
also suffer for his sake Phil. 1.2.
.

And this do the Churches of God believe, and confess Confess Hol. 2. c. 9.
Aug. ar. 18 Bohem. c. 4. Saxon. ar. 4.
.

11. Article. Of the Justification of Man.
We are accounted righteous before God, only for 1 the merit of our Lord, and
Savior Jesus Christ 2 by faith, and 3 not for our own works, or deservings.

Wherefore that we are justified by faith only, is most wholesome doctrine,
and very full of comfort, etc.

The Propositions.
1. Only for the merit of our Lord and Savior Christ are we accounted
righteous before God. 2. Only by Faith are we accounted righteous before God.
3. Not for our own works, or deservings are we accounted righteous before
God.
14. Proposition.
Only for the merit of our Lord, and Savior Christ, we are accounted
righteous before God.

The proof from Gods Word.
BY Christ his blood only we are cleansed.

He is the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world Joh. 1.29.
.

We are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus Romans 3.24.
.

We are bought with a price 1 Cor. 6.19.
, even with the precious blood of Christ, the Lamb undefiled and without spot
1 Pet. 1.19.
; which cleanses us from all sin 1 John 1.7.
.

By his only righteousness we are justified.

By the obedience of One, many be made righteous Romans 5.19.
.

Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness unto every one that believes
Ibid. 10.4.
. He of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption 1 Cor. 1 30.
: and we are made the righteousness of God in him 2 Cor. 5.21.
. And therefore from heaven we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus
Christ Phil. 3.21.
.

And this is the faith, and confession of all Churches reformed Confess 2. c. 15
Bohe. c. 6 Gal. ar. 12. Belg. ar. 22. August. ar. 4. Wittemb. ar. 5. Suevica.
c. 3.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This truth is neither believed, nor acknowledged

Of the Atheists, who are neither persuaded of the life to come, nor understand
the mysteries of man's salvation through the merits of Christ.

Nor of the Pharisees, and their followers, who think that by civil, and
external righteousness we are justified before God Matthew. 5.20.
.

Nor of Matthew Hamant; who held that man is justified by Gods meree mercy,
without respect unto the merits of Christ Holinsh. Chro. f. 1299.
.

Nor of Galeotus Martius, which was of opinion, that all nations, and persons
whosoever living according to the rules of nature, should be saved, and inherit
everlasting happiness Jovius. cleg. doci. vir. p 57.
.

Nor of the Turks, who think that so many as either go on pilgrimage unto
Mecha, or do kiss the sepulcher of Mahomet, are justified before God, and
thereby do obtain remission of their sins Lonic. Tur. ^ist Com. 1. l. 2 par
2 c 14.15.18.
.

Nor of the Family of Love: who teach by the shedding of Christ his blood, is
meant the spreading of the Spirit in our hearts Display, in Allens confess.
.

Nor of the Papists whose doctrine is, that

1. Though Christ has suffered for all men in general: yet not only each man
must suffer for his own part in particular T^^t. Rhem. ^n. Romans 8.17.
: but also that the works of one man may satisfy for another Ibid. an. Col.
1.24.
.

2. They teach next, that sins venial are done away, and purged by prayer,
Almsdeeds, by the worthy receiving of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar; by
taking of holy water; knocking upon the breast with holy meditation, the Bishops
blessing, and such like Vaux catech. c. 4.
, by holy water, and such ceremonies Test. Rhem. an. Joh. 13.10.
, sacred ceremonies Test. Rhem. an. marg. p 258
, as Confiteor, tundo, conspergor, conteror, oro,
Signor, edo, dono, per haec venalia pono: that is,
I am confessed unto the Priest,
I knock mine heart and breast with fist:
With holy water I am besprent,
And with contrition all yrent:
I pray to God, and heavenly host,
I cross my forehead at every post:
I eat my Savior in the bread,
I deal my dole when I am dead.
And doing so, I know, I may
My venial sins soon put away.


And sins mortal, not by the merits of Christ only, but many ways besides
are cleansed, think the said Papists, as by the merits of dead Saints, namely of
St. Mary the Virgin: Threnosa compassio dulcissimae Dei Matris
Per ducat nos adgandium summi Dei Patris.
The pitiful compassion of Gods best pleasing mother,
Bring us to the joys of God the sovereign Father.


Horae B. Virg. S. Mar. secundum usum Sarum.
And of Thomas Becket, Tu per Thomae sanguinem. quem pro te impedit,
Fac nos Christ scanders, quo Thomas ascendit.
By the blood of Thomas, which he for thee expended,
Make us Christ, to climb up, where Thomas ascended.
By Agnus Deis, whereof they say: Peccatum frangit, ut Christi fanguis, and
angit. It breaks sin, and does good,

As well as Christ his precious blood Cerem. lib. 1. tit. 7.
.

By reading certain parcels of Scripture, according to their vulgars.

Per Evangelica dicta,
Deleantur nostra delicta Breviar. secundum Sarum.
,
Through the sayings and words evangelicall,
Our sins blot out and vices all.
2. Proposition.
Only by Faith are we accounted righteous before God.

The proof from Gods Word.
Only believe Mar. 6.36.
, all that believe in Christ, shall receive remission of sins Acts 10.4^.
: from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses, by
Christ every one that believes, is justified Acts 13.19.
.

The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes
Romans 1.16.
.

To him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness Bom. 4.5.
. Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, to every one that believes
Romans 10.4.
.

Know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of
Jesus Christ, etc. Gal. 2.16.
.

God would justify the Gentiles through faith, etc. They which be of faith,
are blessed with faithful Abraham Gal. 3.8, 9.
.

By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves Ephesians. 2.8.
.

Yea, doubtless I think all things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake
of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do
judge them to be doung, that I might win Christ, and might be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law; but that which is
through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through
faith Phil 3.8.9.
.

The Churches of Christ by their public confessions give testimony unto this
truth Confess. Helv. 2. ca 6. Basil. ar. 8. Bohe. c. 6, 7. Ga. ar. 10. Belg ar.
22. Aug. ar. 4 Saxon. ar. 3.8. Wit. ar. 4. S^^^. cap. 3.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Partakers of ths profit, and sweetness of this doctrine are, not they which
be altogether ignorant of this mystery.

Nor they who know the same, but apply it not to their own souls, and
consciences, but altogether despise the same, as did Pilate, in condemning
Christ Not. 27.24.
; Heroa, in killing James Acts 12.1.
: Agrippa, in not defending Paul Acts 26.26.
; the Jews in persecuting the Apostles: and do the Devils Jam. 2.19.
, and many ungodly persons, Tyrants, false Christians, and Apostataes.

Nor they which teach not a sure confidence in Jesus Christ, but an historical
knowledge of him, as the Papists Canis. catec. cap. 1. Vaux. cat^. c. 1. Test.
The. an. Romans 4.14. 1 Timothy 3.15.
.

Nor they which hold that all and every man is to remain doubtful, whether he
shall be saved or no; as do the same Papists Council. Trid. ses. 6. c. 9. Test.
The. an. Romans 5.1.
.

Nor they which teach that man is justified,

Either by works without faith, as did the false apostles in Asia 2 Timothy 1.
, and do the Turks, and Anabaptists Bale mist. of iniquit. p. 53.
;

Or by faith, and works, as both the Pseudapostles at Jerusalem Acts 1.5.1.
, the Ebionites Eus. l. 3. c. 24.
, and the Papists Test. Rhem. an. Luke 7. mar. Luke 10.20, 28. Joh. 3.18. James
2.25.
, with the Russians Russi^ Common-weal^, ^. 23.
.

Or neither by faith, nor works, as they which continue both faith in Christ
Jesus, and good works too, hoping yet to be saved, as the carnally secure
worldlings.

Neither shall they be partakers of the sweetness of this truth, which say,
that for Christians to trust only by Christ his passion, or by Faith only to
be saved, is a breath of the first commandment, as Vaux Catech c. 3.
, is the Doctrine of Devils, as Friar Lawrence a Villavicentia De forman. S.
concion. l. 1. c. 11.
; and the doctrine of Simon Magus, as do the Rhemists Test. Rhem. an. Acts
8.18.
.

Nor they finally which maintain how the truly righteous apprehend not Christ
by Faith, but have him, and his righteousness essentially, and inherent within
them, which is an error of the Catharists Isidor etim. l. 8. c de haeres.
, Papists Conc. Trid. sess. 6. c. 16.7.
, Osiandrians Calvin contra Osiand. epist. fol. 303. Theod. Beza epist. 1.
, and Family of Love Display in Allens confess.
.

3. Proposition.
We are accounted righteous before God, not for our own works, or deservings.

The proof from Gods Word.
Besides what has been said, that works have no place, nor portion in the
matter of our justification, it is evident in the holy Scripture, where we
find, that

All men be sinners, and destitute of the glory of God: And therefore that no
man can be justified by his own works Psalm. 14.2, 3. Psalm 53.2. and 41.4.
Romans 3.12.
.

Eternal life comes unto us, not by desert; but partly of promise Acts 2.30.
Acts 3.25. Acts 13.32. 2 Timothy 1.1.
, partly of gift John 17.2. Romans 6.23. 1 John 5.11. Revel 2.10.
.

The just shall live by faith; and the Law is not of faith Gal. 3.11, 12.
.

Moreover, as the godly in old time were; so Christians in these days, are,
and shall be justified: But the godly were justified, not for any good works,
or worthiness of their own: so justified was Abraham Romans 5.1, 2. Gal. 3.6.
Heb. 11.17.
; the Jews Act. 2.44. etc
, the Samaritans Acts 8.15.
, Paul 1 Timothy 1.14, 16. Acts 22.16. Phil. 3.6, 9.
, the Eunuch Acts 8.36.
, the Iailor Acts 16.31, etc.
, and the Ephesians Ephesians. 4, 5. etc.
.

All Churches reformed with a sweet consent, applaud and confess this doctrine
Confess. Helv. 1.4.16. Basil. ar. 8. Boh. c. 7. Gal. ar. 22. Belg. ar. 24 Aug.
ar. 6.26.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Adversaries hereunto are,

The Pharisees, who thought men were justified by external righteousness,
moral Mat. 5.21, etc.
, and ceremonial Matthew. 15.2.
.

The false apostles in Asia 2 Timothy 1.
, and at Jerusalem Gab. Biel. l. 2. did. 27. q. 1.
.

The Pharisaicall Papists, who against the Justification by faith alone, do
hold a justification by merits, and that of Congruity, dignity, and condignity.

The said Papists teach besides, that life eternal is due unto us of debt,
because we deserve it by our good works Council. Trid. sess. 6. Cant. 32
.

They teach finally, that by good works our sins are purged Petrus a Soto
asser. cath. de bonis oper.
.

12. Article. Of good works.
Albeit that works, which are the fruits of Faith, and follow after
justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods
judgment: 1 yet are they pleasing, and acceptable to God, in Christ, 2 and do
spring out necessarily of a true, and lovely Faith, insomuch that by them, a
lively Faith 3 may be as evidently known, as a tree discerned by the fruit.

The Propositions.
1. Good works do please God. 2. No work is good, except it spring from Faith.
3. Good works are the outward signs of the inward Belief.
1. Proposition.
Good works do please God.

The proof from Gods Word.
THough God accepts not man for his works, but for his dear Sons sake: yet
that good works, after man his justification to please God, is a clear truth
every where to be read in the holy Scripture. For,

God has commanded them to be done Mat^h 5.16. Joh. 15.12. Phil. 2.14. etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, etc 2 Timothy 2.19.
, and requires righteousness, not only outward of the body Jam. 2.
, but also inward of the mind Mat. 5.22.28. Acts 24.16.
, and has appointed for the virtuous and godly, rewards both in this life
Matthew. 5.5. Mark 10.29, 30. 1 Timothy 4.8.
, and in the world to come Math. 7.21. and 10.^^. Luke 14.13, 14. Romans 2.10.
, and to the wicked, punishments, spiritual Es^. 59.1, 2 John 9.32. 1 John
3.21.
, corporal Deuteronomy. 28.15, etc. Jer. 5.25. Romans 13.2.
, and of body and soul eternal in the pit of hell Matthew. 10.33. Matthew. 21.41,
etc. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Heb. 12.14, etc. 25. Rev. 21.8.
.

And this is believed and acknowledged by the Churches Confess. Helv. 2 c. 1.6.
Basil. ar. 8. Bohem. c. 7. Gal. ar. 7. Belg. ar. 24. August. ar. 6. and 26.
Saxon. ar. 3.5, 6. Wittemb. c 7. Suevica. c. 4.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
This truth is oppugned by adversaries of diverse kinds. For,

Some hold, that seeing man is justified by Faith, he may live as he lists;
as the Libertines.

Some think, that to attend upon virtue, and to practice good works, is a
yoke too heavy, and intolerable; as the Simonians Iren. Theo.
.

Some utterly cast off all grace, virtue, and godliness, as did the
Basilidians Iren. l. 1. c. 23.
, the Aetians Epiph. l. 3.
, the Circumcellians Aug. cont. Pet. l. 1. c. 14.
, and do the Machivilians, and Atheists. Some permit, though not all manner,
yet some sins: so allowed was both whoredom, and unclean pollutions, by the
Carpocratians Cl. Alex str. l. ^. Epiphan.
, and Valentinians Theodor.
, and is of the Jesuits Spar. disc. p. 13.
, and Papists Constit. Othonis de (...) cub. Cl^r. removendis.
, and perjurie in the time of persecution, by the Basilidians Phila. Ir^n.
, Helchesaits Eus. l. 6. c. 38.
, Priscillianists August.
, Henricians D. Bernard. sup. Can. ser. 65.
, and Family of Love Display, H. 5. b.
, and violating of promise, yea and oaths made unto Heretics Council. Constable.
ses. 19. and Cochlaeus hist. Hussi. 112. p. 75.
, as they call them, by the Papists.

Some (as the Turkish Priests called Seiti, and Cagi) take it to be no sin, but
a work meritorious, by lies, swearing, yea forswearing, to damnifie Christians
what they can Pol. of the Turk. Emp. c. 24.
. Much like unto these are the aequivocating Jesuits, in deluding, and
deceiving Protestant Princes, and their Officers, by their doubtful speeches;
even when they are sworn to answer plainly, and truly by their lawful
Magistrates.

Some suppose that God is pleased with lip-service only and outward
righteousness; as the hypocritical Pharisees, or Pharisaicall hypocrites
Matthew. 7.23.
.

6. Proposition.
No work is good, except it spring from faith.

The proof from Gods Word.
ALL which man does, is not pleasing unto God, but that only which proceeds
from a true faith in Jesus Christ: so says God in his Word.

Romans 3.8.
They that are in the flesh, cannot please God.

In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love Gal. 5.6.
.

Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbeleeving, is nothing pure Tit. 1.15.
.

Without faith it is impossible to please God Heb. 11.6.
.

And although the works of the Believing do please God: yet are they not so
perfect, that they can satisfy the Law of God. Therefore even of the
regenerate, and justified, says our Savior Christ; Pray, forgive us our debts
Matthew. 6.22.
; say, We are unprofitable servants Luke 17.10.
: and S. Paul.

We know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, etc, Rom 7.14.
.

We, which have the first fruits of the spirit, even we do sigh in our
selves, etc. and have infirmities Romans 8.23.
.

Ye cannot do the same thing that ye would Gal. 5.17.
.

Which is the faith, and confession of the Churches Confess. Helv. 1. cap. 16.
Basil. ^^. 9. Bohem. c. 7. Gal. ar. 22. Belg. ar. 24. August. ar. 26. Saxon.
ar. l. 5.6. Wittem c. 7. Sucv. c. 4.
.

Errors, and adversaries of this truth.
Therefore we mislike, and condemn the opinions of the Valentinians, and
Papists.

The Valentinians say, that Spiritual men do please God (which are themselves
only,) not by Faith, but only by their knowledge of divine mysteries; and
natural men do please him by their bodily labor, and upright dealing Iren.
l. 1. c. 1.
.

The said Valentinians fained three sorts, or degrees of men, the first
Spiritual, who through bare knowledge; the next Natural, who by labor, and
true dealing shall be saved; the third they call Material, men utterly
incapable of divine knowledge, and religious speculations, who must perish both
in soul and body Epiph.
.

The Papists teach, that

They only are not good works, which God commands, but they also which be
either voluntarily done of our selves, or enjoined us by Priests Tapp. p. 188.
.

They are good works, and acceptable before God, which are done without faith
Andrad. de fide, lib. 3.
.

Works of themselves, without respect unto Christ, please God Tapp. p. 189.
.

Men perfectly may keep the Laws of God Tapp. ibid.
, in which error also be the Anabaptists Bulling. cont: Anaba. l. 4. c. 3.
, and Family of Love Display. l. 6. a.
.

3. Proposition.
Good works are the outward signs of the inward Belief.

The proof from Gods Word.
MAny are the reasons, why good works are to be done, in part cited before,
page 49. yet not the least cause is, that men may be known what they are. For
the Scripture says, and shows, that thereby are known, the good trees from
the bad Matthew. 7.16.
, the wheat from the chafe Matthew. 3.12.
, the true disciples from the false John 13.35.
, the sons of God, from the children of Satan Luke 6.36. Ephesians. 1.1. 1 John
3.10.
, the regenerate, from the unbeleevers Iam. 2.18. 1 Pet. 1.17. Ephesians. 4.17.
.

Hereunto the Saints, and Churches do subscribe Confess Helv. 2. c. 16. Basil.
ar. 8. Bohem. c. 7. Gal. ar. 22. Belg. ar. 2. Saxon ar. 3. Wittemb. c 7.
Su^vica. c. 4.
.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
The faithful show their works, yet neither to have them seen of men, as did
the hypocritical Pharisees Mat. 6. and 7.
, nor thereby to merit heaven, as do the Pharisaical Papists, whose doctrine
is, that

Good works are meritorious Test. Rhem: an. Rom 2.6. 1 Cor. 3.8. 2 Cor. 5 10.
Heb. 6.20. Jam. 2.2.
.

Good works (as Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction done in penance) not
only do merit, but are besides a Sacrament for to attain reconciliation with
God, and forgiveness of sins Council. Trid. sess 4. c. 3.


Life eternal is due unto good works by the justice of God Council. Trid. sess
6. can. 42.
.

13. Article. Of Works before Justification.
Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit 1,
are not pleasant to God, for as much as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ
2, neither do they make men meet to receive grace, or (as the School Authors
say) deserve grace of congruity: yea rather 3 for that they are not done as God
has willed, and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the
nature of sin.

The Propositions.
1. Works done before justification please not God. 1. Works done before
justification, deserve not grace of congruity. 3. Works done before
justification, have the nature of sin.
1. Proposition.
Works done before justification, please not God.

The proof from Gods Word.
BEfore men do please God Matthew. 7.16.
, nothing that they do, can please him. But men please not God, being not
renewed and justified by the Spirit. For before men be regenerate, they are not
grapes, but thorns; not figs, but thistles; not good, but evil trees Matthew.
12.33 Luke 6.43.
; not lively, but dead boughs John 15.4.
; not engraffed, but wild Olives Romans 11.17.23.
, not friends, but enemies Romans 5.10.
, not the sons of God, but Ephesians. 2.3.
the children of wrath, which bring forth no good fruit. As the Churches also
acknowledge Confess. Helv. 2. cap. 15. Aug. ar. 20.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Hereby the vanity of them is perceived, which think, before man's
justification, his deeds do please God, such are the Papists, and were the
Basilidians.

The Papists teach, that,

Works done without faith, do please God Andrad. de Fide, lib. 3.
.

Good works, not in respect of Christ only, but in themselves considered,
please God Tapp. p. 189:
.

The Basilidians placed the dooers of civil, and philosophical
righteousness, performed without faith in Christ, in the very heavens Clem.
Alex. strom lib. 2.
.

2. Proposition.
Works done before Justification, deserve not grace of congruitie.

The unregenerate, not yet justified, have nothing in them to moove God to be
gracious unto them; and being, as they are, old Ephesians. 4.22.
, not new creatures; enemies Romans 8.10.
, not favorers of godliness; The children of wrath, Ephesians. 2 2.
, not of God; sinners Romans 5.8.
, nor virtuously bent; Infidels Tit. 1.15.^
; and not believers; of congruity deserve no grace at Gods hands: which is the
faith too, and confession of other Churches Confess. Helv 2. c. 16. Bohem. c. 7.
Belg. ar. 23. Aug. ar 4.20. Saxon. ar. 3. and 8. Wit. ar. 5.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This overthrows the Popish assertions, concerning merits of congruity Test.
R^^m. an. Act. 10.2.
; and that by good works man is justified before God, and made heir of
eternal life Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 10.
.

As evil works deserve hell fire: so eternal happiness is deserved by good
works And rad^le Fide, lib. 6.
.

3. Proposition.
Works done before justification, have the nature of sin.

The proof from Gods Word.
Whatsoever men do, not yet justified before God, it is sin: for of such
persons, the best works which they do, even their Fasting Wherefore have we
fasted, and thou see it not? we have pu^ished our selves, and thou regardest
it not, Esaias 58.3. Did you fast unto me? Zach. 5.7. They have their reward,
Matthew. 6.16.
, praying He that turns away his care from hearing the Law, even his prayer
shall be abominable, Prove. 28.9.
, Almsdeeds When thou prayest, be not as the hypocrites, etc. they have their
reward, Matthew 6.5. Take heed that ye give not your alms before men, etc. they
have their reward, Matthew. 6.1, 2.
, sacrificing unto God Will I eat the flesh of Bulls? or drink the blood of
Goats? Psalm. 50.13. Bring me no more oblations in vain: incense is an
abomination unto me, etc. Esa. 1.13. He that kills a bullock, is as if he
slew a man, he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he
that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood: he that remembers
incense, as if he blessed an idol, Esaias 66.3.
, prophesying, and working of miracles, even in the name of Christ Lord, Lord,
have we not by thy name prophesied? and by thy name cast out devils? and by thy
name done many great works? Then will I profess to them, I never knew you:
depart from me, ye that work iniquity, Matthew. 7.22, 23.
, yea all their actions whatsoever Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans
14.23. Unto them that are defiled, and unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but even
their minds and consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.15. Without faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.
, are abominable before God Confess. Helv. 2. c. 15, 16. Bohe c. 7. Belg. ar.
23. August. ar. 4.20. Saxon. ar. 3. and 8. Wittemb. ar. 5.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Erred therefore has the Council of Trent, in pronouncing them accursed, which
hold that all works of man whatsoever done before his justification, are sin
Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. ^^. 8.
.

14. Article. Of works of Supererogation.
Voluntary works besides, over and above Gods Commandments, which they call
works of Supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogancy, and impiety.
For by them men do declare, that they do not only render unto God as much as
they are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake then of bounden duty
is required: whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all that are
commanded to you, say, We be unprofitable servants.

The Propositions.
1. Works of Supererogation cannot be taught without arrogancy, and impiety.
2. Works of Supererogation, are the subversion of godliness, and true
Religion.
1. Proposition.
Works of Supererogation cannot be taught, without arrogancy and impiety.

The proof from Gods Word.
Works of Supererogation (which are voluntary works, besides, over and above
the commandments of God) are often condemned in the holy Scriptures, where we
are commanded to walk, not after the laws of men, but according to the
Statutes of God Josh 7.1. Ezekiel. 20.19.
; and to hear, not what man speaks, but what Christ does say Mark 9.7.
: and he, teaching the duty of Christians, sets before them as their rule,
and direction, the Law and Word of God Matthew 5.19.
, and more then that, he does neither urge, nor require.

And against man's Injunctions,

They worship me in vain (says he) who for doctrine teach the commandments
of men Matthew. 28.20.
.

Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you Mark 7.7.
.

My sheep hear my voice, and know not the voice of strangers John 20.25.
.

Which doctrine, ordinances, and works whatsoever (besides over and above that
which God has revealed, and imposed) is called of the Apostle, sometimes
ordinances of the world Col. 2.20.
, voluntary religion Ibid. 3.
, sometime the doctrine of Devils 1 Timothy 4.1.
, and cursed Gal. 1.8.
: And the same is condemned in all Churches reformed after the Word of God
Confess. Helv. 2. c. 16. Aug. ar. 20. Basil. ar. 10. Gal. ar. 24. Belg. ar. 12.
Sax ar. 3.17.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore both arrogant, and ungodly be the Papists, which teach, and speak
in the commendation of such works, and namely, Petrus a Soto In his Asser.
catholic. fidei.
, the Rhemists Annot. marg. Luk^ 1^.35. 1 Cor. 9.23. 2 Cor. 8.14.
; yea and the Council of Trent Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 10.
.

2. Proposition.
Works of Supererogation are the subversion of godliness, and true Religion.

The proof from Gods Word.
Where the works of Supererogation are caught, and in regard the Law of God
there is broken, against the will of Christ Matthew. 5.19.
, that men's traditions may be observed Mark. 7.
.

The holy Scripture must be contemned, as not sufficient enough to bring men
unto the knowledge of salvation, which Saint Paul says, is able to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works 2 Timothy 3.16.17.
.

God, who is only wise 1 Timothy 1.17.
, is made unwise, in not prescribing so necessary works.

Faith, and other spiritual, and most special virtues are brought into
oblivion.

Perfection is imputed not unto Faith in Jesus Christ, but unto works: and
which is most detestable, unto the works too, not commanded, but forbidden of
God, ordained by men.

The Law of God is thought to be thoroughly satisfied; and more duties performed
then man needed to have done. The same think our brethren of these works
Confess. Helv 2, etc. as in the former prop.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Contrariwise the Papists of Supererogatory works: they do merit (say they)
remission of sins, and that not for the doers of them only, but for others
besides Test. Rhem. an. 2. Cor. 8.14
.

They are tokens of the forgiveness of sins, so well as Baptism; yea
deliver from the wrath of God, so well as Christ Confess Aug ar. 20.
.

Are greater, and more holy, then are the works commanded in the Decalogue, or
Law Moral Pet a S^^o assert. C^th. de Lege.
.

And so preferring their own works, and inventions before God his Law,
Sacraments, and the blood of Christ, both ought this doctrine of works
Supererogatory to be counted the doctrine of Devils, and the maintainers
thereof taken for the subuerters of godliness, and true Religion.

10. Article. Of Christ alone without sin.
Christ in the truth of our nature made like unto us in all things, sin only
except 1, from which he was clearly void, both in his life, and spirit. He
came to be the Lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of himself once made,
should take away the sins of the world: and sin as S. John says, was not
in him. But all we the rest, although baptized, and borne again in Christ, yet
offend in many things, and if we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the thuth is not in us.

The Propositions.
1. Christ is truly, and perfectly righteous. 2. All men besides Christ,
though regenerate, be sinners.
1. Proposition.
Christ is true ly, and perfectly righteous.

The proof from Gods Word.
THat Christ was pure from sin, it is abundantly to be seen in the holy
Scriptures. For

He was both conceived Matthew. 1.20.
, and borne without sin Luke 1.36.
.

He appeared to loose Luke 1.36.
, but not to fulfill the works of Satan.

He lived, and was tempted, yet without sin 1 John 3.8.
, and did no sin Heb. 4.15.
, knew no sin 1 Pet. 2.22. 2 Cor. 5.21.
, nor bad any sin in him 1 John. 3.5.
.

He dyed a guiltless and just man, even by the testimony of Paul Romans 5.6. etc
, Peter Acts. 3.4.
, Stephen Matthew. 17 24 John. 14, 6.
, yea of his adversaries, and Judge Pilate Confess. Helv ar. 11. and. 3. c. 11
Bohe c. 4.1 Gal ar. 14.
.

As ours, such are the confessions of the purer Churches Belg. ar. 17.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Cursed therefore before God are the Jews, which said that Christ was a
violator of the Sabbath Matthew. 12.10 Luke 13 14. John 5.16.
.

That he taught, being not lawfully authorized thereunto Matthew. 21.23.
.

That he forbade tribute to be given unto Caesar Luke 3.2.
.

That he was the destroyer of the Law Matthew 5 2^.
.

That he overthrew all religion, and moved the Commons unto rebellion Luke 23
5.
.

In this state with the Jews, are

The Marcionites, which said that he dissolved the Law, the Prophets, and all
the works of God Iren. l. 1. c. 29
.

The Saturnians, which blazed that his coming into the world was, to overthrow
the God of the Angels Theodoret.
.

Our new Heretics, viz, Matthew Hamant in England, which divulged that Christ
was a sinful man, and abominable Idol Holinsh chro fol. 1299.
, and Leonardus Vairus, among the Papists, which has written that Christ was
Veneficus, a common poisoner of men, and women Leon. Vairus de Fasc l. 1. c.
11. circa finem.
.

2. Proposition.
All men besides Christ, though regenerate, be sinners.

The proof from Gods Word.
ALL men either be regenerate, or vnregeneate: Proved p. 5.
the unregenerate be all sinners, unrighteous, and in sin whatsoever they do
Proved. p. 54
.

The regenerate also be not without their sins, both original Prove. p.
39.40.
, and actual Proved p. 50.
.

Besides, there is no man just in the earth, that does good and sins not,
says the Preacher Eccles. 7.21.
: Ye cannot do the same things that ye would Gal. 4.17.
. Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief, says
S. Paul 1 Timothy 1.15.
.

In many things we sin all, is S. James saying Iam. 3.2.
, and S. John, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth
is not in us Ioh. 1.8.
.

Pray therefore, Forgive us our debts Matthew. 6.12.
.

A truth believed and confessed by all Churches, expressedly by some Confess
Aug. ar. 20. Sa^. ar. 2.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Many adversaries has this truth had, and has: as the Papists, the Manichies,
the Catharans, the Donatists, the Pelagians, Family of Love, Marcionites,
Adamites, and Carpocratians. For

The Papists say, that the blessed Virgin was pure from all sin, both
Original Conc. Trid. ^ss. decr. de pec. O^g.
, and actual. For (these are their own words.)

Our Lady never sinned Test. Rhem. an. Col. 1.24. an. Mark. 3 35.
.

Our Lady sinned not so much as venial in all her life: she exactly fulfilled
the whole Law, that is, was without sin.

Also of S. Francis they write, that for virtue, and godliness he was like
unto Christ: and has fulfilled every jot of the Law Stap^ an^^d. ^^ang. in
Mat. 12.50 p 11.8.
.

The Manichies S^cut Adae D^^ non pa^e^^^, omnis creatura ^eb^llis
ex^itit^^sic. B. Francisco omnia praecep^^ Dei implenti creatura omnis famulata
cit; omnia Deus fu^^ecit sub pe^ibus cius. Alca^. Fran. lib. 1.
, and Catharans Hiel. in pro. Dial. contra Pelag^
thought, they could not sin so much as in thought.

The Donatists dreamed how they were so perfect, as they could justify other
men Cyp. l. 4 op 2.
.

Some were of opinion, as the Pelagians August. lib. ^. cont. Pet c. 14
, and Family of Love Council. Meli. cap. 8. Dis H. 6. b.
, how they were so free from sin, as they needed not to say, Forgive us our
trespasses. Which Family also teaches, how there be men living as good, and as
holy, as ever Christ was. An error of Christopher Vitels Ans to the Fam. lib.
L. 3. ^ Disp. H. 6. b.
, a chief Elder in the said Family: and ^pat

He which is a Familist, is either as perfect as Christ, or else a very Devil.

Some deemed themselves as pure as Paul, Peter, or any men, as the Marcionites
Iren. 1. c. ^.
: yo^, as Adam, and Euah before their fall, as the Adamites Epiphan.
, yea as Jesus Christ himself, as the Carpocratians Iren. lib. 1. cap. 24:
.

16. Article. Of sin after Baptism.
1 Not every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism, is sin against
the holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the grant of repentance is not to be
denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism. After we have received the
holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin, and by the
grace of God (we may) rise again, and amend our lives, and therefore they are
to be condemned, which, say they can no more sin, as long as they live here,
or any place of forgiveness to such as truly repent.

The Propositions.
1. Every sin committed after Baptism, is not the sin against the holy
Ghost. 2. The very regenerate may depart from grace given, and fall into sin,
and yet rise again, unto newness of life. 3. No men utterly are to be cast
off, as reprobates, which unfeignedly repent.
1. Proposition.
Every sin committed after Baptism, is not the sin against the holy Ghost,

The proof from Gods Word.
THough every sin in it self considered, deserves damnation: yet is there a
sin which shall be punished with many, and a sin, which shall be punished
with few strip^^ Luke 12 40.
, a sin unto death, and a sin to^ unto the death 1 John 5.6.
, a sin against the Father, and the Son, which shall be forgiven; and a sin
against the holy Ghost, which never shall be forgiven Matt. 13.31. Mark. 3.39.
Luke 12.10.
.

So in their extant confessions witness the Churches in Bohem Confess. Bohe c.
4.
, Saxony Confess. 21.10
, Heluetia Confess. Sax. Helv. 3 c. 8.
.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Diversely has this doctrine bin oppugned. For

Some have thought all sins to be like, and equal, as the Storkes, Pelagians
Cor. c. Mileuit.
, and Io^inians D. Hieron. aduers. Io^in.
.

Some have taught, as Manes the heretic Epiphan.
, how none of the godly Fathers, and others from the beginning of the world,
till the 15. year of Liberius the Emperor (though earnestly they did repent)
were saved; but were all punished alike with utter confusion.

Some give out that such persons be utterly out of Gods favor, and condemned,
which depart out of this world, either before they are baptized, as the Papists
do Spec. poreg^m quest de^. 1. c. 3. q. 5. Posstion. Ingol stad de ^urgat.
, or before they come unto years of discretion, as Hieracites did Epiphan.
.

2. Proposition.
The very regenerate may depart from grace given, and fall into sin and yet
rise again to newnes of life.

The proof from Gods Word.
THat the regenerate may fall into sin, and yet rise again it is a doctrine
grounded upon the Scriptures For in them we evide^tly may se, that fall they
may, partly by the admonitions of our Savior unto the man healed of the Palsy
John 5.14.
, and unto the adulteressle John. 8:11.
, of S. Paul unto the Ephesians Ephesians. 21.22.
, Colossians Coloss. 3.8.
, Hebrews Heb. 3, 12.
, and Timothy 1 Timothy 4.3. 2 Timothy 1.19.
, and of S. Peter unto all the godly 1 Pet. 2.10. and ^.8. 2 Pet. 3.27.
and partly by the examples of David 2 S^m. 11.4 1 Kings ^1.4
, Peter Matth^ 25.70 72, 74.
, who egregiously, and very offensiuely did fall, and that they do fall, it is
most evident by the fifth petition of the Lords Prayer, were nothing else to
prove the same: but so before 9. art. Prop. 3. art. 1 2. Prop. 2. art. 15.
Prop 2.

Next, that being fallen, they may rise again, and be saved, it is apparent
both by the exhortations of the Angel unto the Churches of Ephesus, Pergamus,
and Thyatira Revel. 2.
, and by the examples of Peter, who denied Luke 22.55
and yet afterward confessed his Master Christ Acts 2^ 22. etc. and. 3 13 and
40, and^
, and of all the Disciples, who fled Matthew 2^. ^^.
, and yet returned.

This both granted is, and published for truth by the Churches Confess. He^ 2.
c. 7 Bohem c. 58. Saxon. ar. 10, 11 Wit ar. 23. Suev. ar. 15.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Unto this truth, subscribe will not

Either the Catharans Mag. eccles. hist cen. 12.^5.
, Nouatians Eus. l. 5. c. 43.
, Iouinians Magd. eccles. hist. cent. ^. c 5.
, which think Gods people be regenerate into a pure, and Angelical state, for
that neither they be, nor can be defiled with any contagion of sin

Either the Libertines, whose opinions were, that

Whosoever has Gods Spirit in him, cannot sin. David sinned not after he had
received the holy Ghost Wiliams against the family of Love. ar. 14.
.

Regeneration is the restoring of the estate wherein Adam was placed before his
fall Calv contra Liber fol. ^.^7
,

Or the Papists, who are of mind that

The works of men justified are perfect in this life Tapp p 18 9.
.

No man which is fallen into sin, can rise again, and be saved, without their
Sacrament of Penance Council. Trid. s^ss. 6. can. 26.
.

S. Francis attained unto the perfection of holiness, and could not sin at
all Vis ad apicem venire perfectionis?

Vitam cum mo ribus actende B. Franciesci.


,

3. Proposition.
No men utterly are to be cast off as reprobates, which unfeignedly repent.

Such as do fall from grace, and yet return again unto the Lord by true
repentance, are to be received as members of Gods Church: and this by the
Scripture is verified. For there we read, that

God would have all men saved Matthew. 11.28 1 Timothy 2.4.
.

God is always ready to receive the penitent into favor. For there is joy in
heaven for the sinner that conuerteth Luke 5 7.
.

Christ is grieved when sinners will not repent Luke 19, 41, 42, etc.
.

He shall save a soul from death, and hide a multitude sins, which
conuerteth a sinner from going astray out of his way Iam. 5.20.
.

The Lord would have no man to perish, but all men to come to repentance 2 Pet.
3.9.
.

If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to for give us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness 1 Ioh. 1.9
.

He evhorteth his erring people to repent, and do their first works Reu. 2.5,
16.
: neither refuses he the sinner that repents, as appears in the example of
the Prodigal son Luke 25.20.
, and of the debtor Matthew. 18.26, etc.
.

God then being so gracious and merciful, man after his ensample is both by
all good means to provoke sinners unto repentance, and they testifying the
same, to receive them into favor.

So did Saint Paul will the Galatians. Brethren (says he) if a man be fallen by
occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such one with the
spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted Gal. 6.1.
.

So did he enjoin the Corinthians, when he said,

If any has caused sorrow, the same has not made me sorry, but partly (lest I
should more charge him) you all. It is sufficient unto the same man, that he
was rebuked of many. So that now contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive, and
comfort (him) lest the same should be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness 2
Cor 5, 6, 7
.

When also (...) said, Receive him (meaning Onesimus Phile. v. 12.
.)

And so teach the Churches Confe. Helv. 2. c. 14. Bohem c. 5. August. ar. 11
Saxon ar. 3 Wittem. ar. 12
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Adversaries unto this truth are they:

First, which leave nothing but the unappeaseable wrath of God to such as do
sin after Baptism, as did both in old time the Montanists D. Hieron. adv.
Marc.
, and Novatians Cypr. epist. 4. ad Antoniam.
, and of late years Melchior Hoffman, the Arch-heretike of his days Ballm.
contr. Anab. l. 2 c. 13.
, and the Anabaptists in Germany Calv. Inst. 1.
, and the Barrowists among our selves in England Giffords r^pel.
.

Next, who say that being once regenerate, sin is out away, as with a Razor, so
that the godly cannot sin, and therefore need no repentance: so did the
Messalians Magd. eccles. hist. cen. 4 c. 5.
, and do the Family of Love H. N spirit. land. c 33 sect. 3. c. 34. sect. 11.
c. 37. sect 8 and Proverbs c. 5. sect 15. and Crying voice, sect. 6.
.

Lastly, the desperate, whose sins being either infinite, or abominable, they
think how God neither can, nor will forgive them: such in times past were Cain
Genesis 4.
, and Judas Acts 1.
, in our fathers Franciscus Spirae Hist. Fr. Spi^^
, and one Doctor Kraus Luther on Gal. 3.1.
, and in our days Bolton; even he that first hatched that fact in England,
which afterward was termed Brownisme Giffords rep. to Bar. and Green. p. 17.
.

17. Article. Of Predestination, and Election.
Predestination to life, is the everlasting 1 purpose of God, whereby, 2 before
the foundations of the world were laid, he has 3 constantly decreed by his
counsel secret to us, to deliver, from curse, and damnation, 4 those whom he
has chosen 5 in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to
everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor: wherefore they which be
endued with so excellent a benefit of God 6, be called according to Gods
purpose by his Spirit working in due season, 7 they, through grace obey the
calling, they be justified freely: they be made sons of God by adoption: they
be made like the image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ: they walk
religiously in good works: and at length by Gods mercy, they attain to
everlasting felicity. 8 As the Godly consideration of Predestination, and our
election in Christ is full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to Godly
persons, and such as feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ,
mortifying the works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up
their mind to high, and heavenly things; as well because it does greatly
establish, and confirm their faith of eternal salvation to be enjoyed through
Christ: as because it does fervently kindle their love toward God: so for
curious, and carnal persons, lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually
before their eyes the sentence of Gods predestination, is a most dangerous
downe-fall, whereby the Devil does thrust them into desperation, or into
retchlesnesse of most unclean living, no less perilous then desperation.
Furthermore, 9 we must receive Gods promises in such wise, as they be generally
set forth unto us in holy Scripture: and in our doings that 10 Will of God is
to be followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the Word of God.

The Propositions.
1. There is a Predestination of men unto everlasting life. 2. Predestination
has been from everlasting. 3. They which are predestinate unto salvation,
cannot perish. 4. Not all men, but certain, are predestinate to be saved. 5.
In Christ Jesus, of the me^re will and purpose of God some are elected, and not
others, unto salvation. 6. They, who are elected unto salvation, if they come
unto years of discretion, are called both outwardly by the Word, and inwardly
by the Spirit of God. 7. The Predestinate are both justified by faith,
sanctified by the holy Ghost, and shall be glorified in the life to come. 8.
The consideration of Predestination, is to the godly wise, most comfortable;
but to curious, and carnal persons, very dangerous. 9. The general promises
of God, set forth in the holy Scriptures, are to be embraced of us. 10. In our
actions the Word of God, which is his revealed will, must be our direction.
1. Proposition.
There is a predestination of men unto everlasting life.

The proof from Gods Word.
THat of men, some be predestinate unto life, it is a truth most apparent in
the holy Scripture, by the testimony both of Christ himself, who says,

To sit at my right hand, and at my left hand, is not mine to give, but (it
shall be given) to them, for whom it is prepared of my Father Matthew. 20 23.
.

Many are called, but few chosen Ibid. 22.14.
.

For the elects sake, those days shall be shortened Ibid. 24.2.
.

Fear not, little flock; for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a
Kingdom Luke 12.32.
.

I tell you, in that night there shall be two in one bed: the one shall be
received, and the other left Ibid. 17.34.
.

All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me John 6.37.
.

Witnessed also is this by the Evangelist Luke and Paul: the one says how, of
the Gentiles at Antioch, so many as were ordained unto eternal life, believed
Acts 13.48.
, and the other, those whom he knew before, he did also predestinate Romans 8.20.
.

We are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in
them which perish: to the one we are the savor of death unto death; and to
the other the savor of life unto life 2 Cor. 2.15, 16.
.

Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which, etc. has
chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, etc. who has
predestinate us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, etc Ephesians
1.3, 4, 5.
.

The example also of the elected creatures, man, and Angels Matthew. 25.34, 41.
Jude 6.
; of the two brethren, Abel, and Cain Gen 4.4.
, Isaac, and Ismael Romans 9.17, etc
, Jacob, and Esau Man. 1 2.^. Romans ^.13.
, of the two Eunuchs of King Pharaoh Genesis 40 10.
, of the two Kingdoms, Judah and Israel; the two peoples, Jews and Gentiles?
the two Apostles, Peter, and Judas, the two Thieves upon the Cross Luke 23.39,
40, 43.
, the two men in the fields; and the two women at the Mill Matthew. 24.40, 41.
; make to the illustration of this truth.

All Churches consent with this doctrine.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Err therefore do they, which stand in opinion, that

Some are appointed to be saved, but none to be damned.

In soul, some persons: but in soul and body together, none shall be saved;
of this mind were the old heretics, viz. the false apostles 1 Cor. 15.12.
, the Carpocratians Clem. strom. lib. 4
, the Valentinians Iren.
, the Cerdonites Iren.
, the Manichies Aug contra Faust. l. 4. c. 16.
, and the Hieracites Epiphan.
, and of their opinion be the Family of Love H N. Instr. ar. 5. sect. 24.
Prophecy of the sp r. c. 16. sect 7.
.

2. Proposition.
Predestination has been from everlasting.

The proof from Gods Word.
PRedestination begun before all times It will be said (says our Savior
Christ:) Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundations of the world Matthew 25 3^.


God has chosen us in Jesus Christ before the Foundation of the world Ephesians 1.4.
,

God has saved us, etc. according to his own purpose, and grace, which was
given to us through Christ Jesus before the world was 2 Timothy 1.9.
.

The public confession of the Churches, namely in Helvetia Confess. 2. c. 10,
11.
, Basil ar. 1.
, and France ar. 10.
, bear witness hereunto.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Those wrangling Sophisters then are deceived, who, because God is not included
within the compass of any time, but has all things to come, as present
continually before his eyes, do say, that God did not in the time long ago
past only, but still in the time present likewise, does predestinate.

3. Proposition.
They which are predestinate unto salvation, cannot perish.

The proof from Gods Word.
ALL that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and him that comes to me, I
cast not away, says Christ John 6.57.
.

I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of my hand, etc. none is able to take them out of my Fathers
hand John 10.28, 29.
. The gates of hell shall not overcome the Church Matthew. 16.18.
.

Moreover, whom he predestined, them he also glorified Romans 8.30.
.

For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance Rom 11.29.
.

They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would have continued with us 1 John 2.19.
.

So the Church of God: as before in this article.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Wander then do they from the truth, which think,

That the very elect, totally, and finally may fall from grace, and be damned.

That the regenerate may fall from the grace of God: may destroy the Temple of
God, and be broken off from the vine Christ Jesus: which was one of Glovers
errors Bredwels de^ect. p. 89.
.

That the number of those which be predestinate, may both increase, and be
diminished: so thought the Pelagians.

4. Proposition.
Not all men, but certain be predestiante to be saved.

The proof from Gods Word.
WE deny all, and affirm that a certain chosen and company of men be
predestinate, and so does Gods Word.

Rejoice that your names are written in heaven Luke 10.20.
.

I know mine, and am known of mine, is the saying of Christ Jesus John 10.14.
.

I suffer all things for the elects sake, says St. Paul 2 Timothy 2.10.
.

The very same with us do the Churches affirm Confess. Helv. 2 cap. 10 Basil.
ar. 1. Gal ar. 12 Belg. ar. 16.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
We are therefore against them which teach, how not certain, but all, even the
most ungodly, and damnable: yea the very devils shall be saved; of which
opinion were the Origenists Wolf Musculus in epist ad Philip praef.
, and are the Catabaptists Bullin. cont: Catabap. lib. 1.
.

All men be elected unto life everlasting.

There is no hell, nor future and eternal misery at all, but only either in
man's opinion, as hold the Atheists Nash^n Chr. his tears, p. 58
or in the heart, and conscience of man in this life, as the Familists
maintain Ramose is. and Allens confess.
.

No certain company be foredestined unto eternal condemnation.

None, more then others, be predestinate unto salvation: which was an error of
Henry Bolseck Calvin. epist. munistr. Basil. f l. 105.
.

In like sort we condemn such as either curiously enquire who, and how many
shall be saved, or damned; or give the sentence of reprobation upon any man
whosoever: as do the Papists upon Calvine, Beza, and Verone, when they call
them reprobates Test. Rhem. ar. Romans 11.23
.

5. Proposition.
Of the mere will, and purpose of God, some men in Christ Jesus are elected,
and not others, unto salvation.

The proof from Gods Word.
IN the Scripture we read of man's predestination the cause efficient, to be
the everlasting purpose of God That the pupose of God might remain according
to election, Rom 9.11. Who does predestinate us, etc. according to the good
pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.5. Not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 1.9.
, the cause formal, God his infinite mercy, and goodness I will show mercy,
to whom I will show mercy, Exodus 33.19. Romans 9.15. He has chosen us in Christ,
etc and has predestinate us through Christ unto himself, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things, etc. but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and without spot, which was ordained before
the foundation of the world, but was declared in the last times for your sakes,
1 Timothy 1.18, 19, 20.
; the cause material, the blood of Christ c; the cause final, or end, why
both God the Father has loved, and Christ for his elect has suffered, is the
glory of God Who does predestinate us, etc. to the praise of the glory of his
grace, Ephesians. 16. The Lord has made all things for his own sake: yea, even the
wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16.4.
, and the salvation of man Romans 8.29. Those whom he knew before, he did also
predestinate to be made like to the image of his Son, that he might be the
first borne among many brethren. Has not the potter power of the clay, to make
of the same lump, one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? Romans 9.21.
.

And this do all the Churches militant, and reformed, with a sweet consen^
testify, and acknowledge.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Hereby is discovered the impiety of those men which think, that

1. Man does make himself eligible for the kingdom of heaven by his own good
works, and merits; so teach the Papists.

The kingdom of heaven (say they) is prepared for them that are worthy of it,
and deserve it by their well doing Test. Rhem. an. Matthew. 20.23.
.

Licet electis gloria ex aeterna Dei praedestinatione dimanet, non tamen
provenit, nisi ex little operibus, etc. Sine nebis non glorificamur. 1. Although
from Gods eternal predestination, glory flows to the elect; yet for all that
it springs not but from their own works, etc. Without our selves we are not
glorified Stella in Luc. c. 10. fol. 35.
.

2. God beheld in every man, whether he would use his grace well, and believe
the Gospel, or no; and as he saw a man affected, so did he predestinate,
choose, or refuse him.

3. Besides his will, there was some other cause in God, why he chose one, and
cast off another man; but this cause is hidden from us.

4. Men by nature be elected, and saved; an error of the Basilidians, and
Valentinians Clem. strom. lib 2.4.
.

5. It is in man's power to be elected; the error of Theophylact Theoph in
Matthew. 22.
, and of Bolseck Calvin. epis. m^^ is it Helv. fol. 104.
.

6. God is partial, and unjust for choosing some, and refusing others; calling
many, and electing but few.

6. Proposition.
They who are elected unto salvation, if they come unto years of discretion,
are called both outwardly by the Word, and inwardly by the Spirit of God.

The proof from Gods Word.
THough true it be, the Lord knows all, and every of his elect: yet has he
revealed unto us certain notes, and tokens, whereby we may see, and certainly
know, whether we be of that number, or not. For such as be ordained unto
everlasting life, if they live long in this world, they one time or other be
called unto the knowledge of salvation, by the preaching of Gods Word: they
obey that calling, through the operation of the holy Ghost, working within
them, they feel in their soul the same spirit, bearing witness unto their
spirits, how they are the children of God: and finally they walk religiously
in all good works.

These things are most evident, and clear in the holy Scripture, where is set
down, both the calling of the predestinate, Whom he predestinate, them also
he called, Romans 8.30. God separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by
his grace, Gal. 1.15. He has called you to his Kingdom, and glory, 1 Thessalonians.
2.12. He has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. They
that are on his side, called, chosen, and faithful, Reu. 17.14.
and their obedience to the Word being called Your obedience is come abroad
among all, Romans 16.19. in Christ also ye trusted, after ye heard the Word of
truth, Ephe. 1.13 Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Ye received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, the same Spirit
bearing witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God, Romans 8.15,
16. After this manner pray ye, Our Father, etc. Matt. 6.9. And because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, which
cries Abba Father, Gal 4.6. He has chosen us in him
, and their adoption by the Spirit to be the children of God etc. that we
should be holy, and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. we are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
ordained, that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10.
; and last of all, their holiness of life, and virtuous conversation For the
grace of God, etc. has appeared, and teaches us that we should deny all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 16.
.

All Churches reformed consent hereunto.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Sundry adversaries has this truth, and

First the Papists, who teach that none are to think or persuade themselves,
that they are of the number of the Predestinate unto salvation, but to be ever
doubtful thereof Con. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 1 2. con. 15. Test. Rhem. an. Romans
8.38. an. 1 Cor. 2.12. an. Phil. 2.12.
.

The said Papists deliver, that so many persons as are not marked with the
sign of the cross upon their forehead, are damned, and reprobate Test. Rhem.
an Apoc. 6.4.
, also, that they which will be saved, must be Franciscans Conform F: l. 4.
fol. 10^.
, at leastwise become members of the Church of Rome Ans. to the exec. of Just.
c. 8. p. 192.
.

Secondly, the Anti-nomi, which think the outward calling by the word (though
they have not the inward calling by the Spirit, and be destitute of good
works) a sufficient argument of their election unto life Simon Pauli meth.
par. 2. de. ege Dei.
.

Thirdly, the Puritanes, who among other affiances given them from the Lord, of
their saluacions, made their aduancin^ ^te Presbyteriall Kingome (by the
putting down of Bishops, Chancellours, etc.) a testimony that they shall have
part in that glory, which shall be revealed hereafter Demon. of D^s. epist ded.
.

Fourthly, the Schwenfeldians, and all such as depending upon immediate and
divine revelations, condemn and contemn the ordinary calling of God, by the
ministry of his Word.

Lastly, the Russians Sartan. de Relig Ruthen c. 2
, Catabaptists Zuingl. contra Catabap. fol. 107.
, and Family of Love Display. H. 9. b D. 5.
, who believe that themselves only, and none besides, shall be saved.

7. Proposition.
The Predestinate are both justified by faith, sanctified by the Spirit, and
shall be glorified in the life to come.

The proof from Gods Word.
Diverse be the effects of man's predestination; but chiefly it brings to the
elect Know that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ, Gal 2.16. They which be of faith are blessed with
faithful Abraham, Ephesians. 2.8.
, justification by faith in this life, and in the life to come, glorification
Moreone, whom he predestinate them also he called, and whom he called, them
also he justified; and whom he justified, them also he glorified, Romans 8.30.
Come ye blessed of my Fathers, inherit ye the Kingdom prepared for you, Matthew
25 34.
, always a conformity to the image of the only begotten Son of God, both in
suffering troubles here, and in enjoying immortal glory hereafter If we be
children, we are also heire^, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with
Christ. if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with
him, Romans 8.17. and as we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we
bear^ the image of the heavenly, ^c. or 15.49
, as testify all the Churches in their confessions.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
This is flatly against Papias Tritcuhem de eccle scrip
, Justinius Wolf. Musculus in epist. ^d Phil. praef.
, and all Millenaries Eus eccles. hist. l. 7. c 13.
, who deny the eternity of man's happiness, and dream of I know not what
bliss in this life, to endure a thousand years, but no longer.

Also against the Manichies, who said, the soul only shall be saved
Philastrius.


Also against those heretics which deny the resurrection of the flesh, as did
the Carpocratians Clem. strom. lib. 4.
, Manichies Aug. contra Faust l. 4 c. 16.
, and others See before ar. 4. prop. 1.
.

Likewise against the Hieracites, who have a fantasy that no children,
departing this life, before they come unto years of discretion, and knowledge,
shall be saved Epiphan.
. So the Papists do teach Positiones Ingolstad. de Purgat.
that no infants, dying unbaptized, do go to heaven, but unto another place
adjoining unto Hell, called Limbus puerorum Positiones Ingolstad. de Purgat.
.

8. Proposition.
The consideration of Predestination, is to the godly wise most comfortable;
but to curious, and carnal persons, very dangerous.

The proof from Gods Word.
This doctrine of Predestination is to the godly full sweet, pleasant, and
comfortable, because it greatly confirms their faith in Christ and increases
their love toward God.

I account the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory,
which shall be showed unto us Romans 8.18.
.

If God be on our side, who can be against us? who spared not his own Son,
but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us all things
also? who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies; who shall condemn? etc Ibid. 31.34.
.

Ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the possession purchased unto the praise
of his glory Ephesians. 1.13, 14
.

Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption Ephesians. 4.30.
.

But to the wicked and reprobate the consideration hereof is very sour,
unsavory, and most uncomfortable, as that which they think (though very
untruly, and sinfully) causes them either to despair of his mercy, being
without faith; of not to fear his justice, being extremely wicked: where as
neither from the Word of God, nor any confession of the Church, can any man
gather that he is a vessel of wrath, prepared to damnation; but contrariwise
by many, and great arguments may persuade himself, that God would not his
destruction, as in the next proposition immediately ensuing plainly may
appear.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore they are to be taken as much out of the way, which say that this
doctrine leads either unto desperation, which is without all comfort; or unto
looseness of life, and so unto Atheism; and therefore to be published
neither by mouth, nor book; and so thought both the Pelagians Prosper in Epist
ad Aug. der el^qui^s Pela. haeresis.
, and the Predestinates (a sort of heretics so called) in old time Magd.
eccle. hist. Cent. 5, c. 5. p. 620.
, and the Family of Love in our days, who term the doctrine of
Predestination, a licencious doctrine, and say it fills all the prisons
almost in England Display in an epist. of the Families, l. 7. b.
.

9. Proposition.
The general promises of God set forth in the holy Scripture, are to be
embraced of us.

The proof from Gods Word.
That men the better may avoid both desperation, and carnal security, they
are to have always in mind, that,

1. The promise of grace and favor to mankind^, are universal: as

Come unto me, all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you Mark.
11.38.
.

God sent not his Son into the world, that he should condemn the world; but
that the world through him might be saved Ion. 3.17.
.

God will that all men shall be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth
1 Timothy 2.4.
.

2. The doctrine of the Gospel for the free remission of sins, is to be
preached not unto a few, but universally and generally unto all men.

Go therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them, etc. Mate. 28.19
.

Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that
shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not believe,
shall be damned Math. 16.15, 16.
.

3. The seals of the covenant be appointed to be given to all men, which are
members of the visible Church, or desirous to be incorporated thereinto. For

All are to be baptized Math. 28.19.
, and all are to participate of the bread, and cup at the Lords Supper Mat.
26.26, 27. 1 Cor. 11.34.35.
.

4. As the disobedience of Adam brought condemnation upon all men: so the
blood, and obedience of Christ is able, and all-sufficient to wash away all
sins and that of all men.

5. No man ever truly repented, but he was received again into favor; so was
David after his adultery 2 Samuel 12.13.
, Manasses after his Idolatry 2 Chro. 33.12, 13.
, Peter after his Apostacy Ioh. 21.15, etc.
, the Thief upon the Cross Luke 23.42 43.
, the Nineuites Jonas 3.10
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
They are not to be heard then which say, that

The number of the Elect is but small; and seeing we are uncertain, whether we
be of that company, or no, we will proceed in our course as we have begun.

God is an accepter of persons, and so unjust in choosing some, and refusing
others.

God has predestinate all those persons to eternal death, which are not in
the state of true repentance: which was one of Glovers errors Bredwels dete ct
p. 06.
.

It is the part therefore of all and every man,

Not to refuse the mercies of God both generally, and graciously offered unto
all men by his Word, and Sacraments.

Not to despair in respect either of the greatness, or multitude of his sins.

Nor yet to provoke the Lord to execute his vengeance upon them, through
profaneness of life, or security.

10. Proposition.
In our actions the Word of God, which is his revealed will, must be our
direction.

The proof from Gods Word
In our doings, but chiefly in the matter of Predestination, we are to follow
not our own judgment, and what seems good in our own opinions: but the
will of God, and that will too not which is concealed from us, viz. of God his
omnipotency, whereby he governs at his pleasur the things by himself
created; whereof mention is made both in the Psalms Psalm. 115.3
, in the Prophet Isay Esa 46.10.
, and other places of his Word Romans 9.15.
, but of his favor, and good pleasure toward man, revealed in the holy
Scriptures, by Jesus Christ, whom we are to hear Math. 3.17.
.

Subscribed hereunto have, and do Gods Church every where.

The adversaries unto this truth.
This truth is gaine-said by the Phrygians, Montanists, and Messalians
Theodoret. l. 3. de haeret. fab
, also by the Enthusiasts Beza. ep. 81.
, Anabaptists Sle^dan. com. lib. 6.
, and Family of Love H.N. euang. c. 13. sect. 6.
which leave the written Word of God, and rely upon their own dreams,
visions, and lying revelations. Hence proceeds the contempt of Gods written
Word and of the Preachers, and all religious exercises thereof. For says the
Family of Love In a letter of theirs unto the B. of Roch. in Wilk. confut.
, No differunce is there between a ceremonial, either Letter-Doctor
Christian, and an uncircumcised Heathen.

18. Article. Of obtained eternal salvation only by the name of Christ.
They also are to had accursed, that presume to say that every man shall be
saved by the Law, or sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his life according to that Law, and the light of nature. For holy Scripture
does set out unto us 2 only in the name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be
saved.

The Propositions.
1. The profession of every religion cannot save a man, live he never so
virtuously. 2. No man ever was, or shall be saved, but only by the Name or
faith of Jesus Christ.
1. Proposition.
The profession of every religion cannot save a man, live he never so
virtuously.

The proof from Gods Word.
THis we cannot but acknowledge to be a truth, if we believe the Scriptures,
for they testify that

Jews, and Gentiles are under sin, culpable before God, and deprived of the
glory of God Romans 3.6, 19 23.
.

All men that would be saved, must be borne again of the holy Ghost Ioh. 3.3.
.

No man is justified by the words of the Law Gal. 3.16.
, either ceremonial Act. 15.24, 2. Col. 1 16, 20. Gal. 5.18.
, or moral Romans 3 10, 20, 28. Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
.

God hates the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes Reu 2.15.
, and of Balaam Ibid. 14.
.

The Reprobate, whose names are not written in the book of the Lamb, they do
worship the Beast Reu. 13.8.
.

Punishments eternal, and intolerable are threatened, both to the Beast, and
the false prophet Reu. 2.10
, and likewise to all such as will not go out of Babylon Reu. 18.4.
, and to all Idolaters Reu. 21.8.
.

The confessions of Gods-people are to this end, and purpose Confess. Hell. 1.
ar. 12. and 2. c 1. ^ Bohe. c d. Gal ar. 22.23. Belg. ar. 2^, 13 Aug. ar.
45.21. Wittem. ar. 5 6 Suev. c. 3.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Then to be held accursed are they which affirm, that

The observation of the judicial ceremonies is necessary unto salvation, as
did the false apostles Act. 15.11
, the Ebionites Ire. l. 1. c: 27.
, and the Corinthians Philastrius.
.

Such throughout the world as lead an upright life, and be morally righteous,
whatsoever their religion is, shall be saved, as many of the Philosophers were
in the opinion of the Valentinian and Basilidian heretics Clem. Alex. q 2.4.
, of Galeatus Martius Paul. Iovius log. doct. vir. p. 67.
, Erasmus Roterodam Praef. sua. Tuscu. quest.
.

That men externally may profess any religion, and notwithstanding be saved,
if their affections, and heart be with the Family of love H. N. praef. 19 his
3. Reform. sect. 2.6.
.

That all those that live uprightly and do good deeds, shall be of equal
happiness in the Kingdom of heaven, be they Turks, Christians, Jews or
Moors. A Turkish error Pol. of the Turk. emp c. 23. Lon. cer. Turk. hist. tom.
1. 2. par. 2 cap. 12.
.

That men may embrace, and follow the sect, and religion which they have most
mind unto, and so doing, please God, and be saved: the Lampatians doctrine
Damascene.
.

That no sect ever erred, or were out of the way to heaven: a fancy of the
Rhetorians D. Aug ep. ad Quod vult.
.

1. Proposition.
No man ever was, is, or shall be saved, but only by the name or Faith of
Jesus Christ.

The proofs from Gods Word.
This we cannot but acknowledge to be true, if also we believe the Scriptures,
which say that

Among men there is given none other name under heaven whereby we must be saved
Acts. 4.12.
.

Through (Jesus Christ) his name, all that believe in him, shall receive
remission of sins Acts 10.43.
.

In thee ( viz. Christ Jesus) shall all the Gentiles be blessed Gal. 3.8.
.

And this is the Faith, and confession of the reformed Churches Con^ s. Helv.
2. ar. 10, 11. and 2 cap. 11.13. Basil. ar. 4 Bohem c. 4.10. Gal. ar. 13.16, 17
Belg. ar. 17.20, 21.22. August. an. ar. 3. Saxon. ^r. 3. Wittemb. c. 8. Suc
vica. ^r. 9. sect. 2. they revolted.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Many ways this truth very heretically is oppugned For,

Some teach that we are saved not by Christ, (but as the Valentinians said) by
the labor of their hands, and by their own good works Iren lib. 1.
(as Simon Magus boasted) by his fair Helene Iren.
, (as Matthew H man^ he^d) by other means, and that all persons which
worshipped Christ, are abominable Idolaters Holinsh. chro. fol. 299.
, as N^userus, and Silvanus believed by Mahomet ^ za resp. ad repetit. Io. And.
Call. p. ^.
, and therefore he revolted from Christianity unto Turcisme.

Others confess that we are saved by the name of Christ, but either not by
the right and true Christ, for they said, themselves, and every of themselves
were Christ, and in old time did Saturnius Epiphan^
, Manes Eusebius. l. 7. c. 31.
, Desider, Burd^gal, and Eudo de Stella Genebr. chr. l. 3. p 358. 709.
, and of late years, as Basil, David George Hist. David. Georgii.
, and in England, first one John Moore S^ow.
, and afterward William Hacket Conspit for pretend refor^
, the former was whipped for the same at Bethlehem in the second of Queen
Elizabeth, the other hanged and quartered in Cheap side, Ann. 1591.

Or by the true Christ, but either distinguish between Jesus and Christ,
saying Jesus was one man, and Christ another, as did the Marcionites Philaster.
.

Or say there be two Christ's, one revealed already in the days of Tiberius the
Emperor, who came for the salvation of the Gentiles, another yet to come, for
the redemption of the Jews: so tho ght the same Marcionites Tertul. l. 4.
contr Marc.
. Nestorius held also there were two Christ's, whereof one was very God, the
other very man, borne of a woman Vincen. Li^. adv. haereses.
.

Or publish, how (...) ^e were saved by the true Christ, till the 15. year of
the foresaid Tiberius: an heresy of Manes, and his company Epiphan.
.

Others besides (as the Family of Love) understand all things written of
Christ, allegorically, and not according to the letter of Gods Word. For they
teach that whatsoever is written of Christ, must in us, and with us be
fulfilled H.N. proph. of the Spi. c. 7. sect. 3.
.

Others have thought, yea have spoken blasphemously of the constant and holy
Martyrs, who for the Name of Christ, gave their lives in England in the reign
of Queen Mary, some saying: They were stark fools, as did Christopher Vitel,
a chief Elder in the Family of Love Ans to the Fam. let. l 3. a.
, others (as West phalus, and Morbachius) that they were the Devils martyrs
Sturmius, an^^ ap 4. par 3. p. 189.
.

19. Article. Of the Church.
1 The visible 2 Church of Christ, 3 is a congregation. 4 of faithful men: in
the which 5 the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly
ministered, according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same.

As 6 the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch has erred: so also 7
the Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living, and manner of
ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith.

The Propositions.
1. There is a Church of Christ, not only invisible, but also visible. 2.
There is but one Church. 3. The visible Church is a Catholic Church. 4. The
Word of God was, and for time is before the Church. 5. The marks, and tokens
of the visible Church, are the due, and true administration of the Word and
Sacraments. 6. The visible Church may, and from time to time has erred both in
doctrine, and conversation. 7. The Church of Rome most shamefully has erred in
life, ceremonies, and matters of faith.
1. Proposition.
There is a Church of Christ both invisible, and visible.

The proof from Gods Word.
A True saying it is, The Lord only knows who are his. For to man the Church
of Christ is partly invisible, and visible partly. The visible are all the
Elect, who be, or shall be either in heaven triumphing; or on earth fighting
against the flesh, the world, and the Devil. These, as members of the Church,
are said to be invisible; not because the men be not seen, but for that their
faith, and conscience to Godward is not perfectly known unto us.

The members of the visible Church are some of them for God, and some against
God: all of them notwithstanding deemed parts of the Church, and accounted
faithful, so long as they make no manifest, and open rebellion against the
Gospel of Christ.

All this we gather from the holy Scripture, where mention is made of the
Church invisible, and triumphing, Rev. 2.26, 28. and 3.5, 12. and 7.14, 15.
invisible, and militant, in the Epistles of St. Paul Gal. 4.29. Ephesians. 6.10. etc.
2 Timothy 3.12:
, Peter 1 Pet. 5.9.10
, and book of St. John's Revelations Rev. 1^.7, 11, 17 and 17.14.
, also of the Church visible, and mixed with good and bad, by the Parable of
the Sower Matthew. 13.
, of the Marriage Matthew. 22.
, and of the Vrgins Matthew 25.
, as also by the saying of our Savior Christ Have not I chosen you twelve, and
one of you is a devil? John 10.
, and of S. Paul For he knew who should betray him: therefore said, Ye are not
clean, John 13.11. In a great house are not only vessels of gold, and of
silver, but also of wood, and of earth, and some for honor, and some unto
dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20. Confess. l. Helv. 1. ar. 14. and 2. c. 17. Bohem. c. 8.
Gal. ar. 27. Belg. ar. 27. August. ar. 7. Saxon. ar. 11. Wit. ar. 32. Su^vica
ar. 15.
.

The Churches bear witness hereunto i.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This truth has many adversaries, whereof

S me ^en un^^ our Christ, the Savi^ur of mankind; and so think his p^^ple
are not the Church; as the Jews, Turks, and Here^ikes have done See art. 2.
pr p ^ ar. 18. pr p ^.
.

Some acknowledge no triumphing state of the godly in heaven, but dream of an
ever-glorious condition in this world, as the Family of Love L n. Ramse^ and I
Al^: s^^ ^f Als^ H N d^ ^^^m^^ s^n ^ 6 sect 1. c. 3 sect. ^. Sp^l and c. 44.
s^ct. 12. Prove. ^^s, c. 5. sect. 15. Proph ^ 1^. sect. 8.
.

Some think the Church Catholic to be visible, as the Papists c.

Some imagine the Church Militant is not visible at all, as the Libertines.

Some give out, that the visible Church is devoyde of sin, and sinners, as
did the Donatists Vaux cateth. ^. 1. Test. Phem. an act. 11.24.
, and do Anabaptist August contra Peril cap. 19 Calv contra Liber^.
, Family of Love H. N. 1 exhort. c. 13. sect. 10. and ^ ep st. pro^f
, Brownists A confused gathering together (of good and had an public assem^^^
(...) no Church. The Brownists answer (...) Master Cart Bright. p. 39.
, and Barrowists The assem^l^ (...) of good and bad together, are no Churches,
but heaps of profane people, says barrow in his discovery. page 33.
.

4. Propositon.
There is but one Church.

The proof from Gods Word.
When we do say that the Church is visible, invisible; and that there is a
Western, East, Greek, La in, English Church; we mean not that there be diverse
Churches of Christ, but that one, and the same Church is diversely taken and
understood, and also has many particular Churches, as the Sea many Rivers and
arms branching from it. For the visible Church is not many congregations, but
one company of the faithful.

We being many, are one Body in Christ, and every one, one another members
Romans 12.5.
.

We that are many, are one Body ^ Cor. 10.^^.
.

For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the
body, which is one, though they be many, yet are but one body: even so is
Christ. For by one spirit are we all bapt zed into one body, etc. Now ye are
the body of C rist, and members for your part 1 Cor. 12.12, 13, 17.
.

For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same
office: so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one, one another
members Romans 23 4, 5.
.

There is neither Jew, nor Grecian: there is neither bond nor free: there is
neither male, nor female: for ye all are one in Christ Jesus Gal. ^.28.
.

All Gods people agree with us in this point Conf. Helv. 2. c. 17. Bohe. cap.
8. Gal ar. 26. Bell. ar. 27. Wattemb. ar. 32 Su^v. ar. 15.
.

Errors, and adversaries of this truth.
The adversaries unto the 28. Article, be also for a great part, adversaries
unto this truth.

Furthermore, altho^gh it be acknowledged by many, and they too baptized for
Christians, that there is but one Church: yet the same persons do err, which
condemn so many, (as no members of Christ's Church) which joy^e not with them
in their singular, and private opinions, arrogating the style, and title unto
themselves only, and denying all other men to be either the Church, or members
of the body of Christ. Such are,

The Russians, who boast how themselves with the Grecians, are the only Church
of God Alex. Gagu. de relig. Mosc. ^. 2 ^ 1.
, themselves only are the men who shall be saved Sacramus de relig. Ruthen.
cap. p. 88.
, all Christians beside themselves, are no better then Turks Russie Com. c 2^.
p 1. 103.
.

The Papists also which say, that

The present Church of Rome is Gods Church Test. Rhem. an mar p. 321.
, Gods Catholic Church Ans. to the recul. of Inst. c. 8 n. 15. 21.
, the mystical body of Christ Q^odlibets. p 34.
: Papists, Catholics, and tru^ Christians, are all one Test. Rhem. an mar. p
322.
.

Muncer, and the Anabaptists termed themselves (clean opposite to the Church
of Christ) the elect of God; and said that all other men were wicked and worthy
to be slain Slerdan. hist. lib. 5.
.

The Family of Love; who publish how themselves only are the Church, and all
other men are Heathen Allens con.
, and Beasts Display H. 6.
, themselves only are the Catholic Church of God Vitels letter display. D. 5.
, the Saints of God, and his acceptable people H N instru ar 8. sect. 35. ar.
1. sect 35 ar. 7. sect. 36.
, and that such as are no Familists, they have no living God Fidel. declar c.
4. sect. 11.
, and shall perish H. N. evang. c. sect. 7.
.

The Puritanes finally, say they,

If God have any Church, or people in the land, no doubt, the title (Puritan)
is given them Dial concer. the strife, p. 10.
; Notable words: either God has no Church in England, or Puritanes are the
Church.

The Mar-prelate is not afraid to utter this speech.

They against whom I deal (namely the ecclesiastical officers, as Bishops,
and their favorers, and partakers) have so provoked the anger of the Lord, and
Prayers of his Church as stand long they cannot Protest. p. 16.
; others of the said Bish^ps, and the like, write thus, They bid battle to
Christ, and his Church, and it must bid defiance to them till they yield 2. Ad
non.
.

3. Propositon.
The visible Church is a Catholic Church.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe visible Church, properly understood, is but a part of the Catholic: yet
forasmuch as it is a Congregation of the faithful, who are for calling,
Governors, and subjects, noble and base: rich and poor: teachers and
learners: for sex, men and women: for age, old and young: for nation, Jews and
Gentiles: Grecians and Barbarians: for time and continuance, in all ages, even
from our first parents, it may rightly be callled a Catholic Church.

This is grounded upon Gods Word, where we find, that excluded is no calling
Preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark. 16 15. Teach all nations, Mat.
28.19. Not many (yet some) wise men after the flesh, not many (yet some) mighty
or many (yet some) noble are called, 1. Cor. 2.^6.
, no sex Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. Act.
2.2^. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes,
Romans 1.16. There is neither Jew, nor Grecian; there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female: for you are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal.
3.28.
, none age He that shall believe, and is baptized, shall be saved, Mar. 16.16.
By him every one that believes, is justified, Act 13.39. He is the head of the
Law to every one that believes, Romans 10 4
, no nation They shall come from the East, and from the West, and from the
North, and from the South, and shall sit at the Kingdom of God, Luke 13.28.
The promise is made unto you, and to your children, and to all that are a far
off, etc. Acts 2.3^. In every nation he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him, Acts 10.35.
, and that the Church, as it has been from the worlds beginning Rev. 13.8.
, so shall it continue to the end Matthew. 28.20.
.

And this is the confession of the Churches Confess. Helv. 2. c. 17. Bohem. c.
8. Belg ar 27. Wittemb. ar 32.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Unsound be they inreligion therefore which have, and do as it were tie the
Church to a certain Aug lib. 2. con. Pet. c 15.
country, as the Donatists did to Africa a people; as the Jews to themselves
Clenard. op. lib. 2. 190.
; persons, place, calling or time, as do the Papists.

To certain persons, when they sey,

The Church is founded upon Peter, and his successors Confess. Petrocenien c. 29
.

All that will be saved, must of necessity be subject to the Bishop of Rome
Bonifac. c. 8. Vnam extra. de major. and obed
.

The true Church is united to the obedience of the Pope of Rome. Bell. de eccl.
milit c 2.


To a certain place, when they sey,

The Church of Rome is the Catholic Church Test. Rhem. an. 1 Timothy 345
.

The Church of Rome is the mother of faith Jus canonic. distinct. 22.
.

To a certain calling, by their Petrus a Soto, to Bishops, and Prelates Pet a
Soto. asser. p. 133.
.

To a certain time, as when the said Papists affirm, how

The time was, when holiness was only in the Virgin Mary Cost. r. enchir. con.
, when faith rested only in the Virgin Mary Disput. Council. Basil Acts and
Monu. in K.H. 6. f. 7. 96.
, when all the faith was lost, save only in our Lady Festival. ser. 4. post
festum Palmarum.
.

It is a bold assertion also, and very presumptuous of Apostata Hill, that in
England all men were Papists without exception, from the first Christening
thereof, until the age of King Henry the eighth.

4. Propositon. Hil^qua^t. 1. reas. p. 5.

The Word of God was, and for time is before the Church.

The proof from Gods Word.
FOrasmuch as the visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of men (either in
the eyes of God, or in the judgment of the godly) faithful, it follows, that
the Word of God must be before the Church for time, as likewise the authority.
For time, because Gods Word is the Seed, the faithful the Corn Luke 8.11, 12
, and the Children 1 Pet. 1.1^.
, Gods Word is the Rock, or Foundation Math. 16.1^. Ephesians. 1.20.
, the Faithful, the House Ephesians. 2.21.
.

For authority also the Word is before the Church, because the voice of the
Church is the voice of man, who has erred, and may err from the truth: but
the voice of the Word, is Gods voice 2 Timothy 3.10. 2 Pet. 1.21.
, who cannot deceive, nor be deceived.

Of this judgment be the Churches reformed Conf. Helv. 1 ar. 14. and 2. c.
13.17. Bohe. c. 1.8. Gal. ar 7 Bolg ar. 3.7. Saxon ar 1.11 ^^^ev. ar. 1.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
This makes to the strengthening of us against those. Popish assertions o^
Viguerius, and such like, viz. that the Church was before the Word, for time,
and is above the Word, for authority Viguer. In ad Chr. Theo. 10. sect. 3. v.
10. fol 83. a.
.

5. Proposition.
The marks, and tokens of the visible Church are the due, and true
administration of the Word, and Sacraments.

The proof from Gods Word.
THere is the visible Church of Christ, where the Word of God sincerely is
preached; and the Sacraments instituted by our Savior, are duly administered.

Hence it is that our Lord and Savior calls them his mother, and his
brethren, which hear the Word of God, and do it Luke 8.21.
, and says, He that is of God, hears Gods Word John 8.47.
, also, My sheep hear my voice John 10.27.
: and, How shall they hear without a Preacher, says S. Paul Romans 10.14.
?

Likewise the Apostle S. John.

He that knows God, hears us: he that is not of God, hears us not 1 John
^.9.
: Again, they are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the
world hears them Ib^b. v. 5.
.

And touching the Sacraments, first of Baptism.

Go therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things,
whatsoever I have commanded you Matthew. 28.17, 20.
.

We have been baptized into Jesus Christ Romans 6.3.
, ye are washed, ye are sanctified 1 Cor 6.13.
.

By one Spirit are we all baptized into one body 1 Cor. 11.13.
.

Next, of the Lords Supper.

The Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he
had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body, which is
broken for you; this do in remembrance of me.

After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had Supped, saying, This
is the New Testament in my blood, this do as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me 1 Cor. 11.23.24, 25. Luke 22.1^.
.

The Christians in all reformed Churches acknowledge these things Conf Helv. 1.
ar. 14. and 2. cap. 17 Bohe. c 8. Gal. ar. 27.28. Saxon ar. 11. Wittemb. ar.
12. Suev. ar. 13.
.

Some (and they also many of them very godly men) add Ecclesiastical
discipline for a note of the visible Church. But because the said Discipline in
part is included in the marks here mentioned: both we, and, in effect, all
other well ordered Churches, over-passe it in this place, as no token simply of
the visible Church.

Neither tie we the Church so strictly to the signs articulate, that we think
all those to be without the Church, and no Christians, which neither do hear
the Word ordinarily and publicly read, and preached, nor participate in the
Sacraments, if so be they would; and yet can neither hear the one, nor receive
the other, as it falls out sometimes, especially in the times of blindness
and persecution.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
We renounce therefore as altogether unsound, and Antichristian, the opinions

1. Of the Papists, who both deny the pure preaching of Gods Word, and the
administration of the Sacraments among Protestants, to be the marks of Christ
his visible Church Petrus a Soto assert. de Eccl.
, and affirm the tokens hereof to be Antiquity, Unity, Universality,
Succession, etc. as does Stapleton In his Fortress.
, Bristow In his Motives.
, Bozius De signis visib. cc.
, Hill In his Quartron.
, and Alabaster In his Motives.
.

2. Of the Brownists, who make discipline (and that too of their own devising)
such an essential argument of the visible Church, as they think, where that is
not, the Magistrates there be tyrants, the Ministers false prophets, no Church
of God is, Antichristianity does reign R.H. in Psalm. 1.22. Bar. disco. p. 86.
Ans. to M. Cartw. letter, p. 13.
.

3. Of the same Brownists, and Barrowists, who neither allow frequenting of
Sermons, and ministering of the Sacraments, nor have any Sacraments administered
among themselves Alison. consu of Green and Bar. p. 133. 116
.

4. Of the Family of Love, which have in utter contempt and derision, both the
Preachers, and the Sacraments, scornfully tearming the Preachers, Scripture
learned men H N. Evang. c. 33. sect. 11.
, Ceremonial, and Letter-Doctors Fam. letter to the B. of Roch.
, and the water at Baptism, Elementish water H. N. Evang. c 13. sect. 56.
.

Neither do we approve them, who for the visible, and external, put down
invisible, and spiritual tokens of the visible Church, as Faith in Christ
Jesus, and Love toward the Saints, which thing I. K. does In his confut. of
Pop. L. 4. b.
.

6. Proposition.
The visible Church may, and from time to time has erred, both in doctrine and
conversation.

The proof from Gods Word.
Had not this bin most true, it had never bin avouched both by our Savior
Christ, and Saint Paul.

Our Savior says unto his Disciples concerning doctrine, Take heed, etc.
Matthew. 24.4.
Believe it not Ibid. v. 23, 26.
.

Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod; even of the
doctrine of the Mark. 8.15.
Pharisees, and Sadduces Matthew. 16.11.
.

Many shall be deceived Matthew. 24.11.
, yea the very Elect, if it were possible Ibid v. 24.
.

Shall he find faith on earth Luke 18.8.
?

And concerning conversation, and manners, he prophesied that iniquity shall be
increased, and the love of many shall be cold Matthew. 24.12.
.

Saint Paul writes touching doctrine, that

We know in part 1 Cor. 13.12.
.

Antichrist sits in the Temple of God 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
, etc. whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all power, and signs,
and lying wonders, and in all deceiveablenesse, among them that perish, because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: and therefore
God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies Ibid. v 9,
10.11.
.

Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of concision Phil. 3.2.
.

And touching conversation:

Restore, etc. lest thou also be tempted Gal. 6.1.
.

I do not the good thing, which I would, but the evil which I would not, that
do I: if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the sin
that dwells in me Romans 7.19, 20
.

There is a fight even in the best men, and members of Christ Ibid. v. 23.
.

Besides, that Churches visible, and glorious have erred, it appears
evidently by the superstition, heresies, yea, and Atheism now reigning at
Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch.

This with us the Churches in their confessions do acknowledge Confess. Helv.
2. Saxon. ar. 11. Wittemb. ar. 32. Suev. ar. 15.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
The Premises will not be granted for true, neither by the Papists, which
maintain that in faith and doctrine, the Church, meaning thereby the visible
Church Test. Rhem. an. 2 These. 2.4
, whose Rector is the Pope of Rome Ibid. an. 1 Timothy 3.13.
, never erred Ib. an. Ephesians. 5.24.
, never has erred Ib. an marg. p. 264. Gab. B^el. l. 4. hist. 6. quaest. 2.
, and never can err Ibid. an. 1 Timothy 3.3. c^tech. Trid. in exposit. Symb.
Apost. Coster. enchirid. controvers c. 3. de summo. Pont. p 36.
. Nor yet by those which say the Church cannot err for manners, such were the
Donatists, and are the Anabaptists with the Family of Love See of this art.
prop. 1.
.

3. Proposition.
The Church of Rome most shamefully has erred in life, ceremonies and matters
of faith.

The proof.
IVstly is the Church of Rome condemned of us, and all Churches reformed,
because she has erred, and still very badly every way does offend.

1. In life. For,

At Rome the harlot has a better life,

Then she that is a Romans wife W. Thomas hist. of Italy.
.

O Roma, a Roma quantum mutata, vetustaes? Nunc caput es scelerum, quae caput
orbis eras. If ye spell Roma backward: (says I. Bale) ye shall find it to be
Amor: Love in this prodigious kind. For it is a preposterous Amor, Love out of
kind Acts of the Eng. votaries, 2. book praef.
. Hence the pasquill Poets: Roma quid est? Quod te docuit praeposterus ordo.
Quid docuit? Iungas versa elementa, scies.
Roma, Amor est: Amor est: qualis? Praeposterus. Vnde hoc?
Roma mares, Noli dicere plura: scio.
Again. Roma vale; vidi, satis est vidisse. Revertar,
Cum Leno, aut meretrix, Scurra, Cynaedus ero.


2. In ceremonies, which are in number infinite. Gerson writes how diverse men
have run into desperation; others have killed themselves, finding that they
were not able to keep and perform the ceremonies of the Romish Church Confess.
Aug. ar. 4.
.

For use also they are vain, and impious: as their leading up and down of an
Ass on Palm Sunday, their battering of hell, their burial of the Cross,
etc. yea, and damnable, because Romish ceremonies are held both necessarily to
be observed, as well as the Laws of God Eckius enchir de hum. constable axiom 2.
, and also to merit heaven. For sins venial (say the Rhemists) be taken away
by sacred Ceremonies Test. Rhem. an. marg. 258.
.

3. In doctrine. For proof hereof, see the Popish errors in every article
almost, if not proposition of this book.

Again look we unto the head of the Antichristian Synagogue, and we shall
find that of them,

Some have been Conjurours, Sorcerers, and Inchanters; as were Pope Martin 2.
Silvester the second and third, Benedict. 8. John 19, 10, 21. Sergius 4.
Gregory 6. and 7. and such were all the Popes (even 18. for number) from
Silvester the second, until Gregory the seventh Cyp. Valera in his Treat^se of
the Pope, etc out of Cara. Benom.
.

Some Heretics. For Siricius, Calixtus, Leo 9. and Paschalic condemned the
marriage of Priests; Liberius was an Arrian; Marcellinus, an Idolater; Honorius
a Monothe^ite Cath. Apol. 2. part p. 93. Test. Rhem. an. Luc. 22.31
.

John the 22. held many errors, whereof W. Occam wrote a book Biblioth.
Simleri.
, one whereof was, that the souls of the wicked should not be punished, till
the day of Judgment.

Pope John the 23. denies the souls immortality B. Jewel def. fol 6 5.
. Gerson. ser. 1. Pasch.


And some worldly, profane, and devilish Atheists. For Sixtus 4. builded a
Male stews Acts and Mon.
.

Paul 3. received a monthly pension for 45000. whores at Rome D. Spark
against Id. Albine, p. 399.
.

Leo the 10. made a Fable of the Gospel of Christ Smeton contra Hamilt, p. 104.
.

Hence it proceeded, that

Rome has bin called Babylon, both by S. Augustine De civit. Dei, lib. 18.
, and Hierome Praes. lib. de Sp. S.
, and by Pope Pius 5. was said Magis Gentilizare, quam Christianizare: rather
to Gentilize, or to be a City of Heathens; rather then of Christians Chr.
Franck. praef. ad Paradox.
.

St. Bernard said how the Romans in his time were hateful unto heaven and
earth, yea and hurtful unto both, wicked against God: rash against holy
things, and seditious among themselves De consid. ad Eugen.
.

Genebrard (himself an Antichristian Romanist) writes that 50 Popes
successively and within the space of 150 years, departed from the virtue of
their Elders, and showed themselves Abjurers of Christianity, and Apostataes,
rather then Catholic Bishops Chron. lib. 4. p. 817.
.

The Pope was proclaimed Antichrist at Rhemes by the Council there, under Hugh
Capet Arnolph. in Con^. Rhem. inter opera Bernardi.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
What the Papists are then, it appears, whose doctrine (as has been shown)
is, that the Church of Rome neither has nor can err.

Erraverunt aliae ecclesiae (says Di. Stella) other Churches, as Antioch,
Alexandria, Constantinople, etc. have erred, sed nunquam ecclesia Romana, but
the Church of Rome never yet erred Stella in Lu^a 9. fol. 430.
.

Id constanter negamus (says Costerus the Jesuit) we constantly deny, that
Christ his Vicars, and Peter's successors, the Bishops of Rome; have either
taught heresies, or can propound errors E^chirid. controvers. c. 3. de summo
Pontif. p. 136.
.

God preserves the truth of Christian Religion in the Apostolic Sea of Rome
Test. Rhem. an. Matthew. 23 2
, and it is not possible that the Church (meaning the Church of Rome) can err,
or has erred at any time, in any point, say the Rhemists Ibid. an. mar. p. 164.
.

20. Article. Of the authority of the Church.
1 The Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies 2, and authority in
controversies of faith. And yet it is not lawful for the Church 3 to ordain
any thing that is contrary to Gods Word, 4 neither may it so expound one place
of Scripture 5, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore although 6 the
Church be a witness, and a keeper of holy Writ: yet as it ought not to decree
any thing against the same, so 7 besides the same, ought it not to enforce any
thing to be believed for necessity of salvation.

The Propositions.
1. The Church has power to decree rites, or ceremonies. 2. The Church may not
ordain what rites, or ceremonies she will. 3. The Church has authority to
judge, and determine in controversies of faith. 4. The Church has power to
interpret, and expound the Word of God. 5. The Analogy of faith must be
respected in the exposition of the Scripture. 6. The Church is the witness,
and keeper of Gods written Word. 7. The Church may not enforce any thing to be
believed, as necessary unto salvation, that is either contrary, or besides the
Word of God.
1. Proposition.
The Church has power to decree rites, or ceremonies.

The proof from Gods Word.
THE Churches authority to decree rites, or ceremonies, is warranted in the
Word of God, first by the example of the Apostles, who did ordain rites and
ceremonies: among other things, that

In the Church men should not be covered 1 Cor. 11.4, 7, 14, etc.
.

Women should keep silence 1 Cor. 14.34.
, and be covered 1 Cor. 11.5.
.

A known tongue understood of the common auditorie, should be used 1 Cor. 1.24.
, with other things 1 Cor. 22.2, 3, 4.
. Next, by the general and binding commandment of God himself, who at all
times will have every thing in the Church to be done unto edifying 1 Cor.
14.26.
, honesty, and by order Ibid. v. 40.
, as being not the author of confusion, but of peace Ibid. v. 33.
.

All Protestant Churches confess the same Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 13. and 2. c.
22, 23, 24. Basil. ar. 10. Bohem. c. 15.17. Gal. ar. 32. Belg. ar. 32. Aug. ar.
4.57.15. Saxon. ar. 20. Suev. c. 8.14. Wittemb. c. 27.31.
.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
This power being given by the supreme Authority unto the Church, they do
greatly offend, which do condemn either generally all, R H. on Psalm. 122.
or particularly some rites, and ceremonies orderly, and lawfully established:
of the former sort are,

Such a one was that Scottish Minister, which said unto the head of K. James,
how he would hold conformity with his Majesty's ordinances for matters of
doctrine, but for matters of ceremony, they were to be left in Christian
liberty unto every man. This D. Barlow reports in the sum of the Confer. p.
21.
1. The Family of Love, who say of themselves, how they are a free people H N.
Sp. land. c. 31. ss 6.
, in bondage unto no creature, nor to any created thing Ibid. cap. 40. sect. 7.
, they have no several dissenting, or variable religions, or ceremonies c.

2. The Brownists, who teach that every Christian is to join himself unto
that people, among whom the Lords worship is free, and not bound, or withholden
with any jurisdiction of this world.

3. The Puritants, whereof some would have all matters of ceremonies to be left
in Christian liberty unto every man.

Others would have both temples to be left without Service, Sermons, and
Sacraments: and Princes to ^e scarred with the fear of uproares, and sedition;
and all because they would be freed from the obedience unto ceremonies, not
impious of themselves, imposed by the Church: the Father of these men was
Illyricus, of whom Melancton writes Ep. ad Pium. Lect. p. 455.
,

Of the latter kind, be

1. The Family of Love again, who utterly dislike our Churches, or Temples,
also our Liturgies, and forms of serving our God, and finally our designed
times of meeting together for the worship of God.

Our Churches they blasphemously term common houses (and so we term
Brothel-houses or the stews H. N. Speland c. 5. l 5.
.)

Our Lyturgies, and manner of serving of God, they call foolishness of taken
on services Ibid.
, false and seducing Gods services H N exhor. c. 15. sect. 2, 3.
, of no man to be ordained Ib. cap. 16. sect. 14.
, nor to be obeyed, or used, when they are established Ibid sect. ^^
; with these join the Brownists, who do write, that to have Liturgies and
forms of common prayer, is to have another Gospel, and another Testament
Barrowes ref^t p. 244.
.

Our Sabbaths they contemn, yea they condemn, for they say, There ought to be
no Sabbath day Zispl. H. 8.^.
: Our Sabbatarians go not so far, yet come they near unto these Familists,
when they divulge, that

The Church has no authority; ordinarily, and perpetually to sanctify any
day, but the seventh day; which the Lord himself has sanctified D.B doct. of
the Sab. 1. bo^ke, p. 31.
.

The Church cannot take away this liberty of working six days in the week
T.C. 1. replic. p. 120.
. These assertions are against all holy days lawfully established. Barrow yet
goes further then do these men, for he says how the observing of times, as
it is in our Church, is an error fundamental Bar. ref. p. 36.
.

They also be alike culpable, who approving some rites and ceremonies, do yet
tie the Church, or people of God, to the observation of the ceremonies, either
Mosaicall, as many have done, and do See art. 7. prop. 3.
, or of the Romish Church as do the Papists Conc. Trid. sess. 7. can. 13.
, and the half Papists, the Family of Love H.N. euang. c. 3 ^. sect. 1.
.

Finally, they are out of the way, which think that either one man, as the
Pope: or any certain calling of men, as the Clergy, has power to decree, and
appoint rites, or ceremonies, though of themselves good, unto the whole Church
of God, dispersed over the universal world.

2. Proposition.
The Church may not ordain what rites, and ceremonies she will.

The proof from Gods Word.
AS it is a clear truth that the Church may ordain ceremonies: so true it is
also, that the Church has no power to appoint what rites, or ceremonies she
will. For she must decree none which be,

Either for their own nature, impious, like the ordinances, manners, and idols
of our fore fathers Walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither
observe their manners, not defile your selves with their idols. Ezekiel. 30.18.
: teachers of vanity Ier 10.8.
, and of lies Heb. 3.10.
.

Or for use, superstitious: like the brazen Serpent, which King Ezechiah brake
in pieces 2 King. 18.4.
.

Or for their weight, ouer-heauy, and grievous to be borne; like the Jewish
constitutions Ye lade men with burdens grievous to be borne, Luke 11.46. Why
tempt ye God, to lay a yoke on the Disciples ne^kes, which neither our
fathers, nor we were able to bear? Acts 15.10. Why as though ye lived in the
world, are ye burdened with traditions? Col. 2.20.
.

Or for their worthiness, in the eyes of the ordainers, either of equal
price, or of more account then the very ordinances of God, so as for the
performance of them, the laws of God must be left undone; such were many of
the Pharisaicall rites, and traditions Ye lay the Commandment of God apart,
and observe the traditions of men, as the washing of pots, and of cups, and
many other such like things ye do, Mark. 7.8. Ye reject the Commandments of
God, that ye may observe your own traditions, etc. making the Word of God of
none authority, by your traditions which you have ordained, Ibid. 9.13.
.

Or against the liberty of Christians, and to the entangling of them again
with the yoke of servile bondage Stand in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5.1.
.

Or last of all, any way contrary to the Commandments, Word, and Will of God
Every plant, which my Father has not planted, shall be rooted up, Matthew.
15.13.11 Cor. 14.14.
.

But the rites, ceremonies, and constitutions of the Church they must make
altogether, and tend both to the nourishing, and increase of love, friendship,
and quietness among Christians, and also to the retaining of Gods people in
the holy service, worship, and fear of God, according to the rule of the
Apostle before mentioned, Let all things be done honestly, and by order i.

All Churches reformed consent hereunto Confess. Helv. 2 cap. 1. Gal. ar. 33.
Belg. ar. 33. August. ar. 7. 15. Sax. ar. 20. Wittemb. ar. 35. Suevica. c. 14.


The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
The premises being as they are, most true, most false then is it which the
Papsts do publish, viz. that

The Church has power to change the Sacraments ordained even by Christ
himself Conc. Trid. ^st. 5 cap. 2.
.

Whatsoever the Apostles, and Rulers of the Church command, is to be kept,
Test. Rhem. an. marg p. 336.
and obeyedb.

The authority of the Church is greater then of the Sacred Scripture Confess
Patrocemen. 15.
.

3. Proposition.
The Church has authority to judge, and to determine in controversies of
faith.

The proof from Gods Word.
AVthority is given to the Church and to every member of sound judgment in the
same, to judge in controversies of faith; and so in their places, to embrace
the truth, and to avoid, and improve Antichristianity, and errors; and this is
not the private opinion of our Church, but both the straight commandment of
God, himself particularly unto all Teachers a, and hearers Cast away profane,
and old wives fables, 1 Timothy 4.7.

O Timothy, keep that which is committed unto thee, 1 Timothy 6.20. A Bishop
must, etc. hold fast the faithful word according to doctrine, that he also may
be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improve them that say against
it, etc. Tit. 1.9, etc. Hear not the words of the prophets that prophecy unto
you, and teach you vanities: they speak the vision of their own heart, and
not of the mouth of the Lord, Ier. 23.19. Beware of false prophets, Matthew.
7.15. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, Phil. 3.2. The sheep know the
shepherds voice, and they will not follow a stranger, but they fly from him:
for they know not the voice of strangers, John 10.4, 5. Be not carried about
with diverse and strange doctrines, Heb. 13.9. Beware lest you be also plucked
away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own steadfastness, 2
Pet. 3.17. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him
not to house neither bid him, God speed, 2 John 10. If any shall say unto you.
Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe him not. For there shall arise false
Christ's and false prophets, Matthew. 2.4.23.24. I speak unto them which have
understanding, judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10 15. Try all things, and keep
that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.


, of Gods Word, and generally unto the whole Church c, and also the judgment
of our godly brethren in foraigne countries Confess. Wittemb. ar. 32. Sucviar.
15.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Unsound therefore in judgment are the Papists. For first, they maintain,

That the Pope of Rome has the power to judge all men, and matter, but may be
judged of no man Did. 40. c. Si Papa.
, to decree (without controulement) against the Epistles of S. Paul C^^. Ruinus
; to dispense even against the new Testament Panorm. fixtra de diuortris
; and to give the sense, and meaning of the holy Scripture, to which sense, or
interpretation of his, all and every man without contradiction, must yield, and
obey H^rvae^ de potestate Papae.
.

Next they publish, and hold, that the power to judge of religion and points of
doctrine is, either in Bishops only, as some of them do think The mysteries
of religion are committed to the trust of Bishops, p ^bi tantum solendum est;
q^nd ad m^^^ f^^ma^, and vitam per^^net, the common people are only to know
that which pertains unto ^anne is, and good behavior, says Friar La^^nc: a
Villavincence, de forman conci^^. lib. 1. cap. 10. Nec gratia, nec (...) ^or a
i^^a v^rtus ^o qu^enda^st in memoe i^, vel minist^^ Ecclesie, gr^^ter publican
professionem sid. i^ It is sufficient for the members, and Ministers of the
Church, to make open profession of the faith, more is not required of them,
neither grace, (to judge of doctrine) nor any other inward virtue, says Petru^
a So^^, 4 Ter^. ca ^^de Ec. The common and faithful people may in a generality
refuse, and forsake all new doctrine, dissenting from that which they have
learned and embraced. Non autem vt doctrinam in particulari, ex causis and
fundam m^^^^ s^^s examini ^t, sic proprio iudicio discu^^nt quid ^rum, quid
sassum sit: But they have none authority to examine any doctrine in particular
from the very causes, and grounds, and thereby search out what is true, what
false; quod proprium est Ecclesinum ^^ag ^^^is, this they must leave to the
masters of the Churches, to whom properly it b^longeth says Stapl
; or in their Clergy only, as others deem An^d^ae van Matthew 7.
, and in the Church of Rome only, as all of them suppose Sacrae scripturae
^^^sus na^vus and indubitatus a^ eccl^si^ (...) a est p^^n^dus (says the
forementioned Pe^rus a So^^) The native, and true sense of the sacred
Scripture, is to be fetched from the Catholic Church (of Rome) Ass^r, ^^^th de
E^c. The whole Church throughout the world knows, that the holy Church of
Rome has power to judge of all matters, n^que cuiquam ^ebit de eius judicio
iudicare ^^^the^ is at lawful for any man to give any sentence of her
judgment. ^^la 9. q C^n^^ia.
.

4. Proposition.
The Church has power to interpret, and expound the Word of God.

The proof from Gods Word.
TO interpret the Word of God, is a peculiar blessing, given by God only to
the Church, and company of the faithful, though not to all, and every of them:
For

No man knows the Son, but the Father; neither knows any man the Father,
but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him Matthew. 11.27
.

It is given to you to know the secrets of heaven (says our Savior) unto his
disciples, but to them it is not given Mark. 13.11.
.

The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For,
to one is given by the Spirit, the Word of wisdom, etc. and to another,
prophecy 1 Cor. 12.7.
.

If any thing be revealed to another, that sits by, let the first hold his
peace, says S. Paul unto the Church at Corinth 1 Cor. 14 30
.

Ye have an ointment from him that is holy, and ye have known all things, etc
ye need not that any man teach you, says the Apostle John 1 John 2.20, 21, 27.
.

Hereunto subscribe the Churches in Helnetia Confe. Helv. 2 cap. 2.
, Wittemberg Confess. Wit tomb. c^p. 30.
, Boheme Confess Bohe cap. 1.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Many and sundry are the adversaries unto this truth, whereof

Some think, that to expound the Word of God, is so easy a matter, as any
Student, endued with a good natural wit, by diligence and industry of his
own, may do the same.

Some teach, how to interpret the Scriptures, is too hard a thing for any
mortal man to attain unto: so did Johannes de Wassalia Aeneas Syl.
, and do many Anabaptists.

Some, though they acknowledge that diverse have the gift to open the sense of
Gods Word; yet that some, say they, are not the known Preachers, and writers
in the reformed and Christian assemblies, whom the Family of Love, in scorn
do term the Scripture-learned. For says the said Family, It is mere lies,
and untruth, etc. whatsoever the Scripture-learned, through their knowledge out
of the Scriptures, institute, preach, and teach H.N. euang. c. 33. sect. 11.
12. 13.
. They preach the letter, etc. but not the Word of the living God Idem. i. ex.
hor. cap 16. sect. 18.
, but themselves only have that gift, neither every one of the Family, but the
illuminate Elders. For to them it is, given to know the truth Idem in his Prove.
c. 21. sect. 2.
, and they are the Elders of the Godly-vnderstanding, and of the
manly-wisedome, the Sp. land. cap. 7. sect. 10.
Primates or principals in the light 1 Exhor. cap. 14. sect. 1.
.

Some do suppose, that to interpret the holy Scriptures, is not so much a
special gift of God upon some chosen persons, as an ordinary power annexed to
the state, and calling of Popes, Bishops, and Clergy men See the proposit. next
immediate, aforegoing.
.

Others be so far from giving the people of God, not being of the Clergy,
power to expound, as they will not suffer them to read, nor so much as to have
the Scriptures by them in a vulgar tongue, except it be their own most
corrupt, and barbarous translation, which but of late years neither, and that
in part too, is granted by the Papists; but in place thereof they thrust upon
the Laity, their most idolatrous, and blasphemous Festiuals, Legends, Rosaries,
Horaries, and Psalteries of our Lady, as falsely they called her.

5. Proposition.
The analogy of faith must be respected in the exposition of the Scripture.

The proof from Gods Word.
FOrasmuch as no prophecy is of any private motion 1 Pet. 1.20.
, and whatsoever interpretation man gives, if it agree not to the analogy of
faith, which St. Paul gave in commandment to be observed Romans 12.6.
, is private interpretation; special heed is to be had, that one place of
Scripture be so expounded, as it agree with another; and all to the proportion
of Faith.

The Churches reformed approve this assertion by their subscriptions Confess.
Helv. 1. ar. 2. and 2. c. 2 Gal. 1. ar. 7. Sax. ar. 1. Wit. c. 30, 31, 33.
Suev. ar. 1.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Of another judgment are many. For

Some do think, the Scripture may be expounded in what sense, and to what
purpose men list, as the Pharisees D. Iren. l 4. cap. 2 5.
, the Severians Euf. eccl. hist. lib. 4. c. 29.
, and Papists, among whom there be which from this opinion do term the most
holy Word, and Scriptures of God most reprochfully, A ship-mans hose, a Leaden
rule, a Nose of wax Pighius controuer. 3. de Ec. and Hierac. l. 3. c. 3.
Lindan. praef. Cens. Colon.
.

Some do mislike all interpretations, and written Commentaries upon the
Scriptures, as unnecessary, and vain, such were Servetus, Valdesius, Coranus,
with others of late years Beza. epi. 59.
, and are the Libertines, Sowenkfeldians Ibid.
, and Family of Love H.N. 1. exhor. cap. 16 sect. 4.
.

Some depend wholly upon visions, and revelations, as did the Enthusiasts
Th^^d. haeret fab. l. 3.
, Nicholas Storch.

Thomas Monetarius, the Anabaptists D. Mayor. in Dom. 8. Post. trinit homil.
fol. 440.
, and our late English reformer Hacket Arthing. sedu. p 17.
.

Some dislike of the literal, and refer the Allegorical sense of the
Scriptures; and thereby devise what them list, most monstrously from the Word
of God; as did the Origenists, and do the Libertines Calv. contra Anabap.
, and Family of Love; hence teaching one the other, that the spiritual
understanding is the Word of God, and that to embrace the literal sense, is to
commit Idolatary Allens conf.
.

Some of every place of Scripture will have an exposition both Analogicall,
Allegorical, Historical and Moral, as the curious Thomists, and Monks.

Some are addicted to an interpretation, which they call mystical and
prophetical, as Brocardus Morelius, and others.

Some are of mind that the Gospel, or Evangelical Word cannot be committed to
letters, and writing, says Lindanus Lib. 2. c. 2.
.

Some do think (as before also has bin showed) how that is the odd, and
only true sense of the Scriptures, which is made and given by the Church
Haeretici Scripturarum cognitione^, and intelligentione extra Ecclesiamponunt:
nos autem (Papistae (volumus Ecclesiae Romanae esse annexam, nec ab ea separari
patimur. Stapl. antid. Euang. in Joan 19 21. p. 418 Sicut Christo Iudaei. sic
nos Ecclesia (Romanae) simpliciter credere debemus, says Stapleton, Antid. in
Luc. 10.16. When the authority of the Church leaves the holy Scripture then
are they of no more account, then Aesops fables W^lf. Herman
, and Pope of Rome Si Papam qui Christi vicarius est, ac cius omnimodam
potestatem habet in terris, consulerent non erra^ent haeretici (says Stella in
Lucaeus.) fol. 499.
.

Some do maintain, that as the Church in time does alter: so the
interpretation of the Scripture also therewithal does vary, whereby that which
in the Apostles time was a truth, in these days shall be a falsehood. In which
error was Cardinal Cusanus Cusan. ad. Bohemos, epist. 2.
.

6. Proposition.
The Church is the witness, and keeper of Gods written Word.

The proof from Gods Word.
THough the Church has authority to hear, and determine in controversies of
faith: yet has the Church power, neither to judge the Word of God, nor to
judge otherwise then Gods Word does judge. For it is said to the Church and
people of God.

I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently, which cause divisions, and
offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them Romans
16.7.
.

Hear him Math. 17.5.
, To him give all the Prophets witness Acts 10 43.
.

Search the Scriptures John 5.39.
: whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not
God 2 John 5.9.
.

Ye are, etc. built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets Ephesians. 2.19.
.

And of the holy Scriptures.

Thy word is the truth John 27.17.
. They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them Luke 16.29.
, says our Savior Christ.

We have also a sure word of the Prophets, says Saint Peter 2 Pet 1.19.
.

And Saint Paul: The whole Scripture is profitable to teach, etc 2 Timothy 6.16,
17.
.

If any man teach otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, he is puffed up, and knows nothing etc 1 Timothy 6 3, 4.
.

And so with us the other Churches conceive both of the Scriptures, and Church
Confe. Helv. 2. cap. 1. Bohe. cap. 1. Gal ar. 5 Belg. ar. 7. Wittemb. ar. 30
31, 32 Sax. ar 11.
, yet all of us do grant, that the Church as a faithful witness may, yea of
necessity must testify to the world, what has been the doctrine of Gods
people from time to time, and as a trusty Recorder is to keep, and make known
what the Word or God, which it has received, is, which truly has been
performed before the Word was written by the Patriarchs, and after the same was
committed to writing, before Christ his incarnation, by the Jews, in Christ his
life time Luke 4.17.
, in the Primitive Church Acts 13.27. Acts 15.21. 2 Cor. 2.15. 2 Cor. 8.18.
: From the Apostles time, by the godly Christians through out the world.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Be it far therefore from us to think, which the Papists do not stick to
write, and say, namely, that

The Church is to judge the Scripures, and not the Scriptures the Church Jo.
Maria Verract^s. Pighius in controvers. de Ec.
.

The Scripture is not of the essence of the Church: Because without it a Church
may be, though not very well. So said Card. Cusan Card. Cusan ep. 2. ad Bohe.
.

The Scripture, because (in their opinion) it is unperfect, cannot: obscure,
may not: ambiguous, ought not to be the Judge. So Lindan Lind. l. 1. c. 1.
, Latomus Contra Bucer.
, Petrus a Soto De S. Scrip.
, Pighius Eccl. Hierar. l. 1. c. 4.
, Coster Enchir. de. S. Scrip. c. 1.
, etc.

He is an heretic that cleaves to the Scriptures. So said Iacobus Hoestratus.

Again, the careful keeping of the holy Scriptures by Gods people from age to
age, and time to time, declares first, how the mother Church of Rome, is not
the only keeper of the holy writ; and next, that cursedly they do offend,
which either as greatly esteem the Ethics of Aristotle, as the Commandments
of God, the Odes of Pindar, as the Psalms of David Aug. Polit.
, the works and books of men, as the writings of God, which the Council of
Trent does Ses. 4.
: or before, and above the Scripture prefer unwritten Traditions. Hence
Petrus a Soto.

Tradition (says he) is both more ancient, and more effectual then the holy
Scripture Conf. Cath. de Eccles.
: and Lindau, The Scriptures would be of no validity, neither had continued
till this day but for traditions L^nd. l. 1. c. 4, 5.
.

7. Proposition.
The Church may not enforce any thing to be believed, as necessary unto
salvation, that is either contrary or besides the Word of God.

The proof from Gods Word.
Ye shall put nothing unto the Word which I command you, neither shall ye
take ought therefrom Deuteronomy 4.2.
.

Put nothing unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar
Prove. 30.6.
.

Though it be but a man's covenant, when it is confirmed, (yet) no man does
abrogate it, or adds any thing thereto Gal. 3.15.
.

If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this book. And if any man shall diminish of the words of
the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of
life, and out of the holy City, and from those things which are written in
this book Rev. 22.18, 19.
.

And so witness with us the Churches reformed Conf. Helv. 1. ar. 4. and 2. c.
2. Basil. ar. 10. Bohem. cap 1. Gal. ar. 5 Belg. ar. 7. Saxon. ar. 1. Wittemb.
c. 30.33. Sucvica. ar. 1.
.

Whatsoever also is grounded upon Gods written Word, though not by our common,
and vulgar terms to be read therein, we do reverently embrace, which makes
us for doctrine to embrace the Consubstantialitie of our Savior with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, which the Arrians would not; a Trinity of persons
in the Godhead, which the Sabellians would never do: the justification by
faith only, which the Papists will not; the Baptism of Infants, and young
children, which the Anabaptists dare not: and for discipline, not to refuse, of
Church officers, the names; Archbishops, Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitanes,
Suffragans, Parsons, Vicars, etc. of Ecclesiastical censures the terms;
Suspension, Excommunication; of Ceremonies, none at all which tend either unto
order, comeliness, or edification.

But from the heart we abhor in matters both of doctrine, and discipline,
whatsoever either agrees not with the Canon of the Scripture, or is not
grounded thereupon.

Errors, and adversaries of this truth.
Hence detest we both all the old heretics, and their fancies, with the new
prophets of Basilides, the manifestation of Marcion; the mysteries of the
Manichies, the Iobelaea of the Scythians, the Symbonia of the Achontikes, the
Cabasa of the Jews; the Alcaron of the Turks: and also all new heretics, and
Schismatikes with all their cursed opinions, as first the Anabaptists, and
namely the Libertines, and Davigeorgians, and Family of Love, and all the
codeified Elders thereof, as Henry, Nicholas, Eliad, Fidelitas, Christopher
Vitell, Theophilus, the Exile, and the rest.

Next the Papists, whereof

Some have commanded that all the Popes Decrees should be taken, as confirmed
by the mouth of God himself: so did Pope Agatho the first Gra. d. ^. 16. Sic.
.

Some write (as Busgradus) that if the Pope believe there is no life to come
(as some Popes have done) we must believe it as an Article of our faith.

Some say, if the Pope carry innumerable souls with him unto Hell, yet he may
not be judged: so did the Pope Boniface the eighth Decr. lib 3. cit. 2. Crantz.
lib. 8. c. 36.
.

Some, as Bellarmine conclude, that it is a point of faith to hold that the
Bishop of Rome has succeeded Peter in the universal regiment of the Church
Bellarm. de Pontif Romans l. 2. c. 12.
.

Others, as the Jesuits, persuade their Catholics, that the King of Spain,
and their Catholic faith are so linked together, as it is become a point of
necessity in the Catholic faith, to put all Europe into the hands of the said
King, otherwise the Catholic religion will be utterly extinguished, and perish
Spa^. dis. of the Eng. Ies. d. 7.
.

Others of them have published a new Gospel, called Evangelium aeternum, and
Spiritus Sancti, which they say does so far excel the Gospel of Christ, as the
kernel surpasses the shell, the Sun the Moon, and light darkness. The
author whereof was one Cyrillus a Carmelite.

And lastly the Puritanes, and all the speculations of Brown, Barrow, Green,
Penry, Marprelate, T.C.E.G.R.H.A.C.I.B. with the new Sabbatarians, and their
fancies.

21. Article. Of the authority of general Councels.
General Councels 1 may not be gathered together without the commandment and
will of Princes. And 2 when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an
assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit, and Word of God)
they may err, and 3 sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God:
whorefore 4 things ordained by them, as necessary unto salvation, have neither
strength, nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of
holy Scriptures.

The Propositions.
1. General Councels may not be gathered together, but by the commandment,
and will of Princes. 2. General Councels may err. 3. General Councels have
erred, even in things pertaining unto God. 4. The things ordained by general
Councels, are so far to be embraced, and believed, as they are consonant to
Gods holy Word.
1. Proposition.
General Councels may not be gathered together, but by the commandment of
Princes.

The proof from Gods Word.
GReat is the power, and authority of Kings and Princes, by the Word of God.
For as the defense of Religion is committed unto them: so must they see that
all men do their duties. That these things the better may be performed, they
are, as just occasion is offered, not as men, under the power of others, to
summon, but as supreme governors, within their own territories, and dominions,
to command all sorts of men to meet together, and that either to the
implanting of the truth where it is not; or to the suppression of sin, errors,
idolatry, and superstition, where, or in whomsoever it does arise, or is
rooted. Such Councels were holden, both in the time of the Mosaicall
government, by the commandment of the most godly Kings, David 1 Cor. 3.1, 2.
, Solomon 1 King. 8.1.
, Asa 2 Chr. 15.9.
, Ezechiah 2 Chr. 29.4.
, and Josiah 1 Chr. 34.29
, and since the Gospel has bin received into Kingdoms, and Commonweals by
Christian Princes Kings, and Emperors, who gathered Councels both General, as
the Nicene was by Constantine the Great Ruffi l. 10.1. 1. Eus. de vita Constable.
l. 3. c 9.
. The Council of Constantinople, by Theodosius the elder Theo. l 5 c. 6.
. the Council of Ephesus, by Theodosius the younger Euang. l 1. c. 2
, the Council of Calcedon, by Marcian Leo ep. 43.53
, and National, and Provincial: so the Council at Franckford, Rhemes, Turon,
Arelot, and Moguntia, by the will and commandment of Charles the Great
Aventin. Carr^^z^. summa Conc. Carrion. lib. 3.
, at Marison, by Gunthranus Turon. l. 8. c. 10*
, at Paris, and Orleance, by the direction, and appointment of Childeb^rt
Magdeburg eccl hist. Con. 6. cap. 9.
, were kept and holden.

And never yet had there bin a Council, either General, or national, or
whatsoever (I only except the councels held by the Apostles and Apostolical
men in a troublesome state, and time of the Church, there being then no
Christian Princes and Emperors to countenance the truth) neither begun, or
ended, to the glory of God, but it has bin, I say, not called only, but
confirmed also by some godly Emperor, King, or Queen. This in effect is
granted by all reformed Churches Conf. Helv. l. ar. 26. and 2. c. 30 Bohe: c.
16. Belg. ar. 36. Saxon. ar. 23. Wittemb. c. 35. Suevica. in perorat.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
This assertion has been oppugned, and that diversely both by the Papists, and
Puritanes. For the Papists, they say,

Emperors and Kings be the Pope his Summoners, but of themselves are no
absolute and powerful commanders, and callers of Councels Hard. confut. par.
5. cap. 6. sect. 3.
.

There ought no Council to be kept, without the determinate consent of the
Bishop of Rome Harding.
.

No Council ever yet had firm and lawful authority, which was not confirmed
by the Bishop of Rome Duraeus con. Whitak. lib. 2. Cardil. in def. Council.
Triden disp. 1.
.

The Popes of Rome (and not Christian Princes) have the authority, and power of
making laws ecclesiastical, and of calling Councels Test. Rhem. an. Matthew. 16.
.

And the Puritanes do think, that private persons without the leave, or
privity of Princes, may summon assemblies about Church causes at their
pleasures, and consult about the public affairs of the Church. Of this mind
was Beza Per placet autem mihi quod de conventu absque ulla principum, aut
civitatum authoritate, privatim instituendo, scribis, Beza. epi. 68. p. 292.
, and be the disciplinaries both of South Witness their Classical assemblies,
at Commencements, Faires, etc. See Discipline grounds.
, and North Britain The approbation, or disallowance of a general assembly
has been, and should be a matter, and cause spiritual, and always
cognosced, and judged by the Church, as Judges competent within this Realm,
say certain Scottish Ministers in their letter unto the Lords of the Kings
privy Council in Scotland, which letter is printed in the said Lords
declaration, etc. published, an. 1606. and printed by Robert Barker.
.

Others (adversaries to both Puritanes and Papists) are of mind, that were the
Pope a good man (as he is nothing less) he might, and he being wicked,
other good Bishops (though subject unto Kings, and Emperors) may summon
Councels at their discretion. An error of Scelneccerus Analyct. page 35.
.

The Muscovites have a fancy, that since the seventh general Council that
was, neither Prince, nor Pope, nor any other men else have power to call a
general Council Surius comment. an. 150 1. page 30.
.

2. Proposition.
General Councels may err.

The proof from Gods Word.
General Councels, consisting, first of men, who may err, nothing more easily
(for all the imaginations of man's heart are only evil continually Genesis 6.5.
, even from his youth Genesis 9.21.
, but God only is true,) and all men are Psalm. 116.11.
, yea, and every man is a liar Romans 3.4.
.

Next, of men differing in years, riches, learning, judgment, calling, and
authority: whereby distractions of opinions often do arise.

Thirdly, of many men, whereof the wicked be for number commonly the major
part, and the better in outward countenance of the world.

Lastly, of men, not all, nor always either grounded with Gods holy Spirit,
and Word; or gathered together in the Name of Christ: none of found judgment
in Religion, do doubt but they may err.

If Paphnutius had been absent at Nice, that Council had erred Sozom. lib. 1.
c. 33.
.

If Hierome had been away at Calcedon, that Council had erred B. Jewel. dec.
fol. 58.
.

At any time (if some be believed) be the Pope of Rome not present at such
meetings, either per se, or per Legatum, by himself, or his Legate, no
Council but must err Rosien. contra Luther.
.

Therefore Councels may err.

That which one Council does establish, another will disanull: They will not
(we must think) revoke, that which is well decreed. Therefore Councels may
err Test. Rhem. an. Ioh. 16.13.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore err do the Papists, which say that the holy Spirit is director to
all Councels, and

That Councels cannot err.

3. Proposition.
General Councels have erred, even in things pertaining unto GOD.

The proof from Gods Word.
COuncels both general, and particular have erred, and that in matters of
Faith Conf. Wittemb. cap. 33.
.

For in the holy Scriptures we find, that it was ordained, if any man did
confess that Jesus was the Christ, he should be excommunicate John 9.22. and
12.42.
, which could not be but by a Council.

A council was gathered to suppress Christ, and his doctrine. John 12.47.
.

A council consulted how they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him Math.
26 3, 4
.

Mark 14.53, 55.
A council sought for false witness to put him to death.

By a council Jesus was bound, led away, and delivered unto Pilate Mark 15 1.
.

A council judged our Savior Christ to be both a deceiver Math. 27.63.
, and a blasphemer Luke 21 71.
.

A council corrupted the Soldiers, and willed them to tell a lie Mat. 28.12,
13
.

A council withstood Peter, and John: and commanded them that in no wise they
should speak; or teach in the name of Jesus Acts 4 5, 6.18.
.

A council both caused thr Apostles to be beaten, and commanded them also that
they should not preach in the name of Jesus Acts 5.40.
.

In ancient writers of credit, we may read, how (contrary to Gods Word,) by
councels, Arrianisme has been confirmed; as by the council of Ariminum D.
Hieron in vita Damasi Papae.
.

By councels the traditions, and books of foolish men, have been made of
equal authority with the Word of God, as by the Council of Trent Ses. 4.
decr. 1.
.

By councels has been established both the adoration of images, as by the
second council of Nice; and the Invocation of creatures, as by the Tridentine
council Brev. Romans ex decr. S. ^. Council. Trid. ^^^icu^. and edit. 5.
.

By councels the authority of Princes has bin impaired, and the Pope, and
Clergy, advanced above all earthly Princes; as by the Council of Lateran
Council. Later. c. 5. apud Innocent.
.

The consideration of the premises, and the like, moved S. Hilarie to call the
Synod of Mediolane, The Synagogue of the malignant Hilar. epist. ad Constable.
Imper.
: and

S. Augustine to write unto Maximinus: Neither ought I to object against thee
the Synod of Nice; nor thou against me the Synod of Ariminum D. Aug. contra
Max. lib 3.
: and

Nazianzene openly to pronounce, that, He never saw any good end of a Council
Naz. ad Pro. cop. epist. 42.
: and

The French Kings Ambassador to say unto the Chapter of Trent, that scarcely
any good at all, or very little, came by Councels unto the State of
Christendom Orat. Synod. Legate. regis Fran. an. 1562.
: and

Cornelius Bishop of Bitonto, to break out into these words, in the face of
the Council at Trent; I would that with one consent we had not altogether
declined from Religion unto superstition; from faith unto infidelity; from
Christ unto Antichrist; from God unto Epicurus B. Jewels dvf. par. 1. fol. 39.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
This notwithstanding, the Papists do continue in an opinion that Councels
cannot err Test. Rhem. an. Joh. 16.13.
.

4. Proposition.
The things ordained by General Councels, are so far to be embraced, and
believed, as they are consonant to Gods holy Word.

The proof from Gods Word.
General Councels we simply condemn not: yet do we not ground our faith upon
any Council, but only upon the written Word of God.

Therefore in general Councels whatsoever is agreeable unto the written Word
of God, we do reverently embrace; but whatsoever is contrary unto, or besides
the will of God, revealed in the holy Scriptures, we do carefully avoid.

And so are we commanded to do even by God himself.

Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: thou shall put nothing
thereto; nor take ought therefrom Deuteronomy 12.33.
.

Walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither observe their manners,
etc. I am the Lord your God: walk in my Statutes, and keep my Judgments, and
do them Ezekiel. 20 18, 19.
.

Though that we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so
say I now again, If any man preach unto you otherwise, then that ye have
received, let him be accursed Gal. 1. ^, 9.
.

And so think the Churches reformed with us Conf Helv. 2 c. 18. Bohe. c. 1 Gal.
ar 5. B^lg. ar. ^. Wit^^m^. c. 33.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Contrary hereunto are the opinions of the Papists. For of them,

Some do think, that the decrees of Councels do bind all nations; as Pope
Hormisda decreed they should.

Some, as Pope Gregory the great, supposed that some Councels, and namely, the
Council of Nice, of Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon Greg. 1. l 1. epi.
24. and l. 2. epist. 49.
, some, as Campian Campian. 12^.4.
, thought that all Councels were of equal authority with the Word of God.
Others, as the Guisian faction in France, be resolved in matters of religion to
follow the footesteps of their ancestors, though (Gods Word, and) a thousand
Councels decree to the contrary Calvin. epist. Bulling. 1231.
.

22. Article. Of Purgatory.
The Romish doctrine concerning 1 Purgatory, 2 Pardons, worsh^pping, and
adoration as well 3 of images, as 4 of relics: and 5 also of Invocation of
Saints, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of
Scripture, but rather repugnant to the Word of God.

The Propositions.
The Romish doctrine concerning 1. Purgatory. 2. Pardons. 3. Worshipping, and
adoration of Images. 4. Relics. 5. Invocation of Saints is a fond thing, and
not warranted by the holy Scripture, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.

1. Proposition.
The Romish doctrine concerning Purgatory, is fond, and not warranted by the
holy Scripture, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.

The proof from Gods Word.
IT is granted as well by the Romish or false, as by the true Church, that none
unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of God. And because all men either
have been, or be still unclean, therefore they must be purged from sin.

But in the manner of purging them who are unpure, they do greatly differ. For
the true Church, looking into the Word of God, does find that we are
sanctified, or made clean in diverse respects, diversely, as by Baptism Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and
cleanse it by the washing of water through the Word, Ephesians. 5.25.26.
, by the Word preached Now ye are clean through the word that I have spoken
unto you. John 15.3.
, by the blood of Christ The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from
all sin, 1 John 1.7.
, and by the Spirit of God Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 6.^1.
, and that in this life, and not in the other world.

For in the sacred Scripture there is mention but only of two ways, one
leading unto destruction, the other bringing unto life Mat. 7.13, 14.
, of two sorts of men, whereof some believe, and they are saved, some believe
not, and they are damned Matt. 16.16. Joh. 3.18.
, and of two States, one blessed, where Lazarus is; the other cursed, where
Dives does abide Luke 16.
. A third way or sort, or state cannot be found in the Word of God.

And therefore the Purgatory in another world both denied has always been by
the Greek Churches Alphons. de haeres. l. 8. de Indulgentiis. Polydor. de
Inventor. l. 8. c. 1. Cons. Helv. 2. c. 26. Gal. ar. 24. Sax. ar. 11. Aug. ar.
11. Wittemb. cap. 25.
, and neither is, nor will be acknowledged by any of Gods reformed Churches in
this world, as their Confessions do testify.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Erroneous therefore, and not warrantable by Gods Word concerning Purgatory, is
the doctrine both of the old Heretics, the Montanists, who thought there was a
purging of souls after this life Tertul. de cot militis: and De Anima, in si^^.
, and of the new and renewed Heretics the Papists. For

They think it to be unsound doctrine, and not sufferable in any book, for
Christians to deliver, that it is unpossible for godly, and faithful men or
women to be punished after they be dead. Therefore deleatur, say they: Blot out
such doctrine Pu^ari pios post mort^m impossible. deleatur, l^dex expurg. p.
26.
.

They teach by their Catechismes, that to doubt whether there is a Purgatory,
or no, is a breach of the first Commandment Vaux catech. chap 3.
.

Thus do they pray for the souls of the faithful, (as they fancy) boiling
in the torments of Purgatory.

Avete omnes animae fideles quarum corpora hic and abique conquiescunt in
pulvere: Dominus Jesus Christus, qui vos, and nos redemit suo preciocissimo
sanguine, dignetur vos a poenis liberare, etc. that is, All hail all faithful
souls, whose bodies do here, and every where rest in the dust; The Lord Jesus
Christ, who has redeemed both you and us, with his most precious blood,
vouchsafe to deliver you from pains, etc Horae B. Virg. Mariae secundum usum
S^r.
.

They have ratified the doctrine of purged souls after this life in the
Council of Trent Conc. Trid. d^^r. de Purg. Ses. 25. and ses. 6 can. 30.
.

It it further to be noted, how the same Papists, sliding back from the truth
of God, have fallen into many noisome, and diverse opinions in the matter of
Purgatory; agreeing among themselves,

Neither about the place, where Purgatory should be; some placing the same in
the bottom of the Sea Eckius in Enchirid.
: some near unto the mount Hecla in Ireland; some upon the mount Aetna in
Sicil Bernard. de Bustis Rosar. par. 3. c. 2.
, others in the Center of the earth Spec. pereg. quaest. doc. 1. c. 3. q. 5.
, others in Hell, whereof they make four rooms, the first of the damned: the
second of infants dying unbaptized: the third Purgatory, the fourth Limbus
patrum, whereinto Christ descended Position Ing. de purgat.
, and others in a mind tossed, and troubled betwixt hope and fear Lorich.
insti. Cathol. de 12. Fidei art.
;

Neither about the Tormentors there, who are thought of some, to be holy Angels
Albertus, and Roffensis.
, of others, to be very devils S. Th. Morc.
.

Neither about the torments. For some dream how they are tormented there with
fire only, as Sir Thomas Moore: some with water and fire, as Roffensis; and
some neither with fire, nor water, but with troublesome affections of Hope, and
Fear, as Lorichius Insti. Catho. ut supra.
.

Neither about the causes of Purgatory torments: because that some do think
that only venial sins Greg. dial. l. 4. c. 39. Spec. pereg. quaest. dec. 1.
c. 3. q. 4:
, others, that venial, and mortal sins too Eckius posit. 6.
, (for which in this life men have done no penance) are there purged.

Nor about the time, which they that be tormented, shall abide in Purgatory.
For some have given out, how the poor souls there be continually in torments,
till the day of Judgment, as Dionys. Carthusianus De 4. Hom. noviss.
; others as Durandus De officio mort. l. 7.
, do think they have rest sometimes, as upon Sundaies, and Holidaies: others
are of mind, that in time they shall be set free and at liberty, because their
punishment is but temporary Spec. pereg. quaest. ut supra quaest. 5.
, and others, that at any time they may be delivered, if either their friends
will buy out their pains: or the Priests will pray or say any Mass for them:
or the Pope will but say the word.

Nor finally about the state of souls in Purgatory. For,

Our English Papists at Rhemes do think the souls in Purgatory to be in a
more happy, and blessed condition, then any men that live in this world Test.
Rhem. an. Apoc. 14.13.
, and yet say the same Rhemists, that Purgatory fire passes all the pains of
this life Ibid. an. marg. p. 431.
.

Thomas Aquinas holds how the pains of hell fire, and of Purgatory are all
one, and nothing differ, but that the one is but temporal, and the other not
so. And others, put in choice either to tarry in Purgatory one day, or to
endure the miseries of this world an 100 years, have chosen to suffer the
troubles of this life an hundred years together, rather then to abide the
pains of Purgatory but one short Winters day Cap. Quid, in aliud. did. 25.
.

Therefore in this contrariety of opinions, some of them, the Papists
themselves cannot deny, must be; we say all of them are fond, and contrary to
the Word of God.

Besides, they nourish most cursed and damnable errors, as

That all the souls of the faithful, separated from their bodies, are not at
rest.

That all sins in their own nature, be not mortal, or deadly, and that some
deserve not everlasting torments. They are purged in Purgatory.

That one sinful man may save, and satisfy the wrath of God for another; and
that easily by prayer, saying, or doing something for them.

That if friends in this world will do nothing for the poor souls in
Purgatory pains; yet may the said souls come at length unto happiness, by
abiding their deserved torments until the last hour, or day of judgment, in
Purgatory.

Finally, that the Pope is God, in that he can at his pleasure discharge
guilty souls both from the guilt of sin, and from the punishments due for
the same.

2. Proposition.
The Romish doctrine concerning pardons, is fond, and not warranted by the holy
Scriptures, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.

The proof from Gods Word.
SVch has been the exceeding mercy, and love of God toward mankind, that as
he has purged us from all guiltiness of sin by the blood: so has he
pardoned us from the everlasting punishment due for sin, by the pains of
Jesus Christ. For

There is salvation in none other. For among men there is given none other name
under heaven, whereby they must be saved Acts 4.12.
.

Through his name, all that believe, shall receive remission of sins Act.
10.43.
.

He has purchased the Church by his own blood Act. 20.28.
.

With his stripes we are healed Isa. 53.5.
.

He that believes in him, shall neither be condemned Joh. 3.18.
, nor ashamed Romans 10.11.
.

Therefore: Come unto me all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ea^^
you, etc. and ye shall find rest for your souls, says our Savior Christ
Matthew. 11.28, 29.
.

If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe with
thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, says Saint
Paul Romans 10.9.
.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
This being the Doctrine even of God himself Whereof see more, Art. 2. pr. 4.
ar. 11. pr. 1. ar. 22. pr. 1.
, we may evidently perceive, how not only vain, but beside; not only
besides, but against the Word of God, the Romish doctrine concerning pardons
is: For that does teach us,

1. To seek salvation not at God alone, but at the hands of sinful men. For
would we have a pardon for the sins of forty days? A Bishop may give it.
For the sins of 100 days? A Cardinal may grant it. For all our sins
committed; or to be committed? From the Pope we may have it. Hence be his
pardons, if you respect time, for 40. 50. 100. 1000. 10000. 50000. etc. years;
of offenses, Homicide, Patricide, Perjury, Sodomitry, Treason, and what not,
etc. Vide Taxam. poenit.
.

2. That we may be our own Savior. So did that of Purgatory.

3. How the precious blood of Christ was shed in vain. For corruptible gold,
and silver, with our own deeds, and works, may and will save us, if we will.

4. That repentance is not of necessity unto the salvation of man. For without
the same a popish pardon may save. But without either a pardon from the Pope,
or such like, or absolution of a Priest, there is no salvation, by the doctrine
of the Church of Rome See. ar. 25. p. 6.
.

A further manifestation of the vanity, and impieties of the Romish pardons,
from a book of the Papists, entitled, Horae beatissimae Virginis Mariae,
secundum usum Sarum.
Quicunque in statu gratiae existens, dixerit devote septem orationes sequentes
cum septem Pater noster, and totidem Ave Maria, ante imaginem pietatis,
merebitur 56. millia annorum Indulgentiarum.

Johannes Papa 12. concessit omnibus dicentibus orationem sequentem, transcundo
per cemiterium, tot annos indulgentiarum, quot faerunt ibi corpora inhumata a
constitutione ipsius cemiterii.

Oration pro defunctis.

Avete omnes animae fideles, quarum corpora hic and ubique requiescunt in
pulvere. Dominus Jesus Christus, qui vos and nos redemit suo pretiofissimo
sanguine, dignetur vos a poenis liberare, and inter choros suorum sanctorum
angelorum collocare, ibiq^e nostri memores suppliciter exorare, ut vobis
associemur and vobiscum in coelis coronemur.

Innocentius Papa 2. concessit cuilibet qui banc orationem sequentem de vote
dixerit, 4000. millia annorum indulgentiarum. Ave vulnus lateris nostri
Salvatoris, etc.

Quicunque devote dixerit istam orationem, habebit 3000. dicrum indulgentiarum
criminalium peccatorum, and 2000. millia dicrum, venialium, a Domino Iohanne
Papa 22. concessarum, ut in A^tidatorio animae habetur.

Quicunque orationem sequentem devote dixerit, promerebitur 11000 annorum
indulgentiaru^, etc Ave Domina sancta Maria, matter dei regina coeli, porta
paradisi domina mundi, lux sempiterna imperatrix inferni, etc. Ora pro me Iesum
Christum dilectu^ filium tuum, and libera me ab omnil us malis, ora pro
peccatis meis. Amen.

Whosoever being in the state of grace, shall devoutly say the seven prayers
ensuing, with seven Our Fathers, and as many Hail Mary's, before the image of
Piety, shall thereby merit 56. thousand years of Pardons.

Pope John the 12. has granted to all persons, which going through the
Churchyard, do say the prayer following, so many years of pardons, as there
have been bodies buried since it was a Churchyard.

The prayer for the dead.
Hail all faithful souls, whose bodies here, and every where do rest in the
dust. The Lord Jesus who has reedemed you, and with his most precious blood
vouchsafe to deliver you, from pains, and to place you in the company of his
holy Angels, and there being mindful of us, meekely to pray, that we may both
be joined unto you, and crowned with you in the heavens.

Pope Innocent the 2. has granted to every one which devoutly shall say this
prayer following, 4000. years of pardons: Hail wound of our Saviors side,
etc.

Whosoever devoutly shall say this prayer, shall have 3000. days pardons of
criminal sins, and 20000. days of venial (offenses) granted by the Lord
Pope John the 22. as it is to be read in the Antidatory of the soul.

Whosoever devoutly will say the prayer following, shall merit (thereby) 11000.
years of pardons: Hail Lady Saint Mary, mother of God, Queen of heaven, the
Gate of Paradise, the Lady of the world, the Light eternal, the Emperesse of
hell, etc. Pray unto thy beloved Son Jesus Christ for me, and deliver me from
all evils, pray for my sins. Amen.

3. Proposition.
The Romish doctrine concerning Images, is fond, and not warranted by the holy
Scriptures, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.

The proof from Gods Word.
Images are such an abomination to the Lord, as to make them among all men
odious, he describes the vanity of them by his Prophets, as that they are the
doctrine of vanity, the work of errors Jer. 10.15.
, the teachers of lies H^b. 2.18.
, silver and gold, the work of men's hands Psalm 135.25.
, vanity Esa 41.10. etc.
: they have a mouth, and speak not; eyes, and see not; ears, and hear not
Psalm. 135.16.
; hands, and touch not; feet, and walk not Psalm 115.7.
.

2. He gives a strait commandment, Not to bow down to them, nor worship them
Exodus 20.5. 1 Cor. 10.7, 14.
: nor to make them Exodus 20.5. Deuteronomy. 4.15, etc.
, to fly from them 1 John 5.21. 1 Cor. 10.14.
, yea to destroy both the images themselves Deuteronomy. 7.5, 12, 2^, ^.
; the Idolaters Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3.
, and the Enticers unto Idolatry Deuteronomy. 13.5.
.

3. He commends greatly, and praises such men as have destroyed images 2
King. 18.3, 4. 2 Chr. 14.2, 3.
, and not bowed unto Idols Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. Ier. 5 1.
.

4. He finally curses the Images 1 King. 19.18. Dan. 2.
, the Image-makers Deuteronomy. 27.15. Esa. 44.
, and the Image-servers, or worshippers Deuteronomy. 27.26. Psalm. 97.7. Esa 42.17.
.

Hereunto with us, the Protestant Churches every where do subscribe Conf.
Helv. 2. cap 3, 4. Basil. ar. 10.6.3. Bohem. c. 3.16. Gal. ar. 1. August. ar.
12. Wittem. c. 1.23. Suev. ar. 22.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
The Romish Church most fondly, and contrary to the word of God, does allow;
and not only allow, but publicly erect; and not only erect, but adore Dele,
statuas verserari, potius quam statuarios, stolid^m ^^t, Index expurg. p. 31.
, and not only adore Images, but does accu^se, and more then so, condemn to
the fire, yea to hell fire as heretics, such persons as will not worship
images, and the Images too (which is most abominable.)

Of God himself; even of God the Father, and that in the likeness of an old
man with a long white Beard; of the Son, in the similitude of a man, hanging on
the Cross; of the holy Ghost, in the shape of a Dove, of the wholly, holy and
incomprehensible Trinity, with three Faces in one head In hoe plerisque
Christianis ^^hnicus philosophus religiosior, qui etia^ Trinitatis, quae mente
vix co^prehenditur, figuras oculis ^ot poris aspectabilis (Petri Rami verba in
scholis physicis,) delcantur Index expurg. page 149. Atque haec absurditas
Patrem, Filum, Sp effigiantium Iacobitis a Nicephoro tributur. G. Cassand
consul. p. 164.
.

Also of God his creatures, as of Angels always with wings, sometimes with a
pair of balance, as S. Michael; of men, as of Moses (as it were) with horns;
the Apostles with round orbs on their heads like Trenchers; the blessed Virgin
with frisled hair, and costly garments.

And of other base things, as Agnus deis of wax; wafer cakes of flower; Crosses
of gold, silver, stone, wood, paper, copper, etc Non inficiam^^ haec nos
latriae admatione C^r sti, praeclaressimam crucem ^^re and vene^a^i A^drad.
orthodox. expl. lib. 9 p. 284.
.

4. Proposition.
The Romish doctrine concerning Relics is fond, and not warranted by the holy
Scriptures, nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.

The proof from Gods Word.
OF all the erroneour opinions among the Papists (which are infinite) none is
more to the illusion of well meaning Christians, then their doctrine concerning
worshipping, Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 11. etc. 5. Bas^ ar. 10. Bohem. c. 17. Gal.
ar. 24.
and adoration of the relics of Saints. A doctrine, which is so far from
being found, as it is forbidden in the holy Scripture Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve Matthew 4.20.
, and a doctrine in the purer times and writers of the Church, no where to be
found; and in all the best Churches at this day utterly condemned.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Such notwithstanding is the Satanicall boldness of the Antichristian
Synagogue of Rome, that as they will delude men with the relics of Saints,
which are not such: so likewise they teach the people (which is most offensive
and execrable) to give divine adoration, and honor unto them Praed^catio autem
eccl^siastica hoc sc^^p^ ^en^^it, Sanctorum re^iquias ess. ex fide venerandas:
Stap: ^. antidot. evang. in Mat 8.21. p. 30 The Catholic affirms worshipping
of Saints, prayer unto them, feasts of them, adoration of their relics, and
images: the Protestant denies all. Hills quartron. 14. reas p 71.
.

Hence it is that some do pray unto St. Benet, whose Relics they had stolen,
O Benedict, after God our only hope, leave us not orphans, who art come
hither, not through our merits, but for the salvation of many souls Vi^^. Lir.
l. 23 cap. 155.
.

Others have published, that the bodies of Saints, and specially the Relics
of the blessed Martyrs, are with all sinc rity to be honored, as the members
of Christ, etc. If any deny this conclusion, he is to be thought not a
Christian, but an Eunomian, and Vigilantian Ra^^l 6. c. 10. de S^^ ^rop^^
.

The Council of Trent also has decreed; that they are to be taken for damned
which affirm, how worship, and honor is not to be given unto the Relics of
Saints Conc. Trid. sess 25. decr. de Invoc. etc.
.

Of this preposterous devotion, they have appointed a certain, and common
service for the holy Cross, whereon Christ was hanged Massa de S. Cruce, and
Offi ium de S. Cruce.
, they have made a feast for the spear, and Nails, wherewith Christ was
fastened to the Cross Be^-h^ve, lib. ^. cap. 3.
, they have canonized for a Saint the chains which bound S. Peter ^^racian.
did. 3^. Null. ^olat.
. To say nothing of the adoration they gave unto the Hair, Milk, Smock of
the blessed Virgin; unto the Head, Hair, Thombe, Coat of John Baptist, unto
the breeches of Joseph; the sword, and Handkerchiefe of Saint Paul, the Keys
of Saint Peter; and unto many other things which of modesty I will not mention,
but do over-passe.

5. Proposition.
Invocation of Saints is a fond thing, not warranted by the holy Scriptures,
nor consonant, but contrary unto the same.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe Christian exercise of Prayer, is a duty which may not be either s^curely
omitted or vainly abused. And though many things in prayer be necessarily to
be observed, yet a special point it is, that in our Supplications and Prayers
we do call only upon God. For so to do we are both commanded, even by God
himself Call upon me in the time of trouble, Psalm. 50.15. After this manner
^^ay: Our Father, which are in heaven, etc. Matthew. 6.6. When ye pray, (...),
Our Father (...) are in hea^^n, Luke 11:2.
: and thereunto also allured, by manifold as well promises of large blessings
Psalm. 50.15. Math. 7.11. Luk 11.12, 18, 7, 8. Io^^ 16.23, 24.
, as by the examples of godly men in all ages, Patriarks, Abraham Genesis 13.4.
, Isaac Genesis 26.25. etc.
, Jacob Genesis 32.9.
; Prophets, as Daniel Dan 9.16. etc
, Elias 1 King. 18.36.37, etc.
, Jeremy Ier. 14.7, etc.
; Centurions Act. 10.2.
, Publicans Luke 18.13.
, Apostles, as Paul Act. 16 25. and through his Epi tles.
, Peter Acts 1 24.
, etc. yea of all the Elect of God in this world Luke 1.87.
.

On the other side, to pray unto any creature that is out of this world,
besides Jesus Christ, there is in the Scripture neither Law to command, nor
promise of blessing, nor any example of godly men, or women, to provoke

Finally, as all Gods people in the purer and former times have, so in these
days the Protestant Churches utterly condemn the invocating of, or praying
unto creatures whatsoever Confe. Helv. 1. ar 1. and 2. c. 5. 23. Basil. ar. 10
Bohe c. 2. 17. Gal. ar. 14. 24. Belg. ar. 20. Au. ar. 21. Wit. c. 23. Suc. ar.
11. 21.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore the Romish doctrine, that Saints are to be prayed unto Test. Rhem.
page 187. Orationem Dominicam fundimus Sanctis Censur. a Colon. f. 208.
, and their daily praying, as occasion serves, unto S. Agatha, that have sore
breasts; unto S. Benedict, that either be, or fear to be poisoned; unto S.
Clare, for them that have sore eyes; S. Damian, that be sick, for health; S.
Erasmus, for help in the intrals; S. Feriol, for Geese; S. Giles, for women
that would have children; S. Hubberts, for dogs; S. Job, for them which have
the pox; S. Katherine, for knowledge; S. Loys, for horses; S. Margaret, for
women in travail; S. Nicholas, for little children; S. Otilia, for the
headache; S. Petronil, for the Ague; S. Quintin, for the cough; S. Ruffin, for
lunacy, or madness; S. Sebastian, for the plague; S. Thomas Becket, for sinners;
S. Valentine, for the falling sickness; S. Winefrid, for virginity; S.X. or
Cross, for all things: it is vain, not warrantable by Gods Word, but
altogether repugnant to the holy Scriptures.

The vanity and Idolatry of the Popish Invocation, further demonstrated from
that book of theirs, entitled, Horae beatissima virginis, etc.
Oremus. Majestatem tuam Domine suppliciter exoramus, ut sicut Ecclesiae tuae
beatus Andreas Apostolus tuus extitit praedicator, and rector: ita apud te sit
pro nobis perpetuus intercessor, per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum.

Oremus. Deus, pro cujus Ecclesia gloriosus martyr, and Pontifex Thomas gladijs
impiorum occubuit, praesta quaesumus, ut omnes qui ejus implorant auxilium piae
petitionis, ejus salutarem consequantur effectum per Dominum nostrum.

Versus. Ora pro nobis, beata Katherina. Resp. Vt digni efficiamur
promissionibus Christi.

Versus. Ora a pro nobis, beat Martyr Sebastiane. Resp. Vt moreamur pestem
epidemiae illae si tranfire, and promissione^ Christi obtinere.

Virgo Christi egregia, pro nobis Apollonia,
Funde preces ad Dominum, ut tollat omne noxium,
Ne pro reatu criminum, morbo vexemur dentium.
Let us pray. O Lord; we humbly beseech thy Majesty, that as thy blessed
Apostle Andreas was a Preacher and Ruler of thy Church; so he may be a
perpetual intercessor for us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Let us pray. O God, for whose Churches sake the glorious Martyr, and Bishop
Thomas was slain by the sword of the ungodly, grant we beseech thee, that such
as call unto him for help, may obtain a good effect of his Godly prayer
through our Lord.

The verse. O blessed Katharine pray for us. The Ans. That we may be made worthy
of the promises of Christ.

The verse. O blessed Martyr Sebastian pray for us. The Ans. That we may deserve
to escape the plague without hurt, and obtain the promises of Christ.

Christ his noble virgin Apollonia, pray unto the Lord to remoove whatsoever is
hurtful, lest for the guiltiness of our sins, we be vexed with the
toothache.

Whosoever says this prayer following in the worship of God, and S. Roche (the
very words in the said book) shall not dye of the pestilence, by the grace of
God, etc.
Oremus. Omnipotens, sempiterne Deus, qui precibus and meritis beatissimi Rochi
confessoris tui, quondam pestem generalem revocasti, praesta supplicibus tuis,
and qui pro simili peste revocanda sub tua confidunt fiducia ipsius gloriosi
Confessoris tui precamine, ab ipsa peste epidemiae, and ab omni perturbatione,
per Christum Dominum nostrum.

Oration ad tres reges. Rex Jasper, rex Melchior, rex Balthazar, rogo vos per
singula nomina, rogo vos per sanctum Trinitatem, rogo vos per Regem regum, quem
vagientem in cunis videre meruistis, and compatiamini tribulationum mearum
hodie, and intercedatis pro me ad Dominum, cujus desiderio exules facti estis.

Crux Christi, protege me, Crux Christi, salva me; Crux Christi, defend me ab
omni malo.

Let us pray, O Almighty, and everlasting God, who by the prayers and merits of
the most blessed Confessor, Roche, did revoke a certain general plague,
grant unto thy suppliants, who for the revocation of the like plague do trust
in thy faithfulness, by the prayer of that thy glorious Confessor, we may be
delivered from the plague, and from all adversity, through Christ our Lord.

A prayer unto the three Kings. O King Jasper, King Melchior, King Balthazar, I
beseech you by every of your names, I beseech you by the holy Trinity, I
beseech you by the King of Kings, whom ye deserved to see even in his swaddling
clothes, that you would take pity on my troubles this day, and make
intercession for me unto the Lord, for whose desire ye made your selves exiles.

O Christ's cross, protect me; O Christ's cross, save me; O Christ's cross,
defend me from all evil.

23. Article. Of ministering in the Congregation.
It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public preaching
2 or ministering the Sacraments in the congregation, 3 before he be lawfully
called and sent to execute the same. 4 And those we ought to judge lawfully
called, and sent, which be 5 chosen, and called to this work, 6 by men who
have public authority given unto them in the congregation, to call, and send
ministers into the Lords vineyard.

The Propositions.
1. None publicly may preach, but such as thereunto are authorized. 2. They
must not be silent, who by office are bound to preach. 3. The Sacraments may
not be administered in the Congregation but by a lawful Minister. 4. There is a
lawful Ministry in the Church. 5. They are lawful Ministers, which be
ordained by men lawfully appointed to the calling, and sending forth of
Ministers. 6. Before Ministers are to be ordained, they are to be chosen, and
called.
1. Proposition.
None publicly may preach, but such as thereunto are authorized.

The proof from Gods Word.
THis truth in the holy Scripture is evident. For there we find, how

Godly men were both called by God, and commanded to preach, before they would,
or durft so do. So was Samuel 1 Samuel 3.3, 4. etc 20.
, Jeremy Ierem. 1.4, 5.
, John Baptist Joh. 1.6.
, Christ Jesus himself Ioh 20.21.
, who also to preach did send the twelve Apostles Math. 10.5.
, and the seventy Disciples Luke 10.1.
,

2. The wicked and false prophets for preaching before their time are blamed
Ier. 14.14, 23, 21, 27, 14, 15, 29.8, 9.
.

3. A commandment is given us to pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would
send forth laborers into his harvest Matthew. 9.38.
.

4. Lastly, we do read, that God has ordained in the Church some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, some teachers, some to be workers of miracles 1 Cor.
1^.28.
, and Christ being ascended into heaven, gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers Ephesians. 4.1^.
.

And all this is acknowledged by the reformed Churches Cont. Helv. 2. c. 18.
Bohe cap ^. Gal. ^1 31. Belg. ar. 14. Wittem. ar. 2^. Su^^. ar. 13.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
And so are we against them,

Which to their power do seek the abolishment of public preaching in the
reformed Churches, as do first the Papists, who phrase the Preachers to be
uncircumcised Philistims Ans. to the execut of lust. cap. 3. p. 44.
, sacrilegious ministers Ib. c. 9. p. 211.
, Ieroboams priests, inordinate Ib. c. 5. p. 91.
, and unordered Apostataes Ib. c. 3. p 41.
; and next, the Barrowists, who say how the said Preachers are sent of God in
his anger to deceive the people with lies R. A. confut: of Brow. p. 113.
.

Who publish how the word is not taught by the Sermons of Ministers, but only
by the Revelation of the Spirit: so did Muncer, the Anabaptist Sleiden. com.
lib. ^.
, and so does H.N. H. N Evang. c. 13. sect. 6. and Spir. land. c. 48 sect. 5.
, and his Family of Love Letter to the Br. of Roch.
.

Who run before they be sent, as do many both Anabaptists, and Puritanes, as
Penry, Greenwood, Barrow, etc. or which hold, how they which are able to teach,
and instruct the people, may, and must so do; and that not privately only,
but publicly too, though they be not ordinarily sent, and authorized
thereunto, which was the doctrine of R.H R H. in Psalm. 122.
.

Who teach, that Laymen may teach to get faith R. A. conf. of Brownism p. 113.
; and that every particular member of the Church has power, yea and ought to
examine the manner of administering the Sacraments, etc. and to call the people
to repentance: so teaches Barrow Ba. disco. p. 36.
.

5. Proposition.
They must not be silent, who by office are bound to preach.

The proof from Gods Word.
As publicly to preach, before men are sent, is a grievous fault: so not to
preach being sent, is a great sin. Hereunto bear witness,

1. Our Savior Christ, whose words are these. Surely, I must also preach the
Kingdom of God: for therefore am I sent Luke 4.43.
.

2. Peter and John, who being charged to speak no more in the name of Jesus,
said, We cannot but speak that which we have heard, and seen Acts 4.17, etc.
.

3. Saint Paul. For he says, Necessity is laid upon me, and woe is me, if I
preach not the Gospel 1 Cor. 9.16, 17.
.

4. The Apostles of Christ. For though they were beaten for so doing: yet
ceased they not to teach, and preach Jesus Christ Acts 5.42.
.

5. All the Churches of God which be purged from superstition, and errors Conf.
Helv. 1. ar. 25. and 2. c. 8, 9. Bohem. c. 9. Gal. ar. 15. Aug. ar. 7. Wit. ar.
20. Suev. ar. 13.
.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Then, as in a glass they may see their faults,

Who maintain, how there ought to be no public preaching at all, as do the
Anabaptists Bullin. cont. Anabap. c. 12.
.

Which deprave the office of preaching, as do the Libertines, saying, that
preaching is none ordinary means to come unto the knowledge of the Word
Wilkins. against the Fam. of Love. ar. 14. p. 66.
, and especially the Family of Love, who term the public preachers in
derision, Scripture-learned Theoph. against Wilk.
, Licentious scripture-learned Pat. of the prof. Temp.
, good thinkingwise H.N pr^ph. of the Sp. cap. 2. sect. 7.
, Ceremonial, and letter-Doctors ^am. let. to the B. of Roc.
, Teaching-masters H. N. Spi^. l. c 25
, and further say, It is a great presumption that any man, out of the
learnednesse of the letter, takes upon him to be a Teacher, or Preacher.
Again, It becomes not any man to busy himself about preaching of the Word;
so, and more too, the Family.

Which take upon them the office of public preaching, without performance of
their duty, either through ignorance that they cannot; worldly employments,
that they may not, negligence, Idem 1. ^^b. c. 10. sect 15. 16.
that they will not; or fear of troubles, that they dare not preach the Word
of God.

Yet think we not (which our Sabbatarians let not to publish) that

Every Minister necessarily and under pain of damnation, is to preach at least
once every Sunday D B doct of the Sabbath, 2 book p. 174.
, and

Unless a Minister preach every Sunday, he does not hallow the Sabbath day in
the least measure of that which the Lord requires of us Ibid. p. 277.
.

3 Proposition.
The Sacraments may not be administered in the Congregation, but by a lawful
Minister.

The proof from Gods Word.
IN the holy Scriptures we read that the public Ministers of the Word, are to
be Administers of the Sacraments. For both our Savior Christ commanded his
Disciples, as to preach, so to baptize Matthew 28.19.
, and celebrate the Supper of the Lord Luke 22.1^. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
: and the Apostles, and other Ministers in the purest times (whom the godly
Ministers, and Preachers in these days do succeed) not only did preach, but
also baptize Acts 2.3^, 41 8, 12, 13, 40.41.16.32, 33. John 1.25. 1 Cor. 1.1^,
16.
, and minister the Lords Supper Acts 20.7. 1 Cor 10.^6.
.

And hereunto do the Churches of God subscribe Conf. Heb. 2. c. 18 Bohem. c.
9. Gal. ar 2.5 31. Aug. ar. 5. Wittem. ar. 20. Suev. ar. 13.
.

In saying that none may administer the Sacraments in the Congregation, before
he be lawfully called, and sent thereunto, we think not (as some do) that the
very being of the Sacraments depends upon this point, viz. whether the
Baptizer, or giver of the Bread and Wine, be a Minister or no.

Neither is it the meaning of this article, that privately in houses, either
lawful Ministers, upon just occasion, may not; or others not of the Ministry,
upon any occasion (in the peace of the Church) may administer the Sacraments.

The adversaries unto this truth. T. C. 1 rep. p. 113.

Hereby we declare our selves not to favor the opinion, that publicly,

Some may minister the Sacraments, which are not merely, and full Ministers of
the Word and Sacraments, and so think both the Anabaptists, among whom, their
King (when it was) after Supper took bread, and reaching it among the
Communicants, did say, Take, eat, and show forth the Lords death; their Queen
also reaching the Cup, said, Drink ye, and show forth the Lords death Sucius
com. p 237.
: and the Presbyterians at Geneva, where the Elder (a Layman) ministers the
Cup ordinarily at the Communion Survay of dis. c. 15 out of the Geneva laws.
. Some Ministers (and namely the Puritan Doctors) may not minister the
Sacraments: For (say the disciplinarians) the office of Doctors is only to
teach true doctrine Lear. disc. p. 17.
, but in our Church (of England) the Doctor encroacheth upon the office of the
Pastor. For both indifferently do teach, exhort, and minister the Sacraments
Fru^. Ser. on Romans 12. p. 40
.

None, though a lawful Minister, may administer the Sacraments, which either
is no Preacher The administration of the Sacraments ought to be committed to
none, but such as are preachers of the Word, Lear. disc. p. 60. It is
sacrilege to separate the Word (viz. Preaching) from the Sacraments. Ibid. The
preaching of the Word is the life of the Sacraments. T. C. 1. rep. p. 125.
, or when he ministers them, does not preach The unchangeable laws of God he
says (T.C.) that none minister the Sacraments, which do not preach T.C. 1.
repl. p. 104 sect. 3. Where there is no Preacher o^ the Word, there ought to be
no minister of the Sacraments, Lear disc. p. 62.
, which be the errors of the Disciplinarians, or Puritanes.

Publicly and privately too, the Sacraments of Baptism may be administered by
any man, yea by women, if necessity do urge. So hold the Papists. For says
Iavell Iavel. Psalm. Chapter par. fol. 559.
, in the time of necessity the minister of Baptism is every man, both male and
female: A woman be she young or old, sacred or wicked. Every male that has his
wits, and is neither dumb, nor so drunken, but that he can utter the words: as
well Pagan, Infidel, and heretic: the bad as the good; the Schismatike, as the
Catholic, may baptize. And yet usually in the civil wars both in France,
and in Netherland, the Papists did rebaptize such children, as of the
Protestant not laymen, but ministers, had before been baptized So in
Netherland were children rebaptized, when the Duke of Alva there tyrannized.
Trag. hist. of Antwerp. The like Rebaptization was used by the Papists at
Toulouse, Towers, and other Cities in France, especially an. 1561. See the Chr.
of France.
.

The private Baptism by private persons was also taught long since by the
Marcionites, and Pepuzians D. Aug. ad Q^od vult. c 27. Epiphan. haeres. 42.
.

4. Proposition.
There is a lawful ministry in the Church.

The proof from Gods Word.
GOd, for the gathering, or erecting to himself, a Church out of mankind; and
for the well governing of the same, from time to time has used, yea, and also
does, and to the end of the world, will use the ministry of men lawfully
called thereunto by men. A truth evident in the holy Scripture.

Jesus said unto his Apostles, Go, and teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc.
and lo, I am with you always, unto the end of the world Matt. 28.20.
.

Christ gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors, and teachers; for the gathering together of the Saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, till we
all meet together (in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God)
unto a perfect man Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
.

A truth also approoved by the Church Conf. Helv. 1. ar. 15. and 2 c. 18. Boh.
c. 8.9.14. Gal. ar. 25.29, 30, 31. Bell. ar. 30.31. Aug. ar. 7. Sax. ar. 11.
Wittem. ar. 20. Sue. ar. 13.15.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Oppugners of this truth, are

First, the Anabaptisticall Swarmers, who both term all Ecclesiastical men,
The Devils ministers: and also, as very wicked do utterly condemn the outward
ministry of the Word, and Sacraments Althemar. conciliat. Loc. pugnan. lo. 191.
.

And next, the Brownists S.H. on Psalm. 122.
, who divulge that in these days, No Ministers have the calling, sending, or
authority pertaining to a Minister, and that, It will hardly be found in all
the world, that any Minister is, or shall be lawfully called Bar. diseo. p. 104.
: such also be the Barrowists which say, there is no ministry of the Gospel in
all Europe.

5. Proposition.
They are lawful Ministers, which be ordained by men lawfully appointed for
the calling, and sending forth of Ministers.

The proof from Gods Word.
SAint Paul in the beginning of his Epistle unto the Galatians, gives us to
observe the diverse sending forth of men into the holy ministry: whereof

Some are sent immediately from God himself. So sent was by God the Father,
both Jesus Christ Joh. 10.21.
, and John Baptist John 1.6.
: by God the Son, in his state mortal, the twelve Apostles Matt. 10.15.
, in his state immortal, and glorious, Saint Paul Acts 9.15.
.

This calling is special, and extraordinary: and the men so called, were
adorned with the gift of miracles commonly, as were Jesus Christ, and the
Apostles: but not always, for John Baptist wrought none.

And they were also enjoined, for the most part, as the Apostles, to preach
throughout the world Matt. 28.20.
, howbeit our Savior was limited Matt. 15.14.
.

Some again were sent of men: as they be, who are sent of men not authorized
thereunto by the Word of God, and that to the disturbance of the peace of the
Church: sent in the Apostles time, were the false apostles: in our days be the
Anabaptists, Family, Elders, and law despising Brownists.

And some lastly are by men sent: so in the Primitive Church by the Apostles,
were Pastors, and Elders ordained Acts 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14.
, who by the same authority ordained other Pastors, and Teachers 1 Timothy 22.5.
. Whence it is that the Church, as it has bin; so it shall till the end of the
world be provided for. They who are thus called, have power either to work
miracles, as the Apostles had; or to preach, and minister the Sacraments where
they will, as the Apostles might, but they are tied every man to his charge,
which they must faithfully attend upon; except urgent occasion do enforce the
contrary.

The calling of these men is termed a general calling, and it is the
ordinary, and in these days the lawful calling, allowed by the Word of God.

So testify with us the true Churches elsewhere in the world Conf. Helv. 1
ar. 17. and 2. c. 18. Boh. c. 9. Gal. ar. 21. Bol. ar. 31. Aug. ar. 14. Wit.
ar. 21. Suc. ar: 13.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
This truth has many ways bin resisted For there be which think, how in
these days there is no calling, but the extraordinary, or immediate calling
from God, and not by men; as the Anabaptists, Familists, and Brownists: of whom
before.

The Papists, albeit they allow the assertion, yet take they all Ministers to
be Wolves, Hirelings, Laymen, and Intruders, who are not sacrificing Priests,
anointed by some Antichristian Bishop of the Romish synagogue Council. Trid.
sess 7. can. 7.
.

Either all, or the most part of the Ministers of England, says Howlet Howl.
7. reas.
, be mere Laymen, and no Priests, and consequently have no authority in
these things. It is evident, etc. because they are not ordained by such a
Bishop, and Priest, as the Catholic Church has put in authority.

6. Proposition.
Before Ministers are to be ordained, they are to be chosen, and called.

The proof from Gods Word.
THough it be in the power of them which have authority in the Church, to
appoint Ministers for Gods people: yet may they admit neither whom they will,
nor as they will themselves: But they are both deliberately to choose, and
orderly to call such as they have chosen.

This made the Apostles and Elders in the Primitive Church straightly to
charge, that suddenly hands should be laid on no man 1 Timothy 5.22.
.

To make a special choice of twain, whereof one was to be elected into the
place of Judas Acts 1.23.
.

By election to ordain Elders in every Church, and by prayer and fasting to
commend them to the Lord Acts 14.23.
, and by laying on of hands to consecrate them 1 Timothy 4.14.
.

To describe who were to be chosen, and called. For they are to be Men, not
Boys nor Women 1 Timothy 2.12.
, Men of good behavior, nor incontinent, nor given to wine, nor strikers, nor
covetous 1 Timothy 3.2.
, nor proud 1 Pet. 5.3.
, nor froward, nor irefull Tit. 17.
, nor givers of offense 2 Cor. 6.3.
, finally men of special gifts, apt to teach 1 Timothy 3.^.
, able to exhort Titus 1.9.
, wise, to divide the Word of God aright 2 Timothy 2.15.
, bold to reprove 1 Timothy 5.20. Titus 1.9.
, willing to take pains Matthew. 9.38. 2 Timothy 4.2.
, watchful, to oversee Acts 20.28.
, patient to suffer Acts 5.41. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
, and constant, to endure all manner of afflictions 2 Cor. 11.23.
.

And this do the Churches Protestant by their Confessions approve Conf. Helv.
1. ar. 25. and 2. c. 18. Bohe. c. 9. Gal. artic. 13. Belg. ar. 31. Aug. ar. 14.
Wittem. ar. 20 Sue. ar. 13.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
In error they remain, who are of opinion, that

The due election, and calling of Ministers according to the Word of God, is of
no such necessity to the making of Ministers: an erroneous fancy of the
Anabaptists, and Family of Love.

That women may be Deacons Sigebert.
, Elders, and Bishops: the former, the Acephalians; the latter, the Pepuzians
did maintain.

A special care is not to be had both of the life and the learning of men; or
that wicked men, of evil life; ignorant men, without learning; Asses, of no
gifts; loyterers which do no good; or favorers of superstition, and
idolatry, which do great hurt, are to be admitted into the ministry.

They are causes, which indeed are none, to debar men from the
ecclesiastical function, as if men have been twice married (an error of the
Russians Liberus retum Mosco. p. 20. b.
) be married Coster. Enc. controv c. 15. de coel. sacerd.
, have had certain wives Test. Rhem. an. 1 Timothy 5.2.
, have not received the Sacrament of Confirmation Conc. Trid. sess. 23. c. 4.
, have been baptized of Heretics 1 quaest. 1. vencum.
, these may not be Priests say the Papists: or if either they have not been
trained up in the family; or be not Elders in the said Family of Love Such
ought not to busy themselves: -- boot the Word. H. N. document. sent. c. 3.
sect. 1. and 1. Exhort. c. 16. sect. 16.
.

24. Article. Of speaking in the Congregation in such a tongue as the people
understand not.
It is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the custom of the
Primitive Church, to have public prayer in the Church, or to minister the
Sacraments in a tongue not understood of the people.

The Proposition.
Public prayer, and the Sacraments, must be ministered in a tongue understood
of the common people.

The proof from Gods Word.
THis assertion needs small proof. For who so is persuaded (as all true
Christians of understanding, are) that what is done publicly in the Church by
a strange language; not understood of the people, profits not the
Congregation 1 Cor. 14.6, 9, 14.
, edifieth not the weak Ib. 17.26.
, instructs not the ignorant Ib. v. 9.
, inflameth not the zeal Ib. 7.11.
, offends the hearers, abuses the people f, displeases God Mark. 15 8. Ib.
11.16.
, brings religion into contempt 1 Cor. 14.23.
, easily will think, that where prayers be said Conf. Helv. 2: c. 22. Wittem.
c. 27. Aug. de Missa, artic. 3. Suev. c. 2^.
, or the Sacraments administered in a tongue not understood of the vulgar sort,
neither is the Word of God regarded, nor the custom of the purer, and
primitive Church observed.

This article no Church does doubt of, and very many by their extant
Confessions do allow.

Adversaries unto this truth.
But there is nothing either so true, or apparent, which has by all men at any
time bin acknowledged, so contrary to this truth.

In old time the Ossens made their prayers unto God always in a strange
language, which they learned of Elexus their founder Epip haer. 19.
: and the Marcosians, at the ministration of Baptism used certain Hebrew
words, not to edify: but to terrify and astonish the minds of the weak, and
ignorant people D. Iren. l. 1: c 8.
.

In these days, the Turks perform all their superstitions in the Arabian
language, thinking it not only unmeet, but also an unlawful thing for the
common sort of persons, to understand their Mahometane mysteries An. Genfraeus
a^lae Tu^. l 2.
.

The Iacobite Priests do use a tongue at their Church ministrations, and
meetings which the vulgar people cannot comprehend Magd. eccl. hist Genesis ^ 2 c.
5.
.

The divine Liturgy among the Russians is compounded partly of the Greek, and
partly of the Selavonian language Alex Guag. de relig. Mose. page 2 ^0.
.

The Papists will have all divine Service, Prayers, and Sacraments, and that
through out the world, ministered only in the Latin tongue, but which few men
of the common people do understand: some of them holding, that it is not
necessary that we understand our prayers Test. Rhem. annot. p 463.
, and that prayers, not understood of the people, are acceptable to God Test.
Rhem. an. Mark. 21.6.
, and all of them maintaining that he is accursed, whosoever does affirm, how
the Mass ought to be celebrate only in a vulgar tongue Si quis dixerit,
lingu^ tantu^ vulgari Missam cele^^an debere, anathema ^it. Conc. Trid. s^ss 21
cap. 9.
.

25. Article. Of the Sacraments.
Sacraments 1 ordained of Christ, be not only badges, or tokens of Christian
men's profession: but rather they be certain 2 sure witnesses and effectual
signs of grace, and Gods good will toward us; by which he does work invisibly
in us, 3 and not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith in
him. 4 There be two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel,
that is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Those five commonly called
Sacraments, that is to say, 5 Confirmation, 6 Penance, 7 Orders, 8 Matrimony,
and 9 extreme Unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel,
being such as have grown partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles,
partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures, but yet have not like
nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they have not
any visible sign, or ceremony ordained of God.

10 The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be
carried about, but that we should duly use them. 11 And in such only, as
worthily receive the same, they have a wholesome effect, or operation: but they
that receive them unworthily, purchase to themselves damnation, as Saint Paul
says.

The Propositions.
1. The Sacraments ordained of Christ, be badges, or tokens of our profession
which be Christians. 2. The Sacraments be certain sure witnesses, and
effectual signs of grace, and God his good will toward us. 3. By the
Sacraments God does quicken, strengthen, and confirm our faith in him. 4.
Christ has ordained but two Sacraments in his holy Gospel. 5. Confirmation is
no Sacrament. 6. Penance is no Sacrament. 7. Orders is no Sacrament. 8.
Matrimony is no Sacrament. 9. Extreme unction is no Sacrament. 10. The
Sacraments are not to be abused, but rightly to be used of us all. 11. All
which receive the Sacraments, receive not therewithal the things signified by
the Sacraments.
1. Proposition.
The Sacraments ordained of Christ, he badges or tokens of our profession,
which be Christians.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe Sacraments are badges or tokens both of Christians, and of Christianity.

Of Christians. For by them are visibly discerned, the faithful, from Pagans:
and Christians from the Jews, Turks, and all profane Atheists.

Of Christianity. For, as Circumcision in the old Law, was a token how the
corrupt, and carnal affections of the mind should be subdued; and that the
Lord required not so much an outward of the body, as an inward circumcision of
the heart Deuteronomy. 18.16, 39, 6. Jer. 4.4. Acts 7.51. ^^^m 12.28. Phil. 3.3. Col.
^.11.
, so Baptism tells us, that being once dead unto sin, we are to live unto
righteousness, that all we that have been baptized unto Jesus Christ, have
been baptized unto his death, etc. and must walk in newness of life, etc Rom
5.3, etc.
. for we have put on Christ Gal. 3.26.
, by Baptism.

And as the Paschall Lamb was to the Jews a token that the flight of sin
should always be fresh in memory; and that it should be celebrated, not with
the old Leaven, neither in the Leaven of maliciousness, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth 1 Cor 5.8.
: so the participation of one Loaf, and of one Cup in the Lord his Supper,
does commend unto our consideration a sweet concord; a brotherly unanimity; and
a constant continuance in the true worship of God, without favoring of
Idolatry in any respect 1 Cor, 107.
.

This do the godly in any their Churches, and throughout the world both teach,
and testify Confess Hell. 1 c. 29. and 2. ar. 20. Aug. ar. 13. S^x. ar. 12.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Ungodly therefore and in a cursed state are they, which equal other things
with the Sacraments, to discern Christians from Pagans. So the Iacobites
imprint the sign of the Cross on their arms, foreheads, etc. to be known
for Christians Magdeburg. ec. hist. Con. 12 c. 3.
, which contemn the Sacraments as of none account. So do the Anabaptists
Dulling. con. Anab, l 2. c. 4. Althamar. council. Lo. page lo. 191.
.

There be (says D. Saravia) which hold how the Sacraments were to be
administered only at the first planting of the Church by the Apostles, and
Evangelists: but do not appertain unto us in these days D. Saravia. def.
tra. de diverse. min grad. cap. 14.
. It was also one of Matthew Hamants heresies, that the Sacraments are not
necessary in the Church of God Holinsh. chr. fol. 1299.
.

Which think the Sacraments are but only civil, and ceremonial badges of an
outward Church; such generally be all Atheists, and hypocrites; particularly,
the Messalians Theodor. lib. c. 9. c. 11.
, and Family of Love, who think that for obedience sake to Magistrates, the
Sacraments are to be received Pattern of the pref. Tem.
, but are to none effect to the perfect ones in the Family R^msels confess.
.

2. Proposition.
The Sacraments be certain sure witnesses, and effectual signs of Grace, and
God his good will toward us.

The proof from Gods Word.
INfinitely does God declare his unspeakeable, and incomprehensible good will
to man-ward, yet in these days by none outward things more notably, and
effectually, than by the Sacraments: For

Of Baptism says Christ: He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved
Mark. 16.16.
: and Peter, Amend your lives, and be baptized every one, etc. for the
remission of sins Acts 2.38.
: and Paul, Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and
gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing
of water through the Word, etc Ephesians. 5.25.
.

And of the Lords Supper says our Savior Christ, touching the Bread, This is
my body, which is given Luke 22.19.
, and broken for you 1 Cor. 11.24.
: and of the Cup, This is my blood of the New Testament, that is shed for many
for the remission of sins Mark. 26.28 Luke 22.20.
.

This truth do the purer Churches of these days every where acknowledge
Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 20. 22. and 2 c. 19 20, 21. Bohe. c 11. 12, 13. Gal ar.
34, 38. Belgr. ^ 33. 35. August. ar. 9. 13. Wit. ar. 10 19. Suev. ar. 16. 18.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Contrary hereunto the Papists erroneously do hold, that

The Sacraments of the new Law do confer grace ex opere operato Council. Trid
sess. 7 can 8.
.

The Sacraments of the Old, and New Testament in this do differ, for that the
Sacraments of the Old Testament did only shadow forth salvation, but the
Sacraments of the new did confer, and work salvation Council Flo^.
, and do justify (not only signify God his good will toward us) by reason
of the work done, which is the outward Sacraments Bonavent lib. 4. (...). 1
(...). 5. Gab. Biel. l. 4. di^t. 1 p. 3.
.

3. Proposition.
By the Sacraments God does quicken, strengthen, and confirm our faith in him.

The proof from Gods Word.
BE baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
your sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, says S. Peter
Acts 2.38.
.

Christ gave himself for the Church that he might sanctify it, and cleanse
it by the washing of water through the Word Ephesians. 5.25, 26.
.

The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? says Saint Paul 1 Cor. 10.19.
. The same is affirmed by the reformed Churches Conf. Helv 1. ar. 21. and 2. c.
10. 20, 21. ar 6. Bohem. c. 17. 12. Gal. ar. 34. Belg. ar. 33 34. Aug. ar. 13.
Saxon. ar. 13. Suc. c. 17.
.

Howbeit this faith is not necessarily tied unto the visible signs, and
Sacraments. For

Without the Sacraments many have lived, and dyed, who pleased God, and are, no
doubt, saved, either in respect of their own faith (as we are to think of all
the godly, both men who were borne, and dyed before the institution of
Circumcision, in the wilderness, and in the time of grace, etc. yet by some
extremity, could not receive the Seal of the covenant) and women, who before,
and under the Law for many years, were partakers for no Sacrament, and never
of one Sacrament, or that they be heirs of the promise.

Some have faith: for they receive any of the Sacraments.

So had Abraham Romans 49.^0.
, the Jews, unto whom Peter preached Acts 2 41.
, the Samaritanes Acts 8.12.
, the Church Acts 8.37.
; Cornelius the Centurion: and have the godly of discretion wheresoever not yet
baptized Acts 10.42.
.

Some neither before, nor at the instant, nor yet afterward, though daily they
receive the Sacraments, will have faith; such are like unto Judas Ioh 12.26.
, Ananias and Sapphira Acts 5.
, Simon Magus Acts 1 13.
, the old Israelites 1 Cor 10 5.
, and the wicked Corinthians 1 Cor. 11 37.
.

In some the Sacraments do effectually work in process of time, by the help
of Gods Word read or preached, which engenders faith Romans 10.1^.
, such is the estate principally of Infants elected unto life, and salvation,
and increasing in years.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Therefore do they err, which teach or hold, that

They never go to heaven, which die without the Seals of the covenant: so
think the Papists of infants which dye unbaptized Iavel. Phil. Contract. 4. de
relicit. Chr c. 3 and Tigner. institu^. Theol. c. 16. sect. 4, etc. Spec
peregr. quae^t. doc. 1. c. 3 q. 5.
.

They are damned (though they receive the Sacraments) that will not receive
them, after the received, and appointed manner of the Church of Rome Council
Trid. sess 7. c. 13.
.

There is no way of salvation but by faith Lear disc.
, hereby excluding infinite souls from the kingdom of heaven, which depart
from this world before they do believe.

None believe but such as are baptized, say the Papists Test. Rhem. an. Gal.
5.27.
, as hear the Word of God preached, say the Puritanes Lear. ds. c. p. 3.
.

The Sacraments give grace ex opere operato Test. Rhem. an. mar p. 357.
, and bring faith ex opere operato Ibid. an. mar. p. 391.
.

The Sacrament of Baptism, is the cause of the salvation of Infants Ibid an.
1. Pet. ^.21.
.

4 Proposition.
Christ has ordained but two Sacraments in his Gospel.

The proof from Gods Word.
A Sacrament, according to the etymology of the word (as the Schoolmen do
write) is a sign of an holy thing, which being true, then have there bin, and
still are, by so many above either two, or seven Sacraments, as there be, and
have been above two or seven things, which are signs of sacred and holy
things.

But according to the nature thereof, a Sacrament is a covenant of God his
favor to man-ward, confirmed by some outward sign, or Seal instituted by
himself: which also has been sometimes special either to some men, and that
extraordinarily by things natural sometimes, as the tree of Life was to Adam
G^n. 2.3.
, and the Rainbow to Noah Genesis 9.9, 13.
; and sometimes by things supernatural, as the smoking furnace was to Abraham
Genesis 15.17, 18.
, the Fleece of wool, to Gedeon Judge 6.37.
, and the Dial, to Ezeckiah 2 King. 20 7.11. Isa. 38.8.
; or to some Nation, as the Sacrifices, Circumcision, and the Paschall Lamb
was to the Jews.

And sometimes general to the whole Church Militant, and ordinary, as in the
time of the Gospel. And then a Sacrament is defined to be a ceremony ordained
immediately by Christ himself, who by some earthly, and outward element, does
promise everlasting favor, and felicity to such, as with true faith, and
repentance, do receive the same. And such Sacraments in the New Testament we
find only to be Baptism Matthew. 18.19. Mark. 16.16. ^ Ioh. 3.5. Acts 2.38.
, and the Lords Supper Luke 22.19. Joh. 6.53. 1 Cor. 11.24.
.

This is the judgment also of the Churches Protestant Conf. Helv. 1. ar. 20.
and 2. c. 19 Basil. ar. 5. sect. 2. Gal. ar. 35. Belg ar. 33. Saxon ar. 12.
Suev. ar. 16.
.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
In a contrary opinion are diverse, and namely,

The Jews, and Turks: for they deny all the Sacraments of the Church, as we
do hold them.

The Eutychites, who say that prayer only, and not the Sacraments, are to be
used Theodoret.
.

The Schwenkfeldians, who contemn not only the word preached, but the
Sacraments also, as superfluous, depending wholly upon revelations.

The Banisterians, who think there will be a time, and that in this world,
when we shall need no Sacraments Unfold of untruths.
.

The Papists, who publish

That we leave out no less then six of the seven Sacraments How let reas. 7.
.

How there be seven Sacraments of the New Testament Catech. Canis. Vaux.
.

That he is accursed that shall say there be either more, or fewer then seven
Sacraments: or that any of them is not verily, and properly a sacrament; or
that they be not all seven instituted of Christ himself Test. Rhem. an Jam
4.24. Council. Trid. sess. cap. 1.
.

That there are seven Sacraments, whereof two are voluntary, and at the
discretion of men to be taken, or not, as Matrimony, and holy Orders; and five
are necessary, and must be taken; and of these five, three, to wit, Baptism,
Confirmation, and Orders, are but once to be taken, because they imprint an
indelible Character in the soul of the receivers: and four be reiterable, and
may often be received, as the Sacrament Eucharisticall, Matrimony, Penance, and
extreme Unction, because at their first ministration, they leave in the soul
no indelible Character Stella Cleticorum.
.

5. Proposition. Confirmation is no Sacrament.
Touching Confirmation, the sentence, and judgment of the true Church is that
rightly used, as it was in the Primitive Chured, it is no Sacrament, but a part
of Christian discipline, profitable for the whole Church of God. For the
ancient Confirmation was nothing else then an examination of such as in their
infancy had received the Sacrament of Baptism, and were then, being of good
discretion, able to yield an account of their belief, and to testify with
their own mouths what their Sureties in their names had promised at their
Baptism: which confession being made, and a promise of perseverance in the
Faith by them given, the Bishop by sound doctrine, gave advice, and godly
exhortations, confirmed them in that good profession: and laying his hands upon
them, prayed for the increase of Gods gifts and graces in their minds.

The Popish confirmation all Churches of God with us utterly do dislike, as no
Sacrament at all, instituted by Christ Conf. Saxon. ar. 16. Wittem. c. 11. See
the Prop. immediately precedent.
.

Errors, and adversaries of this truth.
Contrariwise the Synagogue of Rome teaches, that Confirmation is a Sacrament,
whereby the grace that was given in Baptism, is confirmed, and made strong by
the seven gifts of of the holy Ghost.

Of which their Confirmation they give us four things principally to observe,
viz.

1. The substance, or matter, which is holy Chrisme confect, (as they say) and
made of Oil olive, and Balm consecrated by a Bishop.

See Canis. catech. chap. 4
2. The form, and manner of ministering the same, consisting of the words of the
Bishop, which are, I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and confirm thee
with the Chrisme of salvation, in the name of the Father, etc. and of the
actions both of a Godfather, or Godmother, already confirmed, holding up the
child to the Bishop: and of the Bishop, crossing him which is to be confirmed
on the forehead, with oil, and next, striking the party confirmed on the ear.

3. The minister who must be a Bishop, and none inferior Minister Nunquam erit
Christianus, nisi in Confirmatione Episcopali fuerit confirmatus. De consecra.
did. 5. cap. and Jejuru.
.

4. The effect, or effects rather. For by Confirmation they say, that

Sins are pardoned, and remitted.

The grace of Baptism is made perfect.

Such become men in Christ, who before were children.

Grace is given boldly to confess the name of Christ, and all things belonging
to a Christian man.

The holy Ghost is given to the full,

And perfect strength of the mind is attained.

But in so teaching, dangerous and very damnable doctrine do they deliver. For

It is an error that confirmation is a Sacrament: because it has no
institution from God, which is necessary to all, and every sacrament, inasmuch
as a sacrament cannot be ordained but by God only, even as the Papists
themselves do confess Catech. Trid. tit. de Confit.
.

To say that Popish confirmation is grounded upon Gods word, is to speak foul
untruths. For in the Scripture there is mention, neither of the matter, that it
must be Chrisme, and that made of oil olive, and Balm, and the same
consecrated of a Bishop; nor of the form, that either a Bishop must sign the
party to be baptized, with the sign of the Cross; or that a Godfather, etc.
must be thereat; nor of the Minister, that of necessity he must be a Bishop,
that is to confirm: nor of the effects, that thereby sins are pardoned, and
released, and Baptism consummated, and made perfect.

It is an error to say, there is any other ointment given to the strengthening
of the Church Militant, besides the Holy Ghost. Ier. 2.27.

It is an error to maintain, that any Bishop can give heavenly graces to any
creature.

It is an error to ascribe salvation unto Chrisme, and not only unto Christ.

It savoureth of Donatisme, to measure the dignity of the Sacraments, by the
worthiness of the Ministers.

It is an error to say, that men cannot be perfect Christians, without Popish
Confirmation.

It is an error, that by confirmation the holy Ghost is given to the full.

6. Proposition. Penance is no Sacrament.
Touching penance, the Papists do publish four things to be noted, whereof
none of them is truly grounded upon the Word of God.

Canis. Catec. cap. 4. Catec. Trid. de poen.
First, the matter, which they do say is partly the actions of the person
penitent, which are sufficient contrition of his heart: perfect confession of
all his sins, and that in particular, with all the circumstances, as of time,
place, etc. and satisfaction by deeds, which makes an amends for all his
offenses: and partly the absolution of the Priest.

Secondly, the Form, which in the Priest is the words of Absolution, which he
utters over the sinner: in the person penitent, it is his kneeling down at
the Priests feet; his making the sign of the Cross upon his breast; and his
saying, Benedicite, to his ghostly father. The Priest (say they) bears the
person of God, and is the lawful judge over the penitent; and may both absolve
from the guilt of sin, and inflict a punishment: according to the offense.

Thirdly, the minister, who ordinarily is the Curate of every parish; but
extraordinarily, and in the time of great necssitie, or by license, is any
Priest. And yet some sins are so grievous, as none may absolve but either the
Bishop, or his Penitentiary, as the crime of Incest, breaking of vows,
Church-robbing, Heresy, adultery: and some again none remit, or pardon, but
the Pope only, or his Legate, as burning of Churches: violent striking a
Priest; counterfeiting of the Popes Bulls, etc.

Fourthly, and last of all, the effect. Hereby, they say, the penitent sinner
is purged, absolved, and made as clean from all sin, as when he was newly
baptized, and besides, enriched with spiritual gift, and graces.

The consideration hereof has moved, besides the Church of England, all other
Churches reformed, to show their detestation of this new Sacrament, as having
no warrant from Gods Word Conf. Helv. 1. c. 14. 19. Bohe. c. 4. August. ar. 3.
11, 12. Saxon. ar. 16. 17. Wit. ar. 13. 15. Suc. 28.
.

The blasphemies are outrageous, and the errors many, and monstrous, comprised
in this doctrine of Popish penance. For neither can the matter of this their
Sacrament, nor the form, nor the minister, nor the effect be drawn from the
Word of God.

They say penance is a sacrament, and yet can they show no element it has to
make it a sacrament.

Their Contrition is against the truth: For no man is, or can be sufficiently
contrite for his sins.

To confess all sins, and that one after another, with all circumstances,
unto a Priest, as it is impossible: so it is never enjoined by God, nor has
ever been practiced by any of Gods Saints.

That any man in any measure, can satisfy for his sins, it is blasphemy to
say, and against the merits of Christ. Test. Rhem. in Colos. 1.26.
And yet do the Papists teach it, as also that one man may satisfy for
another.

An untruth is it, that any Priest, Bishop, or Pope, has power at his will to
forgive sins; or can enjoyne any punishment that can make an amends unto God
for the least offense.

If penance purge men, and make them clean from all sin, then is there a time,
and that very often in this life, when men in this life be perfect; which
tends greatly to the error of the Catharans, Donatists, and Pelagians.

The doctrine of the Papists, that such persons as willingly depart out of this
world without their Shrift are damned, is damnable doctrine, and to be
eschewed: and yet it is dispersed every where in their books Vaux catec. c. 4.
Catech. Trid. de poenit. Test. Rhem. annot. Matthew. 12.31. Hills quartron. 13.
reas. p. 65. Pel. de Seto. meth. confess. par. 4. p. 156. a.
.

7. Proposition.
Orders is no Sacrament.

The Churches of England, and of other places reformed, do acknowledge an
order of making ministers in the Church of God, where all things are to be done
by order. But that Order is a Sacrament, none but disordered Papists will say:
and yet they observe none order in speaking of the same. For among them,

Canis. Catec.
Some do make seven orders: whereof some they call inferior, and some superior:
the inferior be the orders first of Porters, whose office is to keep the
door: to expel the wicked, and to let in the faithful: next, Exorcists, or
Conjurers, which have power to expel the devils: thirdly, Lectors, or Readers,
who are to read Lessons, and books in the Church: and fourthly, Acolytes, or
Candlebearers, whose office is to bear Cruets to the Altar, with wine and
water, and to carry about Candles and Tapers.

The superior is the order of Subdeacons, Deacons, and of Priests. The
Subdeacons are to read the Epistle or Service time, to prepare necessaries for
ministration; and to assist the Priest in ministration. The Deacons duty is to
read the Gospel, and also to assist the Priest in ministration. The Priest his
part, and office is, to minister Sacraments, that is to say, Baptism, Penance,
the Eucharist, and to sacrifice for the quick and the dead, Anoiling of the
sick, and Matrimony.

Others, numbering the seven sacraments, do quite overpasse in silence the
sacrament of Order, and in place thereof mention the sacrament of Priesthood,
as Vaux, of Bishopdome, as Hugo the Cardinal, or Archbishopdome, as W. Paris.

These seven Orders, say some Papists, as Lombard Lib. disc. 24. cap. 1.
, are seven sacraments: which added to the other six, make 13. sacraments: and
are from Christ, and his Apostles time Test. Rh^m a^^ ot. marg. p. 571.
, yea were instituted even by Christ himself Ib^d annot. Luke 22.19.
.

Which their assertions are besides the Word of God. For in the holy Scripture,

Where can it be seen that either orders, as some can make one, or seven
Sacraments; or Priesthood, as others think, is a Sacrament? what element has
it? what form? what promise? what institution from Christ?

Where can any of those hideous titles of Porter, Exorcist, etc. be found
ascribed to any Minister of the new Testament? or the manner of their creation,
or offices established?

Some Papists themselves do write, that all inferior orders are not grounded
upon Scripture, but some of them come by tradition Majoran. clyp milit. eccles
lib. 1. c. 9.
. And Peter Lombard says plainly, that five of the seven Orders neither can
be read in the Word of God; nor yet were heard of in the Primitive Church Lomb.
lib. 4. diss. 24.
.

Where is it appointed to the Ministers of the new Testament, only to minister
Sacraments? or to minister more then two, viz. Baptism and the Lords Supper?

By what one place of Scripture have Priests authority to offer sacrifice, and
that for the quick, and the dead also?

Where without extreme blasphemy can they show that our Savior Christ was a
Porter, an Exorcist, an Acolyte, etc. and not always in his Church, a King, a
Prophet, and a Priest?

8. Proposition. Matrimony is no Sacrament.
Matrimony is a state of life, holy, and honorable among all men Heb. 1^.4.
. Howbeit, to say that the same is a Sacrament instituted, and that by Christ,
as the Papists do Conc. T^id. Ses. 7. cap. 1. Test. Rhem. annot; Ephesians. 5.32.
Catech. Vaux. Canis.
, we cannot be induced, and that for diverse reasons.

For marriage, or the wedded state, was never commanded by God to be taken for
a Sacrament.

Again, it has neither outward element; nor prescribed form; nor promise of
salvation, as a Sacrament should, and Baptism, and the Lords Supper have.

Besides, Matrimony may be entered into, or not, at our discretion. But it is
not at our choice to be partakers, or not to participate of the Sacraments, if
we may come by them.

Moreover, Matrimony was ordained even by God himself in the time of man's
innocence Genesis 24. Matthew. 19.4, 5, 6.
, but the Sacraments of the New Testament were instituted by Christ.

Finally, it was no sacrament to the Fathers before and in the time of the Law;
and therefore is no sacrament to us.

Hereunto subscribe the Churches of God elsewhere Conf. Helv. 1. ar. 20. 37.
and 1. c. 19 29. Basil ar. 5. Bohe. c. 9. Gal. ar. 24. 35. Belg. ar. 33. Aug.
ar. 25. 6. Saxon. art. 12. 18. Wittemb. c. 21. 26. Suc. c. 12. 15.
; all of us opposing our selves against the manifold adversities of this truth:
whereof

Some have too highly conceived of the wedded state; such are the Papists, when
they will have it to be a sacrament, as has been said; and such were the
Vigilantian Bishops, who would take no men into the Clergy, except they would
be married first D. Heron advers. Virgil.
.

Others again too basely, and badly think of Matrimony, defending (some of
them,) how it is not meet that any man or woman should marry at all; such were
the Gnostics c 1. Epiphan.
, the Marcionites Tertul. contra Mar. lib. 4.
, the Tatians Epiphan.
, the Montanists Eusebius.
, the Manichies D. August. de haeres.
, the Hierarcites Ibid. August.
, and the Apostolikes Epiphan.
.

That any man, or woman should twice marry, the husband or wife being dead; of
this mind were the Catharans D. August. de haeres.
, Origin D. Origin. in ^o^. 19.
, and Tertullian Tertul. lib. de monog.
.

That some kind of persons should never marry, as namely, those which have
taken holy Orders Test. Rhem annot.
, or be of spiritual kindred Tim. 3.2. See more afterward, artic. 32. 1. Pet.
Lombard. lib 4. did. 42. By spiritual kindred which is between the party that
is baptized, or confirmed, and his Godfathers, and Godmothers, and also between
the Godfather, or Godmother, and the parents of the child baptized, or
confirmed (matrimony may not be either contracted, or continued) Canis. catech.
c. 4.
; these errors the Papists do hold.

Lastly, that any persons should not be married but by popish priests; thinking
all those men and women not lawfully married, which are coupled together by
Protestant ministers: and therefore have new married such persons. So did the
Papists both in the Low countries Supplic. of the Prince of Orange unto King
Philip.
, and in France Calvin. epist. fol. 266. and Chron. of France.
.

8. Proposition. Extreme unction is no Sacrament.
The Papists do take Anoyling of the sick (which they call extreme Unction)
for a Sacrament, whereof (as they write)

The matter is oil hallowed by a Bishop; wherewith the sick person is anoyled
upon the Eyes, Ears, Mouth, Nose, Hands, and Feet.

The form of the words, which the Priest speaks, when he does anoint the
sick person in the foresaid places, is, saying: By this Oil God forgive thee
thy sins, which thou have committed by thine Eyes, Nose, Ears, and Mouth, by
thine Hands and by thy Feet: all the Angels, Archangels, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, Widows, Infants, heal
thee.

The Minister thereof usually is a Priest; but may be any other Christian.

The effect of anoyling is to purge, and put away venial sins, committed by
mis-spending of our senses; as also sins forgotten.

In this Antichristian doctrine many errors be contained. For,

In respect of the matter, the Papists make of a greasy matter, a spiritual
ointment; whereas there is none ointment spiritual but the holy Ghost.

In respect of the form, the only propitiator, and mediator between God and
man, Christ Jesus is blasphemed; and the merit; and power of his death,
ascribed unto greasy oil. Besides, Christ is not acknowledged for the only
Savior of mankind, and Physician of our souls; but other Physicians he
called upon besides him.

In respect of the Minister, they hold how any man has power to forgive
sins, which belongs unto God alone: also, that other men, yea women (and
not the Ministers of the Word only) may be the Ministers of the Sacraments.

In respect of the effect, they teach us (which is utterly untrue) that neither
all sins be mortal; nor that Christ has cleansed such as be his, from all
their sins, by his precious blood.

10. Proposition.
The Sacraments are not to be abused, but rightly to be used of us all.

The proof from Gods Word.
In the Word of God the right use of the Sacraments, and the ends of their
institution are evidently set down. For

Concerning Baptism, Christ says, Teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc
Math. 28.29.
. He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved Math. 19.16.
.

Touching the Lords Supper, says our Savior, of the Bread, Take eat, etc.
and of the Cup, Drink ye all of it Math. 26.26, 27.
: and St. Paul, The cup of blessing, which we bless, is it not the communion
of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ 1 Cor. 10.16.
?

This truth do the Churches reformed by their Confessions subscribe unto Conf.
Helv. 1 ar. 22. and 2. c. 20. and 2 c 20, 21. Bohem c. 11. 13. Gal. ar. 35 38.
Belg^^. 34. 35. Aug. ar. 2. 9. Sax ar. 13. 15. Wit^ c. 10. 19. Su^v. c. 13. 18.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Then greatly do they sin, who either do not use the Sacraments at all, as
do the Scwenfeldians See in (...) art. prop. 1.
, or minister them but unto whom they list: so is Baptism of the Servetians
Calvin. epiph. 118.
, and Anabaptists Sl^^dan. c^mmon. l. 9.
, ministered only unto elder persons, and denied unto Infants, and so is the
same Sacrament, of the Marcionites, ministered unto single persons, but denied
unto married folks ^ert. contra Marcion. lib. 1. and 4.
: or do abuse them.

So abused is baptism by them who baptize things without reason, yea sometimes
without life, or sense: so have the Papists baptized both Bells, and Babels, as
the great Bell of S. John de Lateran at Rome, by Pope John the 14. who named it
John after his own name Cypr. Valera of the Pope etc, p. 55.
and the great Bell of Christ's Church in Oxford, D. Humfre. (...) su^ll^. p. 81.
which D. Tresham the Vice chancellor, named Mary; Babels, as the Duke of Alvas
chief Standard, which he used in the Low Countries, was baptized by Pius
Quintus. Ann. 1568. and called Margaret by the said Pope D. Morison. de depray.
R^^. Orig page 24.
, and so the Cataphrygians baptized the dead bodies of men Philastrius.
.

Again, Baptism was abused by the Marcionites, when they baptized the living
for the dead Tert. contra Mar. lib. 4.
, also by the Novatians D. Cypr ^d Julian.
, and Papists Suc. ar. 23. prop 3.
, when they rebaptized Infants before baptized, as they termed them, by
Heretics.

And so abused was the Lords Supper by certain Heretics, condemned in a
Council at Carthage, whose manner was to thrust the Sacrament into the mouths
of dead men Conc. Carthag. 3. can. 6.
, and is by the Papists, whose guise is to use it magically, Art. of the peace
between Spain and Eng. ar. 1 1604 ar. 2. concer. a mother. See more in the Art.
of Bap the L. Supper also, ar. 28. prop 5.
as a salve against bodily sickness, and adversity: also to carry the same
about pompously, and superstitiously in the open streets, to be adored of the
beholders.

11. Proposition.
All which receive the Sacraments, receive not therewithal the things
signified by the Sacraments.

The proof from Gods Word.
WE read in the holy Scriptures; that

Some persons do receive the Sacraments, and the things signified by the
Sacraments, which are the remission of sins, and other spiritual graces from
God: and so received was the Sacrament of Baptism, of Cornelius Acts 10.47.
, and the Lords Supper, of the good Disciples Mark 18.26, etc.
, and the godly Corinthians John 13.22^
.

Some again receive the Sacraments, but not the things by them signified: so
received was Baptism of Simon Magus Acts 8.13.
, and the Lords Supper of Judas John 13.26.
, and so receive the Atheists, Libertines, and impenitent persons 1 Cor. 11.17,
etc.
.

And some receive not the Sacraments at all, and yet are partakers of the
things by the Sacraments signified: such a communicant was the Thief upon the
Cross Luke 23.43, 44.
.

This makes us to conceive well both of those men, and women, which would, and
yet cannot communicate in the public, and Christian assemblies; and of the
children of Christian parents, which depart this world unbaptized.

Furthermore, it is apparent, how

Salvation is promised to such as are baptized, yet not simply in respect of
their baptism, but if they do believe Mar 16.16.
.

Again, St. Paul says, Whosoever shall eat the bread, or drink the Cup of
the Lord

Unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ 1 Cor. 11 27.
.

And this the purer Churches every where do acknowledge Confess. Helv. 1. ar.
10 and 2. c. 19 21: Basil. ar. 3. 6. Bohem. c. 11. 13. Gal. ar. 24. 36, 37.
Bell. ar. 33 35. Aug in 3 13. Saxon. ar. 13. 24. Wit. c. 10. Suet. c 17
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
The Papists therefore be in a wrong opinion, which deliver that,

The Sacraments are not only Seals, but also causes of grace Test Rhem. an.
1. Pet. 3.21
, and

The Sacraments do give grace, even because they be delivered and received, ex
opere operato Ibid. annot. marg. p. 357.
.

26. Article. Of the unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the
effect of the Sacraments.
Although in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with the good, and
sometime the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the Word, and
Sacraments: yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name but in
Christ's, and do minister by his commission, and authority, we may use their
ministry, both in hearing the Word of God, and in the receiving the
Sacraments. Neither is the effect of Christ's ordinance taken away by their
wickedness, nor the Grace of Gods gifts diminished from such as by faith and
rightly do receive the Sacraments ministered unto them, which are effectual,
because of Christ's institution, and promise, although they be ministered by
evil men.

Nevertheless it appertains to the discipline of the Church, that enquiry be
made of evil ministers: and that they he accused by those that have knowledge
of their offenses, and finally, being found guilty, by just judgment be
deposed.

The Propositions.
1. The effect of the Word, and Sacraments, is not hindered by the badnesse of
ministers. 2. Evil ministers are to be searched out, convicted, and deposed,
but orderly, and by the discipline of the Church.
1. Proposition.
The effect of the Word, and the Sacraments, is not hindered by the badnesse of
ministers.

The proof from Gods Word.
OF the ministers ecclesiastical the Church is to conceive neither too
sinisterly, as though their unworthiness could make the Word and Sacraments
the less effectual to such as worthily do hear, and receive them: nor on the
other side too highly, as if the dignity of their calling were cause good
enough, that what they do, or say ex opere operato, take happy effects.

These things from the Scriptures are manifest, which teach us, that wicked
ministers, even the Scribes and Pharisees fitting in Moses chair Matthew. 23.1.
, and preaching Christ, though through envy, strife, and contention Phil. 1.15.
, are to be heard; and many administer the Sacraments; as did the ordinary
Priests among the Jews, whereof very many, both before, and after that our
Savior came into the world, were most wicked men: and the best are but the
Ministers of God 1 Cor. 4.1.
, and Gods laborers 1 Cor. 3.9.
.

Also the purer Churches bear witness hereunto Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 15. 20,
22. Hell. 2. 1. 18, 21 Bohe. c. 11. 12. Gal. ar. 3. 35. Aug ar. 8. Sax ar. 1^.
13. Wit. ar 31. Suc. ar. 13
.

Neither is he (whosoever) that planteth any thing, neither he that waters,
but God that gives the increase, says Saint Paul 1 Cor. 3.7.
. And a sign of a good spirit is it, to regard not so much who speaks, a
ministers, or what is uttered, and offered from God.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
The due consideration of the premises will both settle us the more firmly in
the truth; and make us the more carefully to abhor all adversaries thereof,
as in old time were the Donatists, and the Petilians, who taught that the
Sacraments are holy, when they be administered by holy men, but not else D
August. in Psa. 100. and 32. Idem contra P^til. l. 1. c 4.
: also the Apostolikes, or Henricians, who had a fancy that he was no Bishop,
which was a wicked man Magdeburg. eccles. hist. C^nt. ^2. cap. 5. fol ^44.
.

Among the Fathers also, Cyprian, and Origin were not found in this point. For
Cyprian published, that no minister could rightly baptize, who was not himself
endued with the holy Ghost D. Cyprian, epist. lib. 1. lib. ad Mag. ep. 6.
: he further delivered, that whosoever do communicate with a wicked minister,
do sin Ibid. ep. 4.
.

Origin held, that in vain did any minister either bind, or lose, who was
himself bound with the chains of sin, and wickedness D Orig in Math. ^1
act. 1.
.

Such adversaries in our time be the Anabaptists, the Family of Love, the
disciplinarians (usually termed Puritans;) the Sabbatarians; the Brownists; and
Papists. For

Wilk. against the l a ar. 14. p. 66.
The Anabaptists will not have the people to use the ministry of evil
ministers: and think the service of wicked Ministers unprofitable, and not
effectual: affirming that no man, who is himself faulty, can preach the truth
to others.

The Family of Love do say, that no man can minister the upright service, or
ceremonies of Christ, but the regenerate H. N. evang. c. 23. 6. 2.
, also that wicked men cannot teach the truth Fam 1. epist. to M. Rogers.
.

The disciplinarian Puritanes do bring all ministers which cannot preach, and
their services into detestation. For their doctrine is, that

Where there is no Preacher, there ought to be no minister of the Sacraments
Lear. disc. p. 62.
.

None must minister the Sacraments which do not preach T. C. 1. c. p. 104.
.

The Sacrament is not a Sacrament, if it be not joined to the Word of God
preached Ber. de Loquercas of the Church c. 10.
.

It is a sacrilege, to separate the ministration of the word preached, from
the Sacraments Lear. disc. p. 60.
.

Of these men's opinions be the Sabbatarians among us. For their doctrine is to
the common people, that unless they leave their unpreaching ministers every
Sabbath day, and go to some place where the Word is preached, they do profane
the Sabbath, and subject themselves unto the curse of God D. B. doc. of the
Sab. 2. book p. 173.
.

So the Brownists; No man is to communicate (say they) where there is a blind,
or dumb ministry R. H. on Psalm. 122.
.

The Papists do cross this truth, but after another sort: For

Pope Hildebrand decreed and commanded, that no man should hear Mass from the
mouth of a Priest which has a wife B. Jewel on Ag. 1. ser.
.

The Rhemists do publish, how

The Sermons of heretics (and so term they all Protestant ministers) must
not be heard, Test. Rhem. annot. tit. 3. 10.
Ibid. an. Mar. 3.13.
though they preach the truth. Their prayers and sacraments are not acceptable
to God, but are the howling of wolves.

2. Proposition.
Evil ministers are to be searched out, convicted, and deposed but orderly,
and by the discipline of the Church.

The wicked, and evil ministers must not always be endured in the Church of
God. For they are the evil and unprofitable servants Math. 25.26.
, the eyes, which do offend Math. 18.9.
, the unsavory salt Math. 5.13.
, which are carefully to be seen unto; and if admonitions will not serve,
deposed: yet orderly, and by the discipline of the Church. For that God which
appointed a government for the civil state, has also given authority unto his
Church to punish offenders, according to the quality of their transgressions.
And so may we read in the Word of God.

Let the Church say our Savior Math. 18.17.
.

Let such a one by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, be delivered unto Satan,
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of
our Lord Jesus, says Saint Paul e.

So the neighbor Churches Helv. 2. c. 18. Bohe. 2. c. 18. ar 11. Suev. ar. 35.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Then deceived, and out of the way, are the Brownists, and Barrowists, which
are of mind, that

Private persons in themselves have authority to depose unmeet ministers; and
to punish malefactors R.H. in Psalm. 121. p. 117.
.

Every particular member of a Church in himself has power to examine the
manner of administering the Sacraments, etc. to call men unto repentance, etc
Bar. disco. p. 56.
, to reproove the faults of the Church; and to forsake that Church, which will
not reform her faults upon any private admonition Giff. repl. unto Bar. and
Gr. in the end.
.

For want of the due execution of discipline against persons offending, and
malefactors Brown tract. of the life, and mean Bred. detect. p. 121.
, both women may leave their husbands (as some have done,) and husbands their
wives, and go where it is in force. See more in Art. 33. Prop. 1.

27. Article. Of Baptism.
1 Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, whereby
Christian men are discerned from other that be not Christened, but 2 it is also
a sign of regeneration, or new birth, whereby as by an instrument, they that
receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church, the promises of the
forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to the Sons of God, by the holy
Ghost, are visibly signed, and sealed: Faith is confirmed, and grace increased
by virtue of prayer unto God.

3 The Baptism of young children is in any wise to be retained in the Church,
as most agreeable with the institution of Christ.

The Propositions.
1. Baptism is a sign of Profession, and mark of difference whereby
Christians are discerned from other men, that be no Christians. 2. Baptism is
a sign or seal of the Regeneration, or new birth of Christians. 3. Infants,
and young children, by the Word of God, are to be baptized.
1. Proposition.
Baptism is a sign of Profession, and mark of difference, whereby Christians
are discerned from other men, that be no Christians.

The proof from Gods Word.
HOw the Sacraments are tokens: and therefore that Baptism is a sign of the
true Church; which be Christians, it is apparent from Gods Word in the fifth
proposition of the nineteenth Article before going; and the same do the
Churches of God acknowledge Conf. Helv 1 ar 20 and 2. c. 19.20. B^l^. (...). 2.
Gal. ^^. ^^ Belg. ^r. ^4. (...). 13. (...) ar. 12.
.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
This declares us to be sound Christians, and

Not Nazarens, who were with the Jews circumcised, and baptized with
Christians, and so (as Hierome writes of them) were neither Jews, nor
Christians D. Heron. in epist. ad Aug. (...) haeres.
.

Not Manicheans, which baptize not any D. August.
.

Not false Christians 1 Cor. 15.
, or Marcionites Tertul. co^^^^ Mar. lib. 4.
, which did baptize the living for the dead. Which Marcionites also denied
Baptism unto all married persons, and baptized none but persons single,
virgins, widows, and women divorced from their husbands Tertul. Ibid.
.

Not Origenists, who maintain a Baptism by fire; as also that after the
resurrection of our bodies, we shall have need of Baptism Origin. in Luke hom.
14.
.

Not of Matthew Hamants opinion, (that Norfolk Heretic) which stood in it to
the death, that Baptism is not necessary in the Church Holinsh. chr. fol. 1299.
.

Not Anabaptists, which number Baptism among things indifferent, and so to be
used, or refused, at our discretion Bullin. contra Anabap. lib. 2. cap. 1.
.

Not Familists, which say there is no true Baptism, but only among themselves
H N. 1. exhor. cap. 7.
.

Not Papists, who both baptize Bells, and Babels, as before has bin showed, art.
25. prop. 10. and also make the vow, and profession of the Monachall, or life
of a Monk, as good a token of Christians, as Baptism T. Aquinas 1.21. de
ingre. ^elig p. 119.
.

2. Proposition.
Baptism is a sign or seal of the Regeneration, or new birth of Christians.

The proof from Gods Word.
Baptism, of S. Paul is called the washing of the new Birth Tit. 3.5.
, of others, the Sacrament of the new Birth, to signify how they which rightly
(as all do not) receive the same See before ar. 25. p. 11.
, are ingrafted into the Body of Christ 1 Cor. 12.13
, as by a seal be assured from God, that their sins be pardoned, and
forgiven Acts. 2.38.
, and themselves adopted for the children of God Tit. 3.5.
, confirmed in the faith Mark 19.16.
, and do increase in grace, by virtue of prayer unto God Act. 2.14, 42.
.

And this is the constant doctrine of all Churches Protestant and reformed
Conf. Helv. ar. 21. and 2 c. 20 Boh. c. 12. Gal. ar. 35. Belg. ar. 34. Aug. ar.
9. Saxon. ar. 23. Wittem. c. 10. Suev. c. 19.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
But no part of the true Church thinks as many old heretics, viz. that

The baptized of the Orthodoxall ministers, are to be rebaptized, as said the
Novatians Cyp. ad Joh.
.

Original sin is not pardoned in infants, as said the Pelagians, because
they have no such sin in them at all D. August de pec. mer. lib. c. 20.
.

Only sins past, and not sins future, or not yet committed, are by
Baptism cleansed, as the Messalians held Theod. dimider c. de Bapt.
.

Being once baptized, we can no more be tempted, as thought the Iovinians:
which was the error also of the Pelagians Mag. cc. hist. Cen. 4 c. 5. fol. 381.
.

The Baptism of water is now ceased: and the Baptism of voluntary blood by
whipping is come in place thereof, without which none can be saved, as the
Flagelliferans published Gerson. tra. contra ^lage^.
.

We also condemn the opinion

Of the Russeis, that there is such a necessity of Baptism, as that all that
dye without the same, Russie commonweal, c. 24. p. 98 b.
are damnedf.

Also of the Banisterians, which say that the water at Baptism is not holy, in
respect that it is applied to an holy use; and that the ordinary, and common
washings among the Turks, and Jews, is the same to them that Baptism is to us
Banist. errors printed by T. Man.
.

Likewise of the Family of Love, which conceive basely of this Sacrament,
calling it in derision, Elementish water, and of no better validity, or virtue
then common water N.N. evang c. 16. sect. 5.6.
.

Also the Anabaptists, who ascribe no more unto Baptism, then unto any other
thing, civilly discerning one man from another; and say that the Sacraments of
the New Testament are no instruments to raise, or confirm faith Althemar.
council. lo. pugnan. lo. 131.
.

And lastly of the Papists, who maintain that

Baptism serves to the putting away of original sin only ^ Tho. de ^^c.
Altari.
.

Baptism brings grace, even ex opere operato Test. Rhem. an. Gal. 3.27.
.

3. Proposition.
Infants, and young children, by the Word of God, are to be baptized.

The proof from Gods Word.
ALthough by express terms we be not commanded to baptize young children:
yet we believe they are to be baptized, and that for these, among other reasons:

1. The grace of God is universal, and pertains unto all: Therefore the
sign, or Seal of grace is universal, and belongs unto all, so well young
as old.

2. Baptism is unto us, as Circumcision was unto the Jews. But the Infants of
the Jews were circumcised. Therefore the children of Christians are to be
baptized.

3. Children belong unto the Kingdom of Heaven Matthew. 13.14.
, and are in the covenant; therefore the sign of the covenant is not to be
denied them.

4. Christ gave in commandment that all should be baptized Matthew. 28.19
, therefore young children are not to be exempted.

5. Christ has shed his blood as well for the washing away the sins of
children, as of the elder sort. Therefore it is very necessary that they should
be partakers of the Sacrament thereof.

All Christian Churches allow of the Baptism of Infants Conf. Helv. 1 ar. 21.
and 2. c. 20. ar. 35. Belg. ar. 34. Aug. ar. 13. Sax. ar. 13. Wit. c. 10. Suc.
cap. 17.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
The premises declare, that

They slander us which say, that all Protestants deny the Baptism of children
to be necessary, and this is Runagate Hills report Hills quart. reas. 14.
.

They err which oppugn this truth, as do many persons, but not after one,
and the same sort. For

Some utterly deny that Infants, or young children are to be baptized: so did
the Pelagians D. August. de Ver. Apo. se. de Bap par.
, the Heracleans, and the Henricians Mag. eccles. hist. con. 12. c. 5.
; and so do the Anabaptists, whereof said some, how baptism is the invention
of Pope Nicholas, and therefore naught Bullin contra Anbap. l. 1.
, others, that baptism is of the devil. So thought Melchior Hoffeman Ibid. l.
2 c. 13.
, so also do the Swermerians (a sect among the said Anabaptists Althemar lo.
pug. co. 131.
) the Servetians Epi. minist. Bern. in Call epist. fol. 118.
, and the Family of Love, which does hold that none should be baptized until
he be thirty years old Display H. 7. a.
.

Others refuse to baptize not all, but some Infants So denied is baptism by
the Barrowists unto the seed of whoores, and witches Bar. disc p. 9.
, by the Brownists, unto the children of open sinners Giffords reply.
, by the Disciplinarians unto their children which subject not themselves (as
Dud. Fenner says) unto the discipline of the Church, or obey not the
Presbyteriall decre^^. Sacramentorum autem primum pro natura sua administrari
debet vel infantibus, vel adultis. Infantibus autem i^s qui sunt liberi little
qui sunt intra. Intra autem qui ecclesiae (...). sc. subii, civat. D. Fenner.
5. Theol. cap. ult.
.

Others allow the Baptism of Infants, yet think those Infants not lawfully
baptized, which are baptized either by the now ministers of the Church of
England, as the Brownists do think R.A. confut. of Brow. p. 113.
, or by Protestant ministers, as the Papists are of mind, witness their
rebaptizing of infants in France, and in Netherland See before ar. 25. p. 8.
, or by unpreaching ministers, as the disciplinarian Puritanes do hold See ar.
26. pr. 1. Declarent ubinam legerint, tam necessario esse copulandam coelestis
verbi praedicationem cum administratione Sacramenti, ut nisi concio habeatur,
renascentium lavacro infans aspergi non possit?
.

And others are of opinion that none are to be baptized which believe not first.

Hence the Anabaptists, Infants believe not, therefore be not to be baptized.
Hence the Lutherans: Infants do believe Querim. ec. p. 80. Hessius, de 600.
ar. Pontif. lo. 16.
: Therefore to be baptized.

28. Article. Of the Supper of the Lord.
1 The Supper of the Lord, is not only a sign of the love that Christians
ought to have among themselves one to another 2, but rather it is a Sacrament
of our redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch that to such as worthily, and with
faith receive the same, the bread which we break, is partaking of the Body of
Christ, and likewise the Cup of blessing, is a partaking of the blood of
Christ, 3 transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of bread, and
wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy writ, but is
repugnant to the plain words of Scripture: overthrows the nature of a
Sacrament, and has given occasion to many superstitions. 4 The Body of Christ
in given, and taken, and eaten in the Supper, only after an heavenly, and
spiritual manner: and the mean whereby the Body of Christ is received, and
eaten in the Supper, is faith. The Sacraments of the Lords Supper were not by
Christ's ordinance, reserved, carried about, carried about, lifted up, or
worshipped.

The Propositions.
1. The Supper of the Lord is a sign of the love that Christians ought to have
among themselves. 2. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament of our Redemption by
Christ's death, and to them which receive the same worthily, by faith, a
partaking of the body and blood of Christ. 3. The Bread and Wine in the Lords
Supper, be not changed into another substance. 4. The Body of Christ is given,
taken, and eaten after an heavenly and spiritual, not after a carnal sort. 5.
To reserve, carry about, lift up, or worship the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
is contrary to the Ordinance of Christ.
1. Proposition.
The Supper of the Lord is a sign of the love that Christians ought to have
among themselves.

The proof from Gods Word.
THE Supper of the Lord is a token of the love that Christians ought to have
among themselves. For which cause it is called the Lords Table 1 Cor. 10.11.
, the Lords Supper 1 Cor. 11.10
, a Communion of the Body of Christ, and they that partake thereof, though they
be many, yet are but one bread, and one body 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
.

This is the doctrine of all Christian Churches.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth. Conf. Helv. 2. cap. 21. Basil. ar.
6. Bohem. c. 13. Belg. ar. 35 Saxon. ar. 14. Suc. c. 18.

So think not those men, who either with heretic Hamant deny the use of the
Lords Supper to be necessary Hol. chron. fol 1299.
, or with the Rhemists rail on it and the Protestants that use the same,
calling it, a profane, and detestable table, the Cup of devils Test Rhem. an.
1 Cor. 10.21.
.

2. Proposition.
The Sacraments of the Lords Supper is a Sacrament of our redemption by Christ's
death, and to them which receive the same worthily, by Faith, a partaking of
the body, and blood of Christ.

The proof from Gods Word.
THE Sacrament of the Lords Supper is to all Christians, a Sacrament of our
redemption by Jesus Christ. For

This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins Matt. 26 28.
: this is my body, which is given for you, etc. This Cup is the New Testament
in my blood, which is shed for you, says our Savior Luke 22.19, 20.
.

And to such as receive the same worthily 1 Cor. 11.24 1 Cor. 11.28, etc.
, and by Faith 2 Cor. 13.5. Joh. 6.35.
, it is the partaking of the body, and blood of Christ 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
.

This is a truth openly both maintained, and testified by the neighbor
Churches Conf. Helv. 1. ar. 22. and 2. c. 21. Basil ar. 6. Bohem. c. 13. Gal.
ar. 37. Bell. ar 35. August. couch. the Mass. ar. 1. ^. Saxon. art. 13 Wittem.
c. 19. Suc c. 19.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Diversely has this proposition been oppugned. For

Some either denying, or not acknowledging the benefit of so heavenly a
Sacrament, do say, how

It is to be received only for obedience sake to the Princes commandment, but
is of none effect to the perfect ones. An opinion of the Families Leon. Ram.
Conf. 1580.
.

It does neither good, nor hurt to the receivers. The Messalians error
Theodoret. eccl s hist.
.

It does much hurt, and no good, to participate the Lords Supper among
Protestants, say the Papists What can the Protestant Churches afford you? etc.
the communion? O poisoned Cup! better it were for you to eat so much Ratsbane,
then that polluted bread: and to drink so much Dragons gall, or Vipers blood,
then that sacrilegious wine. Garnish of the soul, etc. printed at Antwerp an.
1569. by Joach. Tro.
.

It is no sign assuring us that all our sins through Christ are pardoned.
For only venial, and mortal sins, are thereby remitted Catech. Trid.
, and we must always doubt of the forgiveness of our sins Conc. Trid. ses.
6. cap. 9.
, say the Papists.

Others do teach, that

It can profit such as have no faith, as Babes, and Infants, in which errors
be the Russians Al Guag. de relig. Moscovit. p. 168.
; yea the dead bodies of men Conc. Carthag. 3. can. 6.
.

It can benefit such as receive it not at all, if on their behalf it be
administered, as persons absent, upon the Seas, in the wars, yea and dead and
present too; when yet they participate not, but the Priest for them. These
errors the Papists defend.

3. Proposition.
The Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, be not changed into another substance.

The proof from Gods Word.
TRansubstantiation, or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine in the
Supper of the Lord, we do utterly deny; and the reasons moving us thereunto,
are, for that it is repugnant to the plain words of the Scripture. For

I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, says our Savior
Christ Math 26.29. Mark 14.25.
. Which fruit, had it really bin either the Blood, or by way of concomitance,
the very Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, then our Lord had eaten himself,
which is not only blasphemous to be spoken, but also impossible to be done,
and directly against the Word of God, where commandment is often given, that
the blood with flesh (not of beast, much less of man) must not be eaten Genesis 9
4. Lev. 17.14.
.

The heaven must contain Jesus Christ, until the time that all things be
restored, says S. Peter Acts 3.21.
. If Christ therefore corporally, according to his humanity be in heaven, then
is he not in the Sacrament.

As often as ye shall eat this Bread (not Christ his real Body;) and drink
this Cup (not the real blood of Christ,) you show the Lords death till he
come, says Saint Paul 1 Cor. 11.20.
. Therefore he is not come; which he must be, being under the forms of Bread
and Wine.

Transubstantiation besides overthrows the nature of the Sacrament. For where
there is no Element, there can be no Sacrament Because Gods Word coming unto
the Element, makes a Sacrament.

Finally, it has bin the occasion of much superstition, and Idolatry. For from
hence proceeded the Reservation of the Transubstantiated bread for sundry
superstitious purposes: hence the adoration of the bread, even as God himself,
and that both of Priest and people: hence the carrying about in pompous
procession, of the wafer-God; and hence the Popish feast called
Corpus-Christi-day.

The right consideration hereof has moved all the Churches reformed, to show
their detestation hereof both by their Sermons, and writings Conf. Helv. 1 ar.
22. and 2. c. 21 Basil. art Witten. b.c. 19.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Abominable therefore be the Popish errors, viz. that

In the Eucharist there is not the substance of Bread and Wine, but only the
mere accidents, and qualities Conc. Trid. se^s. 3. c. 3.
.

Substantially, and really the Body and Blood, together with the soul, and
Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore whole Christ is contained in
the Sacramental Eucharisticall Test. Rhem. annot. Matthew 26.6.
.

Under each kind, and under every part of each kind severally, whole Christ
is comprised Conc. Trid. ses. 2.3. Vaux. Catech. c. 4.
.

After the consecration in the wonderful Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Body
and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ is; and that not only in the use, while it
is taken, but before also, and after in the Host, or consecrated pieces,
reserved, or remaining after the Communion Conc. Trid. ses. 3. 4.
.

In the holy Sacraments, Christ, the only begotten Son of God, is to be adored
with the worship of Latria Conc. Trid. sess. c. 5.
.

Marcus also that detestable heretic, held that the wine of the Lords Supper
was converted into blood Epiphan. haeres. (...)
.

4. Proposition.
The Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten, after an heavenly, and
spiritual, not after a carnal sort.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe regenerate have in them a double life, one carnal, the other spiritual.

The life carnal and temporary, they brought with them into this world: The
spiritual was given unto them afterward in their second birth through the Word
1 Pet. 1.29.
.

The life carnal and corporal is common to all men John 6.51.
, good and bad; and is maintained, and preserved by earthly and corruptible
Bread, common also to all and every man.

The life spiritual is peculiar only to Gods elect; and is cherished by the
Bread of life, which came down from heaven, which is Jesus Christ, who
nourishes and sustaineth the spiritual life of Christians, being received of
them by Faith John 6.35.
.

Which spiritual Bread that he might the better represent, he has instituted
earthly, and visible Bread, and Wine, for a Sacrament of his Body, and Blood.
Whereby he does testify, that as verily as we receive the Bread with the
hands, and chew the same with the teeth, and tongue, to the nourishing of this
life temporal: even so by faith (which is in place of hands and mouth to the
soul) we verily receive the true Body, and the true blood of Christ our only
Savior, to the cherishing of the spiritual life in our souls.

And herein there is a goodly consent with the most of the reformed Churches,
and us Confess Helv. 1. ar. 22 and 2. c. 22. Basil. ar. 6. Bohem. c. 13. Gal. ar
36. B^lg. ar. 35.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Jointly we withstand the adversaries thereof whosoever, as

The Capernaites, which thought the flesh of our Lord might be eaten with
corporal mouths.

The Synusiastes, or Vbiquitaries Aliq^^ (...) augimus, sed in c^ognatum
delabimur (...) paru, and vino substantium equidem relinquendo, sed corporale
Christi corpus ita coaduniendo, ut substantia substantiam vel localiter, vel
definitive, vel repletive, vel omnibus istis modis simul contineat, quod ipsum
prefecto nil est iliud, quam Transubstantiationis quoddam quasi involuer. etc.
Jezler, de diutur. helli Euchar. p. 8.
, which think the body of Christ is so present in the Supper, as his said Body
with Bread and Wine, by one and the same mouth; at one and the same time, of
all, and every communicant, is eaten corporally, and received into the belly.

The Metusiastes, and Papists, which believe, the substance of Bread and Wine
is so changed into the substance of Christ his Body, as nothing remains but
the real Body of Christ, besides the accidents of Bread, and Wine After
Consecration there is neither bread, nor wine left in this Sacrament, says
Vaux in his Catech.

By the virtue of the words of Consecration, the substance of bread is turned
and changed into the very Body of Christ: and the substance of wine is turned
into the Blood of Christ, the holy Ghost working by a divine power. So that
Christ is wholly under the form of Bread, and in every part of the Host, being
broken, Christ is wholly. Also under the form of wine, and every part ther^f,
being separated Christ is wholly. Canis catech. c. 4.

Romanenses introduxerunt (...), vos (Lutherani) (...) ejus sororem, and
plumorum errorum matrem, (...). Iezler. de dintur. belli. Euchar. p. 31. b.


.

The Symbelists, Figurists, and Significatists, who are of opinion that the
faithful at the Lords Supper, do receive nothing by naked, and bare signs.

5. Proposition.
To reserve, carry about, lift up, or worship the Sacraments of the Lords
Supper, is contrary to the ordinance of Christ.

The proof from Gods Word.
The true and lawful use of this Sacrament has been before set down: And
therefore it may suffice us to be remembered, how the Lords Supper was ordained,
that the bread should not only be broken, and eaten Math. 26.20. Mark 14.22.
Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 10.16, 11, 2.
, the cup should only be given, and drunken Math. 26.27. Mark 14.23. Luke
22.17. 1 Cor. 11.25.
, and all this is done in remembrance of Christ Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25
.

And so also testify the Churches reformed Confess. Helv. 2. c. 21. Basil. ar.
6. Bohem. c. 13. Aug. de Missa, ar. 1. Sax. ar. 14. Wittemb. c 19
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
But contrary to the institution of Christ, the Papists abuse this holy
Sacrament. For

They reserve the same; and not only so, but take it to be a Catholic, a
pious, and necessary custom, so to reserve it Council. Trid. ses. 3. c. 6.
, and besides, they think every piece, and particle of the Sacrament so
reserved, is the very blood of Christ Ibid. can. 4. Sermons fol. 196. b.
.

They carry it about, both unto sick folks. Hence says the Festival c.

As often as any man sees that body at Mass, or born about to the sick, he
shall kneel down devoutly and say his Paternoster, or some other good prayer
in worship of his sovereign Lord. And also through cities and towns. For
whenever the Pope goes any journey, the sacramental bread is carried before
him on an ambling Iennet, as the Persian Kings have before them carried their
Orsmada, or holy fire See cerem. Pontif. lib. 1. When the Pope goes from one
people to another, he sends before him, yea, and sometime a day or two days
journey, his sacrament upon a horse carrying at his neck a little Bell,
accompanied with the scum and baggage of the Roman Court.

Thither go the dishes, and spits, old shoes, caldrons, and kettles, and all
the sculletie of the Court, whores and jesters. Thus the Sacrament arriveth
with this honorable train, to the place whither the Pope is to come: it there
awaiteth his coming. And when the master is known to approach near the
people, it goes forth to receive him. So Cyp. Valera, a Spaniard, in his
treat. of the Pope, and his auct. p. 17.


.

In Spain even at this day in the time of the peace between the two mighty
Kings of great Britain, and Spain; those English men, as meeting the
Sacrament in the streets, will neither do reverence thereunto; nor go aside;
nor turn into some house, do fall into the danger of the not holy, but bloody
Inquisition Act. of the peace, etc. an. 1604. ar. 2. in the end touching a
Moderation, etc.
.

They worship it, and for the same have ordained a certain set, and solemn
feast, called Corpus-Christi-day, on which the sacrament is borne about, lifted
up, and most idolatrously adored Trid. sess. 3. c. 3.
.

29. Article. Of the wicked, which do not eat the Body and blood of Christ,
in the use of the Lords Supper.
The wicked, and such as be void of the lively faith, although they do
carnally, and visibly press with their teeth (as S. Augustine says) the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers of
Christ, but rather to their condemnation, do eat, and drink the sign, or
Sacrament of so great a thing.

The Proposition.
The wicked, and such as be void of a lively faith, do not eat the Body, nor
drink the Blood of Jesus Christ, in the use of the Lords Supper.

The proof from Gods Word.
SAint Paul does show, how the Supper of the Lord is received of some worthily,
which do examine, and judge themselves 1 Cor. 11.28.
, and discern the Lords Body Ibid. 29.
, as also do abstain from the table of devils. How these do participate of
the body and blood of Christ 1 Cor. 10.31.
, it has already bin showed in the last mentioned article, prop. 4.

Again, of others the same is worthily received 1 Cor. 11 38.39.
, that is to say, which do not examine themselves, nor judge Ibid. 38.31.
, neither discern the Lords Body Ibid. 26.
, and do communicate at the Table of the Lord, and at the Table of devils 1
Cor. 10.21.
. These may receive the Sacrament, but not the true body of Christ. The reasons
be, for that

They lack the wedding garment Math. 22.11, 12.
, which is faith, and the righteousness of Christ.

They are no members of the true Church, the head whereof is Jesus Christ
Ephesians. 4.15, etc.
.

They have no promise of heavenly refreshing, because they are without a lively
faith John 6.25.
.

Therefore they procure unto themselves most heavy punishments 1 Cor. 11.27.
, as diseases, death, guiltiness of the body and blood of Christ, and
therewith damnation.

Of this judgment be other Churches Christian and reformed besides Conf. Helv.
in the declar. of the Lords Supper.

Helv. 2 c. 21. Basil. ar. 6. Bohem. c 13. Gal. ar. 37. Belg. ar. 37.


.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
The adversaries of this doctrine are

The Vbiquitaries, both Lutheran, and Popish; they seeing the very body of
Christ at the Lords Supper, is eaten as well of the wicked as of the godly Stur.
An. ip. 4. par. 1. p. 58.
, these affirming, that all Communicants bad and good, do eat the very, and
natural body of Christ Jesus Test. Rhem. annot. 1. Cor. 11.27.
: they saying, that the true and real body of Christ, In, With, Under the
Bread, and Wine, may be eaten, chewed, and digested even of Turks, which never
were of the Church So reports Sturmius in: his Antipap. p. 4. par. 2. p. 106.
, and these maintaining that under the form of bread, the same true and real
body of Christ, may be devoured of Dogs, Hogs, Cats, and Rats Alex. Hales, par.
4. q. 44. and D. Thom. par. 5. q. 8. ar. 3.
.

30. Article. Of both kinds.
The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay people: For both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and commandment, ought to be
ministered to all Christian men.

The Proposition.
The people must be partakers not only of the bread, but also of the wine,
when they approach unto the Lords Table.

The proof from Gods Word.
OUR Lord, and Savior Christ has so instituted his Supper, as he will have
not only the Bread, but also the Cup to be delivered unto all Communicants. So
find we in the Word of God, namely,

That the Bread must be given to All, and eaten of All Math. 26.26. Mark
14.22. Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 10.16.11.25:
.

The Cup is to be given to All, and to be drunken of All Math. 26.17. Mark
22.27. 1 Cor. 10.16.11.25.
.

Hereunto subscribe the Church Conf Helv 1. ar. 22. and 2. c. 21 Bohem. c. 13.
Gal. ar. 36.38. Belg. ar. 35. Aug. de Massa, art. 1, 2. Saxon. 15 Wittemb. c.
19. Suc. c. 18.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Though it be a man's covenant, yet when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate,
or adds any thing thereunto Gal. 3.15.
, What impudency then, yea what impiety do they show, which alter this
Ordinance of God?

Some, by adding thereto: So added was unto the Bread, Cheese by the
Artotarites Epiphan.
: blood, by the Cataphrygians Philastrius.
; the seed of man, by the Manichies August. de haeres.
; unto the Wine, warm water by the Muscovites I. Faber. de relig. Mosco.
.

Some, by taking there from: so the Encratites Epiphan.
, the Tatians Theodoret.
, the Severians Epiphan.
use no wine at all; the Manichies do minister only the bread Leo. ser. 4.
quadrages.
, the Papists, though they use both kinds; yet they always deny the Cup unto
the people, and unto Priests also when they say not Mass Council. Trid. ses. 5.
c. 1. and ses. 21. cap. 1, 2, 3.
, affirming that

The people, participating of the Cup, thereby perceive no fruit of spiritual
comfort; but receive to themselves damnation Censura Colon. page 289.
.

It is not by Gods, but man's law, that Lay persons communicate, either in both
kinds, or in one Ibid. p. 283.
.

Notwithstanding that Christ instituted the Sacrament to be received under both
kinds, and the Primitive Church accordingly did so administer the same: Hoc
tamen non obstante, yet this notwithstanding, it is to be taken of the Laity,
but under one kind Con^. Constan. sess. 13.
.

Some, by confounding the elements: So the Moscovites do mingle Bread and Wine
together Surius Comment. an. 1501. page 31.
; and the Papists make a mixture of Wine and Water, maintaining that Water must
be mixed with Wine at the Consecration of the Blood Catec. Trid.
: and then that mixture of Water with Wine, without sin cannot be omitted
Ibid.
.

Some, by changing the Elements: So the Aquarians, and the Hydroparastites, for
Wine, administered and gave Water unto the people Theodoret.
.

31. Article. Of the one Oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
The offering of Christ once made, 1 is that perfect redemption, propitiation,
and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original, and
actual: and there is none other satisfaction for sin, but that alone.
Wherefore 2 the sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said, that
the Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have remission of
pain, and guilt, were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceits.

The Propositions.
1. The blood of Jesus Christ once shed for mankind upon the Cross, is a
perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole world. 2. Sacrifices of the Mass, are most blasphemous Fables, and
dangerous deceits.
1. Proposition.
The blood of Jesus Christ once shed for mankind upon the Cross, is a perfect
redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole
world.

The proof from Gods Word.
OF the benefits redounding unto mankind by Christ his offering up of himself
upon the Cross, we have in sundry places before See art 1. pr. 4. 22. pr. 1, 2.
20. pr. 2.
spoken, and by the Word of God prooved him to be the perfect Redemption Acts
20.28. Romans 5.6, etc. Gal. 3.13. 1 Cor. 6.28. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19
, Propitiation Acts 10 43. Romans 3.25. Heb 9.12, etc. 1 John 2.2. 1 John 4.10.
, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original, and
actual John 1.29. 1 Pet. 3.18. 1 John 1.7.
.

Hereunto the Churches of God bear witness Conf. Helv. 1 ar. 11. and 2. cap.
11. 15. Basil. ar. 4. Bohem. c. 6. Gal. art. 13. 16, 17. Belg ar. 20. 22. Aug.
ar. 34. Saxon. artic. 3. Wittemb. c. 2. 5. Suc. c. 2, 3.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Hereby it is evident to the eyes of all godly persons, that accursed be the
errors of them which do affirm, that

From the beginning of the world, until the 15. year of the Emperor
Tiberius, none at all were saved. The error of Manes the heretic Epiphan.
.

Man's body is not capable of happiness, but the foul only; and yet no fowls
shall be saved, but their own, said the Marcionites D. Iron c. 1. c. 29.
.

All men, and women, that sin after Baptism, are undoubtedly damned. In this
error were the Montanists D. Hiero. ap. Marcel. l. 2.
, and the Nonatians D. Cypr. lib. 4. epist. 2.
.

Our salvation is of our selves; so said Melchior Hoffeman, an arch Heretic
Bull in contra Anabap. l. 2. c. 13.
.

Man is restored to grace of Gods mere mercy, without the means of Christ's
blood, death, and passion. One of Matthew Haments blasphemous assertions Holin.
seri. f. 1299.
.

The Savior of Men, is Jesus Christ, a man, and came into the world to save no
women but men, say some Papists Dial. of Dives, and Paup. 6. com.
, and redeemed the superior world only, which is man Jesuits catec. 1. 8. cap.
10. p. 286.
, said Postellus the Jesuit; and yet not all men neither, for S. Francis has
redeemed so many as are saved since his days, say the Franciscan Friars Conf.
S. Fr.
.

The Savior of women, from her time till the end of the world, is S. Clare,
affirm some P. Mornaeus tract. de ec. c 9.
other Papists, as Postellus says, it is one mother Jane Jesuits catec. 1 8.
c. 10.
.

The Savior of men, and women, is S. Mary through her virginity, say some
Dial. of Dives, and Paup. 6. com. c. 10.
, is S. Christina, by her passion, say other Papists Dionis. Cat. de 4. hom.
Novis. ar. 50.
.

There is no sufficient sacrifice yet offered for the sins of the world. One
of Kets errors.

Christ has satisfied, and was offered only for original sin, an error of
Thomas Aquinas.

Sins actual, and venial, are taken away by sacred Ceremonies Test. Rhem.
an marg. p. 258
, by a Bishops blessing Ibid. annot. Mar. 19.12.
, by a Priests absolution Vaux. catech. c. 4.
.

Sins actual, and mortal, be remised by a pardon from some Bishop, or from
the Pope of Rome See ar. 22. p. 2
.

2. Proposition.
The sacrifices of the Mass, are most blasphemous Fables, and dangerous
deceits.

The Papists deliver how the Mass is a sacrifice Test. Rhem. an. Mat. 24.15.
, a sacrifice propitiatory Conc. Trid. sess 22. can 3. Catech Trid. Euch. s.
, a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick, and the dead Conc. Trid. Ibid.
, the same propitiatory sacrifice that was offered by Christ himself upon the
Cross Catec. Trid. Ibid.
.

A sacrifice in which, by virtue of a few, even five words (mumbled by a
Priest) Christ even that Christ, which hung upon the Cross, is contained Conc.
Trid. ses. 3. can. 4.
.

A sacrifice, serving for all persons, quick and dead, to purge them from
their sins, to ease them of their pains; to satisfy for their punishment
Conc. Trid. ses. 22. can. 3.
; and for all necessities corporal, and spiritual Howl. 7. reas.
.

A sacrifice propitiatory of Jesus Christ really offered to God the Father, and
that often, in the honor of dead Saints Conc. Trid. ses. 21. c. 3 ses. 22.
can. 5.
.

A sacrifice, wherein Christ is so gloriously, as it is to be adored, even with
divine worship, both of Priest, and people Ibi. ses 3. c. 5.
.

A sacrifice meritorious to all men for whom it is offered, although they be
not living, but dead; not present, but absent; not endued either with zeal or
knowledge, but quite destitute of faith, and that ex opere operato Albert. Mag.
de sacr. Euch. Howl. 7. reas.
.

Hereby are we to note, first blasphemous Fables. For

It is a fable, that the Mass is a sacrifice, and that propitiatory; a fable,
that a few words of a Priest, can change Bread into a living Body: yea many
bodies with their souls, and that of Jesus Christ, God and man: a fable, that
one, and the same sacrifice is offered in the Mass, which was offered on the
Cross: a fable that the said Mass is any whit profitable for the quick; much
less for the dead.

Next, dangerous deceits. For hereby men are to believe, that

Creatures may be adored, contrary to Gods Word Thou shall not bow to them nor
serve them. Exodus 20.5.
.

Christ is often offered: contrary to the Scripture Heb. 6.12, etc. By his own
blood entered he in once unto the holy place, etc. He was once offered, Ibid. 28.
.

The Priest offers up Christ: contrary to the Scripture Heb. 7.27. He offered
up himself.
.

Sins be forgiven without blood: contrary to the Scripture Heb. 9.22. Without
sh dding of blood is no remission
.

Christ dyed but once, but dies daily: contrary to the Scripture Heb. 9 27. It
is appointed unto men that they shall o^edye.
.

Faith is not necessary in communicants: contrary to the Scripture Heb 11.9.
Without faith it is unpossible to please God.
.

We are to adore Christ as always present, contrary to the Scripture, where we
are taught to remember him absent Luke 22.16. 1 Cor. 11.25.
.

The favor of God by money may be purchased from a Priest: contrary to the
Scripture 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
.

All which their fables, and deceits do tend to the utter abolishing of true
religion. Therefore justly have we, and our godly brethren abandoned the Mass
Conf. Helv. 1. ar. 22. and 2. c. 29. 21. Basil. ar. 6. Bohe. c. 13. Belg. ar.
35 Aug. de Missa. ar. 13. Saxon. ar. 14. Wittem. c. 19 Sue. c. 19.
.

Accursed then stand those Papists before God, which take the Mass to be the
Sacrifice of Christ's Body, and blood Conc. Trid. sess. 6. c. 2. and catech.
Trid. de Euchar. f.
, and the only Sovereign worship due to GOD in his Church Test. Rhem. annot.
Matthew. 24.15.
.

32. Article. Of the Marriage of Priests.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons 1, are not commanded by Gods Law, either to vow
the estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage: therefore it is
lawful also for them. 2 As for all other Christian men, to marry at their own
discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness.

The Propositions.
1. By the Word of God it is lawful for Bishops, and all other ecclesiastical
Ministers, to marry at their own discretion. 2. It is lawful by the Word of
God for all Christian men and women, to marry at their own discretion in the
fear of God.
1. Proposition.
By the Word of God it is lawful for Bishops, and all other ecclesiastical
Ministers, to marry, at their own discretion.

The proof from Gods Word.
NEither the single, nor the wedded life is enjoined any man, much less any
calling of men by the Word of God. And that ecclesiastical Ministers in
particular may marry, it is evident both from the Old, and the New Testament.

From the Old Testament, both by the commandments given unto the Priests for
the choice of their wives Lev. 21.7.
, and by the examples also of Religious Priests, as Aaron Levit. 22.1.
, Eli 1 Samuel 3.13.
, Zacharias, etc Luke 1.5.
. and Prophets, which were all married, as it is thought, except Jeremy.

From the New Testament, by the words of S. Paul, who says, a Bishop must be
the husband of one wife; one that has children under obedience 2 Timothy 3.
. An elder must be unreproveable, the husband of one wife, having faithful
children Tit. 1.5, 6.
. Deacons must be the husbands of one wife; and have wives that be honest, not
evil speakers, etc 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.
. And by the example of Peter Matthew. 8.14.
, Paul Phil. 4.2.
, yea of the Apostles 1 Cor. 6.5.
, who were all married men. John the Evangelist only except, as some think.

All sincere Churches, and professors subscribe hereunto Conf. Helv. 1. ar. 37.
and 2. c. 29 Basil. ar. 1. sect. 1. 2. Bohe. c. 6. 16. Gal. ar. 24. Aug. de
abus. Sax. ar. 18. 21. Wittemb. c. 21. 26. Suc. c. 12.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
And none of Gods Churches, or people be of the mind

Either of the Vigilantians, that all, and every one of the Clergy, is
necessarily to marry, or not to be admitted for a Minister D. Hiero. advers.
vigil.
.

Or of the Iovinians, whose Elect Priests might not marry D. Aug. epist. 74.
.

Or of the Popists, who teach, that

From the Apostles time it was neither lawful for Priests to marry Majora
clymilit eccles.
.

The three orders of Deacons, Subdeacons, and Priests are bound not to marry
Test. Rhem. annot. marg. p. 571.
.

After Orders to marry it is not lawful Ibid. an. 1 Timothy 3.2.
; it is to turn back unto Satan, an Apostacy Ibid. an. 1 Timothy 5.15.
.

None may be a Priest, though he will vow a single life, if he have been a
married man Ibid. an. 1 Timothy 3.2.
.

For a priest to play the whore-master, it is less offense then to take a
wife. This was the speech of Cardinal Campeius Sleidan. com. 1 Timothy 5.9. l. 4.
, And most famous in the Romish Clergy for their unclean, and uncontinent
life. Hence written is it

Of Pope Paul the 2.

Auxia, testiculos Pauli, ne Roma requiras:
Filia huic nata est; haec docet esse marem.
Of Pope Innocen. the 8.

Bis quatuor Nocens genuit puellulos,
Totidem sed and Nocens genuit puellulas.
O Roma, possis hunc merito dicere Patrem.
Of Pope Alex. the 6.

Non spade Alexander fuerat, Lucretia nempe:
Illius conjux nata narusque fuit.
Of the Priests: Multi vos sanctos, multi vos dicere Patres
Gaudent, and vobis nomina tanta placent:
Ast ego vos sanctos non possum dicere; Patres
Possum, cum natos vos genuisse sciam.


Of the Jesuits: With woman ye lie not, but with males rather,
Speak Jesuit, how can thou be a Father? etc Jesuits catec. 2. B. cap. 5.
p. 114. b.
.


2. Proposition.
It is lawful by the Word of God for all Christian men, and women, to marry at
their own discretion in the fear of God.

The proof from Gods Word.
THE Spirit of God says unto men, and women in all ages,

Bring forth fruit, and multiply, and fill the earth Genesis 1.27, 28
.

Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled Heb. 13.4.
.

To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife; and every woman have her
husband 1 Cor. 7.2.
.

If they cannot abstain, let them marry Ibid. 9.
.

Notwithstanding, in saying that Christians may marry at their discretion, the
meaning is not, that any may marry, if they think good, either within the
degrees of kindred, and affinity, prohibited by wholesome laws; or without
the consent of parents, or of others in the room of parents, if they be under
tuition; or to other ends then God has prefixed.

So testify with us the reformed Churches Conf. Helv. 1. ar. 37. and 2. c. 29
Bohem. c. 19. Gal. ar. 24. Aug. de abus. ar. 4, 5: Saxon. art. 18. Wittem. c.
21.26. Suc. c. 22.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Greatly has this truth been crossed, and contradicted: For

Some leave it not to men, and women's discretion, but compel them, whether
they will or not, to marry: so did the Ossenes Hey. de descrip. urbis Hierusal.
l. 3.
.

Some utterly do condemn marriage; as did the Gnostikes D. Iren.
; the Hieracites August. de haeres.
; the Priscillianists Leg. epist. 93. c. 7.
; the Montanists Eusebius.
; the Satumians Epiphan.
, the Aerians Philastr.
; the Apostolikes Epiphan.
.

Some allow of the wedded life: yet not in all sorts of persons. For

The Papists forbid all Clergy men to marry Test. Rhem. annot. 1 Timothy 5.6.
: as also all Godfathers, Godmothers, and whosoever be of spiritual kindred
See above ar. 25. pr. 8.
.

Some will have none to marry but Virgins, and single persons; as the
Henricians Magd. eccles. hist. Cen. 12. cap. 25.
.

Some condemn all iteration of marriage, or twice marrying, the husband or
wife being dead; such heretics were the Catharans D. August. de haeres.
, etc.

Some would have women, though married, to be all common, as the Nicolaitans D.
Iren.
, and Davi-Georgians Hist. D. Georgi^.
.

Some will not marry according to Gods Ordinance, but think that one man, at
one and the same time, may have many wives. In which error were the
Hermogenians Tertul. adue. Hermog.
; and are the Ochiniter Beza. epist. 10.11.
.

33. Article. Of excommunicate persons, how they are to be avoided.
That person, 1 which by open denunciation of the Church, is right cut off from
the unity of the Church, and excommunicate, ought to be taken of the whole
multitude of the faithful, as an Heathen and Publican, 2 until he be openly
reconciled by penance, and received into the Church by a Judge that has
authority thereto.

The Propositions.
1. The person that is rightly by the Church excommunicate, is of all the
faithful to be taken, for an Heathen and Publican. 2. An excommunicate person,
truly repenting, is to be received into the Church again.
1. Proposition.
The person, that is rightly by the Church excommunicate, is of all the
faithful, to be taken, for an Heathen and Publican.

The proof from Gods Word.
THE most severe, and uttermost punishment, that the visible Church can inflict
upon the wicked, and ungodly of this world, is excommunication: which is a part
of discipline to be exercised, and that upon urgent occasions, and it is
commended unto the Church, even by God himself, who in his Word has
prescribed.

1. Who are to excommunicate, namely, such as have authority in the Church
Matthew. 18.17 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2 Cor. 3.13, 14 2 Timothy 3.6.
.

2. Who are to excommunicate, even two sorts of men, whereof the one pervert
the sound doctrine of the truth 1 Timothy 1.20.
, as did Hymeneus, and Alexander: the other be defiled with notorious
wickedness, as that incestuous person at Corinth was 1 Cor 5.1.
.

The manner of proceeding in excommunication, namely, first by gentle,
admonition, and that once, or twice given Tit. 3.10. Matthew 13.15.
, with the spirit of meekness Gal 6.1.
, even as a brother 2 These 3 15.
, if the fault be not notoriously known: and next by open reprehension 1 Timothy
5.20.
, afterward by the public sentence of the Church, to put him from the company
of the faithful 1 Cor 5.13.
, to deliver him unto Satan Ibid.
, and to denounce him a Heathen, and a Publican Math. 18.16.
, if none admonitions will serve, and the crime, and persons be very offensive.

A man so cut off from the Congregation, and excommunicated, is of every godly
professor to be avoided Rom 16 17.
: and not to be eaten withal 1 Cor. 5 11.
, not to be companied withal Ibid 8.
, nor to be received into house 2 Ioh. 10.
.

This censure is had in great reverence, and estimation among the faithful
servants of God Conf. Helv. 1 ar. 19 and 2. c. 18 Bohem. c. 9.14. Gal. art.
19.33 Belg artic. 30. Saxon art. 11.17. Aug. de abuse. ar. 7. Wittemb. art 3 1.
Suc. art. 13.
.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
1. Adversaries unto this doctrine be they,

Who utterly condemn all censures Ecclesiastical, and so Excommunication,
saying how the wicked are not excommunicable, so did the Paulicians Pan. Diaco.
.

Heretics, holding other points of religion foundly, for their private, and
singular opinions, are to be excommunicate; so the Pelagians Prosper. de
ingratis.
.

Christians, cleaving unto the foundation, which is Christ are not by
excommunication to be thrust out of the Church for any other errors, or
misdemeanors whatsoever. Of which opinion be sundry Divines, of good regard
Wolf. Mus. cram. p. 63. Iezler lib. de diutur. lib. Euch^r. ^.73. b.
.

2. Which allow the censure of excommunication, so it be done.

Not (as with us it is) by Commissaries, Chancelers Sold. of Bar.
, or Bishops Assert. polit. an. 1004. Bishops are to be obeyed neither when
they cite, nor when they excommunicate, says the Marpt. These. 46.82.83.
, but in every Parish Demon. of. dis. c. 12.
, and that either

By the whole Congregation Hunt. of the Fox. E. 1.
, or by the Eldership, and the whole Church T.C. 1. rep. p. 146.
; or by every Minister Ans. to M. Car. let. p. 30.
, yea every member Bar. disc. p. 20.
of the Church; or finally if not by, yet not without the consent of his Pastor
who is to be excommunicate Perit. of the 100.
.

3. Which rightly use not, but abuse the censure of excommunication, drawing
the same forth

Against what they list, even against dead bodies, dumb Fishes, Flies, and
Vermin, when they have annoyed them. For this the Papists are famous, or
infamous rather. The dead bodies of Wicliefe, Bucer, P. Fagius, were
excommunicated after they were dead, and buried Act. and Mo.
.

The Bishop of Canaglion, Anno D. 1593. very Catholikely accused the mute
Fishes Mar. Gallo. lib. 6. p. 502.
.

S. Bernard denounced the sentence of excommunication against Flies Pet. de
Natal. in vita Ber.
.

And against whom they please: so the Apostolikes excommunicated all that were
married, only for that they were married Epiphan.
; Diotrephes thrust the Brethren out of the Church 3 John 10.
, The Brownists excommunicate whole Cities, and Churches: the Papists
excommunicate even Kings, and Emperors, Qveene Elizabeth of blessed memory,
was excommunicate by three Popes, Pius Quintus, Gregory the 13. and Sixtus
Quintus. The Puritanes mislike and find great fault that excommunication is not
exercised against Kings, and Princes An. to M. Car. let. p. 30.
: Barrow says T.C. rep. 2. part.
, that a Prince contemning the censures of the Church, is to be disfcanchized
out of the Church, and delivered over unto Satan Ba^. disc. p. 14.
.

Also for what things they list; even for May-games, and Robin-hoods matters;
as sometimes it was denounced in Scotland by the new Presbytery S^r of disci.
c. 25 p. 148.
; and for all crimes, which by Gods Law deserve death: and for all things that
to Gods people be scandalous; yea not only for all matters criminal, but also
for the very suspicion of avarice, pride, etc Knox. order of Ex^om. in Scot. A.
2.
.

4. Lastly, which favor the right, and true excommunication, but exercise it
not being bound thereunto.

2. Proposition.
An excommunicate person, truly repenting, is to be received into the Church.

The proof from Gods Word.
Sundry be the reasons and ends, why excommunication is used; as

That a wicked liver, to the reproach of the Gospel, be not suffered among the
godly, and Christian professors of true religion;

That many good men be not evil spoken of, for a few b^d;

That good and virtuous persons may not be infected, through the continual, or
much familiarity of the wicked: For as Saint Paul says, a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump 1 Cor. 5.6.
.

And that he which has fallen, through shame of the world; may at the length
learn to blaspheme no more 1 Timothy 1.20.
, and through repentance be saved 1 Cor. 5.5.
.

Among all other causes therefore of excommunication, one is, and not the
least, that the person excommunicate may not be condemned utterly, but return
unto the Lord by repentance, and so be received again into the visible Church,
as S. Paul willed the incestuous man should be 1 Co^. 27, ^.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Contrariwise the Montanists D. Hiero. 2d Marc. l. 2.
, and the Nouatian^ D. Cyprian. l. 4. epist. 2.
, are of opinion, that so many as after Baptism do fall into sin, be
utterly damned of God, and therefore be not to find favor at the Churches
hands.

34. Article. Of the Traditions of the Church.
1 It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places, one, or
utterly like: for at all times they have bin diverse, and changed, according to
the diversity of countries, times, and men's manners; so that nothing be
ordained against Gods Word 2. Whosoever through his private judgment
willingly, and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of
the Church 3, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained, and
approved by common authority, ought to be rebuked openly (that other may fear
to do the like) as he that offends against the common order of the Church,
and wounds the consciences of the weak brathren 4. Every particular or
national Church has authority to ordain, change, and abolish ceremonies, or
rites of the Church, ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be
done to edifying.

The Propositions.
1. Traditions, or Ceremonies are not neccessary to be like, and the same in
all places. 2. No private man of a self-will, and purposely, may in public
violate the traditions and ceremonies of the Church which by common authority
be allowed, and are not repugnant to the Word of God. 3. Ceremonies, and
traditions, ordained by authority of man, if they be repugnant to Gods Word,
are not be to kept, and observed of any man. 4. Every particular, or national
Church, may ordain, change, and abolish ceremonies or rites, ordained only by
man's authority, so that all things be done to edifying.
1. Proposition.
Traditions, or ceremonies, are not necessarily to be like, or the same in all
places.

The proof from Gods Word.
IF a necessity were laid upon the Church of God to observe the same
traditions, and ceremonies at all times, and in all places, assuredly neither
had the ceremonies of the old law bin, as they are now Act 6.14, 10, 13. and
15, 1, etc. Gal. 2.3. etc. Ephesians. 2.^4. Col. 2.16.
, abolished; neither would the Apostles ever have given such presidents of
altering them, upon special reasons, as they have done.

For the said Apostles changed the times, and places of their assembling
together, the people of God meeting, and the Apostles preaching, sometimes on
the week Acts 1.46, 5.24.
, sometime on the Sabbath days Acts 13.14.17, 2, 18, 4.
, sometimes publicly, in the Temple Acts 24 6, 3, 15, 26.
, in the Synagogues Acts 9.20, 14, 1, 17 1^, 18,
, and in the Schools Acts 19.9.4.
, sometime privately, in house after house Acts 5.42.
, and in chambers Acts 1.13, 20 8, 28, 30, 3^.
, sometimes in the day time Act. 2.46, 3, 1.
, sometimes in the night Acts 20.7.
.

Neither kept they the same course in the ministration of the Sacraments.

For as occasion was offered, they both baptized in public assemblies Acts
2.46.
, and in private houses Acts 16 33, 10, 17, 48.
, before many Acts 18.12, 10, 27. 48.
, and when none of the faithful, but the minister only, and the party to be
baptized, were present Acts 8.36.
, and ministered likewise the Supper of the Lord, in the day time Act 22.46.
, and at midnight Acts 20.11.
, in the open Churches 1 Cor. 11.17.
, and in private houses Acts 20.7.2.46.
.

So nothing therefore be done against the Word of God, traditions, and
ceremonies, according to the diversity of countries, and men's manners, may be
changed and diverse.

Of this judgment with us be all reformed Churches Conf. Helv. 2. c 7 27 Bohem
c 15. Gal. ar. 27. Belg. artic. 32. Aug. art. 15. and ar. 7. tou^h. abuses.
Sax. ar. 20 Wittem. ar. 35 Suc. c. 14.
.

The errors and adversaries unto this truth.
They are greatly deceived therefore which think, that

The Jewish ceremonies, prescribed by God himself for a time unto the Jews,
are to be observed of us Christians. Such were the old Heretics, the false
apostles Acts 15.
, the Cerdonites Tertul. contra Mar. l 4.
, the Cerinthians Philacter.
, and the Nazarites D. Hieron. in epist. ad Aug.
, and are the Familists H. N euang. c. 13. sect. 5.
,

The traditions, and namely the tradition, and ceremony of the seventh day for
the Sabbath; and the manner of sanctifying thereof, must necessarily be one,
and the same always, and in all places. Hence the demi-Iewes, and English
Sabbatarians affirm, first touching the sanctification of the seventh day, how

It is not lawful for us to use the seventh day to any other end, but to the
holy, and sanctified end, for which God in the beginning created it D.B. Sab.
de. 1. B. p. 4.
.

So soon as the seventh day was, so soon was it sanctified, that we might
know, that as it came in with the first man, so must it not go out, with the
last Ibid. p. 6.
.

The Sabbath (or seventh day of Rest,) which has that commendation of
antiquity, ought to stand still in force Ibid. p. 9.
.

All the Judicial days, and Feasts being taken away, only the Sabbath
remains Ibid. 128.
.

And next, concerning the form, and manner of keeping the day, they deliver,
that

We are bound unto the same Rest with the Jews on the Sabbath Day Ibid. p. 127.
.

As the first seventh day was sanctified: so much the last be Ibid. p. 6.
.

We be restrained upon the Sabbath from work, both hand and foot, as the Jews
were Ibid. p. 127.
.

Every Ecclesiastical in Minister in his charge necessarily must Preach, and
make a Sermon every Sabbath Day Ibid. 174.
, every man or woman, under pain of utter condemnation, must hear a Sermon
every Sabbath Day Ibid p. 173.
.

Every Pastor in his charge must execute the discipline, and (Presbyteriall)
government in his Parish, every Sabbath Day Ibid 165.
.

Last of all, deceived be the Roman Catholics, which are of opinion, how the
Ceremonies of their Church are universally, and under the pain of the great
curse, neccessarily to be used in all places, and countries Council. Trid ses.
7. can. 13.
.

2. Proposition.
No private man, of a self-will and purposely, may in public violate the
traditions; and ceremonies of the Church, which by common authority be
allowed, and are not repugnant to the Word of God.

The proof from Gods Word.
GReat is the privilege, great also the liberty and freedom of Gods Church,
and people.

For they are delivered

From the curse of the Law Gal 3.23.
,

From the Law of sin, and of death Romans 8.2.
.

From all Jewish rites, and ceremonies Acts 15.24.
.

And from all humane ordinances, and traditions whatsoever, when they are
imposed upon the consciences of men to be observed under pain of eternal
condemnation Col. 2.8.
.

Notwithstanding, the Church and every member thereof, in his place, is bound to
the observation of all traditions, and ceremonies which are allowed by lawful
authority, and are not repugnant to the Word of God: For he that violateth
them, contemns not man, but God 1 Cor. 4.46.47.
, who has given power to his Church to establish whatsoever things shall make
unto comeliness, Order, and Edification Conf. Helv. 1. ar. 25. and 2. c 24
Bohem. c. 15. 18. Aug. 21. 4. 15. Sax. art. 20. Suc. c. 14.
.

This, of our godly brethren in their published writings, is approved.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Notwithstanding, say the Anabaptists Bullin. contra Anabap. lib. 2. c. 2.
, The people of God are free from all laws, owe obedience to no man, are not
to be bound with the bands of any jurisdiction of this world, say the Brownists
R. H. on Psalm. 122.
; are freed from the observation of all rites, and Ecclesiastical ceremonies;
say certain Ministers of the precise faction both in Scotland, and England D.
Bar. confe. ar. Hamp. p. 70. 71.
.

Again, there be of the Clergy, who rather then they will use, or observe any
rites, ceremonies, or others, though lawfully ratified, which please them not,
will disquiet the whole Church, forsake their charges, leave their vocations,
raise stirs, and cause divisions in the Church, as did many, when it was in
Germany about the Rhene, Frankeland, and Sueaveland, whereby most lamentable
effects did ensue Phil. M^l. ep. ad pastores and in com^^am Mansfield.
; and do the refractory Ministers in the Church of England at this day Burges
in his letter unto K. James, an 1604 says, the number of those Ministers so
refusing conformity, were 6. or 700. viz. (as it is in the Lincolnshire
Ministers Apology) in Oxfordshire, 9. Staffordshire 14 Dorcetsh. 17.
Hartfordsh. 17. Northamptonshire, 20. Surry, 21. Norfolk, 28 Wiltshire, 31.
Buckinghamshire, 33. Sussex, 47. Leicestershire, 57. Essex, 57. Cheshire, 12.
Bedfordshire, 16. Somersetshire, 17. Darbyshire, 20. Lancashire, 21. Kent, 23.
London, 30. Lincolnshire, 33. Warwickshire, 44. Devonshire, and Cornwall, 51.
Northamptonshire, 57. Suffolk, 71.
, the more is the pity.

The principal author of these tragical furies, about ceremonial matters,
was Flacius Illyricus, whose preachings were, that rather then Ministers should
yield unto the servitude of ceremonies, they should abandon their calling, and
give over the ministry, to the end that Princes and Magistrates, even for
fear of uproares, and popular tumults, might be forced at the length to set
their Ministers free from the observation of all ceremonies, more then any were
willing to use themselves Fateor me suasisse and Francis, and aliis, ne
deferrerent Ecclesias propter servitatem, quae sine impietate sustineri posset.
Nam quod Illyricus vociferatur, potius vastitatem suisse faciendam in templis,
and metu seditionem terrendos Principes, ego ne nunc quidem tam tristis
sententiae author esse vel^m, inquit Phil. Melancton, epist. ad pium Lectorem
inter epist. Theolog suas Page 455.
.

3. Proposition.
Ceremonies, and traditions, ordained by the authority of man, if they be
repugnant to Gods Word, are not to be kept and observed of any man.

The proof from Gods Word.
OF ceremonies, and traditions repugnant to the Word of God, there be two
sorts; whereof some are things merely impious, and wicked; such was the
Israelites Calfe Exodus 30.4. etc.
, and Nebuchadnezzars Idol Dan. 3.1, etc.
; and be the Papisticall Images, Relics, Agnus-deis, and Crosses, to which
they do give Divine adoration See before Art. 22. prop. 3 4, 5.
. These, and such like be all flatly forbidden Thou shall make thee no g^aven
Image, neither any similitude of things, etc. Thou shall not bow down to them,
neither serve them, etc. Exodus 20 4, 5.
. Others are of things, by God in his Word neither commanded, nor forbidden; as
of eating, or not eating Flesh; of wearing, or not wearing some Apparel; of
keeping, or not keeping some days Holy by abstinence from bodily labor, etc.
the which are not to be observed of any Christian, when for sound doctrine it
is delivered, that such works either do merit remission of sins; or be the
acceptable Service of God; or do more please then the observation of the laws
prescribed by God himself; or necessarily to be done, insomuch as they are
damned, who do them not.

We must therefore have always in mind, that we are bought with a price,
and therefore may not be the servants of men 1 Cor 7.23.
; and that none humane constitution in the Church, does bind any man to break
the least commandment of God Acts 5 19.
.

The consideration hereof has caused other Churches also with a sweet consent
to condemn such wicked ceremonies and traditions of men Conf Helv. 1. ar. 4.
and 2. c. 144 27. Ba. ar sect. 3 ar. 10. Bohe. c. 15 Gal. ar. 24 33. Belg. ar.
7. 29. 32. Aug. ar. 15. Wittem. ar. 28. 29. 32. 33. Suc. c. 8. 14. 1^.
.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Such ungodly traditions, and ceremonies, are all the ceremonies and traditions
in a manner of the Antichristian Synagogue of Rome.

Such also be the Sabbatarian traditions, and ceremonies, lately broached:
because they be imposed upon the Church, necessarily, and perpetually to be
observed of all, and every Christian, under pain of damnation both of soul
and body. For they say (speaking yet of their private, and Classical
Injunctions about the Sabbath day.) The Lord has commanded so precise a Rest
unto all sorts of men, that it may not by any fraud, deceit, or circumvention
whatsoever be broken, but that he will most severely require it at our hands,
under the pain of his everlasting displeasure D. B. Sab. doct. 1. book. p. 98.
.

This ( viz. the manner of keeping the Sabbath prescribed by themselves) the
Lord requires of all, and every one continually from the beginning, to the end
of our lives, without any interruption; Under the pain of everlasting
condemnation Ibid. p 146.
.

Another sort of people there is among us, which will observe, and use all
Ceremonies whatsoever, as the temporizing Familists, who at Rome, and such like
places of Superstition, will go unto idolatrous services, and do adoration
unto Idols Pattern of the praes. Tem.
; and no where will they strive, or vary with any one about Religion, but keep
all external orders Ibid.
, albeit in their hearts they scorn all professions, and services but their
own; tearming all Temples and Churches, in derision, Common houses H. N. spi.
lan. cap. 5. sect. 1.
; and all Gods services, or religions besides their own, foolishness Ibid.
.

To the Christian Reader.
Christian, and beloved Reader, let me request thee to observe well the first
section of the proof of this present proposition; and therein how I speak of
ceremonies, and traditions apparently impious, among which, I do reckon
papisticall Crosses, whereunto the Romanists do attribute divine adoration, as
elsewhere in this book, and subscription of mine, I have ddeclared, and could
more copiously; but the relics of a Libell of theirs, left in the Parish
Church of E^born in Bark-shire, an. 1604 sufficiently shall express the
thoughts of Papists touching their Cross, and crossing: whose words be these.

Now Mr. Parson, for your welcome home,
Read these few lines, you know not from whom.
You hold Cross for an outward token, and sign,
And remembrance only, in religion thine;
And of the profession the people do make,
For more then this comes to, thou do it not take.
Yet holy Church tells us, of holy Cross much more V^de Coster. I^s^ enchirid.
controvers c. 11. d. S. Ciuc. p^g 3^8, etc.
.
Of power, and virtue to heal sick, and sore;
Of holiness to bless us, and keep us from evil,
From foul fiend to fend us, and save us from devil;
And of many miracles, which holy Cross has wrought,
All which by tradition, to light Church has brought.
Wherefore holy worship, holy Church does give;
And surely so will we, so long as we live.
Though thou say Idolatry, and vilde superstition,
Yet we know it is holy Churches tradition.
Holy Cross then disgrace not, but bring it in renown,
For up shall the Cross go, and you shall down.
Of this Cross I sp^ake, and meant, and of none other, when I number it among
things merely impi us, and unlawful: And therefore have I not a little
wondered at those my Brethren, which draw these words of mine in this section
unto the Cross used in our Church at Baptism A brid. of the Lancolne mi^ist.
Apol. unto King James, a^. 1605. p. 30.
, which I never thought, not take to be either papisticall, or impious, because
none adoration, not so much as civil, much less divine, is given thereunto,
either by our Church in general, or of any minister, or member thereof in
particular. If they have no other Patrons for their not using, or refusing the
ceremony of the Cross then my self, they are in an ill case. For both in my
judgment, and practice I do allow thereof. This their perverting of my words,
contrary to their sense, and my meaning tells me, that other men's words and
names, are but too much abused by them in that book, to the backing of schism
and faction in the Church, and State, which from our souls we do abhor.

4. Proposition.
Every particular, or national Church may ordain, change, and abolish
ceremonies, or rites, ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be
done to edifying.

It has pleased our most merciful Lord and Savior Christ, for the
maintenance of his Church militant, that two sorts of rites, or ceremonies
should be used, whereof

Some, God his most excellent Majesty has himself ordained, as the ceremony
of Baptism, and the Lords Supper: which are till the end of the world, without
all addition, diminution, and alteration, withal zeal, and religion to be
observed.

Others be ordained by the authority of each provincial, or national Church,
and that partly for comeliness, that is to say, that by these helps, the
people of God the better may be inflamed with a godly zeal; and that
soberness, and gravity may appear in the well handling of Ecclesiastical
matters; and partly for order sake, even that Governors may have rules and
directions how to govern by; Auditors, and inferiors may know how to prepare,
and behave themselves in sacred assemblies; and a joyful peace may be
continued, by the well ordering of Church affairs.

We have already proved In this art. Prop. 1.
, that these latter sort of ceremonies may be made, and changed, augmented, or
diminished, as fit opportunity, and occasions shall be ministered, and that by
particular or national Churches: which thing is also affirmed by our
neighbors Confess. Helv. 2. c. 27. Bohe. c. 15. Gal. ar. 12. Bell ar. 32. Au. de
abu. ar. 7. Wit. ar. 35. Suc. c. 14.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
This manifests to the world, the intolerable arrogancy of the Romish
Church, which dare take upon her to alter, and apply to wrong uses, the very
Sacraments instituted even by Christ himself See ar. 25. pr. 20.
, and to prescribe ceremonies and rites, not to some particular, but to all
Churches, in all times, and places Trid. Conc. ses. 7. c. 13.
.

It shows also the boldness of our home-adversaries, the
Puritane-dominicans; which say that the Church, nor no man can take away the
liberty (of working six days in the week) from men, and drive them to a
necessary rest of the body (upon any saving the seventh T. C. 1. rep. p. 120.
.

Again say these men, the Church have none authority, ordinarily, and
perpetually to sanctify any day, but the seventh day, which the Lord has
sanctified D. B. doct. of Seb. 1. B.p. 31.
, nor to set up any day like to the Sabbath day Ibid. p. 47.
.

The latter sort, what in them is, quench the peoples devotion, and hinder them
from frequenting of Churches upon all holy days falling on the weeke-dayes,
and ordained by the lawful authority of the Church.

35. Article. Of Homilies.
The second book of Homilies, the several titles whereof, we have joined under
this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome doctrine, and necessary for
these times, as does the former book of Homilies, which were set forth in the
time of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by
the Ministers diligently, and distinctly, that they may be understood of the
people.

Of the names of the Homilies.
1. Of the right use of the Church. 2. Against peril of Idolatry. 3. Of the
repairing, and keeping clean of Churches. 4. Of good works, first of Fasting.
5. Against Gluttony, and Drunkenness. 6. Against excess of apparel. 7. Of
Prayer. 8. Of the place, and time of Prayer. 9. The Common Prayers and
Sacraments ought to be ministered in a known tongue. 10. Of the reverend
estimation of Gods Word. 11. Of Almes-doing. 12. Of the Nativitie of Christ.
13. Of the Passion of Christ. 14. Of the Resurrection of Christ. 15. Of the
worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. 16. Of the
gifts of the holy Ghost. 17. For the Rogation days. 18. Of the state of
Matrimony. 19. Of Repentance. 20. Against Idleness. 21. Against Rebellion.
Touching this Article, the greatest matter is, not whether these Homilies
meant and mentioned, do contain doctrine both godly, wholesome, and
necessary, but whether Homilies, or any Apocrypha writings at all may be read
in the open Church, and before the congregation, which I think they may, and
prove it thus.

Great is the excellency, great also the utility of Gods Word preached.
Therefore says Saint Paul. None can believe without a Preacher Romans 10.
: and, Woe is me if I Preach not the Gospel 1 Timothy 4.16.
. Howbeit the manner of preaching is not always one, and the same. For the
Apostles were to teach as well by the pen, as by the voice D. Whitak. cont.
Belg. con. 1 q. 6. p. 335.
.

Paul did preach the Gospel by writing D. Fulke against the Rhem. an. Romans
1.15.
: we owe in a manner evermore to the bonds of Paul (for his books,) than to
his liberty, for preaching Pauli vinculis plura pene qu^m libertati de^emus.
B^z. epi. ded. Ol^vi^n com in ^pi. ad Galar.
.

Calvin's writings will edify all men continually in the time to come The
Ministers of Genevas, epist. before Calv. on Deuteron.
, Protestants books are witnesses of sound doctrine, and sincere Christianity
Soiter de Vinda de bello. Pa. l. 2
.

For my part, I cannot but magnify the goodness of God for all good means to
bring us unto Faith, and so unto salvation, but especially for the written
labors of holy and learned men, whose doings in all ages not only have been
approved, but also used, and read many of them in the most sacred assemblies. So

In the Primitive Church was publicly read the Epistle to the Laodiceans, in
the Church of the Colossians D. Chrysostom. and Muscul. in ad. Col. 4.
, the Epistle of Clemens unto the Corinthians Eus. l 4. c. 23.
.

Hermes his Pastor Idem l. 3. c. 3.
, and the Homilies of the Fathers T.C. 2. rep. p. 110.
.

In the reformed Church in Flanders D. Sutclif. an. to the Petit c. 1. p. 23.
, and France Editae su^t igitur ^a^ prid^m Gallicae istae conciones (Calvini in
Iobum) etc. N^ que id vero teme^e factum fuisse res ipsa mox ostendit, maximo
cum remotissim^rum etiam Gallica^um Eccl^siarum fructu, quibus usque adeo
privatim and public placuerunt, ut plu^mis in locis, quibus quotidiani
Pastores decrant, pastorum Cice fuerint, B. ^ 2. praef. C^n^^onum l. Cal^n
Iobum.
, read are Mr. Calvin's Sermons upon Job: and in the Italian, French, Dutch, and
Scottish Churches, the said Calvin his Catechism is both read, and expounded
publicly, and that before the whole Congregation Sm^ton. contra Hamilton. p.
106.
.

The errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Deceived then, and out of the way of truth, are they, which of preaching by
the mouth conceive either too basely, or too highly: too basely, as do the
Anabaptists, and Family of Love, they affirming there ought to be no preaching
at all Wilkins. against the Fa of Love, p. 7^.
, and that Preachers are not sent of God, neither do preach Gods word, but the
dead letter of the Scripture, these Bullin. con^. An. bap.
, with the said Anabaptists, terming them letter-Doctors H. N lamen. Ro^plaint.
, preaching the letter, and imagination of their own knowledge, but not the
Word of the living God Idem 1. exhor 16.18.
.

Too highly, as do the Puritanes of all sorts. For say they, except God work
miraculously, and extraordinarily, (which is not to be looked for of us) the
bare Reading (yea not of the Scriptures without Preaching, cannot deliver so
much as one poor soul from destruction T.C. 1. rep. p. 17.3.
: Reading (of whatsoever in the Church) without preaching, is not feeding, but
as ill as playing upon estage, and worse too 1 Admon. to the Parliam.
.

Without preaching of the Word ( viz. by the lively voice of a Minister, and,
without the book) the Sabbath cannot be hallowed either of a Minister or
people, in the least measure which the Lord requires of us D.B. Sab. do. 2. B.
p. 277.
.

Next, err do they, which set their wits and learning, either against all
books in general, except the sacred Bible, or against the public reading of
any learned men's writings; be they never so divine and godly, in the open and
sacred assemblies.

Of the former sort are the Anabaptists; who, as Sleidan records did burn
the books, writings, and monuments of learned men, reserving and preserving
only the holy Scriptures from the fire Sleidan coml. 10.
.

Of the latter be the Brownists, Disciplinarians, and Sabbacarians.

The Brownists do say, that no Apocrypha must be brought into the Christian
assemblies Gifford against the Br. 15.
, so the Disciplinarians; Ministers ought not to read openly in the
congregation any writings, but only the Canonical Scriprures Fruct. ser. on
Romans 12 p. 60.
, they complain that humane writings are brought into the Church Def. of the
god. Min. p. 116.
* they cry out, Remove Homilies 1. Admon. 1^ Parliam.
, and they supplicate unto King James, that the Canonical Scriptures only,
may be read in the Church The Petit of the thousand.
.

And so, but much more bitterly and erroneously the Sabbatarians: we damn our
selves (say they) if we go not from those Ministers and Churches, where the
Scriptures and Homilies only be read: and seek not unto the Prophets when
(and so often as) we have them not at home D. B. Sab. doc. 2. book p. 173.
.

36. Article. Of Consecration of Bishops, and Ministers.
The look of Consecration 1 of Archbishops, and Bishops, and ordering of
Priests, and Deacons, set forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and confirmed
at the same time by authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary
to such consecration and ordering: neither has it any thing, that of it self
is superstitious, or ungodly. And therefore 2 whosoever are consecrated, or
ordered according to the rites of that book, since the second year of the
aforesaid King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter, shall be consecrated, or
ordered, according to the same rites, we Decree all such to be rightly, and
orderly, and lawfully consecrated and ordered.

The Proposition.
1. It is agreeable to the Word of God, and practice of the Primitive Church,
that there should be Archbishops, Bishops, and such like differences, and
inequalities of Ecclesiastical Ministers. 2. Whosoever be or shall be
consecrated, or ordered, according to the rites of the book of Consecration of
Archbishops, Bishops, and ordering of Priests, and Deacons, they be rightly,
orderly, and lawfully consecrated and ordered.
1. Proposition.
It is agreeable to the Word of God, and practice of the Primitive Church, that
there should be Archbishops, Bishops, and such like differences, and
inequalities of Ecclesiastical Ministers.

The proof from Gods Word.
ALbeit the terms, and titles of Archbishops we find not: yet the superiority
which they enjoy, and authority which the Bishops and Archbishops do exercise,
in ordering, and consecrating of Bishops, and ecclesiastical Ministers, is
grounded upon the Word of God. For we find, that

In the Apostles days, how themselves both were in dignity above the
Evangelists, and the seventy Disciples, and for authority both in and over the
Church, as twelve Patriarchs, says Beza Bez in Acta Apost. 1.2.
, and also established an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. Hence came it, that Bishop
was of Jerusalem, James D Christ. in Act. hom 3.
.

Of Antioch, Peter D. Hier. in Gal.
, of the Asian Churches, John ^us.
, of Alexandria, Mark D. Hier ad Eugr.
, of Ephesus D. Hier. in 2. Tim. 5.
, yea and all Asia Theo. arg. in ep s^ ad Tit.
, Timothy; of all Creete, Titush, of Philippos, Epaphroditus Theo. in epi. ad
Phil.
, of Corinth, and Achaia, Apollos: of Athens, Dionysius; of France, Crescens
Eus lib. 2.
, of Britain, Aristobulus Doroth. in Apost synop.
.

In the purer times succeeding the Apostles, so approved was the administration
of the Church affairs by these kind of men, as

They ordained Patriarchs, and Corepiscopi Heming. syntag. tit. de guber. Ec.
.

They ratified the degrees of Ecclesiastical superemency, at the first, and
most famous Council at Nice Beza. epist. 1.
.

They glorified much, and greatly, that they had received the Apostles doctrine
by a succession of Bishops D. Ire. 13. c 3.
, that they were the successors in the Apostles doctrine, of the godly Bishops
Sadel. de leg. voc. p. 20.
, and that Bishops succeeded in the room of Apostles D. Aug. in Psalm. 44.
.

Their godly monuments, and worthy labors, and books yet extant, do show
that Bishop was of Lions, Irenaeus; of Antioch, Ignatius; of Carthage, Cyprian;
of Jerusalem, Cyrill; of Alexandria, Athanasius; Basil of Cesarea, of all
Thracia, Asia, and Pontus, Chrysostom; Hilary of Potiers, Augustine of Hippo,
Ambrose of Millane: all of these, most notable instruments for the advancement
of Gods honor and glory in their days.

Finally, From the Apostles days hitherto, there never wanted a succession of
Bishops, neither in the East, nor Western Churches, albeit there have bin from
time to time both Marprelates, and Mockprelates to supplant their states, and
Illprelates, abusing their functions and places, to the discredit of their
calling and profession. So prudent has the Almighty been for the augmentation
of his glory and people, by this kind, and calling of men.

The errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
This manifests the erroneous and evil minds,

1. Of the Anabaptists, who condemn all superiority among men, saying, that
every man should be equal for calling; and that there should be no difference
of persons among Christians Sl^: dan. com. lib. 5.
.

2. Of the old heretics, viz the Contobaptites, which allowed of no Bishops
N^^ ph. lib. 18 c. 49.
.

The Ac^phalians, who would not be at the command, or yield obedience unto the
Bishops Mag. ecel^s. Fist ^^n. 71 c. 5. and N^ceph.
.

The Aerians, that equal Bishops, and Priests, making them all one August. de
^^^cres. cap. 53.
.

The Apostolikes, which condemned Prelacie D. Bernard. (...) ^an. ser. 66.
.

3. Of the late Schismatikes, namely,

The Jesuits, who cannot brook Episcopal preeminence Declar mo^am and ca. 20.
; and in their high Court of Reformation have made a Law, for the utter
abrogation of all Episcopal jurisdictions Quodlibets (...) ^^2.
.

The Disciplinarians, or Puricanes among our selves. For

They abhor, and altogether do loath the callings of Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. as the author of the Fruitful Sermon does F^uit. ser on. Romans 12. p. 37.
; and say, that by the prelaticall Discipline, the liberty of the Church is
taken away Ass^. polit. ^. 29.
, and that in stead of Archbishops, and Bishops, an equality must be made of
Ministers Admon. to (...) Bar.
.

They term the differences of Ministers, a proud ambitious superiority of one
Minister above another D^sco. of D. Ban. ser p 37.
; and Archbishops, and Bishops they call the supposed Governors of the Church
of England Demon. of Dis. epist. ded.
.

Some of them will not have Bishops to be obeyed either when they cite, or when
they inhibit, or when they excommunicate Mar. these. 49.82, 83.
.

Some of them have not only Archbishops, and Bishops, but also Parsons, and
Vicars in detestation. For

Miles Monopodios numbreth Parsons, and Vicars among the hundred points of
Popery, yet remaining in out Church Sold of Bar. in the end.
.

Others, say that birds of the same feather, viz. Archbishops, and Bishops, are
Parsons and Vicars 1. Admon. to the Parliam.
.

Barrow publishes that Parsonages, and Vicarages be in name, office, and
function, as Popish, and Antichristian, as any of the other Bar. disco. p. 54.
.

It is therefore an egregious untruth that Puritanes (or which is equivalent)
The good men, the faithful, and Innocent Ministers (for so do they style
themselves) effect not any popularity, or parity in the Church of God, as some
of them would make his Majesty believe Burges L. to K. James before his Apo.
.

2. Proposition.
Whosoever be, or shall be confirmed, or ordered, according to the rites of the
book of consecration of Archbishops, and Bishops, and ordering of Priests and
Deacons: they be rightly, orderly, and lawfully consecrated, and ordered.

Archbishops, Bishops, and Ministers, which according to the book of
Consecration, be, or shall be consecrated, or ordered, they are consecrated,
and ordained, rightly, orderly, and lawfully, because before their Consecration
and ordination, they be rightly tried, or examined; by imposition of hands,
needful and seasonable prayers, they be consecrated, and ordained; and all
this is performed by those persons, that is, by Bishops, to whom the ordination
and consecration of Bishops and Ministers, was always principally committed D.
Fulke against the Rhom. fol. 39.
, and also after the same form, and fashion (corruptions being before taken
away, and remooved) as Bishops, and Priests before the reign of K. Edward the
sixth, formerly were.

Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
Well therefore may they disgorge their stomachs, but trouble our consciences
they shall never, which condemn, or deprave our callings: as do

1. The Family of Love, which dislike, and labor to make contemptible the
outward admission of Ministers H. N. evan. c. 13. sect. 2.^
.

2. The Papists; who say their pleasure of the Bishops and Ministers of the
Church of England, and of other reformed Churches.

None is to be admitted for a Bishop, (say they) which is not ordained by
imposition of three or four (Romish) Catholic Bishops at the least, of which
none are to be found among the Protestants (...). 7. rea.
.

Whosoever takes upon him to preach, to minister Sacraments, etc. and is not
ordered by a true Catholic (that is, a Popish) Bishop, to be a Curate of
souls, Parson, Bishop, etc. he is a thief, and a murderer (...). Rhom. a^
John 10.1.
.

Our Bishops and Ministers, they are not come in by the door (says Stapleton)
they have stolen in like thieves Staple. sort. ^. part. c. 8. p. 14.
; they be unordered Apostates A^^. 10 the exc^ut. c. 3 p 41.
, pretended ^^^d c. 7. p. 148
, and sacrilegious Ministers Ib. c 9. p. 211.
, Intiuders Ib c. 8. p. 211.
, Mere laymen, and not Priests; because first they have received none other
Orders, and next, they are not ordained by such a Bishop, and Priest, as the
Catholic (Roman) Church has put in authority Howl. 7.10. ^^.
.

3. The Puritanes: For they write, that

The Bishops of our Church have none ordinary calling of God, and function in
the Scriptures, for to exercise T ^ des. p. 21 sect. 1.
: they are not sent of God: They be not the Ministers of Jesus Christ, by whom
he will advance his Gospel ^^al. of the st^te. praef.
.

Inferior ministers they are, not (say they) according to Gods Word, either
proved, elected, called, ordained 1. Admon. 10 ^ c Par^iam.
. Hence, the Church of England wants (say they) her Pastors and Teachers Fr
ct scr. on Romans 12. p. 36.
, and hence they urge diverse before ordained to seek at their Classis, a new
approbation, which they term the Lords ordinance Eng. Scotti. 3. B. c. 14. p.
113.
, and to take new callings from classical ministers, renouncing their calling
from Bishops Ibid.
.

37. Article. Of the Civil Magistrate.
1 The Kings Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and
other his dominions ^, unto whom the chief government of all Estates of this
Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Civil, in all causes does
appertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign jurisdiction,
where we attribute to the Kings Majesty the chief government, by which
titles we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended, 3 we
give not to our Prince the ministering either of Gods Word, or of the
Sacraments: the which thing the Injunctions also sometime set forth by
Elizabeth our (late) Queen, do most plainly testify, but that only
prerogative, which we see to have been given always to all godly Princes in
holy Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should rule all estates and
degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or
Temporal, 4 and restrain with the civil sword the stubborn, and evil doers.

5 The Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

6 The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and
grievous offenses.

7 It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to
wear weapons, and serve in the wars.

The Propositions.
1. The Kings Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and
other his Dominions. 2. The Kings Majesty has the chief government of all
estates, Ecclesiastical and Civil, in all causes within his Dominions. 3. His
Highness may not execute the Ecclesiastical duties of preaching, and
ministering the Sacraments, and yet is to prescribe laws, and directions unto
all estates, both Ecclesiastical and temporal. 4. The King by his authority,
is to restrain with the material sword, and to punish malefactors. 5. The
Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in this Realm of England (nor of the other
of the Kings Dominions) 6. By the laws of this Realm, Christian men, for
heinous and grievous offenses, may be put to death. 7. It is lawful for
Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to wear weapons, and
serve in wars.
1. Proposition.
The Kings Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other
his Dominions.

The proof from Gods Word.
Diverse, and sundry be the forms of Commonweals, and Magistracy. For some,
where many, and they of the inferior people, bear the sway, as in a
Democraty; some, where a few, and that of choice, and the best men do govern,
as in an Aristocraty; and some, where one man (or woman) has the preeminence,
as in a Monarchy; such is the government of this Kingdom.

Notwithstanding whatsoever the government is, either Democraticall,
Aristocraticall, or Monarchciall, Gods Word does teach us, that

There is no power but of God; the powers, that be, are ordained of God; and
that whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God Romans 13.1.^.
.

We must be subject to the principalities, and powers, and obedient, and ready
to every good work Tit. 3.1.
.

We must submit our selves unto all manner of ordinance of man, for the Lords
sake 1 Pet. 2.15.
.

We mest pray for Kings, and for all that be in authority 1 Timothy 2.1.
.

Finally, we must give to all men their duty; tribute, to whom tribute;
custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; and honor, to whom honor is
due Romans 13.7.
.

But of the Monarchciall government, special mention is made in the writings
of the Prophets, and Apostles.

Kings shall be their nourcing fathers, and Queens shall be thy nources, says
Esaias Esa. 43.23.
.

The Apostle Peter calls the King, the superior (or him that has the chief
power) as our King James has in his Dominions 1 Pet. 2.13.
.

All Churches Protestant and reformed, subscribe unto this doctrine Conf. Helv.
1. ar. 26. and 2. c. 30 Basi. ar. 7. Boh. c. 16. and in the Council. Belg. ar.
36. Aug ar. 16. 17. Sax. ar. 23. Suc. in petor.
, as both Apostolical and Orthodoxall.

The Errors and adversaries unto this truth.
These Churches with us, and we with them, utterly condemn the opinions,

Of the dreamers, whereof the Apostle speaks which despise government, and
speak evil of them which are in authority Epi. of Iu. 8.
.

Of the Manichies D. August. contra Faust. l. 22. c 74.
, Fratricellians W. Tho. disc. of Italy, p. 59
, Flagelliferies Pratcol. haeres. de Flage^,
, Anabaptists Alth. Conc. Io. page Io. 191.
, and Family of Love H.N calls a King, The scum of ignorance. Spir. land. c.
6. sect. 5
, all which rail upon, and condemn Magistracy.

Of them who allow not of the government by women, but utterly detest the same:
such were they in Italy, which said,

Interitus mundi est a muliere regi W. Th. descr. of Italy, page 129. ^.
. Again, speaking unto women; Abunde magna civitas vobis sit domus, publicum
neque noscatis, neque vos noscat Lud. Vives de insti. f^m. Chr. lib.
: such in France, who think how the Law of God, and nature is violated, where
a woman is suffered to reign, and govern Nec solum n^turae jura convelluntur,
sed etiam omnium gentium quae nunquam faeminas regnare permise^unt, etc. Bodin.
meth. hist. c. 6. p. 257.
; such in Scotland, or Scottish men rather from Geneva, which wrote, that

A woman's government is a monstriferous Empire, most detestable and damnable
Against the regim. of women, Blast. praef.
.

Again: I am assured that God has revealed to some in this age, that it is
more then a monster in nature, that a woman shall reign, and have Empire above
man, etc Ibid.
.

And little differing from these men are they in England, which termed The
Harborough for faithful subjects, a carnal and unlearned book, smelling
altogether of earth, without time, and without reason, for defending the
regiment of women over men (when it falls unto them by inheritance to
govern) to be lawful and good Martin. Marprel. epist. of D. Bridges.
. He which so censureth the said Harborough, was the Mar-prelate; and this his
Censure declares, that he was the Mar-prince, as well as the Mar-prelate.

2. Proposition.
The Kings Majesty has the chief government of all estates Ecclesiastical
and Civil, in all causes, within his Dominions.

The proof from Gods Word.
WE ascribe that unto our King by this assertion, which is given to every
King, or Queen in their own Dominion by the Word of God. For

They are for titles, gracious Lords Luke 22.25.
, Princes Romans 13.3.
, the Ministers of God Ibid. 4.
, the Nurses of the Church Isa. 49.23.
, Gods Psalm. 32.1.
; For authority the chief 1 Pet. 2.13.
. Which moves St. Paul to exhort, that supplications be made for all men, but
first for Kings, as the chief 1 Timothy 3.1.
.

Again, Every soul is commanded to be subject to the higher power, etc Romans
13.1.
.

Finally, the examples are manifold and pregnant, showing the principality of
Kings over all persons, and causes. For

Aaron the high Priest, called Moses the chief Prince, his Lord Exodus 32.21.
, so did Abimelech term Saul his Lord 1 Samuel 22.12
.

K. Iehosaphat, as chief in Judah, appointed Judges, Levites, and Priests 2
Chr. 19.5. etc. 8.
.

K. Ezechias also as chief, sent unto all Israel, and Judah, that they should
come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep the Passover 2 Chr. 30.1.
: also he appointed the course of Priests, and Levites by their turns 2 Chr.
31.2.
, and commanded all the Priests to offer sacrifice, etc. and they obeyed him
Ibid. c. 29.21.22.
, and enjoined all the congregation to bring offerings, and they brought them
31. Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 16. etc. 2 30. Basil. ar. 7. Bohem. c. 16. Bell. ar.
36. Aug. ar. 16. 17. Sax. ar. 23. Suc. pecorer.
.

Which we do unto ours, the very same do the Churches of God ascribe unto
Christian Magistrates in their principalities.

Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Which being true, then false is it which the Papists deliver, viz. that

The Kings excellency of power is in respect of the Nobility, and
Lay-magistrates under him, and not of Popes, Bishops, or Priests, as they have
cure of souls Test. Rhem. Annot. 1 Pet. 2.13.
, Kings and Princes, be they never so great, must be subject unto some Bishop,
Priest, or Prelate Ibid. an. Heb. 13.7.
.

The whole Clergy ought to be free from paying Tribute Ibid. an. Mat. 17.26.
.

Sacerdotes etiam Principibus jure divino subditi deleatur, say the
expurgators, Priests are not by Gods Law subject unto Princes Index expurg. p.
26.
.

No man is to be subject unto his temporal Prince, and superior, in matters
of Religion, or regiment of his soul, but in such things only as concern the
public peace and policy Test. Rhem. an. Romans 13.1.
.

False also is it which the Puritanes do hold, namely, that

Princes must be servants unto the Church; be subject unto the Church: submit
their scepters unto the Church, and throw down their Crowns before the Church
T. C. r^p. p. 144.
.

Magistrates as well as other men, must submit themselves, and be obedient to
the just and lawful authority of the Church ^^. dis. p. 185.
, that is, of the Presbitery That which our Savior calls Presbyt^rian, and
to does Luke. ^^a disc. p. 89.
.

Quis tandem reges, and principes, who can exempt even Kings and Princes, from
this, Non humana, sed divina Dominatione, not humane, but divine Domination
(meaning of the Presbytery) says Beza B za de pres. p. 124.
, which Presbytery they would have to be in every Parish There ought to be in
every Church a Consistory of seigniory of elders, or governors, ^^ar disc. p.
84 Every Congregation ought to have Elders; and an Eldership-Demon. of dis. c.
12. p. 55. cap. 14. page 69.

In stead of Chancellors, A^chdeacons, Officials, Commissaries, Proctors,
Summoners, Churchwardens, and such like, you (Parliament men) have to plant in
every Congregation a lawful and godly Seigniory. 1. Admor. to the Parliam.

I would that every little Parish should have seven such (Elders) at the least,
and every mean Church 13. and every great Church. 13. Hunt of the Fox, etc.
Ec. 2.2.


.

Quotquot ecclesiae Christi, as many as be members of Christ, and of the
Church, they must subject themselves to the Consistorian discipline, Non hic
excipitur Episcopus, aut Imperator, Neither Bishop, or Emperor is excepted
here, Nulla hic acceptio, aut exceptio est personarum, Here is no acception, or
exception of persons S^eca^ de dis. p. eccles. p. 456.
.

3. Proposition.
His highness may not execute the Ecclesiastical duties of preaching, and
ministering the Sacraments, and yet is to prescribe laws, and directions, unto
all estates, both Ecclesiastical, and Temporal.

The proof from Gods Word.
KIng Ezechiah said unto the Priests, and Levites of his time.

My sons, be not deceived. For the Lord has chosen you to stand before him,
and to serve him, and to be his Ministers, and to burn incense 2 Chr. 29.11.
.

So do we say, The Lord has appointed a company, and calling of men to teach
the people, to expound the Scriptures, to celebrate the Sacraments, to handle
the Keys of the celestial Kingdom: insomuch as he whosoever that shall
presume to do these things, not called thereunto, and that lawfully See before,
ar.
, though he be a King, or Prince, he may fear that punishment which fell upon
Vzzah 2 Chr. 26.19.
.

Notwithstanding, all Kings, Queens, and Princes in their places, may, yea and
must as occasion serves, with K. Solomon build an house for the Lord 2 Chr.
2.1.
, and set the courses of Priests to their office 2 Chr. 8.14.
, with K. Ezechiah break the Images, cut down the Groves, take away the high
places 2 Chr. 31.1.
, appoint the courses of the Priests, and Levites, and enjoyne all the people
to minister sustenance unto the Priests Thus did Ezechiah throughout all Judah,
and did well and uprightly and truly before the Lord his God. 2 Chr. 31.20.
, with K. Josiah, put down, and burn the horses of the Sun 2 Kin 23.11.
, break down the houses of the Sodomites Ibid. 7.
, purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, Groves, carved and molten
Images 2 Chr. 3.34.
, appoint the Priests to their charges Ibid. 3.5.2.
, and compel all that are found in Israel to serve the Lord their God Ib. c.
33.34.
, and with the King of Niniveh proclaim a fast, and command every man to turn
from his evil way, etc Jonas 3.7.
.

Of the same judgment be other Churches Confe. Helv. 1. ar. 26. and 2. c. 30.
Basil. ar. 7. Boh. c 16. Gal. ar. 39. Belg. ar. 35. Sax. ar. 23. Wittem. c. 35.
.

The errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Much therefore out of the way are, and offend greatly do first the Papists,
who publish, that

The care of Religion pertains not unto Kings. Religionis curam semper
pertinnisse adreges, dole, say the expurgators, blot it out Index. expur. p.
145.
.

Queens may not have, or give voice either deliberative, or definitive in
Councels, and public assemblies, concerning matters of Religion, nor make
ecclesiastical laws concerning Religion; nor give any man right to rule,
preach, or execute any spiritual function, as under them, and by their
authority Test. Rhem. an.
.

In matters of Religion, and of their spiritual charge, neither Heathen, nor
Christian Kings, ought to direct Clergiemen, but rather to take direction from
them 1 Cor. 14.33.
.

The Emperor of the whole world, if he take upon him to prescribe laws of
Religion to the Bishops and Priests, etc. he shall be damned assuredly, except
he repent Ans. to the execut. of Just. d. 3. p. 56.
.

Next, the Anabaptists, who being private men, and no Princes, will take upon
them the ordering, and reformation of the Church; as did the Monetarians Test.
Rhem. an. Heb 13.17.
, and Muncer Carranz. sum. Conc^d. 365. Bullin. in con. Anabap.
in Germany.

And thirdly, the Disciplinarian-Puritans, whose doctrine is, that

1. The making of Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and Ceremonies, belongs unto
the Ministers of the Church, and Ecclesiastical Governors T C. 1 rep. p. 163.
, unto the Elders, who are to consult, and admonish, correct, and order all
things pertaining to the congregation 1. Admon. to the Parliam.
.

2. Civil Magistrates have no power to ordain Ceremonies pertaining to the
Church T.C. 1. rep. p. 153.
, but to ordain civil Discipline only Idem. 2. rep. 2 par. p 4.
, as being no Church officers at all.

3. The Ecclesiastical officers be Doctors, Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, the
only officers instituted of God Lear. dis. p. 10.
, or at the most, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons, and widows. These are
all, no more, nor fewer; and are only sufficient; and we are to content our
selves with these, and rest in them, says the Preacher Fruc. s^r. on. Romans 12
p. 33.71.
. In which number unless the King be included, he cannot possibly have any
thing to do in Church affairs, in these men's opinions.

Without the Prince, the people may reform the Church, and must not tarry for
the Magistrate: so thought Barrow, Gr^enewood B^r^ ^fut. p. 169.
, and Wigginton Conspir. for pretend. p. 34.
. Hence Hackets, Coppingers, and Arthingtons insurrection at London, 1691.

Without the Prince also, the Lords and Burgesses of the Parliament have power
of themselves to reform the abuses, and take away the corruptions of the
Church. Hence their manifold petitions, supplications, politic assertions
exhibited unto the Parliament from time to time. In one of which their
supplications, says one (speaking unto the Parliament.)

You must enjoyne every one, according to his place, to have a hand in this
work.

You must encourage, and countenance the Gentlemen, and people, that shall be
found forward, etc.

And, you (of the Parliament) must not suffer an uncircumcised mouth, to bring
a slander upon that Land, etc. sciz. upon their discipline. This has Penry
Penry supp. p. 60.
.

2. Proposition.
The King by his authority is to restrain with the material sword, and to
punish malefactors, whosoever they be.

The proof from Gods Word.
THE office of the Civil Magistrate is to restrain, and if need be, to
punish, according to the quality of their offenses, the disturbers of the
quiet, and peace of the Commonweal; and that as occasion shall require,
sometime by force of arms, if the enemies of his State be either foreign, or
domestical, and they gathered together, be many and mighty. To this end Kings
and Princes have both men, munition, Subsidies, and Tributes. So against the
enemies of God, and good men, went of Israel, and Judah the valiant Judges, and
the noble and puissant Princes.

And sometimes they execute their wholesome, and Penal Statutes upon the
goods, cattle, lands, and bodies of their disorderly, and rebellious subjects.

For the King is a Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil.
Therefore Princes are to be feared, not of them which do well, but of such as
do wickedly Romans 13.3, 4.
.

And this do the people of God acknowledge to be true Conf. Helv. 1 ar.
24.26. and 2. c. 30. Basi. ar. 7. Bohe. cap. 19. Gal. artic. 33. Belg. artic.
36. August. ar. 16. Saxon. ar. 23.
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
Contrarily hereunto,

The Cresconians were of opinion, that Magistrates were to punish no
malefactors D. Aug. contra Crescon. Gra. l. 3. c. 51.
.

One Rabanus maintained, that Magistrates were not of Gods Ordinance for the
good, but an humane institution for the hurt of men Mag. eccles. hist. Cen. 6.
c. 4. fol. 2 16.
.

Many have a fancy, that before the general Resurrection there shall be no
Magistrates at all: because they dream, all the wicked shall be rooted out. Of
this mind are the Anabaptists Confess. Aug. ar. 17.
, and the family of Love H. N. 1. exh. c. 12. sect. 39.40. Ramseis confess.
.

5. Proposition.
The Bishop of Rome has not jurisdiction in this Realm of England (nor other
of the Kings Dominions.)

The proof from Gods Word.
THE Bishop of Rome; did he according to the Will of God Preach the Gospel;
labor in the Lords harvest; divide the Word of God aright; minister the
Sacraments instituted by Christ, and that sincerely; and show by his life and
conversation the good fruits of a godly Bishop, doubtless he were worthy of
double 1 Timothy 5.17.
, yea of triple honor.

Yet will not the Word of God, were he never so holy, and religious, warrant
him any jurisdiction out of his Diocese, especially not within this Realm;
much less when he does perform no part of a Christian, but every part of an
Antichristian Bishop, in corrupting the doctrine of the truth with errors, and
cursed opinions; in polluting the Sacraments of Christ by superstitious
ceremonies; in persecuting the Church and Saints with fire and sword; in making
merchandise of the souls of men through covetousness 2 Pet. 2.3.
; in playing the lord over Gods heritage 1 Pet. 5.3.
; in sitting in the Temple of God, as God, showing himself that he is god 2
Th. s. 2.4.
; and in exalting himself against all that is called God, or that is
worshipped Ibid.
.

In respect of which fruits of impieties, the said Bishop of Rome, in the holy
Scripture is described to be very Antichrist, that wicked man, the man of
sin, the son of perdition, and the adversary of God Ibid.
.

He was openly proclaimed Antichrist by a Council in France in the Reign of
Hugh Capet. He is termed by the truly, and godly learned, The Basiliske of the
Church Luther praef. epi. L. Huss.
; neither the Head, nor the tail of the Church Heming. in 5. c. Iac. epist.
.

His jurisdiction has been, and is justly renounced, and banished out of
England by many Kings, and Parliaments, as by King Edward the 1. 3. and 6. by
King Richard the 2. by King Henry the 4. 6. and 8. by Queen Elizabeth; and by
our most Noble King James.

His pride, and intolerable supremacy over all Christian people is renounced,
and condemned as well by the mouths, as writings of all the purer Churches
Conf Helv. 1 ar. 18 and 2. c. 17 18. Bohe. c. 8.9 Belg. ar. 28.32 Wittem. ar.
31. August. de Abus. ar. 7.
; and that deservedly.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
But with the Papists, the Bishop of Rome, he is forsooth for supremacy,
Abel; for governing the Arc, Noah; for Patriarch-ship, Abraham; for order,
Melchisedech; for dignity, Aaron; for authority, Moses; for justice, Samuel;
for zeal, Elias; for humility, David; for power, Peter; for his unction,
Christ Majoran. clyd milit. Ec lib. 3 c. 35.
: the general Pastor, the common Father of all Christians, the high Pastor of
Gods universal Church, the Prince of Gods people Ans. to the execu. of lust.
; for title, God, even the Lord God the Pope Panorm. de transl. praef c. Q anto.
; for power, God. For

By him Kings reign Cerc. l. 1. c. 2.
, he may judge all men, but must of none be judged Distin 40. c. 5. Papa.
, he can do what him list as well as God, except sin Extravag de cranst.
Epis^. cap. Quanto.
.

His jurisdiction is universal, even over the whole world Test Rhem. annot.
marg. p. 2^0.
.

Him, upon pain of eternal damnation, all Christians are to obey Bor if. 8
cau. de major. and obed. in Extravag.
.

And by his Sovereign authority both all Papists in England were discharged
from their obedience and subjection unto Queen Elizabeth, and the same Queen
disabled to govern her own people, and dominions Bristow motive 40.
.

6. Proposition.
By the laws of this Realm, Christian men, for heinous and grievous offenses,
may be put to death.

The proof from Gods Word.
AS the natures of men be diverse; and some sins in some countries more abound
then in others: so are the punishments to be imposed upon malefactors,
according to the quantity, and quality of their offenses; and any Country and
Kingdom may punish offenders, even with death, if the Laws thereof, and their
offense do require it. For

All that take the sword, shall perish with the sword Math. 25.52.
.

Governors be sent of the King, for the punishment of evil doers 1 Pet. 2.14.
.

A wise King scatters the wicked, and causes the wheel to turn over them
Prove. 20.26.
.

The Magistrate bears not the sword for naught, and is the Minister of God to
take vengeance on them that do evil Romans 13.4.
.

Which punishments testify to the world, that

God is just, which will have some sins more severely punished then others;
and the Magistrates to cut off dangerous and ungodly members.

God is merciful, and has care both of his servants, and of humane society.

God is all wise, and holy, in that he will have it known who are just, who
wicked, who holy, and who profane; by cherishing and preserving of the one,
and by punishing and rooting out of the other.

Our godly and Christian brethren in other Countries approve this doctrine
Confess. Helv. 1. ar. 24 26. and 2. c. 30. Basi. c. 7. Bohe. c 16. Gal. ar. 39.
Belg. ar. 36. August. ar. 16. Sax ar. 23.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
The adversaries of this doctrine be diverse. For

Some are of opinion that no man for any offense should be put to death. Such
in old time were the Manichies, and the Donatists D. August. in Johan 11.
; and such in our days be the Anabaptists Confe. Helv. 2. c. 30.
.

And some do think that howsoever for their offenses against the second
Table, malefactors may be put to death: yet for heretical and erroneous
opinions in points of Religion, none are so to suffer. Of this mind are the
Familists. For

They hold, that no man should be put to death for his opinions Display. lib.
.

They blame Mr. Granmer and Ridley, for burning Ioane of Kent, for an heretic
Ibid.
.

It is not Christian-like, that one man should persecute another, for any cause
touching conscience Fam. 2. letter unto M. To.
. Is not that punishment sufficient (say they) which God has ordained, but
that one Christian must vex, torment, belie, and persecute another Ibid.
?

7. Proposition.
It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrates, to
wear weapons and serve in wars.

The proof from Gods Word.
There is (says K. Solomon) a time of war, and a time of peace Eccles. 2.8.
; and Princes are by war and weapons, to repress the power of enemies,
whether foreign, or intestine. For they are in authority placed for the
defense of quiet, and harmless subjects; as also to remove the violence of
oppressors, and enemies whatsoever they be. For these causes have they Horses,
prepared for the battle Prove 2.31.
; Tribute paid them as well for Christians Romans 13.6, 7.
, as others, and subjects to serve them in their wars, of what nature soever.

Cornelius being a Christian Acts 10.
, was not forbidden to play the Centurion, or bidden to forsake his profession
Luke 3.14.
; nor the soldiers that came unto John's baptism willed to leave the wars,
but to offer no violence unto any man.

This truth is granted by the Church Confess. Helv. 2.^.30. Bohe. c. 16. S^x.
ar. 23
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Many are against this assertion, whereof some doubt of the truth thereof, as
Ludovicus Vives Arma Christianum virum tractare n^s^^o ^n ^^s sit, Lud. V^ves
Instuut. su^m Chr. ^. 1.
.

Others deny it altogether as untrue. So did in ancient time the Manichies,
whose doctrine was, that no man might go to war D. Aug. contra Manich. l.
22. c. 74
.

Lactartius thought it altogether unlawful for a good man, or a Christian,
either to go to war, or to bring any man to a violent death, though by law
he were adjudged to dye Lactan. de vero cultu^e 20
.

In these days the Anabaptists think it to be a thing most execrable for
Christians to take weapons to go to war Confess. Helv. 2. c 30.
.

The Family of Love also do so condemn all wars, as the time was when they
would not bear, or wear a weapon Display. H. 5.5. b.
, and they write first of themselves how all their nature is Love and peace
H.N. spi. lan. c. 37. sect 2.
, and that they are people peaceable Ibid prae. sect. 3^.
, but all other men in the world besides, they do wage war, kill and
destroy: for which ends they have diverse sorts of Swords, Halberds, Spears,
Bows and Arrows, Guns, Pellets, and Gunpowder, Armor, Harness, and Go^gets
Ibid. cap. 4. (...). 9.
, none of which the Familists do use or allow of.

38. Article. Of Christian men's goods, which are not common.
The riches and goods of Christians 1, are not common, as touching the right,
title, and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding 2, every man ought of such things as he possesses, liberally
to give alms to the poor according to his ability.

The Propositions.
1. The riches, and goods of Christians, as touching the right, title, and
possession of the same, are not common. 2. Every man is to give liberal alms
to the poor, of that which he possesses, according to his ability.
1. Proposition.
The riches, and goods of Christians, as touching the title, and possession of
the same, are not common.

The proof from Gods Word.
AGainst community of goods and riches, be all those places (which are
infinite) of the holy Scripture, that either condemn the unlawful getting,
keeping, or desiring of riches, which by Covetousness If any one that is
called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, etc. with such one eat not.

Covetousness let it not be once named among you, as it becomes Saints. Ephesians.
5.3.


, Theevery, Let none of you suffer as a Thief, etc. 1 Pet. 4.15.
, Extortion With a brother that is an extortioner, eat not, 1 Cor. 5.11.
Neither thieves, nor covetous (persons) nor Extortioners shall inherit the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10.
, and the like wicked means many do attain; or do commend liberality It is
a blessed thing to give rather then to receive, Acts 10.35. yea* and that thing
ye do unto all the Brethren throughout all Macedonia, 1 These. 4.10. If a
brother or a sister be naked and destitute of daily food, etc. notwithstanding
ye give them not these things which are needful to the body, what helps it?
James 2.15, 16.
, Frugality If there be any that provideth not for his own, and namely, for
them of his household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
, free and friendly lending From him that would borrow of thee, turn not away,
Matthew. 5.42. And lend, looking for nothing again, Luke 6.35.
, honest labor Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor,
etc. that he may have to give unto him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28. We warned
you, that if there were any which would not work, that he should not eat, 2
These. 3.8.
, and lawful vocations to live, and thrive by Ye know that these hands have
ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me, Acts 20.34. We
labored day and night, because we should not be chargeable unto any of you, 1
These. 2.9. we took not bread of any man for naught, 1 These. 3.8.
. All which do show, that Christians are to have goods of their own, and that
riches ought not to be common.

Of this judgment be the reformed Churches Confess. Helv. 3. c. 29. Gal. ar.
40. Belg. ar. 36. Aug. ar. 16. Wittemb. c. 21.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Of another mind were the Esseis Heyden des. urbis Hierosolym. l. 3. c. 3.
, the Manichies D. Aug. de mor. eccles. Cat. lib. 1.
, the Pelagians Magdeb. eccles. hist. Genesis ^. fol. 586.
, the Apostolikes D. Humfr. de Romanae curiae praxi p 39. exl. Epiphan.
, and Fratricellians W. Tho. desc. of Italy p. 59.
, and are the Anabaptists Sleidan. com. lib. 6.
, and Family of Love Display. H. 3 b.
.

Among the Familists (says H.N.) none claims any thing proper to himself
for to possess the same to any owednesse, or privatenesse. For no man, etc.
can desire to appropriate, or challenge any thing to himself, either yet to
make any private use to himself from the restward; but what is there, is free,
and is also left free in his upright form H. N. Spir. laud. c. 35. sect. 34.
.

1. Proposition.
Every man is to give liberal Alms to the poor, of that which he possesses,
according to his ability.

The proof from Gods Word.
Unto liberality toward the poor, according to our ability, we are in the
holy Scriptures provoked.

1. By the commandments from God, by his servants the Prophets Deuteronomy. 15.11.
Prove. 5.15, 16. Eccles. 11.1, 2.
, by his Son our Savior Matthew. 5.42. etc. 6.2, 3, etc. Luke 9.30, etc.
, and by his Apostles Romans 12.13. 1 Cor. 1.62.
.

2. By sweet promises of ample blessings Eccles. 11.1. The liberal person
shall have plenty: and he that waters, shall also have rain, Prove. 11.24.
He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall cry, and not be
heard, Prove. 1.13.
.

3. By threatenings of punishments to the covetous, and stony-hearted He that
gives unto the poor, shall not lack, but he that hides his eyes (shall have)
many curses, Prove. 28.27.
.

4. By the examples of the best men, viz. the Apostles, and Primitive Church
Acts 11.19, 20. Romans 15.15. 1 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, etc. 2. Cor. 6.2, etc.
.

So the Churches Conf. Helv. 2 c. 2. 3. 28, 29. Sax. ar. 21. Wittemb. c. 18.
.

The adversaries unto this truth.
Of strange minds therefore and impious; are

First, the Anabaptists, which would have no man either to give, or receive.
For all things in their opinion should be common (as before also has bin said,)
and none among them be either poor to receive, or wealthy to minister any
alms Bale mist. of Iniq. p 53.
.

Secondly, the hypocritical sectaries, who are bountiful only to those which
side with them. Such were first the Publicans in our Savior his days Mar. ^
46.47
, and after them the Manichies, who would minister neither bread, nor water
unto any hungry, and pyning beggar, unless he wear a Manichean Homini mendico
esurienti, nisi Manichaeus sit, panem aut aquam no^ porrigunt. Manic. D Aug. de
Mor. Manc. l. 2.
.

And such are the Family of Love; who say they are not bound to give alms but
to their own sect: and if they do, they give the same to the devil. Dispi.
H. 7. b.


39. Article. Of a Christian man's oath.
As we confess that 1 vain, and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men, by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: So we judge that 2 Christian
Religion does not prohibit, but that a man may swear, when the Magistrate
requires, in a cause of faith, and charity; so it be done according to the
Prophets teaching, in justice, judgment, and truth.

The Propositions.
1. We may not swear vainly, and rashly. 2. A lawful oath may be given, and
taken; according to the Word of God in justice, judgment, and truth.
1. Proposition.
We may not swear vainly, and rashly.

The proof from Gods Word.
THE better to avoid vain, and rash oaths and swearing; it is good to have in
remembrance that which is said by our Savior Christ, and his Apostle James.

Our Savior says. Swear not at all, neither by heaven for it is the throne
of God, nor by the earth, for it is his footstool, nor by Jerusalem, for it is
the City of the great King; nor by thine head, because thou can not make one
hair white or black: but let your communication be, yea yea, nay nay Math.
5.34.
.

So the Apostle Saint James, Before all things, my brethren (says he) swear
not, either by the heaven or by the earth, or by any other oath, but let your
yea be yea, and your nay nay, lest ye fall into condemnation James 5.12.
.

All Churches do, and some in their public writings condemn vain, rash, and
idle oaths Conf. Helv. 2. c. 5. Basil. ar. 11
.

Adversaries unto this truth.
This declares many sorts of men to be very impious, as

The Wantons, which for pleasure, and the covetous worldlings, who for gain,
and profit, blush not to take the name of God in vain, by idle, rash and
usual oaches. Next, the Basilidians Philast.
, Helchisaites Eusebius. ex O^ v. d. l. 8. c. 38.
, Priscillianites Bulli. con^^ Anath^p. l. 2. cap 4.
, and Family of Love Ramscis con.
, who for ease, and to avoid trouble and persecu^ion, dread not to swear, and
forswear themselves.

Thirdly, the Papists: whose common guise is to swear either by Saints, or
Idols, or by God and creatures together Pet. de Soto Math. conf. p. 40. a.
.

Fourthly, the Puritanes, who use to swear, though not by God, etc. yet as
wickedly using horrible imprecations: as I renounce God, God damn me: or as
Hackets manner was, God confound me Conspir. fer. pretend refer. p 5.
.

Lastly, the Banisterians, who deem it Hypocrisy for one Christian to reprove
another, for common and rash swearing, which are but Trifles, in their opinions
Unfold of Banist. errors.
.

2. Proposition.
A lawful Oath may be given, and taken, according to the Word of God, in
justice, judgment and truth.

The proof from Gods Word.
THe truth of this doctrine appears plentifully in the holy Scriptures. For
in the same there be both Commandments that we must, and may; and forms
prescribed how we shall swear.

For the first: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him; And shall
swear by his name, says Moses; Again, thou shall swear, Deuteronomy. 9.13, 22.11.
The Lord lives, and thou shall cleave unto him and shall swear by his Name
Ibid. 10 20.
.

And touching the other, swear may we not, either by Baal Ierem. 12.16
: or by strange gods Josh. 27.7.
; or by the Lord, and by Melchom (that is, by Idols Zeph. 1.7.
:) or by any creatures Matthew 5.34.
.

But our Oaths must be made in the name of the Lord Deuteronomy. 6.13.
: as, The Lord lives Ier. 12.^6.
: and all is to be done in truth, judgment and righteousness Ier. 4 2.
, and when the magistrate calls us thereunto Exodus 22.8. 1 King. 8.31.
.

All Churches join with us in this assertion, and some testify the same in
their public writings Confess. Helv. 2. ar. 16. and 1.2.30. Gal. ar. 40. Basil
ar 11. sect. 1. Aug. ar. 16.
.

The Errors, and adversaries unto this truth.
Many be the adversaries one way or other, crossing this truth. For,

1. Some condemn all swearing, as did the Esseies, who deem all swearing as
bad as forswearing ^ard. of s^^^ons, 2 part.
; and do the Anabaptists, which will not swear, albeit thereby both the glory
of God may be much promoted, and the Church of Christ, or Common weal
furthered Conf^. Basil. ar. 11 sect. 1,
.

2. Others condemn some kind of Oaths, and will not swear, though urged by
the magistrate, but when themselves think good. So the Papists, no man (say
they) ought to take an Oath to accuse a Catholic (a Papist) for his religion
Test. Rhem. an Act. 23.12.
, and such as by Oaths accuse Catholics (that is, Papist,) are damned Ibid.
.

So the Puritanes, oftentimes either will take none oath at all when it is
ministered unto them by authority, if it may turn to the molestation of their
Brethren Hook of eccles. pol. praef.
, or if they swear (finding their testimony will be hurtful to their cause)
they will not deliver their ^^nds after they be sworn D. Su^cliffe ans. to Job
Throk. p. 46. b.
.

3. Others, having taken the Oath, do foulely abuse the same as the knights of
the post, like the Turkish Seiti, and Chargi Pol. of the Turk. emp. c. 24. p.
74.
, who for a Ducket will take a thousand false Oaths before the magistrate: as
also the Jesuits, who in swearing (which is little better then forswearing) do
viti scientia, that is, cunning, and equivocations Quod lib p. 34. 68 Garnets
arraign.
: as also do they, who conscionably, and religiously keep not their faith;
such are the forenamed Papists* (For they say) an Oath taken for the
furtherance of false religion (as they take the profession of all Protestants
to be Test. Rhem. an Act. 20 12.
) binds not Iurament^m propter falsam religionem prestatum non obligat Bap.
Frickl^r de jure magist. p. 11.
. Again, Faith ^s not to be kept with Heretics Conc. Constan.
. Which assertion little differs from the opinion of some Puritanes, who
teach, that promise (or Faith) is not to be kept, when (as perhaps by the not
erecting of Presbyteries in every Parish) Gods honor, and preaching of his
Word is hindered Geneva an. Matthew. 2.12. One of them has delivered, that if the
Prince do hinder the building of the Church, the people may by force of arms
resist him. Ans. to the Abstract. p. 94.
.

Subjects be discharged from their Oath of Allegiance, and may gather forces
against their liege Sovereign, if he enterprise any thing to the hurt of his
Realm, or of the (Romish) religion, was a determination of the Sorbonists in a
certain conventicle of theirs at Paris Mercur. Gal. lobelg l. 2. p. 89.
. And that Magistrates, by their subjects, may be brought under to obedience of
Laws, was a conclusion of certain Scottish Ministers in a private Conventicle
of Edinburgh Bucchan. rerum Sotic. l. 17 p. 202.
.

Seditiosi non sunt qui resistant principibus, politicum, aut ecclesiasticum
statum perturbantibus: Nam qui resistit Principi seditiosus non est, sed
seditionem tollit: says a Frenchman Eusebius. Philadelph. dial. 2. p. 57.
: yea (says an Englishman,) whose works by T.C. are highly approved, and
commended, Hunc tollant vel pacifice, vel cum bello, qui ea protestate donati
sunt, ut regni Ephori, vel omnium ordinum conventus publicus Dud. Fen. S. Theo.
l. 5. c. 13
: Subjects may not respect their Oaths made unto such Princes, which trouble
the state of the Church, or Commonweal.

Finally, whatsoever Princes be (good or bad) if they be women (say some)
oaths or allegiance then are not to be kept. Their words be these:

First, (as well the States of the kingdom, as the common people) They ought to
remoove from honor, and authority that monster in nature: so call I woman in
the habit of man, yea a woman against nature reigning above man. Secondly, if
any presume to defend that impiety, they ought not to fear, first to
pronounce, and then after to execute against them (that is to say, against
women governors) the sentence of death. If any man be afraid to violate the
oath of obedience, which they have made to such monsters, let them be most
assuredly persuaded, that as the beginning of their oaths, proceeding from
ignorance, was sin: so is the obstinate purpose to keep the same, nothing
but plain rebellion against God Against the regim. of women 2. blas. p. 53. b.
.

Lastly of all, whereas every Minister of the Word, and Sacraments, at his
ordination does swear to obey his Diocesan in all lawful matters, certain
Gentlemen of the Puritan faction, writ thus unto the Bishops of the Church of
England, and printed the same, viz. The Canon law is utterly void within the
Realm, and therefore your Oath of Canonical obedience is of no force, and all
your Canonical admonitions not worth a rush The Gentlemen's demands unto the
Bishops (printed ann. 1605.) p. 76.
.

D. Hilar. contra Constanti^^ August. Non recipi^ m^^ndarium veritas; nec
patitur Religi^ impietatum. The truth admits no lie; neither can Religion abide
impiety. 1 Timothy 1. v. 19. Unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto
God only wise (be) honor, (and) glory for ever, and ever, Amen.
FINIS.

