A VISITATION SERMON, Preached at the Lord Archbishops trienniall and ordinary
Visitation, In St. Margarets in Canterbury, upon April the fifth, 1630.

By Francis Rogers, Doctor in Divinity, and Minister of that Parish.

ECCLESIASTES 12.10. The Preacher did seek out pleasant words.

LONDON, Printed by John Norton, for William Adderton, and are to be sold at
his shop in Bethlem without Bishops-gate. 1633.

To the most Reverend Father in God, George, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan.
THis Sermon was lately preached at your Graces Visitation; and now being
willing to show it self unto others, as well as unto those that heard it,
presents it self with all humility to your gracious hands, desiring to give it
your blessing, before it walk abroad, even That with which Jacob sent his
sons into Egypt, that God would give it mercy in the sight of the man; in the
sight of the Schismatic man, to make him conformable; in the sight of the
conformable man, to keep in straight paths; in the sight of the idle Shepherd,
to stir him up to feed Gods Flock; in the sight of the paynefull Labourer,
not to pull his hand from the plow, but to persevere in Gods harvest: So God
continue to direct your Grace in all weighty affairs, to Gods glory, and the
good of his Church, and your own souls comfort.

Your Graces most bounden, Francis Rogers.

A Visitation Sermon, preached at the Lord Archbishops trienniall and ordinary
Visitation.
ECCLESIASTES 12.10. The Preacher did seek out pleasant words.


IT is much controuersed betwixt us and the Papists, whether Solomon were
saved. The reasons on both sides, made Petrus Tenerius, Archbishop of Toledo,
to cause his paynter, to picture in his Chapel, heaven and hell, and to place
Solomon in the midst, one half in hell, the other half in heaven. For mine
own part, I had rather believe Saul is saved then Solomon damned: the Canon of
charity will instruct me for the one, and there is no Canon of certitude to
warrant me for the other. But I mean to omit this, and all other things
touching this Book: and at this time only to accommodate my self to this
present occasion.

In these words therefore I note three things.

First, who this Preacher was, cap. 1.12. I the Preacher was King over Israel:
and hence I note the dignity and honor of the Priesthood.

Secondly, I note the labor and travel appertaining to this calling in, did
seek out.

Thirdly, I note the wisdom and discretion should be in this calling, non
magno conatu nugas peragere, like Mirmerides and Milesius in Aeliau, who made
wagons for a Fly to draw: (...). These things are nothing but loss of time.
But my Preacher sought out pleasant words, that is, in the end of this verse,
words of truth.

So these three things I purpose by Gods grace and your patience, to treat of
at this time, namely, the Dignity Labor Wisdom
of the Priest, and Priesthood.

For the dignity: I the Preacher was King over Israel; and he calls himself
in this book, seven times by the name of Preacher. We are called in the
Bible, Gods Ambassadors, shining stars, Revel. 2.3. we are termed Angels,
because as Gods Angels were wont to bring Gods messages to man: so the
Ministers do preach glad tidings of salvation in Christ. Hence the godly did
always give all honorable titles to Gods Priests. Sara called Abraham Lord.
Hannah called Ely Lord. The widow called Elias Lord. The Jews never almost
spoke unto our Savior, but they called him Lord, Master, or Rabbi. The costly
garment appointed by God himself, for Aaron to wear, Exodus 28. shows in
what high esteem the Priest should be. Come we to the heathen men. The
Phaenices allowed their Priest only to wear Gold, and Purple robes, down to
the feet: and in token of a prerogative of greater honor, he wore a Crown
of Gold and precious Stones. The Priest of Hercules was clothed in Purple,
wearing a Miter, and he was next in honor unto the King. Among the Romans,
Kings were wont to undergo the Office of Priests: and when the Kings ceased,
it was unlawful to create Priests of any which were not of the Senate House.
Flamen Dialis, which was Jupiters High Priest, was arrayed with a costly
garment, he was to ride in his Chariot: if any had been brought bound in his
house, he was to be loosed, in honor of the Priest: if any had been carried
to punishment, and had fallen down humbly at his feet, it had been great
sin that day to strike him. The Tribe of Judah was the Kingly Tribe, and none
might marry into that Tribe but Leui. Hence came Iehoiada the High Priest to be
of the Blood-royall, and Uncle to King Ioash. But the Priests greatest honor
is in Job 33. verse 23, 24. If there be with him a Messenger an Interpreter,
one of a thousand to declare unto men his righteousness, Then will he have
mercy on him: and will say, Deliver him, that he go not down into the pit,
for I have received a reconciliation. In which words we see, that authority is
given to the Minister, to redeem a penitent soul from hell and damnation: and
this is the greatest honor that ever was given to any creature.

Angels gave the Law at Mount Sinai. Angels revealed the birth of Christ.
Angels have often brought glad messages from God to man. But it was never said
to Angel, Deliver that man, that he go not down into the pit. To some
callings God says, Work thou for man, Build him houses, Provide him
sustenance. To the Physician, Heal the man. To the Lawyer, Plead for the man.
To the Soldier, Fight for the man. To the Magistrate, Defend him. To the King,
Govern him. To none but to the Minister, Deliver him, that he go no down
into the pit. But, though this function be so excellent, yet we may not say,
as it is in the Popes decrees: As the Sun in glory exceeds the Moon, so
does the Pope excel the Emperor. Nor as Bellarmine, that Kings are not only
subject to Popes, to Bishops, to Priests, but even to Deacons: that an Emperor
must content himself not only to drink after a Bishop, but after a Bishops
Chaplain: if they are as they have been called diseased Priests, this were a
slouenly and a hard penance for a King to perform. And again, Bishops that
are but Popes Vassals, may depose Kings, and abrogate their Laws. These things
proceed out of the mouth that speaks blasphemy, and they savor only of
that man of sin, which does sit in the Church of God, and exalt himself
above God, and above all that is called Gods.

But we hold it for a truth undeniable, that Kings may, as did Solomon, depose
Abiathar the High Priest, and place Zadok in his room. And therefore though
the Priest be so excellent, yet let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, and that for conscience sake: and if every soul, then your soul. So
says Bernard to Pope Eugenius.

This our calling so honorable, serves, First, to instruct our selves.

Secondly, others.

For our selves.

Is this our calling so excellent? Then know, Generatio optima, corruption
pessima, The best things corrupted, prove the worst: for Omnis corruption est in
contrarium, all corruption is into the contrary: See by the Angels, most
glorious in their creation, most loathsome in their degeneration. As I hold
none more to be reverenced, then a good Minister: so, none more base, then one
deboshed in his life. Thus our Savior, Ye are the Salt of the earth, but if
the Salt be unsavory, it is fit for nothing, but to be cast on the dunghill,
and trod under foot. Then, as we are the light of the world: So, Our light
must shine before others, that they seeing our good works, may learn to
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Ille granditer dicit, qui non
contemptibiliter viuit, He preaches well, that does not live contemptibly,
says Augustine. Among Grammarians, he is excellent that can speak well: for
Grammar is an art of speaking. But among Deuines, not only words, but works
are required. Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum: Men (says
Lactantius) had rather have good examples then good words, for it is easy to
speak well, but hard to do well. Priests must be verbarij, et operarij:
preaching in doctrine and in life: for Ille solom praedicat viua voce, qui
praedicat vita et voce: He only preaches with a lively voice, which preaches
with his life and voice. Omnia in sacerdote debent esse vocalia, says Saint
Jerome, All things in a Divine must preach, his apparel must preach, his Diet
must preach, his pleasures must preach, all his life must preach, 1. Tim. 4.12.
He must be an ensample in word, in conversation, in spirit, in faith, in
pureness. Quid Antistes ad dominum, nisi pro delictis populi Intercessor
eligitur, says Gregory? Why is the Minister chosen, but to intercede for the
people, and to reconcile the people to God? And with what confidence dare he
presume to reconcile others to God, when himself is unreconciled by his
wickedness? Will one enemy reconcile a third person to his utter enemy?
Sacerdotis Christios, men's, manusque concordent: The hands, the mouth, and the
mind of the Minister of Christ must agree together, says Jerome, Sic oculos,
sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat.

A learned Friar, at a Council, complaining of the abuse of the Clergy,
preaching before the Emperor, wished him to begin reformation of the Clergy a
minoribus, from the inferior sort of Clergy. The Emperor thanked him for his
Sermon, and said, He had rather begin a maioribus, from the better sort of
Clergy. So, the more eminent a Clergy man, the more shining let him be in
virtuous living. Ministers are like great stones in a building: if one stone in
the side of this Church fall, there will follow a Cart-load of rubbish after.
So, one bad example of a Minister, especially of a great one, will cause
thousands of poor sheep to fall into the ditch: and we must redress the
smallest faults.

Plutarke reports, Cymon a just man was blemished, because he drank wine.
Pompey the great was esteemed effeminate, because he scratched his head with
one finger. Worthy Scipio was checked, because he was given to sleep much.
And so moates in Preachers will be judged beams: For as Eccles. 10.1. Dead
Flies (and a Fly is but a small creature) cause to stink, and putrify the
Ointment of the Apothecary. So, a little folly, him that is in estimation for
wisdom and glory. So, we especially of all men, should make use of the
Italian Proverb, The want of a nail, is the loss of a shoo: the loss of a
shoo, the hurt of an horse: the hurt of an horse, the death of a Captain: the
death of a Captain, the overthrow of an Army: the overthrow of an Army, the
utter ruin and desolation of a whole Kingdom. There is a Fable, That the Axe
wanted an helue, and coming to a great Wood, begged only so much wood as to
make the helue: alleging that it would be no hurt to the Wood which was so
great, and that parcel of wood so small: this being granted, no soone^ was the
helue fitted to the Axe, but presently the Axe did cut down the whole Wood.
And so take we heed, how we harbor the smallest faults, and give scandal in
the least things: for time may come, that these in the end may grow so big, as
That evil doom may befall the Church, which did in Henry the eyghth his time:
which God in his mercy prevent. Nay, to avoid from scandal, we ought to
abstain even a licitis, from things lawful. For as Erasmus observes, That
which is a virtue in God, is oftentimes a sin in man. For example, it was
infinite mercy in God, to forgive David's murder and adultery: but it would be a
blot in justice, to a King to pardon such a double offense in any subject. So,
what is commendable in others, will be vicious in us. Therefore Saint Paul's
rule is true, Though all things are lawful, yet all things are not expedient.

It was a foul sin in Balaam, to be both ambitious and auaricious: but it
was more foul in him, so to persevere that his Ass should be wiser then
himself, and able to prove him. So, it is evil in the Clergy to be sinful
in their conversation: but it is too bad, when they grow to such an height, as
that the asses of this age, the simple Artificer, and plain Countreyman shall
be able to discern and condemn him, and point with the finger, saying, Ditior
hic est, there is one which is a lewd Minister, one which is scandalous in his
conversation.

Secondly, for the people.

Is our calling so honorable, as to be Gods Ambassadors? Then ought ye to
reverence our persons, and honor our function: He which despises you,
despises me: but he which receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall
have a Prophets reward. But alas, our Gospellers are like the Romans Saint
Augustine speaks of, l. 2. de ciu. Dei, cap. vlt. They could allow of Plays
to be acted in honor of their gods, but they esteemed those which acted them,
to be most base. So, we allow of Prayers, preaching, etc. but these which are
set apart for such duties, are esteemed men of the meanest rank and
condition. Under the Law, the Kings would be Prophets, and sons of Kings
would serve at the Altar: Nay, Christ the Son of God took upon him the
Office of a Priest in the Church of Rome. Dukes, Earls, and Nobles desire
admittance into holy orders. But among us a Gentleman, an elder brother a
Priest, were Rara auis in terris, nigroque simillima Cygno: you may as soon
see a black Swan swim down the river, nay but for necessity, none of a Gentle
family: and yet were it not for the Priesthood, there would be many a hundred
poor beggarly Gentlemen which now live in good repute, and uphold the honor
of the family with the Elder brother: and thus it comes to pass oftentimes,
that when learning and honesty abound, the Minister is contemned by reason of
his birth.

Herodotus reports, that in the temple of Apollo were vessels of gold and
silver, wherein they sacrificed to their gods: and other vessels of pewter and
tin, which served for other uses: in process of time, the temple being
robbed of the richer vessels, they were constrained to use the meaner, which
though in themselves but mean, yet they were esteemed of highly, because they
were ordained for holy uses. So, admit the birth of many be mean and obscure,
yet if they be set apart to preach the Gospel, esteem them not as they are
in birth, sons of obscure parents: but as they are in Office, Priests of the
most high God: Knowing, that none dare to resist a poor Bozholder, the meanest
officer, but his contempt is to the King himself. And I could wish, that our
contempt did not oftentimes arise from our own Coat. Which of our great
Prophets will make his son a Prophet, and match into the houses of other
Prophets? Nay, as many Lay Gentlemen observe, They which should uphold the
honor of our Coat, bring the disdain, in regard the Great personages in the
Church, disdain to countenance the poor Clergy. We poor country Ministers
are the legs and feet, whereon the shoulders and arms of the great
Churchmen stand. But I wish these to remember, that if a man catch cold in the
feet, it will quickly strike up into the head, and so, if contempt light on us
the Feet, it will soon possess the Heads, and great Ones too: so here, 1
Cor. 4.1. Let men so esteem of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
disposers of the secrets of God. For, art thou beholding to him, who when thou
have lost a Jewel of much value, finds it for thee? To a Lawyer, for
pleading thy cause? To a Physician, for recovering thy health? Then much more
esteem of him, who when thy soul is lost in Adam, does redeem it out of the
pit, and hell of damnation.

The second thing I observed in this text, is, The Preachers labor and
travail, he did seek out.

Was not my Preacher a King, and so, higher then a Pope? Had he not learning
and wisdom in abundant manner? He did swim in wealth: and then, what madness
was it in him to be laborious and painful? I, but my Preacher esteemed no
wisdom, nor learning comparable, to win souls, and instruct Gods people.
And therefore, verse 9. The more wise the Preacher was, the more he taught the
people knowledge, and caused them to hear, and searched forth, and prepared
many parables. 1 Timothy 3. If any desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires a
worthy work. The name Bishop, puts us in mind of the great labor and
travel belongs to that Function. Episcopus est speculator, obseruator, et
custos, et praefectus: A Bishop is a Watchman, an Ouerseer, a Superintendent:
all which words import a labor and travail, pertaining to the Function. Thus
Tully ad Atticum, Vult me Pompeius esse, quem tota haec Campania, et maritima
ora habeant, Episcopum ad quem delectus et negotij summa referatur. Pompey
would have me him, whom this region and the Seacoasts should have their
Bishop, to whom the choice and chief business should be committed. Thus the
Athenians called them whom they sent to view the disorders of their Cities,
Bishops. Hence Saint Augustine lib. de ciuit. Dei, cap. 19. Episcopus nomen est
operis, non honoris, vt intelligat non se esse Episcopum, qui praeesse
dilexerit, et non prodesse. A Bishops name, is a name of labor, not of honor.
To teach us, that he is not a Bishop, which strives to rule in the Church,
and not to profit the Church by his labor and preaching. For as Prosper says,
Nihil Sacerdoti prodest, etiamsi been vixerit, modo male viuentes tacendo non
arguit. It does not profit a Priest to live well, unless, withal he reprove
evil livers by his doctrine. Our Saviors Commission was, Math. 28. Go teach
and baptize all Nations, teaching them to observe all things I have commanded
you. Hence Saint Paul, Woe is me, if I preach not the Gospel. And Acts 20.
When Paul sent for the Elders of Ephesus, he first related his own pains,
That he was free from the blood of all men, and had kept nothing back, which
was necessary for their salvation. And then verse. 28. he gave them this great
charge, Take heed unto your selves, and to all the Flock, whereof the Holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. And 2 Timothy 4. I charge thee before God, and
before the Lord Jesus, preach the Word in season, and out of season, reprove,
exhort, rebuke, with all long sufferance, and doctrine.

I but how often? Solomon says, Pauci sint sermones tu^, Let thy Sermons be
few: quarter Sermons, monthly Sermons? No, Be instant in season, and out of
season. We are laborers in Gods Vineyard. Take heed we hear not one day, Why
stand you here idle all the day long?

I, but all preaching? no praying? Indeed there are extremes: for some would
have all praying, no preaching: others would have all preaching, no praying:
where the mean should be observed: For God forbid, these two sisters should
be like the two brothers, Aeteocles, and Polynices, which deadly hated one
another. Nay, I would not have these two like Castor and Pollux, two loving
brothers, yet, one must not live, but the other must dye. But I wish from mine
heart, that preaching and praying, might be like Hypocrates two twins, live
arm in arm together. For when Castor and Pollux appeared single to the
Mariners, they prefigured shipwreck, or storms: but if they both appeared, it
noted prosperous weather. So, praying, and no preaching, would not so well
edify the Church: because where visions fail, the people wax naked: and
preaching without praying, does not well beseem Gods Church, whose house is
the house of prayer: but both together: the one will teach us how to pray, the
other will fit us how to hear. If one faggot will warm me, I hope, an hundred
will more; so, if the Prayer of one just man prevail much with God, then the
Prayers of an whole parish together will be more forcible. I, but all
preachings? no reading of Psalms, Chapters, Epistles, Gospels? Surely reading
of Scriptures is a most blessed thing: yea to a large sense it may be termed
preaching, as it is an open publication of GODS will: but for any man to say,
that reading is so excellent, as that preaching Saint Paul commands: which
is, to divide Gods Word aright, by enterperting it, and applying it to the
hearers souls: is, I hold, most inconvenient: for then what need we be at
charge, to get men of gifts, and to send them to the Universities? A child
often, or twelve years old may read distinctly, to the edification of the
hearer. Therefore as spice whole, smells sweetly: but bruised by an
Apothecary, it is more pleasant: so Gods Word read, is as sweet as Honey: but
preached, it is more comfortable. If the loaf of bread be whole and crusty,
the children can hardly bite it: but cut it into slices, and every infant can
eat it: So it is betwixt reading and preaching. See this in the two Disciples
going to Emaus, Luke 24.27. How did their hearts burn within them, when our
Savior was preaching to them the Scriptures! See by the Eunuch reading, but
not understanding, yet at Philips preaching a true Christian, Act. 8.

This doctrine concerns our selves, and the people: for our selves, Must we
be laborers, and not loyterers? Must we preach in season and out of season?
Then, woe worth that man which takes this sacred Function on him, without
gifts furnished for the Calling.

Sacerdos si sit praedicationis nescius, quam clamoris vooem daturus? est
praeco mutus, says Gregory: How can he give or send Gods Word into the peoples
ears and hearts, when he cannot preach? Will any be so idle, as to sue to be
Crier of a City, when he has no tongue in his head to speak? Excuse not thy
self, because the Bishop has consecrated thee a Priest: For, as Gregory
reports, An Emperor commanded an Ape should be turned into a Lion: Et quidem
prouisione illius vocari Leo potest, fieri autem non potest. The Emperor might
cause the Ape to be called a Lion, but he could not cause him to be made a true
Lion. So, the Bishop may call, and cause thee to be called a Preacher: but
surely, he cannot furnish thee with learning, to make thee a Preacher. These
the holy Scriptures call dumb dogs. But there are others of our Coat, whom
God has enabled with gifts sufficient, and the Church with honor and wealth
in an high degree: yet these will bear no heat nor burden of the day, in Gods
Orchard. Nay, they do often hate such as do take pains, eo nomine, only
because they do take pains, and brand them with the odious name of Puritant.
These are not dumb dogs: but as I may say, malicious dogs. Like Lucians dog
in the manger, which will neither eat Hay himself nor let the Ox eat any.
Nay, they are not dumb and malicious dogs: but as one says, dumb devils.

There are many which speak much against Puritants: and for my part, such as
are factious, I wish them at Amsterdam: but I am verily persuaded, that none
make more Puritants in the Church, and Commonwealth, then they that most
speak against them. For the people cannot diue into our controuerted opinions,
but they can judge our outward actions. Now then, when they see men of much
means and honor in the Church, to live idly: and mean persons in place and
Living, to preach much: this makes the people to judge: Surely these men do
best, and therefore they are in the right: whereas consider, we which stand for
the Churches discipline, are as well bred as the other: we have Arts, and
Sciences, and Books, natural parts and ability of body. Now then, if we would
but labor in preaching, I am persuaded, it would put down presently all
factious Schismatickes, and Separatists, which by our idleness do much
abound: but let these which sheare the Sheep, and not feed the flock, think
what will become of them at the last day, when Saint Peter shall appear with
three thousand converted at one Sermon: when Saint Paul, Saint Matthew, Saint
James, Saint John, shall appear with whole Nations converted at their
preaching, and these shall stand single with the unprofitable servant, hiding
his talent in a napkin, and cannot show one soul, that he has won, or
endeavored to win to God. There is a story how a learned Friar in Italy,
famous for his learning and preaching, was commanded to preach before the Pope
at a year of Iubile: and to be the better furnished, he repaired thither a
good while before to Rome, to see the fashion of the Conclaue, to accommodate
his Sermon the better, when the day came, he was to preach, having ended his
prayer, he looking along time about, at last he cried with a loud voice three
times, Saint Peter was a fool, Saint Peter was a fool, Saint Peter was a
fool. Which words ended, he came out of the Pullpet. Being after conuented
before the Pope, and asked why he so carried himself? He answered, Surely
holy Father, if a Priest may go to Heaven abounding in wealth, honor, and
preferment, and live at ease, never, or seldom to preach, then surely Saint
Peter was a fool, which took such an hard way, in traveling, in fasting, in
preaching, to go thither: and so surely if to have many livings and much
honor in the Church, and possessed of them, to take our fill of pleasures, to
heap up wealth, and to live at ease, seldom or never to preach Gods Word, be
the way to Heaven, then surely we poor country Ministers are very fools, to
toil our bodies, and to beat our brains with preaching and studying to go
that hard way, when we may with more ease go to Heaven in a feather-bed. But
let these remember, that Praesbyteri, non sanatis magis quam sanandis hominibus
praesunt, says Austine, Preachers are placed over men which are not perfectly
sound, but are to be made more sound daily, by their preaching and instructions.

For the people.

Are we Gods laborers? Then he which serves at the Altar, must live by the
Altar. He that preaches the Gospel, must live by the Gospel. For the
labourer is worthy of his hyer. Heretofore no sin to great, as sacrilege, no
gift so good as to the Church: now no sin so small, as to rob Peter, and not
to pay Paul, but themselves: and no gifts extracted so hardly, as the Ministers
due, the Shepherds were wont to live by the flock, but now the Minister can
hardly get wool to cloth him, or Milk to feed him because they challenge,
customs and sue out prohibi, tions, where the Judge a Lay man, the Jury Laymen
the witnesses Laymen, the Lawiers Laymen: all Laymen interest in the cause: our
case is like to a poor sheep, which in the time of storm, runs under an
hedge for shelter, when she goes away, she leaves some of her wool behind
her. I, but what say the people? Stand to our benevolence and courtesy, for we
will deal well with you: I, and then men of the best gifts shall be sure to
be preferred, and never to want.

My beloved, woe worth our ancestors, that founded Schools and Universities:
woe worth our parents which brought us up at such charge, and at the
Universities, and woe worth our own selves to take such pains, in studying
arts, and reading of authors, finding out tongues, and then to come into the
Towns and Villages to be judged, if we have learning and gifts: And by whom?
By good man the Cobbler: By Master the Mercer, by clowted shoes and tusset
coats. Think in your own souls, is this fitting?

For your dealing well and bountifully with us: call to mind I pray, how the
Woolues and the Sheep made a League; for certaynety they gave hostages; the
Sheep gave their dogs, which defended them: the Woolues, their young ones,
but after the Sheep dogs were fast tied: the young Woolues crying, the old
did presently run and fetch away their young ones, and killed the Sheep. Even
so part with our freehold, and stand to your love: then in stead of our fee
simple, you will give us a simple fee. The Eagle stole flesh from the Altar,
but she carried away a coal, which set her nest and young on fire. And we all
know, whose fathers were enriched by Church goods, their posterity were beggars
at the third generation. I have observed it in my experience, in this Country,
and I could instance in many Gentlemen, and other persons, which have been most
bitter against tithes, and stood to customs: that either they were men of no
religion, or if they made show of any, yet God has sent upon them, or their
posterity, some fearful judgment, and therefore take heed, if we give unto
you Panem Sanctuarij, the bread of Life, deny not unto us Panem promptuarij,
the bread of Wheat for our bodies: For thou must not muzzle the mouth of the
Ox that treads out the Corn. And Saint Paul does tell you, if you dare
believe him, that if we sow to you Spiritual things, what is it if we reap
Temporal? It is nothing in comparison.

The third thing that was observed, is the Preachers Wisdom: Pleasant words.
There are some. I confess, are very laborious in their Preaching, but yet
Mulier formosa superne, Turpiter atrum desinit in piscem: Tincta Lycambao
sanguine tela dabunt. They must kick and spurn at their Mother, and at her
discipline, and so breed faction. 1 King. 5. All the Stones of the Temple were
smooth, hewed and fitted, and then brought into the Temple and laid: For in the
Temple was heard no noise nor Hammer. To teach us, that in Gods Church there
should be no Schism, nor rent, but all peace and quiet. These men are lights
in the Church, but like the flashing of a candles snuff, which going out,
leaves a bad noisome savor behind it. Surely these do not seek out pleasing
words: Therefore into their secrets let not my soul come. But if any will
labor to seek out pleasant words, the Words of truth, and will speak to
their Mother in unity of doctrine, and in uniformity of discipline: Let Gods
blessings be multiplied upon him in as ample a manner, as the bright Stars
are fixed in the glorious Firmament of Heaven.

Pleasant words. Esaias 58. Cry, and cease not, cry aloud. Praeconis officium in
se suscipit, quicunque ad sacerdotium ascendit, says Gregory: A Priest takes
on him the Office of a Crier: therefore we must be like John Baptist, loud
cryers in the wilderness, to bid the people repent. We must be Boanarges,
sons of thunder, to awaken men out of their dead sleep of sin and
security. What if men be so nice as the Sybarites, which could not endure a
Cock in their City, for fear of too timely awaking in the morning? Yet, we
must be like the Cock which crowed to Saint Peter, he crew once, and he heard
him not: twice, and he was deaf: the third time, Then Peter went out and wept
bitterly. Yet this our crying, this our thundering, this our crowing, must be
like the busling of a Gnat, which wakened the shepherd, when he saw the
Serpent coming. All must be done in wisdom to warn them of the old Serpent:
not in hatred, to exclaim against them, but in care to prevent their danger:
not in stomach, to break our anger, but in love, to awaken them: not in
revenge, to wrong them. The Preacher must seek out pleasant words.

We are the Salt of the earth, therefore we must be applied to the vlcerous
soars of their souls, to keep them from festring in their sins. And we
must remember to be Salt, in another sense, as it was Amoris monumentum, The
emblem of love: it is not to be done in hatred to fret them, but in love to
season them: The Preacher must seek out pleasant words. We must take into our
hands the sword of the Spirit, which is GODS Word, and this must cut and pierce
them to the marrow and the bone. But these wounds must be like the lancing of
a Chyrurgion, In curam, non in cruo^atum, dum producis verbera, extend vbera,
says Bernard: We must be like the Mother, which has a rod to whippe the
child: and withal, a dugge, full of sweet Milk, to nourish, and feed the
child. The Preacher must seek out pleasant words.

This doctrine concerns both Priests and people.

For us, we must seek out pleasant words. Then as Gregory says, See the
Minister observe Quid ^ui Quando Qualiter Quamdiu
loquatur. What to speak To whom When How How long.


First, Quid, What he may speak. Col. 4.6. Let our speech be gracious and
powdered with Salt: that as Salt does extract hurtful humors from the meat,
and expel all corruption from it, so the grace of heavenly wisdom should
repress all idle and unprofitable talk, and renounce all wicked and filthy
communication, Genealogies, and foolish questions avoid, which do breed
rather contention and strife, then godly edifying which is by faith. And as
Salt does dry up the superfluous humors of meats, and makes meat fit to be
digested, and wholesome to nourish: So, the Salt of Wisdom should make the
Preachers words, not only not hurtful, but fit and profitable to edify the
hearers.

Secondly, ^ui, Note to whom we speak, not to all alike, 1. Timothy 5. Rebuke
not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father: the younger men as brethren. Nay,
that which is fitting to be spoken at one time, is unfitting to be spoken to
the same person at another time. When David had sinned foulely, Nathan said in
an hye strain, Thou art the man. But when he came to David about Solomon, he
bowed himself in an humble manner, and spoke mildly.

Thirdly, Quando, When to speak. A word in due season, is like Apples of gold,
with pictures of silver: speak nothing but truth. Yet all truth is not at all
times to be vttred, but mark opportunity, learn wisdom in this point, of a
woman, 1. Sam. 25. Abigal, when Nabal was in his cups, let him alone: after he
had slept, she spied occasion to lay open his fault.

Fourthly, Qualiter. Note, after what manner to speak. For as some Physic
cures one, and kills another. Nay, what Physic does cure the body at one
time, does hurt the same body at another time. So, the same doctrine which
comfort one, wounds another. Therefore, as the Chyrurgion, if he see dead
flesh in the wound, applies not Balsome and healing salues: but red powders
and corrosiues, to eat the flesh to the bones: and after powers in Balm, and
lays on saluing playsters. So, Preachers must not lull dead consciences into
dead sleep of security, with the comfortable promises of the Gospel, unless
they be first humbled by the terror of GODS Law. Therefore, first preach the
Law, then the Gospel. Thus did God to Adam in Paradise: saying, Adam, where
art thou? Who told thee thou were naked? Have thou eaten of the forbidden tree?
And then Adam convicted in his conscience, was comforted by the Gospel, that
The seed of the Woman should bruise the head of the Serpent. Thus did Nathan
to David, Thou art the man; thou have killed Vriah the Hittite, and taken
Bershaba his wife. And David being humbled by the sight of his sin: crying, I
have sinned, was then lifted up by the Gospel, Thou shall not dye, for the
Lord has taken away thy sin. Thus did Peter the 2. of the Acts, he told the
Jews they had killed the Lord of life: and then pricked in their consciences,
they cried, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter comforted them
with the Gospel, saying: Repent, and amend your lives, and be baptized in the
Name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of sins.

Lastly, Quamdiu. Note here. How long to speak. We must not under zeal make
Religion tedious, but as in the Hebrew, I have written unto you in few words,
so, Quicquid percipias, breuis esto: be short, especially if you come to visit
a weak and sick person.

For the people.

If we must preach, and our preaching must be pleasing: yea it will be so to
the spiritual, though not carnal man: then ye must hear with obedience. Ye
must not be like a galled Horse, to kick and fling when his strain is
searched.

If a Maiden tell her Mistress, she has spots of dirt in her face, and bring
her a Glass to see them, will she break the Glass, and chide the Maid?
Will she not (...) water and a towell to wipe them away (...) So, if we tell
you your souls sins, and lay them open out of GODS Word, as a Glass to
convince your consciences, shall ye be offended at us, or should you not
strive to wash your souls clear by tears of repentance, and amendment of
life?

If the Chyrurgion cut your flesh, and tortor you, with setting your broken
bones, ye are not angrry, but pleased with him. And so must ye not malign
the Preacher, if he harrow your consciences, be it yrkesome to flesh and
blood for a time. Wherefore as Lydia attended to what Paul preached: So, do
ye willingly hearken to your Pastor. If his doctrine bite at the first, that
ye say to him, as the Devil did to CHRIST, Are thou come to torment us before
our time? Yet when GODS Spirit shall direct you, and turn your hearts, ye
will say as David did say to Abigal, Blessed be thou Abigal, and blessed be
thy counsel, and blessed be GOD which sent thee to give me this counsel. So,
when we preach, and you hear: we teach, and you practice: we reprove, and
you amend: Vtraque conseruant, et omnia saluata sunt, cum Deus nec inueniat in
plebe quod puniat, nec Sacerdos potest habere quod doleat, says Augustine.
Both do preserve, and all things are safe, when GOD seeing the people to
endeavor well, will in mercy find no occasion to punish and afflict them: and
when the Minister, seeing the attention and practice of his flock, shall have
no occasion to grieve that his labors are in vain in the Lord.

God grant in his mercies, that we may so preach, and you may so hear, as God
may be glorified, his Church edifyed, and our souls comforted, through JESUS
CHRIST our Lord, and only Savior, AMEN.

FINIS.

