THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S Evidences for Heaven.

OR A TREATISE SHOWING how every one, while he lives here, may certainly
know what shall become of him after his departure out of this life.

The sixth Edition, corrected and enlarged.

By Tymothy Rogers, Preacher of Gods word in Essex.

Psalm. 107.43. Who is wise, that he may observe these things? for they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord. 2 Pet. 1 10. Give all diligence to
make your calling and election sure: for if you do these things ye shall
never fall. LONDON. Printed by I. Beale for Ed. Brewster: and are to be sold at
the sign of the Star at the West end of Paul's. 1624.

THE AVTHORS Apology to the Reader.
Far was it from my meaning at the first, Christian Reader, thus to have
exposed my self to the common view of men, but rather to have hidden this my
weak conception for ever, never to have come to the birth: but when it would
abide no longer, to be imprisoned in the womb, but violently brake forth, I
thought to deal wisely with it, though not (as the Egyptians) cruelly to
murder it, yet at least (as Moses his parents) charitably to hide it, for my
own private use: or at the best to have put it to Nurse in an obscure
Country-village, where my self am Pastor, to see the good usage of it; for
which end I be-trusted a friend or two, for the printing of some few, copies,
only for my self: but through friendship I was deceived: for whereas I
expected a small number, like the children of Israel, that went against
Benhadad, like two little flocks of Kids: My books were sent forth in
multitudes, like the Aramites that filled the country. 1 King. 20.27. Only
this difference, they came not forth against the host of Israel, the people of
God, (as did the Aramites) but rather to serve on their side. Thus being driven
to a straight, (though that which is done, can not be undone) yet I thought it
my part to do what I could, namely, to mend, and enlarge that which is done;
that seeing it must be common, it may not be altogether vn-vsefull: Confessing
ingenuously, I had rather it should not have bin common; especially
considering, that there are better bred and nobler borne Treatises of very
worthy men, concerning this subject; but thus it must be now: if therefore it
may but serve as an handmaid to theirs, so thou may reap some profit
hereby, I have both my desire, and full contentment. Farewell.

Thine in the bond of Faith and Love, Timothy Rogers.

Council to the READER.
IN sailing through the Seas of this troublesome world toward the heavenly land
of Canaan, we are to pass two dangerous rocks, the one called Presumption;
the other Desperation; happy is the man that escaping them both, shall make a
safe arrival at the promised Land: Millions of Christians in profession are
cast away against the one, or against the other: for some, though they have no
true grace wrought in them, think notwithstanding that they are in no danger,
but shall certainly be saved: which is as great presumption, as if a man being
stricken through the heart, should think himself very well, and in no danger
of death. Others when they come to apprehend the heavy wrath of God, and deadly
curse of the Law due unto them by nature for sin, in hellish sorrow utterly
despair, Some sincere Christians also there are, against whom the Tempter does
so far prevail, that in beholding their own unworthiness, they are ready to
faint, for fear of hell and condemnation; which although they cannot perish,
or suffer shipwreck against this rock of Desperation, yet their poor Bark may
be so battered and beaten against it, as that peradventure they may be a long
while after in rigging and mending of it up again, with grief and hart-smart
that thou may escape these dangers, use these short questions and answers as
a Sea-mappe, or guide unto thee, to show thee thy way between both, that so
thou may sail to Heaven in more safety, confidence, and comfort. Now to the
end that the better use may be made hereof, consider I beseech thee of these
things. First, what multitudes daily (departing this world) throng in at the
infernal gates of Hell, for want of the assurance of their salvation.
Secondly, consider that thou being by nature a condemned man, if thy pardon be
not sealed to thy conscience, and given thee before the breath be once out of
thy body, afterward though thou would, or could give a thousand worlds
for it, it cannot be had: consider again of the uncertainty of thy life, thou
can not tell whether thou shall be alive to morrow, for thou know not
what a day may bring forth: Consider also the certainty of thy death: dye thou
must, nothing surer, for who can stand against the power thereof? and, oh how
bitter is the remembrance of death to one that is not assured of his salvation!
Further, consider how terrible the Judgment day will be to all such as get
not the assurance of their salvation in their life time: which may will they
turn themselves then? Oh what will they do? Mountains and Hills fall upon
us, and crush us in pieces, shall they cry, but it shall not be. Then what
most doleful and intolerable torments shall they for ever endure in hell;
able to break the hardest heart to think on? Oh who shall dwell with the
deuoring fire? who shall dwell with the everlasting burning? Lastly, consider
of the most inestimable joys of Heaven, and incomparable delights, which all
they shall have, who get the assurance of their salvation in this life: Such as
eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor the heart of man conceived of: O
heavenly joy! O sweet delights! O excellent surmounting glory! O endless
superabounding pleasures! wherewith their hearts shall be ravished and
for-euer replenished. Upon these considerations, I earnestly request thee, if
thou have any pity or commiseration on thy poor soul, Make thy calling and
election sure, even while it is called to day: How shall I do that, thou will
say? This brief Treatise will show thee how, yea, more then that; hereby thou
may be assured of thy salvation, if thou use it rightly, but then thou must
go through it with good aduisement; if thou touch the Honie-combe with thy
lips, thou may find sweetness; but if thou suck, much more: so read these
things, as to learn them, so learn, as to know thy own estate thereby, so
might thou suck out the hole sweetness thereof; get the true stamp of them
in thy heart, so thou may be sure thou shall be saved: which the Lord of
Heaven grant for his mercies sake. Amen.

A Treatise of salvation wherein are
signs propounded proving salvation, the mother grace, Faith. page ^^
sister-graces more general, Conversion p. 29 Justification. p. 36 Adoption. p.
41 Sanctification. p. 50 Repentance. p. 61
more special. Knowledge. p. 77 Hope. p. 86 Love of God. p. 95 Love of the
godly p 104 Fear of God. p. 115 Joy. p. 125 Patience. p. 135


witnessing salvation, Gods spirit. Gods word. Psalm. 34.8. p. 155 Reu. 21.6. p.
159 Math. 5.3, 4. p. 163 Romans 10.13. p. 167 Reu. 3.21. p. 172 2. Tim. 2.21. p.
179


Doubts resolved concerning Election. p. 196 Weakness in Grace. p. 201 Greatness
of sin. p. 211 Hypocrisy. p. 221 Perseverance. p. 2^3 Presuming. p. 238
Evil thoughts. p. 243 Afflictions. p. 252 Fear of death. p. 278

The Righteous Man's Evidence for Heaven.
Minister. SEeing opportunity serves us thus fitly (my Christian friend) to
confer a while together, and seeing there is no conference so comfortable or
profitable as that which is about the affairs of Gods Kingdom, and our own
salvation, and that the counsel of the Holy Ghost is; that 1 Pet. 4.11.
if any speak, he should speak as the words of God, and Ephesians. 4.29.
that such communication should proceed out of our mouths, as is good for the
use of edifying: give me leave therefore to propound a question to you about
these matters.


Convert. Sir, I like the motion passing well, and indeed there is too little
of this good practice in these days; christian communication grows too much
out of use, which shows the want and scarsitie of grace; for there is the like
correspondence between the heart and tongue, that is between the bell and
clapper: if the bell be stirred, the clapper cannot lie still: and if the heart
be moved with delight in spiritual things, the tongue cannot choose but talk
thereof: and where the tongue yields no other but an earthie sound, there you
may be sure to find no other but an earthly heart, no pure good metal, no
heavenly grace to be found in the heart: Now therefore let me hear the
question, and according to my poor measure of knowledge, I will be ready to
shape an answer.


Minister. Ought not every one while he lives in this world, to know as a thing
certain, whether he shall be saved, and so be translated out of this earthly
tabernacle, into the heavenly paradise, whenever he shall be called away by
death?


Convert. Yes undoubtedly; which I prove thus, Mar. 16.16.
He that believes (says our Savior) shall be saved, but he that believes
not, shall be damned: This must every one know as an undoubted truth; and
withal he is bound to know whether he believes, according to that charge of
the Apostle: 2 Corin. 13.5:
Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith: know you not that Christ is
in you, except you be reprobates? Heerevpon it will follow, that every one
must know whether he shall be saved; and therefore such as put their souls to
a venture, cannot be saved, for as much as they take not the right course,
appointed by God thereto; namely, to prove whether they be in the faith, and
Christ in them. And further, whom the Lord intends to bestow heaven upon, he
sets his 2 Cor. 1.21.
seal and mark upon them, whereby he claims them for his own, and he
bestows loue-tokens on them, which are the saving graces of his holy spirit,
whereof he is very charie, setting great store by them, so that he will not
bestow them on cast-awaies, but only on his dearly beloved ones; which marks
and loue-tokens, as they are very precious, so as many as receive the^ (though
they doubt) they need not doubt but that they shall be saved, for God is not
variable in his love: but he that has not these signs in him, whereby he may
know that he shall be saved, shall (if he die in that comfortles state) be sure
to have his portion with devils, Reu. 21.8.
in the burning lake, for ever after death.


Min. If the case stand so, I think it lies every one upon, not to dally with
their own souls, as men do now adays, but to deal soundly, and consider
sincerely with themselus, whether they have received these golden marks, and
loue-tokens of God, or whether they still retain the black brand of the
Devil which they were borne with, the which so long as they retain on them,
the Prince of darkness ownes them; but if they can get it 1 Cor. 6.11.
washed out by the blood of Christ, and Gods marks set upon them, then has the
Devil no more right or claim unto them; for the Lord from that time forward,
even for ever, does take them for his own peculiar ones: But what say you now
of those that mourn after God, in the anguish of their souls, longing for the
assurance of his favor, and laboring to get this knowledge of their
salvation, but yet cannot find it in themselves?


Con. This I say, or rather Christ himself, Mat. 5.4
Blessed are they that (so) mourn, for they shall be comforted; and though
they now sorrow, yet their Ioh. 16.20.
sorrow shall be turned into joy: nay, great cause of rejoicing have they,
that they can thus mourn: neither is it possible for such to be without some
sure signs whereby they may know that they shall be saved; for even this their
practice (they being thus Cant. 2.5.
sick of love) longing and laboring after Christ, is a sure sign to them,
though they should have no other: but indeed this cannot go alone.


Min. How comes it then to pass, that they take no notice hereof in
themselves, but rather fear that they shall not be saved?


Con. Because they are either newborn babes in Christ, and therefore being as
infants though they be alive, yet have not as yet understanding to know that
they are alive, which notwithstanding others of riper age discern in them, and
they also by experience and growth in grace shall afterward perceive in
themselves; or else they are distempered with some strong fit of temptation,
whereby they are so astonished and benumbed, that they have not Psalm. 77.7 8.
a feeling of that which otherwise they might perceive in their souls: like as
one half frozen, and almost stiff with cold, feels no warmth at all in
himself, and yet there is some in him; for else there could be no life or
breath remaining in him: Or lastly, such they are as have taken a surfeit of
sin, whereby they have been overcome; thus while they are soul-sick, their
spiritual senses are corrupted, so as they cannot now Psalm. 88.14.
see the lightsome countenance of Gods favor shining on them so clearly, nor
Ps. 51.8.12.
hear the Lord speakeing unto them, nor taste how good the Lord is to their
souls in special, nor relish religious exercises so sauourlie, nor feel
heavenly comforts so sensibly, as otherwise they might. And yet this surfeit
they shall out-grow in time, by using themselves to a good diet of Christian
practice, and by the help of the Physic of Gods word rightly applied, which
help the Prophet David in the like case, being distempered, Psalm 73.17.
neither is it marvel though such do judge amiss of themselves, for the
present; seeing we know that sick folks are not competent or meet judges of
themselves: for they sometimes feel nothing but pain or sickness, whereas
others know, that there is in them more health then sickness, or at least some
health.


Minist. Now then to come to your self (for it is the part of every wise man,
to be best acquainted with his own estate.) Let me a little examine your
Evidences: have you some good assurance that you shall be saved?


Con. Yes, I praise God, else how could I have any comfort? else my very meat
should be turned into gall, and tears should be my drink; well might my eyes
refuse all rest, and my soul all comfort, knowing none other, but that I
should Job. 18.14.
go to the king of fear, into a Land dark as darkness it self: And sure I
am, that the Mark. 8 36.
whole World, with the Eccles. 2.11.
best of all earthly things, cannot afford true, sound, and substantial
comfort, to the quieting of the conscience, and rejoicing of the heart.


Min. How do you know that you shall be saved?


Con. First, by that mother-grace, from whence all other saving graces flow,
namely true justifying faith, a spark of this pious faith, I find is kindled
in me, whereupon this I build; GOD has promised, The first sign of salvation
taken out of John 3.36.
that he which believes shall be saved: Now then seeing I believe (that is,
am truly persuaded that Christ is my Savior, that he died for my sins, and
fulfilled the Law, to procure me perfect righteousness) therefore I know I
shall be saved.


Min. It is nothing to say you believe, but let me hear if you can prove it?
how know you that yours is true faith, and not mere mocke-faith, which is so
rife in the world?


Con. Because it has been rightly bred and begotten in me, and that by the
spiritual seed of Gods word, according to that saying of the Apostle; Romans
^0.17.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: Thus then I came by
Faith; first by hearing the doctrine of the Law preached, I saw my self to be
in a damnable condition by nature, a wretched sinner, yea wholly sinful, and
therefore accursed, by the just sentence of Gods most righteous Law, deserving
nothing but the horrible wrath of God, and lying open to the vengeance of
eternal fire, so that there was nothing between me and hell, but only a
poor, simple, crasie, tottering life, which I knew not how soon or suddenly
it might be surprised by death; the consideration whereof, wrought in me
terror of conscience, dread of hell and condemnation, despairing of any hope or
help in my self.


Min. And what then, did you rest quiet in the sight of this your woeful
misery?


Con. Oh it was not possible my poor distressed soul should find any rest in
this estate, nay if I had heard no better tidings, I should have bin swallowed
up of despair: but then in the next place I came This is the cape of good hope
in sailing to heaven.
to understand, that God has anointed and sent his own son to Isa. 61.1.
Luke 4.18.
preach good tidings unto the poor, recovering of sight to the blind, to bind
up the broken hearted, and set at liberty such as are bruised: more plainly, I
learned by the doctrine of the Gospel, that God of his rich mercy has given
his son, Christ Jesus, very God and man, to be a Savior unto sinful men,
even to as many as believe in him, and has Ioh. 3.16.
not excluded me out of the number of those that shall be saved by him, but
has offered him unto me amongst others which are weary and heavy laden with
their sins, saying, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all: (even all such) and has also Ioh. 3.23.
commanded, yea even Cor. 5.20.
entreated me, to believe in him: Thus my heart was drawn and won, to take
him and apply him a Savior to my own soul, thinking my self bound in
conscience to yield obedience to the holy commandment, and gracious inuitation
of Almighty God: and what a beast were I, if I should not accept of so free a
profer of his Son, as he has made unto me?


Min. Thus you have showed me well how you came by faith, and I see you have
come honestly by it; whereby it appears that it is not like Jacobs venison too
quickly found to be of the right kind, nor like Ionahs gourd, too suddenly
sprung to continue long, but like the 2 Samuel 23.15, 16.
water of Bethlehem, much longed for, and hardly obtained; now show me further
how you use it: since you got it, what fruits does it bring forth, whereby you
may know more easily whether it be true, and 1 Timothy 1.5.
Faith unfeigned?


Con. As fire may be discerned by heat, 6 Notes of true faith.
and life by motion, so may my faith by the fruits thereof: For first, it
enableth me to Ephesians. 6.16.
quench the fiery darts of that evil one, to resist (not without some
comfortable victories) the suggestions of Satan wherewith he buffets me; and
more particularly, that same temptation of doubting whether the promises of God
belong to me or no: for that I am not overcome of this doubting, and sunk
under it, but struggle and wrestle with it, and with unbelief, that is by the
power of faith. Secondly, it makes me earnestly desire to be more and more
reconciled to God, that is, more fully assured of his favor, that I am at
peace with him, and he well pleased with me; to whom by nature I was an utter
enemy; it makes me cry, Ps. 106.4
remember me O Lord with the favor of thy people, Ps. 84.5.
release thy anger toward me turn thy fac unto me, Ps. 31.16
cause thy face to shine unto thy servant, and save me through thy mercy.
Thirdly, my faith makes me labor to please God, though it be with
displeasing my self, and to do the will of God, yea eue^ in those things
which cross my own will, as it caused Abraham to Genesis 22.10.
offer his dearly beloved Isaac, though otherwise it would have gone full sore
against his heart; and hereby Enoch was Heb. 11.5
reported of, that had had pleased God. Fourthly, by it my heart is in some
measure purified from noisome lusts and affections; as secret pride,
self-love, hypocrisy, carnal confidence, wrath malice, and the like, in that
they are distasteful, yea loathsome to me, so that the spirit within me
fights against the flesh, that is, grace resists and subdueth corruption.
Fifthly, it makes me long after Christ, to taste more fully of his sweetness and
to be Can. 1.2
kissed with the kisses of his mouth, that is, to have a greater measure of
heavenly graces, and greater and more lively tokens of his love, communicated
to me, whom and whose love I do prefer above the whole world, even in my
heart. Lastly, my faith brings forth in me the sweet fruit of heavenly
spiritual joy; for, 1 Pet. 1.8.
believing in him whom we have not seen (that is Christ the Lord) we
rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory; which is therefore called the
joy Phil. 1.25.
of faith, because it proceeds from thence: Thus my faith is Gal. 5.6.
a working faith, and by these fruits and the like, I know it is not a vain
fancy, and ungrounded imagination, but a sound and well-grounded persuasion,
whereby I am ingraffed into Christ: for to believe, is Extra nos ire, and in
Christum transire.
to go out of our selves, and to go into Christ.


Min. If these things be so, I am not able to object any thing against your
faith, nay, all the devils of hell shall never be able to overthrow it: But by
what other sign do you know that you shall be saved?


Con. Well may my conversion plead seniority for the second place, it being of
the same age with faith: for there is no sooner true faith wrought in the
heart, but instantly there is a new Convert made, and a sinner become the son
of Abraham, and well may there then be joy in heaven for a sinner that is
converted. So then there is an effectual calling and conversion wrought in me;
for the Lord of his unspeakable goodness has delivered me out of the power
of darkness, and translated me into the kingdom of his dear son, that is,
he has brought me out of the miserable estate of nature wherein I was borne,
into the happy estate of grace, wherein I now stand: The second sign of
salvation taken out of Romans 8.30.
this calling is a sure sign that one is ordained to everlasting life; for,
whom the Lord has called, those he has also glorified: therefore hereby I
am comfortably assured of my salvation.


Min. Our Savior tells us, Mat. 22.14.
that there are many called, but few chosen: how then can this be a sign unto
you?


Con. There is a twofold calling of a Christian: an outward, and an inward;
the Lord calls outwardly all those to whom the Gospel is preached; for such he
requires to come to him by believing and repenting, that they might be saved,
but many such refuse thus to come unto him, and therefore are not effectually
called: like as if you should call a man that is in a dead sleep, who hears you
not, and therefore lies snorting still; it may be truly said, he was not called
up, because he did not awaken and come unto you: so the outward calling by the
voice of the Gospel alone, is not sufficient to salvation, therefore the Lord
calls his elect inwardly also by his spirit, and this is that whereof I speak.


Min. But how know you that you are thus inwardly and effectually called and
converted?


Con. 1. 2 Notes of effectual calling.
By the ecchoing back, and secret answering of my heart unto the voice and
call of God; for the Lord says, Ps. 27.8.
Seek thou my face, my heart answers, thy face, O Lord, will I seek: Math.
11.28.
Come unto me (says he) all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
ease you: and Ioh. 8.37
if any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink; my heart answers; O
Lord, it is the desire of my soul to come unto thee, oh that I could come, oh
how shall I come, help me that I may come, draw me and I will run after
thee; seeing my heart does thus inwardly answer his call, it is a certain
sign that I hear him call: which I could not unless he did call, inwardly
and effectually.

Secondly, the Lord has wrought in me a wonderful and supernatural change,
so that I am contrary to that I was by nature ( Non noua substantia creatura,
sed labefacta reparatur.
as touching the quality and disposition of my soul) now loving that good
which then I hated, and hating now that evil which before I loved; therefore I
am a new creature, and live a spiritual life, yea Christ lives in me: for by
the power of the spirit flowing into me from Christ my head, I live unto God,
not unto my self; and I would not be again in the condition wherein I was
before, for all the worlds good, but tremble to think upon it, accounting it
as the suburbs and mouth of hell.


Min. I do verily believe you, for they which have thus seen and tasted of
hell in their consciences, will take heed how they come near it again so long
as they live: herein is that verified, the burnt child dreads the fire. But
name unto me a third sign of your salvation.


Con. Me thinks I see Justification offering it self, and coming forth hand
in hand with conversion, as being the daughters of one mother Faith, and two
sisters born at one birth, hand-fasted by the holy Ghost, Romans 8.30. never to
be severed: The third sign of salvation taken out of Romans 8.30.
so then I am justified, that is, I am accepted of God perfectly righteous
through Christ, this sign never fails, for whom God justified, them he also
glorified.


Min. How can you prove, that you are thus justified?


Con. 1. Because it is the daughter of that noble parent, Faith, which faith
being in me, I am thereby only justified, Justification is the daughter of
the true mother Faith, not of works, the false mother; for she says, let it
be divided between Christ and our selves.
and not by works, (unless it be to declare me just before men) for I cannot
be so popishly fond as to think that men must lick themselves whole with
their own righteousness.

2. Whereas justification consists in two things; the remission of our sins for
Christ's passion sake, and the imputation of his perfect righteousness to us, I
have some proof of both: for first I know that God does pardon and forgive me
all my sins, for I do heartily confess them to him, with a detestation of
them: and if we confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us
our sins, as Ioh. 1.9.
says the Apostle. Secondly, I know that God does reckon Christ's righteousness
unto me, as verily as if I had personally performed it my self, this I know
by my peace of conscience; for they which are thus Romans 5.1.
justified by faith, have peace toward God, and they only: thus am I one of
those Reu. 7.14.
that have washed their long robes, and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb.


Min. Indeed if the conscience be truly pacified, it is evident that you are
partaker of Christ's perfect righteousness: for what else can give the
Conscience true peace; and not the drunken peace of hypocrites?


Con. 1. Because it has followed grievous trouble and unquietness in my
conscience, as a calm follows after a storm: for such as never were afflicted
in mind, and distressed in conscience, never had true peace. 2 My peace of
conscience 3 Notes of true peace of conscience.
makes me careful to keep a good conscience (as it made the Apostle) Hebr.
13.18.
desiring to live honestly, and to have 2 Cor. 1.12.
my conversation in godly pureness. 3. This true peace makes my Conscience not
afraid to view it self: whereas the evil conscience is like the Elephant,
which being guilty of his deformity, cannot abide to look on his own face in
the water, but seeks muddy chanells, and foul puddles.


Min. Let me hear you name some other sign, from whence you gather assurance
of your salvation.


Con. Mine Adoption is a sign hereof: for whereas I was by nature a baseborn of
Satan; and no child so like his father as I was like him, the Lord of his free
grace and favor has adopted me his child, to train me up unto eternal
life, that I may inherit with his own Son Jesus; by means whereof I have right
also 1. Cor. 3.22.23.
to the creatures here in this world, as being my fathers goods; and the
miseries of this life Romans 8.28.
become mercies to me, and the glorious Heb. 1.14
Angels, become attenders on me: O high favors, O rich mercy, O instimable
dignity, to be the child of God! Thus I trust I am one of the number of Gods
children. The fourth sign of salvation taken out of Romans 8.17.
Now none of them can possibly be deprived of an everlasting inheritance, for
if we be children, then are we also heirs of God, and ioyntheyrs with Christ.
Seeing then I am one of them, I know I shall inherit together with them yea
with Christ.


Min. It is a common thing with men, yea with lewd and graceless persons, to
say they are the children of God, as the wicked Jews, Ioh. 8.41 44.
said to our Savior, but he tells them, they are of their father the Devil:
how know you then that you are a true child of God?


Con. 1. Because I am regenerate; that is, borne again; Ioh. 1.13 5 Notes of a
true child of God.
not of blood, as by a second natural generation, nor of the will of the
flesh, as by any natural strength or actio^, nor of the will of man, as by any
man's endeavor or operation, but of God, born of the spirit, Ioh. 3.5.
as water through spiritual Tit 3.5
washing and ablution, being begotten by the incorruptible seed of his word:
they which are thus begotten and borne of God, must needs be his children: and
that I am thus borne of the spirit, and so become a new creature, I have showed
before, in that I am converted. Secondly, look what natural affections are in
a child toward his father, such spiritual affections are in me toward God:
if he frown, I mourn; if he threaten, I tremble; if he smite, I stoop; if he
smile, I am right glad; if he speak comfortablie, I rejoice heartily: I
delight in nothing so much as the favor of God, fear nothing so much as the
loss of it: having found it, oh how feign would I keep it: having lost it, I
cannot be at quiet till I recover it: I can be content to want all things so I
have it, and can find contentment in nothing if I want it, my heavenly fathers
favor is more to me then all the world. Thirdly, I know my adoption, by the
spirit of adoption which is within me, and casts out of me daily more and more
the Romans 8.15.
spirit of bondage, a terrifying and tormenting conscience: and it makes me
with some comfortable confidence, and a true heart, unfeignedly to call upon
God, and to call him my Father without either flattery or dissembling. Fourthly,
Romans 8.14.
As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God: by his holy
spirit am I led, and willingly do I submit my self, and unfeignedly desire to
be wholly governed thereby, I desire not to follow the blind guide, carnal
reason, nor the deceitful guide, my own corrupt heart, but I set the Lord
always before me, as a guide to direct me in all things by that rule,
whereby he leads into al truth, even his holy word: it is my delight to say
with the Prophet David, Ps. 25.5.
Lead me in thy truth O Lord, and teach me, for thou art the God of my
salvation. Fifthly, whereas all the children of God do resemble him their
father, (for howsoever a man may have a child nothing like him, yet God has
never a child, but is in some measure like him) hereby I also know that I am
his child, because I do in some sort resemble him my heavenly Father. As he
is 1 Pet. 1.15.
holy Luke 6.36.
merciful, good, Ma. 5.48
perfect; so do I endeavor to conform unto him, having his blessed image
imprinted in me, and being renewed unto that Ge. 1.26
likeness, wherein the Lord created man in the beginning; abhorring to be of
the number of them, who though they profess themselves to be Gods children,
yet are as Nabal, so profane and wicked, that a man cannot speak unto them;
and surely, blasphemy it were to think that there is any likeness between
God and them, he such a pure spirit, and they such impure swine.


Min. Proceed unto some other sign of your salvation.


Con. The Lord will bestow an everlasting inheritance upon all them that are
sanctified; The fifth sign of salvation taken out of Act. 20.32.
such a one am I, the Lord has sanctified me by his holy spirit, that is,
has made me holy, whereas I was before, most vile, filthy, and unclean,
wholly sinful: Neither yet am I now quite and clean freed from all sin, or
perfectly holy; for alas, To. 7.23.
I see another law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity of the law of sin: but I am freed from the bondage
and dominion of sin. And look as in the twilight or day-breake, some little
glimmering light there is ouer-sprea^ing the sky, yet mixed with much
darkness: even so there is in me the admixture of sin, and much corruption,
accompanying the light of sanctifying grace, in every part of me; yet this is
my comfort, That the day star is risen, and the morning-light now shines in
me; and as for high-noone, perfection of holiness, I wait for it, and look
to enjoy it in the highest heaven: for the Pr. 4.18.
path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the
perfect day.


Min. There are not a few, who though they can talk of sanctification, a^^
notwithstanding very profane, yea leaprous persons, having the unclean issues
of sin, like plague-sores running on them, going up and down with the leapers,
cry in their mouth Leui. 13.45.
unclean, unclean, therefore how know you that you are truly sanctified?


Con. If I could not show a difference between my self and such unclean
beasts, Proof of sanctification, by the parts thereof.
I should be sorry: thus then I prove the Truth of my sanctification: whereas
it consists in two things, namely, mortification and quickening, I have some
proof of both; for the first, Romans 8.13.
I mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit: wherein I imitate the
skillful Surgeon, Mortification.
who being to cut off some incureable member, first mortifieth it, that so it
being made insensible, may be cut off more easily, and with less pain to the
patient. And this course I take in mortifying my sins: First, I labor by
searching to find them out: Secondly, to find my self weary of them, and
willing to be rid of them, considering what infinite hurt they do me.
Thirdly, I fetch power from the death of Christ, believing that he died to 1
John 3.5.8.
kill sin in all that are his, and therefore that it is impossible for them
to live unto sin, or sin to rule in them. 4. The death of Christ as a salve
applied to the sore by faith, leaves a print like it self in the soul, a
spiritual death, or dying unto sin.
I apply this power of Christ's death, as a strong corrasiue, to this proud
flesh of mine, to the wounding and killing of the sin that is in me: and
thus I apply it; 1. Seeing that my sins put Christ to death, I am resolved,
as the auenger of blood, to follow the law upon them, to get a scriptum est, a
Writ for them, to do by them, as they did by him, even to pursue them unto
death, which put my elder brother and Savior unto death. Secondly, seeing I
believe, that Christ died for me, to kill sin in me, I see I neither must
nor can Romans 6.2.6.
suffer sin to live, and reign in me; for fhat were to make the death of
Christ of none effect, unto me: Thus then though sin be in me, yet it has
received the deadly wound, by the death of Christ, never after to recover
again, but lies as 2 Samuel 1.6.9.
Saul thrust through with his spear; though life be still abiding in it, it is
gasping, and struggling, languishing and dying, and shall at last be utterly
extinct in death. To. 7.25.
I thank God therefore through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Min. You have spoken to some good purpose: of mortification: but what say you
now of quickening, which is the second part of Sanctification?


Con. They which have the one, Quickening.
can not want the other; therefore I find also a quickening power of grace in
me, whereby I rise up out of the grave of sin, and live unto righteousness,
and that after this manner; 1 I. labor by inquiring to find out that
righteousness, which God requires of me. 2. I strive for a willingness of
mind and heart, to set thereupon, with all delight: which that I may do, 3. I
fetch power from Christ's resurrection, considering, and believing, that he
reviued and rose again, for this very end, namely to procure, and give to all
that are his, strength and power, to Rom 6.4.
live unto righteousness, and therefore that it is as impossible for any such to
want this power, as for Christ to die in vain. 4. I apply this power to my
self, whereby the breath of spiritual life comes into my soul, and that
after this manner: To belieu that Christ rose for me, is to apply his
resurrection, as a soueraign plaster to my heart: which is of such a virtue
that it must needs work in me his spiritual resurrection.
Seeing I believe that Christ rose for me, as verily as he is my Savior, so
verily, must I, and shall I, show forth this spiritual power in the practice
of piety, and righteous living: Thus then there is a spiritual passion, and
resurrction in me (as there is in every true believer) answerable to to the
passion and resurrection of Christ; as he died for sin; and rose again for
righteousness, so I die to sin, and rise again to righteousness, in all the
powers of my soul, and parts of my body, these being made the Romans 6.13.
instruments of those, in righteousness unto God. And this briefly is that
sanctification which I find in me.


Min. And surely this is that, which whosoever find in them, they are no less
than canonized in the Court of Heaven for Saints, and irreuocably registered in
Gods Calendar of Saints. But what will you name in the next place, for a sign
of your salvation?


Con. Repentance: which howsoever it does not Non re sed ratione Polanus
really differ from Sanctification, yet in some respect (as Perkins.
some have well observed) it does, as being subordinate thereto, and proceeding
therefrom as the fruit thereof: for where the Lord infuseth sanctifying grace
into the understanding, will, and affections of the Convert; then according
unto this grace received, he works in turning to the Lord: and though
repentance be discerned, before either Faith, or Sanctification; yet that
hinders not, but that they are before it in Ordinae natura.
order of nature; like as in the morning, the light, and sunne-beames, are
seen before the body of the Sun, and yet in order of nature, it is before
them, and they proceed from it. But to come nearer the matter, I repent me of
my sins; for I turn from all sin to God, in heart, and desire, and labor
to express the same, The sixth sign of salvation taken out of Eze. 18.21.
by a careful framing of my life, in obedience to God, eschewing evil, and
doing good, having respect unto all Gods commandments. Now God has promised,
that he which thus turns from all his sins, shall surely live for ever, and
shall not dye eternally; therefore hereby I know I shall be saved: for this is
a salve for all sores, and a present remedy, to cure all spiritual diseases
of the soul.


Min. All the doubt will be whether you do truly repent, how can you make
that appear?


Con. 5 Notes, of true repentance.
Thus: First, because I grieve in my heart for my sins, chiefly, in regard
that thereby I offend my good Ps. 51.4
God, who always has been, and is abundantly gracious unto me: this pierces
my soul, that I should be so undutiful toward him. Secondly, I Psa. 119.104.
hate, loath, and detest in some measure, all sin in my heart, bearing my self
toward it as an enemy; and when I have been overcome by the deceit thereof, I
love it not the better, but hate it much the more afterward, when I have
recovered my self again: I deal with my sin, as Amnon dealt with his
sister Thamer: who when he had satisfied his wicked lust, did hate her more
than ever he had loved her before, and thrust her out of his company and
presence, as not abiding the sight of her. Thirdly, Psa. 119.57.
I resolve in truth, with a constant purpose, and settled determination, not to
do any thing that I know to be sin, and so displeasing to the Lord; the
Lord he knows, that I do not purpose to maintain my self in any known sin
whatsoever. Fourthly, I strive, and Ps. 119.101.
endeavor in the whole course of my life, to forsake every known sin, and to
come to the fight of unknown sins which as yet I have not taken notice of,
that I may forsake them also. I do as heartily desire, to forgo my sins, as
to have them forgiven; to part with them, as to have them pardoned: whereas the
man unregenerate, will at no hand part with his sin: Job. 20.1.2.1.
for it is sweet in his mouth, he hides it under his tongue, he spares it,
and forsakes it not, but keeps it still within his mouth, (as Zophar speaks)
he will as soon part with a limme, nay his life, as with his sweet sin: But
for my part, I desire that the blood of Christ may as well wash away the
filthiness of my sin, as the guiltiness thereof. 5. I bring forth the right
and kindly fruit of true repentance, namely, new obedience, which cannot
possibly grow out of any other root than this: thus it is my continual care
to Luke 1.6.
walk in all the commandments, and ordinances of the Lord without reproof.


Min. Bet is not all this that you do, for fear of hell, and condemnation
only?


Con. No surely, but partly for love I bear to God; and partly for hatred I
bear to sin: for though I knew there were no day of judgment, when men
shall give an account of all their doings, and receive a full reward according
thereunto; or though I could be assured that there were no hell to take
vengeance on wicked doers, yet would I never commit those foul and filthy
sins which I see some commit continually to my grief: though they are
well-pleasing to sinful corrupt nature, and so were to me, whiles I was
carnal, now I do abhor them.


Min. It seems you make true grief for sin a sign of true repentance: show
me then how godly sorrow, which is only in the faithful, may be known from
worldly sorrow, which causes death, and was in Cain, Saul, Ahab, Herod, Judas
and may be in any reprobate.


Con. Difference between worldly and godly sorrow.
He that has godly sorrow is at least persuaded, that his sins are pardonable,
not that they are Ge. 4.13.
greater than may be forgiven, as Cain said; but that they may be pardoned by
the infinitely farre-surpassing mercy of God. 2. He loves the Preacher, and
other wel-disposed persons, that tell him of his faults, and show him his sins;
though happily reproving him sharply for them: and he reuerenceth and
regards Gods word the more, that he sees his sin discovered, and condemned
thereby: the contrary was in Ahab, 1 Kings 22.8.
who hated the Prophet, because he dealt plainly with him; and Herod Mat.
14.3.4.
who deprived John the Baptist, both of liberty and life, because he touched
his copyhold, in reproving his incestuous life. 3. Godly sorrow drives a man
nearer to God by prayer, and makes him seek to the Minister, and to the
godlywise for counsel; to the word, and spiritual means for comfort: but the
sorrow of the world drives a man further from God and the means; as in Saul,
who went to a witch, and Judas who hanged himself, both of them hasting to get
as far from God, as the most remote place in all the world, even hell it self
could make them. 4. The sorrow of him that is truely-penitent, is most occupied
about the Malum culpae.
evil of sin; the sorrow of others, most about the Malum poena.
evil of punishment, all their care, and thoughts are taken up therewith: and
were it not for that, the evil of their sin, should not trouble their minds,
or disquiet them one whit.


Min. You named new obedience, for a note of true repentance, and that not
amiss if it be true, unfeigned, and of the right kind. But how prove you this?


Con. 3 Notes of true obedience.
First, because it is obedience of the whole man, inward, as well as outward:
for a true obedienciarie unto God, must be both sound, and straight, sound in
heart, and straight in life, all over obedient; though he be not perfect. 2.
It is obedience, yielded to the whole law of God, to precept as well as
promise, and to one precept as well as to an other: whereas they which are
false hearted in obedience, are also lame therein, and will be dispensed
withal in some things, they can be content that some of their sins should dye,
with the lean cattle slain by 1 Samuel 15.9.
Saul; but they have some one or two, or more fat sins, which they will needs
have spared. I praise God (in humility I speak it) I have no such reservation
in my obedience; but that my master-sins, and darling-sins, should be put to
the sword, as well as others of inferior rank. 3. It is performed in the
whole course of my life; it does not take me now and then at times, like the
Fit of an Ague, but is constant, and continual. For a man may cross the way
to heaven oftentimes, in, and out, and yet never come thither; but he that
holds on constantly in the way, shall be sure of heaven. Thus true obedience
in all these respects is Catholic, that is, universal: and they, and none but
they, deserve the name of good Catholics indeed, which are careful to yield
to God this true, and universal (though imperfect) obedience.


Min. Hitherto you have mentioned such graces as are more general, and
concern the whole person renewed: now if you think good allege some special
graces, which make their abode in several seats of the soul: and first for
knowledge, which resideth in the mind, is not this a sign of salvation, which
you discern in your self?


Con. Saving knowledge is indeed a true sign, which is called Ioh. 2.20.
the unction of the holy one, and Christ's Reu. 3.18.
eye-salue; because the understanding, being as it were anointed therewith, is
enlightened to see, and discern those things, which before it neither did, nor
could; it comprehends Col. 1.9.
spiritual understanding, (that is a right conceiving of the truth of God) and
wisdom, (that is, a right applying thereof, wisely and discreetly, to all our
particular actions, for the right ordering thereof: The seventh sign of
salvation taken our of Joh. 17.3.
) this knowledge of God, is life eternal; both because it is the beginning
thereof, as also because it is the means whereby we attain thereto: now then
seeing I have found this knowledge, I am sure I cannot lose eternal life.


Min. Every one is a beast by his own knowledge: he therefore that wants this
knowledge of God, does not much differ from a bruit beast: and Praestat nasci
iume^ tum quam comparariiumento.
better were it to be borne a beast, than being borne a man, to become thus
like a beast. But how do you prove that yours is this saving knowledge, and
not rather that common knowledge of Gods word and religion, which may be in
the very reprobates?


Con. 5. Notes of true saving knowledge
This will appear the better by comparing them together. First then, the common
knowledge which may be found in reprobates is general: they understand
spiritual things in a general confused manner; not unlike the Mar. 8.24.
blind man cured by our Savior, who at the first opening of his eyes, saw men
aloof off, walking as trees: they cannot abide to bring it home to themselves;
but I apply my knowledge to my self, desiring to know chiefly, how things
stand at home in my own soul. Secondly, their knowledge is partial; they
desire not to be acquainted with all the ways of God, but are, and will be
wilfully ignorant of some things; they will not know that to be evil, which
they like well of, nor that to be good which they do dislike, though it be
made plain and evident unto them: but I desire to know the whole truth of God,
yea that which is disrelishing at the first unto me. Thirdly, their knowledge
puffs them up with pride; thy be not a little proud thereof: but mine humbles
me; for the more light of knowledge shines in me, the more I see the
corruptions of my heart, and life thereby; which minister greater matter daily
of humiliation to me. Fourthly, all that they know, or speak, is only from
hearsay; for they have no experience thereof in themselves; they know, and
learn Gods truth by rote, but I learn it by heart; my knowledge is
experimental; I find the truth thereof in my own experience. Fifthly, their
knowledge is not joined with conscionable practice; whereas that is but raw
knowledge that is not well digested into practice: these two should always go
inseparably together; for knowledge without practice is lame, and practice
without knowledge is blind. And if the lame and blind were hated of 2. Sa. 5.5.
David's soul; much more are these hateful to the soul of the Lord, as an
abominable sacrifice: but my knowledge is practical, it walks upon the feet
of practice, and my practice sees with the eyes of my knowledge: hereby we
know that we know God, if we keep his commandments, 1 Ioh. 2.3. Though,
then, there be many which know Christ to profess him, which notwithstanding
shall not be known of him (for he will say unto them in that day, Mat. 7.23.
Depart from me, I know you not, because they have not the saving knowledge of
him) yet I can thus bring proof, that I rightly know him, or Gal. 4.9.
rather am known of him, whereby I also know that I shall hereafter live, and
reign for ever with him.


Min. Thus it appears that the true knowledge of Christ does counterpoize, yea
and far excel all other knowledge whatsoever: for if one know Christ, it
matters little though he be ignorant of other things; but if he be ignorant
of Christ, it matters nothing though he know all things: wherefore the wisest
wordly men, with all their knowledge, shall perish for want of knowledge. So
that I can well assent unto him, who says, that the knowledge of God, Greenham.
is as necessary an Art for Christians, as the Art of husbandry is for
husbandmen. Now, if you think good, name another special grace, as the sign
of your salvation.


Con. The eight sign of salvation taken out of Romans 8.24.
I have a true hope of eternal life: which who so have, they shall be saved;
for we are saved by hope, as says the Apostle: this grace also the Lord of
his mercy has vouchsafed me, to be as an anchor to my soul, both sure, and
steadfast, to hold me to the port, that I be not driven back with boisterous
storms; and than bears up my head above water, in the seas of dangers, in
this present world, that I sink not.


Min. But the hope of most men is a false hope, and desperate madness, (as if
a man having his throat cut, or being thrust through the heart, should yet hope
to live, every body would be ready to deride his idle fancy, or at least to
pity his extreme folly) the hope of such o shall perish, and be cut off, and
their trust shall be as a spiders web: how know you then that yours is a true
hope?


Con. Truth it is, that the common hope of men is such, that they do rather
dream than hope: and though they think they have fast hold of it in their
hearts, yet it is but as a child that catches at the shadow on the wall, he
thinks he holds it fast closed in his hand, but when he opens his hand there
is nothing in it; so when their hearts shall be laid open before God, the
shaddowlike hope being vanished, there shall be no such thing found in their
hearts, and they shall have hope to seek, when it will be too late to find
it. 4 Notes of true hope.
First therefore I prove that my hope is true, from the foundation whereon it is
Heb 11 1.
grounded, and that is Faith: for as it is impossible for a mighty Castle to
hang in the air, or to stand without either ground or foundation, even so, and
much more impossible is it for hope to be, or abide without faith. Such
therefore as boast of hope, and are barren of faith, may well be said to dream
of building castles in the air: I contrariwise believe, and therefore do I
hope, apprehending the promises of God by faith; and so hoping and looking for
the performance and accomplishment thereof: which faith, the groundwork, I
have formerly proved to be effectually begun in me. Secondly, true hope
follows an effectual calling: for first God calls men to salvation, and then
he gives them to hope for it; therefore the Apostle styles it; the Ephesians. 1.18
hope of his calling. Such therefore as hope for heaven, not being effectually
called unto it, come before they are called, and are like to speed accordingly.
It was Ester. 4.11.
death to rush into the presence of Ahasuerus uncalled: and sure, eternal death
shall cut them off, short, of coming home, which think to rush rudely into the
Holiest of all, the inner Court of God Almighty, even the highest heaven, being
never inwardly and truly called thither: but well may I hope, for I am truly
called, as I have also proved before. Thirdly, my hope makes me use diligently
all good means appointed by God, for the obtaining of salvation; for he that
has good hope to obtain his wished desire, will show it by his industrious
use of the best means, for the compassing thereof: so he that in the mourning
hopes to be 50. miles off by sunne-set, will not fit him down, or lay himself
to sleep, but get on horseback, and be riding onward on his way; and he that
hopes to live long, will not starve himself, but use the best diet for
preserving his life, 4. It makes me fit my self by holiness, for that which I
hope for, namely the full fruition of the glorious ous presence of the
perfectly-pure, and holy God in heaven, according to that of the Apostle, 1
Ioh. 3.3
Every one that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as God is pure:
not unlike to one who hoping to get access into the presence of the King with
his petition, does address himself in all sutabe manner, both in apparel,
behavior, and speech, for the presence of his Sovereign.


Min. It appears your hope is found, and good, even that Romans 5.4.
which makes not ashamed: and the God of hope fill you therewith, and grant
that you may abound therein through the Holy Ghost. But by what other sign do
you know that you shall be saved?


Con. I find in my heart a true love of God, now I have learned out of the
word, that the Lord has promised the crown of life to them that love him,
etc. I make no question but he will be as good as his word, who never failed
therein, since the world began: therefore I know, that the crown of life is
mine.


Min. All say they love God, and profess great friendship to him:
nevertheless most flatter him with their mouth, and lie unto him with their
tongues, for their heart is not right with him, How know you then that you love
him in truth?


Con. 7. Notes of true love of God.
Whereas there are three things in love, affection to the thing beloved, a
desire of conjunction with it, and a well-pleasing contentment taken in the
enjoying of it, all these I find in some measure in me, toward my God, so that
I know I love him truly, which I further prove by these notes: First, because I
prize and estimate him above all worldly things; yea, mine own life: so that I
can truly say with that blessed Martyr Ignatius, Eus. l. 2. c. 36.
I esteem no visible thing, nor yet invisible, so that I may have Christ:
Phil. 3.8
yea, doubtless I count all things but loss in comparison of him, and do
count them but dung, that I may win him. Neither is this a mercenarie love,
hired with the wages of reward: for, though there were no heaven, O Lord, I
would love thee: but seeing there is a heaven, I will account of it, and labor
to obtain it; yet still will I love thee for thy goodness sake, O Lord: for
thou thy self art reward enough, though there were no more. Secondly, I am
careful, and unfeignedly desirous, to please the Lord in all things; even as we
see, that men are loath to cross or displease those whom they entirely love and
affect. Heerupon I give my self to love that which he loves, and to hate
that which he hates. Ps. 45.7
He loves righteousness, and hates wickedness: and so do I, though not in
equality (for that is impossible) yet in similitude, and conformity: for it is
required and expected, (as the Prophet says) Ps. 9.10.
They that love the Lord, hate evil: thus I endeavor my self, 1 Ioh. 4.17.
as God is, even so to be in this worldr Thirdly, a man may know his love to
any thing, by the zeal and heat of affection, whereby he is carried to that
thing which he loves. Thus every man is transported, and as it were eaten up
with one zeal, or other; some with the zeal of pleasure, as Esau was, who for
a mess of pottage sold his birthright; some with the zeal of honor, as
Absalom was, who, for to get a kingdom, sought to draw blood of his own
father; some with the zeal of money, as Judas was, who for his thirty pieces
sold his Lord and Savior. By my zeal I know my love to God: for, tho I be
not eaten up with zeal as Ps. 69 9.
David was (oh I would I were so too) yet I feel it burning within me, as
Ier. 20.9.
Jeremiah did: my heart is hot within me, and the fire kindled: my zeal
carries me to God. Fourthly, I love his Ps. 119.97. Qui diligit legem,
diligit regem.
word, and sacraments, prayer, and all other holy exercises: whereby as I have
gracious intercourse, and heavenly conference, with the blessed Trinity; so in
especial with Christ my wel-beloued, who therein causes me to hear his sweet
voice, and to see his lovely countenance: for which cause I also love the house
of God, so that I can no less heartily, than merrily, sing the note of the
Prophet David; O Lord I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place
where thine honor dwells: and another of the same, O Lord of Hosts, how
amiable are thy tabernacles! my soul longs, yea even faints, for the
Courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for the living GOD.
Fifthly, I love his Mat. 10.40.
messengers and ambassadors, the Preachers of his word, which are sent unto me
from God to treat about conclusions of peace, beseeching me in Christ's stead
to be reconciled to God. O how beautiful are the feet of him that brings
these good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good,
that publishes salvation to me! Sixthly, I long for the coming of Christ, not
as though I could no longer bear (for impatiencie) the miseries of this life
(which are but light in comparison of the weight of glory) but that I might be
married for ever unto Christ, my Love, in perfect joy, and hearts delight, being
now but espoused only to him, and that I might be perfectly freed from all
sin (whereby I grieve both him and my self) and always praise his name in
heaven, How long Lord, how long? thou have Re. 22.20
said, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so come, Lord Jesus.


Min. Thus it appears that the love of God will warrant a man (as it does you)
no les than heaven: but what say you now of love to Gods people? may not that
be ranked among the evidences of your salvation?


Convert. Yes without doubt: For, The tenth sign of salvation taken out of 1
Ioh 3.14.
hereby we know (says S. John) that he have passed from death unto life,
because we love the brethren: these do I love, that is, the children of God,
and such as are godly, and these will I love for ever; knowing, that love is
such a debt, as I shall be always owing; and yet I must, and will be ever
paying; I will strive to be rather a creditour, than a debtor heerin, and will
not only return to the Saints of God the love of love, the same measure that I
receive from them but even usury and advantage of love: and I would to God
there were as many paid use for love, as do in these days pay use for money.
Then should they be no whit impouerished, less in the usurers books, and more
in Gods: and so would it be a better world.


Min. Whereas you say you love the godly, it may be that is only because they
are friendly to you, or because you receive, or hope to receive, some outward
kindness and benefit from some such: if your love be no other than this, it is
but self-love, being grounded merely upon your own private commodity: and
this kind of love may be found in an unregenerate and carnal man.


Con. It is not so with me: for (though happily I may regard some such for some
such respects as you name, yet if I should not love the child of God for his
own sake, and for his and my fathers sake, more than I love my worldly friend
for my commodities sake; or my kinsman for neerenesse of blood, I should be
void of any spark of true heavenly love: therefore I chiefly love the godly for
their goodness and godliness sake: the ground of my love unto them, is the
image of god in them. This is that divine lodestone, which draws my affection
toward them.


Minist. How can you make it appear, that you love them with a right affection?


Con. Thus: 1. because I love some such in the In abstracto.
abstract, even when they are severed and separate from all external respects
and grounds of love to mee-ward: as, 4 Notes of true love to Gods children.
when I hear or read of the zeal, piety, constancy, heavenly virtues, and
gracious endeauours, of the worthy servants of God, such as I never knew, nor
had any dealing with; yet I find, that I love them, and feel the affection of
my heart spreading it self toward them, to embrace them: which cannot be for
carnal respects, nor worldly hopes, for it may be some of them are dead, and
gone, and thus I love the Saints departed, which are now in heaven: sometimes
also I have known and loved some worthy Christians, who then have flowed with
worldly prosperity, but after have fallen to a very low ebb of great
adversity: when the world has bid them, adieu, and friends, wealth, goods,
have altogether taken their leaves; yet then have I loved them as dearly as
ever I did before: whereby it appeared, that my love was not grounded upon
worldly regards, which all forsook them, but upon their goodness and godliness
which still continued with them. Secondly, I much affect the godly, and delight
exceedingly in their company, yea of such as are nothing of kin unto me, that
To. 1.12.
we may be edified, through our mutual faith; whereas I care not for the
company of others wanting true godliness, though they may be perhaps of my
very near kindred. So that I can truly say, Psa. 16.3.
As for the Saints that are in the earth, and the excellent, in them is all my
delight: but as for others, I have hated the assembly of evil doers, and will
not sit with the wicked: and if of necessity I be forced to be in their
company, then am I ready to wish with the Prophet, O that I had wings lik a
Dove, then would I fly away, and be at rest: or if this (o) will not set me
at liberty, then I take up woe to express my misery, Woe is me that I
soiourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar. 3. I have a
fellow-feeling of the miseries of the Saints, my dear Christian brethren and
sisters: which works in me compassion, and makes my heart even ache and bowels
yearn within me; to see their grief, and behold them in necessity. Whereby I
perceive, that I have the true affection of a fellow-member: for, if one member
suffer, all the members suffer with it. Fourthly, I find in me a
willingness, in some measure, to impart my self unto them, in life and goods,
soul and body, so far as I can to afford them help and succor: for, as
it is truly said of faith that Fides toto copulatiua.
it is wholly copulative, wholly employed in coupling us to Christ; so may it
as truly be said of love, that it is Charitas communicatius.
wholly communicate, employed in imparting it self, and what it has, to
others, for their good. Faith is as the leads, and pipes to bring in: and love
is as the cock of the conduit to let out. Now for as much as my love is thus
communicatiue to the children of God, because they are his children, hereby I
also see, that it is of the right kind.


Min. Allege some other sure sign of your salvation. For, the more, the
better man: the richer you are in the true treasure, the more comfort may you
have thereby.


Con. The Lord has promised to fulfill the desire of them that fear him; The
eleventh sign of salvation taken out of Psalm. 145.19.
and that he will hear their cry, and will save them. Now I find in some
measure in me the true fear of God: and though I say not of my self, as the
Scripture says of Obadiah, that 1 Kings 18.3.
he feared God greatly: yet this I can say, that I desire to fear God
greatly; and this I dare say in despite of the devil, that I fear GOD
truly. Therefore I shall be saved certainly, according to Gods holy word of
truth.


Min. St. JOHN tells us, that there is no fear in love, but that perfect love
casts out fear. Seeing then you love God, how can you be said to fear him?
how can these two stand peaceably together?


Con. Very well: for, there is a twofold fear of God: the first is a slavish
and servile fear, in horror to dread his majesty, as a severe revenging
Judge, either executing his judgments, or ready to take vengeance on his
enemies. Thus all impenitent persons, and the Devils fear him, and only thus;
and therefore hate him, wishing there were no God. And this is the meaning of
Saint James, when he says, Iam. 2.19.
The Devils believe, and tremble. The second is a childe-like fear, in awefull
reverence, and love toward God, to be careful not to offend him: now this
fear is the true and natural birth of love; being bred and brought, forth of
it. Look then, as Sarah cast out Ismael, the seed of the bondwoman, but would
not cast out her own dear son Isaac: even so the love of GOD does cast out
of me, by degrees the seed of bondage, the slavish fear, but not her own
birth, the awefull and holy fear of God: but cherishes and nourishes this
continually in me, and is as a nurse unto it; so that now I fear not so much
that God will condemn me, as that I may not offend him so good so loving a
father to me: even as a good ingenious child fears to offend his father for
very love; but fears not that his father will cut his throat, or murder him,
seeing he knows he loves him dearly.


Min. Many say they fear God, and yet do but lie against the truth: how know
you, that yours is this true childelike fear of God?


Con. First (as I have 6 Notes of the true fear of God.
said) because it follows upon the former sign of salvation; namely, the love
of GOD, and is an inseparable companion thereof, as another Ruth Ruth 1.16.17.
hanging upon her mother Naomie: for, love in fear, and fear in love, is a
sound testimony of the true fear of GOD. Secondly, it works in me marvelous
humiltie toward God, and causes me in awful respect unto his glorious
majesty, to abase my self as sinful dust and ashes before his blessed
presence: as Jacobs fear of his brother Esau, made him humble himself, and
Ge. 3.3.
bow to the ground 7. times before him. Thirdly, it makes me afraid of sin,
and to flee from it as Exo 4.3.
Moses fled from his rod when it became a serpent: it makes me fear to commit
sin secretly, as well as openly (for, though no eye do see me, Ps. 16.8.
I set the Lord always before me) as it kept Ge. 39.9
Joseph from committing folly, though he might have done it closely and
covertly enough. Fourthly, it makes me hate sin: for, Pr. 8.13.
The fear of the LORD (says Solomon) is to hate evil, yea, inward
corruptions, which stick in the cranies of the soul, and cannot be descried,
but but a very narrow search; it causes my heart to rise up against rebellious
lusts, which lie lurking within: as, secret Atheism, pride, vainglory,
hypocrisy, envy, and the like. Fifthly, it makes me Pro. 3.7.
depart from every evil way, and from iniquity, to break off the practice of
sin, in the course of my life; to be a discontinuer, in the Psalm. 1.1.
way of sinners, and a resident in the paths of righteousness. Sixthly, this
true fear of God dispelleth (so far as it prevails in me) all other false
fears; as, fear of men, of poverty, of disgrace, of death, etc: whereas men
void of the fear of God, are full of fond, and foolish fears; they fear the
crossing of an Hare, the howling of a Dog, the crying of a Raven, Fairies, yea
fancies, and their own shadows: as therefore the wicked man may justly fear
every thing, because he fears not God; so contrariwise, the righteous man
needs fear nothing else, because he fears him. This one thing then will I
fear, that I may fear nothing but GOD: and that I may rightly fear him, O
knit my heart so near unto thee O Lord, that I may fear thy Name:


Min. I am glad to see you so well stored of this divine grace and rare
commodity, the fear of God: oh, I would many thousands had more of this good
ware in their storehouses, their hearts. But how else are you assured, that you
shall be saved?


Con. The Lord of his goodness has given me to taste of the first fruits of
the heavenly Canaan, already, as a pledge of the plenarie possession thereof
hereafter: he has given me that spiritual joy, which is a heaven upon earth.
And like as the Number. 13.23.
cluster of grapes brought from the Brook Eshcol, with other fruits, was an
Earnest to Israel of the future inheriting of the earthly Canaan: even so is
this joy to me, of inheriting that goodly, that heavenly Land (whereof this is
some of the right fruit) the kingdom of glory: The twelfth sign of Salvation
taken out of 1 Pet. 1.8.9.
and I can bring St. Peter to be bound for my truth in this point; for thus he
speaks of them that rejoice with this joy unspeakable, and full of glory, that
they shall receive the end of their faith, even the salvation of their souls.


Min. True Joy (I hold well) is a good pledge of heaven: but how prove you,
that yours is true joy? for who seem more merry, more frollicke, or iocund,
than ignorant, worldly, yea ungodly men? they seem to have as light hearts as
any; and indeed, in my judgment, too light to be poized, and settled, with the
weight of grace; in a word, too light to be good.


Con. Well have you said, that they seem so joyful; and now have you spoken
the best you can of them: for indeed they seem, and do but only seem so:
their joy is like the laughing of a man in his sleep, who dreaming of some
very pleasing delights, rejoices in his imagination thereat, but when he
awaketh, he finds no such cause: even such is the joy of the wicked; they
do but laugh in their sleep, and the devil shall give them such a greeting
and good morrow one day, as shall make it manifest. And therefore well says
Solomon of such, Pr. 14.13
Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness. Now therefore, 6 Notes of the true joy.
that mine is not this base-borne joy, but of a nobler descent, but sound and
good, I prove it thus: 1. Because she is an hand-maide to the right noble and
renowned Lady, Faith: she never goes alone, but is always following her. For
first, I believe through faith, that I am reconciled to GOD, and then hereupon
I rejoice, being thus at peace with him: and for this cause it is called, Phi.
1.25
the joy of Faith. 2. It issues out of the right vein and fountain: it
springs out of the bitter root of godly sorrow, and grief of heart for
sin: neither can any come to drink of this water of life, this heavenly Joy,
till they have first drunk of the waters of Marah, bitter yet godly sorrow; as
our Savior tells his Disciples, Ioh. 16.20.
your sorrow shall be turned into joy. 3. It is fastened upon the right
objects: for I chiefly rejoice in heavenly and spiritual things, as in God
himself; I can say with the Prophet, He is Ps. 43.4.
my exceeding joy, and Psalm. 4.7
Lord lift up: the light of thy countenance upon me, hereby thou have put
gladness in my heart! I rejoice also in the word of God, as one that finds a
great spoil, yea it is the very Ier. 15.16
joy and rejoicing of my heart; yea then when it searches me even to the
quick, herein I find an hony-combe. I rejoice in the grace of God wrought in
me, and others, as also in my own and their Ps. 51.12
salvation; I rejoice in the Romans 5.2
hope of the glory of God, in the comfortable use 2 Chro. 30.21.
of the sacraments, in prayer, christian conference, in Psalms, and spiritual
songs, making melody to the Lord. I am glad when they say unto me, let us go
into the house of the Lord. I rejoice in the welfare of Sion: yea, I can prefer
Jerusalem above my chief joy. 4. It is the fruit of Ga. 5.22.
the Spirit; not of the flesh, as carnal joy is, which causes men to rejoice
only or chiefly in their corn and their wine, their wealth and their honors,
their pleasures and their profits; this, nature affords unto them. But I find
in me a supernatural joy, in things divine and spiritual; which, corrupt
nature can take no liking of, much less delight therein: therefore it has
been wrought in me by a power divine, that is the fruit of Gods holy spirit. 5.
Whereas the joy of the wicked is slight and short, a flash and away, no better
then the chirping of birds in a sunneshine day: mine is firm, and durable; not
like summer-fruit, which holds good but for a time, for the summer-season of
prosperity: but my joy is lasting fruit, which still holds good; yea, even in
the hardest winter of greatest adversity, To. 5.3.
I can joy in tribulations. 6. It is a victorious joy: for, when as grief like
lead lies heavy on my heart, pressing it down, then does this joy lift up my
heart in faith, together with my hands, eyes, and voice upward to the heavens,
above the mountains, from whence my help comes; whereby appears, it
overcomes grief, and gets victory over tentation: thus I have that which
is the very life of life, true joy: for life without this, is hardly worthy the
name of life.


Min. This pawn of heaven, which the Lord has put into your heart, I may not,
nor cannot except against: therefore proceed unto another sign of your
salution.


Con. Patience under the cross may not be left out nor forgotten, no more
then it may be cast off, or forgone; well it deserves a room among this good
company of witnesses, all which give in evidence, that heaven is mine. The
thirteenth sine of salvation taken out of Iam. 1.12.
That this is a sure sign of salvation, S. James proves it, when he says,
Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life: and that it is in me; my conscience proves it;
therefore I am blessed: but more blessed shall I be when I receive the crown.


Minist. Well may the crown indeed be set upon the head of patience, so noble,
and so conquering a grace: for, christian Nobile vince^di genus est patientia:
vincit qui patitur.
suffering is a noble kind of conquering; and he that so suffers, no less
than conquereth. And if you have also found this gemme in you, happy are you,
provided always that it be true patience: how prove you that?


Con. 1. 5. Notes of true patience.
Because I do not only find out, but also find fault with any inclination
or disposition toward impatiency: I check and control my self for it: when it
begins to stir, I begin to stifle it before it gather strength, or get to
head. 2. I do not go about to prescribe to GOD the measure of afflicting me;
nor yet the manner, means, or time of helping, easing, and delivering me: I
can be content with the grace of God in the forgiveness of my sin, and
sanctification of his Spirit, tho I want other things; and can receive the love
of God with good contentment, though it come alone, or attended with the
cross. 3. I more fear to do the evil of sin, than to suffer the evil of
punishment for sin, Malum parti malu^ non est: malu^ facere malum est.
for, to suffer affliction is not evil, but to commit sin is evil: and I
can be content still to bear the punishment, so that the sin may be taken
away; oh, I would not for any thing that the rod of God should be removed,
before the Cure be thoroughly wrought. 4. My patience goes accompanied with a
profiting under the correcting hand of God: for first it brings forth Romans 5.4
experience, both of the care, and love, and gracious dealing of God toward
me, as also of my own estate and carriage toward him; and thus I come to have
better acquaintance with God, and with my self: it also increases my love
toward him, and makes me cleave and cling faster to him, as a child does to
his parent, when he turns away from it, and makes as though he would go
away, and leave it to the wolf: it strengthens my faith, and causes me to
rely more steadfastly on God, in distresses for time to come, and a dram of
tried faith is better then a pound of untried. Lastly, it works in me
reformation: I am not like wicked AhaZ, 2 Chr. 28 22.
who in the time of his distress, did yet trespass more and more against the
Lord. For I can truly say with the holy Prophet, Ps. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now have I kept thy word o God.
Thus by patience I reform my self; and thus in patience I possess my soul:
therefore it is true patience.


Min. By what other certain sign are you persuaded of your everlasting
salvation?


Con. They which have received the Earnest of the Spirit in their hearts, The
fourth sign of salvation taken out of 2. Cor. 1.22 Ephesians. 4.30. To. 8.16.17.
are thereby sealed unto the day of redemption: this have I received, to wit,
the infallible testimony of GOD's holy spirit, which bears witness with my
spirit, that I am the child of God, and so an heir of glory: seeing God (who
cannot lie) tells me by his spirit, I shall be saved, I hold it (as I am bound)
for a necessary, and a most undoubted truth.


Min. Thousands of ungodly ones, have a persuasion, that they shall be saved,
and none seem more confident than they, and yet it is but presumption, and the
illusion of the devil in them; for they have no more true right to salvation,
than dogs to the childrens bread: yea, and though they swear to it too (as,
that they are ready enough to do) yet you need not credit them, unless you
will; and if you do, it is but a lie: as if a woman that had a child, should
swear she were a maid; or one that had a plague sore on him, should swear,
that he were clear; would you believe either of them, for all their facing of
the matter? sure you would not: how know you then, that yours is the testimony
of Gods Spirit, and not presumption, which is nothing else but the lying spirit
of Satan in the mouth^s and hearts of all his children?


Conuer. 5. Notes of the true testimony Gods of spirit.
First I prove it by the birth of it: for it has been wrought and planted in
me, contrary to nature, by the word of God, heard, read, meditated upon, and
the like good means: whereas presumption, like a stinking weed, grows of it
own accord, out of the rank soil of Nature. 2. As Jacob may be known by
Jacobs voice, from Esau: so may this be known by its voice; for it does not
barely tell me, I shall be saved, but proves it to me, and persuades me by
all these former signs which I have alleged, and diverse others: whereas
presumption does only suggest that conceit unto men, but proves it not; so that
when they are asked, why they think, they shall be saved, they are not able
to allege any sound sufficient reason for the same. 3. The witness within me
speaks the same, that the word of God does without me, both being the voice of
the self-same spirit of God, which cannot contradict it self; but presumptuous
presumption, speaks contrary to Gods word: for whereas the Scripture says,
Mat. 18.13.
Unless a man be converted, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God: and 1
Cor. 6.9
the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God: and Heb. 12.14.
without holiness, no man shall see the Lord: and that the Lord will take 1
These. 1.
vengeance on them that know him not, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ: yet presumption bears men in han^, they shall be saved
howsoever, and is ready to buzze into their ears, ^alas good Sir, pity your
self, these things shall not be unto you. 4. Gods spirit, does as well Romans
8.27.
make intercession for me, as witness to me, and therefore brings me to God,
making me pray earnestly, and fervently to him from a sense and feeling of my
manifold sins, with groanings, which cannot be uttered: but presumption
drives men further from God, neither works any such fervent prayer in them.
5. Gods spirit brings forth the fruits of the Spirit in me, as love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, etc. Gal. 5.22. whereas presumption,
as it is of the flesh, so it yields the fruits of the flesh, as adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, hatred, variance, wrath, strife,
enuyings, murders, drunkenness, reuellings, and such like, Gal. 5.19. and
these are the common fruits of these days, which grow more commonly in towns
and houses, then crabs do in woods, and hedgrowes: They which bring forth such
fruits as these, give heed to the witch that speaks within them; the spirit
of Satan, who tells them, they shall be saved as as soon as the best, and
they believe him: but I will hear what God the Lord will speak; for he will
speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints: Yea, O Lord, let me hear
this thy voice within me, speak louder, that I may hear thee better, O say
unto my soul, I am, thy salvation.


Min. There may appear as manifest a difference between the witness of Gods
holy spirit, and the lying suggestion of the Devil (to such as are not
wilfully blind) as is between light and darkness; truth and falsehood: But
lest I be burdensome to you, name one sign more of your salvation, and that
shall suffice.


Con. It is no whit irksome to the men of this world to look on their gold
and silver, their deeds and leases; nay, they take a marvelous pleasure and
delight therein: why then should it be burdensome to the children of God, to
view, and look over the marks of their salvation, seeing these are much more
precious then gold that perishes? But for as much as you require but one sign
more, I will endeavor to comprehend all under one: In sum then; I perceive
that I am one of those, whom God has faithfully promised in his word to save:
The fifteenth sign of salvation.
for though a number of men, yea, the greatest number think to get heaven,
though they have neither scrip, nor scrole to show for it: yet I have both Gods
word and his writing to show; or rather his word in writing, that heaven
belongs to me. Now the Scripture is a true copy, and draught of the book of
life, taken out of the court of heaven by Gods own hand, so that there can be
no error in it: Hereby I know that my name is written in the book of life,
because I find my self enroled in Gods holy scripture, among those, to whom
he has promised eternal life.


Min. Indeed If you be of that number, there is no doubt, but you shall be
saved: For 2. Tim. 2.13.
he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself: but are you sure, that you are
such a one?


Con. Though all that I have hitherto said, and the signs which I have
produced, drawn out of Scripture, and grounded thereon, do verify the same,
yet (if you will give me leave) I will further prove it by other express
texts of Scripture (though the same for the most part in substance, with that I
have already said) that as you have seen my special evidences, truly taken
out of the graund copy, so now you may also see the grand copy it self: in
the volume of which book I find it written of me, and that in sundry places,
that I shall be saved.


Min. This would I gladly see: proceed then to show it.


Con. God in his word has promised, that Ps. 34.8.
he will be nigh unto them, that are of a broken heart, and that he will
save such as he of a contrite spirit, he himself has undertaken the cure of
such, Psalm. 147
He heals those that are broken in heart, and binds up their wounds (as it
is in the Psalm) and a wonderful cure indeed he will work upon them: even
then when all helps do utterly give them over; he, like the good Samaritane,
will bind up their wounds, and pour in the oil of comfort, and wine of
gladness; he will take them in his arms and bring them Can. 1.4
into his Chambers, he will take the care of them, and work the cure on them,
for none can do it but he, none can cure thoroughly the heart-wound, and such
as are sick thereof, but only God: Such a one am I; I am bruised, and broken
in heart, and spirit, and distressed in conscience, for my sinfulness and
wretchedness; having by my sins (O my sins) so many, great, and grievous,
deserved no less then the heavy wrath of God: O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from sin; that unwelcome guest; nay, that deadly enemy? I
thank my God through Christ, for by him I have deliverance: Oh still
vouchsafe, dear God, to visit me, thy poor patient; and though I be not
worthy, with the Centurion, that thou should come under my Roof, yet far
be it from me, to say as Peter, Luke 5.8.
Lord depart from me, for I am a sinful man; nay, rather therefore come to me,
for I have the more need of thee; the whole need not the Physician, but the
sick, as I am: thou look for such a Patient, sweet Jesus, and I lack such
a Physician as thou art, Oh be pleased to come home unto me, pour forth some
more of thy precious oil into my wounded heart; Oh spread a plaster of thine
own heart blood, and apply it to my soul, Can. 2.5.
Stay me with thy flagons, and comfort me with thy apples, for I am sick of
love: My heart is wounded within me, but seeing thou have promised, I know
thou will perform it; that thou will cure me; that thou will save me, being
thus perplexed in my soul for my sins.


Min. How else can you prove your self to be such a one as God has promised
to save?


Con. He has promised to Re. 21.6.
give to him that is athirst, of the fountain of the water of life freely,
that is, he which earnestly desires the favor of God, through Christ's
righteousness, to the inheriting of eternal life, shall be assured thereof,
to the allaying of the scalding heat of his boiling conscience, and to the
endless comfort and salvation of his soul: thus I do thirst, I do no less
truly then earnestly desire salvation. 3 Notes of the true desire of salvation.
First, in the right place, preferring it before all things in the world.
Secondly, to the right end, that I might be wholly freed from sin, and
perfectly glorify God in Heaven. And thirdly, in the right manner, as well
desiring the means that lead thereto, as the end whereto they lead. Heerevpon
it is, that the more grace I receive, the more I hunger after, and that I have
always such a spiritual drought and insatiable thirst after Christ's most
precious blood and perfect righteousness, that my sinful soul may be
clothed with this fine white garment and gorgeous attire; and oh how I long
after the favor of God: and like as the Disciples said unto our Savior (when
he told them of the bread of Heaven); Ioh. 6.34
Lord, evermore give us this bread: so I, having tasted the sweetness of Gods
favor, cannot choose but pray, Lord, give me evermore to enjoy this thy
favor: yea Even as the Heart pants after the water brooks; so pants my
soul after thee O God, my soul thirsts for God, for the living God, like to
the thirsty Land. Well, yet his word is good, Ps. 107.
he satisfies the longing soul, and fills the hungry soul with goodness;
and this is my comfort.


Min. Whom else has God promised to save?


Con. Mat. 5.3 1.
Blessed (says our Savior) are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of heaven: and Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted: These poor ones, and these mourners are they which are humble and
lowly in spirit, seeing and feeling their spiritual wants, and poverty, their
sins and misery, being heartily sorry for, and bewailing the same; and so
despairing as touching any goodness of their own, betake themselves wholly to
the mercy of God in Christ: which mercy of God is like the Act. 3.2.
beautiful gate of the temple, whereat poor creeples lie, yea lazers, a
multitude of impotent folk, blind, halt, withered, spiritual beggars, woeful
creatures, poor sinners, humble craving an alms at the hand of so pitiful a
God. And well does Gods mercy deserve to be called the beautiful gate of
heaven, for hereby only do penitent sinners enter into the presence of God,
to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enjoy his blessed vision for ever in
heaven. Thus do a poor creature, lie daily at Gods beautiful gate knocking,
craving, crying, Ps. 57. and 51. and 86.
Have mercy upon me, O God, have mercy upon me, according to the multitude of
thy compassions put away my iniquities, incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear
me, for I am poor and needy; O bow down thine ear and hear, open thine eyes
and see, for my heart is smitten and withered like grass, and I am in great
misery, Psa. 25.16. and. 18.
O turn thy face unto me and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and
afflicted, look upon my affliction, and my pain, and forgive all my sins: O
turn unto me, and have mercy upon me, heal my soul, for I have sinned
against thee, Dan. 9.19.
O Lord hear, O Lord, forgive, O Lord, hearken and do, defer not for thine
own sake, O my God. Thus am I poor in spirit, and thus do I mourn, and
therefore the promise of blessedness belongs to me, and I have as good right
unto it as any poor sinner whatsoever, for the poorer the sinner is in spirit,
and the greater beggar he is, the better right he has heereunto; so then, I
am blessed (according to Christ's own words) because I shall be blessed.


Min. Whom else has God said he will save?


Con. To. 10.13
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved, as witnesses
the Apostle: that is, whosoever not only in outward miseries, but also and
that especially in spiritual distresses, shall pray unto the Lord in faith,
both as concerning his power, and will to help, and (...) and yet more,
whosoever fearing that he has not faith, nor any saving grace, that he is not
in the favor of God; nor his sins pardoned, and that his soul shall not be
saved, if he can but find a heart to pray unto the Lord for these things with
an honest and upright mind; as sure as the Lord is true, he shall be saved,
and that by virtue of this promise of God; Whosoever shall call upon his name,
shall be saved; for thus he flies unto this strong Tower, where he shall be
preserved served safe a while, and after shall be removed by the guard of good
Angels to the Palace of Nonesuch in the Kingdom of Heaven, which is a
priueleged place; where sin; Satan, the flesh, and the world, have nothing
to do and therefore he shall not be there molested by any of them in the least
measure. Now I am one of them that do thus call upon the name of the Lord, and
that daily, when I feel my self oppressed by sin and Satan, and can find
very small, or (to my thinking sometimes) no grace at all in me, yet then can
I heartily pray unto the Lord, for his help and saving grace that I may be
saved, therefore I shall be saved.


Min. To whom else has God promised salvation in his word?


Con. Christ has promised; that Reu. 3.21
he which over comes, shall sit with him in his Throne, that is, he that
holds out to the end, continually resisting and fighting against his spiritual
enemies, the world, the flesh and the Devil, shall have (though not equal
glory) yet fellowship with Christ in glory everlasting: thus do I daily fight
that I may overcome: First, I account my self a spiritual soldier, bound and
sworn to my Captain the Lord Jesus, of whom I have also taken presse-mony, the
Sacrament of Baptism, and wear his colors, the profession of Christianity,
and know there is martial Law, eternal death for me, if I should fly from
my Captain. Secondly, I take notice of the manifold trains, and plots of my
foreign enemies, the world and the Devil, and the treasons and treacheries of
my domesticke foes; the flesh, that Rebel, my headstrong passions and unruly
lusts, those traitors: I see and observe, how they every where lay snares for
me, and spread nets in my pathway, and set grinnes for me, purposing to
cause my steps to slide, and to overthrow my soul, these do I see; whereas men
of the world see no such snares laid in their ways by their spiritual
enemies, for the entrapping of their souls, and the murdering thereof; for
ask them, and they cannot tell you of any, but are like Samson Judge 1^.20.21.
their enemies are upon them, and they fast a sleep in carnal security, and so
the Devil preuailes against them, puts out their eyes, and leads them
captives at his pleasure, he makes a mock of them; and makes sport with them,
but at length he falls from jesting and brings them to destruction in good
earnest. Thirdly, whereas these my enemies do continually besiege me, seeking
to invade me, I therefore keep daily watch and ward, fortifying in this my
little Kingdom, the City of my soul, and Castle of my heart, I have a
special care, to look well to the gates and cinqueports, my outward senses,
whereby oftentimes diverse traitorous thoughts and rebellious lusts, are ready
to steal in, which cause very often much mutiny, in the souls commonwealth,
for if I should grant liberty for sin to break in, the devil would enter
too with his great Armado of his hellish spirits, and would take possession,
placing his deputies in strongest holds, as the spirit of blindness in the
understanding; of error in the judgment, of lying and slumber in the
conscience, of deadness and hardness in the heart, and so in the rest: Thus
with his Legions would he overrun me desolate. Fourthly, I resolve when I
am in the conflict, with the allurements of the world, the inticements of
sin, the temptations of Satan, Imperato rem oportet mori stantem, said
Vespatian; so, Christianu^ militante^, may we say.
rather to die, then to yield to any of them, I purpose never to give over
fighting, as long as I have any breath within me: not doubting but I shall at
length have perfect victory, only through the might of the Almighty God, who
strengthens me. Fight thou O God, against them that fight against me, and
stand up for my help, through thee I shall do vallantly, for thou shall tread
down my enemies, and bruise Satan under my feet.


Min. Who else shall be saved according to the tenure of the records of holy
writ?


Con. Such as are 2 Timothy 2.21.
purged from the pollutions of profane ones, and are sanctified, are vessels
unto honor: that is, they which are made partakers of true grace; and so have
the Image of God renewed in them, Ephesians. 4.24
which consists in Holiness, and true Righteousness, shall be heirs of
glory, these are they which are called Saints: Yea, the Lord himself, that
high and mighty. Potentate, is their Godfather, for he has given them this
name, what mortal man then dares be so bold, as to nickname them with terms
of reproach; or to find fault with this name of Saints, which their heavenly
Godfather has given unto them?


Min. Me thinks none should dare once to miscall these, or to deny them their
names, saying we cannot be Saints here, but let them go: What is true
sanctifying grace?


Con. A new created quallitie of holiness, throughout the 1 These. 5.23.
whole man, in spirit, soul, and body, that is, in mind, will, and all our
bodily members; yea, in all the powers of the soul, and parts of the body,
wrought in us by Gods spirit, for the honoring of him.


Min. Have you this new quality of holiness in you?


Con. I dare not deny but God of his mercy, has begun this work of grace in
some weak measure in me: for how could I possibly be thankful to the Lord,
for such an inestimable gift, if I should not take notice of it, and
acknowledge it; especially considering that the very least measure of saving
grace that can be, is far more worth, than I can express, or praise God for
enough, so long as I live: deny it therefore I dare not, (though it be very
small) least I should be unthankful to the Lord, for so great a mercy, as
the lest seed of grace is: but this I dare do, to pray to him for more: yea,
and I beseech him to make me rich in all grace, Ph. 1.12.
filled with the fruits of righteousness unto his glory and praise; for he alone
is Act. 20.32.
able to build me up further, and to give me an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified.


Min. It appears by all these signs which you have produced, that your
assurance is not that common counterfeit ware which goes for current among a
number of men, a vain fleeting conceit in the brain, but that you are truly
assured of your salvation: I must confess, I can no way mislike these your
evidences, having thus examined them, nor (I think) a whole council of
Divines, if they should sit to determine thereon. I cannot see, how any can
pick a hole, or find a flaw herein: and I judge, that you have as good a title
to Heaven, by these your Scripture evidences, as the best landed man in the
world has, or can have, to his best freehold, by his parchment evidences: But
I pray you; now tell me further, are you not sometimes troubled with fear, and
doubting of your salvation, for all this?


Con. Oh alas; good sir, I must needs confess that I am, and that not a little
to my grief. I am none of those confident fools, which never doubted in all
their lives, whereby they give evidence against themselves, that they never yet
believed.


Min. But how then; To strive against doubting: diverse reasons.
do you not strive against doubting, as being a very evil and permicious thing?


Con. Yes, that I do: for to yield unto that, were to entertain Satan for
my counceller, who is my greatest aduersay, and to take him for my chirurgian,
to heal my wounded heart, who is my deadliest enemy: no, Satan shall not be my
chirurgian; for in stead of healing the wounds of my heart, he will make
himself more work, he will make more sores, then he heales: and those which
he seems to heal, he does but skin over, with the stinking salve of
falsehood: and the wounds which are, he will make deeper and more incurable,
let all good people take heed of this murdering chirurgian. I have experience
enough of him, and therefore though he do impudently obtrude his salve unto
me, yet I cast it away from me, that is I strive against doubting, with all my
might and power; as one would work against the pangs of death, to retain life
and breath: and I am bound in conscience so to do, because I know, (for as
much as I have the true signs of salvation in me) doubting proceeds from the
malice of Satan, who means me no good, and from unbelief of heart in me, and
is much prejudicial to my souls comfort, it is also greatly dishonorable to
God, for as a man hurts himself most by presuming, so he offers God the
greatest wrong, by doubting, indeed a double wrong: First, he offends his
justice by sinning; then he wrongs his mercy; by doubting of forgiveness; yea, a
triple wrong: for it is to call his truth also into question, and to make him a
liar: for, 1 Ioh. 5.10.
He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the
record. that he gave of his son, as says Saint John, and doubting To. 4.20
is not believing: It is also great disobedience to God, for he commands to
believe, 1 Ioh. 3.23.
This is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his sone Jesus
Christ, in regard of these infinite injuries offered to God; hereby, it must
needs be much displeasing to him, and if I were clear of all other sins in
the world, yet I should deserve condemnation, for this very sin, if I did not
beleeeue: Therefore it stands me highly upon, to withstand doubting, in all
these respects, and not to listen to those secret questions, which Satan
propounds inwardly unto me by way of doubts, lest by consulting therewith, I
should be ensnared, as Eve was: for first he did but propound a question to
her, wherein one would think there were no harm, Genesis 3.1
Has God said, Ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden: But while she
began to think of this question, he wound further into her, and made her
doubt of the truth thereof, and at length grew so strong, as that he persuaded
her, she might eat thereof, and that it would be greatly for her good, and
advancement; this his old policy he has not forgotten, but uses at this
day, and therefore first propounds secret questions inwardly to the minds of
Gods children; such questions, as seem, in show, not hurtful, but profitable,
that we may know our estate better, as whether the promises belong to us?
whether God will keep his promise with us seeing we break our promise and
covenant toward him? whether we have faith? whether grace were ever soundly
wrought in us? (though we have had experience thereof formerly) whether we do
not presume? whether God will save such unworthy ones as we are? etc. which
when we begin to think upon, he draws us to doubting of the truth thereof;
Not to listen to Satan by doubting.
and at last gets head, and grows so strong, as that we are ready to be
persuaded by him, that it is as he suggests. Thus we often make our selves
work, and puzzle our selves very much, by consulting with Satan: for the
greatest advantage we have against sin and temptation, is at the first; then
it is weakest: but by, Demurre, it still grows stronger, and gets ground of
us, and winds further into us, by insinuation. Therefore it is wisdom, to
watch our time and take our advantage; to refuse disputation, when he first
propounds his question: for he is to subtle a sophister for us to dispute
with. This therefore we must do; we must hold the conclusion in despite of
all Satan's premises: and this indeed will weary him, much sooner then the
popish Round, I believe as the Church believes, and the Church believes, as I
believe: For he is as weary of this, as he is afraid of holy water, and all
one. My resolution therefore is this, always to hold the conclusion; and
having once found in me some sure mark of salvation, never after to give any
entertainment to doubting; but so soon as ever it creepes into me, presently
to exclude it as the messenger of Satan; not once to demurre, or pause upon
it: for the less; the better, and more safe it will be for me. Oh, that I
could so do, according as I do resolve: O Lord, enable me that I may so do.


Min. Indeed, the way to have any ability hereunto, is to ask it of the Lord,
Iam. 1.5.
Who gives to all men liberally, and vpbraideth not: But acquaint me (if you
think good) more particularly, with some of those things, which most, and
oftenest trouble the mind.


Con. To keep Satan's counsel, is not, nor cannot be good: therefore I will
freely acquaint you with some of those his policies, whereof I have experience
in my self. And first to begin at the very root of all, namely, Doubting of
our election answered.
my election to salvation. Sometimes I begin to doubt hereof, and to think
that I am not one of the number of Gods elect; and that he has not decreed
before the world was, to save me after the world shall be at an end.


Min. That Satan has been here, you may see by his footings. And as King
David said to the subtle woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14 19.
Is not the hand of Ioab with thee in all this: So say I to you, has not the
subtle serpent had a hand with you in this? That he has, may appear: for, he
has left, as it were, the print of his foul fingers behind; and you may
perceive the claws of this roaring Lion, where he has been scraping in the
heart, to rake out of it, that assurance of your salvation, even by the very
root, if possibly it might be. But tell me: how do you to foil this
temptation?


Con. First, I see upon better thoughts, that there is no reason, why I should
lay blocks in my way: for, Satan will lay enough to bring me to eternal ruin,
if he can. And therefore, for me to doubt of that whereof I have no warrant
to doubt, is against all reason. Secondly, I see it is an ouer-curious pride,
for me to go about to pry into the secret and hidden council of God, any
other wise then as he has revealed the same unto me: for, secret things
belong to God, but things revealed to us. Therefore, thirdly, I learn by the
word, (which is his revealed will) that to be truly called and converted To.
8.30.
is a certain declaration, that one is elected and predestined to eternal
life: for, thus the secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him.
Therefore, finding my self converted, I thus rest quiet in my mind.


Min. That the Devil will lie shamefully, you see evidently; as, to tell you
that you are not elected, when it is more then he can tell, or all the men in
the world beside. Nay, you can tell him that it is a lie, for as much as you
are converted: and seeing you have thus taken him in this lie, me thinks you
should never believe him more, whatsoere he says. For, as this is not the
first lie that he has told, so it will not be the last, I warrant you. But
tell me: how else does he assault you?


Con. It is my great fault, I must needs confess, to give so much credence to
his lies, as I have done: and that I have smarted for thoroughly, ere now. But to
proceed further, he does assault me, by setting before me my many wants and
weaknesses. For, Doubting because of the wants and weakness of grace,
answered.
I find in me, such a poor and weak measure of grace, that at times I make
question, whether there be any true grace at all in me: I have not such a
feeling of faith as I desire, nor of that joy which at other times I have felt,
especially at my first conversion: I am also affraide, that I grieve not enough
for my sins; sure I am, not so much as I would: which makes me doubt, whether
these graces be in me at all, and whether I were ever truly converted.


Min. How do you ouercom this Devil, when he thus grapples with you?


Con. Thus I encounter him: I remember what I have learned, that they which
see, and heartily bewail in themselves the want of grace, cannot possibly be
without true grace: and the Lord respects not so much the quantity of grace,
as the quality thereof; not how much, but whether it be of the right kind: so
that if it be truly in me, though but as a grain of mustard seed, it is
accepted with him. And as for feeling, it is no sure rule to try my estate by:
and faith without feeling is stronger and more precious, then faith with
feeling. It was not so much Ioh. 20.29
for Thomas to believe when he saw and felt, as if he had done neither. It is
nothing for a child, being dandled in the lap, to think his father loves him:
but, when his father frowns and lowers upon him, then to be persuaded of his
love, is something indeed. And I stand bound in conscience, as well to believe
when I want feeling, as when I have it: for, Gods commandment of believing, is
not confined to the condition of reason, experience, and feeling: nay, he is
the best scholar in Gods school, that reasons least upon these grounds, and
assents most. I must not therefore believe, according to my feeling of comfort;
but, must believe better, that I may feel more comfort. And as for my joy, I
call Psalm. 77.6 Psalm. 143.5
to mind the comfortable experience that I have had at times heretofore of my
conversion, and the lively feeling of grace working in me, and that sweet
consolation, which I have had in the assurance of the favor of God, in former
times. Hereby I relieve my self, and gather, that true grace is in me,
though at the present it does not so clearly manifest it self; for joy is
more perceived of some at their first conversion, than ever after; but it is
because of the newness, strangeness, and suddenness of it, which makes a
deeper impression, and causes greater admiration: for, it may be more after:
like as one, that is brought out of some deep and dark dungeon, (wherein he
has been enclosed all his life before) into the sunshine, more joys in it at
his first coming forth, then after, when he has been daily wonted to it, and
yet may enjoy more clear and lightsome days by far, then at the first, and
may enjoy also more constant and continual comfort thereby; and like as a
beggar, that is advanced to some very great and unexpected honor, joys more at
the first therein, than afterward, and yet his dignities and revenues may daily
increase and grow far greater than at the first; and like as the Ghurch at
their first return out of captivity, had their Psalm. 12 6 2.
mouth filled with laughter, and their tongue with singing, and yet inioyed
more good and comfortable days after in the peaceable service and worship of
God, then at their first return. As touching my grief for sin, though it
makes me hang down my head to see the largeness of David's heart this way, and
the straightness of mine (for he Psalm. 6.
made his bed to swim, and watered his couch with his tears, and I can
hardly shed on tear for my fins (yet in that I am afraid, that I do not
grieve enough, yea, and therefore grieve because I can grieve no more, it is
hereby evident that I would feign grieve more; which the Lord accepts of: for
if there be first a 2 Cor. 8.12.
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according
to that he has not: and secondly, though in the intention of my affection,
Perk. Cas. Con.
my sorrow for sin seems little, and less then my sorrow for worldly
losses, yet in the estimation of my mind it is greater; because I grieve for
my sin, as the greatest evil of all, and so in truth of judgment do
account it; and grieve for the loss of Gods favor, as for the loss of the
most precious and excellent thing of all: and thus I see that my weakness in
grace, is no just cause to make me think that I have no grace, no, not in the
least measure.


Min. I pray you proceed further, to show Satan's cunning in seeking to unsettle
and subvert you.


Con. The multitude, and greatness of my sins (which Satan sets before me)
do now and then much dismay and affright me, and make me almost faint. I ca^
say with the Prophet David, Ps. 40.12.
Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold
upon me, Doubting because of the multitude and greatness of sin, answered.
so that I am not able to look up, they are more then ths hayres of my head,
therefore my heart fails me. And beside outward sins, I am inwardly much
oppressed, with hardness of heart, coldness of good affection, dullness of
spirit, barrenness of good thoughts, motions and desires, with manifold foul
corruptions. I perceive also sundry imperfections in my prayers, and in the
best duties; so that when I look back on the service, which I perform to
God, I find it such simple, patched, and broken service, that I fear, least
he should account it us sin unto me, and that it should be as abomination
to him, and that he should abhor both me and it.


Min. How do you beat back this temptation?


Con. First, for my sins, I learn, and believe that God is able to forgive my
greatest sins, as well, as the least; yea all, though bloody sins, Esa. 1.16
18.
as red as scarlet, and though they be innumerable; for, his mercy far passes
my sins, yea, the sins of the whole world. Great is the Hell of my sins
(says one) But greater is the depth of thy mercies, O Lord. This bottomless
deep is not like 2 Kin. 19.24.
those pooles about Jerusalem, which might be dried up with the tramplings of
horse and horsemen; but such as all the sins of a thousand worlds cannot dry
up. Augustine.
I remember a speech of an ancient Father to this purpose; who (upon those
words of Cain, My sins are greater then can be forgiven) says, Thou lie
Caine, the mercies of God are greater than the sins of all the world; and no
marvel: for, the mercy of God has all dimensions. It is so deep, that it
brought up David's soul from the nethermost hell: it is so high, that Ps. 36.5.
it reaches to the heavens: it is of such admirable length and breadth, that it
Ps. 103.12.
remoueth our fins as far from us, as the East is from the West. And the
cause, why the sins of all the world are not pardoned, is not because Gods
mercy cannot pardon them; but because they cannot repent, that they might be
pardoned. So then I make no doubt, but that God of his mercy is able to forgive
my sins, be they what they will be; yea, and further, upon my unfeigned
repentance he will forgive them; if I repent, he will forgive: for we cannot
be so sinful; as he will be merciful, if for our sins we be heartily
sorrowful. For this he has promised; and by this his promise is become
indebted to us, whereas we only by our sins, were debtors to him, so that
now he is not only a merciful creditor to us, content to release the debts of
our sins; but also by his promise become our debtor, upon our repentance to
give us a pardon, and upon our pardon, to give us heaven; O unspeakable mercy!
Well, sure I am, he is a true debtor, and will pay what he has undertaken;
therefore I am persuaded, he will forgive my sins: for seeing when he knew
all the sins, that ever I should commit, he would notwithstanding in love,
send his son to be my Savior; whereas he has now by his death made full
satisfaction for them, shall I think the Lord will stick at the pardon of
them? Now as concerning the hardness of my heart, I see, I need the less to
fear it, in regard I have a sight, and sense thereof, and unfeignedly bewail
the same. For like as it is with a green wound, if it bleed well, when it is
made, there is the less fear of rankling, and more good hope of curing; so,
for as much as I feel my heart bleed, in bewayling the hardness of it, I see
there is the less danger of festering inwardly to the destruction of my soul.
For my weakness in the service of God, though Satan would hereby take occasion
to keep me from the word, prayer, and Sacraments (persuading me, that I do
but take the name of God in vain, and profane his worship, and increase my
own condemnation) yet I am resolved to try masteries with him, and not to
neglect Gods service, and these holy exercises at any hand; for if he could
once get me at this bay, he would triumph indeed: and I further consider to
my comfort, that God measures the obedience yielded to him, rather by the Deus
magis delectatur affectu quam effectis.
desire, and will to obey, than by the large and exact performance thereof.
Though therefore I do not all the good I would, yet seeing in love, I desire
to do it; and though I be not wholly rid of all the evil I hate, yet seeing
in hatred thereof, I desire to be rid of it, God will accept of that which I
do, and will impute unto me, that which I desire.


Min. What is it else, that does disquiet your mind, and interrupt your peace?


Con. Sometimes I fear that all the grace which I have conceived to be in me,
Doubting proceeding from fear of hypocrisy answered.
and all that I do at any time in the service and worship of God, and the
holiness which I make show of, is but all in hypocrisy: which my conceit
grows the stronger on me, because I see sometimes some who have been
accounted very rare Christians, far excelling me, in knowledge,
seemingzeale, forwardness, and other gifts, and yet have fearfully fallen
away from the grace of God, and so fowly discovered themselves, that it has
appeared evidently, they never had the soundnes of grace in them.


Min. This is a sly temptation indeed; for thus the Devil transformes
himself into an Angel of light, as though he loved sincerity, and would have
men sincere; whereas he hates nothing more; and therefore while he thus goes
about to condemn you of hypocrisy, he shows himself a damned hypocrite:
but how deal you with this subtle suggestion?


Con. First, I see I have no warrant to take so near to heart, the fearful
examples of backsliding hypocrites, as to question mine own estate therefore:
for tho some earthy comets, and muddie meteors are drawn aloft sometimes, and
make a great blaze, than the true stars of light, but after a short time
vanish away; yet the true stars must not therefore, nor will not leave their
place, or shining: and though the wolves sometimes go in sheeps clothing, Non
debet ouis pellensuam deponere, quod lupi aliqua^do se ca co^tega^t. Aug.
yet must not the sheep therefore forgo their clothing, and think themselves
to be wolves. Secondly, I consider, that to see, fear, and shun hypocrisy,
is to be sincere. Whiles then I fear it, I have the lesser cause to fear the
danger of it, and am the further from it. Thirdly, I desire rather to be good,
than to seem to be so; and to do good rather than to seem to do it: therefore
I am not an hypocrite; for he desires the contrary, he looks chiefly to the
outside, I to the inside, to my heart, I have an eye to that to keep it in
good temper, The good temper of the heart.
especially in two respects, 1. Supple, and soluble, that is, always humble,
(for else I cannot be long in spiritual health) and 2. always hungry,
keeping in my heart an appetite unto Christ by faith, and unto all good things
in love thereof: and for the maintaining of my heart in this good temper, I use
a daily good diet of the soul, namely, watchfulnes, meditation, prayer,
reading, conference, etc. I am chiefly desirous and careful to know how my
estate indeed stands before God, and therefore take pains to examine my self
soundly, and thoroughly, and am very willing to be tried by others; this
working thorow-stitch, the hypocrite cannot brook. 4. The hypocrite does not
use to go to God in Mat. 6.5.6.
secret by prayer, (when he thinks none knows, sees, or hears him) and that
in conscience being acquainted with the distress of his own soul, and privy
to his own corruptions, to bewail them to God, and to cry for grace; but this
I do: neither yet would I have once mentioned this my practice unto you, (for
fear of vainglory) but that I now stand upon my trial, and must in this
case produce all the witnesses I can. Fifthly, I find in my self, that I
should be full sorry, that all should be but in hypocrisy in me: O, I would
not for all the world it should be so: yea, I desire from my very heart, that
it may be in sincerity; hereby I am persuaded, that it is not in hypocrisy,
but in sincerity.


Min. You say well: how else do you withstand this temptation?


Con. I may perceive in my greatest fear and doubting, that some of the signs
of salvation are in me in truth: as first hatred of sin, for though there were
no hell (as I have said before) I would not commit those sins which some do
(though nature corrupt do relish them very well) my soul goes against them.
Secondly, I make conscience of lesser sins, (which the world count no sins)
as well as of those great and gross sins, which stare us in the face: and
though some would shrink up sin into a narrow scantling, and feign would
bring it to this, that none do evil but they which are in gaoles, yet I have
learned otherwise to judge of sin, to 1 These. 5.22.
abstain from all appearance of evil: holding it a point of wisdom, to
look to sin in time, lest it fester, and eat in, and infect more, and at
length break forth into a running sore. Thirdly, I love the godly in
sincerity, not for fear of hell, (that cannot make me love them) nor for any
sinister respects, but because they are godly. Fourthly, when I go to the word
preached, sacraments, prayers, and all other holy exercises of religion, I
heartily desire to use them, not for form or custom, (as the manner of most
is) but with profit, and therefore lift up my heart to the Lord, craving his
blessing in the use thereof for the edifying of me in grace, and for the
ripping up of my corrupt heart: an hypocrite does nor thus. Fifthly, though the
Lord should condemn me, (which he never will) and throw me into hell (which
in regard of his faithful promise he neither will, nor can), yet I find my
heart so affected, that sure I should never blaspheme his holy name with the
Devils and damned spirits, but even out of the bottom of the lowest pit should
I praise him, yea, out of the very Iona. 2.2.
belly of hell (as the Prophet Jonah speaks) should I pray unto him: so that
I see, I love the honor of God, neither for fear nor favor, but in
sincerity; whereby I also gather, and conclude that I am sincere and not an
hypocrite.


Min. Be there yet any more evil spirits of Satan, sent of him to vex you,
that put you in fear and would make you believe lies?


Con. Sir, it is not for nothing that their name is Legion, for they are many:
there is another which does not seldom molest me; for when I cannot deny (upon
a right trial taken of my self) but that the grace of God, is in some measure
begun in me, yet then sometimes steps in a shameless messenger of Satan,
Doubting of perseverance answered.
much like his master, that has sorsworne all shame and truth, thinking to
outface me, and bear me down by maine strength, he will needs face me
down that I shall not continue in grace; the way to heaven so straight and
difficult, my skill so little, my weakness so great, my enemies so many,
mighty, crafty, resolute and malicious, that it is not possible for me to hold
out to the end, that I might be saved.


Min. Dare you look this Goliath in the face, or enter co^bat with him?


Con. Yes, that I dare, and do, and will do all my days, because he
blasphemeth the living God, as though he could lie, or did repent; but I do
not trust in my own bow, neither can my sword save me: I do not betake my
self to my own strength, good mind, and meaning, free will, etc (as blind
Papists and others do) for these are weapons of Satan's own making; and be
sure he will make none to hurt himself withal: therefore I take unto me, the
Ephesians. 6.17
sword of the spirit, which is the word of God; this I brandish against the
tempter, and tell him, as it tells me, that Ier. 31.3.
the love of God is an everlasting love; and Ioh. 13.1.
whom Christ loves, he loves to the end; and Io. 10.28.
none can pluck me out of his hand, neither men nor devils; and To. 8.39.
nothing can separate me from the love of God in Christ, neither life, nor
death, height nor depth, things present, nor things to come, no, not sin it
self, (which is most likely of any thing) for that lies pining and wasting in
me, in as much at the first instant of conversion, it fell into a deep
consumption, and that incurable, all the drugs of that old Empirick the Devil,
can never restore it to perfect strength again: therefore I shall endure to
the end, and in the end be saved, for all that. Secondly, for the better
animating of me to persevere, He. 12.2
I look unto Christ the author and finisher of my faith: he held out to the
end in suffering for me, why should not I then hold out to- the end in serving
of him? he would not leave me in hell fire, why then should I leave him in the
heat of temptation, or in the cold bleake wind of affliction: well, I am Phil.
1.6.
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun the good work in
me, will perform it until the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.


Min. What is there else, which does perplex your mind?


Con. Doubting of presuming answered.
I am now and then grievously afraid, that I do but presume, in being
persuaded, that I shall be saved by Christ: partly, because I am so very
sinful, and my unworthiness is so great; and partly, because (me thinks) I
do not grieve enough for my sins.


Min. What help do you use, against this shaking fit?


Con. First, I consider, that it is but spiritual pride, in the habit, and
show of great humility, to fear to believe, because of our great sinfulness,
and unworthiness; for thus we show we would have some thing of our own to
bring to God, or else we dare not trust him: we would spy some righteousness
and worthiness in our selves, before we be persuaded of salvation, and so not
to be beholding to God: this proceeds from the poysonfull root of pride, and
natural popish desire of meriting at the hands of God. Secondly, I must not
hang off from believing, till I find, that I grieve enough for my sins: for
this were to set the cart before the horse. In as much as godly sorrow for
sin, proceeds from faith, therefore I must not stay to believe, till I find
more godly sorrow, but I must believe more, that I may grieve more for my
sins; for the more faith, the more godly sorrow. Thirdly, indeed if I had bin
never humbled in the fearful sight of my sins, and a sense of the heavy
load thereof, then I should presume, if I did persuade my self in that estate
to be saved: but now I see, and feel my sins, and misery, and what extreme
need I have of Christ, God calls me as verily, as if it were by name, Matthew.
11.28. to come unto Christ, that is, to believe in him, therefore there can be
no danger in so doing, I can not sin, or presume in being persuaded that I
shall be saved by Christ: for that persuasion which follows sound humiliation
is faith; that which goes before is presumption. Therefore I may well be out of
fear, that my believing is presuming; nay, I can not do amiss in being
persuaded, that I shall be saved, I can not be forward enough herein: but
this belongs not at all to them, that were never troubled in mind, nor wounded
in conscience for the greatness of their sins, the dread of hell, and
horrible wrath of God due to them for their sins; for they indeed presume.


Min. I like and approve well of this that you say; but let me hear if there
be any further matter, which causes doubting in you.


Con. Evil thoughts, Doubting because of evil thoughts answered.
and cogitations, are no small dauntment to me: for never was the land of
Egypt more pestered with noisome vermin, than I am with foul, filthy,
impious, yea, sometimes blasphemous thoughts against the holy majesty of God,
they come upon me thick and threefold, I can at no time, in no place, be
quiet for them; yea, when I am in the presence of God, speaking unto him by
prayer, or he speaking to me by his word, or when I am about any other holy
duty, even then they come crowding in upon me, (I wonder sometimes with my
self, how, or which way they should so creep in) to amaze, and astonie me,
and withal to choke and interrupt the holy business I have in hand: the
ugliness of these evil thoughts, works horror and quaking in my heart, and
makes me think my self no better than a firebrand of hell, and that I might
do well (O Lord, forgive that horrible, and murdering thought) to make away my
self.


Min. This seems to be as strong a Devil as any, that drives you thus near
the gates of death, (I had almost said of hell) how do you to recover
strength, and to get the victory over him?


Con. Strong he is indeed, but 1 Ioh. 4.4
greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the world. First, therefore
I consider, that I do not love, like, and approve of these evil thoughts,
wherewith I am so combred, nay I abhor them, as the Devil himself, (by whom
they are hatched) insomuch as they make me even weary of my self, because of
the stinking breath thereof, continually steaming forth, ready almost to choke
my soul: and when Satan by these thoughts, does break in violently upon me,
I do not bid him welcome, and lay him (as it were) a cushen, to take up his
seat in my mind, and heart, to have residence in me, by these so vile and
horrible motions, and cogitations: but I deal by him, and them, as men do by
thieves, that break into their houses, at unawares, they give them no abode,
but hunt, and drive them out again (so soon as ever they come within the
threshold) with all the speed and power that they can: and therefore the Lord
will not account me a friend unto them, much less the father of them; I shall
not bear their name, much less the burden of them, he will never lay them to
my charge, to answer for them. Secondly, I am resolved, as long as I live,
(for so long I shall be troubled with them) to resist them with all my might.
And like as Genesis 32.2 6.
Jacob ceased not to wrestle, though his thigh was bruised, till he had the
blessing; so neither will I, till I have got the victory. Thirdly, I know that
the Lord will not be angry with me, for these evil thoughts, which I consent
not to, nor take no pleasure in, but hate: for will a tender mother, be angry
with the babe she bears in her arms, because some naughty people fling
stones at it, hurt it, and make it cry? nay, will not rather her bowels vern to
ward it? will she not rather hug it closer to her, stroke it, kiss it, and
bemoane it, but her anger is toward them that fling stones at it, whereby they
bruised and battered the face of it, she could find in her heart to fly in
their face, and to scratch out their eyes, that did her child that harm:
surely then the Lord will not be offended with me, because my enemies,
Satan, and the flesh, cast fiery darts at me, and thereby wound me; for I
cannot help it: but his fierce indignation is against them, for that they do
so molest me, and he does, and will both pity, and help me so much the more;
for Psalm. 103 13.
as a father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him:
and his affection toward his children is infinitely far surpassing the
affection of the tender heartedst mother in the world toward her dearest babe;
for though a mother could forget the child of her womb, yet would not I
forget you, says the Lord.


Min. Yet a little more, I pray you let us hear of Satan's deep subtletie, and
hellish policy, in laboring to defeat you of all true comfort here, and of
heaven it self hereafter.


Con. Doubting because of afflictions answered.
Sometimes he would needs persuade me, (and my own heart withal is
ouer-greedy, I confess, to catch up and swallow such poisoned morsels) that I
am none of Gods children, and that the Lord does not love me, because I am
kept so near and bare, and am so followed continually with afflictions. I am
hardly free at any time from one or other; they are like Jobs messengers, while
one is speaking to me, before he has done his message fully, there comes in
another, sickness, pains, aches, losses of friends, goods, good name; outward
crosses and calamities innumerable, beside the inward affliction of the mind;
oh That the greatest of all, for a wounded spirit who can bear: a rare thing
it is not to see me under some one or other of these, to keep me down:
whereas I see the wicked wallow in their wealth, as they do in their
wickedness, and Esaus portion is Genesis 27.39.
the fatness of the earth; they swim up to the chin, in rivers of oil, and
wash their paths with butter, Job. 21.24. and 15.27.
their breasts are full of milk, and their bones run full of marrow: their
faces are covered with fatness, and they have collops in their flank: yea,
Ps. 73.7.
their eyes stand out for fatness, and they have more than heart can wish:
yea, Ps. 119.70.
their very heart is fat as grease: they are so fat, so lusty and strong, that
they kick up their heels against their keeper, and will not know their daily
benefactor, but contemn their master: Job. 21.14.
They say to God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways. Behold these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world, they increase
in riches: but as for me, poor wretch, Psalm. 73 14.12.
all the day long have I been punished, and chastened every morning: hereupon
my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped; for I began to think
that these were Gods darlings, at lest my self none of Gods beloved ones; for
the rod of God is not on them, but never off from me.


Min. What means do you use, to be preserved against the violence of this
assault?


Con. I presently take sanctuary, and so am safe, I Ps. 73.17
go into the Sanctuary of God, (and consult with his word) and then I
understand their end: I see a man may go through a fair City to execution;
and contrariwise, through a narrow stumbling lane to a feast or coronation; I
see well why it is that the wicked do so prosper and fare so well, for why do
men set up their Oxen a-fatting? is it not against the day of slaughter? so the
Job. 21.30.
Wicked are reserved to the day of destruction, they shall be brought forth
unto the day of wrath: the servants of God are kept at hard commons, but they
have their keeping of free cost: the wicked, which are strangers from the
womb, and none of Gods household, have larger cates, and far better, but they
shall pay sweetly for it in the end, when the reckoning comes: so that all
things considered, I see small reason why I should heaw a stumbling-blocke out
of the prosperity of the wicked, to my own overthrow. Secondly, I labor in
time of affliction, to spy out the love of God shining unto me through some
little peep-hole or other: at length I find that even then I love God; hereby
I discern that he loves me, for so he says Pro. 8.17
I love them that love me; and indeed, his love to me is the cause of my
love to him, so that it is impossible for me to love him in the time of my
affliction; but he must needs love me much more. Thirdly, I consider, that it
is for want of wit in a child, to think that his father cannot abide him,
because, when need is, he uses the rod to correct him: for they which are of
discretion can tell, that the father loves the child never the worse for all
that, but the better; yea, this very dealing of God toward me, is an evident
token of his love unto me, for Heb. 12.6.7.
whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives, if therefore we endure chastening, God deals with us as with
sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? So that the Lord
comes to me with fire in the one hand, and water in the other; the fire of
affliction to melt out the dross of my corruptions, and the cooling water of
comfort and assurance of his favor, to allay the heat thereof, lest I should
be ouermolten with heaviness and sorrow: but indeed sometimes he holds this
behind him, that I see it not, but I must not be so unwise as to think,
because I see it not, therefore he has it not: because I see not his love, or
at least not so as I would, that therefore he loves me not, far be it from
me so to think, though I am too ready so to think in my distress: but it is
my infirmity. For as verily as he does afflict me, and I feel it; so
certainly does he love me, though I feel it not. Fourthly, I consider that
this is the cup Mat. 26.39. and 27.46.
which Christ himself drank of, he drank it off to the very bottom, which
made him cry out of the bitterness of it, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? whereas I do but drink a littie of the uppermost: but seeing
Christ my Savior has begun to me therein, Mat. 20.23.
needs must I pledge him, though it be but to kiss the cup: which is also a
cup of Gods own tempreing, and therefore very good and wholesome, though not so
toothsome, he knows all the ingredients perfectly that go into it, and there
is not one drop or dram of bitter aloes in it, more than he sees must needs
be put in, or else it would do us no good: which also is skilfully corrected
and sweetly qualified with those heavenly sweets that far surpass the honey
and the hony-combe, as peace of conscience, tranquilty of mind, patience and
joy of each a dram, and the hope of heaven, a marvelous sweet thing, which it
self alone (me thinks) might well allay the tartness and sharpness of
affliction; this is my comfort in time of grief, my friend in time of need,
my best Physic in time of sickness, and present remedy against all maladies;
and I dare undertake, that one dram of this, well taken of a sick man, shall
do him more good at heart, than twenty pounds-worth of the most precious
Apothecaries stuff. O, it is a most sovereign restoratiue, and happy is he
that is never without some of it in his heart. It is of such singular use at
all times, and upon all occasions. Now seeing afflictions are thus sweetened to
us: properly to speak, they deserve no worser name, than bitter-sweets,
whether we respect inward distresses, or outward calamities: truth indeed the
Lord lays more upon some, than he does upon others, and more upon us, at one
time, than he does at an other: he sometimes strikes an heart-veyne, when an
other will not serve, and that we cannot bleed well at it, with godly sorrow;
yet this I dare avouch, he never puts us to more pain, than needs must for
our profit, and benefit. Fifthly, I enter into serious meditation of the
manifold good, which comes by affliction, according to that of the holy
Prophet, Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me, that I have been afflicted: this is the physic that God
does minister to his servants, and it is both purging physic, and
strengthening physic: for the former of these, it pleases the Lord hereby,
sometimes to discover, and bring to our sight the disease of some sin,
wherewith we are infected, whereof we had taken no notice before; and then to
bring us to humiliation for it, so to work the remoueall thereof: sometimes
he does hereby prevent some sin; whereto he sees us very subject, by
purging out the ill humors of self love, covetousness, pride, lukewarmnesse,
which else, in time would break forth, into dangerous, yea incurable diseases:
and thus he works a miracle upon us, turning the serpent, sin, into the rod
of affliction, as Exodus 4.4
Moses his rod was turned: alas, how ready are we to run out at random after
these earthly things, to set our affections too much upon them, and to be
taken up too much with them, to grow not only wanton, but even wild with the
things here below? and how easy a matter is it for a man, to lose both
himself, and heaven too, in running up and down in the maze of this sinful
world? which that we may not do, the Lord that good Sheepherd, uses his Ps.
23.4.
rod, and staff: when we straggle too far on the pleasant green pastures of
worldly gains and pleasures, he fetches us in again; then he begins to
hamper and shackle us, with sundry crosses, to keep us better within compass,
to make us mind home better, and to make us better husbands for our souls,
that so we may think of him in time of adversity, who had almost forgotten
him in time of prosperity: sometimes he sees that we trust to the arm of
flesh, and lean too much to some outward means, then by a cross he takes it
away, that so we might wholly and only rely on him. Manifold corruptions,
and much filth of sin do we gather, by walking in this dirty world: the
Lord does use the waters of affliction, as a bath to cleanse and purge us from
those corruptions, in bringing us thereby to a sight thereof, and humiliation
for the same: in these and the like respects, well may affliction be termed
Gods purging physic. Sometimes he also uses it for strengthening physic,
when as he does afflict his servants for their trial, for the strengthening of
their faith, patience, love, zeal, holy desires, etc. for these, and the like
graces, the more they are exercised, the more they are confimed, and the
stronger they grow: and even inward afflictions of the mind, serve greatly to
these good ends. O blessed rod of God, that do so much good! Did I think the
Lord loved me not, because his rod lay on me! oh how could I be without it?
Surely it is as needful for me as my meat and drink, and much more needful
too. Hic ure, his seca, vt in aeternum pareas domine. Aug.
O scourge me, and lance me here, O Lord, that thou may spare me for
evermore hereafter. Sixthly, as touching outward calamities, I have learned at
length, a little wisdom, by Gods word, for the right demeaning of my self
therein; not to look downward, on the rushing and roaring streams of
miseries and troubles, which run so swiftly under me; for then I should be
taken with a giddiness in the head, which would make me think, and speak an
advisedly of Gods dealing, and my own estate, and so I should be in hazard of
being drowned and overwhelmed therein: but this I do, I fasten my eyes upon
the sure stay, by which I am vpheld, that is, God all-sufficient; and
steadfastly behold his promise in the midst of all miseries: thus (I praise
God) I pass over many a dangerous deep, Ps. 42.6.
when one deep calls another, or the noise of the water-spouts, when one
trouble comes on the neck of another, I pass over, or wade through, safe and
sound. Seuenthlie, as I desire to prepare for affliction before it comes; so
do I resolve in like manner aforehand, to hold fast my assurance of the love of
God, and so to bear it as comfortably as may be, when it shall come;
observing that it is the work of Satan; to make me utterly discomfortable in
tribulation; that heaven our country, and holiness, the way thereto, might
both be brought out of credit by my means; that others, beholding my
vncomfortablenes, might be discouraged from entering, or proceeding in the
happy way to life. By the grace of God, Satan shall not make me his
scar-crow, in the way to heaven, to keep others out, nay rather, by my sweet
and lightsome deportment of my self therein, I will allure others, what I may,
rather to choose the way of the cross, the way to the kingdom, than for fear
of the cross, to lose, and forgo the kingdom.


Min. It is a good resolution: and surely it is not for any ill will, that the
Lord corrects his children, whether with inward afflictions of mind, or
outward of body, friends, children, goods, good name; or howsoever else, his
love is never the less unto them, and he is never the further from them; and
though they greatly fear sometimes, yet they have no more cause to fear, than
the Disciples had, when Christ came walking to them upon the sea, thinking that
they had seen a spirit; to whom our Savior answered, Math. 14 26.27.
Be of good cheer, it is I, be not afraid: even so when the raging winds
and blustering storms of afflictions do cause an earthquake in our hearts,
the Lord sends forth a calm quiet voice, to the comfort of his children, It is
I, be not afraid; which all they may easily hear, that will but lay their
ear to the word of God, and listen thereunto; for so he speaks unto them
therein. Now if there be any other matter that troubles your mind, allege it
if you will for conclusion of all, lest I be also one of them that trouble you.


Con. Doubting proceeding from fear of death answered.
Why then, if you think good, we will end with that, that shall end our lives,
namely, death: I greatly fear sometimes that I am not as I should be, because
I find in my self such struggling with the thoghts of death, and that I am so
afraid, yea and unwilling to die.


Min. How do you to repel, and overcome this assault?


Con. First, I consider, that they which are truly in Christ by faith, and
living members of him, may have, and have all of them, some fear of death for
all that, though it can do them no harm; like as man that sees the sting of a
serpent plucked out before his eyes, and therefore knows it can not hurt him,
yet has some fearfulness in him to handle it, and put it into his bosom,
because of that natural enmity, and antipathie, that is between him and it:
the sting of death is sin, which Christ has plucked out, in being made sin
for us, and satisfying fully for it, so that well may we say, O death where is
thy sting; and yet we are afraid of the very looks of death, but more afraid
to come nigh it, because we naturally hate death: this therefore is no good
reason, to make me think my self none of Christ's, because I have some fear
of death; no more than it is to prove a man, no man, or reasonable creature,
because he is loath to put a snake in his bosom, when the sting is plucked out.
Secondly, I take up such meditations, as may make me better and more
familliarly acquainted with death, and may make me better conceited of it, and
to take better liking to it: as first, that it is the common lot of Heb. 9.27.
all the sons of Adam, none exempted, no, not the Worthies of the world, and
holy Patriarcks; and should I then desire to be exempted? Death has his
warrant to take hold of every sinner; therefore none can be spared, for all
have sinned; but before he comes himself, he sends forth many summons to
warn men to appear at Court before God: every ache, pain, sickness,
faintness, weariness, yea, every wrinkle, or gray hair, or dead coarse, is
deaths summons, to warn us appearance; but because we are too regardlesse, and
make too light hereof, at length he comes personally, with a special Writ from
the most high, and mighty Monarch of all the world, with a Capias corpus, first
for one, and then for another, and at last for us all. Now whereas, because of
this necessity of death, many take care how to do when death comes, I will
chiefly take care how to do before it comes: for if I live well, I shall be
sure to die well; this shall be therefore my chiefest care, how to live well.
Again, I labor to pluck away that grim, and ghastly vizard of the curse, which
death has upon it, and to look at it through Christ, and then behold it has
a lovely countenance, and friendly look, ready prepared as the groom of Gods
chamber, kindly to embrace me, and to bring me into Gods presence: and what
is death else to the faithful, but as Hos. 2.15
the valley of Achor, the door of hope, to give entrance to their souls into
the paradise of God, where are joys unspeakable, rauishing the heart, and
pleasures at his right hand for evermore? and what is the grave but a mould,
wherein the Lord does cast our bodies into a new form, making them
incorruptible, which before were corruptible? so Phil. 3.21.
changing our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like the glorious body
of his Son. What is life but a wearisome way, and death to the godly a
comfortable home? should the faint, and weary traveler, be loath to draw near
home? What is life but a toilsome labor, and death to the righteous, a sweet
rest and sleep? should rest be unacceptable, or sleep unwelcome to a toyled
labourer? What is that which does disrobe the faithful of all the base rags
of sin and misery, and clothes them with the most sumptuous garments of
perfect righteousness, glory, and immortality? is it not death? Who would not
be contented to be stripped naked of beggarly robes, that so he might be
apparelled with gorgeous attire? Thus then, though I see some reasons why I
might desire to live long, yet I see more reasons why I might much better
desire to dye soon; but none at all, why I should be unwilling to die, 2 Cor.
5.8.6.
To be present with the Lord: for, whilst we are at home in the body, we are
absent from him, and as it were in prison. The body is the prison of the soul,
and the earth of the body: as we must not break prison (for that is greatly
displeasing to the Lord); so when the prison door is set open to us by
authority (as when death is sent unto us, he comes with authority) we should
very gladly, and willingly depart, yea, and go forth singing with old father
Simeon, (a Nunc dimittis) Luke 2.29
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Upon these and the like
meditations of death, I find in my self some willingness to die: and that I may
be still more willing, I labor to have my thoughts more and more taken up
therewith, and at least once a day to look him in the face, that I may be
still better acquainted with him: for the more acquaintence I have with death,
the more friendship shall I find at his hands, when he comes to apprehend
me? and on whom does he: look so sour and grimme, as on them that are
strangers to him, and he to them? and as every day I hold it a point of
wisdom to get some further acquaintance with death; so especially upon the
occasion of sickness; for every sickness is a little death. I therefore
endeavor so to dye often, by making good use of every fit of sickness, that I
may once at the last dye well: that so, when my departing shall come, it may
be a sweet and acceptable sacrifice to the Lord: whether it be a burnt
offering, by the violent death of martyrdom, or at least a peace offering, by
a natural death, I desire that it may be a free will offering, not wrung from
me perforce, but freely surrendered into 1 Pet. 4.19.
the hands of a God, a faithful Creator: and if my life be willingly offered,
(which I desire from my heart it may be, and therefore know it shall be) then
shall it be well and favorably accepted; for, Ps. 116.15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of his Saints.


Min. The Lord has given you good wisdom to discover, and put to flight,
these forces, and assaults of Satan the deadly enemy of all the seed of man,
but especially of the seed of the woman, the Church, Reu. 12.17. I see you are
endowed with some good skill, to dispell the gross thick clouds of doubting,
whereby the Devil labors to ouer-cast your evidences, that either you
should not see them at all, or else very dimly, with little comfort, thanks
therefore be unto God for this unspeakable gift: but what if you could find
none of the signs of salvation in you at all, which you have alleged to me;
how then?


Con. Time was when I had not any one of them, and then I was in the estate of
damnation, though I thought my self in as good an estate as the best, and the
devil then persuaded me so too, (though since he has changed his note; for
he must needs go against the truth, or else he is not himself) yet since I
see, that if I had died in that estate, I had without all fail gone headlong
into hell: and in the selfsame case are all they, which have none of those
signs in them. S. Peter puts a question to them, which puts all such to
silence, and makes them speechless now, but what will it do hereafter then? 1
Pet. 4 18.
where shall the ungodly, and impenitent sinner appear? let the brauest mind,
the proudest, the stoutest stomach of them all answer it if he can: alas,
alas, poor wretches, they can none of them answer it.


Min. They which have not one of the signs of salvation in them, are in a
wo-case indeed: but what if a man can find but one sign in him, and not all?


Con. He that can find but one of these true signs in him, has cause of
comfort; for though there be but one good apple growing upon a tree, it proves
both that there is life in that tree, and that it is not a choke-peare, or
crab-stocke, but a good tree: but in truth, where there is one of these signs
of salvation in a man, there they are all in some poor measure, though he do
not so sensibly, and evidently perceive all alike.


Min. It rejoices me not a little to find you so well provided for the Lord;
oh happy estate that you are in: for nothing now can come amiss unto you, come
life, come death, you are the Lords. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and
God, even our Father, which has loved us, and has given us everlasting
consolation, and good hope through grace, comfort your heart, and stablish you
in every good word, and work, and preserve you to that inheritance, which is
incorruptible, reserved in heaven for us.


Con. Even so Lord Jesus. Amen, Amen.


FINIS.
PSALM. 32.11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous: and shout for
joy, all ye that are upright in heart. PSALM. 1.4, 5. The ungodly are not so:
but are like the chafe which the wind drives away.

Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment; nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous.


