THE WILD VINE: OR, AN EXPOSITION ON ISAIAH'S PARABOLICALL Song of the Beloved:
Isa. 5.1, 2, 3, etc.

By NEHEMIAH ROGERS, Pastor of Messing in Essex.

Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: How then art thou
turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me? Ier. 2.21. LONDON,
Printed for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the
Bible, at the great North door of Paul's. 1632.

TO The Right Honorable and truly Noble Lord, ROBERT Earl of Warwick, Lord
RICH, Baron of Leeze, etc.
Increase of Honor here, and everlasting Glory hereafter.
Right Honorable Lord;
MAy it please you to take in good worth this my bold attempt, in that upon so
little knowledge and far less deserts, I have adventured so far, as to grace
these my weak labors with your Noble name.

Besides some personal and particular respects which I here let pass; I have
had some general inducements hereunto; and this above the rest, Your Honors
love unto the Truth, and great regard of the Ministry thereof; which your
more than ordinary pains taking to hear holy Instructions, together with the
great respect your Honor gives to such as bring glad tidings of peace (whose
feet (and much more their face) Romans 10.15.
are esteemed by you as beautiful) are sufficient arguments to euince. By
which and other fruits of piety you still merit renown to your Noble Name,
and are zealously honored of all that know you and love goodness. into which
number (I hopefully presuming) have thrust my self, as being loath to be
hindmost in that acknowledgement which is so nobly deserved, and joyfully
rendered of all; desiring (as far as in me lies) to make known unto the world
that grace which lies lodged in your noble breast, which being united to your
greatness, makes so happy a composition, as that they who had no more than
Natures light, esteemed it only for true Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus.
Iuven.
Nobility.

For whereas greatness makes some men scornful and imperious: yet what Nec
quicquam in te mutavit fortunae amplitudo nisi ut prodesse tantundem posses and
velles Plin. epist. ad Vespas.
Plinius reports of Vespasian, may be truly said of you; It has changed
nothing in you but this, that your power to do good should be answerable to
your will.

Yea, it may be justly thought, that your Honor would teach men to take the
measure of your greatness, by your goodness; of so even a length and equal
pace are they. And indeed so it must be, for should Honor outrunne Honesty,
it would hardly be overtaken.

But I must remember to whom I speak, even to such a one as cares not for
long salutations in the Markets: I have done when I have once again craved
pardon for my boldness, and humbly requested at your Honors hands (whose
goodness has not wont to magnify it self more in giving, than in receiving
such like holy presents) acceptance and countenance to what is here offered by
a thankful heart.

As for the Matter herein handled, I will not fear to say it deserves it: And
for the Manner I must say it needs it; whatsoever it be, be it not as it
should be, yet my will wishes it to be well; but as it is

I humbly betake it to your Honors fouourable protection: And so your Honor
to the protection of the Highest.

Your Honors humbly and officiously devoted in all duty, NEHEMIAH ROGERS.

and TO The right virtuous and truly zealous Lady FRANCIS, Countess of
Warwick, and wife to the Right Honorable Lord, ROBERT Earl of Warwick, etc.
Increase of Honor here, and everlasting Glory hereafter.
Right Noble Lady;
MY attempt may seem a wonder, but where IVDGEMENT searches out the cause,
and Prudence guides Wisdom to weigh the circumstance, the conceit of
wonderme^t cease. What has induced me to join you with your Honorable
Lord, needs no long relation: God has cemented and combined you together with
the nearest and strongest bands, and therefore I in my due honoring of both,
presume to conioyne you both in this one Dedication.

What is conceived and reported of your Honors worth, through all our Country,
I must pass over in silence, for well I know your excellent modesty will not
suffer such (though deserved) a relation: Your Honor rather affecting to do
things deserving Fame, than Fame it self: And like the fixed stars, the
higher God has set you, the less you desire to seem.

I confess I am (as yet) but a Stranger in these parts, yet must he be more
strange that meets not with the report of your Honors virtues: whose
diligent pains in gaining knowledge of holy things, and conscionable practice
of what you know: whose humble, sober, wise, courteous, and modest carriage
(rare virtues to be found in Ladies of so high a place and rank) are so many
tongues, and mouths, and pens, without mine, to publish your due praises.

And though through the corruption of these times, this age is grown so base,
as that one cannot think any to be the better or the worse for the report that
flies of them, unless they be eyewitnesses either of their good or ill; yet
where the sound is all so honorable, I dare be confident of an holy
inclination, and gracious disposition; which has given me such encouragement,
as that I have little need to misdoubt either your Honors acceptance of this
Treatise, or to advise your use: for I persuade my self that you will not only
view the title and Epistle (as the fashion of most Patrons is) but the whole
book also in some of those hours which your Honor redeemes (I dare say) for
soul employments, from those idle and excessive customs wherein too many
Ladies please themselves and none else.

But I know that your Honor will be better pleased, if I turn praises into
prayers: therefore I will endeavor to supply that want, this way; beseeching
the God of Majesty and mercy, to sanctify your heart, yet more and more; who
with the New-yeere give you new supplies of the graces of his Spirit, and
graciously to increase in you the ground of all true Honor, Goodness.

Let me not offend in offering so mean a work to so worthy a Personage: the
weaker it is, the more need has it of a worthy Patron, therefore

I humbly betake it to your Honors fouourable protection: And so your Honor
to the protection of the Highest.

Your Honors humbly and officiously devoted in all duty, NEHEMIAH ROGERS.

TO THE READER.
HE that feasts high Estates, must seek out for foreign Cookeries, and
fantastical dishes to please their pallats; but he that in true charity
inuites home his plain honest neighbors, does well enough if he provide such
homely fare as shall be competent and befitting men of meaner quality: It is
the plain Countryman I feast, commonly called the Good Man; And therefore for
thee Reader to expect any curious Division, rare Invention, or Rhetorical
composition in this Treatise, would be as vain and idle, as to hope to meet
with puffed paste at a Plow-mans table.

As for those who drive their flocks upon the mountain tops, for every spear
of grass they there spy growing, I neither envy them, Qui sua metitur
pondera far potest. Martial.
nor dare follow them, for I confess ingenuously my ability and gifts will
not suffer me: Or if they would, yet I would forbear, and rather choose to feed
my sheep in the valleys where is grass enough, handling the Doctrine of Faith
and Good life, than to travel in the controuerted points of Predestination,
Free Will, Church-gouernments, etc. for he is blind who sees not that men's
brains are full, but their hearts are empty. Our tongues run over, but for
twenty good words, we have not one good work; which is our shame.

If then thou love not plainness, lay this book by, for such as love it;
for though such diet be not for thy tooth, yet there are thousands of good
souls, who like better with such pulse, than with daintier fare, growing
faster in knowledge, and stronger in the Faith, with such plain Instructions,
than by more learned Treatises. But if thou be such a one as desire rather to
have thy conscience, than thy curiosity satisfied; thy heart seasoned, and
soul profited, than thy ears tickled with pleasingnesse of words; thou art
he for whom this was penned: And thou art welcome. I have said; do thou
read; God bless thy reading. And do thou remain mine, as I am

Thine in Christ, N. ROGERS.

A TABLE OF THE DOCTRINES collected out of the several Verses of this
Parabolicall Song of the BELOVED.
VERSE 1.
Doctrine 1 GOD seeks to draw us to himself with such baits as we most
affect. page 4 Doctrine 2 Gods Ministers both for matter and method must fit
themselves unto their hearers. page 10 Doctrine 3 It is no disparagement to
greatness to be the Lords Prophet. page 17 Doctrine 4 Poetry is an Art ancient
and praiseworthy. page 23 Doctrine 5 Songs and Poems artificially modulated,
may lawfully be sung for the setting forth of Gods praise. page 26 Doctrine 6
All our labors should be dedicated to the Lord. page 32 Doctrine 7 Every true
member of the Church does, and so ought, to love the Lord entirely. page 40
Doctrine 8 Ministers are Christ's Paranymphs. page 57 Doctrine 9 Ministers
should deliver nothing for Doctrine, but what they are able to show warrant for
the delivery of. page 63 Doctrine 10 Ministers should spend their pains
especially for the Churches good. page 66 Doctrine 11 It is lawful to make
resemblances betwixt things earthly, and things heavenly. page 82 Doctrine 12
There is no earthly thing which may not be applied to some special use for our
edification in grace. page 83 Doctrine 13 God is the Husbandman of his Church.
page 89 Doctrine 14 The Church is Gods inheritance. page 93 Doctrine 15 A true
Church may be corrupted with error and idolatry. page 95 Doctrine 16 The
Church of God is but one. page 99 Doctrine 17 God is no way wanting in any
point of good husbandry for his Churches profit. page 103 Doctrine 18 The fat
of the earth is sometimes given by God to his people for a possession. page 108
VERSE 2.
Doctrine 1 GOds Church has a strong fence about it, whereby it is preserved
from the fury of their enemies. page 111 Doctrine 2 It is not safe for the
Church to suffer Idolaters or other obstinate sinners to remain within her.
page 113 Doctrine 3 The godly and their seed are the choicest plants and
noblest persons. page 119 Doctrine 4 The beauty and bulwark of a place is the
service and worship of God in that place. page 127 Doctrine 5 God has his
Wine Press for the pressing and discovering of his Vineyards fruit. page 131
Doctrine 6 Where God has taken pains in husbanding, there he expects fruit
somewhat answerable to his pains. page 135 Doctrine 7 The wicked make an
ungrateful return to God for all his favors. page 162 Doctrine 8 The wicked
divert the means of their salvation to their confusion. page 164 Doctrine 9
The fruit of sin and disobedience is a stinking fruit. page 168
VERSE 3.
Doctrine 1 GOd does proceed against sinners in much meekness. page 174
Doctrine 2 God is content to submit his courses unto scanning. page 179
Doctrine 3 God will fetch witness from the consciences of his enemies for the
justifying of his proceedings. page 181 Doctrine 4 Sin is the makebate
between God and his people. page 186
VERSE 4.
Doctrine 1 GOd cannot any way be charged with the sinfulness and barrenness
of men's hearts and liver. page 192 Doctrine 2 Though God use all means to make
the wicked good, yet notwithstanding they will still continue wicked. page 197
Doctrine 3 God grieves when man contemnes the means of his salvation. page 200
VERSE 5.
Doctrine 1 GOd does warn before he smite. page 209 Doctrine 2 He is of a
patient and forbearing nature. page 217 Doctrine 3 Gods holy hand has a
special stroke in all those afflictions which are laid upon his Church. page
223 Doctrine 4 God will not spare his own people if they sin against him.
page 231 Doctrine 5 The ungrateful abuse of Gods blessings causes the Lord to
deprive us of them, and to bring upon us the contrary wants. page 238 Doctrine
6 Sin depriueth man of Gods protection. page 240 Doctrine 7 The wicked cannot
hurt us until God leave us. page 246 Doctrine 8 The enemies of Gods Church are
more raging and ravenous than the very beasts. page 254
VERSE 6.
Doctrine 1 War is the forerunner of desolation. page 258 Doctrine 2 Such as
neglect the means shall be in the end deprived of the means. page 266
Doctrine 3 Ministers have no power, nor ability of themselves, to perform
their ministerial function. page 271
VERSE 7.
Doctrine 1 General Doctrines must have particular applications. page 278
Doctrine 2 God is an absolute Lord over all creatures. page 282 Doctrine 3 God
is a God of power, and has all creatures for his hoasts. page 286 Doctrine 4
Good Progenitors may have a degenerate offspring. page 288 Doctrine 5 Good
names and titles are nothing worth without grace. page 291 Doctrine 6 Good
Parents are great ornaments to their posterity. page 293 Doctrine 7 Rhetoric
is an Art sanctified by Gods Spirit, and may lawfully be used in the handling
of Gods word. page 296 Doctrine 8 The duties of the second Table God especially
respects. page 297 Doctrine 9 Oppression of the poor, especially by such as
should be defenders of the poor, is a heinous sin. page 300 Doctrine 10 The
cries of the oppressed ascend up into the ears of the Almighty. page 315
ESAIAS 5. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Now will I sing to my well-beloved, a song
of my beloved touching his Vineyard: my well-beloved has a Vineyard in a very
fruitful hill.

2 And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with
the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a
winepresse therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it
brought forth wild grapes.

3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, Judge, I pray you,
betwixt me and my Vineyard.

4 What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it?
wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes?

5 And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard, I will take
away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down.

6 And I will lay it waste, it shall not be pruned, nor dug, but there shall
come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds that they rain no
rain upon it.

7 For the Vineyard of the LORD of Hosts is the house of Israel, and the men
of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but behold
oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.

A Strange Vineyard in PALAESTINA, IN An exposition of Isaiahs parabolicall
Song of the Beloved, discovered: To which Gods Vineyard in this our Land is
Paralleld.
ISAIAH 5.1.8. Now will I sing to my well-beloued a Song of my beloved touching
his Vineyard. Text.

IT was a practice usual with the Prophets in former times, Calu. in praesat.
ad hunc lib.
after that they had prophesied to the people, to Isai. 8.1.2. and 30.8. Hab.
2.2.
gather a compendious sum of what they had taught, and affixe it to the gate
of the Temple, that the prophecy might be the better viewed and learned of
all; and after it had there remained for certain days, it was then taken
down and put into the treasury of the Temple, that the memory thereof might
continue for ever. And thus by Gods special providence it came to pass, that
(if not all, yet) most of the books of the Prophets were gathered, and
preserved, and now as rich treasures are enjoyed by us: wherein we have the
Sermons of the holy Prophets not so largely penned as they were preached,
Muscul. in Isai.
but only such general heads collected as were by them delivered. Now as
before in the former Chapters, so here in this we have some such Sermon notes,
preached by an excellent and incomparable Prophet, by name Isaiah: A man of
noble birth, and of as noble a spirit; trace him and you shall still find him
like his noble self, pithy, powerful, and (as Saint Paul witnesses) Romans
10.20.
very bold in delivering of his message, fearing no cruelty nor danger, albeit
for his boldness he lost his life, being by the commandment of Manasses sawne
asunder with a wooden saw, Hierom. lib. 15. in Isai. in fine.
if History speaks true.

He was a Courtier and a Master of speech, being (says one of the Ancient
Hierom. epist. ad Paulinum.
) the eloquentest Prophet for Hebrew in the Old Testament, as Saint Paul was
the elegantest Apostle for Greek in the New: To whose elegancies the rowlings
of Demosthenes do no more answer than that confused noise of waters, does to
that sweet noise of Harpes spoken of in Saint John's Revelation Revel. 14.2.
^ulling. Praef. in Isai.
. In all his writings he rather seems to be an Evangelist than a Prophet,
most lively describing and setting forth the Nativity, Preaching, Persecution,
Apprehension, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, yea, and latter coming to
Judgment of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: so that no Evangelist seems to
go beyond him. His Auditorie was Judah and Jerusalem, a stubborn and
disobedient people; more brutish than the Ox and Ass Cap. 1.18.
: whose sins were crimson, receiving a double dye, or admitting a twofold
aggrauation, one from Gods unutterable kindness unto them, in nourishing,
bringing of them up, and choosing them for his: The other from the quality and
multitude of their transgressions against him, whose sins were for number
many; for nature heavy.

To these is Isaiah (Gods Health) Etym. nom. Prophet.
sent that he might heal their sickness; with these he deals, and first
discouers their disease, and then labors for their recovery: He proves that
they Cap. 1. Verse. 4.
are a sinful nation, a people full of iniquity, a seed of evil doers,
corrupt children, whose whole head was sick, and whole heart heavy; so that
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there was no soundness,
but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores, etc. And that of a faithful
city it was now become a harlot, whose silver was become dross, and wine mixed
with water, etc. For all which, Gods anger was conceived against them, and yet
withal he signifies his mercy, if it were received by them; using his best
Oratorie, in Inuiting those that did rebel, Inciting those that did neglect,
hastening those that did linger, and recalling those that did wander, to sue
out their pardons and make peace with their Maker: And thus he spends the four
foregoing Chapters. All which to have heard this Orator himself press in his
own words and with his own affections, whose bowels would not have yerned and
heart melted within their breasts? And yet ah Lord! what hear I? Israel is not
gathered Esaias 53.1.
, thy servants report is not believed, even Isaiah himself labors in vain,
and spends his strength for naught Cap. 49.4.
: no better fared it with him in his ministry, than it fares with us the
Ministers of thy Gospel: Scarce a tenth is gathered. And yet we cannot wonder
that it fares so with us: For can we (who are but rude in speech, and of a
slow tongue) hope for that which so rare a Rhetorician found not? little or no
fruit could he see of all his travels; and yet he does not faint, but with an
invincible constancy goes on in performing his prophetical function.

Oh! how sorts the humor of many with this his practice? such is the
impatiencie of our hearts, that except we see present reformation in those we
have to deal withal, we are ready with Jeremiah Ier. 20.^^.
to resolve to speak no more in the name of God. It is noted as his blemish,
and the word of God gives him no rest until he had altered his resolution.

But what course will thou now take, oh thou man of God with this obdurate
people? Their hearts are fully set in them to do evil; they will not obey:
nay, which is worse, they will not hear thee: would they listen to thy
Sermons, there were some hope they might be wrought upon: but turning away the
ear, what hope is left? Tell us then, oh noble Prophet, what will thou do?
let us be so bold with thee as to ask the question; and be so favorable as to
acquaint us with thy purpose.

Text. Verse. 1.
Now will I sing to my well-beloued a song of my beloved touching his vineyard,
etc. q. d. I see indeed they lightly set by my ordinary Sermons: and therefore
I purpose to leave my accustomed manner of prophesying, and fall to singing,
being unto them rather as a Poet Ezekiel. 33.32.
, than as a Prophet, that so by their own delights they may be allured. Obser.
Thus God seeks to draw us to himself with those baits which are somewhat
agreeable to our pallat, he does compose himself to our disposition; and even
as face answers face in a glass, so does he apply himself to fit the humors
of mortal men. Do the Sages love stars, and dreams? Matthew. 2.
a bright shining star and a dream shall instruct them in the truth of God,
and direct them unto Christ. Does Saint Peter love fishing? Luke 5.
he shall be won by a great draught of fishes. Does Augustine love eloquence?
Ambrose by his eloquence shall catch him at a Sermon. What is it that can win
us? which way soever our desires stand (that is not sinful) God does in his
word allure us: The best things in earth and heaven are made our bait: Let us
yield our selves therefore to be caught, for with these does the Lord seek us,
not for any need that he has of us, but for our own salvation.

In which Song we have a Parable proposed of a fruitless Vineyard, which after
great care and cost of the painful Husbandman bestowed on it, is left desolate
and forsaken for its barrenness.

The Argument of it seems not to differ from that of the foregoing Chapters;
here being nothing said, Argument of the Song.
that for substance was not before taught: Luther.
The difference that is, is only in circumstance, the style and method only
being altered and changed.

The Scope and drift of the Prophet is, The scope is threefold.
first to get audience and attention: And therefore he chooses to deliver his
message in the sweetness of verse, rather

Secondly, that they might the sooner learn, and better

Thirdly, that he might bring them to a sight of their both sees and
corrects all other things save it self; so is it with the sinner, when his
own case is proposed to him, not as his own, but in the person of another, he
will soon see the fault and pass a just sentence on it, but else it cannot be
espied. Whiles 2 Samuel 12.
wise Nathan was querulously discoursing of the cruel rich man, that had
forcibly taken away the only Lamb of his poor neighbor, how willingly does
David listen to the story, and how sharply (even above law) does he censure
the fact? Verse. 5.
As the Lord lives, the man that has done this thing shall surely die. See
how severe Iusticers we can be to our very own crimes in others persons? Had
he known on whom the sentence would have light, it should not have been so
heavy; but now he is selfe-condemned. The like was our Saviors practice with
the Scribes and Pharisees, in propounding Matthew. 21.
that Parable of perfidious Husbandmen, who beat the Servants that were sent to
receive the fruits of the Vineyard, and slew the heir; and not without the
like success: For being Verse. 40.
asked what the Lord of the Vineyard would do to such; they answer, 41.
He will cruelly destroy them, and let out the Vineyard to others. 43.
Then Christ infers, Therefore I say unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, and given to a Nation that will bring forth the fruits thereof.
And this is the reason why our Prophet does not only sing, but sings a
Parabolicall song, propounding the truth in such an obscure manner, under a
continued similitude or allegory; like some expert Physician, who so cunningly
wraps up his pills and conueyes his dose, that it begins to work ere it be
tasted.

And surely, there is no one thing, wherein is more use of wisdom than in the
due contriuing of a reprehension, which in a discreet delivery, helps the
disease; in an unwise, destroies nature.

Division.
In which Song consider we: First, the Prooem or Preface to it, verse 1.

Secondly, the Poem it self, or body of it, verse 1.8.

The Prooem in these words, Now will I sing to my well-beloued a song of my
beloved touching his Vineyard: wherein, these particulars are obseruable:

First, the Inditer or Author Isntrumental, intimated in this particle [I.]

Secondly, the kind of Treatise indicted [A Song.]

Thirdly, the manner of the Prophets publishing and delivering it [Will sing.]

Fourthly, the Dedication of it [To his well-beloued.]

Fifthly, the warrant and authority for the publishing of it [Of my
well-beloued.]

Sixthly, the Subject matter thereof [Touching his Vineyard.]

These in the Prooem. As for the Poem, we will then limb and branch it forth,
when we come to the handling of it. Let us now go to the sickle of the
Sanctuary, and there weigh those words which we have already numbered.

Now] Some read it Go to, or Go to yet: Exposition. Muscul. Moller.
As if the Prophet should stir up himself to sing; and like the watchful
Cock, first clap his wings to awake himself, before he crows to awaken
others. Others read it as we have it Now, or Now I pray; hereby stirring up
his people to attention; which reading is the best: for the Hebrew particle Na
notes the motion of the mind to persuade or entreat.

Will I sing] id est, I will lift up my voice and make a melodious sound,
modulating and singing the Song I have composed.

To my well-beloued] id est, To the grace or praise of his well-beloued, or (as
some) in his defense. Calu. and Vrsin. in loc.


Well-beloued] Some there are who would have Gods Israel to be meant hereby: He
so terming them in regard of the great love he bare toward them, and great
care he had over them, they being dearly beloved of him: But the Prophet
explaineth his own meaning, when he says, My well-beloued has a Vineyard.
Now the Vineyard of the Lord of Hoasts, is the house of Israel, verse. 7. By
well-beloued then he understands, not the people of God, but God himself.
And he calls him so in a twofold respect.

Generally; as he himself was a member of the Church, and in the behalf of
it, and thus said Solomon, Cant. 2.13. and 6.3. 7.10.
My well-beloued is mine, and I am his.

Specially; as he was a Prophet, and so one of the Bridegroomes friends, to
whom the charge of the Church was committed; according to that of Saint John,
John 3.29.
He that has the Bride is the Bridegroom: but the friend of the Bridegroom
which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroomes
voice.

A Song] Three kinds of Songs were in use especially amongst the Jews:
Mizmor, Tehillah, Shir.
Some they called Psalms; othersome Hymns; and another sort they had which
they called Songs or Odes: All which kinds Saint Paul mentions, when he
wills us to speak to our selves with Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs Ephesians. 5.19. Coloss. 3.16.
. The first of these were such as were artificially framed in a certain full
number of words and measure, as the original word notes; it coming of a word
Zamar.
which signifies to prune or cut off superfluous twigs: and contains in it
holy matter, of what argument soever: whether Precatorie; Prayers for benefits
to be received: or Deprecatorie; Petitions against adversities: or
Consolatorie; Matter of comfort and consolation. These were wont to be sung
both with Instrument and voice.

The second sort, were special songs of praise and thanksgiving, and come of a
word Halal.
which signifies the lifting up or exaltation of the voice, in extolling and
magnifying either the worthy person or his noble action; and these are properly
those that set forth the Almighties praise: Hymnus Psalmo sanctior. Chrysostom. in
Colos. 4. Hom. 9.
therefore says Chrysostom; A Hymn is more divine than a Psalm. These were
wont to be sung either with the Instrument, or without.

The third kind contained in them doctrine of the chief good, or man's
eternal felicity, with other such like Spiritual matter, and were
artificially made, and after a more maiesticall form than ordinary. These were
sung only with the voice, without any Instrument.

A learned writer Zanch. in Colos. cap. 3. verse. 16.
shows diverse other differences, and distinctions given of these by diverse of
the Ancients: but that I have named, is the most received. Let this suffice,
there were and are variety, and all allowable by the Lord.

As for this Song of our Prophet Calu. in loc.
, it is of this latter kind, and was most artificially composed, and set out
with the most exquisite skill that might be. It is of the like nature and kind
with that of Solomon's, Oecolamp.
which is called the Song of Songs: For here the great love of God toward his
Church, with the fruit of that his love is set forth unto us. In this indeed
they differ (as some have well observed) that is Comicall, but this is
Tragical; for though our Prophet begins merrily, yet he ends heavily.

Of my beloued] D^dho.
Here the Prophet uses the same word that he did before, though with some
little alteration: and some Moller. and Hector. Pint. in loc.
translate it Uncle; others Cousen; (For so it signifies as well as friend or
beloved) and would by it note out the Messiah, and his humanity in a special
manner: For Isaiah descended from David, and so was of Christ's kindred; in
which regard (say they) he calls him his Uncle or his Cousen. But this
exposition is rejected by other of the learned Calvin. Vrsin.
as constrained: And they take the word here used to be the same in
signification with the former, holding the addition to be but a garnishing of
the Prophets speech, which liberty Poets have above other writers, to the end
that by the rhyme and running of the verse, the Memory might be the better
helped, and the Understanding quickened.

Now, in that he says it was [Of] his beloved, he hereby notes out his
Warrant and Authority. It was the Song which his Beloved put into his mouth,
and which he had in charge from him to publish. It was of him and from him, as
well as for him.

Touching his Vineyard] Some read it, to his Vineyard; others, for his
Vineyard. The word may be read both ways, both in the Genitive and Dative case
(as Muscul.
one observes.) By this Vineyard we are to understand the Church, as appears,
verse. 7. The reasons why it is compared to a Vineyard we shall hereafter see.
And thus much for Explanation. Come we now to matter of Observation.

And first in general from the Prophets method and manner of proceeding, which
we see was not as usually it was; Doct. Ministers both for matter and method to
fit themselves to their hearers.
note we, What wisdom is requisite for Gods Ministers, that they may be able
to apply themselves to the several affections (if not sinful) of their
hearers: becoming all things to all men, seeking by all possible means to
win or gain any unto Christ.

To the Jew 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 21, 22.
(says Saint Paul) I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them
that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them which are
under the Law. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak. I
am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. Then
follows that general exhortation: Verse. 24.
So run that you may obtain. This course likewise took our blessed Savior;
sometimes he taught by Explication; otherwhiles by Application: sometimes
Propounding doctrines; othertimes Expounding them: sometimes he delivers
plain Principles, at other times Parables and dark sentences; and not seldom
by exemplarie similitudes. The rich man he teaches by the rich man's care and
greedy gathering: The Vine-dresser by the Vinitors digging and hedging: The
Labourer by the Laborers hire and working: The Builder by the builders laying
of a good foundation: The Husbandman by the Husbandmans sowing and reaping:
The Fisherman by the Fishermans casting in nets and drawing. By all which the
Ministers of the Gospel are admonished to become all unto all, that they may
win the more, Muscul. in Matthew. 4.
according to our propounded point.

Let us not then be discouraged, though we have to Physician omits no point of
his Art, though the recovery of his Patient seem desperate; he will use his
best skill before he gives him over. What is this divine trade of ours, but a
spiritual Piscation? Now how much skill, and toil, and patience is requisite
in this Art, who knows not? The world is the Sea; Souls like fishes swim at
liberty in this deep, ranging up and down after their own disposition,
vncaught: Ministers are the Fishers in this Sea, who must be ever busied,
sometimes in preparing, sometimes in mending, sometimes in casting abroad,
sometimes in drawing in their nets. The Net to take men with, is the preaching
of the Gospel, which Net is oftentimes let down, and many a draught made by
the poor Fisherman, yet nothing taken. For some are crafty, and will not; as
the worldling, who is so wise (at least in his generation Luke 16.
) that he no sooner spies the Net laid, but he shuns it. Some are slippery, and
cannot; as the Hypocrite, Qui capit anguillam per caudam non capit illam.
who like an Eele slips through when he is enclosed. Some are great, and may
not; Amos 7.13.
Prophecy not at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings
Court: So shows Jeremiah, when he says, Ier. 5.5. read Psalm. 2.3.
I will get me to the great men, and speak to them, but these have broken the
yoke, and burst the bonds. And therefore Paul though he had caught many a soul
in his Nets, yet he could catch but a piece of King Agrippa: So shows the
Text, Acts 26.28.
Almost thou perswadest me to become a Christian. And lastly; Some are little,
and dare not: Our Peter-like professors, whom the voice of a silly damsel,
crying, Thou art a Galilean, terrifies. So that the sum of the pains of many
is, Luke 5.5.
We have labored all night and taken nothing. Thus it pleases God to exercise
the patience of his servants. But howsoever some fishes are too great, and some
too little, some too silly, and some too subtle, yet let us launch out into the
deep, and once again let slip our new-washen Nets at our Masters bidding:
What though there be no likelihood of success? yet the last throw may draw up
some to grace and glory: Say then with Simon, Master, though we have traveled
all night, and taken nothing, yet at thy word we will let down the net, and
make one cast more. In so doing certainly we at last shall find, that our
humble and penitent obedience shall come home laden with blessings as theirs
did, for when they had so done (says the Text) verse. 6.
they enclosed a great multitude of fishes, so that their nets brake; and they
filled their ships, so that they began to sink. O happy complaint of too large
a capture! Who would not obey thee, oh Christ, since thou so bountifully
requitest man's weakest services? Their nets break, their ships sink with the
burden of that which they have taken: O blessed Savior, if those Apostolical
vessels of thy first rigging were thus ouerlaid, ours flote and totter with an
vnballast lightness: Thou who art no less present in these bottomes of ours,
lade them with an equal freight of converted souls; give us ability to take;
give men will, and grace, to be taken, and let us praise thee for thus sinking.
Howeuer, let thy work be followed, and thy leisure waited for: Assure us of
this, that that pains cannot be lost, which we resolve to lose for thee. For
Isay 49.5.
Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall we be glorious in the eyes of the
Lord, and our God shall be our strength. Though our preaching be not a sweet
savor to them that hear us; yet even in them we shall be a sweet savor unto
the Lord 2 Cor. 2.15.
. If then we preach, and men repent not, let it never repent us of our
preaching; for they are the losers and not we: 2 Chronicles. 15.7.
Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak, for your works shall
be rewarded.

Let Hearers hence likewise be admonished, not rashly Elijah 1 King 19.12.
, and is a Barnabas, the son of consolation: When with the stubborn and
refractarie, then he lifts up his voice a strain higher, he Isay 58.1.
cries aloud and spares not, being a B^anerges, the son of thunder. Blame him
not for this: for some men's hearts are like nettles, touch them but gently, and
they will sting, when rough handling is without prejudice: And others are like
briars, that wound the grasping hand of reproof, but yield willingly to them
that softly touch them with that Lady-like hand of Exhortation.

Aarons bells must be wisely rung; sometimes the Treble of mercy sounds well,
at other times the Tenor of Judgment, or Countertenor of Reproof sounds
better: and it often happens, that the Mean of Exhortation sounds best of all.
It is his wisdom to observe circumstances, and know how to curse as well as
bless; chide as well as comfort, and speak war to a rebel, as well as
peace to a friend. And herein indeed lies the wisdom and faithfulness of a
Teacher: Then and only then shall he prove himself sincere and impartial,
when he holds this course.

Again, when he has to deal with a people of a shallow capacity and
understanding, he so speaks both for matter and manner of delivery, as they
are best able to receive it. Should he use the Latin or Greek tongues to
such as can only understand the English: Or such a Roman-English, or soaring
sublimitie of phrase, as plain Englishmen know not what to make of: He knows
full well he should be as a Barbarian to those which hear him. Or should he
tell the vulgar of Fathers and Historians; of Ambrose, Austin, Gregory,
Cyprian, Chrysostom, with the rest; and of their Homilies, it would little
else than amaze his Auditors. Wherefore here he uses a plainer method, and
more familiar style, stooping to the understanding of the simplest, daily
beating upon those highway points of Faith and Repentance: Tene and deuo^e
accipe aperta, vt tibi pandantur obscura. Quomodo eris penetrator obscurorum,
contemptor manifestoru^? Aug. Hom. de Pastor.
for which his plainness let him not be despised; but reverently and devoutly
see that his doctrine be received, that obscure things may afterward be more
profitably opened. At another time it so falls out, that he is to speak to a
more learned and intelligent Auditorie, and then he takes more scope to use the
liberty of his liberal education, in quoting the Fathers, and alleging humane
testimonies: Sometimes in case of Grammar, that the true sense and meaning of a
word, or sentence, may be the clearer: Sometimes in case of controversy, by
showing the consent of the ancient Church, that he may free the truth from
Novelty (especially dealing with an Adversary that would claim all
Antiquity from him:) Or sometimes for conviction of Atheists; Heathens, and
the like, who care not for the authority of Scriptures.

And thus did S. Paul himself, when he had to deal with the Athenians,
Epicures, and Cretians, allege the sayings of Acts 17.28.
Menander, Titus 1.12.
Aratas, and Iam. 1.17.
Epimenides, whereby he did convince their wickedness. And this is an
excellent way to stop the mouths of Adversaries, which Julian a wise, but
wicked Emperor saw; Behold (says he) we are wounded with our own quills
Proprijs pennis configir^ur. Theodor. 3. 8.
, out of our books they take armor which in fight they use against us. And
therefore he made a law, that the children of the Galileans should not read
Philosophers nor Poets. In these and such like cases, and upon these and such
like occasions, for a Minister Prudenter and sobrie. Zanch.
wisely and soberly, having respect to times and places, to allege the savings
of ancient Writers in their own terms and language (not seeking themselves,
nor affecting their own glory therein) let it not be thought unlawful nor
unfitting.

Such also may be here lesson'd, who would have all Ministers use one method in
their teaching, and that such as they best like of. This man's method is
excellent (says one) I like this kind of teaching well. Such a ones I like
better (says a second) and it is more profitable. Would all had this man's
vein in preaching (says a third:) He goes for my money; of all that ever I
heard I like him best. And thus like foolish frampole children we care not for
the meat, except we choose the spoone: Or like those Germans, who meeting
together at a Tavern, fell into discourse of their profession and religion:
One protested himself to be of Dr. Martins religion; and the other vowed, he
was of Dr. Luthers profession: whereas Martin Luther was one and the same man:
Such is the folly of many of our followers, who hold with this Preacher, and
with that; when as though 1 Cor. 12.
we have diversity of gifts, yet but one and the same spirit. S. Paul spends
well-neere a whole Chapter about this argument in the first of those Epistles
which he wrote to the Corinthians, who as it seems were troubled with this
disease: for having three famous Preachers, Paul, Cephas, and Apollos, some
professed themselves the followers only of Paul, despising Cephas and Apollos;
and other of Cephas, despising Paul and Apollos; and lastly, others held
themselves to Apollos, despising Paul and Cephas. This itch of men's wits and
ears, is fatal to these times, and (in the judgment of a great Physician
Fatalis haec ingeniorum scabies. Lips. ciu. doct. lib. 4. c. 3. Galen. cit. a
Lipsio lib. aduers. Dialog. cap. 3.
almost incurable; for he avouches, that there is no scab nor itch more
dangerous, than the ambition of sects and new opinions. Oh that we could see
the richness of Gods mercy toward his Church in this particular, who has
given such diversity of gifts to diverse men; to one is given the word of
wisdom, to another the words of knowledge, to another the gifts of healing, to
another diversity of tongues. Some have a more excellent gift of conference,
some of prayer, some in opening of a Text, some in application of his Text,
etc. And all (not for the making of a rent in the Church, or breeding of a
schism) but Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ. This is that same (...).
manifold wisdom of God, that liking not one we might like another; and that
the variety of men's affections might be satisfied with the variety of his
gifts. Let us then make the true use of this mercy, and by some ones gift or
other, be brought nearer to the Lord: Not being like the Jews, of whom Christ
thus complains; Math. 11.16.
Whereunto shall I liken this generation? It is like unto children sitting in
the markets singing unto their fellows, and saying, We have piped unto you,
and you have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and you have not lamented.
For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say he has a Devil; the
Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man gluttonous,
and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners. Thus John came in one
sort, Christ came in another, yet neither John's vein, nor Christ's vein could
like them. If it be so with us, oh then, how inexcusable are we? Art thou a
daily hearer, and hear thou diverse men, and yet does no man's gift like thee?
Can none of them so far prevail with thee, as to make thee leave thy lying,
deceit, cozenage, drunkenness, profaneness, etc? Alas for thee! Woe worth
the time that ever thou were borne: Thy damnation is just.

This in general: The particulars follow. And first of the Inditer, or Author
isntrumental [Isaiah.]

Who this Isaiah was, we find in the beginning of this prophecy, where we
have him described by his parentage, Cap. 1.1.
Isaiah the son of Amoz. Not of that Amos who is numbered amongst the smaller
Prophets, as Epiphan. and Daenaeus in proph. min. praelud. and Graeci plaerique.
some have thought: For besides the great difference that is found in the
Original, both in the writing and signification of their names, (the Prophets
name beginning with Gnajin, and ending with Samech, and is by interpretation,
Gnustus, vel Avulsus.
A man burdened and laden; or one that is separated from others: But Isaiah
his fathers name begins with Aleph, and ends with Tzadi, and signifies
Fortis and robustus. Hier. in Amos.
Stout, or valiant.) there is great difference also in their race and descents.
For that Amoz who was father to this our Prophet, was of the Race Royal, being
brother of Amaziah King of Judah; (as most of the Ancients hold, and the Jewish
Rabbines report) when as that other Amos was of mean parentage, and (as
himself confesses) Amos 7.14.
neither a Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet (until it pleased God
extraordinarily to call him to that office) but an Herdman, and a gatherer of
Sycamore fruit, Cap. 1.1.
keeping amongst the Herdmen of Tekoa.

Thus it appears that this our Prophet was of the Race Royal: And being so,
we thence infer,

It is no disparagement to greatness to be the Lords Prophet. Though Isaiah
was of the blood Royal, Doctr. It is no disparagement to any ones greatness
to be the Lords Prophet.
yet he counted it no impeachment to his birth or breeding; nothing
derogatorie to his reputation to be employed in the meanest piece of service
(though it be in composing Songs or Poems) for the setting forth Gods praise,
and the public good of his Church.

It was S. John's honor to be called Luke 1.76.
a Prophet of the most High, and therefore it cannot be a disparagement to any
to serve the same Master. The blessed Apostles S. Paul, S. Peter, S. James, S.
Jude, etc. amongst all their titles count this to be the most honorable, that
they are the Romans 1.1. 2 Pet. 1.1. James 1.1. Jude 1.
Servants of Jesus Christ, and therefore the two former set that first, and
then Apostles after.

What shall we say to Noah? He was a Prince of the world, and yet a 2 Pet. 2.5.
Preacher of righteousness. To Heb. 7.1.
Melchisedech, who was King of Salem, and yet a Priest unto the Lord? To Samuel
a Judge; To David a King; and yet 1 Samuel 3.20. and 7.15. 1 King. 3.12.
Prophets both? And to wise Solomon his son (before whom there was none like
him, neither after him shall ever any rise like unto him) who amongst all his
titles, and that in his wisest and best days, did count this to be the most
honorable, to be called Eccles. 1.1. Luke 2.9, 10. Phil. 2.6.
a Preacher? And to the glorious Angels of heaven, who have not refused to be
publishers of the glad tidings of peace? And to Christ himself, who (though
equal in glory with the Father) disdained not the title of a Romans 15.8.
Minister? How then can it be thought a thing not beseeming the worth of any to
be the Lords Prophet? Besides these examples, weigh the Reasons.

Caesar Acts 22.25, 28. 1 King. 10.8. Psalm. 107.40.
And so happy a thing to be a servant unto Solomon: How much greater is their
privilege, and how much happier are those servants, who serve such a Lord, as
does at his pleasure pull down one, and set up another upon the throne.

viz. the salvation of men's souls. By Ministers God works faith Romans 10.14.
1 Cor. 3.5. 1 Timothy 4.16.
; by them he conuerts; by them he comfort, sanctifies, saves: By them he
declares to men their righteousness; preaches repentance, free forgiveness,
and perfect salvation, to all that truly believe in Jesus Christ. In which
respect, says Job, A good Minister is Job 33.23.
one of a thousand. A good Lawyer may be one of ten; A good Physician, one of
twenty; A good man, one of a hundred: Perk. duty and dignity of Ministers.
But (says a Reverend Divine) a good Minister exceeds all, for he is one of a
thousand. A good Lawyer may declare unto thee the true state of thy cause: A
good Physician may declare unto thee the true state of thy body: But no man
can declare unto thee thy righteousness, but a true and faithful Minister:
The Lawyer then in caring for thy cause, and the Physician in caring for thy
body, are both inferior to the Minister, who cares for thy souls salvation.
No marvel then, if the Apostle requires, that they should be 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
esteemed highly even for their works sake.

Such shall have the greatest wages of any other: for Dan. 12.3.
They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: but they
that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. All good
men shall have glory, yea great glory, They shall shine as the firmament: But
such as labor in the word and doctrine shall shine, and that with no ordinary
glory, but as the stars, which have a brighter glory than the firmament.
Seeing then the Master which they serve is the highest: The work which they
do is the holiest: The wages which they have is the greatest: It may beseem
the worth of any to be the Lords Prophet.

How guilty then are such as think basely of so honorable Priest and Minister
by such is cast in our faces, as terms of infamy and reproach, and used no
otherwise amongst us, than the name of Christian is amongst the Barbarians in
Russia by way of disgrace: And the very weed and garment of a Minister is
enough to procure contempt, though otherwise he himself be free enough from
all contempt. This is one of the blots of this our Nation, that a Minister is
seldom spoken of but with diminution: And the simplest in a multitude, though
he be not able to give the meaning of one petition in the Lords prayer, yet
has eloquence enough to disgrace their persons and their callings. A horrible
confusion it was, that was foretold by this our Prophet, which should come on
Israel: Isay 3.5.
The child should behave himself proudly against the Ancient, and the base
against the honorable. Who sees not that this confusion is befallen this
generation? Who almost so vile, but thinks himself a better man than the
ablest Minister? What Gentleman so mean, but thinks his child too good for
this Priestly trade? Yea his whole house disgraced, his blood and family
disparaged, if either his daughter be matched with a Preacher, or his son
entered into that calling? But be it known unto thee, who thus basely iudgest,
That God has honored the poorest Minister far above thy self; and taken
him to serve at his own table, when he has rejected thee and thy fathers
house. Be not then any more so much deceived, as to think the calling of the
Ministry to be base and beggarly, and not meet for any, but the poor to live
by; fit only for the lame, and such as are disfigured; for younger brothers,
blunt-headed scholars, and such as are good for no Trade else; when Princes,
Peers, and Nobles, and such as have been of the royal blood, have held it as
an honor to be employed in the service of the Lord. Dan. 1.3.
Nebuchadnezzar would have only such to wait upon him as were of the Kings
stock; and comely, witty, and every way well qualified, both for lineaments of
body, and ornaments of mind; none of the refuse must come into his presence:
And shall they that come before the Lord, to administer in his presence, be the
scum and off-scowring of the people? What is this but to serve the Lord with
the Mal. 1.8.
blind and lame, which he abhorres? Certainly this dishonor of the Ministry
threatens the departure of the word, and therefore let us pray hard, that this
sin of contempt and base esteem of Gods Ministers and their callings may not
be laid unto our charge.

reproving to persuading and exhorting) let every one beware how they refuse or
reject the Ministry, as thinking themselves, their friends or children too
high for it, and it too low for them: No man may be thought to be too good to
serve God at his Altar, and to administer at his Table: If any so think, he
deceives himself and ouer-valueth his own condition. Amongst the Jews the
Joseph. Antiq. 11. hist. tripart. lib. 9.

Eusebius. hist. 10. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 8.


Priests were sometimes matched into the blood Royal; Numa Pompilius would be
a Priest amongst the Romans: And the Egyptians chose their Kings from amongst
their Priests: and shall we then think basely of them? our forefathers
counted it an honor to have one of their children an Abbot, or a Bishop, in
which callings then they lived like Epicures; having nothing of a good
Christian save the title only. Yea Princes of this Land have renounced their
Crowns and Kingdoms, and entered into Monasteries; and have put their sons
and daughters into Cloisters. Shall not these condemn us? Nay, will not the
very heathen rise up one day in judgment against us? who have given their
sons 2 Chronicles. 33.6.
for sacrifice unto their Idols, and caused them to pass through the fire;
thinking them not too dear to be offered to their gods. Let us look on these
and be ashamed of our selves: For certainly the best and noblest amongst the
sons of men are a thousand-fold more unfit for that high place, than that
calling is or can be thought unworthy of them.

And as for such as are already called to this high place, let all beware of
despising of them. It is the Apostles rule 1 Timothy 5.17.
, that they which rule well should have double honor: First, honor of
countenance, and then of maintenance; one of these is not enough without the
other: for it must be double. Isai. 52.7.
Beautiful are the feet (says this our Prophet Isaiah) of them that bring
good tidings, that publishes salvation, etc. If their feet be beautiful, how
beautiful should their face be? who should be so welcome to us as these, who
more esteemed or reverenced? Remember how the Lord has every way endeavored to
make them so; as by giving them titles of highest respect; as 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors for Christ; and Mal. 2.7.
Messengers for the Lord of Hoasts; 2 King. 13.14.
Fathers (the first title of honor that was in the world) Revel. 1.20.
Angels, which are the noblest of the creatures. Besides, he has given them
wonderful authority. He has put the Matthew. 16.19.
Keys of the Kingdom of heaven into their hands to open and to shut. John
20.23.
Power to remit and retain sins. Thus the Lord is pleased to ratify their
regular proceedings in the Court of Heaven. Likewise he has given them Ephesians.
4.8, 9, 10, 11.
extraordinary gifts above the common rate, as Knowledge, Experience, Comfort,
and the like. Is it safe despising these whom God has thus highly dignified?

comfort unto us who wait at Gods Altar. Let us count it our honor to be
called hereunto, and prefer it before all other callings whatsoever: not
giving way to any thoughts of coffeehouse in respect of the many ignominies
or persecutions that we daily do or are like to undergo, so as to be grieved
at the Lords leading of us to so toilesome, and (in man's judgment)
disgraceful a vocation; or to be moved to leave and give over our function in
that respect; As sometimes that Cardinal of Loraine did, who after he had
preached once unto the people, and was therefore derided by the Prelates of his
Order, left off utterly the Office of preaching, as a calling too base for his
Cardinals Hat-ship. Let this be far from us. If we do our duty, the world
will hate us: True, But if we do it not, God will curse us: By the first we
are in danger to lose our goods, our names, our lives: by the second our soul,
our heaven, our God: Now whether it be better to please God or man, judge ye.

Let every Minister therefore do his duty; and albeit most in the world
contemn us, yet we shall find some in the world, who are not of the world,
that will reverence and respect us. So long as the 1 King. 17.9.
widow of Sarepta has any oil we shall not want. Howeuer, though here we have
troubles to weary us, yet in the end we shall have heavens joy to refresh and
comfort us. It is enough we have deserved; our work shall have a reward.

And thus much for the first particular to be considered in this Preface: the
second follows; And that is the nature and kind of the Treatise indicted, and
it is

A Song] or Poem. And here occasion is offered to speak somewhat in the
defense of Poetry and Verse. The Position is: Doct. Poetry is an Art ancient
and commendable.
Poesy and Poetry is an Art and exercise ancient; lawful, and praiseworthy.

The practices of the servants of God make this good. Moses that man of God was
excellent herein, as appears by that same Exodus 15.1.
Canticle which he made in commemoration of Gods goodness for his peoples
deliverance out of Egypt, and for the destruction of their enemies: Josephus de
Antiqu. lib. 7.
which Song is held to be the most ancient Song that ever was (I am sure it is
that we read of in Scripture) and is thought to be first composed in Hexameter
verse, though it is not certain; (For it is no easy matter to find out the
Scansion of verse used amongst the Hebrews; such was the variety of their
Measures) As also by that which he made Deuteronomy. 32.
a little before his death, which he commanded should be taught the Children of
Israel: yea, the text says Cap. 31.19. verse. 22.
he himself wrote it and taught it them. Thus Judge. 5.1.
Deborah and Barak also composed a Song and sang it to the Lord. So David (that
same 2 Samuel 23.1. Qui noster Orpheus est. Euthy.
sweet singer of Israel) had an excellent gift this way, as is evident by that
same 2 Samuel 1.17. Joseph. de Antiq. lib. 7. cap. 10.
funeral Song or Epitaph which he made for Saul and Jonathan after their
deaths: Besides diverse Odes and Hymns which he composed, to the honor of God
in various kinds of Verse. This likewise was the practice of Christians in the
Primitive Church, as Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Eusebius reports out of Philo Iudaeus; They contemplate (says he) not only
divine things, but they make grave Canticles and Hymns unto God in a more
sacred ryme of every kind of meter and verse. If any doubt remain
(notwithstanding what has been showed) of the truth of our propounded point;
let then this be considered of, how Verse is the form of speech which it has
pleased that wise and all-knowing Spirit to choose, to reveal a great part of
his revealed will in: for besides those special Psalms and Canticles before
mentioned, there are sundry parts and books of holy Scripture Poetically pend,
as the book of Job, the book of the Psalms, the book of the Proverbs, with
Solomon's Ecclesiastes and Canticles; as the most learned Fathers of the Church
have testified. And many other parcels of holy Scripture, which we have merely
translated into Prose, are Verse in the Original. This me thinks should put
all out of doubt: (For who can be so irreligious as to think or imagine that
the Holy Ghost would ever have used any indecent or unlawful manner of
expression of his holy Mysteries?) and cause us to give credence to this truth,
viz. Poetry and Poesy is an Art and exercise lawful and praiseworthy.

Reason.
The commendable properties of which Art appear in these two ancient Verses:
Metraparant animos: Comprendunt plurima paucis:
Aures delectant: pristina commemorant.
Which I find by Withers preparation to the Psalter, page 64.
one thus Englished to my hand: Verse does the soul prepare, and much in
brief affords:
It rauisheth the ear, and things long past records.
Ryme and Reason: or Reason for Ryme. First it prepares and fits the soul for
holy duties, and therefore we use Psalms before our Sermons. 2. It comprehends
much in a little, as we see in the Psalms: For what are they Compendium of
both Testaments? 3. It delights the ear, and causes it to hearken more
attentively, as

inform our judgments concerning the lawfulness hereof, that so this
exercise and Art which is by some wrongfully held in contempt, may be brought
into a more reverend esteem: for what is the maine cause so many speak
against Poetry, but an ignorant misconceit they have thereof? imagining it to
be but a vain invention of man, and an unfitting language for to express holy
and sacred matters and mysteries by. But that which has been said before
serves for the discovery (and I trust shall also for the recovery) of this
error. God has used Verse to express a great part of his revealed will unto
us: and has mingled many of his heavenly precepts with the sweet and pleasing
strains of Poesy and Numbers. And therefore let it neither be thought a vain
and unnecessary curiosity, nor yet (as some others do) a horrible and
damnable impiety. True it is, in these wretched days, for the most part we
shall find, that the subject of Poesy is wantonness and lasciviousness,
wherewith the minds of youth are wonderously bewitched: But yet as Plut. de
Music.
one said of Music we may say of it: The proper and principal subject of it
is the Almighties praise. Shall we then condemn the lawful use with the
unlawful abuse? That may not be. Let us cast away the fashion, but keep still
the stuff. Let not the exercise it self be abhorred, nor the use thereof
condemned; but the corruption thereof: For certainly, there is no Art that does
set forth the glory of God (which is the chief end of man's creation) with so
much excitation and expression as this Art does. And therefore by Spondanus.
some it is preferred to all Arts and Sciences. To conclude this use; if every
Art be the gift of God; and if it be of him Exodus 31.3, 4, 5, 6.
to invent and find out curious works, to work in gold, and silver, and in
brass, etc. Then must it likewise be of him to guide the pen, and give the
tongue for speaking such excellent things, and after so elegant a manner. The
like might be said for her sister Music.

This may likewise serve for a Reprehension of such as abuse this Art which in
it self is so lawful and commendable, and by their wantonness cause it to
grow contemptible.

And thus do vainer Poets, who by their lascivious times, lustful Sonnets,
Plays and Enterludes, bring shame unto the Art, disgrace to Poesy, and
dishonor to the giver. The like is the practice of wicked Fiddlers and
Baladmongers, who make it their profession, and get their living by poisoning
many a soul, in alluring their minds unto vanity with their bewitching
harmony, and tempting charms of lascivious Music.

A shame it is that such Vermin should be suffered in so well a governed
Commonwealth as this is. And the greater is our shame, in that our Magistrates
have no more care for the putting such good Laws in execution as are already
enacted for the punishment of these.

Come we now to the third circumstance propounded in this Preface to our
consideration, and that is the manner of the Prophets publishing this Poem
which he did indite.

I will sing] As the former particular gave occasion to speak of the
lawfulness of Poesy and versifying: so does this for the authority and
lawfulness of Voice-Melodie and Singing. Let the point be this:

Doct. Songs and Poems artificially modulated may lawfully be sung.
Songs and Poems artificially modulated, may lawfully be sung for the setting
forth of Gods praise.

This I will make good both by precept and practice out of the Old and New
Testament. Out of the Old: Psalm. 95.1, 2.
Come let us sing unto the Lord; let us make a joyful noise to the rock of
our salvation. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a
joyful noise unto him with Psalms. And again, Psalm. 66.1, 2. and 135.3.
Make a joyful noise unto God all ye Lands, sing forth the honor of his name:
Praise the Lord, for he is good; sing praises unto his name, for it is
pleasant. As in these and many other places it is commanded: So by many of Gods
faithful servants we may find it has been practiced. For Numb. 21.17
Israel sang this song: Spring up oh well; Sing you unto it. 1 Chronicles. 15.
David and 2 Chronicles. 5.
Solomon did likewise use it, and gave appointment how the Jews should sing
Psalms in their Temple. So did Exodus 15.1.
Moses, Iud. 5.1.
Deborah and Barak, with others more, as in the proof of the former Doctrine
appeared. In the New Testament it is commanded in these express words, Ephesians.
5.19. Coloss. 3.16.
Speak to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing
and making melody in your hearts unto the Lord. And again; Iam. 5.13.
Is any amongst you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing
Psalms. And there also we find it used by Acts 16.25.
Paul and Silas, who at midnight prayed and sang praises to the Lord: and by
Mat. 26.30.
Christ and his Apostles (whose example is without exception) who sang a Psalm
together (as at other times) so that night in which our Savior was betrayed.
Thus out of holy writ we have proved the point. Vide Eccles. hist. Theod. lib.
2. cap. 24. and Clem. Alex. lib. 2. Paedagog. cap. 4. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib.
2. cap. 17. and
Much might be brought likewise for the further confirming of it out of
Ecclesiastical History (if it were as needful as easy so to do) of the
practice of Christians since Christ's time; but of that much, I will allege
only at this time that testimony which Lib. 3. cap. 33. and lib. 8. cap. 9.
and lib. 10. cap. 4.
Plinius secundus (a Heathen, who lived about 200 years after Christ) gave
unto the Emperor Traian in the behalf of Christians: They use (says he) to
rise before day, to celebrate Christ in Psalms as God: And as Socrates
reports; neither Constantine nor Theodosius ever began a battle, Socrat.
Schol. Eccles. hist. lib. 7. cap. 22.
but first they and their soldiers sung Psalms, and made supplications to the
Lord. Let us now come to some profitable use.

And first it serves soundly to lesson such as condemn 1 Cor. 14.15.
sing with the spirit, as S. Paul avouches; then against whom do these open
their mouths? whom do they blaspheme? A lamentable thing it is, that in a
Land professing the Gospel, and after the continuance of the public preaching
thereof so many years; such an ancient, laudable, and holy exercise, should be
made a matter of scorn in the seeming of any. The Lord lay not this sin unto
our charge.

commended to us by the practice of Gods Saints, and by Christ himself: And
not only so, but commanded likewise in express terms; so that we may not
think it as a thing indifferent, whether we sing or no; but every man to whom
God has given the faculty of singing, ought as well this way as any other, to
set forth his Makers praise. Motives to singing.
Now the better to stir us up to the performance hereof (for we shall find
our flesh backward enough as well in this as in any other good exercise) I
might use many motives: One taken from the admirable effects and virtues of the
Psalms; there being in them a precious balm for every present sore; so as
that there is no temptation nor affliction which can befall a Christian, but in
the Psalms he may find both the forms of expressing them, and their means
of remedy. Another might be drawn from the practice of the dumb creatures:
As the Lark, and other birds, which shut up the light with a sweet dittie, and
again saluteth the Sun when it begins to peep the next morning, with such
sweet strains as God has naturally given to it. This Ambros. Hexa^. lib. 5.
cap. 12.
one of the Ancients uses as a motive to draw us to the exercise of singing:
For how can men but blush, says he, to remember that they have begun or ended
a day without a Psalm, when they see the birds, those wild quiristers of the
wood, constant in their devotions, beginning and ending the day with variety of
song? But I love not to be tedious: Remember only what David says; Psalm. 147.1.
It is a good thing to sing praises to our God: It is pleasant, and praise is
comely. There are some things good but not pleasant, as afflictions: Some
things are pleasant but not good, as sin: And some things may be both good
and pleasant, yet not comely. But this is all. It is good, because commanded of
God, and agreeable to his will, as before has been proved: It is pleasant, as
the children of God experimentally have witnessed; who in time of tribulation
have used them as a great means of consolation, and as a sweetning to their
tortures. So did Theodorus, a man young in years, though not in grace, of who^
we read, August. de Ciu. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 52. and Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 35.
that being cruelly tortured with unheard of torments from the break of the
day until the tenth hour without intermission; and then set on horseback,
and on both sides tortured by the executioners, sang with a cheerful
countenance the 96 Psalm. Which undaunted constancy the Officer perceiving;
sent him back again to prison; reporting to the Emperor, what was done, and
with all told him, that unless he forbear to exercise such cruelty, it would
redound to their glory and his shame. It is comely; for it is the exercise of
the Angels in heaven to sing praises and Halleluiahs to the Lord. Would thou
then exercise thy self in that which is both good, pleasant, and comely? then
sing Psalms, for all these are met in that one duty.

Now for as much as many a good duty is mard in direction, and therein show
what is required of us in our singing that God may have the glory. The rules
that concern this exercise are summarily comprehended in these words of the
Apostle to the Colossians, Coloss. 3.16.
Teaching and admonishing your selves in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual
songs, singing with grace in your hearts unto the Lord. Here we have directions
both for Matter, Manner, and End.

Concerning the matter of our songs: It must be first good and wholesome;
spiritual and heavenly: Such songs we must sing as are either already in the
word, or else composed according to the word. 2. It must be fitting, that it
may edify: It must teach and admonish: and therefore wisdom is required even
in choosing of a Psalm, that it may be fitting the occasion.

manner of our singing, these are the things required. First, it must be with
the heart. Now to sing with the heart is to sing with understanding, and with
feeling. For he that sings and understands not what he sings, what is he
better than a sounding brass, or a tinckling cymball? And therefore says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.15.
I will sing, but I will sing with the understanding. Our hearts must go with
our voices; the one must be lift up as well as the other: For God is a spirit,
and will be worshipped with the spirit. Look then to prepare thy heart before
thou singest, and awake thy tongue with Psalm. 57.7, 8. Plus valet consonantia
voluntatu^ quam vocum. Bernard.
David before thou speak. For when the mouth sings, man has music; but
when the heart sings, we make God melody: that is the best Organ, tune that,
and all is well; God hears not words without it.

Non vox sed votum, non Chordula Musica sed cor;
Non cantans sed amans, cantat in aure Dei.
Not voice, but will he brings; no Harp but Heart prepares;
No songs, but Love he sings, whom the Almighty hears.
As it must be with the heart, so secondly with grace in the heart, i. we must
exercise the graces of Gods holy spirit in singing, as well as in praying, or
in performing any other of Gods ordinances. The disposition of the heart must
be suited to the nature and quality of the song: If it be a Psalm of praise,
then are our affections to be suitable; our spirits must be cheerful: If of
promises, then must we stir up our faith and trust in Gods mercies: If of
threatenings, then must our hearts be struck with an awe and fear of Gods
greatness: If of petition, then must our affections be fervent: If of
confession, then the Soul must be humbled. And this does the Apostle mean by
Grace in the heart. Thus for the Manner.

The End is now to be considered; which is 1. Gods glory. 2. The edification of
our selves and others. First, we must direct our Songs to God: for singing
Psalms is a part of his worship, and his glory he will not give unto another.
The Papists then are much to blame, who rob God of this his right, and give it
to the Virgin Mary, in singing songs of praise to her. And as much to blame are
they, who sing to their own glory, delighting most in sweet voice, clear
throat, etc. This is singing to our own selves, and senses; not to our Makers
praise.

Secondly, in our singing, our own and others edification and profit is to be
respected. 2 Timothy 3.16.
All Scripture is profitable for our instruction; and whatsoever is written, is
written for our learning: The book of Psalms then must needs be profitable
for this purpose. Thus edify thy self by applying the matter sung to thy own
heart, and examine thy self after the Psalm is ended, what thou have thereby
profited, as well as after thy hearing of the word preached. Here likewise that
manner of singing used amongst the Papists in a strange and unknown tongue; as
also that kind of singing Psalms, wherein the words and sentences are broken
and divided, which hinders the edification of the hearers, is not justifiable.

Thus, we have seen the rules propounded to us: What now remains, but that a
watchful care be had that they be put in practice by us; and the rather for
that amongst all the exercises belonging to a Christian, God is most
dishonored by this: For few sing, but (as it may well be feared) take Gods
name in vain in singing, because they do not so perform it as Gods word
enioynes. The more subject then this duty is to be performed amiss, the more
cause have we of care for the right performance of it, when ever we set upon
this holy exercise.

Text.
To my well-beloued] Here is the Dedication of the Prophets Poem: From whose
practice learn we our duty, Doctr. All our labors are to be dedicated to the
Lord.
viz. To consecrate all our labors unto God. Thus Moses and the children of
Israel write a song and sing it Exodus 15.1.
unto the Lord. And in that sweet Swan-like song, which that man of God sang a
little before his death. Deuteronomy. 32.3.
He will publish the name of the Lord: So David spoke unto the Lord in that
same Psalm of Thanksgiving 2 Samuel 22.1.
, which he made for Gods powerful deliverance of him out of the hands of all
his enemies. The like did Solomon, Hannah, Hezekiah, Mary, Zachary, Simeon,
with other of Gods Saints dedicate their labors in this kind, to Gods
eternal praise: And so the Apostles, as evidently appears by that doxologie,
or form of praise which they continually use in their Epistles; Romans 16.27.
Ephesians. 3.21. 1 Timothy 1.17. and 6.16. Jude 25.
To God only wise be glory, etc. Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ
Jesus: Unto the King immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and
glory: To God only wise our Savior be all glory, etc. And hereunto tend those
general exhortations; 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God:
And again, Coloss. 3.17.
Whatsoever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. And
thus this truth is strengthened.

Reason.
Besides there is good Reason for it. For the first thing in Gods intention
should be the first in ours. But this is the first in his: He predestined us
(says the Ephesians. 1.5, 6.
Apostle) to the praise of the glory of his grace. Prou. 16.4.
He has made all things for himself (says the Wiseman) yea even the wicked
for the day of judgment. Isay 43.6, 7.
Bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth: even
every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for my glory. And
again we read, Coloss. 1.16.
All things were created by him and for him. Seeing then God himself proposes
his own glory to himself, for the end of all his works, man should make the
glory of God the end of all he does.

But ah! Lord God how little is thy glory thought Use.
upon? How few make it the supreme end of all their labors? Should thou
Psalm. 14.2.
look down from heaven upon the sons of men to see if there were any that
would understand and seek after thee to honor thee; would thou find one
amongst a thousand that did truly do it? We all can say with Saul, 1 Samuel
15.30.
Honor me, I pray thee, before the Elders of my people: when notwithstanding
we turn thy glory into shame, Psalm. 4.
loving vanity, seeking after lies.

Oh that we could once be brought to learn this Use 2.
lesson! That we would not suffer any part of the repute or honor of any of
our acts or labors to rest upon our own heads, but repel it forcibly from
our selves, and reflect it carefully upon our Lord and Master. It is the Matthew.
6.9.
first grace which Christ teaches us to beg of God, and it ought to be the
chiefest aim of our whole lives; yea we should prefer it before our lives, or
the salvation of our souls; wherefore it is made the first petition, and set
before the desire of daily bread, and the petition that is made for remission
of our sins. Now at length then learn to prefer it before all the world, and
promote it by our best means. Consider we for this end:

All creatures in their kind glorify their Maker, Motives to seek after Gods
glory.
and employ themselves in the setting forth of his praise: Psalm. 19.1.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work: by their admirable structure, verse. 2.
one day tells another, and one night certifieth another: 2. In every kind
of language; for verse. 3.
there is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard: and 3. In
every part of the world, in every Country, City, Town, Village, Parish; for
verse. 4.
Their sound is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of
the world. Thus ( Bellarm. in Psalm. 19.
says one) they be diligent Pastors, preaching at all times: And learned
Pastors, as preaching in all tongues: And Catholic Pastors, preaching in all
Towns. And the subject of all their preaching is no other than the glory of
God. And as the Heavens; so do the Fowls of the Heavens, as the Ier. 8.7.
Storke, Crane, Turtle, Swallow. And so also the beasts of the field: for Isay
1.3.
the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, as I say shows.

Turcisme, Paganism, etc. they not so much as professing the true God in
Christ; and therefore amongst them God can get no glory, but is continually
dishonored, by their lives and actions: so that there is but a fourth part of
the world (if that) which does profess him in his Son; and amongst those
(though all profess him in word) how many are there which deny him by their
works? Should we make a subdiuision, and again divide that fourth and least
part into four parts more, we shall find the least part truly to seek his
honor. One part we shall find are Heretics, who rob him of his glory by
their superstition and Idolatry: A second part are Atheists and notorious
evil livers, who are so far from honoring him, as that they daily belch out
blasphemies against him. A third part are Hypocrites and carnal Protestants;
backsliders, and lukewarm Christians, who Isay 29.13.
honor him with their lips, but have their hearts far from him. Now there is
but a fourth part, and hardly that, who are sincere and faithful; and if they
should not bend themselves with all their might, to maintain and advance Gods
glory, it would be trodden under foot of all. Should not this consideration be
a spur in our sides to make us forward in this duty?

Call to mind the practices of Gods Saints. Moses, Exodus 32.32.
preferred it before his own salvation, no marvel then if he preferred it
before Heb. 11.24.
the honors and treasures of Egypt: the like did blessed Paul Romans 9.2.
, who professes that for Gods glory in the salvation of the Jews, he could
wish himself accursed or separated from Christ. Remarkable also is the
Apostles care in the cure of the Creeple Acts 14.11.
, that the least part of Gods praise might not cleave to their fingers, but all
might be ascribed to the Lord. The 24. Elders Revel. 4.10.
cast their Crowns before the Throne; they empty themselves of all glory,
merit and worthiness whatsoever, that they may give all praise unto the Lord.
And lastly, have we not our Saviors own example for our imitation, who both
by prayer and practice sought his Fathers glory, and only it? John 12.28.
Father (says he) glorify thy name: and again, 8. 49, 50.
I honor my Father, and seek not my own glory. And in that sweet prayer of
his, John 17.4.
I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which that gave me
to do. Wherefore seeing we are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, and have so many examples before us for our encouragement, let us
lay aside all pride of heart, self-love, vainglory, and every such like
weight and sin which does so easily beset us, and in simplicity of heart
aim at our masters praise, in all we undertake. Every dull jade will follow,
though he will not lead the way; we are but iades in Christianity and
godliness, if we continue careless, when so many have gone before us in this
duty.

Remember further, how we pray: Do we not desire Isay 6.3.
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Hoasts, the whole earth is full of his
glory? Oh take heed lest; thou multipliest lies as thou multipliest prayers;
see that thy heart and tongue be not at variance; what thou praiest for with
thy lips, see thou practisest in thy life: Let not your works give your
tongues the lie.

1 Samuel 2.30.
Them that honor me will I honor.

Moses and Aaron (yet his own dear servants) Numb. 20.12.
were debarred out of the Land of Promise, because they glorified him not at
the waters of strife: The High Priesthood 1 Samuel 2.29, 31. and 3.13.
was removed from the house of Ely, and the wrath of God was kindled against
him for the iniquity of his sons which he saw in them, and stayed them not,
and so honored them above the Lord. When Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 4.30, 31.
vaunted vain gloriously of that great Babel which he had built, by the might
of his power, and to the honor of his Majesty; how was he debased? his
kingdom was taken from him; he was driven from amongst men, and sent to grass
with the beasts of the field for seven years space, until he was made to know
that the most high God rules in the kingdom of men. And lastly, remember Gods
hand on Herod Acts 12.22, 23.
, who taking to himself the glory which was due unto the Lord when the people
applauded his eloquent oration, was immediately smitten by the Angel of God,
and was eaten up of worms, and so gave up the Ghost. 1 Cor. 10.11.
Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples unto us: and they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, to the
intent that we should not do as they have done, lest 1 Samuel 2.30.
despising him we be despised as they were.

Let these things be laid to heart, and kindly work upon us; so as that
whatsoever we are, we may be it Romans 11.36. A love principium. Virg. Eglog. 3.
In him, through him, and for him. Begin all your works in God, and end in
God; yea, dedicate your selves unto him. No Tradesman can endure to have any of
his chief tools, which he has made or wherewith he works, used to a wrong
end: Man is one of Gods chief instruments, whom he has made for his own
honor, and therefore cannot endure that he or any of his members should be
instruments of wickedness to his dishonor. And let all good Christians take
heed lest they do any thing which may cause God or his Gospel to be
blasphemed.

The lewd life of one professor does more harm, and tends more to Gods
dishonor, than the lewd life of an hundred Atheists, as daily experience
makes good. Let a profane wretch, that neither fears God nor reuerenceth
man, live in the grossest sins that can be thought of, there is hardly one
word of reproof or dislike uttered: Let another that professes religion be
overtaken, through infirmity, and that but once in all his life, then are the
mouths of all the profane multitude opened against the very truth and
profession it self. These are your Bible-bearers; your professors; your men of
the holy house; see their fruits. Thus every little aberration in a Professor
is noted, when outrageous wickednesses of profane wretches is nothing at all
regarded. When the lesser stars be eclipsed, none takes knowledge of it; but
if the Sun be once, then every one observes it: what cause therefore have all
such to be careful of their carriage? Look to thy self therefore thou that
art a professor of the Gospel; thou dippest in the same dish with Christ, and
therefore thou of all other should be farthest off from dishonouring his
name. David took it more to heart, that those who did eat bread at his table
did despise him, than that others did; (...).
that Absalom should seek his life, than that Shemei should rail upon him.
And thou my son Brutus, art thou one of them, said Julius Caesar to his son,
when he saw him to be amongst them that murdered him: this pierced deeper into
his soul than the swords of all his enemies did or could. So the sins of
such as come near unto the Lord in a holy profession, of whom he looks to be
sanctified, is more grievous to him than the grosser sins of other men: To
such he will one day say, as Caesar to his son, Art thou one of them? What in
the habit of a professor, and live like a beast? One in show that loves me, and
yet a worldling, a drunkard, or the like? On how will thou answer it? Thou that
gloriest in the name of a Professor, and yet live like a Pagan, Vt nemo de
nobis male loqui absque mendacio possit. Hier.
can God endure it? Surely no. See then thou so live; as that none may speak
evil of thee, but that all the world may see he lies. Yet further; this would
be pressed to all callings and conditions. Let Magistrates mind this; and do
what lies in them to establish the Churches peace and continuance of the
Gospel; let godliness be countenanced; sin punished; and the faithful be
by them encouraged: Deuteronomy. 4.6.
It shall be their wisdom and glory in the sight of the people thus to do.
Let Ministers be careful in a special manner of this: Oh! how difficult a
thing is it for us not to lurch away some part of our Masters praise? A
glorious and comfortable thing it is indeed, for a Minister to be able to say
that he has been Gods instrument to bring one soul to the obedience of
Christ; yet for him to aim at his own vainglory, even in gaining of souls
to Gods kingdom, suits not with that sincere affection which ought to be in
him, to promote not his own, but the praise and glory of him that sent him.
Let us then not suffer any part of the repute or honor of any of our labors to
rest upon our own heads, but repel it forcibly from our selves, and reflect it
carefully upon the Lord Jesus, saying with S. Paul, Not I, not I, but the grace
of God in me. Yea let every one, of what calling or condition soever, so carry
his course of life, as that God may be honored in all things. And here let me
bring to mind Ioabs commendable carriage in taking of the City Rabbah (with
which I will conclude the point:) for when he had fought against it, and took
the City of waters (that is, the waters of the City) (so called by a figure)
and cut off the conduits, Hypallage. Praecisis aquae ductibus. Joseph.
by which his policy he brought the people into such distress, as that they
could no way escape, he sends this message unto David; 2 Samuel 12.28.
Gather the rest of the people together, and encampe against the City, and
take it, lest I take the City, and it be called by my name: i. lest it redound
to my honor, and that victory be ascribed unto me. Doubtless this was his
great praise so to order the battle, as that his Lord and King might have the
glory of the day, and not himself: Should not we do thus? Are not we more
bound to God than Ioab was to David? Ought not we more to respect our God than
he his King? What good thing therefore soever we do or have, give him the
glory of it, saying with the Psalmist, Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be the praise.

Text.
Welbeloued] We have before seen whom the Prophet means by his well-beloved,
together with the Reasons: By well-beloved, God is meant. One Reason for that
Appellation was because he is the Churches well-beloued; she being his spouse,
and he her husband. In which respect as he was a member of the Church, and in
the behalf of the Church he so terms him, for he did love him well. So then

Doctr. Every one ought to love the Lord.
The Church and every true member of the Church does and so ought, to love the
Lord entirely.

This we find commanded; Deuteronomy. 6.5. and 10.12.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy might. Psalm. 31.13.
Love ye the Lord all his Saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful, and
plentifully rewards the proud doer. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, 1
Cor. 16.22.
let him be Anathema Maranatha, had in execration, or excommunicated to death.
This we shall likewise find practiced by Gods Saints: Psalm. 18.1
I will love thee, O Lord my strength, says David. And again, and 16.1.
I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice. Thus S. Peter, John 21.25.
Lord thou know that I love thee. And Mary had many sins forgiven her,
Luke 7.47.
for she loved much. The Church in the Canticles likewise plentifully, Cani.
1.7.
Tell me o thou whom my soul loves (says she to Christ.) And again, ^. 1.3
By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves. And what word more
common in that song, than Love and well-beloved? I must bring Ignatius also to be
of the Quorum, Epist. 12. quae est ad Romanos.
My Love Christ (says he) was crucified. And thus has this truth been
proved, That the Church and every true member thereof both does and ought to
love the Lord entirely.

Reason. Dilexit enim non ^xistentes i^o ^^sistentes. Bernard.
And Reason good: For first he loved us not existing, yea resisting. For Romans
5.8. 1 John 4.19.
while we were yet sinners he loved us. This Reason is given by S. John; We
love him because he loved us first. And surely if God prevent us with love, we
can do no less than answer him in the same nature, though not (for that is
impossible) in the same measure. Do not Publicanes Mat. 5.46. Luke 6.32. Si
taerdi sumus ad amandum, non tardi simus ad redamandum.
love those that love them? Sinners do the same. Though then we have not been
forward to love first, yet let us not be backward to return love at last.

Again, we are tied to him by all the bonds of love and duty: we are his
creatures, Psalm. 100.3.
he our maker; we his Servants, he Mal. 1.6.
our Lord; we his Children, 2 Cor. 6.18.
he our Father; we his Hos. 2.19.
Spouse, he our Husband. Yea so strait is the union betwixt him and us, as that
he is said to be the Foundation Ephesians. 2.20.
, we the building; He the John 15.1.
root, we the branches; He the Ephesians. 5.23.
Head, we the body, etc. Being bound by so many and so near bonds, how can we
but acknowledge it is our duty entirely to love him?

Besides, he only is loue-worthy, being Cant. 5.10. Splendour summi illius boni
pulchria Coelnin, pulchra terra, fed pulchrior quifecit illa.
the chiefest amongst What is there to be compared with him? The most
excellentest creatures are but as the beams of his beauty; That glory or
goodness which is in any of them is but as a shadow in respect of that
infinite good which is in him, who is the maker of them. Thus this threefold
cord may hold us; Eccles. 4.12.
it will not easily be broken, as speaks wise King Solomon. And now Triplex
ex arbore fructus; A threefold use this point affords.

For trial: And indeed what better use can we make Senacherib nor Iesabel but
said they loved God; and who boasts more they love him, than the prophanest
wretch that daily does contemn him? It is a thing counted both common and
easy to perform this duty, and no man doubts he is herein to seek; when
notwithstanding this is as true as God is true (who is Truth it self) that no
more do truly love God than are from all eternity elected by God to salvation;
And we know, or may know (for Scripture says it) that the number of them is
small Esaias 1.9. Luke 12.32.
, yea very small (comparatively considered) their account will soon be made,
Romans 9.28.
it is but a short work, into a short sum shall they be gathered.

Rules of trial for the discovery of our love to God.
Seeing then, it is as narrow as Gods election (and that is very narrow) let
each one search narrowly his bosom for this grace. A rule of three, (1. our
Affections, 2. our Words, 3. our Actions) will sufficiently discover it.

By our Affections.
By our affections will it soon be seen, what love we bear to God: For Love,
as the greatest wheel sets all the rest a work; Desire.
It is the strongest affection, and to it do all the rest give place: where
that goes before, Desire follows after: What I love I desire to enjoy, and it
is not where it begets not a desire of society. 2 Samuel 13.2.
Ammon was very sick through love, his flesh did pine and waste away because
he could not, enjoy his sister Thamar. David and Jonathan did love entirely, 1 Samuel 18.1.
and as the Text says, their souls were knit together, whence it was that
they took such pleasure and contentment each in other; Cap. 20.18, 19, 41, 42.
the story shows what shifts they made to meet, what weeping and heart-sorrow
there was when they were to part, and all because they loved. Thus he that
loves the Lord must needs desire to have society with the Lord: A joy it is to
his soul to meet him; and nothing does he desire so much as to enjoy him. And
so David was affected, as appears by those many patheticall desires of his:
Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon the earth that I desire
besides thee. Psalm. 42.1.
As the Heart pants after the water-brookes, so pants my soul after thee O
God. Psalm. 146.6.
My soul thirsts after thee as a thirsty land. Psalm. 130.6.
My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning: I
say, more than they that watch for the morning. These and many other such like
sayings show the affection of his soul. And whereas in some places God is
pleased graciously to manifest his presence after a special manner, and in
some exercises there is an especial kind of fellowship had with him, we shall
find what a great desire the godly have had to such places, and what great
love they have borne to those duties. Psalm. 26.8.
I have loved (says David) the habitation of thy house, and the place where
thine honor dwells. And elsewhere thus: Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after, that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty
of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. And again; Psalm. 84.1, 2.
How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! my soul longs, yea even
faints for the Courts of the Lord. verse. 4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house. A day in thy Courts is better than a
thousand: verse. 10.
I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the
Tents of wickedness. The like is his desire after the means and exercises of
Religion. Psalm. 119.97.
Oh how love I thy Law! it is my meditation all the day. verse 127.
I love thy Commandments above gold, yea above fine gold. Psalm. 55.17.
Evening and morning, and at noone will I pray, and cry aloud. Psalm. 119.164.
Yea seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous judgments.
This has been the desire of such (whose hearts have been enflamed with the
love of God) after his presence of grace here; and as desirous have they bin
after Gods presence of glory hereafter, with Paul desiring to be loosed that
he might be with Christ, Phil. 1.15.
which they count best of all: and with the Bride and Spirit in the Revelation
say, Come Reu. 22.17. verse. 20.
. Amer; even so, come Lord Jesus.

Again, out Joy will make known our love. Joy.
For where love is, there joy will show it self, 1. In the Presence or
enioyment of the party beloved: 2. In his Image or picture: 3. In such things
as tend to the setting forth of his Honor. As love causes us to desire
society with the beloved party, so it makes us to rejoice in it greatly, when
it is obtained and had, even as a loving wife rejoices in the company of her
Husband above the company of any other whatsoever: so says the Church, Isay
61.10.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God. The
Apostle Paul calls Christ his rejoicing; 1 Cor. 15.31.
By our rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus. Thus do Gods children rejoice
in Gods presence, yea Isay 9.3.
their joy before him is according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice
when they divide the spoil.

As they joy in his Presence, so do they rejoice in his Image. The very
picture of a friend whom we entirely love we esteem highly of, and often
solace our selves in the beholding it: So 1 John 5.1.
If we love him that begat, we love him also that is begotten: If we love God,
it cannot be, but we must needs rejoice in the Image of God, which appears in
his children, consisting in Ephesians. 4.24.
righteousness and true holiness. And thus did David, Psalm. 16.2, 3.
My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth,
and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. Where mark, 1. His delight
was In the Saints. 2. In all the Saints. 3. All his delight was in them. The
mother of Darius (as I have read) saluting Hephestion in stead of Alexander,
who was but Alexanders favorite, blushed and was much ashamed upon notice of
her mistake: which Alexander perceiving, bid her not be troubled, for said he,
he is also Alexander. Do thou rejoice in Christ, thou must then rejoice in
the godly, for they also are 1 Cor. 12.12.
Christ.

And as in the Image, so Love causes us to rejoice in every thing that serves
to the praise or profit of the beloved party; So here: As 1. generally; in the
Churches welfare; Jerusalem Psalm. 137.6.
shall be preferred to our chiefest joy: thus the godly in Isayes days, Isay
66.10.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her,
rejoice for joy with her all you that mourn for her. 2. More particularly; The
readiness of the people to do God service, will stir up Joy: as in David's
time, 1 Chro. 29.9.
The people rejoiced for that they offered willingly; And in Asa's time, 2
Chro. 15.15.
All Judah rejoiced at the oath of the covenant which they had made unto the
Lord, for they had sworn (says the text) with all their heart. So likewise
will the conversion of sinners: Thus when the Jews heard of the conversion of
the Gentiles, and that the Holy Ghost was fallen upon them as upon themselves
at the beginning, they glorified God, saying, Acts 11.18.
Then has God also unto the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. It makes
us likewise to rejoice at our own well-doing, because honor thereby redounds
to the name of God; so says Solomon, Pro. 21.15.
It is joy to the just to do judgment. And lastly, in our own salvation,
Luke 10.20.
that our names are written in the book of life. Thus in these, and in all
things else, which tend (and so far forth as they tend) to the setting forth
of the Almighties praise, does Love cause us to rejoice.

Further, Fear.
our Love (if sound) will be discerned by our Fear. How afraid are we to
offend, or any way displease, those whom we entirely affect? And therefore
these two are joined together by Deuteronomy. 10.12.
Moses as sisters, for where one is there is the other. True it is, that
perfect Love casts out Fear 1 John 4.18.
, as S. John speaks; but that is meant of a slavish and servile fear, not of
this sonne-like and filial fear, for it does establish it. Moses in one verse
shows both these kinds of fears: Exodus 20.20.
Fear not (says he to Israel) for God is come to prove you, and that his
fear may be before your faces, that you sin not. He bids them not to fear,
viz. with that slavish fear; and yet charge them to fear, viz. with this
godly and child-like fear. By this latter fear then, we need not fear to try
our love: For without question, he that truly loves God is afraid to displease
God by committing of the least sin, for fear lest it should make a divorce
between him and his God, whom his soul loves.

Moreover Love causes Sorrow and Grief; Grief.
1. For our beloueds absence: 2. For any wrong or injury offered unto him. Do
we not see what coffeehouse, beasts (which out of natural instinct love
their young) do show when they have lost them? And how grievously do Parents
take the death or absence of their children? In humane love amongst friends it
fares after the same manner as it does in natural; what a heavy parting was
there between Jonathan and David 1 Samuel 20.41.
? And is not this the nature of religious love? The Spouse having lost her
well-beloved, inquires through the streets as undone without him, Cant. 5.6. Cap.
3.2.3.
Saw ye him whom my soul loves? And so does every faithful soul when
through their misbehauiour they cause the Lord for a while to leave them, and
withdraw his favorable presence from them.

In case of wrong; we have an excellent example in Jonathan; how grievously did
he take it, that his beloved friend David should be injured, though it were his
own father who offered it? For so says the text, 1 Samuel 20.34.
He was grieved for David because his father had done him shame: So love to God
causes a man to take to heart things done against his name and honor, be it
done either by himself or other; If by himself, he goes out Matthew. 26.75.
with Peter and weepeth bitterly; and (as it is said of the people of God in
the day of their repentance) draws water 1 Samuel 7.6.
, to power it out before the Lord. And so was David affected, as appears in
that Psalm. 51.
poenitentiall Psalm, which he made upon occasion of his soul fall into
adultery and murder: If by others; he laments it heartily with Lot, 2 Pet.
2.8.
who dwelling amongst the wicked in seeing and hearing vexed his righteous
soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. And thus did David, Psalm.
119.158.
I beheld the transgressors and was grieved, because they kept not thy word.
Verse. 136.
Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law. So
Ezra; who when he heard how the people had sinned, and dishonored God by
taking strange wives unto them, Ezra 9.3.
He rent his garment and his mantle, and plucked the hair from off his head and
beard, and sat down astonished. Jeremiah likewise when he saw the people would
not give glory to the Lord, neither would hear, he tells them, Ier. 13.17.
his soul should weep in secret for their pride, and his eye should weep
sore and run down with tears for their disobedience. And thus did those
mourners marked with Gods own mark for his, Ezekiel. 9.4.
mourn for the abominations committed in Jerusalem, whereby they testified the
soundness of this grace of Love.

As Grief, so Patience, Patience.
in suffering and undergoing of trouble, labor, pain, will manifest how great
our love is which we bear to God. What infinite pains will men that love the
world take for a handful of it? Hunters, Hawkers, how do they toil and
moyle, yet never complain? And why? They love the sport. Vbi amor est non est
labor, sed sapor. Bernard. ser. 85. in Cant.
Hard things, love makes easy; great pains to it seems pleasure; no task so
hard which love refuses to gratify the beloved party. For the love that Jacob
did bear to Rachel, Genesis 29.20.
he was content to undergo seven years hard service, and they seemed unto him
but as a few days: the reason is given in the text; For the love he had to
her. If Shechem will marry Dinah, it must be on condition of Circumcision, he
must first suffer the cutting of his tender flesh, though it be (as
questionless it would be) very painful: Genesis 34.19.
Now the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had delight in
Jacobs daughter. The like patience will be found in undergoing any pain or
trouble for Gods cause if we truly love him. The Apostles depart from the
presence of the Council, Acts 5.40.
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of
Christ. Ignatius that blessed Martyr of Christ Jesus thus testified his love,
as appears Eccles. Hist. Eusebius. li. 3. ca. 36.
by his Epistle which he wrote unto the Church of Rome, where he professes,
that the more he was exercised with the injuries of his oppressors, the more he
was instructed: and that he weighed neither visible nor invisible things for
the love of Christ. And adds further: Come fire, cross, wild beasts,
slaughter, tearing of bones, dismembring of the parts of my body, yea let all
the torments of the devil rush upon me, so I may enjoy Christ: better for me
to be a Martyr than a Monarch; Ex narratione historica de condem. Ioh. Hussi in
Council. Constable.
my Love is crucified, etc. And so John Hus who being led forth to the place of
execution (after he was condemned in the Council of Constance to be burned)
having a cap of paper set upon his head, in which were painted three devils of
an ugly shape, and this inscription added, This is an Arch-heretique: when he
beheld it, said very mildly, My Lord Jesus Christ who was innocent, vouchsafed
to wear a sharp crown of thorns for me wretched sinner; and therefore I
will bear this though imposed as a scorn for his names sake. And in that
(truly named) Golden Legend Heb. 11.36.
of how many do we read, who were tried by mockings, scourgings, bonds,
imprisonments; who were stoned, sawen asunder, tempted, slain with the sword;
who wandered about in sheeps skins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented, etc. Thus Gods servants, whose hearts have been inflamed with a
love unto him, have rejoiced in their sufferings, and patiently underwent the
heauiest trials, especially when it has been for their Saviors sake, taking
greater pleasure in their iron fetters, than the proudest Courtier does of his
golden chain. It was Hardings inuectiue against our reverend and precious
Jewel, that we Protestants were worse than the very devils: For whereas bread,
and water, and the Cross could scar them away; Princes could be rid of us by
no means but fire: To whom that excellent Bishop answered, that though it
pleased his malicious humor, to make but a jest of the blood of Gods Saints;
yet it was no more ignominy for Lambs to suffer what Christ suffered, than it
was praise and credit for Wolves to betray him as Judas did.

Zeal.
By our Zeal lastly may our love be tried: For whether it be an intention of
love as some would have it; or a compound of love and anger, as other describe
it; Certainly it is a spiritual heat wrought in the heart of man by the Holy
Ghost improuing this good affection of love, as one of late has well defined
it. By this Moses discovered his love, for though he were the meekest man upon
the earth, yet he was not only grieved, but wonderfully angry Exodus 32.19.
when he saw God to be dishonored. So Elijah, Phineas, Samuel, David,
Nehemiah, and many others did the like, as largely appears in their stories.
And surely, if we loved the Lord, it could not be, but we would be zealous
for the Lord. It is a cold love that is not heated with this fire. When men can
digest oaths and blasphemies as easy as the Ostridge iron; and see God to be
dishonored without indignation; let them conclude, love is wanting. That same
Spirit that descended first upon the Lord Jesus Matthew. 3.16.
in the similitude of a Dove, descended afterward upon his Apostles Acts 2.3.
in the similitude of fire. As in some things we should be meek and patient,
so in other things hot and earnest: Meekness in our own causes; but in Gods,
zeal and feruencie does well. And thus we have seen the first rule of
trial, wherein I have been somewhat large (though I hope not ouer-large)
forgive all good faults: breuity in the next shall make amends.

The second way for the discovery of our love is by our Speeches: 2. By our
speeches.
For Mat. 12.34.
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Experience makes this
good. Isay 32.6.
The niggard will be talking of his niggardnesse; the worldling of his wealth;
the voluptuous of his pleasures; the ambitious one of his honors and
preferments. And whatsoever a man loves most, that will he take his greatest
joy in talking of. Nauita de ventis, de tauris narrat arator, etc.
What commendation shall you hear the Huntsman give of his Dog? The Faulkner
of his Hawke? How large are these in praising of their sport? Thus is the
tongue the Interpreter of the mind, Lingua est animi Mercurius.
and by its language you may easily guess at the hearts meaning. If the love
of God be there, thy tongue will be the tell-tale and bewray it, either in
speaking of the Lord, or for the Lord. Of him, in commending or admiring him.
It was the love of God Psalm. 119.164.
in David's heart that filled his mouth with often praises: The Spouse in the
Canticles, she loved much and praised much: Cant. 5.10.
My well-beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest often thousands, his head is as
the most fine gold, his locks are bushie and black as a Raven, his eyes are
as the eyes of Doves, etc. So she goes on, her tongue being Psalm. 45.1.
as the Pen of a ready Writer, having words at will to praise and admire every
thing that was in him. So likewise for him the tongue will be employed, if love
be in the heart. David will speak for God and for his truth, Psalm. 119.46.
even before Kings, and will not be ashamed. To hear God to be dishonored,
his Word blasphemed, his Gospel scorned, his Children reviled; Love cannot
brook: It will work within us, as Nature wrought in the son of Craessus, of
whom it is recorded, Herodotus.
that though he had been always dumb, yet seeing one come to kill his
father, the impediments and strings of his tongue were violently broken;
through the force of natural affection, so that he cried out, Oh man kill not
Craessus. And surely we may in this case say as that heroical Luther said in
the like; Maledictum silentium quod hic conniuet.
Cursed be that silence that here forbeareth. Thus may we make our tongues the
touchstone of our hearts. For as the doore-keeper said to Peter, so say I, Mat.
26.73.
Thy speech bewraieth thee.

3. By our Actions.
The third and last way is by our works and actions. Love is full of operation,
so shows Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 13.
and hardly can it deny any work which the party beloved does enjoin: Hence
said Daelilah to Sampson; Judge. 16.15.
How can thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? Thou have
mocked me these three times, and have not told me wherein thy great strength
lies. Our blessed Savior makes this a rule of trial: John 14.15.
If you love me (says he) keep my Commandments. And again thus; ^ers. 21.
He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me. And
elsewhere thus; Cap. 15.14.
You are my friends if you do whatsoever I command you. Thus Abraham made good
his love Genesis 12. and 22.
by his ready obedience to Gods command in offering up his son, and in leaving
his own Country to go to that place whither God should send him.

And as love makes us thus obedient and dutiful, so it causes us to be
bountiful and liberal, 1 Cor. 13.4.
as the Apostle speaks: For where the heart is enlarged, the hand cannot be
straightned; where the bowels are open, the purse is never shut. So that Herod
may have his pleasure which he affects, Mark 6.23.
what cares he though he part with half his Kingdom? What will a man spare
from his special friend that may be for his good? All I have is at his
command to whom I have given my self: So said Iehosaphat to Ahab 2. Chron.
18.3.
I am as thou art, and my people are as thy people. Jonathan loves David as his
soul, and he will show it 1 Samuel 18.3.4.
by stripping himself even to his sword and to his bow, for the supporting and
helping of his dearest David. Of so frank a disposition is love, that it will
be prodigal of its nearest and dearest things. If Mary's tears will wash her
Saviors feet, Luke. ^.38.
she will power them out, and not think her hair too good to be the towell.
No Spikenard John 12.3.
shall be too costly for his head whom her soul affects: what though that
unguent might have been sold for some great sum of money, wherewith she
might have done her self much good? Yet she had rather bestow it on her
Savior than on her self, because she loved her Savior more than her self.
Thus love will be content to be at cost for Christ, and thinks nothing too
much that is done to him or for him.

As that renowned Master Fox, of whom it is reported, that he would never deny
Beggar that asked in Gods name: Thus by our obeying of him, and cost for him,
our love may soon be seen: our works indeed do not justify, yet they
testify. As in a clock, though the finger of the Dyall makes not the clock
to go, but the clock it, yet the finger without shows how the clock within
does stir; so here. And therefore what Saint James speaks of Faith; James
2.18.
Show me thy Faith by thy works, for that Faith that is without works is
dead; So say I by love: Show me thy love by thy works, for that love that is
without works is dead. Ye love your backs, and spare not to cloathe them; you
love your children, and therefore do much for them; you love your beasts, and
therefore bestow largely on them: and can you say you love the Lord, and deal
so pinchingly and illiberally with him? It cannot be: For look as the love of
God is the fountain of all his benefits extended unto man; so is love in man
the cause of his obedience and service to his God. God has loved us first to
do us good; and we love him next that we may do him service.

And thus we have done with the marks of trial, whereby (if we take any
tolerable pains in the examination of our selves) it would soon be seen what
love to God we bear, and (as I fear) it would appear, that albeit the
greatest number profess they love the Lord, yet the fewest number would be
found to love him in sincerity. And Lord thou see and know it: For how
little art thou desired or sought for? How small is that Joy which men take in
thee or thine? Who sets thy fear before their eyes, and when thou hidest thy
face what man is troubled? Where is our patience in suffering for thy sake, when
one hour in thy house of praise cannot be endured without an ache in our
bones? and of what are we so soon weary as of well-doing? As for our zeal,
where is it, while we sit still and see thee dishonored, having no courage for
thy truth? And do not our tongues cond^mne us while they are for all purposes
except thy glory? If they should justify us, would not our works and actions
testify against us? We call thee Lord, but where is thine honor? The title
only, and no more thou gettest of us. Or if thou do, it is but the dregs
and offall, the very worst of all; and yet we grudge when we have not the best
from thee. O blessed Savior, shed abroad thy love in our hearts, that we may
love thee better.

And this is the first use which I would have made of this: let our second be
for Exhortation, that we would Affections be set upon him and be enflamed
toward him. Let our tongues be mute to all vanities, and eloquent only unto
him and for him, who gave man his tongue and speech; and whilst other men's
discourses are taken up about trifles, let ours be spent in setting forth his
praises. Let our Actions be such as may be pleasing to him, and let us not
dare to venture upon any thing that may offend him. And how ever we cannot
perfectly, yet let us all pray for grace, that we may love him yet more
fervently, and less fainedly, only for himself and his mercy. For this end
use these helps. Helps to attain to the love of God.
Get a true knowledge of him and of his name Psalm. 9.16. Ignoti nulla cupido.
: For they that know him love him, and as our knowledge is, such is our love.
The Heathen man observed Cant. 1.2.
Thy name is as ointment powered forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. His
name, fame, glory, and renown, was by many means made known (especially by
his Word) unto the world, and hence it was, the Church did carry such an inward
affection and hearty desire to him, which she testified by an outward approving
and liking of him. Thou then that desire to love God, see thou get the true
and sound knowledge of God; labor first for that, by using all good means
tending thereunto, especially diligent reading and conscionable attending to
the preaching of the Word. John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures (says our Savior) for in them ye think to have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me.

Seriously meditate of Gods love to thee in Christ, before Consider what a
difference he has made between thee and many other that are reprobates,
which only came from the riches of his love: for by nature thou were as vile
as they, as miserable as they, a child of wrath as well as any of them, not a
hair to choose between them and thee. Consider of it likewise in other
particulars, as thou shall have occasion, and it will work thy heart to love
him. Love is loves lodestone; so shows the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.14.
The love of Christ constrains us. Labor then to love God a little, who has
loved us exceeding much: and indeed (as Ser. 83. in Cant.
Bernard speaks) we cannot answer God well in any thing but in love: For if
he be angry with us, we may not answer him again in anger; if he judge us, we
may not again judge him; if he chide us, we must be patient; if he command, we
must obey: But in that he loves, we may, yea must return love for love, for
he loves to be loved.

Remember often his holy presence; and do not dare to go whole weeks, nor
days, nor hours, without thinking of him; for that will estrange our
Affections more and more from him. We see how it often happens with new married
couples, who though at first they seem somewhat strange, and hardly can affect
each one the other, yet through daily familiarity and communion, they come at
length entirely to love.

Withdraw your hearts from the love of the world, if you would love the Lord;
For the love of God and it, cannot stand together; so witnesses S. John, 1
Ioh. 2.15.
If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. And so S.
James, Iam. 4.4.
The friendship of the world is enmity with God; whosoever therefore will be
the friend of the world, is the enemy of God. And thus our blessed Savior,
Matt. 6.24.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. We must therefore either renounce the world,
or our part in Christ: for worldlines and Christianity (as we see) are two such
ends as will never meet. Thy love to the world must abate, if thou would
have thy love to Christ increase.

See thou frequent the company of the godly. Thou Cant. 1.8.
walk in the steps of the flock, and feed thy kids near the tents of the
shepherds. Thou must converse with holy Christians, who are Cap. 2.5.
sick of love, and abound in holy affections. When those daughters of
Jerusalem, who at first despised Christ, and wondered why the Church should
make so much ado for him, had a while conuersed with the Church about him, and
heard her speak with such affection, admiring and extolling him; then they
also fall in love with that beloved, and offer their service to the Church, in
joining with her to seek him out. Cant. 6.1.
Whither is thy beloved gone (say they) O thou fairest amongst women, whither
is thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee? Thus holy
conference with such as love Christ, is an excellent means to inflame our
hearts also with a love to him.

The last help is Prayer: For, Iam. 1.17.
Every good and perfect Ask it therefore at Gods hands, for Verse. 5.
he gives liberally to all men, and vpbraideth no man. These are some helps
for the attainment of this grace, which if we conscionably practice, I doubt
not but we shall soon find kindled in our bosoms, to our endless comfort.
And that is our second use.

A third we now infer, but briefly; and that for Consolation of such as love
the Lord; esteeming him as their best beloved, setting their whole hearts and
souls upon him: In so doing they have performed a worthy work, and such a
work as in the end brings peace. Oh the privileges! the superexcellent
privileges that belong to such a one! Job. 14.21.
He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
manifest my self unto him (says our Savior.) So that we see here is no love
lost: Christ will respect them most graciously for evermore, and always do
them good. Yea every thing shall further their good and welfare: and so says
the Apostle, Romans 8.28.
All things work together for good to them that love God. Every thing, the
least ens and being, any thing that can be named or conceived, shall work thy
good; thy good of grace here, and glory hereafter: so that the Devil in the
end shall get nothing by tempting thee to sin, but the greater overthrow of
his own kingdom, and thou thereby shall grow the better; it shall make thee
more humble, lowly, watchful, careful, etc. Thus, blow what wind can blow,
the illest wind shall blow thee good; hap what happen may, it cannot make thee
miserable. Thou stand in a Center, the Circumference is mercy; whatsoever
comes to thee, be it loss, cross, pain, sickness, death, it must first
come through the circumference of mercy, and so taste and relish of mercy
before it come at thee, or touch thee. Oh! what a privilege is this? how
excellent, how admirable? This is thy privilege who love God, for to thee it
is made, and to none else besides.

Can we marvel now at the Apostles words; 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Many excellent and
beautiful objects has the eye beheld; and the ear has heard relation made
of things far surpassing those which the eye has seen; but the heart is
able to conceive of things more excellent than either eye has seen, or ear
has heard: yet neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor yet can the heart
conceive (says he) the things that God has prepared for such as are lovers of
him. He has promised, says S. James, Iam. 2.5.
a kingdom unto such, and Cap. 1.12.
a crown of life, which they shall receive. Let then the loue-sicke hearts of
the godly be cheared up, for God does not forget their labor and love, but he
will recompense it with an everlasting love. Let it serve likewise to enkindle
our love, so that where it is now but in the spark, it may break out into the
flame, loving him with all our soul, strength, and might, desiring nothing
above him, equally with him, or without him; loving him for himself, and all
things else for him. And so (to end the point and use with that sweet
meditation of Austine) August. 4. Confess.
Blessed is he, O Lord, who thus loves thee, and his friend in thee, and his
enemy for thee; for only that man cannot lose any thing which he loves, who
loves nothing but in thee who cannot be lost.

And thus much for the first reason that is given for this Title or
Appellation: come we now to the second, and see whether we can be briefer there.

In a more particular respect also might the Prophet call the Lord his
well-beloved, viz. in respect of his office and calling as he was a Prophet, to
whom the charge of Christ's Queen the Church was committed. And in regard of
this, Ministers are called Christ's friends, according to that saying of S.
John, John 3.29.
He that has the Bride is the Bridegroom, but the friend of the Bridegroom,
which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroomes
voice: where by friend he understands himself, and in himself all other
Ministers, both Prophets and Apostles; and that both because they labor to
make the marriage between the Church and Christ, as also endeavor to hold fast
the Church unto Christ, being jealous over her for his sake, lest she should
be seduced. Calu. Vrsin. Moller. Trem. and Iun.
Taking this as a reason (which indeed is the usual reason rendered by our
Expositors) for this Appellation; by good consequence it will follow, that

Ministers are Christ's Paranymphs. Doctr. Ministers are Christ's Paranymphs.
In a special manner they are his friends to woo the Church and win the
Church unto himself, to fit it and prepare it for himself.

So witnesses the Apostle when he says, Coloss. 1.28, 29.
We warn every man, and teach every man in all wisdom, that we may present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus, whereunto (faith he) I also labor. And
writing to the Corinthians he thus speaks; 2 Cor. 11.2, 3.
I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, for I have espoused you to one
husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin unto Christ. By whose
practice we see the Ministers duty, dignity, and office; both to fit and
prepare the Church for Christ; as also to hold fast the Church unto Christ,
that she break not her mariage-couenant with him. I hasten to the Uses for in
this I have promised brevity.

Ministers hence learn our duties. And seeing we have the Church committed to
our care, and are so far honored as to be betrusted with Christ's Queen, let
us use all possible means that we may deliver unto the Bridegroom a pure and
chaste virgin. When Genesis 24.
Abraham sent his servant to fetch a wife for his son Isaac, he brought him
godly and beautiful Rebeccah: We are the Lords servants, sent to fetch a wife
for Jesus Christ the Son of God; O let us be as faithful to God the Father
and to Jesus Christ his Son, as that good servant was to Abraham and Isaac:
Let us do our message with diligence, and execute our charge with
faithfulness and prayer: Let us speak of Christ, and only of Christ, making
him the scope and subject of all our preaching: And (as is the old Emblem of
S. Christopher, under which our ancient Mythologists have described the good
Pastor) wade through the sea of this world, staying on the staff of faith and
lifting up Christ aloft to be seen of men, John 3.14.
as the brazen serpent was on a pole to be seen of the Israelites who were
stung. Let us so speak of him, as that the daughters of Jerusalem may fall in
love with him: working first upon the understanding of our people, bringing
them to a through knowledge of this Christ, whom we tender unto them as an
husband; for this is requisite in marriage: Error personae makes a nullitie. And
then secondly upon their affections, that they may take liking of him. To
further which, we must speak earnestly and seriously, not coldly, carelessly;
using the best of our skill with arguments and motives to win them to his
love. What a shame then is it for a Minister either to be ignorant of this
Christ, whom he should commend for a husband to the Church (for what wise man
will speak for a stranger, of whom he has no knowledge?) Or knowing him, yet
be dumb or silent, never speaking to the Church in his praise and
commendations. Or if he does, yet then to speak either idly and foolishly (as
alas too many do) whereby many are discouraged and driven further off from
Christ; or else unfaithfully speaking two words for themselves, and one for
him, desiring Acts 20.30.
to draw disciples rather after them, than win souls to God. Oh let not
these things, my brethren, be found in any of us, but seeing we are called to
such honor, let us be instant in preaching, holy in living, earnest in
persuading, careful in admonishing, giving to Gods people the golden bracelets
of Gods truth; that so as Genesis 32.10.
Jacob returned with many more souls out of Syria into Canaan than he brought;
so we may go out of this world with many souls converted and won by us to
Christ's love into the world to come.

Let Hearers hence also be exhorted: For seeing Ministers leisure. And when our
leisure serves us, what a deal of wooing needs there? A man indeed would
think it would be but an easy suit, and that Gods Ministers should not need
to spend much breath before they have obtained; and yet they with all their
persuasions and entreaties cannot so far prevail with us, as to make us
hearken to it: Every suitor shall have hearing, yea and speeding too before
Christ Jesus. The Devil though he comes ever masqu'd, and never dares show his
face (as well knowing if he did appear in his own colors, no soul could
then affect him) yet because his promises are great and large (as Matthew. 4.9.
they were to our blessed Savior, when he offered to ioynture him in many
kingdoms, if he would love him, and fall down and worship him) is soon heard
and answered. The World though it be a warped, aged and decrepit suitor;
exceeding old, blind and lame; having sore eyes, bleare and raw with cares;
swollen legs diseased with surfets, and but a few minutes more to live (all as
bad qualities in a suitor as may be) yet promising large ioynture, good
maintenance, wealth at will, honors and preferments, with the like; this old
dotard speeds. And for the Flesh, though as Jude 23.
S. Jude speaks, it be spotted all over like an unclean Leper, or vlcerous
Moore, yet because it is (as it were) a homebred child, and pleads more than
familiarity with us, promising all pleasure and content unto us, as soon
speeds as either of the former: But as for Christ who is best worthy, he has
but a cold suit of it. But beloved be more wise; give not, oh give not, thy
consent to any other save Christ alone; if thou do thou art undone for ever.
The devil he is large in promises, his words drop Nectar; but he is John 8.
a liar and a murderer, and so thou will find him in the end if thou do
trust him. And for the world; it has but a weak tenure of all that it
possesses, and can assure thee of no other dowry than vanity and vexation, as
Eccles. 1.
Solomon witnesses, who proved it: if then thou bestowest thy self on it, be
thou assured that in the end thou must be left without being satisfied. As for
that other suitor the Flesh, he is least worthy the harkening to of any.
Remember he is an ill wooer that wants words, they are the cheapest chaffer a
man can part withal, and therefore no wonder if he does seek to insinuate
himself by promises; but pass not for them, nay stop your ears against them,
and in this point be like the Adder, Psalm. 58.4, 5.
which will not hear the charmer, charm he never so sweetly. For be you well
assured, if you make him your head and lord of all, he will soon consume all,
to your final undoing. Give entertainment therefore I beseech you to the Lord
of glory: For him I am a deputed wooer at this time; my suit unto you is for
your loves for Christ my Master (For 2 Cor. 5.20.
as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's stead that
ye be reconciled unto God.) Were he euill-fauoured or deformed, then you might
have some cause to refuse to love him: but he is not; Cant. 5.9.
He is white and ruddie, the chiefest amongst ten thousands, infinitely fairer
than all the sons of men, Heb. 1.3.
being the brightness of the glory of his Father, and the express image of
his person. Or were he poor like Lazarus, you might have some reason to
dis-affect him: but he is not; for he is rich and wealthy, being the greatest
heir that ever was, even Heb. 1.2.
heir of all things. Or could you allege that his stock is mean, his birth
ignoble, it were somewhat: but that you cannot; for he is Revel. 19.16. and
17.14.
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, which dignity is his by birth. Or could you
object against his wisdom, it might be some excuse for your refusal: but
neither can you here except; Coloss. 2.3.
For in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge. Seeing then
he is the fairest, wealthiest, noblest, and wisest of any other whatsoever, set
thy heart upon him, and love him until thou be sick of love for him. We see
how many in this world marry; some only for beauties sake; many again for
riches sake; other some for Nobility and Gentry sake, and not a few for
wisdoms sake; but where all these meet, it is judged a match unmatchable. Why,
see all these are abundantly in him, and therefore seek no further, for thou will assuredly speed worse. Standst thou upon dowry? Alas! Thou have little
cause, for what bring thou but sin and beggary? And yet he will enstate
thee into a kingdom of incomprehensible glory. Ahashuerosh promises Esther
half his kingdom; but Christ's performances outstrip his promises, he gives
his a whole one: Psalm. 45.15.
With joy and gladness shall they be brought, they shall enter into the Kings
Palace (says the Psalmist, speaking of the Church Christ's spouse.) He has a
glorious house, a City of gold, to entertain thee, the foundations of whose
wall are garnished with precious stones. S. John in his Revel. 21.
Revelation sets down a full description of it; who so will, let him read it
and regard it; though it passes the measures of Geometry to measure it; the
skill of Logic to define it; and the eloquence of Rhetoric to express it.
But thus conceive; If the house of this world be so excellent, as that it
deserves to be so esteemed by us, wherein God lets his enemies dwell; and if
the lowest pauement of that heavenly mansion be so gloriously bespangled with
the Sun, Moon, and twinkling Stars, as we see it is; what then is the
Mansion it self? how glorious must the sides and seeling of that eternal
Tabernacle be, which God has sequestered for himself and Spouse? These things
being well considered, I hope thou will forbear to set thy love upon any other
Suitor, and now at length suffer thy self to be wrought upon by our
Ministry, not to gainesay; that we with all speed and haste (as Abraham's
servant did) may return again to him that sent us. And thus much for the
Appellation, which I could not pass over without some useful observation. His
warrant is next to be considered, which he brings for the publishing of this
his Song, and is implied in these words,

Of my beloued] i. Text.
The song which his beloved put into his mouth, and which he had in charge from
him to publish: for albeit Isay was the Author isntrumental, and Penman of
it, yet God was the Author principal. We see then he set it forth, Cum gratia
and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. And hence let Ministers learn, Doctr.
Ministers are to deliver nothing for Doctrine but what they have warrant for
the delivery of.
To deliver nothing for Doctrine, but what they are able to show warrant and
commission for the delivery of. Good warrant we must have for what we teach
our people, whether it tend to the enforming of their judgments, or rectifying
of their affections, and be able to show that we deliver nothing but what we
have received in charge from God to deliver.

It was the usual manner of the Prophets (preaching unto the people) to
prefixe before their message these and such like prefaces, Ezekiel. 2.4. Hos. 4.1.
Joel 1.1. and alibi.
Thus says the Lord; Hear the Word of the Lord; The Word of the Lord which
came, etc. Whereby they showed they had authority from God. And thus does Saint
Paul ground his Doctrine as upon a sure and certain foundation: 1 Cor. 11 23.
I have received of the Lord (says he) that which I also have delivered unto
you. And again elsewhere thus; 1 Cor. 15.3.
First of all I delivered unto you that which I received, etc. This the Lord
himself enioynes his servants: Ier. 1.7.
Thou shall go to all that I will send thee, and whatsoever I command thee
thou shall speak, said the Lord to Jeremiah. And to Ezechiel was this charge
given; Ezekiel. 3.17.
Thou shall hear the Word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. So
likewise when our Savior sent out his Apostles into the world to teach all
Nations, he wills that they should Mat. 28.20.
teach them to observe all things whatsoever (says he) I have commanded you.
Yea, our blessed Savior himself professes, Ioh. 7.16. and 8.28.
My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. And again, The things that I
have heard of him, those speak I to the world.

And the reason of this is good: viz. Reason.
that the faith of our hearers should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the
power of God: which reason the Apostle himself renders 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
why he came not with excellency of speech, nor entising words of man's wisdom,
but in demonstration of spirit and power.

Ministers, that we be careful of our Doctrine, and see that it be
warrantable, sound and good: not ours but Gods. The Lawyer (says one) begins
with Reason, and so descends to common Experience and Authority: The Physician
he begins with Experience, and so comes to Reason and Authority: But we
Divines must begin with Authority, and so proceed to Reason and Experience.
We are Christ's Ambassadors, and in his stead, says the Apostle 2. Cor. 5.20.
: Now we know an Ambassador is to speak nothing but what is given him in
Commission: He may not add nor alter, chop and change, invent or devise any
thing of his own: No way is he to depart from what is given in charge, but he
must be found faithful in the execution of his office: and so see we be.
Beware we, oh beware we of propounding any such Doctrine as tends either to
the infecting of the judgment with error, or tainting the life with
uncleanness. Take heed how we dare to broach any new conceit or unnecessary
quiddite fitter to breed iangling than godly edifying; still remembering, that
it is the conviction of the conscience, the information of the understanding,
the resolution of the judgment, the gaining of the affections, the redress of
the life that should be our aim in dispensing of the Word. Now as for tricks
and crankles, Grammatical and Rhetorical descant, ends of gold and silver,
what help they to this business? Aarons bells must be golden bells; not brass
nor copper, nor any such like metal, but pure gold. Doctrines proceeding from
our own brain, coined on the Anuill of our own inventions, are not Cum
gratia and priuilegio. Gods pure truth must be dispensed, and all the truth,
and nothing but the truth. So help us God.

Secondly, this nearly concerns all Hearers, that Seen and allowed, and
published by Authority. To the Law and to the Testimony Isay 8.20.
, (said the Oracle of God of old) If they speak not according to this Word, it
is because there is no light in them. This is the touch by which all Doctrine
must be tried. If we have authority of Scripture for our propounded points (it
being rightly understood) then we have authority from God himself for the
delivery of it, else not. Too to blame then are our ouer-credulous multitude,
who hand over head admit and receive for Orthodoxe whatsoever is propounded
unto them by their teachers; and think this is a sufficient warrant for any
point they hold; Our Minister said it, or such a Preacher delivered it in a
Pulpit. Ier. 23.16.
As if there were not some who run before they are sent, and publish the
visions of their own brain, prophesying that which God never spoke. In
matters civil we are more cautelous and wary; no gold (almost) we take before
we have tried it by the touch, or weighed it in the balance; and what is the
reason? because there is much of it light and naught; yea hardly we will take a
groat without bowing, bending, rubbing it, and the like, being therein
oftentimes ouer-curious: But in religious matters which concern our faith and
souls salvation, we are ouer-carelesse, albeit we are forewarned 1 John 4.1.
of many false Prophets that are gone into the world, and therefore willd not
to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they be of God. This is
a great, yet common fault amongst us. Were he Gal. 1.8.
an Angel from heaven that preaches to thee, yet art thou bound to look into
his Doctrine and examine it, and not to take it upon credit without he bring
sufficient proof and warrant for it. By virtue of our place we challenge
Audience; hearken to a matter you must because we say it; but we cannot by and
by challenge Credence; for you may not believe it until you know upon what
ground we speak it. And therefore like good Beraeans see you search the
Scriptures whether these things be so. Acts 17.11.


The Matter Subject of this Song is the last thing to be considered in the
Prooem: the text says it is

Text.
Touching his Vineyard] Of which Vineyard we shall hereafter speak more
largely. In the mean time this observe we:

Doctr. Ministers ought to spend their pains especially for the Churches good.
The good of Gods Church is the subject of a Preachers labors; that is it
whereupon he must especially attend, as did our Prophet, whose Art, wit,
learning, time, and pains, was especially spent about that which might make
for the welfare of Gods Vineyard.

Hereunto tends that exhortation of the Apostle, Romans 12.7, 8.
Let us wait on our ministering: he that teaches, on teaching: or he that
exhorts, on exhortation: with which duty he straightly charge Timothy,
and us in him, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15.
Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. Neglect not the gift
that is in thee: Meditate upon these things: give thy self wholly to them.
Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, etc. And according to
this Doctrine was his and the other Apostles practice, who would not admit any
other charge to be joined to their Ministry, no not the Office of Deacons,
but laid the charge of providing for the poor on others; Acts 6.2.
thinking it not fit to leave the word of God to serve tables.

Reas.
And did we but consider the weightinesse of the calling, we would soon confess
a Minister had little need to employ himself in any by-affaires: For as it is
an honor, so it is a burden, and such a burden as is too much for half a man,
Humeris angelorum formidandum. 2 Cor. 2.16. Object.
it requires the whole man, yea the strength and ability of Angels to stand
under it; and therefore says the Apostle, who is sufficient for these things?

But Saint Paul exercised a manual occupation and became a Tent-maker,
laboring with his hands, and that after he was called to his Apostleship. And
so Saint Peter and others were fishers and followed fishing.

I grant, the Apostles did so, Answ.
but it was only in case of necessity, in time of the Churches wants and
poverty, to the end they might support the need and necessity of it, as also,
that they might cut away all occasion from them who watched for an occasion,
whereby they might disgrace them and win credit to themselves. And thus for a
Minister to join another calling to his calling, when he is not able to
maintain his charge, and in the general want and poverty of the Church, it
not being able to maintain him and his, cannot be thought unlawful: But where
there is a Church well established and reformed, this cannot be allowable.

This Doctrine likewise (like Rebeckaes womb) does that 2 Timothy 2.4.
we entangle not our selves with the things of this life. The Lord has laid a
heavy burden upon thy shoulders, couch not down with Isachars Ass to receive
any other load. What a shame is it for to see a Minister to turn Farmer,
Grasier, Physician, or the like, and all for a little pelf? so loading his
mind with the burden of cares and covetousness, as if he were exonerated of
the burden of the Gospel? May we not well wonder with Synesius how becomes to
gain so much leisure as to serve two Masters, God in Choro, Epist. 57.
and Mammon in Foro? I know there is a care of secular affairs belonging to
us: For a 1 Timothy 3 4, 5. 1 Timothy 5.8.
Bishop must be able to rule his own house honestly. And again, if there be
any (without exception) that provides not for his family, he denies the
faith, and is worse than an Infidel. But these things must not hinder our
constant care for the welfare of Gods Vineyard. Neither do I think it a thing
unlawful for a Minister to study Physic, or have to do with some other
calling; for (besides in the forenamed cases) so it be at spare hours, Horis
succisiuis.
and used rather as a recreation than occupation, it is allowable: yet still
Divinity must be our most and mainest study, Mayor pars vitae atque ingenij
huc s^et.
that we may save and win souls to God. Let us then that are Ministers of
Gods word, neither be idle nor ill occupied: and when we are about any thing
which belongs not to our calling, then remember we the check that Christ gave
to Peter, John 21.21. Clericus in oppido, Piscis in arido: Age quod tui muneris
est: verbi es Minister, hoc age.
What is that to thee? The Church is thy proper element, and the Pulpit thy
right vbi: the Temple should be the center of all thy circumference. Do that
which belongs unto thy Office, as Valentinian said to Ambrose; Thou art a
Minister, mind thou that.

Thou have well said in all that thou have spoken: but now mark your duties;
for if this be so, then ought you so to provide for your Ministers and their
families, as that they may have no cause to divert their studies. In 1. ad Tim.
A necessary living (says Chrysostom) ought plentifully to be ministered unto
your Teachers, lest they should be discomfited, and that they might not deprive
themselves and you of great things, while they be busied about the smallest.
And surely this is one of the blemishes of our Church, that many well-deseruing
Ministers are of necessity compelled to leave studying of Sermons, and study
for bread to put in their own and childrens mouths. What Vocation is there in
this land (honest in it self, and industriously followed by the professors of
it) wherein a man may not live, and leave well behind him for the maintenance
of such as shall ^ome after, Dat Galenus opes, dat Iustinianus honores.
except only in the Ministry? Physic and Law bring wealth and honor, but
Learning follows Homer with a staff and wallet; the study of Divinity
brings contempt and beggerie. Look how it was with the Jews under the
tyranny of Egypt, Exodus 5.
so is it now with us; when we should make brick, work in our profession, we
are enforced to gather straw, seek out for sustenance; and yet if our tale of
brick be not made up, we are cried out upon for being idle. But God hears our
cries, and will one day plead our cause. In the mean time let such places and
Parishes as would have their Ministers thus to follow close their callings, see
that they so provide for their certain maintenance, as that they may without
distraction follow it.

We have done with the Prooem: Now we come to the Poem or Song it self.

My well-beloved has a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill, Text.
etc. Wherein is set forth Gods great love toward his people Israel and Judah;
and their horrible ingratitude and disobedience toward him; together with
their fearful and final ruin, for that their disobedience: All which is
darkly and obscurely propounded under a continued similitude or allegory of an
unprofitable Vineyard which did not answer the cost and expectation of the
Vinitor by bringing forth of fruit Heb. 6.7.
meet for him that dressed it.

In opening whereof we need not doubt of finding out the true and proper sense
and meaning in the General; as who this Vinitor is, and who the Vineyard, and
what the fruit; these being explained and expounded by our Prophet, verse. 7.
But in the Particulars there is question: As, what is meant by Hill, Fence,
Stones, Plant, Tower, Winepresse: forasmuch as these parts are not followed by
him, and are diversely interpreted by Expositors. By Hill some understanding the
field of this world: others, the city of Jerusalem, which was higher than all
other Cities and the Country thereabouts: And others, the Land of Canaan, a
land flowing with milk and honey.

By Fence or Hedge, some understand the Law which was given by Moses, whereby
the people of Israel were fenced in and kept within compass: Others, the
Covenant which God made with his people the Jews, wherewith he did hedge them
in unto himself to be his peculiar people: And others understand thereby the
Divine protection; by which as by an hedge the Lord did continually protect his
people.

By Stones, some understand their wicked Kings; (Saul, Ahab, and the rest) who
by their wicked practices did hinder the growth of Gods Church: Others the
Gentiles and Heathen people (the Canaanites, and Hittites, with the rest) whom
the Lord cast out before the people of Israel: Others understand thereby, all
kind of Idolatry, Errors, Abominations, which the Lord purged his people
from: And there are some others, who by stones, understand the Wall wherewith
the Lord did make the fence or h^dge, and that because the Sakal] in Piel.
word here used, signifies as well to build with stones, and gather them
together for that end, as to remove stones.

By the choice Plant, some would have the Lord Jesus to be meant, and that
because the Prophet speaks in the singular number, both in the Parable and in
the exposition of it. He says not, Vines or Plants, Sorec Isch Iehudah.
but a Vine or Plant; and the man of Judah, not the men of Judah: Others
understand thereby, the best and choicest persons amongst that people,
especially them of the house of Judah (as David, Solomon, and the rest) whom
God had chosen and endued with an excellent measure of his Spirit, for rule and
government: and others understand it more largely, for the whole body of that
people, the stems, and branches, of Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, those honorable
Plants.

By Tower, some understand their Prophets, Priests, and Princes, whom the Lord
gave unto them, to watch (as out of a tower) over them for their good: Others
would have us understand thereby Jerusalem, that great Metropolitan City of
the Jews: And others, the Temple which was built therein.

By Wine Press that was therein, some do understand the Doctrine of the
Prophets, their exhortations and reprehensions, whereby they did labor to
bring the people to repentance: Others, Passions and Afflictions, which the
Lord laid upon them for their sins: And others understand thereby, the Altar
in the Temple, upon which they did offer up their sacrifices and oblations.
Thus we see the diversity of opinions concerning these particulars, and the
variety of paths wherein our Interpreters walk; so that it is no easy matter
to take the right: yet amongst all, I had rather follow them, who by this
fruitful Hill, understand the Land of Canaan: For of it the Scripture thus
speaks; Deuteronomy. 11.9, 11, 12.
The Land whither you go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and
drinks water of the rain of heaven: A land which the Lord thy God cares
for: the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of
the year even unto the end of the year. A good land and large, flowing with
milk and honey.

By Fence or Hedge, his mighty protection, whereby he defended and preserved
his people from all their enemies. This was that hedge which the Lord made
about Job 1.9.
Job, and about his house, and about all that he had on every side. And this
hedge did the Lord promise to make about Zach. 2.5. Psalm. 90.
Jerusalem, so that none should hurt it. Of which Fence read at large, Psalm.
90.

By Stones, the Canaanites, and Hittites, of whom David thus speaks: Psalm.
44.2.
Thou did drive out the Heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them, thou did
afflict the people and cast them out. Of which Stones ( Alphons. Salm. in
parab. vincae. Matthew. 21.
say some) John Baptist speaks, when he tells the Jews (bragging they had
Abraham to their father) Matthew. 3.9.
that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. (But that
I deliver not for doctrine.)

By choice Plant, the seed of Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, the men of Israel, and
Judah, as appears verse 7. One number there being put for another, Per
Synecdochen.
the singular for the plural; a thing usual in Scripture. And thus we read:
Psalm. 80.8,-12.
Thou have brought a Vine out of Egypt, thou have cast out the Heathen and
planted it. Thou preparedst room before it, and did cause it to take deep
root, and it filled the land. The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and
the boughs thereof were like the goodly Cedars. She sent out her boughs unto
the Sea, and her branches unto the river. And elsewhere thus: Ier. 2.21.
I had planted thee a noble Vine wholly, a right seed: How then art thou turned
into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine unto me? In both which places the
people of Israel are meant.

By Tower, the glorious Temple that was in Ierusalen, that stately edifice or
building; according to that of the Prophet; Psalm. 78.69.
He built his Sanctuary like high Palaces, like the earth which he has
established for ever. And so is it termed elsewhere, Mic. 4.8.
A Tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Sion.

By Wine Press, the ministry of the Prophets, and the discipline of the
Church, whereby the fruits of true repentance were pressed forth; and they
caused to bring fruits of new obedience to the glory of God, and their own
souls good.

And this is the sense (amongst all the former) I approve and fasten on, as
judging it to be the best, and least dangerous; it being consonant to other
Scriptures, as I have before showed. Howeuer I intend not to dwell on it, nor
largely to insist on every one of these particulars, but will content my self
with pointing at some general observations, arising most naturally and
clearly, when I come to the handling of them. Now for the Parts.

Division of the second general part.
In this Song or Poem there is considerable, first, a Parable, verse. 1.-7.
Secondly, the application of it, verse. 7.

The Parable is briefly propounded, verse. 1. and then more largely prosecuted
from the second verse unto the seventh.

In the Proposition of it we have, 1. The Vinitor, 2. and his Vineyard,
generally to speak of.

Text.
My well-beloved has a Vineyard] By well-beloved he means God himself, as
before we have seen: And by vineyard he means the Church visible, as in the
application, verse. 7. we may see. By which similitude the nature and condition
of the Church is Psalm. 80.8. Ier. 2.21. Matthew. 21. John 15.1.
usually set forth in Scripture, and by none more: For indeed there is no
earthly thing that does better resemble it, than a vineyard does; as will
appear if we compare the one with the other, either in general, or more
special respects. And first more generally.

A Vineyard we know is a place severed and hedged Vineyard: And thus the Church
is called and separated from the rest of the world both in life and
conversation, and is gathered by the word. Deuteronomy. 14.2.
Thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God (says Moses) and he has chosen
thee to be a peculiar people unto himself above all Nations that are upon the
earth. And again; Leuit. 20.24, 26.
I am the Lord your God which have separated you from other people. This is
that Solomon says, Cant. 4.12.
A garden enclosed is my sister (whereby he understands the Church) my spouse:
A spring shut up, a fountain sealed. And this our Savior tells his
Disciples, John 15.19.
Ye are not of the world: I have chosen you out of the world. Thus we see God
has taken it in out of the vast wilderness of this wretched world, and has
imparked it with the pales of his mercy, and separated it from all other
grounds whatsoever, to be a Vineyard for himself.

Secondly, a Vineyard requires great pains and diligence ascended up on high,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
he gave some to be Apostles, and some to be Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors, and others Teachers; and all was to husband his Church, that
it might be brought unto perfection, to which it cannot very suddenly be
brought. The hardness of our hearts, the flintinesse of our affections, and
the sticking weeds of wickedness, are not at one instant, but by degrees
removed: Should then the husbanding of it be neglected, it would soon decay;
and the estate of the Church would prove worse than the estate of a No-Church.

Vineyard of any other field is most subject to be wasted by wild beasts; and
lies open to the prey of many kinds of spoils, and that in regard of its
pleasant shadow and sweet fruit: So the Church of God of all other places and
societies, is exposed to greatest dangers. There Cant. 2.15.
old Fox and his young Cubs study to destroy the Vines, and lay this Vineyard
waste. It is like Cap. 2.2.
a Lilly amongst thorns, assaulted on the one side by unbelievers, and on the
other side by misbeleeuers: On the right hand by the contentious oppositions of
Schismatikes, and on the left hand by the blasphemous propositions of
Heretics: openly wronged by cruel Tyrants; secretly wringed by backbiting
hypocrites. Psalm. 94.5.
These break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage. Would
any man take the Churches picture? then let him, says Luther, Loc. com. tit.
de persec. verae Eccl.
paint a silly poor maid, sitting in a wood or wilderness compassed about on
every side with hungry Lions, Wolves, Bores, and Bears, and with all manner of
cruel and hurtful beasts, and in the midst of a great many furious men,
assaulting her every moment and minute: for this is her condition in the world.
And what is the cause of this her trouble and molestation? Psalm. 11.3.
What has the righteous done? Surely godliness and grace is that which breeds
the quarrel. Iustus quia iustus, Christianus quia Christianus.
Aristides must be banished out of Athens because he is just, and Christians
must be thrown to the Lions because they are Christians: Revel. 12.17.
The Dragon is wrath with the woman, and makes war with the remnant of her
seed (mark now the reason) because they kept the Commandments of God, and
had the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

A Vineyard of any other possession, is most dear to The Lord forbid it me 1
Kings 21.3.
(said Naboth to Ahab) that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto
thee. Thus is the Church more dear and precious to the Lord, than all other
societies in the world. Psalm. 87.2.
He loves the gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. It Isay
43.4.
is precious in his sight: He will give men and people for her life: Cap. 62.3.
It is a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the
hand of her God. Hence it is called, Isay 49.22.
The beauty of the earth; The standard of the Nations; Matthew. 4.
The holy City; Reu. 21.2.19.
A city whose walls and gates are of precious stones, and the streets of
gold. Cant. 2.1.
The rose of the field: The Lilly of the Valleys: and 4.13, 15.
The fairest amongst women: An Orchard of Pomgranats: A Fountain of Gardens: A
well of springing waters. And being compared with other societies, Cap. 2.2, 3.
As a Lilly amongst thorns, and like the Apple Tree amongst the trees of the
Forest. So then by all these comparisons it is evident, that there is no
society in the world so excellent, none so worthy, none so amiable, none so
lovely, none so dear, none so precious unto the Lord, as is his Church. And
thus in general we have seen what excellent proportion and congruity there is
between them, and how lively by a Vineyard the nature and condition of the
Church visible is set forth. Now (more particularly) if we compare the Church
and the Vine it self together, we shall find the resemblances manifold,
either in respect of the Root, or of the Branches, or of the Bank, or of the
Wood, or of the Leaves, or of the Fruit, there being no property in the one,
which is not (in a sort) answered in the other.

For the Root; Qui viret in folijs venit a radicibus humor.
that we know sends sap to every Stem and Branch, whereby they flourish and
bring forth fruit, and unless they continue in the root, they can never thrive
nor prosper, for thence it is whence they have their moisture: Thus the Church
and every true member of it receives the life and sap of grace from Jesus
Christ, who is the root, and into whom the multitude of true believers are
engrafted, whereby they grow and bring forth fruit to God. So that unless they
continue in him they cannot prosper, but must needs fade and wither, according
to our Saviors speech: John 15.4.
As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in the Vine;
Verse. 5.
no more can ye except ye abide in me. I am the Vine, ye are the branches; he
that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for
without me you can do nothing. Verse. 6.
If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and
men gather them up and cast them into the fire, and they are burned.

In the Branches there is great resemblance diverse ways.

1. There are many branches in the root, yet all make but one Vine: so all the
faithful in the congregation, and all the congregations of the faithful in
the whole world make but one only Church. And albeit there are Cant. 6.8, 9.
threescore Queens and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without number, yet
(says Solomon, speaking in the person of Christ) my dove my undefiled is but
one. And so witnesses S. Paul, 1 Cor. 12.20.
Now are they many members, yet but one body: One, as sucking sap from one and
the same root; living by one and the same spirit Ephesians. 4.4.
and ruled by one and the same head, Christ, blessed for ever. But of this more
hereafter.

2. All the branches of a Vine (though they seem to stand alike in the stock)
are not alike fruitful, neither do they all draw sap and moisture from the
root; for as some are fruitful and flourish, so some again are barren and
wither, which are cut off and cast into the fire: Thus is it in the Church
visible; all the members thereof are not alike incorporated into the root,
through the invisible bonds of the spirit, neither do they John 15.
bring forth fruit in him. Some there are who are only externally engrafted;
others there are who are also internally. The former sort are such members of
the Church visible, who by external baptism have given their names to Christ,
and so entered into the profession; yet indeed are not Christ's, because they
have not the Spirit of Christ: for though they are baptized with water, yet
they are not with the holy Ghost. They have John's baptism, but not Christ's
baptism. This kind of Sacramental engrafting will suffer a cutting off John
15.2.
, because they have not the sap of grace ministered unto them from the stock of
life, but are as dead trees and branches. The other sort are they who besides
the outward engrafting are also inwardly engrafted by the holy Ghost into the
stock Christ Jesus, and do live in him, and grow in him, and bring forth
fruit to the praise of his name. Notwithstanding both these sorts as they
communicate together in the outward bonds of one profession, as they visibly
continue together like one visible body upon that one root Christ Jesus, on
whom they all outwardly profess that they depend, as on the fountain of their
sap and life, so they both together make this visible Vineyard and Church on
earth.

3. There is no branch of any tree that exceeds it, Sine modo crescunt.
Pliny.
in growing and spreading forth it self: in one week, yea night, how
exceedingly is it shot? So the true members of the Church exceed all others in
growth, in grace; they are still spreading forth their branches, growing from
one degree of grace unto another. They are all for Addition and Multiplication,
nothing for Division or Substraction (except in evil.) Virtutes Christianae
sunt copulatiuae.
They sing the song of degrees, adding to 2 Pet. 1.5.
Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to
Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness,
Brotherly-kindnesse; and to Brotherly-kindnesse, Charity. They be not like the
old Moon in the wane, but like the new ever in her increasings.

4. The branches of the Vine grow the better for their pruning, and not the
worse; bringing forth (after it is cut) more and better grapes, not worse nor
fewer: Thus the Church, and true members of the Church, the more they be
afflicted the more they flourish, as Exodus 1.2.
the people of Israel under Pharaohs tyranny, the more they were oppressed, the
more they multiplied and grew. Thus the Church of God ever rises in its ruin,
Sanguis martyrum est semen Ecclesiae.
prospers in its persecution. The blood of Martyrs is but the seed of it, and
the chopping off their heads but as the pruning of this Vine. And as Joseph
said, so may every true Christian say; The Lord has made me fruitful in the
Land of my affliction. Romans 5.4, 5.
Their tribulation works patience; and patience experience; and experience
hope; and that makes not ashamed. And thus for the resemblance in the branches.

Bark or Rind let us compare them: we see that the Bark of the Vine seems
more withered and dry than the Rind or Bark of any other Tree whateuer: yet
it has plenty of sap and abundance of moisture under it. Thus the Church of
God seems black and deformed outwardly to the worlds eye (which only
beholds and judges the Rind) by reason of the scorching heat of
persecution; yet she is inwardly glorious and beautiful, for there the
invisible graces of Faith, Fear, Hope, Love, Patience, Holiness, are hid.
This shows the Psalmist: Psalm. 45.13.
The Kings Daughter is all glorious within: and the Church makes this
confession of her self; Cant. 1.5, 6.
I am black but comely, oh ye Daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar,
as the curtains of Soloman. And this is the cause that her mothers children
look upon her and are angry with her.

Wood, let us see what likeness we can find: 1. That we know is the weakest
and feeblest wood of any other. The trees of the Forest are strong and tall,
but the Vine so weak that it cannot bear up it self without a stay or prop.
Thus the Church of any society is least able to help it self, it cannot stand
against a storm without the prop of Gods protection, by reason of her natural
weakness. It is Isay 33.
a weak tent in it self not fortified with any walls: A small flock of sheep
very impotent and feeble. Zeph. 3.12.
An humble and poor people; yea a very worm, for so the Lord calls her,
Isay 41.14. Verse. 10.
Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel: I will help thee, says the
Lord: Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I
will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee, etc. Thus
Gods 2 Cor. 12.9.
strength is made perfect in the Churches weakness, by his power is it
sustained, on her beloved she is Cant. 8.5.
feign to lean, coming out of the wilderness of this world. The Altar of the
Sanctuary, which at the base had Lions of brass for supporters of it, we may
well think was a type of this. Secondly, unless it bear grapes it is the
vnprofitablest wood of any: Ezekiel. 15.3.
Son of man (says God to Ezechiel) what is the Vine-tree more than any tree,
or than a branch which is amongst the trees of the Forest? Shall wood be taken
thereof to do any work? Or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel
thereon? Verse. 5.
Behold when it was whole it was meet for no work, etc. Thus the wood of this
plant is meet for no use (being cut down or taken from the root) it is only
fit fuel for the fire. This is the condition likewise of all barren and
fruitless professors, they are good for nothing but to be fuel of Gods
wrath. But of this hereafter.

In the Leaves likewise the resemblance is excellent: shadow Hos. 4.13.
, every thing delights in the heat of Summer to harbor under their shade: And
thus howeuer the Church and members of the Church are persecuted and afflicted
by the wicked, and well cudgeled, as fruit trees are in Summer; yet in the day
of trouble their shadow is good, then can the wicked run to them for shelter.
Thus Pharaoh and his Courtiers in the evil day can send for Moses and Aaron
Exodus 9.27.
, and desire them to pray unto the Lord that there be no more mighty thunders
and hail, etc. So 1 Samuel 24.21.
Saul in foul weather runs to David; and Jeroboam 1 King. 13.6.
to the man of God; Belteshazzer Dan. 5.12, 13.
to Daniel; Zedekiah Ier. 37.3.
to Jeremiah; the foolis Mat. 25.8.
Virgins to the wise. These besides many more that might be reckoned, have
found the best harboring to be under their shade, and that no leaves could so
well keep off a storm of vengeance as these leaves could. Themistocles though
he were banished in peace, yet he was sent for home in war. And so the godly,
though they be passed over in the days of pride, yet when the showers of Gods
wrath shall fall, then they and their shadow shall be more regarded.

2. The leaves of the Vine are good for medicine, they are very profitable and
of excellent use, for healing wounds, cleansing sores, if they be taken and
applied. The fruit thereof shall be for meat, (says Ezechiel speaking of the
Church) Ezekiel. 47.12.
and the leaf thereof for medicine. Thus the very outward profession of a
Christian, the very leaves and outward carriage of the godly is for medicinable
use; hereby many have been healed, thousands have been won to 1 Pet. 2.12.
a love and liking of the truth. Thus Lucianus an ancient Martyr, persuaded
many Gentiles unto the faith by his grave countenance and modest disposition,
insomuch that (as it is recorded) Maximinus that persecuting Emperor durst not
look him in the face for fear he should turn Christian. And so mention is
made by Beda Eng. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 7.
, of one Albane, who receiving a poor persecuted Christian into his house, and
seeing his holy devotion and sweet carriage, was so much affected with the
same, as that he became an earnest professor of the faith, and in the end a
glorious Martyr for the faith. And so their words, they have a healing quality
with them if they were applied, they tend to the Ephesians. 4.29.
edification and Pro. 10.21.
feeding of many, and minister Colos. 4.6.
grace unto the hearers, as the Apostle speaks. Psalm. 37.30.
The mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom (says David) and his tongue
talks of judgment: They are sometimes persuading, sometimes instructing,
sometimes admonishing, sometimes comforting, other whiles praying, all tending
to the healing of wounded and distressed consciences. And thus in this we see a
good agreement.

Now lastly for their fruits; and first for the quantity, plenty of fruit; it
bears in bunches and clusters many Grapes together: So the Church abounds
in good works 1 Cor. 15.58.
, being filled with the fruits of righteousness Phil. 1.11.
, as the Apostle speaks to the Philippians, John 15.5.
bringing forth much fruit, as our Savior testifies of his Disciples. Full of
mercy and good works, Iam. 3.17, 18.
without partiality and without hypocrisy (as Saint James says) which fruit
of righteousness (as he further speaks) is sown in peace of them that make
peace. Thus they bring forth Grapes in clusters, united in the bond of peace
and love.

2. The Vine bears Pleasant fruit: no fruit more delectable to the taste,
than is the Grape; nor more comfortable to the heart, than is the Wine made of
the Grape: Judge. 9.13.
Should I leave my Wine which cheereth God and man (says the Vine to other
trees in the Parable.) And so the fruit of Christians: How do their works of
love and mercy refresh the bowels of the Saints distressed, brethren afflicted?
How do their fruits of justice and equity ease and relieve the oppressed
soul? How is God glorified; John 15.8.
Angels and men rejoiced by the fruitfulness of these trees of righteousness?
when as the fruit of other trees and plants is but bitter fruit, fruit unto
death, Romans 7.21.
as the Apostle speaks.

In diverse othet particulars the comparison might be followed; but I desire not
to be more curious than profitable. By this that has been said, we cannot
but see the aptness of the similitude. Now to some profitable observations.
And first something may be noted in general, in that the Prophet uses a
Parable or Similitude, and that from a Vine or Vineyard (a thing earthly and
temporal) whereby he does set out the estate and nature of the Church,
together with Gods care and cost for the welfare of the Church (things heavenly
and spiritual.

Doctr. It is lawful to make resemblances between things earthly and heavenly.
As first: It is lawful to make resemblances and likenesses between corporal
and spiritual, earthly and heavenly things for our better instruction.

The Prophets and Apostles, and Christ himself that chief Shepherd of the
Sheep, have used thus to teach. For proof read these places, amongst
multitudes that might be brought: Psalm. 92.12. Mat. 13.3.24.31.33.44.45.47.
Luke 13.6. and 15. and 18.

Use.
Let Ministers wisely and soberly use this their liberty in teaching, for the
edification of their hearers, whom (if they be of the weaker sort) let them not
trouble with profound matters which they are not able to understand, but let us
be content to use plain similitudes and homebred comparisons, fetched from
leaven; from the meale-tub; or other domestical business; knowing therein we
do no other than Jesus Christ our great Doctor and Master himself did. We are
called Nurses 1 Thessalonians. 2.
: Now nurses are not ashamed (nay they rather delight in it) to condescend to
the balbutient infancy of their nurcelings: And so let us; becoming (in this
sense) Barbarians unto Barbarians. Habeo in abscondito quoddam ossum. Sic enim
p^tuis lequam^er. Melius est vt reprehend^nt nos Grammatici, quam non
intelligant populi. Aug. in Ps. 138.
Thus learned Austin (as himself speaks) chose rather to speak barbarously
than finely, and to use the barbarous word ossum in his exposition, rather than
the word os (though he allow it in the text, and so reads it) because (though
it were not so Grammatical, yet) it was the more intelligible word, and he
desired his peoples profit, above his own credit; holding it better that the
learned should reprove him, than that the ignorant should not understand him.
So then let us preach (not as we are able to speak, but) as our people are
able to hear Mark. 4.33. John 16.12.
, and as they can bear; remembering still that we must rather seek to make our
people scholars, than to show our selves scholars unto our people.

Now in using of Parables, Similitudes, Allegories, etc. See my exposition on
the Parable of the Prodigal, page 13, 14.
these rules (as I have elsewhere showed) are to be followed.

1. That they be not far fetched, but fitting for the matter in hand.

2. That they be borrowed from things well known, and easy to be conceived.

3. That we still have a care of the majesty of Scripture, avoiding all
ridiculous and base stuff.

4. That we use them rather for instructing of life, than for proving any point
of faith.

5. That we turn not all into Allegories to the destroying of the letter,
which was Origens fault.

6. That they be quickly dispatched, and not too much insisted on.

Let Hearers learn, not to despise their Ministers for

There is no earthly thing which may not be apllied to some special use for
our edification in grace. Doct. Things earthly should teach us things heavenly.
Things earthly may put us in mind of things heavenly; things natural of
spiritual.

What is there in this world that has any being, but may read to man a
Divinity Lecture? From the highest Angel to the lowest worm, all teach us
somewhat. The Sun, Moon, Stars, are good Schoolemasters: Psalm. 8.3, 4.
When I behold thy Heavens, the works of thy fingers, the Moon and the
Stars which thou have ordained: What is man, say I then, that thou art
mindful of him, or the son of man that thou so visitest him? Thus Psalm. 19.1.
the Heavens preach the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
work. So the Fowls of the Heavens; Ier. 8.7.
The Storke knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the
Swallow observe the time of their coming. These may teach us to know the day
of our visitation, and the judgment of the Lord. The beasts of the field
likewise may instruct us: Isay 1.2.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters Crib: By them may Israel
be schooled and learn obedience. Yea of the little Ant or Emmet may man be
taught providence. Pro. 6.6.
Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise, which having
no guide, ouerseer or ruler, provides her meat in the Summer, and gathers
her food in the harvest. And as the creatures, so may every action and ordinary
occasion be applied to good purpose. The Husbandman breaking up his ground,
teaches us the necessity of Repentance, and calls upon us for the Ier. 14.4.
breaking up the fallow ground of our hearts: His Mat. 13.3.
casting in his seed, and sowing of his field, shows us the nature of the
word; the necessity and vtility of the same. The 1 Cor. 15.37.
Corn dying and fructifying, preaches to us that Article of our faith, The
resurrection of the body. The beholding of Mat. 13.25.
tares and weeds in the field, may instruct us of the state and condition of
the Church militant. Verse. 45.
The Merchant searching for pearls, and paying dearly for that of price,
should remember us of a far more precious pearl. The Gospel, of the
Kingdom which we should highly rate, and sell all to buy. Mat. 7.9, 10.
Childrens asking for bread or meat at their fathers hands, and the Fathers
readiness to give them what they ask, may teach us our duties toward God,
and set forth the readiness of Gods love to us. Psalm. 123.2.
Servants waiting upon their Masters, and Maids attending upon their
Mistresses, should teach us to wait upon the Lord our God until he have mercy
on us. Thus Gods wisdom is in this kind remarkable; directing us by all
things that may run into our senses, to raise us furtherances in spiritual
things. Yea not only things lawful, but we shall find likewise that things
sinful and unlawful afford resemblances to admonish of duty. The employment
of our gifts to the glory of the bestower, we have pressed by resemblance of
the Matthew. 25.27.
Usurers cursed courses; Wisdom to provide for everlasting Tabernacles, by
liberality to the poor Saints is taught us, Luke 16.8, 9.
by the unjust policy of the deceitful Steward. Matthew. 24.43.
Watchfulness for the sudden coming of Christ, by the unexpected coming of a
thief to his prey. In a word, there was nothing which our Savior could hear,
or see, or do, but he made spiritual use of it, and took occasion thereby to
administer heavenly instructions unto his followers. Thus we have seen this
truth proved: now let us hear it further applied.

This may serve for our Humiliation, seeing that by Adam was made Lord of the
creatures, and by the knowledge wherewith God endued him, he knew the Lord and
the creature also. Genesis 2.19, 20.
At one Court he imposed names to them all, according to their kinds, as
knowing them better in their nature and virtue, than they did themselves. The
knowledge which he had of God, led him to this knowledge of the creature, and
it was not by the creature that he learned the knowledge of the Creator. But
by sin man falling away from God, he has so far degenerated from his own
kind, as that he is now become inferior unto them, and they (as Balaams Ass)
can teach their master. Numb. 22.28.
To the school of the creature is man now sent, and put back (like an idle
truant) to his A.B.C. to learn the glory, goodness, and providence of the
Creator, by looking upon it; neither are we able to learn so much as the
creature can teach us when we ply our lesson hardest. Consider we how far the
creature does excel man; Nos aper auditu praecellit, aranea tactu, Vultur
odoratu, lynx visu, simia gustu.
and that not only in natural faculties, as the Ape in tasting, the Spider in
touching, the Lynx in seeing, the Boar in hearing, the Vulture in smelling,
etc. (wherein we come not nigh them) nor yet only in natural gifts and
qualities of the body; as the Horse in strength, the Roe in swiftness, the
Lion in courage, etc. (wherein we are not able to compare with them) but also
they far excel us in many virtues; as the Dove in simplicity, the Storke in
kindness, the Dog in fidelity, the Ox and the Ass in thankfulness and
obedience; in all which we come far short, and wherein they may become our
Tutors. Not to speak of the Spider, which (say some) taught man first to
weaue; nor of the Eagle, which (say others) taught man first to build; nor of
that same Egyptian bird Ibis, which (as others hold) gave knowledge to
Physicians how to use the glister (for these are but conjectures.) We have
seen enough to humble us, yea even the proudest of us, seeing in many good
things they now excel us, though indeed in vice and evil we excel them all,
being by our sin become more cruel than the Wolf, more crafty than the
Fox, more envious than the Serpent, more venomous than the Adder, more proud
than the Peacocke; yea all vices which are but several in beasts, are mustered
and troopt together in us. And this is our natural condition.

reprehension, in that we have such empty hearts, and heads, when in every
corner we have so many teachers to inform us and instruct us. The plea of
ignorance is a common plea and goes for current: Alas Sir we are ignorant and
not booke-learned, we want teachers, etc. And this is the strongest pillar and
prop that many have. But how is this possible? Du Bartas, 1. Day 1. Week. Hab.
2.2.
Does not the great book of the creatures (termed aptly by some, the
Shepeards Calendar, and Ploughmans Alphabet) lie open, in which even the most
ignorant may run and read? Do not the Heavens and those celestial Orbs
that are placed therein, plainly catechize thee in the first elements of
religion, and teach thee that there is a God, Romans 1.20.
and that this God is but one, and that this one God excels all other things
both in might and majesty, and that he will be worshipped, etc. And indeed,
Vniuersus mundus nihil aliud est quam Deus explicatus. Cusan. Job 12.7, 8.
the whole world is nothing else but God expressed. Can men then plead ignorance?
Ask now the beasts (says Job) and they shall teach thee, and the fowls of
the air, and they shall tell thee: Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach
thee, and the fishes of the Sea shall declare unto thee. Look above thy head,
below thy feet, on thy right hand, and on thy left hand; all thou see would
enforce thee, if thou had a heart to learn. The rudest rusticke has his
horse and plow, his earth and seed, to instruct him in his duty: All which
leave not God without witness, leave men without excuse, Romans 1.20,-28.
as they did the Gentiles, who because they knew not God according to those
means, neither honored they him according to that natural knowledge gotten
by those means, were given up to vile sins and grievous punishments. Oh
then! that we were as ready to learn good lessons, Isay 1.5. Oneramus Asinum
and non curat quia Asinus est. At si in ignem impellere, si in foucam
praecipitare velis, cauet quantum potest, quia vitam amat and mortem timet.
Bern. de diverse. 12.
as these kind of tutors are to teach us them, how much better should we be
than now we are? They will leave when they are corrected, but man waxes worse
and worse when he is reproved. We lay load upon an Ass (says Bernard) and
he cares not because he is an Ass; but if you offer to thrust him down some
steep hill, or to drive him into the fire, he holds back and shuns it all
he can, because he loves life and fears death: whereas wretched man, more
blockish and senseless than the very Ass, more brutish than the brutishest of
beasts, has no fear nor dread of that which will be his eternal bane, and
bring everlasting damnation upon him. And if such as do not further their
salvation by the creatures are justly to be taxed; then much more cause have
we to condemme such, as hasten their perdition by them, using or rather
abusing them to excess and riot, eating to gluttony; drinking to
drunkenness; spending their wealth to the maintenance of pride and
wantonness. Surely the damnation of such sleeps not.

Instruction, that we so use and behold things earthly, as that thereout we
draw some heavenly lesson: for there is a double use of every creature: the one
is natural, the other spiritual: If we content our selves with the natural
use without the spiritual, we do not take the one half of that comfort in
the creature which God gave it for. And indeed what do we more than the bruit
beast, which has a carnal and natural use of the creature as well as we? Let
us then no longer be like children who look upon the pictures and babies in
their books, and gaze upon the gilded leaves and cover, never looking to their
lesson which they should learn therein: But let us do as Travelers in a
foreign country, make every thing we see a good instruction, and every action
a stirrup to heavenly meditation; translating the book of nature into the use
of grace: which unless we do, how can we comfortably thank God for the use
of his creatures? they being by us but abused when they are half lost: Yea,
God is wronged, and our own souls most of all injured when the creatures are
so neglected. And therefore now at length (for better late than never) learn
to pick your bones cleaner, and suck more sweetness out of the creatures
than heretofore you have done.

Text.
My well-beloved.] We see then who was the Vinitor or Husbandman; and he was no
other than this well-beloved, God himself. So then the point is evident:

God is the Husbandman of his Church: Doctr. God is the Churches Husbandman.
He it is that husbands it; Isay 27.3.
I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment (says God) lest any
hurt it, I will keep it night and day. And so S. Paul tells the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 3.9.
that they were Gods tillage or husbandry. This our blessed Savior does there
intimate when he says, Matthew. 15 3.
Every plant that my Father has not planted shall be rooted up: and elsewhere
in plain terms avouch, John 15.1.
I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. Thus the point is proved:
and yet that it may be further cleared, a question would be answered; for some
may demand, whether Gods Ministers are not husbandmen? Quest.
Are not they to Ier. 1.10.
set, sow, plant, pluck up; and Luke 13.7. Resp.
to dress this Vineyard? How then can God be said to be the husbandman thereof?

I answer, God is the principal, they are but subordinate and inferior, being
called of him and set a work by him: they are not 1 Pet. 5.3.
Lords of the heritage of God, but servants and vnder-workmen, being taken in
as 1 Cor. 3.9.
Laborers, who (when the even is come) shall from this Lord of the Vineyard
Matthew. 20.8.
receive their hire. God is the chief Lord and owner; he directs and rules the
other, and prospers their work as it pleases him. So then the former point
still remains good, God is the Husbandman of his Church.

Now here me thinks I have a good occasion to Mercers, Goldsmiths, Iewellers,
and others of the like rank, are not so often mentioned in Scriptures as these
are: neither does God so much credit them, in so often resembling himself unto
them. And yet alas! how is this profession disdained? and how are such
contemned as hindes and clownes, etc. who are professors of it? And what man
almost so mean, but he scorns to be of it or put his child unto it? and yet
God himself assigned it to Genesis 2.8.
Adam; and and 4.2.
Adam made a choice of it for his eldest son. Surely it is righteous with God
(as Dod on Prou. 12. verse. 11.
one says well) that tillage is so much decayed, when it is no more regarded:
and that there should be so much daily detracted from the imploiment of men,
because there are so few men that are willing to be employed in it. But I am
loath to step too far out of my way to salute a friend.

Cant. 8.13.
dwells in it to preserve and guard it by his power. Great was Gods care for
Isreal's safety, as Moses shows, for Deuteronomy. 32.10, 11, 12.
He led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye. As
an Eagle stirs up the nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her
wings, takes them, bears them on her wings: So the Lord alone did lead him:
But the ground of all was, The Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of
his inheritance. How blessed a thing then is it to be within the hedge and pale
of Gods Church? For then we see God becomes our husbandman; he protects us and
defends us from all evils and dangers, and prouides for us whatsoever shall be
needful, as hereafter we shall see more lab^s^y and particularly.

trial whether we be true members of the Church of God or no: We may thus know
it; if Gods husbandry appears in our souls: And for this purpose hear a
Parable, Prou. 24.30, 31.
I went by the field of the slothful, and by the Vineyard of the man void of
understanding: And lo it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had
covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down. Thy
heart is this field; examine now what grows in it: Do thistles grow in stead
of wheat, and Job 31.40.
cockle in stead of barley? (as Job speaks) Do the thorns and nettles of
hard-heartednesse and hypocrisy, pride and blasphemy, profaneness and
impiety? does beastly drunkenness, filthy whoring and uncleanness,
chambering and wantonness, or the like to these, cover the face thereof? why
then be thou assured, an ill husbandman owes this ground; it is the envious man
the devil that sowes these seeds, and husbands such plats as these. But on the
contrary, is the fallow ground of thy heart turned up; and is the stoninesse
thereof taken away? Are those brambles and briars, (noisome lusts, and strong
corruptions) which formerly grew therein, now weeded up, and cast out? And art
thou fenced in with good purposes and resolutions for time to come? and does
this wall stand firm and sure? why then assure thy self thou art one of Gods
chosen closes; a true member of that Church whereof he is the husbandman; for
he husbands it, and only it. And in that his tillage and husbandry is so
effectual in thee, questionless thou art not only in it as many are; but of
it as few are. Stick this as a nosegay in thy bosom.

Thirdly, this may admonish every one that lives in Earth teach Earth: Terra
quam terimus, Terra quia teritur.
the Earth we tear, may instruct terram quam gerimus, the Earth we bear, this
lesson of contentedness. And let none think it is better to have their hearts
lie waste than to be thus broken up; for a barren estate is a woeful and cursed
estate, and there can be no comfort in it. Does God then come unto thee
himself with his pruning hook in his hand, and cut thee near, yea so near
that in thy sense and judgment there is no hope of ever after flourishing?
well, yet be content: for thus deals the Vinitor with the most generous plant;
he oftentimes prunes it so close, as that in sense and reason it were utterly
dead, and clean killed; yet it reuiues again, and after this, is more richly
laden than ever it was before. And so, albeit Heb. 12.11.
no chastisement seems joyous for the present, but grievous; yet it
afterward brings with it the pleasant fruit of righteousness. Or does he
send his deputies the Prophets to thee with the plow and harrow of the Law, to
break up that heathy ground of thy heart, and turn up the weeds of sin by
the very roots, that they may never more revive? why then subject your selves
to be directed by their care and pains without repining; remembering still your
hearts as of themselves will never yield any other fruit than weeds, or grass
at the best: needs then must they be accursed, if you refuse to have them by
these husbanded that they may grow fruitful.

Boar of the forest, or wild beasts of the field; Make God acquainted with
it, and tell the Vine-dressers, Gods Ministers, thereof, and will them tell
their Mas^^^ that he may take some order for his Vineyards safe^^. Yea do
thou or any other member of the Church need husbanding? Then go to God and
tell him of the barrenness of thy heart, and with a holy boldness urge him
with his care and pains: Say thus, or in this manner to him; Ah Lord, how
barren is my soul of what is good? How fruitful is it in what is bad and
naught? What ignorance, pride, senselessness, security, grows there, where
knowledge, humility, zeal, patience, and other such like graces ought to
grow? Now since thou have taken the charge upon thee to be the Husbandman of
thy Church and people, husband thou this heart of mine, and be mindful of me,
oh my God: Let it not be thought an ill husband owes it, or one that is
negligent and slothful in his business; but let thy care appear in dressing
of it, that the fruits of all heavenly graces may abundantly spring forth and
grow to the praise and glory of thy name.

And so much of the Husbandman: A word or two of his Possession.

Has a Vineyard] This Vineyard is the Church, Text.
as we have seen before, together with the reasons of the similitude: The
observation is,

The Church is Gods heritage. Doct. The Church is Gods inheritance.
For the further proof thus we read; Deuteronomy. 9.26, 29.
Destroy not thy people and thine inheritance which thou have redeemed: Yet
they are thy people and thine inheritance which thou broughtest out. Cap. 32.9.
The Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. 1 Samuel
10.1.
The Lord has anointed thee to be Captain of his inheritance (said Samuel to
Saul.) 1 Samuel 26.19.
They have driven me this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord
(says David.) 2 Samuel 20.19.
Why will thou swallow up the inheritance of the Lord (said that same wise
woman unto Ioab when he battered the walls of Abel.) Psalm. 74.2.
Remember thy congregation which thou have purchased of old, the rod of thine
inheritance, this Mount Sion wherein thou have dwelt (says the Psalmist.) And
again, Psalm. 28.9.
Save thy people and bless thine inheritance, feed them also, and lift them up
for ever. Yea the Lord of Hoasts shall bless saying, Jsai. 19.25. Read Psalm.
33.12. and 78 70, 71. and 79.1, 13. and 94.5. and 106.5, 40. Is. 47.6. Ier.
2.7. and 3.19. and 12.7. 1 Pet. 5.3.
Blessed be Egypt my people, and Israel my inheritance.

Now for Use; let us hence take notice, whence it is him he bears a spleen
unto; and will not stick to wrong his very dog, and all to despite the
owner. Do thou then persecute the Church, or any member of the Church? The
more wretch thou, for let me tell thee, thy hate is not originally and properly
to them, (pretend what thou will pretend) but to God himself, whose
inheritance they are.

1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
Ye are not your own, therefore glorify God in your souls and bodies (says
the Apostle) for they are his. If his; then not the worlds; nor the fleshes;
nor the devils. Why then do we suffer these or any of these to sow tares and
corrupt seed in Gods closures? Why do we endure the plants of wickedness to
be set in his field? And why do we bring forth fruit unto our selves or any
other, rather than unto him? Remember whose thou art, or at leastwise do
profess thy self to be; and be no longer for the weeds of sin; nor for
voluptuous pleasures to feed on, as bullocks do on pasture land; but be thou
Gods garden of sweet flowers; his Vineyard of fruitful grapes; and bring all
unto him for first fruits and tenths, that thou may be his blessed land and
possession for evermore.

1 King. 21.2, 3.
Naboth could not be drawn to part with the inheritance of his Fathers, though
Ahab made him never so large proffers for it; and much less will God who gave
it for a law and ordinance, Leuit. 25.25.
that none should sell away their inheritance for ever; but if in case that any
of his people had sold away any part thereof, then he or his kin should
redeem it again if they were able: And in case of inabilitie, that which was
sold should remain in the hand of him that bought it until the year of
Iubile; in which year it should go out, and then every man should return
again unto his own possession. Surely he that made this law will be mindful
of it, and will not easily be driven to give over his own inheritance which he
has chosen: And if in case (for the barrenness thereof) he should forsake it
for a time (as he did this people Israel) yet it would be but for a time, and
nor perpetual: in the end he will return again unto his own. And thus much
briefly for this point.

Now further, in that the Prophet speaks in the Present tense, My beloved
[hath] a Vineyard: Albeit the whole Church of Israel and Judah was at this time
so generally corrupted, as that from the Crown of the head to the sole of the
foot, there was nothing found but wounds, swellings and sores, full of
corruption ( Cap. 1. ver. 5.
as he had before testified) we do observe, that

Albeit a Church be corrupted with error and idolatry, Doct. A true Church may
be corrupted with error and idolatry.
yet it is still to be accounted Gods Church, till he have divorced and
forsaken her.

Thus in the days of Ely 1 Samuel 2.24.29.
Israel was called Gods people; and so his Church, albeit they were not then
separated from all false ways, and Elyes sons (sons of Belial, says the
text, Ver. 12.
who knew not the Lord) remained amongst them. So Moses calls Israel Gods
people Exodus 32.11.
when he was upon the Mo^^t, and yet at that time they were in the very act of
their Idolatry, which was not unknown to Moses, Verse. 7, 8.
for God himself informed him thereof. So in this our Prophets time, Isay
1.21, 22, 29. and 2.6, 8. and 65.11. Cap. 1.3.
albeit this people were sunk deep in rebellion and idolatry, yet for all
that God himself does call them his people, Israel does not know, My people
does not consider. Turn we our eyes from the estate of the Church in these
times to after times, as it was under the Gospel, and we shall see the truth
of the point propounded. Look upon Jerusalem in our Savior Christ's time Mat.
23.37.
, and we shall see the eleven Tribes were become Apostates, and the Church
amongst them was wonderfully corrupted both in Doctrine and manners, as
appears Mat. 5.21.
by our Savior Christ's severe reproof of both; yea the Temple it self John
2.14.
was almost become a den of thieves, full of buyers and sellers. Yet at this
time it was the true Church of God, else the Evangelist would never have called
it Mat. 4.5. and 27.53.
the Holy City. In Saint Paul's time 1 Cor. 1.1, 2. Cap. 5.1. 2 Cor. 12.20, 21.
the Corinthians were called the Church of God, and yet at that very instant
some of them were in an heresy; others in incest, and othersome that had not
repented of their filthiness. Such was the estate of the Churches of Asia
Revel. 2. and 3.
yet the title of true Churches were given to them.

England for a No-church, and make a separation from it in regard of the
errors and corruptions that are in it, are far from the spirit of Christ,
and the Prophets and Apostles, who never made any schismatic and bodily
separation from any true Church, for the corruptions (though gross) that were
therein found. I deny not but blemishes are in every Church; (for what Church
ever breathed in so pure an air, as that it might not justly complain of some
thick and unwholesome euaporations of error and sin?) but because our Mother
wants some beauty, has she lost her face? Because she is black, has she no
comeliness at all? What is it they charge us with, b^ See a little book set
forth by the Separatists of the confession of their faith.
with corruptions? (for fundamental error they can discover none.) Now do
corruptions in a man make a false man; or a corrupt man? So that though they
make the worst they can of our Church, they can make it but a corrupt Church,
and not a false Church. We have the true Word of God preached, the true
Sacraments of Christ Jesus administered, which all Divines Bucer. Martyr.
Fagius. Calvin. Beza. Bullinger. Zanchius. Iunius. Rollock.
in all the reformed Churches in Christendom, which now are or have bin, do
hold to be the infallible tokens of a true Church, and are reciprocally
converted with the true Church: we maintain every point of the most ancient
Creeds: we overthrow not the foundation by any consequence. And as yet we have
not received a bill of diuorcement. As for Discipline (the want whereof they
charge us with) our Church is not destitute of it altogether: I would we had
the execution of so much as our Church allows. Neither do we deny but
therein there may be some defects and wants, as appears by those words in the
Book of common Prayer: In the commination.
until the said discipline may be restored. But does it follow hereupon, that
because Discipline is wanting, the Church is fading, and that the infirmity of
the one makes a nullity of the other? That this is necessary for the
well-being of a Church I grant; that it is necessary to the essence and being
of a Church I utterly deny: Neither will they ever be able to prove it by
evidence of Gods Word. The Church of the Jews thus says of the Church of the
Gentiles: Cant. 8.9.
If she be a wall, we will build upon her a Palace of silver; and if she be a
door, we will enclose her with boords of Cedar. She calls her a sister,
because she had a wall though not of silver, and a door though not of Cedar.
So is our Church a sister to all reformed Churches, though she may have some
spots in external matters: And our hope is, that her wall shall be made more
costly, and siluer-like, and her door of Cedar, in Gods good time. In the
Interim, Heb. 10.25.
Forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is:
but exhort one another, and so much the more as you see the day approaching.
Whom thou can, amend; whom thou can not, tolerate; in any case beware of
offering thy mother so great an injury as to fly from her. Say she were poor,
ragged, weak; say she were deformed yet she is not infectious: Or if she
were, yet she is thine, which should be motive enough for thee to pity her,
to pray for her, to labor for her redress, not to avoid her.

Quest.
Before I end this point, some happily may demand, what may be thought of the
Church of Rome; whether is it to be accounted Gods Church, it being so
corrupted with Idolatry as it is?

Answ.
For answer whereto a distinction must be made: Errors and corruptions in a
Church are of two sorts; either such as concern Manners, or such as concern
Doctrine: As for corruption in Manners, they make not no Church, but a bad
Church; and therefore in respect of them, they are not to be forsaken by us,
neither to be accounted of, as no Church of God. For corruptions in Doctrine;
they are either such as are citra fundamentum, besides the foundation; and
these trouble: or circa fundamentum, about the foundation; and these shake: or
contra fundamentum, against the foundation; and these ouerturne all. The two
former are weakening errors, and do not debar them from being the true Church
of God; being but the 1 Cor. 3.12.
building of hay and stubble on the foundation; the stubble burnt (I mean not
in their fire of Purgatory) their souls may be saved. The latter are
destroying errors; and in these, consideration must be had, whether a Church
erreth of weakness, or of malice: If it be of weakness, then are we not
peremptorily to conclude against such a Church; for S. Paul Gal. 1.2.
writes to the Galatians as a Church of God, though they were perverted to
another doctrine, embracing a fundamental error of justification by works.
But if it be of malice or affected ignorance, like 2 Timothy 3.8.
Iannes and Iambres that withstood Moses, resisting the truth; then does such a
Church cease to be a Church, neither is it any longer to be reputed as a
Church. Thus the Church of Rome does wilfully and obstinately destroy the
foundation it self, and therefore may be concluded for no Church of God. And
so much briefly for the Answer to the Question, with which answer we end this
point, and come unto another.

The Prophet does not only speak in the present tense [hath] but he also
speaks in the singular number [Vineyard] not Vineyards: and thence we note,

The Church and Vineyard of God is but one. Doctr. The Church of God is but one.
There are indeed Cant. 6.8.
threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without number: but
my Dove, my undefiled is but one: She is the only one of her mother. Thus
testifies S. Paul; 1 Cor. 12.12.
As the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that one
body being many, are one body; so also is Christ (that is, the Church.)
Hitherto likewise tends that saying of our blessed Savior; John 10.16.
Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also must I bring, and
they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold and one shepherd.

True it is, this one Church may have many parts: As the Ocean Sea is but one,
yet distinguished according to the Regions upon which it lies: And so there is
the Germane Ocean; the Spanish Ocean; the English Ocean; the Irish Ocean; and
the like: And thus there is a Church in Geneua; a Church in France; a Church in
Scotland; a Church in England; and yet but one militant Church upon the earth.

For as a Kingdom divided into many Shires, Reason.
and more Towns and Villages, is called one, because it has one and the same
King, one and the same Law: So the Church is one, because it lives by one and
the same Spirit; and is ruled by one and the same Lord; and professes one and
the same faith; has one and the same hope, and has been baptized with one
and the same baptism, as Ephesians. 4.4, 5.
S. Paul writing to the Ephesia^s declares. And not one as tied to any one
place; much less to any one person, as the Popish Antichristian crew, who
though they have nothing in their mouths, so much as, The Church, the Church
(and therein (like Oister wives) do outcry us) yet exceedingly infringe the
liberties of the Church: for all of them have made the Catholic Church to be
nothing else but the Roman Church, and Haruaeus de potest. Papae cap. 23. See
B. Jewels defense of Apolog. fol. 610.
some of them have made the Roman Church to be nothing else but the Pope: And
this is their One. But now for Use.

Use.
This unity or oneness of Gods Vineyard should teach us all, unity and
concord, that profess our selves to be of this Vineyard. And as in the
natural body there is a perpetual sympathy between all the parts, so ought
there to be in this body mystical; 1 Cor. 12.26.
If one member suffer, all should suffer with it; if one member be had in
honor, all should rejoice thereat. The eye must not say to the hand, I have no
need of thee; nor the head again unto the feet, I have no need of you; but
every member ought to be helpful to its fellow members, and willingly yield to
every one that which belongs to them; and according to that of S. Peter, 1
Pet. 4.10.
As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one unto
another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. For as the incolumitie
of the body depends upon the concord of the parts, in the mutual performance
of their duties; so the welfare of the Church, when we thus show ourselves to
be members one of another: And therefore as God has called us, so let us
walk; whether we be Magistrates; Ministers, or others. Art thou a Magistrate?
Then thou as the head should rule and govern wisely: woe be to the body,
when the head is p^^^nzie, drunken, idle, or the like: see thou be not so; but
as the head does hear and see, taste and smell for the good of the inferior
members, so should thou in that place wherein God has set thee. Art thou a
Minister? Then as the Heart thou should be the fountain of life and vital
spirits; doctrine like dew should distill from thy lips. Little joy have the
other members, when the heart is sick or heavy. Art thou in meaner place; a
Tradesman, Husbandman, or the like? then as the foot, see thou be sound and
serviceable; being ready to go or run for the least good that may betide the
body. And that unity and love may the better be continued and maintained, let
these evils be avoided.

First, Envy or repining at the gifts of others; a sin

Secondly, arrogancy and highmindednesse for any

Thirdly, curiosity or busy meddling with things belonging 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
study to be quiet, meddling with our own business, leaving other things to
whom they do concern.

S. Paul shows, 1 Cor. 3.3.
writing to the Corinthians, and avouches that such are carnal, and walk as
men. What answer will Brownists and Separatists make to God at the last day? Oh
they were wicked Magistrates, ungodly Ministers, etc. But if the head ache, does
the foot refuse to bear it? Or if the eye be blemished, does the rest of the
members disdain it or contemn it? or whilst it remains in the body, refuse
to have fellowship with it? and renounce their own part in the body because of
it? Me thinks this being well considered must needs convince them. But of these
before.

Hitherto I have been in the Proposition of the Parable: The prosequution,
explication, or narration of it follows now to be handled, which begins at
the latter end of the first verse, and continues to the end of the sixth.

Wherein we have laid down to be considered; first, the Vineyards Plantation,
in the latter part of the first and in the second verses; secondly, the
Supplantation thereof, in the four next.

In the first of these we have two things to entreat of; as first, of the
Vinitors great pains and cost, which he bestowed upon it; and secondly, of his
just expectation which he made, to receive fruit from it.

His pains, cost, and care, for this his Vineyards good, appears in six
sundry particulars: First, in the situation of it; for it grew, 1. upon a Hill,
2. upon a very fruitful Hill, In an horn of the son of oil (for so the
words are) by which Hebraisme is set forth the fatness and fruitfulness of
the place: For by an horn is noted 2 Samuel 22: 3. Psalm. 75.4, 5. Luke 1.69.
strength, power, and height, usually in Scripture; and by oil Job 29.6.
fatness, and plenty; and by the son of oil is meant, that which comes of
the oil, and is of it: A phrase usual amongst the Hebrews. And so we read
of the son of days; of the son of death; of the son of plenty, and the
like. By this phrase then is noted thus much, that they were excellently
seated, both for pleasure and profit; Muscul. in loc.
and in so fruitful a place as if it had been the son of oil, and borne of
it.

Secondly, in the Protection of it, for he fenced and enclosed it in strongly,
that it might not be wasted nor any way annoied.

Thirdly, in the Elapidation or Cleansing of it: casting out the stones, and
preparing of the soil by purging it from all noisome things.

Fourthly, in the Election or Choosing of choice and noblest Plants; such as
were of the best kind to set it with.

Fifthly, in the Fortification and further strengthening it: for he built a
Tower in the midst thereof for the preservation of it.

Sixthly and lastly, in the erection and setting up a Wine Press in it, as
being desirous to supply all things that might be useful for it: So that by
all these he testified, that his care for its good was very great. Before I
come to speak of these particulars, in general observe we,

God is no way wanting or defective in any one point of good husbandry toward
his Church and Vineyard. Doctr. God is no way wanting in any point of good
husbandry for his Churches good.


Is any thing wanting in it? that he supplies: Is any thing hurtful in it?
that he remoues: Is any violence offered to it? that he withstands: No
husbandman shall so labor his ground as God will do it.

And thus does God speak of himself, professing his provident care for the
good of it; Isay 27.2, 3.
In that day sing ye unto her a Vineyard of red wine. I the Lord do keep it;
I will water it every moment* lest any hurt it: Calu. and Musc. in loc.
I will keep it night and day. Where by watering of it, he comprehends
whatsoever belongs to the dressing and manuring of it; so that no duty shall
be left unperformed, whereby the good thereof might be procured. And unto this
he adds vigilancie: for what would it avail to husband a Vine with great
pains and labor, if afterward it should be left open for thieves and beasts
to enter in and waste it at their pleasures? therefore he promises withal,
that he will keep it so that no hurt shall be done unto it, but the fruits
shall have time to ripen, so that afterward they may be reaped in their season.
So our Savior John 15.2.
having compared his Father to an husbandman, sets out his great care in
trimming and dressing of his Vine, by taking away those branches which were
barren, and purging those which were fruitful, so that they might become more
fruitful; omitting no part of his skill, neither to the one or other. The like
care is Luke 13.8.
showed in that Parable propounded by our Savior of the fruitless fig tree;
And in that which the Apostle propounds Heb. 6.7.
of the good and bad soil; in both which the great and constant pains of this
husbandman is declared.



John 15.8 Matthew. 5.16.
Herein is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit: For look as it
tends to that husbandmans praise, whose fields exceed the fields of other men
in fruitful crops; So we being Gods Vineyard, set and planted by his right
hand, do then commend his husbandry, and set forth his praise, when we are
laden with the fruits of righteousness, Phil. 1.11.
as the Apostle shows. No wonder then if God be so diligent in his husbanding
of his Church, seeing the fruitfulness of the Church brings praise and honor
to his name; which is the maine end he proposes to himself in all his actions
(as has been before proved.)

And is God so careful a husbandman of his Church? Cant. 2.2.
Lillies. God is a better husbandman than to suffer these for ever: A day will
come when he will view his field and stub up all winding and wounding briars;
all renting and ranckling thorns that fetch away the clothes, yea skin and
flesh too from off the Lambs of Christ with their entanglements. It may be God
may suffer these for a while as he did the Canaanites in Israel, lest the wild
beasts should break in upon them: and as a wise husbandman permits such to lie
in the hedge for a year or two, and makes them serviceable for the stopping of
a gap or some such purpose: but in the end when they are sear and rotten in
their sins, then he will have them to the fire, for that's their portion.

Secondly, it should admonish all to look unto their cutting, pruning,
smoking, that if it be possible we may be brought into better case.

faith, meekness, patience, thankfulness, heauenly-mindednesse, and the
like; and albeit they have some good desires and unfeigned purposes and
resolutions to bring forth fruit to God; yet withal they find such strong
corruptions in themselves, as pride, vainglory, worldliness, lust, passion,
reuengefulnesse, with such like; as that they be even out of hope, and know not
what to judge of their own estate, but fear they belong not unto God, because
they are no better husbanded; Now let me speak a word to the souls of these,
and let my words be to them as Deuteronomy. 32.2.
the rain to the new-mowen grass: Do thou not see the Husbandman suffer his
ground to lie as though he had forsaken it? and for a time to endure to have
weeds and thistles grow thereon, even when he has a purpose to break it up
with his plough, and bestow much cost thereon? yea and after he has turned it
up, to let it lie; as if he were a weary of his pains; when notwithstanding
becomes with his plow again, and gives it another tilth or two, and then sowes
his seed; being all the while before but a preparing of the soil for the
receiving of it. The like is Gods dealing with his dearest servants; he many
times suffers them to bring forth the weeds of sin, and to lie in their
wickedness for a time (as we see in David, Peter, and some others) as if he
had cast them off; but it is for no other end but to mellow their hard hearts
by humiliation and godly sorrow, and to teach them to distaste their pride, and
not to trust to their own strength hereafter: But notwithstanding, in due
season he does return, restore, and lift them up again. And therefore wait
thou a while. Is thy heart hard and stony? why in his due time he will
mollify and mellow it, and make it fit for the seed of grace, by bringing
down all high hills of presumption, and making deep and long furrows of
mortification in it: Has he begun to scatter the seeds of grace within thy
soul? Why then he will follow thee, and so husband the least dram thereof, be
it but Mat. 13.31, 32.
a grain of mustard seed, as that it shall shoot up to ripeness, and become
as a mighty tree, so that the birds of the air shall come and lodge in the
branches of it. And forasmuch as thy heart is as apt to bring forth sin upon
the least temptation, as the best and fattest ground is to bring forth weeds
upon the sweetest April shower; God will daily look unto thee, and no sooner
shall a weed peep out, but he will with his weeding hook have it up; nor a
superfluous twig sprout forth, but he will with his pruning knife cut it off;
according to that which our Savior teaches, John 15.2.
Every branch that brings forth fruit he purges, that it may bring forth
more fruit. And therefore discourage not thy self, for thy soul is the field
not of the sluggard, but of a careful husbandman, who will so follow thee, as
that thou shall every day grow more fruitful in grace and goodness.

And lastly, hence let good Ministers (who are Gods reprehensions,
obiurgations; and if need require, with the knife of discipline: evermore being
occupied about some thing that may make for the good thereof; remembering that
it is Gods Vineyard we labor in, and not man's; and he is able to recompense
the faithful and punish the unfaithful: which should make us to be the more
circumspect and laborious in our calling, taking heed to what seed we sow, and
to what plants we set. Alas for such as are idle, negligent and regardlesse of
the Vineyard of the Lord; Damasc. Papa, epist. 4. Did. 78.
who like Harlots, so soon as they be brought to bed put forth their children
to other nurses, that themselves might have the better leisure to take their
pleasure and satisfy their lust: how will God allege his own example against
such for their conviction, and strike their ears with that chiding and
unpleasant voice; Away thou disloyal and unprofitable servant into utter
darknssse?

This in general: Come we now to the particulars, wherein this good Husbandman
showed his great care for his Vineyards good. In handling of which I would be
loath to be found too curious: I confess I am of their judgment, Calvin. and
Vrsin. in loc. Theologia symbolica non est argumentatiua.
who think it not so fit, to sift every branch too exquisitely or exactly; for
every string of a Parable is not to be strained, nor too curiously to be
pressed, lest in stead of milk we fetch blood. The principal scope is
especially to be regarded, beyond which nothing is to be urged. I intend
therefore to gather from these branches such fruit as hang lowest for my reach,
and as will readily and naturally, and (as it were) of it own accord fall into
our hands: I hope I shall offend no reasonable hearer nor reader in so doing.

The first particular wherein God commends his love and care to this his
Vineyard, is in the situation of it: He chose for it such a place and plat as
was, First, commodious; for it was a Hill (which place vines love well and best
prosper on.) Secondly, fertile and plenteous; for it was A very fruitful Hill,
Bacchus amat colles, Aquilonem and frigora sylua.
or the horn of the son of oil; by which Hebraisme the fatness and
fruitfulness of the place is set forth, as we have seen before. Put both
together, and thence we learn,

Doctr. God often gives the fat of the earth to his Church for a possession.
The fat of the earth is often given by God to his Church and people for their
possession.

God often gives abundance of temporal good things and earthly blessings to
his own people, as well as to the wicked; and as David shows Psalm. 23.5.
, he prepares a table for them even in the presence of their enemies, and
does anoint their heads with oil, and so fill their cup as that it runs
over. A cloud of witnesses might be brought to justify as much, both out of
the old Testament and new. Out of the old these; Genesis 13.7. and 24.35. Job 1.1,
2, 3. and 31.24, 25.
Abraham, Lot, Isaak, Jacob, Job, David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Iehoshaphat,
Josiah, besides others: All good and rich. Out of the new Testament these;
Matthew. 27.57. Mark 15.43. Luke 23.50. Luke 8.3.
Joseph of Arimathea, a rich man, an honorable Councellor; and he was a good
man and just: Ioanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's Steward, and Susanna, both the
disciples and followers of Christ, with many other of all estates; 1 Cor. 1.26.
Some rich, some noble, some wise, some mighty and of great account, as the
Apostle shows. Agreeable hereunto is that promise, that Psalm. 112.1.3.
Riches and treasures shall be in his house that fears the Lord: And that
Prophecy, that the Esaias 60.11.
Rich should come to the people of God, and join with the Church.

Reasons may be rendered; as these: First, that the

This may serve, first, to restrain men from rash censuring Matthew. 6.24.
Chrysostom. Aret. in loc.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, says our Savior; he does not say (as it is
well observed) Ye cannot have God and Mammon; but, Ye cannot serve God and
Mammon: for he that is the servant of God must be the master of his money: And
so he may have both the one and the other. Aug. in Psalm. 9. Ser. 1. tom. 10.
Poor Lazarus indeed attained unto everlasting life, and the rich Glutton was
tormented; but yet it was rich Abraham which did hold poor Lazarus in his
bosom. And therefore conclude we, It is not wealth, but vice that excludes out
of Gods kingdom: A man may be wealthy and wise; great and gracious. In heaven
you may find such, though they be rarities there.

Prou. 3.16. Sunt Dei dona, ergo in se bona, Aug. epist. 70. ad Bonif.

Ne putentur mala, dantur and bonis; ne putentur summa bona, dantur and malis.


Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honor.
They are the gifts of God then, and therefore good: indeed they are but gifts
of the left hand, and therefore not the chiefest good. They are given to the
good, that we may not undervalue them; and they are given to the bad, that we
may not too highly prize them. It was then but a foolish part of Crates, a man
of great riches and a Philosopher at Thebes, to cast his wealth into the sea,
saying he would destroy it, lest it should destroy him: for neither needed. And
as great folly for Friars, Heremites, and Anchorists, to vow and profess
voluntary poverty upon the like ground. I have seen a rotten logge yield as
much saw-dust, as a piece of good timber: And Jerome Quid facit sub tunica
poenitentis regius animus? Hier.
espied a proud heart under a Monks Cowle.

Object.
If any do object that our blessed Savior calls riches Luke 16.9.
the Mammon of unrighteousness, and Matthew. 13.22. Resp. Crimen non est in rebus,
sed in vsu agentis. Bern.
thorns and snares to choke and catch the soul: They are to know that our
Savior therein aims not at riches as they are in their own nature; nor as
they are used and possessed by the faithful; but as they are abused by the
wicked unto sin, either in their unlawful getting or possessing; and so they
are as a sword in a mad-mans hand: The abuse, and not themselves, is to be
rejected.

The second Particular that manifests Gods care, is his Protecting of it in
building a Fence about it: and that teaches us,

Gods Church and people are strongly fenced in and protected from the rage and
fury of their enemies. Doct. Gods Church is strongly fenced from the rage of
their enemies.


What the Devil confesses of Job, is true of all Gods people; Job 1.10.
Thou have made a hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he
has on every side. The truth of this I will endeavor to show in sundry
particulars.

For first; the unreasonable creatures are as a hedge and defense unto them;
God many times sends armies of them as a valiant garrison to defend his Israel.
Yea Exodus 14.22.
the very waters shall be as a wall of defense unto them, as well on their
right hand as on their left. The cruellest of these creatures God often makes
both their Friends and Patrons.

Secondly, they are oftentimes fenced and protected by the very wicked. Chafe
and straw is good to preserve the corn, though otherwise it be good for little
but to burn. Thus the cursed Canaanites shall remain a while amongst the
Israelites (as before was showed) and not be destroyed at once, but by little
and little; as Gods people got more and more strength, that the wild beasts of
the field might not break in upon them or molest them.

Thirdly, the godly as an holy army do rise up in their defense to help
them; sometimes by making Apology for them; otherwhiles by sending aid and
succor to them; and continually by their prayers which they put up to God for
their preservation and safety.

Fourthly, the glorious Angels Psalm. 103.20.
that excel in strength do Psalm. 34.7.
pitch their tents about them, and Psalm. 91.11.
keep them in all their ways. These are the Esaias 62.
watchmen over the walls of the new Jerusalem, and of the mountains about the
same.

And lastly, in all these and above all these, the Lord himself is the defense
and protection of his people: He is unto them Zach. 2.5.
a wall of fire round about: He is Isay 4.6.
their covert, their shadow, and their place of refuge. He is Psalm. 18.2.
their Rock; their fortress; their strength; their buckler; their high tower,
and their deliverer.

Reason.
Desire we to know the reason why the godly are so hedged about and so strongly
fenced? then take it in a word. There is a near bond and conjunction between
God and them; they are his friends; they are his subjects; they are his
servants; they are his children; they are his Spouse; yea the members of his
own body, according to that saying; Zach. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye.

Atheists, Papists, and all other, cease plotting and devising any thing, which
may be hurtful or pernicious to any of Gods children; for if they do, let
them be well assured their labor will be Psalm. 2.1.
in vain. And he is a very fool that will attempt any thing which he knows
for certainty will never come to good, but prove his bane and ruin; as all
their wicked plots and proiects will most assuredly in the end.

Hence also arises much comfort to Gods people; 2 King. 6.17.
which Elisha and his man saw with bodily eyes, every believer may be assured
of by faith.

No Monarch on the earth has a stronger garrison than the meanest Christian,
neither is any man's safety better provided for than is the godly man's. So that
he may be bold and confident at all times, in all places, and in the midst of
the greatest dangers. Whether he walk abroad or stay at home; whether he be
in company or alone; whether it be in the day or in the night; whether he wake
or sleep; he may sing and say with David, Psalm. 23.4.
I will fear no evil. Let the enemies of the Church band themselves together
against it, to molest it: let Pharaoh and his host pursue Gods Israel: God
will suddenly step forth and cause the cloudy pillar Exodus 14.19.
to remove behind his people, and to be betwixt their enemies and them; As if
God should say, before they touch thee they shall overcome me o Israel. Let us
then go on as God commanded them, and keep our selves in our ways, and then
fear nothing, Verse. 14.
for God will fight for us, let us hold our peace.

The third particular here mentioned is its Elapidation or cleansing: He
gathered out the stones thereof] whereby is meant (as before was showed) the
Idolatrous heathen, whom God Psalm. 44.2.
drove out before his Israel, that they might not hinder this his Vineyards
growth. Hence we infer;

It is not safe nor profitable for the Church to suffer wicked Idolaters, Doct.
Toleration of Idolatry, is not for the Churches safety.
or other obstinate sinners to remain within the Church: Of such Gods Vineyard
must be rid, and his Church purged.

Will you hear in a few words what the Scriptures say for confirmation hereof?
It is commanded in the law, Deuteronomy. 13.1. and seq.
that the false Prophet, and seducing Idolater, whether he be brother, or
son, or daughter, or wife, or friend, should be taken away and slain
without mercy or pity, that all Israel may hear and see and fear, and not
dare to commit the like. And again, Deuteronomy. 29.18.
There shall not be amongst you man, nor woman, nor family, nor tribe, which
shall turn away his heart from the Lord our God, to go and serve the gods of
these Nations. Besides, it forbad Leuit. 19.19.
sowing of the field with mingled seed; Deuteronomy. 22.10.
plowing with an Ox and an Ass together; the wearing of a garment of diverse
things, as linen and woollen mixed together. Now these laws according to the
letter seem ridiculous, Haec ad literam videntur esse ridicula. Ordin. gloss.
in Leuit.
(says the gloss) but the thing that God intends hereby to show is, that he
cannot away with a mixed Religion. The Church of Ephesus Revel. 2.6.
was commended for hating the works of the Nicolaitans: but Pergamus Revel.
2.14.
was reproved, for suffering them that maintained the Doctrine of Balaam: and
Thyatira Revel. 2.20.
blamed, for suffering Iesabel to teach and deceive Gods servants. And why in
Scripture are Idolaters called, Ios. 23.13. Judge. 2.1.
stumbling blocks, snares, thorns, traps, whips, and destruction, but because
they prove so to the people amongst whom they live? Israel found them so, and
England did no less in Queen Mary's days: and France does so. For, from
whence spring these commotions, tumults, horrible massacres, and bloody
tragedies, but from the diversity of Religion amongst them?

light with darkness, or God with Belial? The Lord can never digest two
contraries, though never so well mixed or wisely tempered in matters of
religion, as the Church of Laodicea Revel. 3.16.
shows. Hereupon zealous Elijah exhorts the people after this manner; 1
King. 18.21.
If the Lord be God, follow him; and if Baal be God, go after him.

1 Cor. 5.6.
Do ye not know that a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump? Sin
therefore being infectious, the sinner is not to be tolerated in the assembly
of the righteous.

Take we occasion hence to magnify Gods name, Monks, Friars, Massemongers,
and Jesuits, are whipped out of the Temple, and driven from amongst us: He has
pulled down that great Idol of the Mass, with other Idols that were set up
to be adored, and has abolished the manifold heresies and corruptions of
false doctrine: And withal has blessed us with so religious and prudent a
King, as is a constant Defender of the Faith, and an open adversary to
superstition and Idolatry. What shall we now render to the Lord for all these
testimonies and tokens of his love toward us, but take the cup of Salvation,
and praise with tongue and heart the name of God? acknowledging his goodness
in delivering us from the Romish bondage, laboring to bring forth the fruits
of the Gospel, to the glory of his name and our own endless salvation.

This likewise serves for the Admonition, 1. Of Ministers, whom God has
reposed such great trust and confidence in, as to be the dressers and keepers
of his Vineyard; that we be found faithful, and (what lies in us) remove
whatsoever may any way annoy it: For which end, Christ has not only committed
unto us Ephesians. 6.
the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, wherewith we may Tit. 1.
convince gainsayers, but also Matthew. 16.19.
the keys of the kingdom, that men being convicted and not converted, nor
reclaimed, they may be cast out and expelled, either for a time as the
incestuous 1 Cor. 5.5.
Corinthian was, or for ever even unto the coming of the Lord: Which kind of
excommunication, the Apostle calls 1 Cor. 16.22.
Maran-atha (of Mara) the Lord, (and Atha) he comes, being interposed for
sound sake. Which censure being so grievous as it is, (for it is a delivering 1
Cor. 5.5.
up to Satan) ought not be inflicted rashly for every trifle, but deliberatly
in matters of weight and moment, and in such cases as expressly shut out of the
kingdom of heaven, such as those the Apostle mentions, 1 Corinthians. 6. because
it is a declaration of that which is by God done in heaven. In the execution
whereof, let all such as it does concern, beware of filthy lucre, and
faithfully discharge what is committed to them, not suffering the notoriously
profane to remain within the Church, lest others be endangered and infected
by their society; for 2 Timothy 2.17.
their very words (and much more their conversation) creeps and corrupts as
a gangreene.

Verbum informans, virga reformans.
2. Magistrates, who must second the word of information, with the rod of
reformation, and back the Ministers of the Word, by the use of the temporal
sword, which they must not Romans 13.4.
bear for naught, but as the Ministers of God, take vengeance on them that do
evil. These are Gods Surrogates and the Preachers hopes: Our words are thought
air, where their hands do not compel. Good laws are made against the wicked
and profane; but what are we the better for Gods own laws without
execution? If those who have the charge imposed, and the sword put in their
hands, stand like the picture of S. George, with his hand up, yet never strike,
it will fare full ill with the Vineyard of the Lord. Let it be their care with
David, Psalm. 101.8.
carely to destroy the wicked of the Land, and to cut off all wicked doers from
the City of the Lord. Cant. 2.15.
Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines; for our vines have
tend^r grapes: Let neither young nor old be spared. And of all other, let that
Romish Reinard and his C^^s (extrauagant Priests and Jesuits, with other
obstinate Recusants) be hunted, as most hurtful to our Vineyard.

For what think you of these Positions: 1. Decret. Papal. apud Great. cause. 15.
Gloss.
Neighbors if Heretics (meaning thereby Protestants) may lawfully be spoiled
of their goods, though indeed it were better (say they) to do it by the
authority of the Judge.

2. Alanus Cardi. and Parsonus.
It is lawful for Parishioners to defraud Protestant Ministers of their
Tithes, and of this, Non est dubium, say they, there is no doubt to be made.

3. Simancha Epis. Pacens. Instit. Cath. tit. 46.. 73.
Men are not bound to restore that which they have received, or to satisfy
their creditours, who are tainted with heresy.

4. Simanch. Instit. Gregor. 13.
A Catholic wife is not bound to give due benevolence to her husband, being a
Protestant.

5. Simanch. quo sup. tit. 46.. 74. and Alan. Card.
By the heresy of the father a child is freed from his obedience: So that if
a Priest returning into England, finds his father to be a Protestant, he may
deny him to be his father, meaning that he is not such a one as he ought to
acknowledge for his father.

6. Apud Great. gloss. in Decret. lib. 5. ex Decret. Greg. 9. Cause. 23. q. 8.
That Heretics may not be termed either children or kindred; but according to
the old Law, thy hand must be upon them to spill their blood.

7. Bellar. lib. 5. de Romans Pontif. cap. 67. and 4.
That it is not lawful for Christians to tolerate an heretical King: they may
expel him, depose him, yea murder him. And this (they say) is agreeable to
the Apostolic doctrine.

8. Simanch. Instit. Cathol. cap. 45. Sect. 13.
If war be once proclaimed by them against Sectaries (that is, in their
language, us Protestants) then it is lawful for any private man, to take,
spoil, kill such Sectaries, and burn their houses over their heads.

9. Paulus Windebek in delib. de haeret. extirp. page 414.
It is lawful for Catholic Princes to make leagu^ with Protestants, only for
their own advantage: as for example, to dispatch some businesses which hinder
them from falling upon Protestants with their whole forces.

10. Card. Tol. lib. 4. Instit. Sacerd. cap. 21.
. And that one may swear with Equivocation and meant all reservation, is good
positive Divinity with them.

By these and the like Positions, which they maintain, we plainly see, how
they dissolve all bands of humane fellowship, and strangle the vital spirits
of humane society. Whether it be safe then to suffer such, judge ye. Besides,
as is their doctrine, such is their practice, in deposing Kings and Emperors,
practicing hellish treasons, justifying the murdering of Princes, making
leagues only for their own ends; breaking their promises, oaths, vows, at
their pleasure. Can it then be well with the Vineyard, if these Foxes be at
liberty? Can it be well with the Lambs of Christ, if these Wolves be suffered
to range about? Can Israel enjoy the Land of Canaan in quiet, if these
Canaanites be not subdued as servants to the Congregation, or subverted as
enemies? Let therefore all such Magistrates as tender the good of their King
and Crown, Land and State, do their best to watch and catch these Foxes:
lenity and mildness has long been used. Now Doct. Kings Sermon at
White Hall, Nouemb. 5. Anno. 1608.
(to use the words of a late worthy Prelate) some justice with mercy would do
well: some frosts with the fire that warmes these Snakes in the bowels of our
Land: some pluckes at these thorns and prickles in our eyes (the mean time)
and will be hereafter in our sides and hearts; left if Justice go on to sleep
as it were her dead sleep, the tares of disloyalty, treasons and seditions,
be so thick sown in the field of this Kingdom, by those envious ones, the
Seedesmen of Rome, that it will be difficulty and mastrie afterward to remove
them.

3 And let all good Christians, of what estate or degree soever, beware of
having any inward society or familiarity with Idolaters, or other obstinate
sinners and offenders. It is worthy our remembering, how Z^z^m. lib. 7. cap. 7.
when the Emperor Theodosius senior was desirous to confer with Eunomius the
Arrian Bishop, his wife, Placilla the Empress, very earnestly dissuaded him,
lest he being perverted by his speeches, should begin to like of his
heresy; and surely there is more danger of being infected by them, than of
doing good upon them: Easier is it to draw a profane person from hell-gates,
than to remove an opinion from a wilful mind. Let us all with Genesis 35.2.
Jacob cleanse and purge our families of these and such like baggage, not
suffering any Psalm. 101.
ungodly person to dwell with us. We see how it is in the body; when nature
has any evil or unprofitable humors that oppress the stomach, it is forced
to cast them out for the preservation of the health of other parts. So should
it be with us; if we perceive our families to be endangered by obstinate and
obdurate sinners, it should vomit them out as raw and undigested humors by
timely eiection, lest the whole head wax heavy, and the whole body sickly,
and so the vital parts languish. To conclude, let us all pray, and pray
heartily for this Vineyard in this Land, as all are directed by authority:
Prayers appointed for the fifth of November, the first after the second Lesson.
Lord strengthen the hands of our gracious King, the Nobles and Magistrates of
the Land, that with judgment and justice, they may cut off and root out that
Babylonish and Antichristian Sect, out of the Confines and limits of this
Kingdom, that they may never prevail against us, nor triumph in the ruins of
this Church. And with our Prayer let all protest with one joint voice to God;
Psalm. 16.2.4.
Thou art my Lord, etc. their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after
another god: their drinke-offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up
their names into my lips.

Now in the next place consider we of Gods great love to this his Vineyard, in
regard of the Choice Vine wherewith he planted it. It was not of an ordinary,
but of the best and noblest kind. Which whether it be meant of all the seed of
Abraham in general (as some would have it) or of some of the choicest persons
of the house of Judah in particular (as of David, Solomon, and other such godly
Kings) (as some other take it) yet this will follow,

The godly and their seed are the noblest plants and choicest persons. Such as
are godly, Doctr. The godly are the choicest, chiefest.
such are most excellent.

Psalm. 16.2, 3.
My goodness (says David) extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are
in the earth, and to the excellent in whom is all my delight. Where see how
that Kingly Prophet honors such as are Saints, with the name of Excellent,
and Worthies of the earth. And Solomon his son affirms as much, when he
tells us, Prou. 12.26.
The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor; i. he is better beloved
and graced of God, and has that in him, which makes him more honorable, than
any other who is unrighteous and sinful. And our Prophet Isaiah calls the
godly in plain terms, Isay 4.5.
The glory: Upon all the glory (says he) shall be a defense. Thus as the godly
go before all other in virtue, so they go before them in honor; and as they
exceed others in piety, so they surmount them in excellency.

Reason.
And that this is truth, viz. That the godly are the noblest and choicest
persons, may appear further, if we consider,

1. Their Race and Pedigree: for they are descended 1 Pet. 2.9.
of the blood royal, they 1 John 3.9
are borne of God, being 2 Cor. 6.18.
sons and daughters of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. And whereas other
men are called, children of the earth; or Colloss. 3.6.
children of disobedience; or Hos. 10.9.
children of iniquity; or Ephesians. 2.3.
children of wrath; or 1 Samuel 26.16.
children of death; or John 8.44. and
children of the Devil; or 17.2.
children of perdition; or Matthew. 23.15.
children of Hell; we shall find that all the godly are called, either John
12.36.
children of light; or Acts 3.25.
children of the Prophets; or Romans 9.8.
children of the Promise; or Mark. 2.19.
children of the wedding chamber; or Matthew. 8.12.
children of the Kingdom. Thus for birth and blood they exceed all other of
the earth besides.

2. Their kindred are vere rich and noble: For their Father they have him Psalm.
95.3.
in whose hands are all the corners of the earth, and the strength of all hills
is his also. 4.5.
The Sea is his, for he made it; and his hands prepared the dry land. A great
God is he, and a great King above all gods. For their Mother they have a great
Psalm. 45.9.
Queen, who has Kings daughters and honorable women for her attendants,
verse. 13.
being clothed in raiment of gold and needle work. For their Brethren, they
have Christ, the great heir of the world, Heb. 2.11.
who is not ashamed to call them Brethren: and all Saints upon the earth
besides. Now 1 Samuel 18.23.
seems this a light thing unto you?

3. Their Place and Dignity is very great; they are in high place and office,
being made by Christ Revel. 1.6.
Kings and Priests unto God his Father: They are in high authority to command
and rule, like Kings and Priests, who have the chiefest rooms of all.

4. Their Attendants are honorable. The Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11.
glorious Angels that are above, and which excel in strength, do evermore
wait upon them, and are become Heb. 1.14.
ministering spirits sent forth to minister for those who are heirs of
salvation. Yea Kings and Queens Isay 49.23.
are but as nurses to them, and they must do them homage, worshipping with
their faces toward the earth, and licking up the dust under their feet.

What shall we need to speak of other things, wherein one man is wont to
excel another, and thereby wax glorious and become renowned? Who are wise
besides these? Are not these only Deuteronomy. 4.6.
A wise, prudent and understanding people? Who are valiant but these? Are not
these the 2 King. 2.12. and 13.14.
Chariots and horsemen of Israel? Who go fine but these? Are not these they
Revel. 3.5. and 19.8.
who are arrayed with pure fine linen and shining? Do not these go clothed
with the golden and silken robes of Jesus Christ, and of his Spirit? Who fare
so well as these? Are not these fed John 6.33.
with Manna, the bread of life? Have not these prepared for them, Isay 25.6.
A feast of fat things, even a feast of fined wines, of fat things full of
marrow, of wines fined and purified? Who are out of debt but these? Has not
Christ discharged them of all their Matthew. 6.12.
sins (which are called debts) and Coloss. 2.14.
cancelled the bonds? Who have peace within and without but these? Romans 5.1.
^hil. 4.7. 2 Cor. 5.19.
God is now reconciled with them, so that they have peace not only with God
himself, and his creatures; but also with themselves in their own souls and
consciences. Who enjoy health but these? Their souls are sound and well; and
daily they go on Psalm. 84.7.
from strength to strength, till they appear perfect in Sion. Who speaks so
pure a language as these? Their language is the Isay
language of Canaan; out of their mouths Coloss. 4.6.
no filthy, unsavory, nor rotten communication does proceed. What shall I say
more? Who can compare with these, who have the heavens for their 1 Pet. 1.4.
inheritance; the Scriptures for their evidences; the Sacraments for their
seals; and the Holy Ghost for their assurer: 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
Who have all things theirs, and they are Christ's, and Christ is Gods?

The godly are the choicest plants and chiefest personages; why then are such
most contemned, and accounted according to S. Paul's saying, 1 Cor. 4.13.
as the filth of the world, and off-scowring of all things? But let me say to
worldlings, as the Apostle of those great ones who put the Lord of life to
death; 1 Cor. 2.8.
If they had known, they would not have crucified the Lord of life and glory.
So did thou but know who these are, and what manner of persons they are, whom
thou thus despisest, thou would more respect them; yea love and reverence
them; nay, kiss the very ground they go upon. Indeed they seem outwardly
black and weather-beaten; but what then? Yet under that baseness and
blackness is hid great honor and beauty. Within that leather purse is a
precious pearl: In those earthen pots is abundance of golden treasure. As
mean and base as they seem in thy eyes, they are children of God; great
Heites and Princes, and shall one day reign with Christ in glory. Be therefore
well advised; and disdain them not. Had 2 Samuel 16.
Shemei ever thought that David should ever have recovered again the Crown
and Kingdom, and so Sovereignty over him, he would have spared his cursed
speeches used against him, and have been more temperate. Or had Joseph's
brethren as much believed his dreams, Genesis 37.11.
that they should come and bow to him, as they envied him for them, they would
have used him with more mildnes; but they when they sold him thought never to
have seen him more, much less did they expect to have been told of their
cruelty from his mouth. And yet (what ere they thought) it so fell out
contrary to all their expectations. Now when they hear him which was a Ruler
in Egypt say, Genesis 45.4.
I am Joseph your brother whom you sold; how amazedly do you think they looked
one upon another? with what palenesse and silence do they stand before him?
Wonder, Doubt, Reverence, Fear, Hope, Guiltiness, struck them at once; the
more they considered, they wondered the more; and the more they believed, the
more they feared: for those words, I am Joseph whom you sold, seemed to sound
thus much to their guilty thoughts; You are murderers, and I am a Prince in
spite of you; my power and this place give me all opportunities of revenge; my
glory is your shame, my life your danger, etc. Even thus it is and shall be
with all wicked ones: When they revile and mock Gods children, do they think
they shall ever see Joseph more? or ever come and bow before him and do him
reverence? Alas, they have no such thought: and yet they must and shall, for
Joseph will appear, though not in Egypt, yet in Heaven, to their confusion
and shame: Then will they be vexed and amazed, who now set Gods children at
naught; then will they change their minds, and sob and sigh for grief of
spirit, and say within themselves; These are the men and women whom we
disdained and contemned, and called Puritanicall fools, and precise fellows:
These are they whom we slandered and molested: But now we see how highly they
are advanced, being counted amongst the children of God, having their portion
with the Saints. Oh that such as vex and molest the righteous, either with
virulent tongues, as Shemei 2 Samuel 16.
; or with violent hands, as Herod Acts 12
; or with both, as Julian the Apostata; whether by themselves, as Diotrephes 3
John 9.
; or by other, as the Scribes and Pharisees Matthew. 26.3.
; whether closely, like Iezabel 1 King. 21.
; or openly, like Pharaoh Exodus 5.
, would think of this change and alteration: And how soon it may come, who
knows? But certainly it will come, and then what the Psalmist speaks shall
infallibly be verified, Psalm. 112.9, 10.
Their horn shall be exalted with glory: The wicked shall see it, and be
angry: he shall gnash with his teeth, and consume away: the desire of the
wicked shall perish.

Instruction, that we learn highly to esteem of such as be truly godly, seem
they never so mean or base in the worlds eye. Thus did S. Lawrence, Eusebius.
that blessed Martyr of Christ Jesus, who being demanded of the Tyrant, where
the riches of the Church lay (looking for store of gold, and such like
treasure) he gathered together a multitude of poor Christians, telling the
Tyrant that there was the riches and beauty of the Church, and albeit they were
now ragged and unseemly in the eyes of men, yet they should one day be clad in
white robes, and shine in majesty and glory before the throne of God. Aeneas
Syluius. cap. 20.
The like (as I have read) was the practice of Ingo an ancient King of the
Draues and Veneds, who making upon a time a stately feast, invited thereunto
all his Nobles; (who were at that time Pagans, and unconverted to the Christian
faith) and a multitude of poor Christians: His Nobles he set in his Hall
below, and those poor Christians with himself in his presence chamber,
entertaining them with the royallest cheer, and kingliest attendance that
might be. At which when his Nobles wondered, he told them this he did not as
he was king of the Draues, but as king of another world, wherein these should
be his companions and fellow Princes: To them he would give civil due in the
government of the Commonwealth, but these he must love and honor in his
heart, as most honored and best beloved or God. Read this to thy shame who
know not how to show the least respect unto a Christian: and if thou would
not have it to condemn thee, let it mend thee; causing thee to be more
respective in thy carriage toward such as serve the Lord: So shall thou imitate
God like a good child herein, and get a testimony to thy own conscience,
that thou art Gods John 3.2.
because thou love his image: which mark of a child of God may comfort thee
when all others in the time of temptation may fail thee.

Hence also we may have Direction how to become Cant. 1.8.
Pharaohs horses had costly trappings, and the Midianites Camels Judge. 8.26.
had chains of gold about their necks: Grace and goodness do more deck and
adorn than all these do or can. This is that which the Apostle calls Romans
2.7.
Seeking glory and honor by well-doing: and only is that whereby Heb. 11.12.
Abel, Noah, Abraham, and the rest obtained a good report. How grossly then are
such deceived as think godliness does cause contempt, and the way to become
honorable is to grow graceless and sinful? For, can any wise man think that
the dunghill of wickedness is a fit Mine to dig out a good estimation; or
that the puddle water of vanity will make a man seem beautiful and fair? or
that the only way to make a man sweet is to tumble in a iakes? Certainly figgs
grow not upon thorns; neither is the sweet ointment of a good name, compounded
of those stinking ingredients, Pride, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Profaneness, or
the like: Famam extendere factis hoc virtutis opus.
A good name arises out of honest things (as the Poet could say) and not from
actions sinful and dishonest. Cain and Esau we know were wicked men, and dead
many hundred years ago; yet the Scripture never speaks of them but with
great reproach, as Profane Esau: Heb. 12.16. 1 John 3.12.
Cain who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother: And so Judas who is
never almost spoken of but he is called by the name of traitor. The Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles, have likewise been a long time dead, and yet how
lovely are their names! Scripture never speaks of them but with great respect;
Romans 4.
as, Abraham the Father of the faithful: Psalm. 90. title. 2 Samuel 23.1.
Moses the servant of God: David the sweet singer of Israel: And S. Peter, S.
Paul, S. John, and so the rest. Thus the wicked leave a filthy savor behind
them as a greasy snuff, when it goes out, which every one that passes by
stops his nose at: but the godly leave their names behind them for a blessing;
the very remembrance of them is sweet; and like the end of some sweet wax
candle, which every one loves to have the sent of, even after it has left
burning. Would thou then be counted excellent? See that thou do Ruth 4.11.
worthily in Ephratha and so be famous in Bethlehem. It is virtue only that
can emblazon thy name, and that will do it. A field of sincerity charged with
deeds of piety, cannot but be accomplished with a crest of glory. But if thou
live licentiously and profanely, so loathsome will thy abominable life make
thee, as that thou shall scarce ever come into mention of Gods people, but with
a style like that of Jeroboam the son of Nebat 2 King. 10.29.
, that made Israel to sin.

Cons^lation, let this serve, to the godly poor despised by the rich and
worldly wise. Know thou for thy comfort, thou art a choice plant in Gods
account, and he that knows the true worth of things esteems thee precious,
and holds thee for one of his jewels of great price (whateuer men do deem.
Malach. 3.17.
) And when that day of separation shall come, he will then make it known to
all the world, First by his setting thee on his right hand as one of his
darlings, Matthew. 25.
whom he purposes to advance and honor, when all other shall be turned to the
left hand as base and contemptible. Secondly, by that his gracious call and
sweet sentence, Come thou blessed, etc. The prosecuting of this point would be
very comfortable: but I hasten; and now come to the fifth Particular here
mentioned, whereby Gods love to this his Vineyard was manifested in these words:

He built a Tower in the midst of it] which was as well for the beautifying and
adorning it, Text.
as for the further strengthening of it. By which Tower whether we understand
the glorious Temple in Jerusalem, that stately edifice and building; or
Jerusalem it self whereunto all the Tribes resorted, Psalm. 122.4.
and the nations came to worship; it will lead us to this Observation: that

The Beauty and Bulwark of a place is Gods service and worship erected and
set up in that place. Doctr. Gods worship beautifies and strengthens that place
where it is set up.
For neither is Jerusalem nor Zion here compared to a Tower (especially) in
regard of the stately buildings, multiplicity of Turrets, aspiring Towers, or
the like: but in regard of Religion that was found in it. In Jerusalem was the
continual worship of God; In the Temple the continued service of God; and this
was it which gave the grace and countenance; this made it the golden head of
the picture; Lady of the world; seat of the Monarchy; and as Micah (agreeing
with this of our Prophet) calls it, the Mich. 4.8.
Tower of the flock, and the strong hold of the daughter of Gods people.

We read 1 Samuel 4.20, 21
how that good woman the wife of Phinehas, upon hearing tidings of taking of
the Arc, with very grief fell in travel, and gave up the ghost: before whose
death neither could the birth of a manchild, nor the kind and comfortable
speeches of those women then present with her, any whit comfort or content her;
but she cries out, The glory is departed from Israel, because the Ark of God
was taken; yea she doubles her passionate complaint, and again with her last
breath says, The glory is departed from Israel, for the Ark of God is taken:
And thereupon she gives her son a name, and calls him Ichabod, as much as to
say, where is the glory, or rather No glory: and all because the Ark of God
was taken. And thus not State, not wealth, not outward magnificence, but the
presence of God in his Ordinances was ever accounted to be the glory of that
people.

And so the Apostle in reckoning up the privileges and prerogatives of the
Jews, tells us, Romans 9.4, 5.
That to them belonged the Adoption and the [Glory] meaning thereby the Arc
which was a token of Gods presence, whence God also heard the prayers and
praises of his people, and gave forth Oracles unto such as sought him.

As it was their glory, so it was their Strength. By it great things had been
for them wrought. Before it the waters of Jordan were divided; Ios. 3.14.
The Idol Dagon was laid flat upon the floor; Ios. 6.11.
The strong walls of Jericho were demolished by the presence of it; before it
their enemies cannot stand. And this caused Israel too superstitiously to trust
in the Arc of wood, when they had God their enemy: for when they fell before
their enemies, they thus advise; 1 Samuel 4.3.
Let us fetch the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto us, that
when it comes amongst us it may save us out of the hands of our enemies.
Besides this that has been said and showed of the Arc, for making good this
point, that of the Prophet Isaiah might be brought, Jsaiah 26.1.
In that day shall this Song be sung in the land of Judah; We have a strong
city, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks, etc. But I hasten to
the vs^.

Stay and Pillar of our Land. Satan and his instruments have ever charged true
Religion and the professors of it to be the authors of all contentions, tumults
and insurrections, and the greatest enemies of States and Kingdoms: which
imputation the father of lies has laid before the eyes of great ones to
alienate the minds of Princes both from it and them. Thus was Hest. 3.8. Dan.
3.12. Acts 17.18.19.26.24.5.
Ahashuerosh incensed against the Jews; and Nebuchadnezar against the three
companions of Daniel, as if they had been disobeyers of the kings laws and
contemners of his edicts. So S. Paul was often accused by the Stoics in
Athens, by Demetrius, by Tertullus, that he was a pestilent fellow, a mouer of
sedition amongst the Jews through the world, and a sect-master. And in the time
of the ten first persecutions, if there were any public plague or calamity
fallen on city or country, the heathen would straight cry out upon the
Christians, accusing them to be the authors and causers of it: If Nilus
ouer-flowed not her banks; if the clouds withheld their rain; if the earth
quaked; if famine increased; if the sword spoiled; if pestilence continued; by
and by the poor Christians, as the sheep of Christ, were cast unto the Lions:
They were charged to make privy conspiracies; to devise secret counsels
against the Commonwealth; with the murdering of children, and eating man's
flesh, as Eusebius does record. Eccles. Hist.
Thus Nero when he set Rome on fire, laid the fault on them. And where would
the Papists have laid the gunpowder treason, had the blow been given, but upon
the Puritans? But as the Wolf in the fable (oh that it were but a fable) when
he sees the Lamb drinking at the poole, comes blundring into the water and
troubles it, then quarrels with the Lamb for troubling the water; Sic nocet
innocuo nocuus, causamque nocendi Quaerit: So though Ahab the Wolf troubles
all Israel, 1 King. 18.17, 18.
yet Eliah the Lamb shall be accused for it. And herein the wicked plays
Athaliahs part, who cried out; Treason, treason, when she was the traitor and
none else. Therefore as Eliah answered the crime objected, and rejected the
same back, that it rebounded at him that gave the charge* so do I. It is not
the godly and religious, but you irreligious and profane, who are the troublers
of this Kingdom.

Sampsons strength lay in his hair, so does the strength of our land consist
herein: Judge. 16.19.
which if it should be shaued and deprived of (which we trust shall never be)
though every shower were a shower of gold, every stone in the land a pearl,
every beggar an honorable Senator, every fool as wise as Solomon, every
weakling as strong as Sampson; yet our wealth, honor, strength, wisdom, and
glory are gone, and we shall sing a doleful Miserere with 1 Samuel 4.21.
Phineas his wife, Ichabod; The glory of England is gone; for Religion is gone:
And therefore let every one both Magistrates and others, as they love their
souls, their bodies, their King, their Country, their peace and prosperity,
pray heartily, and pray continually for the establishing of it: esteeming it
for Gods best friend, the Kings best friend, the Courts best friend, the Cities
best friend, and the Countries best friend, and best friend to us all: Prou.
4.8.
Exalt her therefore, and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee (oh
England) to honor, if thou do still embrace her.

The sixth and last particular follows, and that is the erection and setting up
of a Winepresse in it, for the pressing of the grapes and saving of the Wine.
And this (says one) shows what hope the Vinitor conceived of the fertility
of his Vineyard: as if the Prophet should say; He nothing doubting of the
fruitfulness thereof, made a Winepresse therein.

About which Winepresse our Expositors are very various in their judgments:
and yet the opinions of the most of them have some probable ground: amongst
all, theirs seems probablest who understand thereby the Word and discipline.
But for as much as we have not here so sure footing as we have had in the
former (in that we want Scripture for the seconding such an exposition) I will
content my self with this general observation:

God has his Winepresse for the pressing, Doct. God has his Winepresse for
the pressing o^ his Vineyards grapes.
pruning and discovering of his Vineyards fruit.

The truth of this I will endeavor to prove by an induction of particulars.

First, the Word preached is an excellent Winepresse for this end: This
discouers what is in a man; and therefore it is compared to an Matthew. 3.10.
Axe put to the root of the tree, because it discouers who are sound and
unsound, as the Axe does: For albeit by the eye it is not so soon perceived
what trees are good and what naught (for many a one there may be which is
strait without, having a goodly top, and fair rind, and yet rotten and hollow
within) yet when the Axe is brought and laid to the root, and it felled, then
what was before unknown, is manifestly seen. In the same respect it is
compared to a Verse. 12.
Fan in Christ's hand, whereby he does purge his floor. Chafe and Corn,
good and bad, lie together upon an heap a while; but when the Gospel comes
(it being preached with power and a good conscience) it blows so mightily, as
with the gust thereof hypocrites are scattered, and the faithfulness of such,
as with honest and good hearts embrace it, is revealed and made known. After
the same manner is the Word compared unto Ierem. 23.29.
fire, which has a double effect; to waste stubble and dross, and to purify
that which is refineable, as gold and silver: It enflames some men's hearts with
a zealous love to God and his glory; and sets others on fire to persecute
and impugn it: And to a Heb. 4.12.
Sword with two edges, which cutteth both ways, and diuides between the
ioints and the sinews, and the marrow and the bones; it does anatomize the
hearts of men, and discover the soundness or unsoundness of them: And to
Ephesians. 5.13.
Light, which makes all things clear and manifest, which before lying in the
dark could not be discerned nor discovered. Thus we see the nature of the
Word, which like a Winepresse will make known what is within; laying open the
poison that lurked in the wicked, and the grace and goodness that lay hid in
the bosom of the godly.

Secondly, Crosses and Afflictions wherewith God exercises his Church, are as
Gods Winepresse. By these he does discover what is in his people that profess
his name. Thus Moses said Deuteronomy. 8.2.
he led his people Israel forty years in the Wilderness, For to humble them,
and prove them, to know (that is, to make known) what was in their hearts. And
so God speaking of the remainder of his people, whom he did not utterly cut off
in judgment, says thus: Zach. 13.9.
I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is
refined, and will try them as gold is tried: And S. Peter comforting the
faithful in their afflictions, speaks after this manner; 1 Pet. 4.12, 13.
Dearly beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is
amongst you to prove you, as though some strange thing were come unto you, etc.
And Saint James after the same manner calls afflictions trials, and James 1.3.
Temptations, because they serve to try us what is in us, and make it known.
And indeed afflictions are blabs and tell-tales (as one says well) they will
not conceal the truth, but make it known: they press out of the godly that
sap and juice of grace which is within them; yea the more they are pressed, the
more the liquor of grace distilleth from them; the more abundant they are in
prayer, confession, humiliation, etc. But from the wicked they can press
nothing but noisome, stinking putrefaction; all they send forth in the day of
trouble, is railing, murmuring, and impatiencie.

Thirdly, Discipline or the Spiritual censures of the Church, executed against
such members of the Church as have fallen into any scandalous offense, the
highest degree whereof is Excommunication, and debarring from the public
ordinances of God, and society of the faithful, both public and private, are
as a Winepresse. And though it be not absolutely of the essence of the Church,
no more than the Winepresse is essential to the Vineyard, yet it cannot well
be wanting in the Church, no more than a Winepresse can be wanting in a
Vineyard. By and in the true use whereof, the sinner becomes humbled and
reformed 1 Cor. 5.5. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
: Others are terrified and made afraid 1 Timothy 5.20.
: And the ordinances of God are kept in reverence 1 Cor. 5.6, 7.
. The sweet juice that this ordinance of God wringeth forth, S. Paul shows in
his second Epistle to the Corinthians: 2 Cor. 7.11.
For behold (says he) this selfsame thing that you sorrowed after a godly
sort, what carfulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves,
yea what indignation, yea what fear, yea what vehement desire, yea what zeal,
yea what revenge; In all things ye have approved your selves to be clear in
this matter.

All this may serve to stir up every one to look that their hearts be
upright and sincere; Use.
and our graces sound and saving: for God will in time discover us. His
Wine Press is for some use and end: we must assuredly be brought unto the
trial; first or last, he will press us to the purpose; and then what will
become of fair shows and flourishes? The house that is built upon the sands
makes as goodly a show as any other in a fair Sunshine day; and stands as
well while the weather is calm: but when the winds arise, and the rain
beats, then it falls, and is not able to stand out the trial: Matthew. 7.27.
And the fall of that house is great (says our blessed Savior.) If thou be
not found at the core, thy false-heartednesse will appear; when thou come
unto the Press, it cannot be hid. Happily the word and discipline has
discovered abundance of corruption in thee, and caused thee to murmur, repine,
and grudge, etc. Well, assure thy self, the Wine Press of affliction will
discover far more, when thou shall be brought unto it: (and how soon we may
be tried therewith, God only knows.) Lesser and lighter afflictions make thee
as the raging Sea, Isay 57.20, 21.
foming out mire and dirt: what then will common afflictions and heavier
persecutions, which may befall the Church, cause thee to do? And yet as S.
Paul says concerning heresies, so say I of these, 1 Cor. 11.19.
they must needs be, that the approved may be known. Would thou then be able
to endure the press? Look well unto thy inside; thy faith must be 1 Timothy 1.5.
unfeigned; thy love unfeigned, 1 John 3.18.
in deed and truth; thy repentance an unfeigned Joel 2.
renting of the heart; and thy wisdom Iam. 5.17.
without dissimulation* and then thou need not fear it; for as good grapes,
thou art pressed to be preserved and not spoiled. A child or a fool indeed,
would think a goodly cluster of grapes spoiled, when it is cast into the
press: but a wise man knows, if it be not cast in, it will perish within a
few days. If it had not been so, we had wanted the Vine we now have. Thus the
precious liquor distilled from thee, De hoc liquore saecla futura bibent.
shall be kept to refresh the heart Judge. 9.13.
both of God and man; out of that gracious and sweet juice, God will glorify
himself and comfort others. And thus much of these particulars, wherein the
great care and diligence of this Vinitor did appear for his Vineyards good.
Now see the success.

Text.
He looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild
grapes.]

His hope and expectation was to find grapes in the vine, or clusters of
grapes, as the word notes: But it deceived the hope and expectation of the
Lord, and (like a degenerated plant) brought forth wild grapes: Not leaves or
no fruit; but (as the word signifies) stinking and bitter fruit; such a kind
of fruit, as in smell was most odious and stinking, and in taste most loathsome
and unsavory, being neither answerable to the nature and kind of the noble
plant, nor yet to the care and cost of the good and painful husbandman.

What God expected, for his cost and pains, [He looked for grapes.]

What it returned, and how it answered the hope and expectation of the
Vine-dresser, [It brought forth wild grapes.]

Before I come to any observation, Quest.
let me make answer to a question. Some may demand, whether God can fail of
his end in any of his actions, or be deceived of his hope and expectation?

The answer is, Answer.
Gods knowledge is absolute and perfect, knowing all things from all eternity
at one instant; Zanch. de naturae Dei. c. 2. quaest. 13.
and it is most certain, and cannot any way be deceived, all things being
known of him as they are, and all things are as they are known of him. The
future degeneration and ingratitude of this people, the Lord foresaw even from
the beginning, and knew full well what he should receive from them; and causes
his servant Moses to sing and write thereof, even before they came into the
Land of Deuteronomy. 31.20, 29.
Canaan; and so he tells them by this our Prophet, that he knew they would
deal very treacherously with him Isay 48.8.
. This then is not spoken, as if Gods hope and expectation were uncertain, or
could be frustrate, or as if he were doubtful what would follow, but by a
(...).
figure he thus speaks: Showing thereby; 1. What they ought to have done; 2.
How acceptable and pleasing it would have been to him, if they had so done.

Now to some Instructions: and first from Gods expectation, this we note:

Where God has taken pains in planting and husbanding, Doctr. Where God has
taken pains, he expects fruit.
there he justly expects fruit somewhat answerable to his pains.

He looks for the fruits of his travels, from them on whom he has bestowed
it. Cant. 6.11.
I went down into the garden of nuts (says the Well-beloved) to see the fruits
of the valley, and to see whether the vine flourished, and the pomegranats
budded. He having purged and dressed his garden, came to see how his
handy-worke did thrive and prosper, expecting in convenient time some
answerable return. That Parable which our Savior does propound Matthew. 21.34.
of the Vineyard let out to unthankful husbandmen, is a pregnant proof: for
when the season came and time of fruit drew near, that great Householder sends
out his servants to those husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits: And
in the application of that Parable we read, that He will let out his
Vineyard to other husbandmen, who should render him [fruits] in due season. And
when our Savior tells us John 15.2.
of his Fathers purging and pruning of the Vine, he withal shows us what is
his aim and scope therein; namely, that Christians should be abundant in
bringing forth of fruits beseeming their profession.

Reason.
There is good Reason for it: For 1 Cor. 9.7.
who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a
flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? What husbandman bestows his
seed and pains upon his land, and does not expect a good crop therefrom? And
is it not then just and equal, that the Lord should look for some answerable
return for all his pains?

Instruction, that we answer this Husbandmans hopes in some good measure. Let
us remember the end of all his cost and labor, and consider with our selves,
the reason why we have received so many blessings from him: Let us set before
our eyes his many favors, spiritual and temporal, and then say, whether he
has not been as careful a Husbandman for England, as ever he was for Israel.
Has he not taken us out of the Romish Egypt, where we grew not well, and
planted us in a very fruitful Hill; in a Land flowing with milk and honey?
Has he not fenced us about with his mighty protection, Remember 88. and 1605.
and defended us from many dangers and deuillish plots, devised against us by
the enemies of the truth: So that neither Boar nor Bear, Wolf nor Fox,
Turk nor Pope, could yet invade us, or prevail against us? Has he not
rooted out and expelled, those ranckling thorns and renting brambles, (I mean
the Papists) and cast out of this his Vineyard, the stumbling stones of
superstition, and baggage of man's traditions, with the relikes of Idolatry,
hammering and beating down the Popish Dagon? And has he not planted choice
plants in this his Vineyard, giving us such Princes as may be compared with
the best Princes of Israel and Judah, under whom we have a long time enjoyed
the Gospel, with the fruits of the Gospel, Peace and Plenty; so that we may
sit under our own Vines and Fig Trees, conferring of the ways of God, and
quietly enjoying our goods and earthly happiness? No Church under heaven more
enriched with treasures and gifts from God than ours is. What could he have
done more for this his Vineyard than he has done? And what can he expect
less from this his Vineyard than he now does, abundance of sweet grapes and
good fruits? Yea, in particular let every one consider this, and make
application of it to himself. Has not the Lord chosen thee above many
thousands in the world, and afforded unto thee such means, as he has not
granted unto many, who by nature are as good as thy self art? Has he not sent
his servants unto thee early and late to call upon thee, that thou should
bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life? Has he not often trimmed thee
with his pruning-hooke of afflictions and crosses; sometimes in thy friends, at
other times in thy goods; sometimes one way, at other times another? and to
what end has all this been, but that thou should be fruitful? Thus
should every one commune with his soul, and put the question to himself, what
God meant in being at such pains and cost with him; that so those fruits may
be found in us, which the hand of God looks to gather from us: For to whom
much is given of them much shall be required. Oh! beware then that thou
deceiuest not Gods hope; he expects fruit of thee, let him find it in thee.

This point (though plain) I find so needful to be pressed in this barren
age, as that I must be bold to pursue it, and show, First, the Motives or
Reasons inducing us to fruitfulness: And secondly, acquaint you with some
profitable means that must be used to make us grow more fruitful: And
thirdly, acquaint you with the nature and quality of that fruit which we must
bring forth, that God may accept of it, and take pleasure in it: All which are
necessary points to be handled in the prosecuting and following of this Use.

Motives to fruitfulness.
To begin with the Motives: besides what has already been said and showed of
Gods deserving it, by reason of his pains and cost (which strongly binds us
to obedience) sundry other Reasons may be brought: Every creature in it kind
is fruitful: The poorest creature that God has made, is enabled with some
gift to imitate the goodness and bounty of the Creator; and to yield
something from it self to the use and benefit of others. The Sun, Moon and
Stars, as they are endued with light, so they restlesly move to impart their
light and influence, to the enlightening of this inferior world. The Clouds
fly up and down emptying themselves to enrich the earth, from which
notwithstanding they reap no harvest. The Earth liberally yields her riches,
and brings forth food for the maintenance of those innumerable armies of
creatures that live thereon; Green herb for the cattle, and oil and wine
for man: The valleys stand thick with corn; the Mower fills his Sithe, and
the binder up of sheaues his bosom: Thus it returns fruits in abundance to
the painful tiller and dresser of it. Yea, what Herb, Plant or Tree grows
upon the earth, which is not in its kind fruitful; spending it self and the
principal part of its sap and moisture in bringing forth some pleasant berrie
or other such like fruit; which being ripe and perfect, suffers to have plucked
from it for the good of man, and voluntarily lets drop down before his feet?
And does not every one dislike sterilitie in his grounds and barrenness in his
cattle, expecting fruitfulness in all that belongs unto him? Now then, how
can it be allowable, when heaven and earth are fruitful in their kind; and
neither bird, beast, nor plant are idle, but are ever bringing forth for the
good of their Lords and owners, that only man should remain unfruitful; his
faculties and graces idle, and he himself a burden to the earth? Shall not
every creature be a witness against man, and rise up in judgment to condemn
him, if he be barren; fruitless? And therefore as the Earth to Man; so let Man
to God, return a blessed usury; ten for one; nay, thirty, sixty, an hundred
fold.

Secondly, the fruitfulness of a Christian is the groundwork prosperity: so
that Psalm. 1.3.
whatsoever he does shall prosper. Oh! what a large extent is here of Gods
goodness toward such a one; He shall prosper, not in some things, but in all
things whatsoever he undertakes or goes about: Deuteronomy. 28.2-10
Blessed shall he be in the City, and blessed in the field: blessed in the
fruit of his body, and in the fruit of his ground, and in the fruit of his
cattle, and in the increase of his kine, and in the flocks of his sheep:
Blessed in his basket, and in his store: In his coming in, and going out; yea,
the Lord shall bless him in all that he shall set his hand unto. And thus it
was with Joseph, that Genesis 49.22.
fruitful bough: Cap. 39.23.
The Lord was with him, says the Text, and that which he did, the Lord made it
to prosper. As it is thus with him in whatsoever he undertakes by action; so
shall it be with him in whatsoever he undergoes by passion or by suffering:
His losses, crosses, troubles, persecutions, or what else betides him shall be
Romans 8.28.
for his good, as the Apostle witnesses, and tend to the furthering him with
that eternal weight of glory. Let tortures, torments, fire, gallows, Verse 35.
tribulation, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword, or any such like
befall him, yet they shall never wrong him, but prove an advantage unto him;
and he at length shall prove a noble and a worthy conqueror over them: they
will but help him sooner to that crown which he has so long striued for: And
(to use the words of blessed Bradford Fox Martyr. Fol. 1492.
) If there be any way to heaven on horseback, this is the way: So that these
shall never hinder him in his journey. Me thinks this consideration should
work effectually with us, and upon us all; and if I should say no more, this
were enough to make every one that is not settled on his lees, to resolve to
become fruitful: for who would not do any thing to have such a privilege as
this is? What man would not himself follow, and set his child unto such a
vocation, in the which every action would bring profit and great commodity?

Gal. 5.22, 23.
There is no law against us; for so witnesses the Apostle. An excellent
privilege this is indeed, there is no law to condemn such, nor domineere over
such: Though there is a law for them, which is as a rule unto them of
obedience; yet there is no law against them; for such are freed: First, from
the obligation and rigor of it, as it binds us to perfect obedience in our
selves and by our selves, for the obtaining of eternal life, according to the
tenor thereof, Do this, and thou shall live. And secondly, from the curse of
the Law, for any breach thereof, either in thought, word or deed; so Romans 8.1.
that there is no condemnation belongs unto them: though the best do things
worthy of condemnation, and have need to use David's Prayer, Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord; yet they shall never be
condemned.

Stay Christian, meditate a while of this privilege before thou proceedest
further; ponder it well in thy mind, and consider the excellency hereof. Art
thou a fruitful branch? Why then thou have liberty to live and serve God
without fear of damnation; Luke 1.74.
when as otherwise, thou can not but quake and fear upon the thought of hell
and judgment; and as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 2.15.
All thy lifetime must needs be subject to fear and bondage. Hence likewise
thou may comfort thy self in thy desires and weak endeavors to obey, Isay
1.19.
which God will accept at thy hands for obedience it self, because thou art
freed from the rigor of the Law; so that thy many weaknesses and imperfections
in doing good duties need not discourage thee: for the Lord will not examine
thy actions according to the strict rule of his Law, but according to the
purpose, desire and endeavor of thy soul will he reward thee, and Mal. 3.17.
spare thee, as a man spares his own son that serves him. But on the other
side, so long as thou continuest fruitless, the Law has power over thee to
require exact and personal obedience at thy hands unto it; and to accuse and
condemn thee for the least breach of it. Thy desires, thy endeavors, thy
meanings, thy purposes, cannot stand thee in stead, nor defend thee from the
wrath of a revenging God: no whither can thou fly for succor or relief,
thy case is fearful. Again, thou may Romans 5.3.
rejoice in tribulation, and sing in the very stocks Act. 16.25.
with Paul and Silas: though thou be persecuted and afflicted, railed upon and
reviled, by evil men, yet seeing there is no law against thee, and the curse
(which makes these things bitter) is removed from thee, thou need not fear
them before they come, nor be discouraged when they are come: but, e contra, if
thou bring not forth the fruits of the Spirit, then assure thy self, that
whatsoever loss or cross befalls thee, they fall upon thee with a curse; the
venom and sting is in the tail of them, they tend to thy perdition. Were
these things well weighed by us, how could we then but labor to be filled with
the fruits of righteousness? Men of this world commonly comfort themselves
with this; that how ever they fail, yet the Law cannot take hold upon them. Be
thou a fruitful branch, and this comfort thou may have, for the Law Moral
is no killing letter to thee.

Fourthly, The circumstance of time calls upon us to bring forth the fruits of
obedience. Our Master has suffered us our first year already, yea our second,
Luke 13.7.
nay our third, or rather our third score year; for is it not rather three
times twenty years, than three years since the Lord has spared us, as he
spared the Fig Tree? For as much then as he has year by year, for so long
succession of years, sought for fruit of us, and found none; it is now high
time to look about us, and bring forth plenty, or else with fear and
trembling, it is to be expected that we shall stand no longer, but be stubbed
up, and have that sentence passed against us, which was sometimes passed
against the Fig Tree, Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground? Besides these
Motives, our blessed Savior uses many more in that same sweet Sermon John 15.
, which he preached to his Disciples a little before his departure from them;
and as some think, in the way between the place where he did eat the
Passover, and the Garden wherein he was betrayed: Herein (says Verse. 8.
he) is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit.



By this we shall be his Disciples, that is, know, and have a testimony that we
are so: and indeed without fruit none can have his vocation, adoption, or
engrafting into Christ, sealed up unto his soul. He then that is unfruitful,
wants this testimony which every one desires to have, and none to be without.

Verse. 16.
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you that you
should go and bring forth fruit.

in the same verse he adds this as a reason to his exhortation, That
whatsoever they should ask of his Father in his name he might give it them.

If all this will not serve to make us fruitful, that Verse. 2.
for Every branch that bears not fruit, he takes away: and presently after,
If a man abide not in me (viz. to bring forth fruit) he is cast forth as a
branch and is withered, and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and
they are burned. Much more might be said for the pressing of this so necessary
a duty. My desire is to say enough, and but enough: now what has been spoken
is enough, if God shall please to accompany it with his grace, and operation
of his blessed Spirit, without which neither this, nor all that can be said,
will be enough to work us hereunto.

By this time happily thy heart may smite thee for thy barrenness, and the
Spirit may begin to work within thee a desire after the fruits of holy life;
insomuch that out of the longing desire of thy soul, which thou have of
fruitfulness, thou will now come to me, as those Publicans and soldiers came
to John, saying, Luke 3.10. Cap. 10.25.
What shall we do? Or as that Lawyer came to Christ, with Master, what shall I
do? If this be thy next question, what thou should do to become fruitful,
I would advise thee to follow these directions.

See thou be removed out of thy natural soil, Directions how to grow
fruitful.
and be engrafted into another stock. For that thou may be fruitful, thou
must be, as it is said of the godly man in the first Psalm, Psalm. 1.3.
A tree planted, because by nature the wild Olives; and if ever we become
fruitful trees, we must of necessity be transplanted from the first Adam into
the second. The tree must be good before the fruit can be: Mat. 12.33.
Either make the tree good, and the fruit good; or the tree evil, and the
fruit evil, says our Savior: for men Cap. 7.16.
gather not grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles. Verse. 18.
As a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit; so neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit. Until thou be a plant planted in the house of the
Lord, and engrafted into Christ by a true faith, and made a new creature by
Regeneration, having a believing heart, and a good conscience; thy fruit can
never be good: all thy works are as so many sins, yea thy best works are but
as rotten weeds: Thorns and Thistles thou bring forth, and therefore art
Heb. 6.8.
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned: but being once engrafted into
this stock Jesus Christ, thou can not but bring forth fruit incontinent
(though not such plenty and store of fruit as afterward) for such a lively
power of life is in it, that were thou as dry as Aarons withered rod, yet thou
shall presently be changed into a flourishing and fruitful tree. As the Thief
upon the Cross, Luke 23.39.
who no sooner was set into it, but he bears fruit in an instant: 1. Reproving
his fellow thief, for his sin in railing upon Christ. 2. Justifying Christ,
and pleading his innocence; giving a good testimony of him. 3. Condemning
himself, acknowledging Gods righteousness in laying that punishment upon him.
4. Craving mercy and forgiveness from his Savior, desiring him to remember
him when he came into his kingdom: so thou being joined unto him, that is,
raised from the dead, Romans 7.4.
shall bring forth fruit unto God. Labor therefore to be engrafted: The
ordinary means is the word preached: for as in grafting, so here, God is the
husbandman; Christ the stock; Believers the imps; the Spirit the sap; the word
the saw; the Sacraments the ligatures: As therefore without a knife or saw to
open and riue the stock, and let in the imps, no man can graft; so without the
word no hope of this benefit. And this that has been said overthrows a point
of natural and Popish religion, viz. That a man may be justified and saved by
his good works, when by this that has been said, we see that good works can
only be the fruits of persons already justified; Non praecedunt iustificandum,
sed sequuntur iustificatum. August.
and that which follows cannot be the cause of that which went before. The
fruit cannot make the tree to be good, it does only declare and manifest that
it is good, according to that speech of our Savior, Matthew. 7.
The tree is known by his fruit.

In the second place, that thou may be fruitful, see plant thy self by the
running brooks: Seat thy self under a powerful Ministry, that so thou
may be partaker of those waters, Ezekiel. 47.12.
which flow from under the threshold of the Sanctuary. Water we know causes
fruitfulness, as drought does famine. The inundations of the river Nilus
caused Egypt to be so fruitful: So these spiritual waters will cause us
mightily to fructify and increase, and make us Isay 44.4.
spring up as amongst the grass, and as willow by the water courses. Thus the
Church as it was planted in a fruitful field; so was it likewise placed by
Ezekiel. 17.5.
great waters, insomuch that it grew and became a spreading vine. And the godly
man being planted by the rivers of waters, Psalm. 1.3.
brought forth his fruit in due season. Is it then the true desire of thy soul
to fructify and bring forth fruit? See then that thou frequent the Sanctuary
of the Lord. Job 8.11.
Can the rush grow up without mire? or can the flag grow up without water? Is
it possible that thou should increase in grace and goodness, and yet never
drink of the waters of Shiloah? It cannot be. If therefore thou have not in
thy own fountain, seek to thy neighbors, and carry thy pitcher with thee;
for nothing can more dangerously or uncomfortably be wanting to thy soul.

Besides, see thou labor for humility and tenderness The ground which is
hard and stony is unfit for fruit, as our Savior has manifested in that
parable of the seed Luke 8, 6.
. For neither can the seed sown take any root, neither will it drink in the
rain that the heart of it might be moistened. It may be the outside may be a
little washie, but it gets not in to prepare it to fruitfulness. Thus
hardness of heart keeps the soul dry and barren. And surely here is the
reason, why after so long time of preaching, there does so little fruit
appear: Much water has been powered on us, many a gracious Sermon has been
preached to us, but what are we the better? The invincible hardness of our
hearts will not suffer one drop of these heavenly deawes to sink into our
souls. How many handfuls of good seed do Gods Seeds-men daily cast amongst
us; and can they say with Isaac, that they have reaped an hundred fold, as he
did in the land? Alas! So far are they from seeing such an increase, as that
they would be heart-glad of thirty; nay of ten: Yea, let me tell you, many
Ministers would be glad, if they could see their seed again: and what is the
reason but this, that men's hearts are so stony, flintie? Labor then for
greater tenderness of heart, if thou would bring forth more fruit in thy
life; and see thou retain the waters, Heb. 6.7.
and drink in the rain: hold fast what thou hear by conscionable
meditation.

thou must beware of ouershadowing thy heart by any sinful lust, whereby the
warm beams of the Sun of righteousness is kept from it. Husbandmen have
evermore a great care of this, and will not by any means endure to have their
young nurseries ouershadowed by any bough or tree; but so plant them, as that
they may enjoy the benefit of the Sunne-beames: for no ground or plant will
ever prove good, which has not a favorable aspect from the heavens: And thus
our hearts are made fruitful by the heavens answering the earth, Hos. 2.21.
as Hosea speaks (though in another sense) I mean, when Christ the Sun of
righteousness darteth the beams of his gracious countenance and favor upon
our souls; warming and cherishing Paul's planting, and Apolloes watering, with
the influence of his grace: for without him we can do nothing John 15.5.
, nor have any life in us. And therefore beware lest through superfluity of
lusts, or inordinate desires; through worldliness and covetousness, or any
other such like sin, thy soul be so shaded, as that this Sun of
righteousness cannot shine upon it, if thou would grow fruitful.

Fifthly, a special care must be had to the root, that that if we would bring
forth fruit abundantly. Now faith is that same radical grace, which must
especially be regarded: if that thrive not, no other grace can prosper. Foolish
then and preposterous is their care, who seek and study how to be laden with
the other fruits of Gods blessed Spirit, as with Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, Temperance, and the like,
and yet neglect the looking to this grace of faith. This is no otherwise (says
one Wards Life of Faith.
) than if a man should water all the branches of a tree, and not the root.

Sixthly and lastly, we must be earnest with the Lord, that and give us wisdom
from above, which wisdom, says S. James, James 1.5.3.17.
is full of good fruits. Call upon him earnestly and frequently for grace: and
not only so, but withal seek the prayers of Gods Vine-dressers his Ministers;
and desire them to be earnest with God for you, that you may be fruitful: for
how ever this ungrateful world contemns and despises these; yet the truth
is, they can prevail much with God Luke 13.6, 7.
, and if they should not oftentimes rise up and stand in the gap, woe would be
to thousands for the barrenness of their lives.

And thus I have showed you the way, how of barren you may become fruitful. If
then any amongst you, that hear me this day, do hereafter continue barren and
fruitless, it must needs be because they are wilful, or slothful, or both:
for put in practice what now you have been taught, and I dare pass my word and
pawn my credit, that in a short time, the barrennest professor in this
congregation, will bud, and blossom, and bring forth fruit abundantly. For
what should hinder? Is there any fault in the Husbandman to be found? Surely
no: for we have heard it before proved, that he is no way wanting, nor
defective; and therefore cannot justly be charged with the barrenness of any
man's heart or life, as hereafter shall be cleared. Where then lies the fault?
Is it in the stock or root? No neither: for we have lately heard how lively
and full of juice it is; insomuch that whosoever is set into it, does
incontinently fructify and bring forth fruit. If then there be any want, it
must be in thy self, in not using the means that has been now prescribed.
Oh that men would now at length be brought to look about them; and suffer
themselves to be so far prevailed with, as to make trial of these means in
uprightness and sincerity of heart. Consider, I beseech thee, with thy self,
how exceedingly hitherto thou have frustrated the Lords hopes and expectations:
as likewise in what a woeful estate and condition thou have lived, and still
live in, whilst thou art under that same curse, that heavy curse which is
never far from thee, Luke 13.
Cut it down, why cumbers it the ground? Urge therefore and press thy soul
unto this fruitfulness, and in some good measure answer the Lords hopes
hereafter: and content not thy self with shows and leaves; but as a tree of
righteousness, do thou show forth thy grapes, and figs, and sweet fruits, for
that is it which God expects.

Object.
But we are fruitful members of the Church; we hear the word, receive the
Sacraments, and delight therein: we keep good orders in our families; speak
against common abuses; and reform evils in our selves and ours; what would you
more?

Answ.
Yet something may be wanting: The fig tree had leaves enough, and by the
flourishing greenenesse seemed to promise great store of fruit; no wonder then,
if such fair green leaves as these cause many a soul to deceive himself and
others also; when alas all this, and more than this, may be, and is, in many,
who are like to have the doom that fig tree had, Matthew. 21.19.
Never fruit grow on thee more. And therefore before thou boastest, see thy
fruits have these properties.

First, Properties of good fruit.
look that the fruit thou boastest of be proper fruit: It must be thy own,
done by thy self; not by a Deputy nor Attorney. Thus the godly man is
compared Psalm. 1.3.
her fruit in due s^ason. It must not then be borrowed fruit (for so an heart
as stony and barren as Cheapside it self, may be made a far richer garden
than some of those are where those herbs brought thither naturally grew.) The
Papists indeed would feign make us to believe that if our own lamps be
without oil, we may go and borrow of our neighbors to supply our wants: For
holy men of God, say the Rhemists Supererogatio quasi super id quod erogatur.
Rhem. Annot. on Luke 10.35. 2. Cor. 8.14. 1 Cor. 9.16.
, have done not only that which they ought to do, but more than was required
at their hands: as for example, John Baptist fasted more than he was commanded;
and Mary lived more strictly than she was required: now these superabundant
works, as a Church treasure, becomes an advantage to others who are more
defective; and indeed hang as it were upon the Popes tally, for who gives most.
But these works of supererogation, are works of superarrogation: our Savior
has taught us this lesson, Luke 17.10.
When we have done all we can, we are but unprofitable servants. And therefore
let none build their hope upon such a sandy foundation as the good works of
others: another man's meat cannot nourish me; another man's garment cannot warm
me; another man's eye cannot guide me; neither can another man's works save me.
You call upon your Minister to preach for himself; upon your servants to do
their work for themselves; and upon your Captain to lead his company for
himself: and therefore let me call upon you to do good duties by your selves,
and for your selves: Let not great men think to go to heaven by their
Chaplains, nor Wives by their Husbands, nor Parents by their Children, nor
servants by their Masters; by whom (usually) they are religious here, and
think to be glorious hereafter. Let me crave your patience a little in hearing
a Story, which though in it self it be idle and fained, yet may be of good
use to set forth a truth unfeigned: There was a certain man (says the Legend)
which would never go to Church himself; but ever when he heard the Saints
bell ring, would say to his wife, Go thou to Church and pray for thee and me:
one night he dreamt that both he and his wife were dead, and that they knocked
together at heaven gate for entrance; Peter (being the imagined and supposed
Porter) lets in the wife, but keeps out the husband, Illa intrauit pro se, and
te.
telling him thus; She is entered in both for her self and thee: For as she
went to Church for thee, so she is gone to heaven for thee: This is the Fable.
The Moral is good, and instructs every one to have a personality of faith, and
propriety of fruit; that himself serving God, himself may be blessed of God:
So wills the Apostle, Gal. 6.4.
Have reioicing in thy self alone, and not in another. It is his Hab. 2.4.
own faith the just shall live by; and a man's 2 Cor. 5.10. Luke 16.2.
own works that he must give an account of: For at the last day the question
will not be, what has he done? but, what have thou done? And therefore let thy
grand (...) be to provide an Answer to that Question which will put the
greatest part of the world to a Nonplus. See then that thou preach for thy self
(if thou have a calling thereunto) pray for thy self, give thanks for thy
self, serve God for thy self, and thus make the Proverb good (which
otherwise is deuillish) Every man for himself, and God for all.

Prevention.
And yet to avoid all scruples, I would not so be understood, as if we might not
join with others in holy duties; for that we may, yea must: or that we are not
to pray for others, or have others pray for us; for this ought to be: only we
are not to content our selves with what is done by them, unless we join in
heart, and do the like our selves: Neither do I think it a thing unlawful,
but fitting, if a Samuel be in presence, that he should perform these holy
duties, be it in any family, and bless the meat be it at any man's table (for
at such a time, the Lord and Master of that house or family (how great soever)
should give way) But as for children to give thanks at their Fathers board
(except in case before that they are Prophets) I think it not expedient. Sure
I am, Christ never put his Disciples to it, though they were men grown up, and
of ripe years, but ever gave thanks himself. And therefore the practice of
many parents is too too childish, who make their children their chaplains; and
if they be out of the house, grace shall be out of the parlour, as if it were
unbeseeming their worthiness, to call upon God for a blessing upon what they
eat.

Secondly, our fruit it must be kindly fruit: For no Matthew. 7.
. Good ground we know brings forth fruit of the same kind and nature, with
the seed that it was sowed withal; and not tares when wheat was sown, nor
cockle when barley was cast into the ground: Thus a Christian man's fruit must
be, such a conversation as may beseem the Gospel Phil. 1.27.
; thy fruits may not be fruits of the flesh, which are so rife, so ripe, yea
rotten: No nor fruits of civil righteousness, wherewith many content
themselves; concluding they are trees of righteousness, because they pay every
man his own, deal justly, truly, and so carry themselves, as that no man can
say black is their eye; when notwithstanding, they are void of all true piety
and sanctity: No nor fruits of external profession of Religion, or outward
reformation. But the fruit God expects from thee, must be kindly, resembling
the Author, which is the Spirit of grace; and that holy and pure seed which is
the word of grace. Such fruits as those reckoned up by the Apostle Gal. 5.22,
23.
, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, etc. other
fruits than these, or the like to these, beseem not Christians: Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
As for fornication, uncleanness, covetousness, let it not be once named
amongst you (says the same Apostle) as becomes Saints: Neither filthiness,
nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient. If it becomes not
a Saint once to name these things; much less to bear them and bring them
forth. Muddie water is less offensive in a puddle than in a fountain:
Brambles and briars do a great deal better in a hedge or thicket than in a
garden knot: Let one worldling do as another worldling does; but let no
worldlings practice be a president to thee. What if my Lady Iesabel and other
gentlewomen in Court and City have such a complexion, such hair, not as God
has made, but as the devil has been the dyer of ( Non quos Deus fecit, sed
quos diabolus infecit. Cypri.
as one of the Ancient speaks) what if they disguise themselves like harlots,
more like than attiring themselves as chaste Matrons? what is that to thee? And
what if many (it may be the greatest in your country, Master Justice, or thy
Landlord) will drink till they be drunken; swear, lie, and break Gods
Sabbaths? will thou imitate and follow them in their lewdness? It beseemes
thee not: learn more manners than to do as such great ones do. The
consideration of whom I am should teach me what a one I should be: Think then
thus with thy self; I am a tree of righteousness; a branch of the true Vine;
the planting of the Lord, whose heart has been sowed with pure seed; and
shall I bring forth such fruit? will such works become me? Good Nehemiah Nehem
6.11.
being persuaded to fly and save his life, would not, but said to him that
persuaded him unto it, Should such a man as I fly? and who is there that being
as I am would go into the Temple to save his life? I will not go in: Verse 9.
Now therefore O God strengthen my hands. So say thou when thou art entised
unto lewdness; Should such a one as I do thus? Shall I swear, swagger,
drink to be drunk, or the like? I will not do it: For who is there being as
I am; what heart having been sowed with such seed as mine has been, would
bring forth such fruit so unanswerable thereunto? Now therefore O Lord
strengthen my hands; give grace to withstand, for I will not do thus.

Thirdly, our fruit if acceptable, must be timely and This is a commendable
property in our grounds, trees, plants, that they bring forth their fruit in
due season, as it is said of that tree which was planted by the rivers of water
Psalm. 1.3.
, whereto the godly blessed man was resembled. If our corn should not ear
until harvest was past; nor our trees bud until after Midsummer; men might
look to have but small store of fruit, and to reap but a sorry and slender
crop. Thus the grace of our fruit is the seasonablenesse of it. God himself
for our example has Eccles. 3.1.
an appointed time and fit season for all his works.

But is any time unseasonable for the bringing forth of fruit? Quest.


I answer, Yes: A good work may be unseasonable, Answer.
as well as fish or flesh. For the clearing this we are to know, there is a
difference of good things to be performed by us: Some good things are as
continual acts to be performed by all persons, at all times, and in all
places; from the doing whereof no part of our life is exempted, because they
reach to all times of this life (and yet only to this life.) As for example,
the exercise of Faith, Repentance, Mortification, Amendment of life, working
out our salvation with fear and trembling, seeking reconciliation with God
(and such like;) these are daily and hourly to be performed by every of us:
and yet for these there are sometimes and seasons more fit, (though all be fit)
wherein if they be done they will be more acceptable: As to repent in the day
of our youth, and to remember our Creator before our old years come Eccles.
12.1.
. Who will not confess that young age is a fitter time to learn the
Horne-booke or Primmer in, than old? yet it is better for a man of three score
to learn his A. B. C. than die a d^nse: so for repentance. God takes no
delight to pledge the devil, and drink those snuffes and dregs that he has
left.

Other good duties we are bound to do, that reach not to all times and places,
but are limited to some particular place, time, and season. As hearing,
reading, set and solemn Prayer, Singing, Conference, Almsdeeds, and the
like: and these are they that may unseasonably be performed. Take an instance.
In time of public exercise while the Minister is preaching, here is no fit
time for any person to fall a praying, otherwise than by eiaculation or lifting
up the soul to God: for he is now Gods mouth, and by him the Lord is speaking
unto us; now it is no point of good manners to speak to our betters before
they have made an end of speaking. And so while the Minister is praying, for a
man then to fall a reading is unseasonable: for he is now the voice of the
people to the Lord, and all must join with the congregation in that duty. And
let not this seem strange to any: for it is an old policy that the devil
has, to iustle out a greater good by a less. He can be well content, that we
should do duties for matter good, so we dishonor God in the sinful manner of
performance of them. Neither let any think I speak against these duties (for
my desire is that men would pray more, read oftener, etc.) but only against the
unseasonableness in the performance of them, which makes our best service in
Gods esteem, no better than the sacrifice of fools Eccles. 5.1.
. Wisely then observe thy time, and bring forth fruit in the right Quando, in
the due season: For know it for a truth, all duties done unseasonably are
hopeless, fruitless.

ripe fruit, if commendable. Would a husbandman respect that tree which every
year does bud and blossom (like many of our outlandish plants) but never
bring any fruit to its perfection? And yet if happily he should delight in it and
nourish it in his Orchard, because of the sweetness of the blossom, or
fairness of the leaf, or flower, which may yield a comfortable shade in the
heat of Summer: yet God will never. He knows not how to entreat such whose
goodness is but as the morning dew Hos. 6.4.
, and whose righteousness is but as a cake not turned 7.8.
: who have some good purposes and motions in their minds, and so begin to
blossom; but within a short space suffer all to fade. See then thou bring thy
actions to persection; let thy resolutions be brought to execution, and suffer
them not to perish like an abortiue birth. Thou have a purpose to leave thy
ungodly course of life and sinful trade, and take a new course, etc. Thou
blossomest very fair, what a pity is it if the frost should nip these in the
head?

Many make their purposes like our Eeues, and their performances like our
Holy Days: Servants work hard upon the one, that they may have the more
liberty to play upon the other: So do they labor hard upon their purposes,
but are idle and play upon their performances. But purpose without performance
is like a Cloud without Rain; and not unlike to Hercules club in the tragedy,
of a great bulk, but the stuffing is moss and rubbish. Would such blossoms
bring a man to heaven, Baalam and many other wicked wretches (who are now in
torments) would have gotten thither long ago. The five foolish Virgins
intended to go in with the bridegroom; but before the time their lights dropped
out. If a bare Intention would serve the turn, Gods Church on earth would be
fuller of Saints, and his Court in heaven fuller of Souls. Good motions and
resolutions are to be respected, but thou must up and be doing, else God
distasts them.

A fifth property of good fruit is universality; It must Esaias 27.9.
All fruit, as Isaiah speaks: fruits of the first and second table; of
holiness toward God, and righteousness toward man; for what God has joined
may not be divorced. Particulars were infinite. Fruits inward; as, good
Thoughts, motions, purposes: good Desires, longings, faintings after God and
his graces: good Affections; as Love, Joy, Fear, Sorrow, Patience, Compassion,
etc. Fruits outward, as, Good words; sauourie speech, pure and wholesome
language: And good works; such as we are bound to perform within the compass
of our calling, whether General or Special. In a word, Phil. 4.8.
Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; those things must we think on to do: and as Mary
said to the servants, John 2.5.
Whatsoever he says do it, so say I, Whatsoever the Lord commands that must
be done: we may not pick and choose, and do what best likes us, but as once
Israel said, so must we always, Exodus 19.8. and 24.3.7.
Whatsoever the Lord commands that will we do. True it is, many points of
our Masters will we know not; but our desire must be to know: And many things
we do not; but our desire must be to do: for our obedience must reach to
Gods whole revealed will. Every Christian duty thou must make account belongs
to thee as well as to any other: and therefore as a man that is to plant an
Orchard, will be sure to get of every good fruit some: so, do not hear of any
fruit that good is, but carry it home and set thy heart therewith. Memorable
was the practice of blessed Bradford: (who was content to sacrifice his life in
Gods cause) See Master Sampsons Preface to Bradfords Sermon of repentance.
He used to make unto himself a Iournall or day-booke wherein he used to set
down all such notable things as either he did see or hear each day that
passed: If he did hear or see any good in any man, by that sight he found and
noted the want thereof in himself, and added a short prayer wherein he craved
grace and mercy that he might amend: If he did hear or see any plague or
misery, he noted it as a thing procured by his own sins, and still added,
Lord have mercy upon me. Oh that we would tread in this Saints steps! how
much more fruitful should we then be, than now we are?

Lastly, our fruit must be constant fruit. Constancy Luke 8 15.
It brings forth fruit with patience. And herein we may not be like to
other trees, wihch grow barren with their age; but we must bring forth fruit in
our old age Psalm. 92.14.
and continue fat and flourishing: nay not so much as a leaf must fade or
fail Psalm. 1.3.
: there must not be any appearance of being out of the state of grace Heb. 4.1.
: none of us must seem to be deprived or come short of entering into Gods
rest. Alas for such! who have left bearing, yea lost their very leaves and
shows of profession, which formerly they have made; being now worse than that
cursed fig tree which was green: what hope have these, who come short of those
that come short of heaven? Shall the former fruitfulness of such professors be
regarded, or rewarded? Surely no; Ezekiel. 18.24.
All their righteousness which they have done, shall never be mentioned, but
in their trespass that they have trespassed and in their sin that they have
sinned, in them they shall die. And if every man shall receive according to his
fruits; then such shall one day feed upon the bitter fruit of their Apostacy
and Backsliding; and find how bitter a thing it is to forsake the Lord; and
feel what they will not now be brought to believe; 2 Pet. 2.21.
That it had been better for them never to have known the way of truth, than
thus to have departed from the holy commandment. Look then thou walk not in
a good course for a fit, but be constant to the death, Revel. 2.10.
and so receive the crown of life: For Romans 2.7.
glory and immortality is the part and portion only of such as by constancy
in well-doing seek it. To you Luke 22.24.
(says our Savior) which have continued with me in tentations, have I
appointed a kingdom, as my Father has appointed me a kingdom.

And thus we have seen what is necessarily required, that our fruit may be
acceptable and pleasing unto God. Now then thou that braggest of thy
faithfulness and fruitfulness, tell me, dare thou abide the trial? Why
then answer me to these Interrogatories which I propound unto thee: Is thy
fruit thy own? Is it done by thy own self, and in thy own person? Do thou
rest and rely upon thy own faith, and live by it, and by no man's else? Again
tell me, is thy fruit kindly, answerable to the good seed that has oftentimes
been cast into thy heart, and beseeming the stock wherein thou say thou art
engrafted? Is not swearing, lying, cogging, and dissembling, and such stinking
fruit as this, the fruit thou bear? I demand again, do thou observe the
time and season; not contenting thy self in doing good for matter, unless
also thou do it then when God may have most glory by the doing of it? Answer
me yet further; Do thou labor that thy fruit may come to some perfection?
Not resting thy self in this, that thou bloomest, blossommest, but still art
striving that every bud may be brought to maturity and ripeness? Besides all
this, do thou truly and unfeignedly desire and endeavor to be fruitful in
all good works, making no exceptions, like a lazy servant, at any of Gods
Commands, seem they never so hard or harsh, so mean or base? And lastly, tell
me, do thou continue constant in bearing fruit, not giving over in the year
of drought? but even then continuest fresh and flourishing? What answerest
thou? Can thou stand out this trial? And does thy conscience witness that
these things are so? Why then indeed thou art a fruitful branch, and have
whereof to rejoice, in as much as thou bear fruit to God; who does so accept
it, that he will reward it. Hebr. 6.7.
For the earth that drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and
brings forth herbs meet for him by whom it is dressed, receives blessing
from God. But if thou find it otherwise with thee, and art not able to
endure the trial, then let me tell thee; Thou deludest thy own soul, in
thinking that thy leaves and shows, will, or can, answer Gods hopes and
expectations: neither can thou comfort thy self in thy estate, for it is
wretched, fearful: All such barren, or rather euill-fruited ground, is Verse.
8.
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

And so I am fallen into a use of Reprehension of thousand dead ground is there
in the world, which brings forth just nothing? They think it will prove
somewhat a troublesome journey to go toward heaven, and therefore they sit
them down, and fall fast asleep. Let these idle wretches know, that though
they sleep out their time, their 2 Pet. 2.3.
damnation sleeps not. And what abundance of ground is there, that for all
Gods care and pains, return but leaves, which are as good as nothing? Numbers
of carnal gospellers, who content themselves with the form of godliness,
denying the power thereof; boasting much of this, that they are harmless men,
and no drunkards, whore-masters, thieves, usurers, extortioners, and the like.
All this is well; and I would to God, all you that hear me this day could so
boast. Oh! how would it beautify this Assembly? But all this is not enough.
Negative Divinity and Christianity which is so rife, and grows almost in
every hedge, is not the fruit that must answer Gods hopes. The Parable Matthew.
25.
dams the evil servant, for not doing good with his talent, though he
misspent it not: and Dives for not helping Lazarus, though he hurt him not.
It is not enough that thou can say, I bring forth no evil fruit, I bear
fair leaves, etc. For thou deceiuest Gods expectation, if thou bring forth
no good; and what ever thou think of thy self, or others think of thee,
thou can not escape the fire: For Matthew. 3.10.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into
the fire. And therefore, be more wise than to trust to these fair leaves and
shows, wherewith thou art richly decked, and make a goodly show, as the
fig tree did; for they cannot save thee from the curse. And yet a worse kind
of ground than either of these. Such ground as my Text speaks of, which in
stead of grapes brings forth wild grapes; that brings forth hedge fruit like
the Heathen, nay not so good, but like those figs the Prophet Jeremy
speaks of: They are evil, very evil, they cannot be eaten they are so
evil. Deuteronomy. 32.32.
Their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter. Their wine is the
poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes. O Beloved! weigh it; if
barrenness and leaves will not, cannot escape the axe and fire, how shall the
euill-fruited tree? If the barren Vine fare so bad, the wild Vine must fare
far worse. What hell, and how many torments, are prepared for oppressing
Dives, when Dives that but denied his own, shall be so tortured and tormented
in endless flames? Shall he that gives not, wring his hands? then certainly
he that takes away, shall rend his heart. Matthew. 24.38.
The old world did but eat and drink, plant and build, mary and be merry,
(things lawful in themselves) and yet were swept away with the besome of
destruction: And shall we think, that liers, swearers, whoremongers,
malicious, monstrous, scandalous, offenders, (whose works are in themselves
simply unlawful) will ever escape unpunished? Certainly, if omission of good
works be whipped with rods, commission of impieties shall be scourged with
Scorpions. At the hands of these, and every one of these, will the Lord of the
Vineyard require fruit, and judge them according to their works.

comfort, to all such as find themselves so qualified in some good measure, as
is necessarily required he should be, whose fruit God accepts, (as we have
before showed.) Howeuer these have in them many weaknesses and corruptions, yet
allowing and maintaining none, let them assure, and secure themselves, against
all the fears of their own hearts, and cauils of Satan, or this wicked world,
that they are truly fruitful, and in some good measure answer the Lords hopes
and expectation. The husbandman (as we see) though he receive not a crop of an
hundred fold, yet he will think it well, and count his ground for good, and
his labor well bestowed, if he might receive sixty or thirty fold: So though
we be not the best ground, yet we may be good ground; as he may be a good
servant, that is not best of all. And it is not good ground that is rejected:
it is only the bad and barren, that God accepts not Hebr. 6.7.
. Let not then the littleness of thy fruit discourage thee, though it humble
thee. It is not, How much, but, How good, that God does especially regard. We
see the fruitfullest tree that grows, loses many of her buds and blossoms;
some are smitten with blasting; some are nipped with frosts, and bitten with
the cold and dry East-winde; and some again are eaten up with worms and
caterpillars; and if the tithe thereof come to perfection, we think it well.
Thus our buds and blossoms, holy purposes and resolutions often perish,
sometimes in the very thought, and go no further; sometimes they come to
words; we talk and tell what our purpose is, and there it rests: much ado
there is to bring them into works; the Devil, the world, and flesh, so nip us
with their temptations; and if we (when we have done all we can) can save the
tithe, nay the tithe of the tithe of our resolutions, and bring them to
execution, we have done well. Look more therefore to the quality than to the
quantity of thy fruit, (though look to both) and see it be not counterfeit
nor fained; let that be thy chiefest care: that as men say of their plums, and
pears, etc. Here is but little, but it is good; I have not many of them, but
them that be are very dainty, they are right of such and such a kind, I dare
assure you: So thou may say of thy Faith, Repentance, and Obedience; Though
it be very little, and not so much as I could wish it were, yet I assure my
self it is of the right kind, true and good, what is of it: And then assure
thy self, to thy endless comfort and more cheerful undergoing of holy
duties, that thou art a fruitful Christian, and shall every day grow
fruitfuller than other. Eccles. 9.7.
Go then and eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a cheerful
heart, for God accepts of thy works.

Text.
And it brought forth wild grapes.] This was the return it made to God for
all his cost and pains. He does not say it was barren and brought forth no
grap^s, (for that had been more tolerable) but it was fruitful: It brought
forth; but what? wild grapes, says the Text: such grapes as we find after
mentioned in this Chapter by the Prophet; Injustice, Oppr^ssion, Covetousness;
Avarice, and the like; which fruit was loathsome and unsavory to Gods smell
and taste, and nothing answerable to the kind and nature of the root.

Here then we have taxed in them, a real, actual, sensual, senseless
ingratitude and unthankfulness. And yet this does not sufficiently express
it; it goes a degree beyond it. Mere ingratitude returns nothing for good;
but here we have evil returned for good: and therefore we may rather call it
a contumacious and contumelious retribution.

Doct. The wicked make an ungrateful return to God for his favors.
Thus the wicked answer heavens kindness with an ungrateful wickedness: for
many blessings which they have from God received, they return horrible, and
more than brutish ingratitude.

Great and many were the favors which this people had received from God; for
he chose them (says Moses) Deuteronomy. 32.10-18
for his own inheritance: he kept them in the wilderness as the apple of his
eye: he bore them on his wings, as the Eagle her young ones: he fed them with
the best, and gave them plenty of all things; honey out of the rock, and oil
out of the flinty rock: butter of kine, milk of sheep, fat of lambs, and
rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats, with the fat of kidneyes of wheat:
yea, they did drink the pure blood of the grape. But I^surun waxed fat and
kicked: when he was waxen fat, and grown thick, and covered with fatness,
then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his
salvation. They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods; with abominations
provoked they him to anger. They sacrificed to Devils, and not to God: to gods
whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom their Fathers feared
not. Hence was that complaint which the Prophet made; Verse 6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? The like complaint
makes God himself in the first Chapter of this Prophecy, Jsay 1.2, 3, 4.
Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, for the Lord has spoken: I have
nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. The Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib: But Israel does not know, my
people does not consider. Ah sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a
seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord,
they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they are gone away
backward. O piercing words! woe unto such as occasion God thus to complain.

Beware we then; oh! beware we of it. Use.
Be not so ungrateful, as to conceal the many favors thou have received from
the Lord; and much less so unthankful, as to make so wicked a retribution. To
return evil for evil, and that to man, is damnable; but to return evil for
good received, is far more inexcusable. If it be thus between man and man,
then is the case more grievous between God and us. How do we provoke him
every day? yet he to win us, bestows abundance of blessings on us; giving us
life, health, food, raiment, liberty, peace, plenty, comfortable seasons,
etc. But the more he follows us with his favors, the further are we off: the
more he ladeth us with his blessings, the more we oppress him with our sins:
and the better he is to us, the worse we be to him; like Springs of water,
which are then coldest, when the Sun is hottest; and like the Thracian flint,
whereof I have read, that it burns with water, and is quenched with oil: or
like the nature of that Country, Siccitas dat lutum, aut s pul^erem. Plin.
(which if true, is wonderful) wherein a great drought and heat makes
abundance of mire and dirt; but store of rain causes dust: So is it with us;
experience makes it good: The plentiful showers of Gods blessings rained down
upon us, is answered with the dustie and sandy barrenness of our lives: The
sweet dewes of Hermon have made the hill of Sion more barren. Oh! how
inexcusable shall we be? How can such a generation as this escape the damnation
of hell? Needs must we perish and be consumed in the indignation of the Lord,
if we amend not.

They rewarded me evil for good (says David) Psalm. 35.12.
to the spoiling of my soul. Well David be content, for the like measure God
himself has found, and daily does find at the hands of sinful men, and the
servant must not think to fare better than his Lord and Master.

Doct. The wicked divert the means of their salvation to their confusion.
Again, observe we hence, how The wicked divert the means of their salvation
to their confusion. God plants and sets, prunes and waters, to make this
Vineyard fruitful; and this his pains engenders nothing in their wicked
hearts but noisome and stenchfull fruits. In stead of grapes, they bring forth
wild grapes.

Thus the Gospel was given for the bringing of men to Christ, and therefore
the Apostle calls it Romans 1.16.
The power of God to salvation: and yet it is found to be to some 2 Cor. 2.16.
a savor of death unto death, and a swift furtherer of their perdition. So the
Sacraments were ordained (in their true and proper use) as a means to increase
faith: But the matter by many is so handled, that they serve for no other end
than to increase their 1 Cor. 11.29.
judgment: yea Christ himself, who was laid in 1 Pet. 2.6.
Sion as a chief corner stone elect and precious, on whom whosoever believes
shall never be confounded, becomes Verse 8. 1 Cor. 1.23.
a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense to disobedient ones. And thus is
it with every other good blessing and ordinance of God.

For as it fares with him that has a surfetted stomach, Reason.
the more good meat he eats, the more he increases his corruption: (the former
crudities undigested having the greater force, turn the good nutriment into
themselves:) so is it with the wicked, whose hearts are full of poisonfull
corruption, and surfetted with sin; and so Tit. 1.16.
corrupt every thing that they have or do receive. Yea, such an Antipathie
there is betwixt Gods grace and man's bad heart, that the more it wrastles with
him, to bring him to salvation, the more he wrastles against it for his own
confusion.

Hence then we may take notice, first, of the poisonfull Christ, the Word, the
Sacraments, the Creatures, yea God himself, are by it made occasions of evil.
Yea look as Gods wisdom and goodness can draw good out of the greatest evil
(as out of man's fall, Judas his treason, the Jews abiection, etc.) So man's
sin can draw evil out of the greatest good, and make it hurtful and
pernicious to his soul: Should we not then hate it and abhor it?

And secondly, of the wretched estate of the sinner, who is poisoned by sin
Needs must his condition be fearful, who brings swift damnation on himself,
not only by foul gross sins but even by the most holy things of God, as the
wicked does: For as Romans 8.28.
all things work together for the best unto them that love God, even to them
that are called of his purpose (as witnesses the Apostle:) So by a rule of
contraries, to them who are unregenerated, all things work together for the
worst. They corrupt all things, they defile all things. Their tongues are
Adders spears, their lips are instruments of guile, their hands work
iniquity, and their feet are swift to the shedding of blood. Their wits they
abuse to cavil with; their wealth to oppress; their strength to steal; their
friends to bolster them out in all: with their knowledge they beguile and
deceive the simple and unstable soul. The Scripture they make a cover for
their profaneness; for when they be espied or reproved, they will tell you
they do no more than what they can justify by holy warrant. Their marriage
they abuse for lust, their children for covetousness, the day for open evil,
and the night for secret shame. How near must their damnation be, when every
thing does further it? Every word, every action, yea every thought does hasten
it. Oh! the misery of the wicked, who in the top of their happiness, and in
the midst of their store and plenty are hastening to death, to Hell.

whose Romans 11.10.
table becomes a snare unto them, and their prosperity their ruin. Do not
then content thy self in the simple enioyment of things good, unless they be
good to thee: Better be as poor as Lazarus, than with Dives to have much
wealth, and have no grace to use it. Eccles. 7.11.
Wisdom is good (says wise King Solomon) with an inheritance; but an
inheritance without wisdom is passing hurtful.

for man's good, shall never return in vain: for if they further not man's
salvation, they will hasten his destruction and confusion. If we will not be
the better for his mercies, we shall be a great deal worse: Some effect will
follow thereupon; if they produce not sweet grapes, they will sour. For Esaias
55.10, 11.
as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may
give seed to the sower, and bread unto the eater: So shall my word be that
goes forth out of my mouth; it shall not return unto me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I
sent it (says the Lord) The preaching of Gods word (and all other of his
ordinances) is such physic as will either cure or kill; none ever heard the
one, or used the other, but was thereby made either much better or much worse;
they became either more barren or more fruitful. The Word in Scripture is
called Hebr. 4.12.
a two edged sword, that cuts both ways; it is either a converting or a
conuincing power: A savor it has to all, either of death or life. And look
as fire has a double operation upon the several subjects it works upon; it
fires stubble, but refines the gold: So has the Word; some hearts (as we have
heard) it enflames with zeal and love unto it; other hearts it sets on fire to
persecute and molest it, and the bringers of it. At one Sermon. Act. 13.7, 8.
Sergius Paulus was converted, and Elimas obdurated: at another Sermon Act.
17.4, 5.
some believed, and some believed not. And upon our Saviors preaching we may
read how John 6.66.
some went back, and walked no more with him; but others stuck more fast and
close unto him, knowing full well that he had the Verse 68.
words of eternal life, and therefore whither should they go? Thus is it to
conversion, if believed; to confusion, if despised. How should this stir us
up to a zealous preparation before we come to the house of God? We return
not to our own homes as we came from thence, but we are one step nearer to
heaven or to hell. Oh! what a grief and heart-breake will it be unto thee at
the last day, to see many who have heard the Word with thee, been of the same
Parish, under the same Ministry, sat in the same stool; to be received into
heaven, because they believed and repented; and thou thy self thrust down to
hell, for thy infidelity and hard-heartednesse? Look therefore well about
thee, and regard the means. Exodus 4.3.
When Moses threw the Rod out of his hand, it became a Serpent; but when he
laid hold of it, and took it to him, it became that Rod wherewith he wrought
those many and mighty miracles. Thus if thou castest the word thou hear from
thee, look to find it as a Serpent that will sting thee to the heart; but lay
hold of it, and take it up, obey it, and apply it, and thou shall have the
great work of thy salvation wrought thereby.

Before we leave this verse, one thing more I would have observed: The fruit
that it brought forth is said to be wild fruit. The word (as was before noted)
signifies Baaschim, Vuas putridas, seu foetidas. Moller. in loc. Acerbas ac
insuaues. Vatab.
such a kind of fruit, which in smell is most odious and stinking; and in taste
most loathsome and unsavory. And this teaches us thus much:

Doctr. The fruit of disobedience is a wild and stinking fruit.
The fruit of disobedience and sin is a stinking and unsavory fruit. It is
such a fruit as is odious and unsavory in Gods nostrils; bitter and unpleasant
to his taste.

Moses in his last song speaking of the wicked and ungodly enemies of the
Church, says thus: Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33.
Their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their
grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter. Their wine is the poison
of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes. For the better understanding of
which words, we are to know, that the Vale of Jordan, where Sodom and her
sisters stood, was before the destruction thereof, one of the goodliest,
pleasantest, and fruitfullest places in the world, even Genesis 13.10.
like Eden the garden of the Lord; or like the land of Egypt: But after the
destruction and overthrow thereof, it became the Zeph. 2.9.
breeding place of nettles and salt pits; yea, it was turned into a most ugly
and loathsome Lake, which is called to this day, the Lake of Sodom, or the
salt, or dead Sea; wherein there is not any fish, or other living creature,
(though it be more than twenty miles of length) neither will it admit any thing
into it that has life, as Josephus a Jew borne, relates Joseph. de bello
Iudaic.
; which relation is seconded by some of the August. de Civ. Dei. Hieron. in
Ezech.
Fathers, and by all such as have traveled in those parts. The report whereof
seemed so strange unto the Romans, that when Vespasian besieged Jerusalem, he
would needs go thither to make a trial; and taking six men that could not
swim, he bound their hands and feet, and cast them all into the water; and not
one sunk, but all swam like leaves. This Josephus witnesses he was an
eyewitness of; who lived there, and went with him. Round about the brinkes of
this Lake there grow store of vines, and fruit trees of all sorts, which bear
grapes and fruit most pleasant to the eye, as evidences of the former
fertility and fruitfulness of that place; but take those grapes and fruits,
and break or bruise them to be eaten, and there is nothing but filthy and
stinking ashes, as though some vile matter had been newly burnt. By this then
it does appear what Moses means in the former words, Their vine is as the
vine of Sodom, etc. that is, fair and pleasant to the outward show, but
within filthy, stinking, and unsavory. And that such is the fruit of sin,
appears yet plainer in sundry places of holy Scripture: In the first chapter
of this prophecy, God tells these Israelites, that Isay 1.11, 12, 13, 14.
he delighted not in the blood of bullocks, nor of lambs, nor of he-goats:
their Incense was an abomination unto him; their new Moons, and Sabbaths, and
calling of Assemblies, he could not away with; for it is iniquity even their
solemn meetings. Their new Moons and appointed Feasts his soul hated; they
were a trouble to him; he was weary to bear them. And when they spread forth
their hands, he would hide his eyes; and when they make many prayers, he would
not hear; for their hands were full of blood. The Scripture for our
understanding ascribes senses to God: and here we find every sense displeased
with their sins.

1. They were offensive to his Tasting: for their burnt offerings of Rams, with
the fat of Lambs, etc. he could not relish; they delighted him not, they were
sour to his palate.

2. They were offensive to his Smelling: for he tells them that their Incense
was an abomination unto him; that precious perfume Exo. 30.34, 35.
which was made with so many sweet spices and pure frankincense, did stink in
his nostrils, the sent thereof he could not abide.

3. They were offensive to his Feeling: for their new Moons and appointed
Feasts were a burden unto him; he was a weary to bear them: And though he be
not weary of bearing the whole world, yet he is a weary of this burden; so
heavy is it to his sense, that he complains Amos 2.13.
he is pressed under it as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaues.

4. They were offensive to his Seeing; and therefore he tells them, though they
spread forth their hands; he will hide his eyes. His pure eyes cannot Hab. 2.13.
behold evil, nor endure to look upon iniquity, and therefore he must turn
away his face from them.

5. They were offensive to his Hearing* for when they make many prayers he will
not hear. Their prayers were as iarring in his ears, as if diverse distracted
Musicians should play upon diverse bad instruments, so many several tunes at
one time.

Neither were their sins only displeasing to his senses, but also grievous to
his mind, and therefore he tells them, Their new Moons and appointed Feasts
his soul did hate; which is an Emphaticall speech, and an argument of Gods
hearty detestation. Now Isay 7.13.
is it a small thing for you to grieve men, but you must grieve God also?

Besides this, the diverse names given to sin in Scripture, and the
comparisons used to set it forth, may show unto us the odiousness of it. It is
called a pollution, a leprosy, a contagion, the vomit of a dog, and wallowing
of a swine in the mire. Again, it is called uncleanness, filthiness, the
execrable thing; and every where it is said to be abomination. From all which
we may safely conclude, that Sin and the fruits thereof are odious and
loathsome to the Lord.

Take the Reason in a word: God is light and purity, Reas.
and perfection it self; and therefore cannot but he must detest and abhor
that which is his contrary.

Hence then we see what the Apostle teaches, Romans 8.8.
They the very oblations of their defiled hands stink in his presence. Their
hearts are like to some Fen or Bogge; and every action they do, is as an evil
vapor ascending thence. Of all the sacrifice and service of wicked men,
Solomon says, Prou. 15.8.
It is an abomination to the Lord: And of their Verse. 9.
whole way, he says as much; every action of their lives God abhorres: Their
actions spiritual, as prayer, reading, hearing, singing, etc. God takes no
pleasure in: Esaias 66.3.
He that sacrifices a Lamb, is as if he cut off a dogs neck, etc. Their
actions civil, as buying, selling, giving, lending, honest dealing, etc. shall
have no better acceptance with him. Their actions natural, as eating,
drinking, sleeping, recreation, etc. all are stinking, loathsome. Alas, for the
fearful estate of such! Oh that the eyes of these were open, that they might
see their misery!

Secondly, let us be admonished to take heed of Omnis malitia eructat fumum.
for all wickedness belcheth forth an evil savor, which God cannot endure,
nor abide. Shall we delight in that which God abhorres? or take pleasure in
that which makes us loathsome to him? Be it far from us so to do. True it
is; while we live here upon the earth, we cannot but we shall fall, and that
often; yet let us not lie still and wallow in uncleanness. For casual
defilements there is hope; but for wilful pollutions there is little. How can
God dwell or abide with us, if we be swearers, drunkards, usurers, oppressors,
or the like? Assuredly he neither can nor will; for these impieties, and such
like, are more odious to him, than any carrion is or can be to us; nay the
Devil himself is not so hateful to him as sin is; Non odit peccatu^
diaboli causa, sed diabolum peccati causa.
for he hates not sin for the Devils sake, but the Devil for sins sake.
And therefore (to shut up all with that exhortation of the Apostle) 2 Cor. 7.1.
Dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

Hitherto we have entreated of the Vineyards plantation: The supplantation of
it follows next to be handled, which is contained in the 3, 4, 5, 6 verses:
wherein we have,

First, the Lords Plea with them, verse. 3, 4.

Secondly, the Verdict or Judgment past upon them, verse. 5, 6.

In the Plea, we have first an Appeal made to them, verse. 3. And secondly an
Indictment against them, verse. 4.

In the Appeal diverse circumstances are considerable: As

1. The Manner of it, which is not in commanding-wise (as it might have been)
but by way of entreaty and request [I pray you.]

2. The Matter requested, and for which this Appeal was made, and that is,
that they would discern wisely of the matter, and accordingly pass sentence,
[Iudge.]

3. Who they be which are made Judges of the cause; and they are the men of
Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; even the whole multitude.

4. The Parties between whom the controversy and variance is, and they are
God and his Vineyard: God being the Plaintiff, and Israel the Defendant.

And now, o inhabitants of Jerusalem, judge, I pray you, Text. Verse. 3.
betwixt me and my Vineyard, etc.

And now] or, Now therefore. Expos.
These are the words of God himself: q* d. Seeing it is thus that my Vineyard
has so frustrated my hopes, therefore now etc.

O inhabitants -- And men -- ] The words are in the Original read in the
singular, not in the plural number: O inhabitant; and man. By whom some would
have the Lord Jesus to be meant (as before was showed:) but it is evident, that
here the Lord appealeth to the Jews themselves, and makes them Judges in their
own cause; referring the matter between him and them to their own
consciences: And we know it is no rare thing in Scripture to find one number
put for another; the plural for the singular, and the singular for the
plural. Now the reason why the Lord speaks to one man (as it were) rather
than to all; or to them all, Singulariter loquitur, postulans non simpliciter
omnes, sed and vnumquemque. Muscul.
as if they were but one, may be this; because he would have judgment, not as
simply of them all together, but particularly of every one; willing every
singular person of Judah and Jerusalem, to commune with their own hearts, and
accordingly give sentence. And therefore Tremellius and Iunius, with diverse
others, Imo viri Ichudae singuli.
read as the Original has it.

Jerusalem; Iudah] Judah was the Country; Jerusalem was the chief City in
that Country; and indeed one of the most famous Cities of the world; full of
people; great amongst the Nations; Princess amongst the Provinces, and in one
respect exceeded all other Cities in the world besides; for therein was Mount
Zion, the place of Gods service and worship, and therefore it was called the
Psalm. 48.1, 8.
City of the Lord of Hoasts: The City of God.

Iudge] To judge sometimes signifies to pass an upright or impartial
sentence against any, true or false: so Christ wills the Jews to John 7.24.
judge righteous judgment: and sometimes it is only taken for the
understanding and discerning of all things; so means the Apostle when he
says, 1 Cor. 14.29.
Let two or three speak, and let the other judge, i. discern what is spoken.
This latter some would have only here meant; as if the Lord did not require
sentence, but only an inspection into the cause. But it may rather seem the
Lord requires not only that they should consider and discern, but also that
they should speak their mind, and give sentence against such a Vineyard.

We shall not need to stand longer upon Interpretation; the other words are
clear: we come now to Doctrine, with the Uses and duties which we are to
learn from each of the particulars. And first from the Manner of this Appeal
[I pray you] learn that

Doctr. Gods proceedings against sinners is with meekness and much mildness.
With much meekness and mildness does God proceed against sinners. When he
has to deal with them, he does not come in fury and rage, but in mild and
peaceable terms, with kind entreaties: He does not, as we see, imperiously
command them with Sic volo, sic jubeo, etc. but vouchsafes kindly to request
them: Iudicate quaeso; I pray ye judge.

The like was Gods manner of proceeding with Adam after his transgression; Genesis
3.9, 11.
Adam where art thou? Who told thee thou were naked? Have thou eaten of the
tree whereof I told thee thou should not eat? In the like manner he comes to
Cain; Genesis 4.9.
Where is thy brother Abel? What have thou done? And so our blessed Savior,
how mildly did he deal with him that smote him unjustly? John 18.23.
If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest
thou me? And what mildness and meekness did he show to Judas, when he came to
betray him, even at that time calling him friend; Matthew. 26.50.
Friend, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? In that parable of the
marriage of the Kings son Matthew. 22.11.
, (wherein Gods proceeding against wicked and ungodly professors, who repent
not of sin, neither do believe in Christ, is set forth) this point may have
further confirmation; for to him that has not on a wedding garment, the King
says thus; Friend, how came thou in hither, etc. quietly and peaceably
examining and conuincing him.

And this the Lord does, Reason.
that he may the sooner and the better bring the sinner to a sight and sense of
his sin and fault, and that he might (if it were possible) be pricked in his
heart, and be brought to see that it is out of love which the Lord bears to
him, as he is his creature; and that he desires not his death, but his
repentance that he might live. And certainly this mild and gentle kind of
dealing, does much sooner cause the offender to see his fault, than a hasty
and passionate proceeding does or can: So that unworthy guest, when he was so
friendly dealt withal had nothing to answer, but was speechless Matthew. 22.12.
.

Herein let us be followers of God, as dear children, precious oil Psalm.
141.5.
which shall not break the head. Let Ministers here learn how to deal with
their hearers; entreating, exhorting, beseeching, even then when they may
lawfully command. In things of this life, see how men are feign to entreat and
sue hard for that which is their own; and heart-glad they are if by any such
course they can gather up their debts. How glad then may we be, if by any
earnest persuasion or fair entreaty we can gather up the debt of obedience,
which our people owe unto the Lord? I will never think much to speak fair
and friendly, so that may follow thereupon, And thus the Apostle Paul does come
unto his hearers, with Romans 12.1.
I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God. And, 2 Cor. 5.20.
We beseech you that you would be reconciled unto God. And again, 2 Cor. 10.1.
I Paul my self beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ* These
are his usual exhortations. And surely when Ministers speak thus to sinful
men, and proceed after this manner with them, I beseech thee by the mercies of
God; I pray thee that thou would leave thy drunkenness, profanation of Gods
Sabbaths, swearing, etc. and be reconciled unto God; it must needs strike deep
into their hearts, if they be not sealed up with hardness and unbelief. Let
Magistrates hence learn to show mercy and compassion, and all tokens and
testimonies of love toward malefactors, even then when Justice is to be
executed, and punishment inflicted, that offenders may see it is not malice,
but Justice that inflicteth that punishment upon them: and that it is not their
blood, but their good and the good of others which is sought. And thus dealt
Joshua with Achan after he was apprehended for that execrable wickedness which
he had committed, and whereby all Israel was troubled. Iosu. 7.19.
My son (says he) I beseech thee give glory unto the Lord God of Israel, and
make confession unto him, and tell me now what thou have done, hide it not from
me. For want of this, Iehu the king of Israel is threatened to be punished: For
albeit he executed the judgments of the Lord against the house of Ahab,
according to Gods command; yet doing it with a cruel and reuengefull mind,
without all pity and compassion, God was displeased, and says he will
revenge the Hos. 1.4.
blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu. Let all Christians in general take
out this lesson which the Lord himself does here and elsewhere teach us by his
practice: and in informing or reforming offending persons, let us use all
moderation and meekness, endeavoring in the quietest and mildest manner to
convince them of their sins: In so doing we shall first, tread in the steps of
God himself: Secondly, give obedience to Gods commands, which require us Gal.
6.1.
to Restore such as are fallen with the Spirit of meekness: Thirdly, manifest
we have the Spirit of God in us by the fruits, whereof this is one Cap. 5.23.
: Fourthly, have some hope that our reproves, admonitions, exhortations, etc.
shall be profitable: for if ever we do good, it must be by weight of good
Arguments pressed in meekness of wisdom with mildness of spirit, that must
be as sugar, without which the bitter pills of reproof will not be swallowed.
But alas! we cannot hit of those steps which our heavenly Father has trodden
in, and wherein our blessed Savior has gone before us. How does that
hastiness in many of us Ministers, who because we see not present success of
our labors, are ready to surcease our pains, and forgo all, sort with this
truth, or that Iniunction which S. Paul gives to Timothy, and in him, to all
other Ministers, 2 Timothy 2.29.
In meekness instruct those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth? How do those bitter
jests, taunts and reproaches cast out against such as are in misery (what
though they be evil doers, standing at the bar to be judged and arraigned)
usually to be heard in the places of Justice and Judgment, by such as are in
place of authority, come nigh this copy which God has set? How can we see we
imitate God like good children, when having to deal with friend or foe, we
grow hot and boisterous, if we be a little moved? Alas for us! oh that we could
but remember Gods peaceable proceeding, even with the vessels of his wrath, and
learn more mildness.

But are we to deal thus mildly with all, Quest.
may some demand? is there no time when, nor no person to whom, rigor and
severity must be showed?

Surely, much patience and lenity must be used even unto the very worst, Answ.
until it be despised and wilfully contemned: and then if it be clear no
meekness will serve to win men, it is high time to use severity toward
such, who by mild entreaties will not be persuaded: And thus our blessed
Savior, though in his first Sermon he pronounces Matthew. 5.
Blessings, yet in his other he denounces Matthew. 23.
Woes and curses against the Scribes and Pharisees, when as the former did not
work upon them.

Let this teach us likewise to admire the great goodness and unspeakable mercy
of the Lord. Men commonly are intreaters for those things which are profitable
to themselves; but who is he that is earnest with another to do that which
tends only to the profit of him with whom he deals? If a man of himself
cannot see what makes for his own good, and do it of his own accord, we
think him well worthy to smart for his own folly. But here see Gods dealing
with us the sons of men, who desires and entreats us to sit in judgment
against our selves; and why? surely for this end, that he might not judge us:
for as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord; so that the
profit hereof would be our own. How should our hearts relent? how should we be
overcome with this kindness of the Lord, who so graciously and mercifully
requesteth and entreats us for our own welfare?

Psalm. 103.8.
The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy, who
will not always chide; neither will he keep his anger for evermore: He
bears patiently with the wicked, his slaves, his vassals: and will he not
with thee, who art his child, his darling? Is it possible that he should be
worser toward thee who seek his face, than he is with them who seek it not
at all? That cannot be. And thus much for the Manner, how he makes his
Appeal: Now for the Matter, or thing it self for which he does Appeal, and
that is Judgment.

Judge I pray you.] He does not say, condemn these, Text.
or justify my procedings, but judge, advise, take counsel, and accordingly
pass sentence. Thus

God is content to submit his courses unto scanning; Doctr. God is content to
submit his courses unto scanning, etc.
and to bring his proceedings with the sons of men unto a trial before he
proceed to judgment.

In the first Chapter of this Prophecy, we read how the Lord does as it were
provoke the people to a pleading with him, Isay 1.18.
Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, etc. as if he should say,
If you are so well persuaded of the goodness of your cause, and are so ready
to accuse me, and excuse your selves (which is the property of all hypocrites)
let us reason about the business, and bring the matter unto a trial, that so
it may appear whether I or your selves be most in fault. The like Plea he
offers his people by the Prophet Jeremiah; Ier. 2.9.
Wherefore I will yet plead with you, says the Lord, and with your childrens
children I will plead. And by the Prophet Micah he summons them to the like
business, willing them to plead the cause with him, as it were at even hand,
offering to make answer to whatsoever they could object or lay unto his charge;
and he calls upon the hills and mountains to be witnesses, yea Judges of the
cause; Mich. 6.1, 2.
Hear O ye mountains (says he) the Lords controversy, and ye strong
foundations of the earth, for the Lord has a controversy with his people, and
he will plead with Israel: O my people, what have I done unto thee? and wherein
have I wearied thee? testify against me, etc.

And the maine reason hereof is, Reas.
that the Justice of God might hereby be cleared, and every man's mouth stopped;
Ps. 51.4.
That he might be justified when he speaks, and cleared when he judges.

But the Apostle reproves such as dare word it with the Lord, and dispute with
him about his proceedings; Object.
Romans 9.20.
Who art thou O man, says he, that pleadest against God? Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? etc.

Answer.
True; for though God be content to offer it, for the clearing of his justice,
and conviction of the sinner, yet it is ouer-great boldness and sauciness,
for any man to require and demand it: Here was Jobs failing, Ieremiahs
weakness, and David's infirmity.

Make these uses of this point.

I^struction, that we admire the rich mercy and great goodness of the Lord,
who is content so to abase himself, as to put his holy actions and proceedings
to our scanning; and plead with us Clay and Dirt, Dung and Wormes-meat, about
his just and righteous proceedings. Should he use Martial law against us, and
as soon as ever we offend, (like Draco) write his laws in blood upon us, it
were but just and right: Now for him to come and reason with us, and plead
about the justice of his cause, before he proceeds to judgment, this deserves
acknowledgement and admiration in the highest degree. Should the wood quarrel
with the Carpenter? or the Iron with the Smith? or the clay with the Potter?
Would they do thus? And yet there is more difference between God and us, than
is or can be between the Carpenter and his wood; the Smith and his Iron; the
Potter (though he were a King) and his pot, (though it were of the worst
fashion, or for the basest use.) Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom, and loving kindness of our
God! How unsearchable is his goodness, and his mercies past finding out!

Admonition unto us; that we beware how we tax God of the least injustice in
any of his proceedings, for he is so assured of the equity of his actions, as
that he fears not the scanning of them by his very enemies: yea, so far is
he from fearing it, as that he will provoke them to a pleading with him that
do accuse him: Now we know, none call for a day of trial, but such as are
well persuaded they are of the surer side; as for those that do evil, they
John 3.20.
hate the light, as our Savior speaks, lest their deeds should be reproved.
Be thou then contented with his will; he has reason for his actions, though
thou know it not. This is a lesson we cannot hit on; the best of us are
much wanting in it: We can all say, It is a shame to contend with the
Almighty; yet when his hand lies any way upon us, then, Oh that I might speak
with the Almighty. Holy Job while he was himself, Job 9.1, 2, 3.
acknowledges this; but being tried with affliction, then Cap. 23.3, 4.
he forgot himself; for which God sharply Cap. 40.2.
reproues him; and then Cap. 42.1, 2.
Job cries peccaui, and acknowledges his own vileness, and promises
amendment. Whatsoever God does, acknowledge to be most just: Say not, what a
hard case is this; or how can this stand with justice? But learn thou better
things, and with Ely say; 1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: And with Mauritius,
remember that of David, Psalm. 119.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy judgments. What thou can not
understand, inquire not a reason of, but reverence it: Could thou understand
it, thou should much more understand that thou have no reason to complain,
though it were for the reprobation of thy husbands, wives, childs, or own
soul.

The Parties, who are appointed Judges in the cause, are in the next place to
be considered; and they are themselves.

You inhabitants of Jerusalem, Text.
and men of Iudah] He does not put the business to this or that friend to
arbitrate, neither does he call upon Isay 1.2.
heaven and earth, nor on the Mica. 6.1, 2.
mountains and strong foundations, (as he does elsewhere) to hear the
quarrel: (for it might have been thought these would have been partial) But
he makes his adversaries themselves the Judges of the cause: Whence note we;
Doctr. God will fetch witness from his adversaries own consciences, for the
justifying his proceedings.


God will fetch witness from his adversaries own consciences, for the
justifying and condemning themselves. God will neither choose nor use any other
Judge to condemn man, than man himself.

Thus the Lord after he had used all good means, for the converting of
Ephraim and Judah, demands of no other than of themselves, Hos. 6.4.
what he should do more: And so our Savior, after he had propounded that
Parable of the Vineyard, Matthew. 21.40.
let out to wicked husbandmen, requires of the Priests and Rulers their
judgment: and they sentence them; and in them, themselves thus: That they were
worthy to be destroyed, and to have the Vineyard taken from them, and let out
to others, who should render the fruits in their seasons. The like I might show
of Pharaoh, Exodus 9 27.
who by force of conscience, was made to justify the Lord to his own
confusion: And of Adonibezek, Judge. 1.7.
who acknowledged, (when Judah had taken him and cut off his thumbs and toes)
that as he had done by others, so had God requited him: And of Judas, Matthew.
27.4.
who read the sentence against himself, there being none else to do it:
Besides many other, of whom mention is made in Scripture, whose mouths have
been opened to read their own doom, to the justifying of the Lord, and
condemning of themselves. Hereunto tends the Apostles speech when he tells
us, that the sinner is subverted and sins, Tit. 3.11.
being selfe-condemned. Thus, God loves to have a sinner accuse himself,
before he accuse him; condemn himself, before he condemn him.

condemn them, for such or such an action? Alas poor soul! There is a
conscience within thee that sees thee, and will condemn thee; thy self shall
pass sentence against thy self: Now thou can hide, cover, and cloak thy
sin, and plead in the defense thereof; but when God shall cite thy conscience
to give in evidence, that shall be as a thousand witnesses, Conscientia mill
testes.
and condemn thee for thy most secret sins. Though thou do escape all
apprehension and accusation in this world, yet thy own conscience will arrest
thee and hale thee unto judgment: And albeit thou escape man's judgment, yet
the judgment of thy own conscience thou shall never escape. Neither think,
that what thou thy self know shall ever be concealed: thou art privy to
thy own lewdness, and know of thy drunkenness, adultery, theft, etc. Quid
tibi prodest non habere conscium habenti conscientiam?
What art thou the better then, in that no body else is privy to them, so long
as thou have a conscience within thee? Neither think thou, that because thy
conscience is now asleep, or seared, and benumbed, through a continuance in
the custom of sin, that it will never be awakened, or that this is nothing
so: For as the poize of a clock being down, all motion cease; the wheels
stir not; but being wound up, all is set on going: So albeit now, while thy
conscience is down, there is no noise nor moving in thy heart, all is quiet;
yet when it is wound up by the justice of God, (as one day assuredly it shall)
it will set all the wheels on working; thy tongue, to confess and say,
guilty, Lord, guilty; thy eyes, to weep; thy hands, to wring; thy voice, to
cry; thy heart, to ache; and yet all in vain. Be watchful therefore, and ever
remember Conscience: Beware of hypocrisy, and secret sins, for though thou
can hide them from men and Devils, yet not from it: And look thou neglect
not the checks of conscience. Does it now check thee, and reprove thee, for
thy ways? know the time comes, when that conscience which does now check
thee, shall judge thee and condemn thee; and that which does now reprove thee,
shall hereafter torment thee in endless woe, if thou repent not.

Man shall judge himself and justify the Lord; then let it teach us this
point of wisdom, to begin betimes, and now 1 Cor. 11.31.
judge our selves that we may not be judged. Selfe-condemning is an especial
means to prevent future condemnation; and the more speedily we set upon the
work, the more mercifully will the Lord deal with us. It is recorded of
Edward the first, sometimes King of this land, Acts and Monum.
that being crossed by a servant of his in the sport of Hawking, and further
incensed by a saucy answer which he made unto the Kings threatenings (telling
him it was well there was a river between them) spurd his horse into the depth
of the river, not without great danger of his life (the water being deep, and
the banks too high and steep for his ascending) Yet at last recovering land,
pursues his servant with his drawn sword. The servant finding himself too ill
horsed to outride the King, and seeing no way to escape his fury, lights from
his horse, and on his knees exposed his neck to the blow of the Kings sword:
The King seeing this, puts up his sword, and would not touch him. Behold how
humble submission and selfe-iudging soon pacifies him, whom a dangerous water
could not withold from violence.

Whiles men stand out against God, just fying themselves, stubbornly flying
from him, he that rides upon the wings of the wind posts after, with the sword
of vengeance drawn; but when we condemn our selves, and cast our selves down
at the foot of his mercy, then will his wrath be soon appeased toward us.

Ephesians. 5.1.
as dear Children, and be so upright and just in our proceedings, as that we
may dare to appeal to the consciences of our adversaries for witness and
testimony of our innocence: And (as the Apostle wills) 2 Cor. 4.2.
let us approve our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. Such
was David's carriage toward Saul 1 Samuel 24.18. and 26.21.
, as that he was constrained twice to testify of him, Thou art more righteous
than I. The innocence of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, Dan. 3.26.
caused Nebuchadnezzar to pronounce with his own mouth, they were the servants
of the high God. Though Plinius Secundus be an enemy to Christians, and a
persecutor of them, yet their holy and godly conversation shall make him to
certify the Emperor his Master, Traian, that they are harmless persons.
Thus let thy life be holy and innocent, and then thou may fetch a testimony
from the conscience of the very enemy. And as David said sometimes to Micol
(obiecting unto him that even his own servants contemned him for his dancing
before the Arc) 2 Samuel 6.22.
Of the servants which thou have spoken of, of them shall I be had in honor:
So say I; even those wicked ones that outwardly traduce thee and revile thee,
cannot, but inwardly they must acquit thee and commend thee; their heart and
conscience shall speak for thee even then, when their tongue and lips do
speak against thee. And when ever it shall please the Lord to set their
consciences on the rack, or to compass them about with the snares of death,
then shall their tongue be constrained, will they, nill they, to discover what
now lies hidden for the justification of thy righteousness. Then they cry
out, oh send for such a man, or such a woman, they will pray for me and do me
good, and give me comfort: and do we not see daily that they sooner trust (for
all their talk) such as they term Hypocrites, Dissemblers, and Precisians,
with their goods and with their children, and with their portions, yea, and
with their souls also, before any other?

The last thing propounded to our consideration in this Appeal, is the Parties
between whom the variance is, and they are the Lord and Israel, God and his
Vineyard; God being the Plaintiff, and the whole body of the people, even all
Israel and Judah, the Defendants: As unequally matched as ever were Earth and
Heaven, Strength and Weakness, or the great Beemoth and the silliest worm
that creepes in the chinkes and crannies of the earth. God contends with man;
he that is excellent, with them that are but dust: who then is like to have the
day?

Text.
Between me and my Vineyard.] And is it possible that there should be a
controversy between God and his Vine, which he planted with his own right
hand? Between him and that people whom he had so highly honored? Then it will
follow, that

Doct. Sin is a makebate between God and man.
Sin will make bate and stir up strife between God and his dearest people.

There is no City, no not Jerusalem; no people, no not Israel nor Judah, be
they graced with never so many privileges, crowned with never so many
blessings, but sin will set the Lord and them at variance: The Lord has a
controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land (says Hoseah) Hosea 4.1, 2.
because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land, etc.
Sin was the breeder of it. Babylon Isay 13.19.
the glory of the Kingdoms, the beauty of the Caldees excellency: yet her
pride set her and God at variance, so that her Palaces were made dens of
Dragons; wild beasts of the field did lie there; their houses were cages for
unclean birds; Owls did dwell there; Satyrs did dance there; with doleful
creatures were they filled. And thus Sodom, Genesis 19.24.
sometimes as fair and beautiful as Paradise it self, was set at variance
with the Lord by reason of her sins: Ezekiel. 16.49.
Pride, Idleness, and Fullness of bread, etc. bred the quarrel, and was the
cause that she was made Zeph. 2.9.
a perpetual desolation. And will not those seven famous Churches of Asia,
Revel. 1. and 2. and 3.
Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Laodicea, Philadelphia, Sardis, (in the midst
whereof God is said to have his walk) witness as much? Did not their sins
cause the Lord to contend with them a long time; and in the end make him to
give up their Land to be inhabited by Zijm and Ochim; Turks and Infidels? What
shall I need to say more? Such a variance it made between God and the Angels,
Jude 6.
as that they were turned out of Heaven: Between God and our great
Grandfather, as Genesis 3.22.
that he was drove out of Paradise: Between the Lord and Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.51,
52.
as that it kept him from Canaan: And such a contention daily it breeds
between God and men, as that infinite thousands are thereby kept 1 Cor. 6.9.
Revel. 21.
out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Let all wicked ones hence take notice of their estates, What peace (says Iehu
to Ioram) 2 King 9.22.
so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Iezebel, and her witchcrafts are so
many? So say I, What peace so long as that makebate is harbored in thy breast?
Nay, Isay 57.21.
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. For what 2 Cor. 6.14.
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? What communion has
light with darkness? What concord has Christ with Belial? God is thy enemy,
and Matthew. 5.25.
has against thee, and therefore see thou agree quickly with thy adversary.
We say in a proverb, He is poor that God hates: true, none so poor as the
wicked are; for what though they have riches, honors, friends, etc. when there
is a controversy between God and them? 1 Samuel 2.25.
If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge for him, (said old Ely
to his sons) but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?
Seek therefore reconciliation; cast that makebate our of thy bosom, which
stirs up all this strife. Sin is thy own creature; destroy that, and God
must needs love thee, who art his creature: but if thou will not, then expect
no peace, but contention and destruction. If the Pot will needs contend with
the Potter, it cannot be, but it must be broken: Thou art but an earthen
Pitcher in the hand of thy Maker, and he can full easily dash thee against the
wall, and stamp thee into powder. It is good counsel that the Wiseman gives
thee, Eccles. 6.10.
Contend not with him who is mightier than thy self: and if thou be not a
fool, I advise thee to follow it, lest Woe and Alas come too late.

Joshua 7.8-13.
What shall I say, O Lord, when Israel turns their backs before their
enemies? (said Joshua to God:) now mark Gods answer: Get thee up; wherefore
lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned, they have transgressed my
Covenant which I have commanded them, for they have even taken of the accursed
thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it even
amongst their own stuff. Therefore the children of Israel could not stand
before their enemies, because they were accursed: neither will I be with you
any more, except you destroy the accursed thing from amongst you. This answer
may we give to the like demand; Why are we so often punished, afflicted,
plagued? Surely we have taken of that execrable thing, and broken the Covenant
of the Lord; and until that accursed thing (Sin) be searched out and cast
away, never hope for any favor to be showed from the Lord: Jonah 1.15.
Jonah must be cast ouer-boord before the storm cease.

at variance, be they graced with never so many excellencies or privileges:
then Romans 11.20.
be not high minded, but fear: for whatsoever thou art that sinnest against
the Lord, be thy privileges never so many or excellent, Ierem. 22.24.
were thou as a signet upon Gods right hand, or as the apple of his eye; yet he
will have a controversy with thee. And so for our Land in general, which may
seem to outvie the felicity of all other Nations in high and rich
prerogatives. Of all the trees in the Garden, we may seem to be the Vine that
God has set his heart upon; amongst all the variety of Flowers, England is
the Lilly and the Rose; amongst all the Princes we have had a Deborah, and have
a David; amongst all the Prophets of the Lord, we have the most reverend
Elishaes; amongst all the Nurseries and Springs of learning; we have the most
famous Naioths; amongst all Lands, we have that Canaan which abounds with
plenty of all good things; and amongst all Cities, we have Jerusalem. But
will these privileges bear us out if we take liberty to sin against the
Lord? Alas! they cannot; nay, so far are they from stopping Gods wrath, as
that they will rather make way for it. As a man is more offended with the evil
behavior of a servant that has been advanced by him; so the Lord with us.
When Saul behaved himself not so well in his Kingdom as he ought, it was
taken from him and given unto David. Hold that thou have, O England, lest
misery come upon thee.

And thus much for the Appeal, which was the first thing we considered in the
Plea. The Indictment follows in these words: Text.
What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it?
Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes?

Wherein we have an Action commenced against them of Ingratitude, which is
prosecuted and proved to their faces, and therein,

More particularly we see; first, how the Lord excuses himself from being in
any fault for that their barrenness: No way was he defective; he had done as
much as might be done to make it fruitful: What could have been done more to
my Vineyard (says he) that I have not done in it?

And secondly, he accuses them for horrible unthankfulness in making so
ungrateful a return; which accusation is amplified by an Antithesis between
his just demand, He looked that it should bring forth grapes, and their unjust
demeanure, for it brought forth wild grapes.

The form of the words, as we see, is Interrogatorie; What could have been
done? Wherefore when I looked, etc. And it is observed by some, that before man
fell to sinning, God fell not to questioning; all his speeches to him were
either commendatory or commandatory. But when man turned his heart to another
object, then God turned his voice to another accent; and the first word he
speaks to him after his transgression was a question, Genesis 3.9.
Adam where art thou? and with the same form and method of speech he goes
on; Verse 11.
Who told thee thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded
thee thou should not eat? And ever since it is usual with the Lord to
discuss with man after the same manner; sometimes to teach him; sometimes to
reprove him; sometimes to confirm him; and oftentimes to convince him: For
albeit man's questions are for the most part effects of dubitation (doubting
being the mother of them that breeds them and causes them) yet Gods
questions are of another nature, and have another use; for they for the most
part tend to convince the conscience, and bring it to a sense and science of
sin: And so here; God does Appeal to the consciences of these Israelites,
and fetch evidence against them, from the impartial evidence of their own
hearts, What could have been done more? q.d. Is there any thing that could
have been desired of a Husbandman, wherein I have been wanting? Show me
wherein I have failed of my duty; allege what you can against me; let your
consciences speak.

Wherefore when I looked, etc.] Some read it, Why have I looked Moller. in loc.
: as if God should expostulate with himself, why he expected any good fruit
from so naughty and perverse a people; and that he does after the manner of
men, who oftentimes complain of themselves, and are offended with themselves,
when the event of a thing does not answer their hope and expectation; for that
they have bestowed such cost and pains to so little purpose. But others think
this sense to be the plainer; Calu. in loc.
Seeing I have fully discharged my duty, and have done above all that could
have been expected in husbanding my Vine; whence comes it, that it yields me
so evil recompense?

Now happily some may object, Object.
that albeit God had thus planted and watered his Church, and used all outward
means for the fertility thereof, yet seeing (as the Apostle shows) 1 Cor. 3.
Paul's planting is nothing, nor Apolloes watering, without Gods blessing; how
could God say, he had done all that could be done, when he withheld a
blessing, and softened not their hearts, that the means might become
profitable? Might not this man of Judah, and inhabitant of Jerusalem have had
replied Matthew. 8.2.
Why Lord, if thou will, Loquitur de sufficientia externoris mediorum, non
internae gratiae. Hieron. and Vrsin. Simul pluit Dominus super segetes and
super spinas: sed segeti pluit ad horreum, spinis ad ignem; and tamen vna est
pluvia. August. de benedict. Esau and Jacob.
thou can make us clean?

For answer hereunto: First, we are to know, that God here speaks of the
sufficiency of the outward means, and not of inward grace: That was done to
this wicked Vineyard, which if it had been good, would have brought forth the
fruit of repentance and new obedience. The Rain falls, the Sun shines upon
the earth; the garden hereupon brings forth herbs, the desert thorns; whence
is this, but from the nature of the ground? there is as much done to make one
fruitful as the other. Thus God had done enough, the means he used were
sufficient, had not this people been of such a peevish and froward disposition.

Abraham; and give Christ more than twelve Legions of Angels to deliver him)
but he denies that he was bound to do any more for them than he did. And
therefore that cavil would have been but frivolous (says Calvin) for their
consciences pricked them in such wise, as that they could not escape by laying
the fault upon another. For albeit God do not pierce with efficacy into the
hearts of men by his holy Spirit to make them teachable; yet it will be in
vain for any notwithstanding to mutter that this was wanting to them, seeing
that their external vocation does sufficiently cut off all pretext and show of
ignorance whatsoever. And now let us come to some such Instructions as the text
will naturally afford: And first we see how

Doctr. God cannot any way be charged with man's barrenness.
God is altogether out of fault, and can no way be charged with the sinfulness
and barrenness of men's hearts and lives.

In another place of this prophecy we find the Lord complaining, Isai. 65.2.
that he had held out his hands all the day long to a gainsaying and rebellious
people. His arms were stretched out, he ready to receive, but they did
gainesay and rebel, and refused to come into his arms. And by the Prophet
Jeremiah he tells the people, how Ier. 44.4, 5.
he sent all his servants the Prophets unto them, rising early, and sending
them, saying, Oh do not such abominable things which I hate. But they harkned
not, nor inclined their ears to turn from their wickedness. And by the
Prophet Hosea he thus speaks; Hos. 12.10.
I have spoken unto them by the Prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and
used similitudes by the ministry of the Prophets. The meaning is, that he had
declared his will, and made known his mind unto them so plainly, as that they
could not plead ignorance, or any way charge him with fault. And our Savior
Jesus Christ complains thus; Matthew. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together, even
as a Hen gathers her chickens, and ye would not. Where we see clearly how
God would their conversion (understand it of his Voluntas signi, not voluntas
beneplaciti.
signifying will) and therefore gave them the outward means, sending unto them
Verse. 34.
Prophets, Wisemen, and Scribes; messengers endued with all variety of gifts,
administrations, and operations; and that not once, but often; How often would
I have gathered? Often by the mouth of his servants; often by his own self;
as the loving Hen is always caring for her chickens; always clucking and
calling them, if they wander out of her sight never so little, that she may
gather them and guard them from the mischief of all vermin: But they would
not; they themselves gainesaid. Where then lay the fault? And so S. Stephen
complains of the Jews; yea tells them to their faces, that they were Acts
7.51.
stiff-necked, and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, and did always resist
the Holy Ghost; that is, the work of the Holy Ghost in the ministry of the
word, and would not be wrought upon.

But the Scripture speaks of Gods hardening Exodus 7.3. and 10.27.
Pharaohs heart, Object.
so that the means should not be profitable unto him: And God himself
commands Isaiah, to preach unto the people, that they may be hardened Isai
6.10. and 63.17.
, and so not converted.

True; and yet in all this God cannot be charged Psalm. 81.12.
My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me: so I
gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own
counsels. Thus then God does this for a punishment of such as withstand and
contemn those gracious means he offers them for their good. Pharaoh seipsum
indurauit libero arbitrio: Deus indicrauit Pharaonem iusto iudicio. Aug.
If Pharaoh harden his heart against the means, God will harden his heart that
he shall not profit by the means. So then though Satan hardneth as a
malicious Author; and man hardneth himself as a voluntary instrument; yet God
hardneth no otherwise, than as he is a just Judge and righteous auenger of
sin.

Non inducendo malitiam, sed subtrahendo gratiam. Aquin.
by infusing evil, but by withholding of his grace, and forsaking of his
creature, which Divines call spiritual desertion. As the Sun freezeth the
water, not by adding coldness to it, but by keeping back his heat: so is God
a deficient cause of hardness, but no efficient thereof. And this must be
marked, that we err not in this point. Now let us make the Use.



Romans 9.19.
Who has ever resisted his will? and why does he yet find fault? He has
decreed it, and his decree must stand: If the Devils in hell should speaks
what could they say more? We have fallen, and God caused it. Wicked and
fearful thoughts! When Adam sinned, Genesis 3.12.
he blamed his wife; and she, God himself; and we have sucked the same milk:
but as it would not serve Adams turn, no more will it serve ours. Cease then
thou foolish one from charging God, or drawing him in as an accessarie to thy
profaneness; God would have thee saved, but thou will not: He labors to make
thee good, and dare thou lay to his charge thy own voluntary badnesse?
Behold, God is so far from being guilty of thy misery, as that he gives
thee his Word, his Sacraments, and affords thee all good helps to mollify
thy heart, justifying himself by these proferd means of thy salvation, that
he has no desire nor delight in thy destruction; and dare thou charge him
with thy damnation?

Thou say, If God would, it should be otherwise: if he

True; Resp.
if we speak of his absolute power (as was before showed) but it is his
actual power that thou must look unto; and so he (having tied the end and the
means together) cannot, because he will not bring thee to the end without thy
using of those means which tend unto the end: for that is the ordinary course
which he has decreed to use, and which he will not alter but upon special
occasion, as our Savior notes Luke 4.26, 27.
in the cure of Naaman, and in the feeding of the widow of Sarepta. God has
ordained that a man's body should live by the means of meat, drink, sleep,
etc. should thou now neglect these means for the preservation thereof, and
yet accuse God if thou growest sick, and weak, etc. because if he would he
could continue health and strength unto thee without these helps* I am sure
that all men would condemn thee; nay that thou would condemn thy self of
folly and presumption.

decree; for albeit thou use the means, yet the end is already decreed, and
who can alter it?

Resp.
But secret things belong unto the Lord; leave them to him: It is not for thee
to pry into that Arc which is covered with a curtain of holy secrecy; not to
be drawn aside until that day comes; wherein we shall know as we are known.
That signed and revealed will, written in Tables, published with trumpets, is
it to which thou stand bound. Neither does the necessity of this Decree
excuse: for God does not by his Decree force thee unto evil; but he finds
thee evil, and prone only unto it of thy self: He decrees that thou shall be
so or so; and knows that thou would be so, had he never decreed it: but
seeing thou know not what this his decree is, use the means, and condemn
not God.

Thus learn to chamber thy tongue, vain man: for God cannot be charged, nor
any way blamed with thy sinfulness and barrenness. Lay thy hand upon thy
mouth, and condemn thy self: for Hos. 13.
Thy destruction is of thy self, oh Israel. Say not, what can I remedy it, if
God will not save me; for what can God do more than he has done for thee? God
raines upon thee his holy deawes, and is not wanting in his purging and pruning
thee with his corrections. He has given thee strange and excellent means; so
that it is only thou that art wanting to thy self: Heaven is good, but thy
ground is naught. A cunning Caruer can cut the similitude of any creature; yet
not on a rotten stick: where lies the fault? Surely in the rottenness of the
wood, and not in the Caruers cunning: that thou art not wrought upon, the fault
is thy own, and not the Lords. Thy case is that of Jerusalem; How often would
I have gathered thee, and thou would not. If then thou smartest for thy
sinful and barren life, thank thy self; for thou art the cause, God only the
auenger; thy blood then be upon thy own head, that which will die let it die.
And thus much for the first point. A second follows: and I propound it thus:

The wicked will still continue wicked, Doct. The wicked will still continue
wicked, notwithstanding all means to the contrary.
although God use all good means that can be used to bring them unto good, and
make them better. God had done what might be done, and yet his Vineyard is as
bad, nay worse than ever: A pregnant proof this our Prophet gives us, when he
says, Isay 26.10.
Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: in
the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the
Majesty of the Lord. Such is the vile and cursed nature of them, as that no
mercy nor favor can work with them to do well; nay in the land of
uprightness, amongst many occasions and means of good, they will do
wickedly. And thus Jeremiah to the same purpose; Ier. 2.30, 31.
In vain I have smitten your children, they received no correction, etc. O
Generation, see ye the word of the Lord: have I been a wilderness unto
Israel,? a land of darkness? wherefore say my people, We are Lords, we will
come no more unto thee? And again, Cap. 5.3.
O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have stricken them, but they
have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction, they have made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused
to return. And so Amos Amos 4.6.
shows how incorrigible the wicked of his time were; no correction that the
Lord could use, would better them. Many are the examples likewise that might be
brought for the further strengthening of this truth, as of Pharaoh, Ahaz, and
others; but I purposely forbear, inasmuch as something has formerly been
spoken to this purpose. Now briefly for the use, which is,

For Admonition, Use.
that we beware of this sin which has an aggravating circumstance with it:
for then is sin most vile and filthy when it breaks out against those
means that should have kept it in: Means that should keep us from sin.
Amongst many of which means, these are some; which let us all take especial
notice of.

1. Vows.
First, our Vows and promises which we have often made unto the Lord both in
health and sickness, that we would do such or such a holy duty, and refrain
from such or such an evil action: let us beware of sinning against these: our
vows are Gods debts, and they must be paid; and therefore says Solomon,
Eccles. 5.4, 5.
When thou vowest a vow to God, defer not to pay it; for he has no pleasure
in fools: pay that which thou have vowed. Better is it that thou should not
vow, than that thou should vow and not pay. And indeed Just exigitur ad
soluendum, qui non cogitur ad vouendum. Bern.
he is justly required to pay, that was not compelled to vow. And amongst all
other vows, be mindful of that solemn vow which thou made to God in thy
Baptism, and have often since renewed in thy coming to the Supper of the Lord.
Oh! what a fearful thing is it, if we wittingly and wilfully break covenant
with God, when civil honesty makes some conscience of keeping promise made
with man.

2. Check of Conscience.
Secondly, check of Conscience. God has set conscience within us as a Monitor
to give us an Item when we do amiss, and to forewarne us of evil; this
oftentimes tells us we may not do such or such an action, or when we have done
it, that it is not well: now beware we of sinning against conscience; neglect
not the checkes thereof reproving us of our ways, but heedfully mind its
watchword; for else know assuredly, that the conscience which now checkes
thee, shall hereafter judge thee, and that which now reproves thee, will
hereafter vex thee and torment thee for thy neglect. Beware also how thou
suppressest any good motion suggested by conscience; for in so doing, thou will
in the end clean silence conscience, and quite kill it, so that the grossest
sins shall be practiced without Ephesians. 4.18, 19.
any check or remorse. Fearful is this sin, and such as is the forerunner
of Romans 1.21, 26.
a reprobate mind.

3. Corrections.
Thirdly, Corrections and Afflictions. These are the Hos. 2.6.
thorns wherewith God does hedge us in; and serve to keep us from leaping out
of Gods pastures into the pasture of wickedness and sin. Beware we then of
leaping over this hedge: take we heed of sinning against these means: let it
not be said of us as it was of Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
This is that King Ahaz, who in the time of his distress did trespass yet
more and more against the Lord. To be afflicted, and not to be purged by
afflicton; to be stricken with the rods of God, and to have no correction nor
reformation follow, is a sign of a fearful induration. Ier. 6.29, 30.
The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed with the fire: the founder
melts in vain; for the wicked are not plucked away. Reprobate silver shall
men call them, because the Lord has rejected them.

Fourthly, Gods many and great mercies; 4. The Word.
especially the Word, and the light of the Gospel: take we heed how we
withhold the Romans 1.18.
Truth of God in unrighteousness, Psalm. 50.16.
hating to be reformed, casting it behind our backs. Such a sin is this, as
brings condemnation with a witness, with a vengeance; sore and heavy
condemnation: John 3.19.
This is that condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. The clear light of
the truth shining, has discovered to us, that Swearing is a sin;
Drunkenness is a sin; Sabbath breaking is a sin, etc. what now will such
plead for themselves that live therein? Surely they have now John 15.22.
no cloak for their sins. S. Paul would have the word of God Coloss. 3.16.
to dwell plentifully in our hearts; to have full scope and the whole sway in
the heart of a Christian: And so be it. These and the like means which God
affords us for our good, let us profit by, and by no means sin against
them; for if we do, assuredly God will require it of us; for good turns
aggrauate unkindness, and our offenses are increased with our obligations: Of
all the gracious means he affords us, he keeps a reckoning. The sundry
afflictions Amos 4.6.-11.
wherewith his people were afflicted, are by him remembered; and so the Sermons
and Prophesies of his servants, Isay 1.1. Ier. 1.1. Hos. 1.1.
with the circumstances of time and place, and under what Kings reign, are
likewise by him recorded. Since therefore God keeps such a precise account of
the means he vouchsafes to us, let it stir up all to make better account and
use of those means: for otherwise they will be reckoned for no other end, but
to make our reckoning the heavier. So many means will the Lord one day say I
have afforded you; so many Ministers have lived amongst you, and warned you; so
many hundred Sermons you have heard, and lost. We read that he took account
of how many men were won by a Acts 2.41.
Sermon; and shall we then think he does not take an account of how many
Sermons are lost by men? Oh! how should this make every one see that they
profit by the means which God affords?

Text.
Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes?

Whether we take this second member, as a complaint made by God against
himself, for that he expected fruit from so bad a Vineyard, as (we noted
before) some do: or else as a complaint made by him against them, for not
profiting by the means; it is not much material. From either of them both we
may collect,

Doct. God grieves when the means of man's good is despised.
God takes it grievously, that the means which he uses for man's good should
be contemned. For this is a complaint, and proceeds (as it were) from a
grieved heart and troubled mind.

To prove this point, remember what is said of the old world: after Gods Spirit
Genesis 6.3.
had striued with them a long time by admonition, reprehension, threatening, and
expectation (for that is there meant by his spirits striving) laboring (in
vain) to bring them to repentance; Verse. 6.
It repented the Lord he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at the
heart. This caused the Lord to take up that pitiful complaint against Israel
and Judah; Hos. 6.4.
O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee? for
your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goes away: As
if he should have said, Hitherto I have used al means that possible I can, to
humble you for your sins and to do you good, so that I know not what I shall
do more for you; and yet I can bring you to no good pass: therefore it
grieves me for you, and I cannot but mourn to see you so rebellious. And thus
our blessed Savior beheld Jerusalem and wept over it, saying; Luke 19.42.
If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day the things which
belong unto thy peace, etc. He considering the obstinacy and stubbornness of
this people, despising his Word, reproching his miracles, and rejecting his
grace, could not refrain, but he must burst forth into tears. By these
Scriptures it is evident, that it is grievous unto God, to see men neglect the
good means ordained and afforded for their good and welfare.

And indeed, Reason.
a little unkindness at their hands of whom we have deserved well, must needs
be grievous; when much indignity received from an enemy, shall never be
regarded.

Whose example may be for our Instruction: When Isay 24.16.
My leanness, my leanness, (cries out this our Prophet Isaiah) woe is me:
the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously, yea the treacherous
dealers have dealt very treacherously. He did so grieve at the transgressions
of the people, that he became exceeding lean therewith, as the doubling of
the word imports. The Prophet Jeremiah likewise is full of passion in this
behalf, and cries out; Ier. 4.19.
My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart; my heart makes a noise in
me, I cannot hold my peace. Yea he wishes, that his head were full of water,
Cap. 9.1.
and his eyes a fountain of tears, that he might weep day and night, for
the sins of the people: And also tells them, Cap. 13.17.
That if they still contemn the means, and turn away the care refusing to
hear, his soul should weep in secret places for them, and his eyes should
weep sore and run down with tears. Thus did righteous Lot 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
vex his soul with the unclean conversation of the wicked: And thus did
Samuel 1 Samuel 16.2.
weep for the sins of Saul: And so did David's Psalm. 119.139.
eyes gush out with tears, because men kept not Gods Law. Thus did Ezra Ezra
10.1.
weep for the sins of the people in his time: And Paul Phil. 3.18.
weep for them that did walk inordinately amongst the Philippians. Did Gods
children so weep in those days, for the obstinacy and hard-heartednesse of
the wicked? How comes it to pass then in these days, that we are so dried?
Is it because the men of this generation are not so bad? or rather (as the
truth is) we that profess our selves Christians are not so good? Soon may we
guess then, of what stamp they are of, who are so far from mourning and
grieuing at the sinfulness and hard-heartednesse of this age, as that they
make themselves merry therewith, and rejoice thereat: In Theaters, Play Houses,
and such like meetings, not only with patience, but with content, and delight,
hear blasphemy, and behold uncleanness: Blasphemy, Pride, Drunkenness, and
such like profaneness, they can see and hear without remorse, yea laugh at:
What monsters are these? Judge. 5.
Meroz must be cursed bitterly, for not helping the Lord against the mighty:
and can such look to be blessed, that laugh with those that fight against him?
When thou see the iniquity of the people, remember God grieves for it; and
will thou rejoice at it? If those infernal and hellish spirits have any
delight, this is their delight, to see men sin and offend their God: And will thou make the Devils delight, thine? Do not so; but be thou contrary to him,
and grieve at that which he takes pleasure in. Would thou in stead of a
smile afford a tear, when thou see sinners to transgress, it might so come
to pass, that thy grief might work also a grief in them; and thy tears
cause them to relent, (as many times we see, the seeing others fall heartily to
their meat brings on their stomach) when thy smile confirms them in their
wickedness.

And secondly; seeing this is so, that God takes it Lament. 1.12.
Is it nothing to you, all you that pass by? What creature is there that God
has made in heaven, earth, seas, or all depths, brings heaviness into the
Courts of happiness, except man? It is he, and only he, that does it. Thou
mockest at thy oppressions, oaths, sacriledges, lusts, frauds; for these he
grieves. Thou scornest his Gospel preached; he bewailes thy scorn. That
which is sorrow to his soul, is but Prou. 14.9.
a pastime unto thee. Oh do no more so wickedly, my brethren; bewail sin
past, and amend for time to come.

And lastly; hence may the humbled and contrite we will not, then assuredly he
will destroy us, though with grief. As the Judge passing sentence on a
malefactor, though he be moved with indignation against him, as he is a
thief, or murderer, etc. yet with compassion as he is a man. And if we be
condemned, whether it be with the will or against the will, all comes to one
end; our pains and plagues shall be never the less, nor lighter.

Text. Verse. 5.
And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard: I will take
away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down.

And I will lay it waste, it shall not be pruned nor dug, but there shall
come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds, that they rain no
rain upon it.

Look as in Courts of Justice, and seats of Judgment, after Conviction
follows sentence of Condemnation; so here we have the like proceeding: They
being convicted by their own consciences, and as condemned persons by their
own mouths, sentence passes against them on the plaintifes side; and that
most fearful: for it is a sentence of destruction and desolation, even of the
whole Land and People. He will take from them those many blessings and
favors, which he had bestowed on them. And that is not all: for he will also
lay them open, and give them up to the spoil of their enemies, so that they
shall be trodden down and made desolate.

Division.
In which sentence is considerable: First, A gracious Premonition, in the
beginning of the fifth verse.

Secondly, A terrible Execution of the judgment threatened, from the middle of
the fifth verse, to the end of the sixth.

In the Premonition, observe we Gods merciful goodness: First, in foretelling
them of the Judgment; And now go to, I will tell you. Secondly, In prolonging
it; for he does not by and by punish them, but a while deferres, and therefore
he speaks in the future tense, what I will do.

In the execution, consider we these three circumstances: 1. The party
punishing, and that is the Lord himself [I] will take away, [l] will break,
etc. 2. The parties punished, and they are Gods own people, his chosen
vineyard, his own inheritance [It] shall be trodden down, the hedge [thereof]
etc. 3. The punishment it self, and that consists both in the pain of loss
and pain of sense: good things shall be removed, and evil things inflicted.
For first he will take away the hedge, and break down the wall; whereupon
shall follow eating up, treading down, laying waste: and then secondly, he
will withdraw his pains in pruning and digging of it, and withold the clouds
from raining rain upon it; and thereupon shall follow the barrenness of it:
for it shall bring forth nothing, or worse than nothing; briers and thorns
shall grow upon it.

Having now seen the sum; let us spend a little time in the opening of the
words, that so having found out the sense and meaning, we may the better raise
some profitable observation.

And now go to] The Lord seems here to excite and stir up himself after
the manner of men to proceed in judgment. Exposition.


I will show you what I will do to my Vineyard] or, I will give you to
understand, or, make known unto you (as some read it) q.d. Seeing that you
are condemned in your consciences, and yet will not pronounce sentence with
your mouths, therefore go to now, I my self will tell you what I will do.

I will take away the hedge thereof] By hedge, as before verse. 2. we have seen
sundry things may be understood: but not to trouble you with repetition of what
was before taught, we are especially (as I take it) to understand thereby Gods
divine protection, which was as a hedge or wall about them, and whereof they
should be now deprived. As if he should have said; Hitherto you have had my
merciful protection, which has ministered unto you safety and defense from
all your enemies; but now I will leave off to help, succor, or defend you any
more. This was that for want whereof the Church did complain; Psalm. 80.12.
Why have thou broken down her hedges, so that all they that do pass by the
way do pluck her?

And it shall be eaten vp] or, That it may be eaten up, and devoured; to wit,
by the beasts of the field, the enemies of the Church. Not only their
neighbors nigh about them, but also their enemies far off should molest and
trouble them, according to that threatening, Deuteronomy. 31.17.
Mine anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them,
and hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and
troubles shall befall them, etc. This also does the Church complain of in the
place before quoted; Psalm. 80.13.
The Boar out of the wood does waste it, and the wild beast of the field does
devour it.

And break down the wall thereof] or, as some read it, tear down the wall
thereof: and so indeed the word signifies, to tear down a thing with
violence; which notes out the vehemency of Gods wrath: for it shall not fall
down of it self, but be violently torn or broken down. Now by this wall
many understand the Tower which he spoke of before, verse. 2. that was built in
the midst of the Vineyard, whereby, as we saw (after the judgment of many of
the learned) the Temple was to be understood. But what need we be so exact in
each of these particulars? Idem alijs atque alijs verbis bis dicit. Mus. in loc.
For if by wall we understand no other thing, than that before was meant by
hedge, we should not fall into any great absurdity.

And it shall be trodden downe] or, for a treading. He here alludeth to the
manner of wild beasts breaking into a Vineyard, which do not only eat and
devour, but tread down and spoil. And this notes a higher degree of wrath
than the former did. The enemies of this people should not only trouble them
and afflict them, but overcome them and enter into their possessions; and not
only carry away, but also make strip and waste; havoc and spoil what they
leave behind. This also sets out unto us the rage and fury of the wicked
against Gods Church.

And I will lay it waste] or, make it a desolation; so that it shall become as
a vast desert without any to inhabit it. And here we have a higher degree than
either of the former: for though the enemy might overcome them and spoil
their country, yet there might remain some City: and albeit some Cities might
be assailed and destroyed; yet some houses in those Cities might still
continue: Or say it should so fall out, that all their Cities, and houses in
their Cities should be laid level with the ground; yet some men might happily
escape by flight, and afterward return, and build new houses, Cities, and
erect new laws and government. But in that he threatens to lay it waste, and
make it a desolation, all hope is gone. This is that which the Lord speaks in
the next chapter, where he seems to comment upon these words, Isai. 6.11, 12.
The Cities shall be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and
the land be utterly desolate. And the Lord will remove men far away, and
there shall be a great forsaking in the midst of the land. All which befell
this people at their carrying away into Babylon: and much more fully and
completely was it fulfilled after Christ's time, when Jerusalem was utterly
destroyed, so that one stone was not left upon another. To which time some
refer it.

It shall not be pruned nor digged] By cutting or pruning, he seems to
understand fatherly discipline and correction, which now he would withold
from them, according to that in the first of this prophecy; Isai. 1.5.
Why should you be stricken any more? As if he should have said: I see it is
but lost labor to smite you; for the more I correct you, the worse you prove.
And by digging he understands that point of husbandry, Moller. in loc.
whereby the earth is drawn into ridges, or heaps, chiefly about the vines;
which is so convenient and necessary in such places where vintages are, as
that without it, the vines will never prosper. And here he alludeth unto such
husbandmen, as having barren vineyards and fruitless trees, do neglect to
prune or cut them, dung or dig about them, because they take no pleasure nor
delight in them.

Musculus in loc.
But there shall come up briers and thornes] By briers and thorns some here
understand the Gentiles, according to that of our Savior; Luke 21.24.
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the time of the
Gentiles be fulfilled. But we may better understand thereby, Idolatry and
superstition, with other errors and abominations, that for want of Gods
husbandry should (as afterward there did) grow up amongst them. And thus
sins and transgressions are compared to thorns and briers Heb. 6.8.
elsewhere in Scripture. And that fitly: 1. For their wounding and pricking
those that handle them; for whom does not sin wound? whom has it not stung
that ever dealt with it? 2. For their holding together, and twining one within
another. Sins grow in heaps, and where you find any, you may find many.
And therefore when the Apostle speaks of them, he couples them, Romans 13.13.
Chambering and wantonness, gluttony and drunkenness, strife and envying:
thus they grow like thorns in hedges, by companies. 3. Because they choke the
plants, and hinder them from the Suns heat and influence of heaven: thus the
seed is choked by these thorns, Matthew. 13.
as our Savior teaches: And therefore S. Peter wills to 1 Pet. 1.1.
lay aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisy, and enuies, and evil
speakings (those cursed thorns and briers) and then As newborn babes desire
the sincere milk of the word to grow thereby. Verse. 2.


Called. Paraph. and Hect. Pint.
I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it] By clouds
understand we the Prophets; and by rain the Word. The Metaphor is usual:
Moses thus begins his Song; Deuteronomy. 32.2.
My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew; as
the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass. And
so the word of the Lord came to Ezechiel, and said, Ezekiel. 21.2.
Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward the
holy places, and prophecy against the land of Israel. And thus Amos speaks
to Amaziah; Amos 7.16.
Thou say, Prophecy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the
house of Isaac. In which places it is apparent, that Gods Prophets are as
clouds, and their words or prophesies like drops of rain. Now in comparing the
rain and the word, we shall find good resemblance in sundry particulars: as,
1. In regard of cooling heat: 2. quenching thirst: 3. cleansing the air: 4.
allaying the winds: 5. mollifying and mellowing the parched and heat-hardned
earth. In each one of which, if we should spend time, we should find an
excellent agreement: but especially in a sixth respect; It is a principal
means and subordinate cause that all things fructify and grow. And therefore
this must needs be a heavy judgment, and argue Gods hot displeasure against
his Vineyard, in commanding the clouds to rain no more rain upon it,
according to that charge given to Micah, Mic. 2.6.
Prophecy ye not unto them; seeing that without it, it was impossible the Vine
should grow or flourish. Thus we see that as by briers and thorns the Plants
should be choked; so for want of rain their very roots should wither.

And thus much for the literal exposition. Now to come to some particular
observation.

And now go to, Text. Doct. God does warn before he smite.
I will tell you] This is the usual manner of Gods dealing, To warn before he
strikes, and foretell the judgment before he inflicteth it. He punishes none
before he has admonished them; smites none before he has forewarned them.

That of the Prophet Amos makes this good; Amos 3.7.
Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secrets unto his
servants the Prophets. He sends his Heralds to proclaim war before he
makes it, and foretells them of such judgments as he is purposed to inflict,
that they may forewarne others. Take the old world, my brethren, for an
ensample: did he not foretell the destruction of it unto Heb. 11.7.
Noah, before he brought that great Deluge upon the earth? And was not Noah 2
Pet. 2.5.
a Preacher of righteousness unto them, whose hand taught them as much as his
tongue? His business in building the Arc was a real Sermon to the world,
wherein at once were taught mercy and life to the believer, and to the
rebellious destruction. And did he not the like by Sodom and Gomorrah, unto
whom he sent his servant Lot, 2 Pet. 2.8.
whose righteous soul was vexed from day to day with their unlawful deeds?
Was not this likewise his dealing with Pharaoh and his people? did he not Exodus
8.2.21. and 9.3.14.19. and 10.4.
again and again admonish them, and threaten them by his servants Moses and
Aaron, that if they would not let his people go, he would do thus and thus
unto them? And so with the Ninevites, unto whom he sent Jonah with this cry,
Jonah 3.4.
Yet forty days and Niniuie shall be overthrown? And with Jerusalem Matthew.
23.37.
which was often forewarned by his Prophets, and by our Lord himself of her
destruction before it fell?

Moses foretold would fall on Egypt, Exodus 9.20.
sent their servants to fetch their cattle into their houses.

John 15.22.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had had no sin; but now they
have no cloak for their sin (says our blessed Savior.) These may be some
reasons why God gives a Caveat before his Capias, and does warn before he
wound.

And is this Gods usual dealing? why then are we Tamberlane that warlike
Scythian) displayed first a white Flagge, in token of mercy, and then a red,
menacing and threatening blood, before that black Flagge, the messenger and
ensign of death, was hung abroad. Accuse not the Lord then of any hard
dealing, but the hardness of thy own heart which will take no warning. He
need not to give thee any warning of his judgments; thou gave him no warning
of thy sins, no respit: yet that God might approve his mercies to thee, he
gives thee warning, and respit of repenting. How loath art thou, oh blessed God,
to strike, that threats before! He that delights in revenge, surprises his
adversary, whereas he that gives warning, desires to be prevented: Were we not
wilful, what need we ever feel smart?

Oh that this might teach us wisdom to see the evil Diverse ways God
forewarneth us of vengeance.

1. By the ministry of his servants.


let us diligently observe the usual ways whereby the Lord premonisheth, and
they are sundry: As first, By the ministry of his servants, the Prophets,
whereby he foretells when wrath is ready to fall upon us for our sins: By
them he foretold 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.
the Israelites of the King of the Caldeans coming up against them, whom they
laughed to scorn and contemned: and by them Jerusalem was forewarned (as was
before noted.) Their threatenings therefore and menaces should not be lightly
despised, but feared; not passed over, but prevented; not derided, but applied
to our consciences. For though they die, Zach. 1.5.
yet Gods word shall live, and his judgments they denounced seize upon us
except we die to sin.

2. By signs in the heavens.
2 By signs and wonders; of which sort was that Earthquake which happened Amos
1.1. Zach. 14.5.
in Vzziahs days in the whole Country: And those strange apparitions seen in
the heavens a little before the destruction of Jerusalem; as that Blazing
star like a sword, which hung over the City a whole years space; Horses and
Chariots with armed troops of men seen in the air; the Eclipse of the Moon
for twelve nights together, with many other wonders, Ieseph. de Bell. Iud. lib.
7. cap. 12.
whereof Josephus has at large written, as that voice heard in the Temple the
night before the Feast of Pentecost; Let us depart from hence: And the constant
crying of one about the walls for a long space, Woe, Matthew. 24.32.
woe, woe to Jerusalem, and the like. And thus does God forewarne us of the end
of the world, as our blessed Savior shows.

3. By lesser judgments.
3 By lesser and lighter judgments; by gentle and fatherly corrections, that by
them we may be brought to turn unto him, and so escape further vengeance. Thus
were the Israelites often warned from the Lord: sometimes Amos 4.8.
he smote them with Blastings and Mildewes; and at other times by giving their
Gardens, Vineyards, Fig Trees, and Oliue-trees to the Palmer-worme to devour:
and when these warnings would not serve, then he sent amongst them the
Pestilence, after the manner of Egypt, and slew their young men with the sword,
and took away their horses, etc. And when nothing would serve, he overthrew
them as he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. And so our Savior having foretold
many evils that should come upon Jerusalem for their contempt of the Gospel,
and refusing of grace offered, adds, Matthew. 24.6.8.
All these are but the beginnings of sorrows, the end is not yet. There were
more in number and greater in weight to follow after these. Thus lesser
judgments are as it were the prints of Gods foot, whereby we may trace him, if
he be come out against us.

4 By the death of the godly, 4. By the death of the godly.
and such as fear his name, are future judgments forewarned: especially if
they be such as are great and eminent, whether in Church or Commonwealth: If
these be taken away, it is a fearful sign that some grievous judgment will
overtake the remnant of the people. This is that whereof our Prophet Esaias
speaks, Isay 3.1, 2, 3.
Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts does take away from Jerusalem the mighty
man, and the man of war, the Judge, and the Prophet, and the prudent, and the
ancient: The Captains of fifty, and the honorable man, and the Counselor,
etc. And elsewhere, thus; Cap. 57.1.
The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to his heart, and merciful men
are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the
evil to come. Thus was that good King Josiah dealt withal, 2 King. 22.20.
not long after whose death followed the Captivity of Babel: In that grave
wherein he was interred, the liberty, glory, and peace of Iewrie lay also
buried. And so Luther, after whose death presently followed that miserable
calamity upon Germany, which he had often foretold would come upon them for
their contempt of the Word, and which he desired he might never live to see (as
Calvin observes in his Comment upon that place of Isay last quoted. Cap. 57.1.
)

These are some ways whereby the Lord fore-warneth us that evil is at hand,
and therefore it behooves us when by any of these he premonisheth us of danger
nigh, we Amos 4.
prepare to meet him, and prevent it. And surely if ever there was cause, then
now there is, why we should humble our selves before him in sackcloth and
ashes: for who can be ignorant of the many warnings we have had in each
particular kind? The Turtles of this Land have groaned out the sad tunes of
woe and misery; God has so guided the hearts and tongues of his Ministers, as
that they all, even as one man, do constantly cry out, (with that Jesus the
son of Anani a little before the destruction of Jerusalem) Woe to England,
and to the inhabitants thereof, by reason of such outrageous wickedness as
every where abounds; which thing is not lightly to be passed by, but deserves
pondering on. For certainly, if we be not persuaded to fear their
threatenings, we shall in the end be constrained to feel them, whether we will
or no. Besides, what strange signs and wonders, and what variety of them have
we lately seen, both in the heavens and upon the earth? What wonderful and
mighty tempests, fearful thundering and lightning has lately happened, This
present year 1622. on August 19.
whereby much hurt has been done at Sea, many ships and barks cast away, and
that in the safest Rodes and Harbors of this land: As appears in that
relation of the tempest which happened in Deuon: the year and month aforesaid,
which is in Print.
besides the almost incredible hurt done by land, throughout this Kingdom; the
violence of the wind, thunder, and lightning, being such, as that in many
places Westward whole fields of Corn have been blasted, stackes of Corn
scorched, and here with us the Corn has been so dispersed and scattered, as
if it had been sown again, and so beaten out of the ears, as if it had
been threshed on the floor; so that with the Mildew and blasting which was
sent upon our Corn in general before our harvest, and now with this sudden
judgment of wind, upon that little store of Corn remaining in harvest, God
has taken from us our stay and staff of bread. What shall I need to speak of
those many Earthquakes, mighty inundations of waters, great hailestones,
strange Eclipses, monstrous births, which every year brings forth? Certainly
if the Sorcerers of Egypt were now amongst us, they would confess these to be
the finger of God: But fools and blind, that we are, who have no eyes to see,
nor hearts to understand these things, or at most make of them but a nine days
wonderment, and so pass them over.

And again, has not God often warned us by lesser and lighter judgments;
has he not visited us with Famines, Pestilence, and other such like infection
of sickness? These are but as warning-peeces shot off in our ears, and
assured forerunners of greater judgments, unless repentance cut off their
course. Perk. Exhort. to Repent.
For look as one cloud follows another till the Sun consume them; so one
judgment hastens after another, and Repentance only is the Sun that must
dispell them. And lastly, that the righteous perish, who sees not? and yet
alas! who sees it so, as to consider it in his heart? The Lords hand has
been upon us these many years, and has come, not in favor to weed out the
worst, but in displeasure to gather the best and ripest. Amongst our Princes he
has smitten at our chiefest: Amongst our Nobles, he has taken of our noblest:
Amongst our Magistrates he has fetched away of our vprightest. Surely, surely,
God never thus beheads a State or Country, but for some treason. The Shepherds
are smitten for the sheep unthankfulness, unfruitfulness. What shall I say
more? Death has been at the City, as well as at the Court; and in the
Country, as well as in the City, and has fetched away of all sorts almost
the best. And can this be any other than a plain prognostication of some evil
nigh at hand? which evils they have prevented by their death: God grant we
likewise may prevent them by our Repentance.

To draw toward a conclusion of this paint; let every one in particular, yea
thou that hear and read this, go home to thy self and make application
hereof to thy own soul, for God speaks in particular to thee, as well as to
any other, and demands of thee how thou have profited by these or the like
warnings. For has he not often by the ministry of his servants come so home
unto thy conscience, as that thou have been persuaded and enforced to confess
thou art the man he means, and at whom he aims. And what drunkard, or
profane Esau is there here amongst us, who has not been at sometimes or other
told by them, that if they repent not they shall be damned? Besides, have not
thine eyes seen his signs and wonders in the heavens, upon the earth, etc.
Thou have heard, and have been told of such a child, borne without a mouth,
or with two heads, or with one eye, etc. why; take thou warning, this is meant
to thee, as well as to any other. And has not the Lord smote thee (hitherto)
with a little rod? afflicted thee wi^h light losses, crosses, etc. see then
thou Mich. 6.9.
hear the rod, and who has appointed it. And once again I will demand of
thee; answer me: Have thou not been deprived of some faithful friend; it may
be of a godly husband, a religious wife, a Christian and careful parent, a
gracious child, a faithful Shepherd; or a true hearted brother? If it be so,
take it as the shaking of the rod, and as a warning from God unto thee, that
thou mend thy manners. Remember Solomon's Proverb, Prou. 22.3.
A prudent man foreseeth the evil and hides himself, but the simple pass on
and are punished. Be thou that wiseman, not this fool, but foresee the danger,
and prevent it before it fall. Oh happy man, to hear this word, before it
fall, sound in thine ears. As for many thousands, it is fallen irrecouerably
upon them already; to those poor souls it cannot be said, as now it is to
thee, Prevent it by repentance before it fall: for judgment has already
seized upon them; but how happy art thou, if thou knew thy happiness in
that thy day is yet to come? And therefore I say to thee, take warning by these
things, and prevent the evil before it fall; for when it is fallen, there is
no preventing of it. Luke 19.41.
Oh that thou knew at the least in this thy day those things which belong
unto thy peace, and that they were not hidden from thine eyes! My prayer shall
be for thee, my self, and the whole land in general, that we may so do. Even
so, O Lord open our eyes, that we may so see thee warning, as that we may fear
thee threatening; and obey thee teaching, and patiently suffer thee chastising,
and at last be by thee made partakers of those good things, Which 2 Cor. 2.9.
neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor can enter into the heart of man.
Amen, Amen.

What I will doe] Great was Gods mercy toward this his people in foretelling
and premonishing them of vengeance. Text.
And this makes it greater in his prolonging of it. He does not by and by
inflict, but will a while defer. There shall be some delay and pause, some
lucida interualla misericordiae; A breathing time and merciful space is
granted between the fault and punishment. And therefore he speaks not in the
present tense, but in the future; What I will do: where we see, and whence we
learn,

God is of a patient and forbearing nature, Doctr. God is of a patient and
forbearing nature.
of much gentleness and long sufferance, forbearing sinners for some space
after they have transgressed before he proceed to punish.

Many examples might be brought for proof. Isay 65.2.
All the day long he did wait upon the Israelites, stretching out his hand to
that disobedient and rebellious people. Genesis 19.1.23.
A whole night did he forbear destroying Sodom after he had told Abraham
thereof, and forewarned them by Lot. Ion. 3.4.
Forty days did the Lord allot unto Niniuie for their Repentance; Yet forty
days and Niniuie shall be destroyed. Luke 13.7.
Three years did he bear with the barren fig tree before he would cut it
down with the Axe of his judgments. He suffered the ill manners (the word is
very significant) of the Israelites, Act. 13.18. (...).
Forty years in the Wilderness before he did destroy them. Genesis 6.3. 1 Pet.
3.20.
One hundred and twenty years respit of repenting God g^ue the old World,
even all the while the Arc was a preparing. Genesis 15.16.
For the space of four hundred years he spared the Canaanites and Amorites.
Yea he suffered the Gentiles to wander in their own ways, and in the vanity
of their minds almost for Acts 14.16.
three thousand years together. Thus, 1. Al a day, 2. A whole night, 3. Forty
days, 4. Three whole years, 5. Forty years, 6. One hundred and twenty
years, 7. Four hundred years, 8. Three thousand years breathing time is
given man between the threatening and execution. Oh! how loath is God to strike,
that threats so long? In a word have we not all experience of this truth? Are
there not so many thousand witnesses as there are consciences in this
congregation to confirm this point? Had not this been true, where should
every one of us have been at this present? Surely I should neither have been
here to speak, nor thou to hear; but long before this hour we should have
been swept from off the earth like dung, had there not been this Patience and
long animitie in God. Thus sundry ways has God made good his name, which all
of us must needs feelingly subscribe unto: Exodus 34.6.
The Lord, the Lord strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, abundant in
goodness and in truth, etc.

he is God: were he not God, it were impossible for him so long together to
hold his hands; but he is God and not man, therefore he forbeares. This reason
seems secretly to be implied in those words of the Chronicles, 2 Chronicles. 36.14,
15.
The Lord God of their fathers sent to them his messengers, etc.

He knows our weakness, our frame, and remembers that we are but dust;
Psalm. 103.10, 14.
he therefore deals not with us after our sins, nor rewards us after our
iniquities. This reason is rendered by the Psalmist, why he pitieth, spares.

He is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count flacknesse, 2 Pet.
3.9.
but is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to repentance. He desires our conversion, not destruction, and
therefore bears so long. And this is the reason that Saint Peter gives.

4. He bears a long time with the vessels of his Genesis 15.16.
fill up the measure of their sins. And this is the reason the Holy Ghost
makes why the Amorites were forborne so long, before punishment was executed on
them for their wickedness. Let us now apply these things unto our selves: And

First, this serves for Information of our Judgments, Ierem. 12.1. Non ille
amisit prouidentiam, aut amisit potentiam, sed patentiam exercet suam, dum
poenitentiam expectat tuam. August.
in the hearts of Gods children. But see here the reason; God is of a patient
and forbearing nature: the wicked think it is Psalm. 50.
because God is like them, a lover and liker of sin: but be not thou deluded,
learn the cause.

2. Admire the richness of Gods grace in bearing so long with rebellious
sinners. For God to bear with his own children when they provoke him is very
much; but to suffer his enemies, and bear so long with the vessels of his
wrath; to suffer drunkards, whoremongers, Sabbath Breakers, to run on in a

And thirdly, if this be so, that God is of such a patient of Gods grace it is
to take occasion by this patience, to continue and increase in sin. In things
of this life, we hold it detestable if a servant should thus reason from his
masters bounty; He deals thus and thus graciously with me, therefore I care
not how I provoke him and displease him. And yet this is the reasoning of
thousands in the world: for thus say some (and far more think) I have lived
in such or such a course (as I hear Preachers say of sinning) for many years,
but I see that God has blessed me as well as the precisest of them all; I live
still and thrive well (God I thank thee) and therefore I purpose to hold on as
I have begun, talk these Preachers what they please, I pass not. And thus,
Eccles. 8.11.
because sentence is not speedily executed, ungodly men take courage to offend:
Dealing with God as birds do with the scarcrow, at first they are afraid; but
seeing it not to stir, at length they come near it and sit upon it: So
these, at first they are somewhat fearful to offend, but through impunity
they harden themselves to commit iniquity: And yet (says Solomon) Verse 12, 13.
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times and God prolong his days, yet
surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, which fear
before him. But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong
his days which are as a shadow, because he fears not before God. Understand
therefore, oh ye unwise amongst the people; all is not well because God
forbeares to punish: His patience and longanimity, is no good argument of man's
innocence. It may be by the prayers of the Vinedressers Luke 13.6.
respit has been obtained for thee for a while before thy cutting down, as
was for that barren fig tree: Or else it may be thy sins (though heinous
enough amongst us) Genesis 15.16.
are not come as yet to their full ripeness: Or happily, God thus forbeares
thee, to show his lothnesse to destroy. How ever his patience always tends not
to countenance received courses, but to give occasion to alter our accustomed
evils. And what though his wrath comes slowly, yet in the end he will make
amends for his delay with the weight of vengeance. Lento gradu ad vindictum sui.
His mill grindes slow, but yet sure and small. All this while he bears, he is
but a fetching of the blow; and the higher he lifts, the heavier it lights. Now
he is preparing his deadly arrows, this time he takes to fit them to the
string, and because he means not to miss the mark, he stands long at
level, and draws far, even to the head, that his arrows may pierce deep
even to the soul. Take Jerusalem for an ensample, and set that famous City
before thine eyes; Did ever any people taste more of Gods patience, or drink
deeper of the cup of his merciful forbearance, than Jerusalem, famous
Jerusalem did? How long did he spare them? how many ways did he forewarne
them? And when nothing would serve, how was his patience turned into fury?
Matthew. 24.2.
Not one stone left upon another; and the inhabitants and their posterity made
slaves and vagabonds for this 1600 years. Say not then with Agag, 1 Samuel 15.32.
Surely the bitterness of death is past, because thou art a while forborne:
No, no; the longer before the reckoning, the greater the account will be.
Patientia laesa fit furor.
And evermore remember, that there is no wrath so furiously outrageous, as that
which arises from patience long and obstinately abused.

See therefore in the next place thou be admonished, Romans 2.4.
Let it lead thee to repentance. Happy thou, if thou do thus use it. And
indeed, except thou do so, thou never make the true and proper use thereof:
Psalm. 130.4.
There is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared (says that Kingly
Prophet:) Gods children do fear God Hos. 3.5.
and his goodness, and fear to offend God in regard of his goodness. Joseph
reasons thus, Genesis 39.8.
My Master has dealt thus kindly with me, etc. how then can I commit this
great wickedness? So must all Gods children reason.

Imitation: As God is and has been toward us patient and long-suffering, so
let us be toward others. That hasty spirit of calling for fire from heaven
for every disobedience, was sharply Luke 9.54.
reproved by our blessed Savior. Let us learn to have an eye to the rich
patience of our God, who is daily by us provoked; and (after his example)
tolerate the froward infirmities of our ignorant brethren, 2 Timothy 2.25.
with meekness instructing them rather, than with rashness of zeal rejecting
them; and in case of wrong, say not, I will recompense evil. It was a good
specch (and coming out of a Heathens mouth, deserves the more regard) Socrates.
I will willingly neither suffer wrong nor do it; but if I must choose one, I
will rather choose to suffer than to do. But why speak I of the Heathen
(unless to shame us) when we have God himself to imitate? How patient is he
toward reprobates and vessels of his wrath? If thou put up an injury
patiently once or twice, thou have thy self highly in admiration, and (in thy
own conceit) deseruest to be chronicled, for a rare pattern of patience. But
God does bear with thee and other, many thousand times in a day; write after
that copy, and forgive Matthew. 18.22.
not seven times, but seventy times seven times, if thou be so often
wronged: And be thou transformed into the same image of God, from glory to
glory.

Comfort, for the lifting of them up. It is Gods nature to be patient, be not
therefore out of hope. He is long ere he be provoked, and when he is provoked,
easy to be appeased. An earthly father will not take every advantage against
his child; he will tell him and forewarne him, before he does correct and
punish him: And why should we think God harder than our selves? How long
bears he with such as never grieve, mourn, nor complain of sin? will he
then be hasty to mark what is done amiss by such as groan under the burden of
their corruptions? He spares such as never so much as say, Ier.
What have I done; and is it possible that he should not spare such as with the
Prodigal cry out, Luke 15.
Father I have sinned? Certainly if the wicked fare so well, the godly shall
fare much better: and be thou persuaded so. And thus much for the Premonition:
the Execution follows.

I will take away the hedge thereof, Text.
and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden down, etc.

Here (according to our propounded method) consider we first the Party
punishing; and who it is that does inflict this judgment on them: and that is
the Lord himself, [I] will take away, etc. Thence observe:

Gods holy hand has a special stroke in those afflictions and visitations
which are laid upon his Church and befall his people, whosoever be the
instrument. Doctr. Gods hand is in all afflictions that do befall us.


What truth more strongly confirmed in holy Writ than this? Do we not there
read thus; Job 5.6.
Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of
the ground. Esaias 45.7.
I form the light and create darkness, I make peace and create evil: I the
Lord do all these things. Esaias 28.21.
The Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley
of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass
his act, his strange act. 1 Samuel 2.6, 7.
The Lord kills and makes alive, he brings down to the grave, and
brings up. The Lord makes poor and makes rich: he brings low and lifts
up. Deuteronomy. 32.39.
I, even I am he, and there is no god with me: I kill and I make alive, I
wound and I heal, neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. And,
Amos 3.6.
What evil is there in the City (understand it of the evil of punishment)
that I have not done? Hereupon does the Church Hos 6.1.
mutually exhort one another, to return unto the Lord, because he has torn
and he will heal, he has smitten and he will bind up. And by S. Peter we
are instructed, to 1 Pet. 5.6.
Humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt us in due
time. And hereupon Joseph, though of his envious brethren sold into Egypt,
says; Genesis 45.8.
God has sent me hither: And David being cursed by Shemei, said; 2 Samuel 16.10.
God had bid him curse: And Job robbed by the Sabaeans says; Job 1.21.
God has taken away.

Reas.
And how can it otherwise be, seeing that Matthew. 10.29.
a sparrow falls not to the ground, nor a hair from off our heads, without
the providence of the Almighty, as our Savior has taught us? If then Gods
providence reaches to matters of such small weight, it must needs reach to
matters of greater moment.

Object.
If any now object, That wicked and bad men, yea the Devil himself, does
persecute Gods Church, and sorely afflict his people, and that the most evils
which befall Gods children come from them, how then can it be said, they are of
God?

Resp.
I answer; We are to know that these are but as the executioners, God employing
them no otherwise than as a Judge does some base slave in making him the
hangman. God has a hand in those evils which are inflicted by wicked
instruments.

1. In ordaining them.


Still has God a hand in those punishments inflicted on his by those evil
ones; which shows it self in these actions:

First, in ordaining and appointing them even from all eternity to do Acts
2.28.
whatsoever thine hand and counsel has appointed to be done.

2. In ordering and disposing them; first, in regard of the time when they
shall both begin and end; 2. In ordering them as 1. In regard of the time.
so as that all the fury and malice of the wicked cannot any jot hasten,
lengthen, or prolong them. There is an hour appointed for the powers of
darkness to work in, and till that hour be come, an hair shall not fall
from the heads of any of the godly. Let the Jews take up never so many stones
against Christ Jesus, yet he shall escape: let them seek to take him, yet none
shall dare to lay hold upon him, because John 7.30.
his hour is not yet come. And when that hour is come, they shall not be able
to lengthen it one moment; as we may see in the 400 years appointed to the
Israelites in the Egyptian servitude, which being once expired, they came out
(maugre all the malice of their enemies) Exodus 12.41.
even the selfsame day: and in the Dan. 9.2.21, 23.
70 years of the Babylonish captivity; as also in the afflictions and
persecutions of the Church of Smyrna, Revel. 2.10.
raised up by Satan, which is restrained to a determinate time of ten days.
Secondly, 2. For measure.
in regard of the measure, which is also appointed in such an exact and strict
manner, as that it is alike impossible, for all the powers of men or devils to
add one dram unto the weight, as we see in Job 1.12.
Jobs example. For as Satan at first could not touch him, until he had
received a commission from God; so neither could he add and 2.6.
any thing to his first afflictions, until his commission was renewed. To this
purpose speaks the Psalmist thus; Psalm. 80.5.
Thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and give them tears to drink
in great measure. And thirdly, 3. Of their ends.
in regard of their ends and issues, turning them to his own glory and
Churches good; Romans 8.28.
All things working together for their best. Thus Joseph said of his selling
into Egypt, Genesis 50.20.
God disposed it to good, though it was evil which his brethren intended
against him. Thus the Caldeans steal Jobs wealth to enrich themselves; the
Devil afflicts his body in his hatred to mankind; God suffers all this for
the trial of his patience: Man for covetousness; the Devil for malice; God
for the probation of the afflicteds constancy, and advancing his own glory.
The covetous Extortioner, or griping Usurer, spoils thee of thy goods; God in
wisdom raises profit from it, and by thy poverty in purse, helps thee to the
riches of his grace, and suffers these snares to be taken from thee to save thy
soul; yet no thanks to them. Thus we have seen how God has a hand in such
evils as are inflicted on us by wicked instruments.

Now hence again it may be questioned, why God does not rather correct his
servants by his own hand, and let his chastisements come purely from himself,
or by the means of righteous and just men, than by such wicked instruments,
who infuse into those afflictions the poison of their malitiousnesse and
spleen.

Answer.
The execution of punishment, in it self, is a base and servile thing, and does
not so fitly agree with the nature of the most High, who being the chief
goodness, takes his chief delight in doing good. Now because it is not
familiar and delightful to his nature, he does it not by himself, nor yet by
the godly, but commonly allotteth it to the Devil and wicked ones, as being
fittest for such a service. For do we not see a Carpenter has diverse kinds
of tools? some are course, which he uses about stones or gravel; others are
choice, which he uses about finer work. Thus when God has some base work to
effect, he has some reprobate at hand, about which he is employed: but if a
more honorable piece of service, then he usually fetches a tool of a purer
metal and finer making, one of his children shall be sent for. He will not use
the Virgin Mary, or such choice pieces, but a Judas, a Caiphas, a Pilate, and
such like as they, if Christ is to be crucified.



will of God is secret or revealed. The former was never propounded as a rule
for us to conform our actions unto; but the latter, which we find written in
his Law, unto which he requires conformity and obedience; and by it we are
enjoined to love our neighbor as our selves, and by all good means to seek
the good and advancement of our brethren: now though they do the secret will
of God (which the Devil and all reprobates do, and cannot otherwise choose but
must do, will they nill they) yet because they run full butt against Gods
revealed will, the rule and square of all their actions, their condemnation is
most just.

Again, they aim not therein at the glory of God, Isai. 10.7.
Howbeit (says the text) he means not so, neither does his heart think so.
His intent and purpose was to destroy and cut off not a few Nations; that he
might make all his Princes Kings, and so himself a mighty Monarch. This then
serves not for their excuse, that they are but instruments, seeing they are
such instruments. Now we come to apply the point unto our selves. And first,

Seeing it is so, that all afflictions and visitations that Bad luck, bad
fortune. If any loss or cross betide us, oh (say we) what luck and fortune
was this. In every misery, blind fortune is complained of: And so e contra,
when any good thing happens, Luck and Fortune must be thanked for it; thus
walking after the lusts of the Gentiles, Te facimus, Fortuna, Deam, coeloque
locamus. Iuuen. Satyr. 10.
who held Fortune as a Goddess, and assigned her a place in heaven;
representing her by a woman sitting upon a ball; as if the whole world were at
her command; having with her a rasor, as if she could at her pleasure cut off
and end man's happiness; bearing in her right hand the stern of a ship, as if
she could turn about all things at her pleasure; and in her left hand, the
horn of abundance, as though all plenty came from her. Which palpable Idolatry
that was amongst them, should be renounced and abhorred by us Christians. Yea
so far should it be had in detestation, that the very name of Fortune should
not once be named amongst us, and much less any thing ascribed to it, whereof
we see not an apparent cause.

David when Absolon rose up against him; Psalm. 39.10.
I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. It must needs be
a bold audacious impudency to murmur in afflictions, considering God is the
author and inflicter. If our inferior strike us, we revenge it treble: if an
equal, we requite it: if a superior, we have learned this wisdom not to
repine; or if we mutter, yet not to utter our discontent. Think whose hand
strikes: It is Gods, who-euer be the instrument; the blow was his, whatsoever
was the weapon. It is usually seen, that in corrections coming immediately
from Gods hand, we are not ordinarily so impatient, as in those which come by
means of wicked instruments; and what is the cause but this? we do not so
apparently behold Gods holy hand striking us in these latter as in the former:
Did we but seriously consider, that it is God that scourges us by them, we
would be then ashamed of our folly in being angry at the rod without any regard
of the smiter; in snarling like dogs at the stone, never considering the
flinger. Do we not see how patiently Lords and Nobles condemned to die, suffer
the stroke of death at the hands of the base hangman, showing therein their
subjection and obedience to their Prince? Even so should we, quietly and
patiently endure all the indignities that are offered unto us by wicked worldly
men, therein giving testimony of our obedience to God, who uses them as
instruments of his justice to correct us. See then that thou do so: never
sever the cross from Gods hand, though there be never so many instruments; but
Hear the rod, and who has appointed it; so shall thou with patience and
meekness bear that affliction that is inflicted. But if otherwise; if when
the cross comes, thou art willing to see any thing rather than God, running
upon inferior causes, gazing on men, or means, regarding more the staff
wherewith thou art smitten, than the hand moving and ruling it; it will then be
intolerable, and thou must needs break the bounds of patience.

But may we not have an eye upon second causes? Quest.
Are we utterly to neglect the instruments of our afflictions?

In all afflictions, Answ.
we are to consider not only the action and work, as it is simply natural,
and the disposition of them to the manifestation of Gods glory and our good, in
which respect God is the chief author of them; but also an accidental
confusion and malignitie of the action, which is wholly to be ascribed to man's
corruption, by whom it is performed; in regard of which malignitie and sin,
we are to have some respect unto them, that we may hate and fly that evil and
injustice that is in them, and use all good and lawful means whereby we may
cross them in their wicked purposes, and free our selves from their injuries
and oppressions; having herein the word of God for warrant, which enioyneth us
to use all honest courses, that spiritual wisdom can suggest unto us for our
preservation and safety.

Thirdly, if God be the author of affliction, this may direction unto us, what
course to take in time of danger, even that which is given us by the Prophet
Hosea, to Hos. 6.1.
come and return unto the Lord; for it is he that spoils, and he must heal;
it is he that wounds, and he must bind up; there is none that can Job 10.7.
take off Gods hand but himself. He is a foolish malefactor that seeks to the
executioner and not unto the Judge: and yet as foolish are we, who in the day
of trouble rest upon vain helps that cannot profit, hoping to have relief
from some Saint or Angel in heaven, or which is worse, from Coniurers and
Witches here upon the earth: Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta mouebo.
As sometimes the Heathen man said; If I cannot entreat the gods, I will go
unto the devils: and as King Ahuziah did, who being sick, sent to inquire of
Baalzebub the god of Ekron 2 King. 1.
, whether he should recover of his difease or no. Woeful is that cure which is
wrought by such Physicians. We have learned better things. The general rule
for all troubles is; Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Psalm. 123.2.
As the eyes of servants therefore look unto the hands of their Masters, and
as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mistress; so our eyes shall wait
upon thee our God, until that thou have mercy on us.

comfort to the godly, in that they are not left into the hands of their cruel
and crafty enemies, but are in the hands of so gracious and merciful a God and
loving Father; through whose sweet hand the sharpest and bitterest afflictions
do pass. As for our adversaries, they are but as the rod in the hand of him
that smites: As therefore the rod can of it self do nothing, further than the
force of the hand using it, gives strength unto it; no more can they do any
thing unto us further than they have John 19.
power given them from above. Boisterous Tubeco may happily dismay us with his
thundering speeches; but let us know there is an ouer-ruling hand to moderate
and restrain him. The swinging rod the child sees in his fathers hand, may
somewhat terrify him; yet the child may certainly persuade himself, his
father will so use it, as it shall do him no more harm than a smaller one
would do. Let the wicked storm, and fret, and breathe out threatenings against
Gods Church and people; this we know assuredly, they may do what they can, but
they cannot do what they would. And thus much for the first circumstance which
concerns the Author or inflicter of the judgment: Now follows the second,
which concerns the punished, or the parties on whom it is inflicted, and they
are Gods own people, a people whom he chose for his peculiar, before any
other people in the world beside; it was his Vineyard, his own enclosure, as
these words [thereof] and [it] do note unto us.

Let this then be our observation hence: Doct. God will not spare his own
people if they sin against him.
That God will not spare his own people, if they sin against him, but will
visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquities with strokes.

The Scriptures propose many examples; our ears have heard many reports, our
eyes behold daily many presidents, which may confirm this Doctrine. What
doleful complaints do we read that the Church makes every where in the
Lamentations, Lament 1.18.20. and 2.1. etc.
Behold oh Lord how I am troubled, my bowels swell, my heart is turned within
me, for I am full of heaviness: The sword spoileth abroad, as death does as
home, etc. How lamentably do the godly bemoane themselves and the estate of
the Church in the Prophecy of Isay, Isay 64.9, 10, 11.
Be not angry, O Lord, above measure, neither remember iniquity for ever:
behold, see we beseeth thee, we are thy people. Thy holy cities are a
wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation: Our holy and our
beautiful house where our Fathers praised thee, is burnt up with fire, and all
our pleasant things are laid waste. And how does the Prophet David express the
burden of his afflictions, wherewith he was afflicted, in the Psalm. 6.3. and
32.4.
Book of the Psalms? Psalm. 38.2, 3.
Thine arrows (says he) stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore.
There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there
any rest in my bones, because of my sin. And again thus; Psalm. 116.3.
The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me:
I found trouble and sorrow: and many such like patheticall complaints he makes.
The whole Book of the Judges may be a proof for this truth, wherein we see
how the people of Israel proceeding to do evil in the sight of the Lord, he
sold them into the hand of his and their enemies. We might further instance in
Solomon, Asa, Iehoshaphat; Josiah, Hezekiah, and others; all which make this
good, that God spares not his own people when they sin against him.

That the Lord might declare himself to be an adversary to sin in all men,
Psalm. 51.4.
and that the wicked may see he is not partial to any when his commandments
are not regarded.

he may reduce his servants from running on headlong with the wicked to
perdition. For were we altogether exempted from the rod, how wanton and
froward would we grow, and into how many perils would we cast our selves? And
so says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11.32.
When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we might not be
condemned with the world.

Object.
But did not Christ give himself for his Church, and shed his blood for their
redemption? was not their sins punished in him? How comes it then to pass they
are still subject to Gods heavy v^sitations?

Resp.
True it is that Christ did bear away all our punishments, but he has not
freed us from fatherly corrections: Now when God affl^cteth his in this world,
it is more for medicine than for punishment; more for a correction, than for a
penalty. Losses, crosses, poverty, imprisonmeent, sickness, yea death it
self, are not to us punishments nor curses properly, but fatherly
chastisements, being inflicted as furtherances of sanctification, not as means
of satisfaction. And thus you have this objection answered, and my doctrine
confirmed, viz. God will not spare any, no not his own people when they sin
against him.

terrify wicked and ungodly ones, who make a trade of sin, driving after it
(as it was said of Iehu in another case) as if they were mad; and yet imagine,
because God for a time Psalm. 50.21.
holds his peace and keeps silence, that he is such a one as themselves, a
lover and approuer of their wicked ways. But oh you fools, how long will you
love folly? and when will you grow wise? Does God correct the flock of his own
pasture, the children of his own household, and shall you go scot-free? Does
the Lord chastise them so heavily, the burden of whose sins Christ has borne
in his body on the cross, and shall such as Christ never died for, no nor yet
John 17.9.
prayed for, escape? shall not many prayers and tears, sighs and groans,
petitions of Gods Saints, requests of the Spirit, together with the daily
intercession of Jesus Christ, Gods only and well-beloved, in whom he is well
pleased, keep off such bitter things from them, who but now and then break
out? Woe and alas then! what shall become of you, who never pray, sigh, nor
shed tear for sin, for whom Gods blessed Spirit makes no request, and who
have no interest in the mediation and intercession of that just and righteous
Advocate; who sin not of infirmity and weakness, but boldly and
presumptuously with a high hand against the Lord? Think of an answer to those
interrogatories which the Spirit of God propounds to thee in holy Writ: Ier.
25.29.
Lo I begin to bring evil on the City which is called by my name, and shall
you go utterly unpunished? And again, Cap. 49.12.
Behold, they whose judgment was not to drink of the cup, have assuredly
drunken; and art thou he that shall escape? And again, Luke 23.31.
If these things be done to the green tree, to them who have in them the sap
of grace, what shall be done to the dry, to them who have no moisture of
goodness? And again, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18
If judgment first begin at us who are the house of God, what shall the end
be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? What answerest thou to
these, why speak thou not? And now, O my God, behold how I am troubled, my
bowels swell, my heart is turned within me; for I hear an answer, true, but
terrible; Psalm. 11.5, 6.
The Lord indeed will try the righteous in his furnace, but the wicked and
such as love iniquity does his soul hate: upon the wicked shall he rain
snares, fire and brimstone, and stormy tempest; this is the portion of their
cup. He will indeed judge the just man for his transgressions in this life; but
Psalm. 68.21.
he will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy pate of him that walks
on in his trespasses. Yea in 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.
flaming fire shall God come, taking vengeance on them that know him not, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and they shall be punished
with everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. Revel. 6.15, 16
Then shall the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and
the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every
freeman, (whose names are not written in the Lambs Book) hide themselves in
dens, and in the rocks of the mountains: And say to the mountains and
rocks, Fall on us and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb. But as it was with the old world, when God
rained from heaven the greatest shower that ever the earth did or shall
sustain, their shifts were bootlesse; so will it now be: They then thought to
ouer-climbe the judgment, and haste up to the highest mountains, and being
there, with some hope look down on the swimming valleys: But alas! the water
begins to ascend to their refuged hills, and within a small time the place of
their hopes becomes an Island; now they hitch up higher to the tops of the
tallest trees; but soon after the waters following, overtake them half dead
with hunger and with horror. Thus those mountains could not save those in that
day of water, nor these mountains these, in this day of fire: for the very
heaven Verse 14.
shall depart as a scrowle that is rolled up together, and every mountain and
Island shall be moved out of their places: and what hope then remains in them
of security or refuge? Tremble, tremble at this, all you ungodly ones: Psalm. 4.
Stand in awe and sin no more. A judgment is reserved for you, deceive your
selves no longer. Weakness in Gods children must be corrected, and shall
wickedness in you escape unpunished? Is it possible you should think it? Me
thinks it is a thing impossible you should be so senseless. No, no, if God
thus afflict his children, he will never suffer disobedient bastards to go
free: he whips the one with rods; he will scourge the other with Scorpions.
For, Prou. 11.31.
Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth, and therefore much
more the wicked and the sinner. And this for the first use. A second follows.

This serves for admonition to the best, that they beware David was as well
elected as thy self, and as safe from being condemned as thou art, or can
be; and yet such calamities befell him, as made him Psalm. 32 4.
groan and cry, yea roar, so that his blood was dried up, and his moisture
was like unto the drought in Summer: yea he felt as great anguish, as if his
bones had been broken, or all out of joint: and therefore be not high minded,
but fear. For it is not the virtues that thou have, that can be a warrant to
thee to fall in vice, nor yet thy profession or religion, no nor yet election
that will keep the rod from off thy back, if thou play the fool in
committing folly. I confess God will not wipe out those, whose names he has
written in the book of life, nor damn any of his elect which are in Christ;
yet if they or any of them wax wanton, he will whip them to the purpose and
make them tame. The Magistrate we know has many punishments for offenders,
besides death, and gallows: he has the stocks, the whipping-post, the
pillory, the jail: And so has God more judgments besides damnation; he has
his stocks, his whip, his little-ease, his purgatory, for his own in this
world: though he do not reprobate them, yet he may so hide his face and
conceal their pardon from them, as that they may find little difference
betwixt a reprobate and themselves. Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12.
Be wise now therefore, oh ye Christians, be instructed all ye godly of the
earth: Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling: Kiss the son,
lest he be angry and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
little: Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

Comfort may be gathered, in as much as afflictions do not disable us from
being Gods. It was Gedeons weakness to argue Gods absence by them. Judge. 6.13.
If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us (says he?) Fond
nature thinks, God should not suffer the wind to blow upon his dear ones,
because her self makes this use of her own indulgence. But we shall read,
Heb. 11.36, 37.
that none out of the place of torment, have suffered such or so many
afflictions as his dearest children. There is no reason then why we should
imagine that Gods favor is the less toward us, when we are exercised though
with great and heavy afflictions: for Prou. 3.10.
whom he loves he does chastise; and nearest to God, fullest of sorrows, as
one says Clem. Alexand.
well. Hence is it, that the Apostle enformeth us after this sort; Heb. 12.5,
-- 13.
My son despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art
rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every
son whom he receives. If you endure chastening, God deals with you as with
sons: For what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? But if you be
without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are you bastards and not
sons. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and
we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the
Father of spirits and live? For they verily for a few days chastened us after
their own pleasure; but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness. Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous: nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby. Wherefore lift up the
hands which hang down, and the feeble knees. See how large our Apostle is in
his comfortable exhortation: Surely he full well knew how hardly the very best
are persuaded that God is with them in the day of trouble, and how apt the
godly are to make hard conclusions against themselves in the day of their
calamity, and therefore is he so large in his comforts. Feign would the Devil
Matthew. 4.6.
have had persuaded Christ that he was none of Gods because he was afflicted
with hunger; and the same would he willingly persuade thee of: but remember
thou the former consolation, and relinquish not thy hope of happiness in
heaven, because thou art recompensed with judgments here on earth; for in so
doing thou will but add to thy own sorrow, and needlessly increase the weight
of thy own burden. And thus much for this use, as also for this second
circumstance: The third follows, which concerns the punishment inflicted, and
what it is.

The hedge thereof shall be taken away, Text.
and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden down. And I will lay it waste, etc.

The judgment here inflicted, as we see, consists in the pain of loss, and
pain of sense. First, Good things shall be removed and taken from them, as the
hedge and wall shall be broken down; his pains in digging and pruning, he
will withdraw: And he will withold the clouds from raining any more rain
upon it. Secondly, Evil things shall be imposed and inflicted on them; for it
shall be eaten up, trodden down, and laid waste, by their enemies. Moreover
it shall be cursed with barrenness; for thorns and briers shall be the best
crop that will grow therein; fit fuel for the fire.

Before we come to the particulars let us observe in general:

Doctr. The ungrateful abuse of Gods blessings causes him to bring the
contrary wants.
The ungrateful abuse of Gods blessings and favors, causes the Lord to
deprive a people of them, and to bring upon them the contrary evils.

This is that which is here threatened to this people, because in stead of the
sweet grapes of righteousness, it brought forth nothing but the sour grapes
of sin, after all his pains bestowed about it, he would not only abandon and
let it alone, but pull down the hedge, break down the wall, and lay it
waste, so that the beasts of the field should devour it; and it should become
as a barren heath and forsaken wilderness.

This is that which is threatened by Moses, the servant of God, against Israel:
Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.
Because thou seruedst not the Lord thy God with ioyfulnesse, and with
gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things: Therefore shall thou serve
thine enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst,
and in nakedness, and in want of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron
upon thy neck until he have destroyed thee. This is that also which is
threatened by Hosea, Hos. 4.7.
against those Priests who ungratefully abused all those benefits and
prerogatives wherewith they were endowed above the rest of the people to Gods
dishonor. For as they were increased, so they sinned against me (says the
Lord) therefore I will turn their glory into shame. He would not only take
from them their honor and advancement which they so abused, but he will bring
upon them the contrary evils, viz. shame and reproach. The like we may find
threatened by the Prophet Joel, Joel 1.4, 9, 10, 11, 12.
against the people, for their abuse of Gods creatures by gluttony and
drunkenness; their condition should be so far changed, that the new wine
should be cut from their mouths; that is, they shall not have any taste of it
at all. The field and the corn should be wasted, the new wine dried up, the
oil shall languish. So that their husbandmen should be ashamed, their
vine-dressers should howl, for the wheat and for the barley, because the
harvest of the field is perished. A marvelous and great change if it be well
considered; that they who had so great plenty should now fall into such
exceeding penury: But herein we may see the just judgment of God, against such
as abuse his favors to licentiousness. We might further confirm this truth
by the Prodigals example, Luke 15.16.
of whom it is said; that after he had lauished out his patrimony upon whores,
and riotous company, he came unto such exceeding misery, that he would gladly
have fed upon the husks that the swine eat, but none gave them unto him: Upon
which Parable read my exposition True Convert
if you desire more of this doctrine, where you shall find this truth handled
at large in sundry observations, to which I refer thee; for now I will
content my self with a word of exhortation for the use, and so proceed.

This being so, Use.
how should it stir us up on all hands to return thankfulness to God for
his benefits, who has with such a liberal hand sown the seed of his favors
amongst us, and cause us to beware that we abuse not his good blessings unto
sin, lest the contrary evils do betide us. When a child begins to play
with his meat, a wise father will take it from him; if we wax wanton by reason
of Gods good favors, he will withdraw them, and turn our peace into war,
our health into sickness, our liberty into thraldom, our plenty into penury;
or (which is worse) if they be continued to us, he will cause them of
blessings to become curses; so that Psalm. 69.22.
our table shall be made our snare, and our prosperity our ruin.

Text.
I will take away the hedge, and break down the wall] We have seen before in
the exposition, what is meant by this hedge and wall; namely, the divine
protection of the Almighty, wherewith they were compassed about, so that their
enemies could not once touch them to hurt them; of this they should be now
deprived, so that there should be a gap made for their enemies to enter in upon
them. Hence we infer:

Doctr. Sin depriueth man of Gods protection.
Sin depriueth man of the protection of the Almighty, and lays him open to
the rage and fury of the enemy.

When the people of Israel had committed Idolatry, in making them gods to go
before them, the text says, Exodus 32.25.
they were naked amongst their enemies; whereby he means that they wanted
Gods favor and protection, which is as the clothing of his children. So when
Rehoboam the son of Solomon, and all Israel with him, had forsaken the Lord,
the Prophet is sent unto him with this message, 2 Chro. 12.5.
Thus says the Lord, Ye have forsaken me, therefore have I left you in the
hands of Shishak. The like we read in the book of Judges; no sooner had
Israel fell to Idolatry, in worshipping Baal and Ashtaroth, and such other
Idols as the Nations served who dwelt about them; Judge. 2.13, 14. and 10.6.
but God as soon left them, and delivered them into the hands of spoilers that
spoiled them, and sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so
that they could not any longer stand before their enemies. In the book of
Joshua likewise we read, that Ios. 7.12.
when Achan had taken of the accursed thing, and transgressed Gods covenant, in
stealing that Babylonish garment, the shekels of silver, and the wedge of gold,
they could not stand before their enemies, but turned their backs before them,
and all because God was not with them with his protection, by reason of that
offense committed, neither would God be with them any more, except that
accursed thing were destroyed from amongst them. Hitherto tends that also of
this our Prophet, Esaias 59.1.
Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither is his
ear heavy, that it cannot hear; but your sins have separated betwixt you
and your God; and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not
hear. And thus is the point made good, that Sin depriueth a people of Gods
protection: It breaks down the hedge and wall of their defense, and lays
them open to the fury of their enemies.

And no wonder, Reason.
seeing sin is a breach of the covenant made betwixt God and us. Genesis 17.1.
I am God all-sufficient; walk before me and be upright. Where the promise on
Gods part is to be an all-sufficient God, to bless, save, protect and defend
us; the condition required on our part, is upright walking before the Lord, in
all faithful, constant, cheerful, and universal obedience: if then the
latter be not performed, the former cannot be expected; for God is not bound
unto us further than we keep the promise which has been made by us. And
this is the ground of my propounded point, why sin should deprive us of Gods
protection.

And this may serve first for Information. See here sin and sinners. This,
and These, open the gates, throw down the walls, and let in the enemy: Were
our Armies never so strong, our Cities never so sure blocked, our walls never
so well fortified, that we feared not to have them scaled; yet so long as our
Chams continue their scoffing; our Esaus their profaning; our Senacheribs
their blaspheming; our Achans their theeuing; our Nabals their coveting; our
Iezabels their whoring; and all of us our sinning and rebelling, we deceive our
selves if we think we be strong, for we are weak. How can God be with us,
when these accursed things are found so rise amongst us? And how shall we stand
before our enemies, when the most high God has forsaken us? Oh the weakness
of this Land, wherein sin does so abound! This is it which will weaken our
forces, overthrow our Castles, break down our towers, batter our bulwarks, and
make frustrate all our devices. When Phocas had built a mighty wall about his
Palace for his security in the night, he heard a voice thus speaking: Cedren.
hist. page 542.
Though thou build as high as the clouds, O King, yet the City will easily be
taken; for the sin within will mar all. True it is, we have no enemies
without, but are at peace with all about us; but what are we the better, when
our chief enemies are within; sin is harbored within our walls and gates;
our wicked manners are stronger than armed men. Grauiores sunt inimici mores
praui, quam hosts infesti. Ambros. ser. 87.
This is enough to bring upon us those days of desolation, the days of
darkness and gloominesse, the days of wastnesse and confusion. What has
been the ruin and overthrow of the most famous kingdoms in the world but it?
What has turned the noblest Cities into dust but it? What has brought those
infinite calamities of famine, sword, pestilence, fire, slavery and bondage
but it? From this comes the ruin of Countries, Cities, Families, yea and of
particular persons. Do not many ruined Monuments and Monasteries, seem to
tell passengers, Hic fuit hostilitas, War has been here? And may we not
also there read in those rude heaps, Hic fuit iniquitas, Sin has been
here; Idolatry rather than war pulled down those walls. For had there been
no enemy to raze them, they would have fallen alone, rather than hide so much
superstition and impiety under their guilty roofes. Oh that we could once see
this! Oh that we would be once persuaded of it; then would there be some hope
that that accursed thing would be cast out from amongst us, that so God might
be our defense and fortress. And let us assure our selves, that until
repentance make up our breaches, we lie open to the fury of our adversaries.
Wickedness has struck up the drum, and we may every day expect for
destruction to come marching on.

Secondly, this may serve for our Instruction: When Iezabels, that bewitch us;
and pluck away sin, which like Iuie weakens the wall of our protection, and
fear nothing, for we shall stand immovable.

Thirdly, here is a commination against the wicked: Fort, in any Castle, in any
Tower? Can any place or any power upon the earth, or in the earth, or above the
earth, keep back the stroke of death and destruction, hell and damnation? Can
any wicked man say with warrant, I am here free from the dart of death: I shall
surely carry my self from hence; judgment shall not seize on me in this
place? Can any of them say at any repast or recreation; I shall continue out
this feast, or game, or sport, to the end, before my fall or ruin? This
delight shall not be interrupted and broken off by fear and torment before it
be fully finished? Alas they cannot: for evil shall Psalm. 140.11.
hunt the wicked to destruction, and Prou. 13.21.
pursue him, and in the end Deuteronomy. 28.45.
overtake him, and seize upon him. So that as the Hare runs in hazard and
ieopardie before the Greyhound, and is at last snatched up; so is it with the
wicked whose damnation sleeps not.

True it is, no men's estates seem to be more happy, nor no men's stays more
strong; and who more secure than these men are? But all is not gold that
glisters: Their hope is as the Spiders web, their staff they lean on, is but
an Egyptian reed, that will in the end break, run into their shoulders, and
lay them flat along the earth. Their security is but senselessness and
blockish stupiditie, and well compared to that of Ionahs, Jonah 1.
who slept most soundly when he had most cause to watch and pray. The Lord is
pursuing him as a vagrant and fugitive: The officers of God are about him to
apprehend him; the wind rages, the waves of the sea roar and beat against
the ship, wherein he was, and roll with violence against the Bark, refusing
all other satisfaction offered by the Mariners; so that all the company that be
with him are afraid, and compelled to cry every man unto his god; yet Jonah is
still sleeping under hatches: Thus fares it with the wicked. The Lord stands
offended with them; the heavens above are closed upon them; Hell beneath is
open to receive them; Gods fearful judgments are ready to lay hands upon
them; the Devil is at hand waiting when they shall be delivered to him; yet
they lie snorting in their sins sleeping between Death and Hell, as Peter
did Acts 12.6.
between the two soldiers, being fast bound with chains; or to use Solomon's
Proverb, As a Sailer upon the topmast in the midst of a storm, there being
but a hairs breadth between them and their destruction. See then thy estate,
thou who art from under Gods protection, living in thy sins, thou live in
perpetual peril: thou may eat and drink, make merry and be iocund, but
thou have little reason. Belshazzar Dan. 5.2.5.
may carowse it in golden and silver vessels, but he had little cause, when
his doom was written on the wall. 2 Samuel 13.28.
Amnons heart may cheer him, but as little reason had he, Death being so nigh
at hand. Be then as merry as you will, you wicked ones; this I am sure of, your
wretched estate gives you no leave.

Lastly, here is a ground of encouragement for the Pax populi, patriaeque
salus, and gloria Regni.
or to undertake war against the enemies of the Church, either for the
defense of true Religion, or for the releeuing and delivering of such as are
oppressed for religion, or for the safety and defense of Land and people, or
for other such like just causes; that we lift up our heads and hearts with
hope of victory, because we have to do with weak and naked men. Thus Joshua
and Caleb comforted the people against the Canaanites, saying, Number. 14.9.
Rebel ye not against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of the Land, for
they are but bread for us: their shield is departed from them, and the Lord is
with us, fear them not. This was that also wherewith Abijah, the King of
Judah, 2 Chro. 13.10, 11, 12.
comforted himself, going against the mighty army of Jeroboam: with this let
us and all Gods people comfort our selves, when we are to go out against our
adversaries, for they come out into the field as soldiers without weapons,
they have neither shield, nor buckler, nor breast plate, nor helmet, nor sword,
nor spear; their loins are ungirt, their feet unshod, their heads are
uncovered in the day of battle; they lie open as naked men to be wounded and
destroyed, and therefore 2 Chronicles. 32.7.
Be strong and courageous: fear not, neither be afraid for the wicked nor all
their multitude, for there is more with us than is with them; with them is an
arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, for to help us, and to fight
our battles. And so much for this. Now we go on.

Text.
It shall be eaten up and trodden down.] This follows upon the former: The
hedge and wall being plucked up and broken down, way is made whereby the beasts
of the field, (that is, the enemies of the Church) shall have free egresse and
regresse to eat and devour; and not only so, but to tread down and spoil;
they should not only trouble and afflict them, but also overcome them; and
enter into their possessions, carrying away what they list, making strip and
waste of the rest.

Doctr. The wicked cannot hurt until God forsake.
The first point hence to be observed, is, Until God break down the wall, and
pluck up the hedge of his protection, wherewith his people are encompassed,
the wicked and ungodly cannot hurt them or any way harm them. God must give,
yea make way, before they can come in upon them to afflict them. Deuteronomy. 32.30.
How should one chase a thousand, Id est, Qui fieri potuisset vt hostis vnicus
persequeretur mill Israelitas, nisi quod, etc. Vatab. in loc.
and two put ten thousand to flight (says Moses in that same sweet song which
he sang a little before his death) except their rock had sold them, and the
Lord had shut them up? This was a thing impossible that one enemy should chase
a thousand Israelites, and two Gentiles put a thousand Jews to flight; had not
that God, who had been before their rock, delivered them up into the hands of
those their enemies. The Devil himself, who is the greatest of all their
enemies, and strongest of that hellish band, being the great Goliath in that
army of Philistines, can do nothing without permission, he must have a
commission to go forth and be a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets, 1
King. 22. verse. 22.
that he and his people may fall at Ramoth Gilead. He must beg leave at Gods
hands to touch Job, Job 1.11.
such a hedge being made about him, and all he had, on every side, that there
was no coming at him, except God leave open some gap for this foul beast to
enter. The like protection have all Gods people, whereby they are so fenced,
that neither the Devil nor any of his limbs can hurt any of them without
special warrant and commission from the Lord. Hitherto tends that which we
read of in the Acts, Acts 4.27.
Doubtless against thy holy Son Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod
and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel, gathered themselves
together, to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel has determined before to
be done. And that answer of our Savior unto Pilate, John 19.11.
Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above.

For as our Savior says elsewhere, Reas.
John 10.29.
My Father is stronger than all; all power and strength is of him and from him
originally, according to that in Daniel, Dan. 2.20.
Wisdom and might are Gods. He can give and take away at his pleasure.

Which being so, this discouers unto us a notable delusion The Devil cannot do
harm to any, to gratify a Witch, unless God permit.
and at their request or command will lame and kill men or beasts, and
whatsoever they bid him do, or hire him to do, that shall be done: with which
conceit also many of our people are possessed, which causes them to be so
afraid of Witches, as that they dare not any way displease them, or give them a
foul word, for fear they should send their spirits to torment their bodies,
destroy their goods, lame their cattle, or do them some other mischief. And
thus are thousands deluded by the Devil, yea and bewitched before they be
aware, and led into all manner of error and of falsehood.

That there are Witches, by whom the Devil works, I deny not; Scriptures and
experience does make it evident; but that these Witches can send the Devil to
kill or lame either men or beasts, when they list, and where they list, I
utterly deny.

Reasons.
For first we are to know, that the Devil has of himself

1 Pet. 5.
a roaring Lion, going about seeking whom he may devour: and like Revel. 12.3.
a red or fiery Dragon, burning in malice against Gods Church and people; so
that he needs not to be stirred up or sent by a Witch, he being so forward
and watchful of himself to do mischief. Whence it follows there is no
more, nor less hurt done than would be done, if there were no Witches: for as
the Devil can do nothing to hurt the poorest creature, before he have power
granted unto him from the Lord; so when he is permitted and has his power
granted, he is not so sottish as not to execute his power, except some Witch
do send him: true it is, if he can, he will do it, as entreated and sent by
Witches (so cunning and crafty is he) that he may do the more harm, using
them but for a color to draw on worser matters.

and most expert Physician cannot epsy; yet he can see and know, and can
conjecture very near the time when they will take effect; he plyeth it with
the Witch and enflameth her mind with malice, and moves her to send him
against that party, upon which sending, the man or beast suddenly and
strangely are tormented, fall lame and die; and then he tells her that he
did it upon her sending and command; when indeed she obeys him, being led by
his suggestion, and not he her. The like is his practice when God gives him
liberty to strike with bodily plagues any of the godly, for the trial of
their faith and patience; he couets, if he can, to bring it thus about: So
that we see she is but his drudge, and not he her servant. Let us not then
be so deluded by this deceiuer, neither stand in fear of any witch or
sorcerer, but of God alone; for neither one or other can any way molest or hurt
us, until God please to give way and suffer them.

For a second use; seeing none can hurt us until God Admonition unto us all,
that would live in safety, that we keep in with God; for if he be our friend,
what need we care who be our enemies? Romans 8.31.
If he be with us, who can be against us? Be then of David's resolution, to make
Psalm. 3.3. and 91.2.
God thy shield and buckler, thy refuge and thy fortress; and thus being in
David's taking, thou may be in David's tune. Psalm. 27.1.
The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Psalm. 3.5.
I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves
against me round about. Psalm. 27.3.5.
Though an host should encampe against me, my heart shall not be troubled:
though war should rise against me, in this I will be confident. For in the
time of trouble he shall hide me in his pauilion: in the secret of his
tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me up upon a rock. I end this use
as David ends that Psalm, Verse. 14.
Wait on the Lord: be of good courage and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait
I say on the Lord.

Numb. 23.8.
Prophet of their own side will teach them it is in vain to curse whom God
has blessed.

Noah's Genesis 8.11.
Dove brought in her mouth an olive leaf, so does this doctrine bring with it
tidings of peace and comfort to such as are in Christ. For if it be so, that
man cannot hurt until God give way, then Psalm. 5.11, 12.
Let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice: let them ever shout for
joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that love thy name, be joyful
in thee. For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous: with favor will thou
compass him as with a shield. What the Apostle speaks in case of damnation,
may be spoken also in case of ^^nger, Romans 8.1.
There is none unto them. They are alike safe in every place, even in the midst
of their mortal enemies, as amongst their kindest friends: and so likewise at
all seasons; for whereas the wicked who are without God, are like a bird
without a nest, or a beast without a den, liable to any storm that arises and
danger that befalls; yet it is otherwise with the godly, they know whither to
go to be hid from the strife of tongues, and violence of Tyrants. Gods favor
joined with his mighty power and faithfulness, is a Prou. 18.10.
strong tower, thither the righteous run and are exalted; which fort and
castle of defense is every where, and no time is unseasonable to repair unto
it; no place an impediment to hinder them from it; no bodily weakness can
disable them of it: their journey may be undertaken at midnight as well as at
midday, and they may run apace as they sit in their houses, or lie in their
beds; and the feeblest creeple may make as good speed as the swiftest footman:
the walls thereof can no enemy scale; the forts thereof can no adversary batter:
well may our enemies assault us, but no multitude nor power can prevail
against us, because 2 King. 6.16.
he that is with us is stronger than they that are against us; Psalm. 32.6.
so that the floods of great waters can never come nigh us. Oh the security and
felicity of the faithful! marvelous great it is; who have such a tower to
fly unto, and such a shield to cover and compass them round about as is
impenetrable; no sword, no dart, nor shot, can possibly strike them until it
pierce him: so fenced are they in their goods, in their cattle, and in all
that belongs unto them, that no wicked spirit by any art can come near to
touch them, without a special commission from the Almighty. When Philip King
of Macedon had slept a sound sleep, and at length waking, spying Antipater by
him, he used these words (as the story says Plutarch.
) No marvel I slept so soundly, seeing Antipater was by and watched. It would
not have fallen out so well with this Land in general, and many, no nor any of
us in particular, had not this Ante-pater, our gracious Father, (who was before
all worlds) been our merciful keeper. In 88. fierce enemies intended the
invasion of this Land, but they were foiled, and England triumphed; for the
Lord of Hoasts was our defender. Many enterprises have been undertaken against
our most gracious Sovereign, especially that hellish attempt of popish
monsters in that infernal Powder Plot; yet King James is waked (and long may
he wake) for Ante-pater stood by and watched, (O still stand by and watch) but
as for his enemies they are executed as traitors, and have slept their last:
And so let them perish oh Lord.

Object.
But do we not see how the godly are wronged, spoiled, yea and sometimes
killed by their adversaries?

Resp.
True, yet this comes not to pass through the force of their adversaries
might, but by the will and permission of the Lord; neither does he suffer it
to satisfy their foes, but to increase their felicity, and for their good: For
it is with the godly as with the beast in the field, which is safer in a storm
than in the fairest seasons; the storm drives him to his den and harbor, but
when it is over he comes forth, and is in danger to be taken of the hunter.
Thus in trouble the godly fly unto the clefts of their Rock, and get under
the wing of their Protector; but when troubles are over they are in greater
danger to be ensnared. We know rain and thunder are many times better for
corn and grass than fair sunshine: so here.

Again, God has promised not to defend us from troubles, but preserve us in
troubles. Our Formido sublata est, non pugna. Leo.
Fear shall be taken away, not our Fight: And so though we be persecuted, yet
we be not forsaken; though slain, yet not overcome: nay when we seem to be
overcome, then do we overcome our enemies. Though we bear away the blows,
and are slain by them, yet God still preserues us, and we obtain a noble
victory Romans 8.37.
. Excellent was that speech, which sometimes Anaxarchus used, when as Nicocreon
the tyrant commanded he should be beaten to death in a mortar: Beat and bray,
said he to the executioner, as long as thou will Anaxarchus his sachell,
(meaning his body) but Anaxarchus thou can not touch. Thus are the godly
preserved by God, who puts his right hand under their heads, and gives them
grace sufficient, proportioning their strength to the burden; mitigating their
sorrows, making them possess their souls in patience, yea to rejoice in
their tribulation, as appears not only in the examples Acts 5.41. and Cap. 16.
of the Apostles in the Acts, but also by the practice of some in our own
Nation in the time of persecution, as Glouer, Farrar, Hawks, with diverse
other: Read their stories in the Act. and Mon.
the later of which three (being desired by some of his godly friends, to give
some token when he was in the flames, whether the pain were tolerable or no,
for their further confirmation) after his eyes were started out of his head,
his fingers consumed with the fire, and when every one thought him dead, and
did expect the fall of his body, suddenly lifts up his stumps, and thrice (as a
famous conqueror) claps them over his head in token of victory. Thus the
faithful famously conquer when they seem to be conquered by their enemies. I
remember what one says Rupertus.
of S. Laurence his patience and constancy, when he was broiled on the
gridiron; That God was more glorified by it, than if he had saved his body
from burning by a miracle. So undoubtedly it is as much for Gods glory to
preserve us in our suffering, as to preserve us altogether from suffering.

Thus then we see that our enemies could not so far prevail, did not God
permit them: neither would he suffer them so far to prevail, did it any way
tend to his dishonor or our damage. Our God is omnipotent, doing what he
will, and suffering no resistance in that he will not; Nemo nos laedit nisi qui
Deum vincit.
so that only he which can overcome him can hurt us. That godly gloriation then
which the Apostle uses against the enemies of our souls, may fitly be used by
us against the enemies of our bodies; Romans 8.31.
What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against
us? And then a little after, Verse. 35, 37.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay
in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us. Thus
as if all these had been but flea-bitings he does triumph over them. And then
in a strain beyond all admiration, he goes on thus; Verse. 38, 39.
For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. If then we be Gods, though Satan and
sinners would, yet they can do nothing against us, that shall be for our hurt;
and though God himself can, yet he will do nothing to us, that shall not
turn to our endless and everlasting good.

Further, in that it is said; The wall shall not only be broken, but that it
shall likewise be trodden down; we may see as in a glass, the beastly and
brutish disposition of the enemies of the Church.

Doct. No beast is more savage than the enemies of Gods Church.
No beast of the field does show it self more raging or ravenous, than do the
wicked, when God suffers them to break into his Vineyard for the afflicting of
it. Look as it is with beasts, who do not only eat and devour, but tread
down and spoil (when they come into good pastures) more than they eat: so is
it with them; and therefore Scripture gives them names agreeing with their
natures; they are called Psalm. 124.7.
Fowlers, Mic. 7.2.
Hunters, Psalm. 53.4.
Canibals and men-eaters. They are also named 2 Timothy 4.17. Psalm. 58.6.
Lions; and this was Neroes style, who was the first that stained his sword
with the blood of Christians, as Eusebius shows in his Ecclesiastical
History. They are likewise called Psalm. 80.13.
Boares; The Boar out of the wood does waste it: and Bulls; yea strong Psalm.
22.12.
bulls of Bashan. They are also compared to 21.
Unicorns, Psalm. 58.4.
Bears, Leopards, Psalm. 74.13, 14. Prou. 17.12. Psalm. 3.7.
Dragons, Serpents, Aspes, Adders: and they have their horns, tusks, teeth,
talants, mouths, jaws, paws, checkbones, given to them. These names they
have made good in all ages. If we should view the Scriptures, or read over the
Histories of the Primitive Church, we should find plenty of examples for the
confirming hereof. Such and so great cruelty has been practiced by them
toward Gods people, that as Euschius affirms Eccles. Hist. lib. 8. cap.
3.10.11.
, it far exceeds the credit of any relation. If we come to our own times;
we shall not want examples of their cruelty for the proving this truth. What
unnatural cruelty was it to take the infant Acts and Mon. page 1864.
issuing out of the mothers womb in the midst of the flame, and cast it in
again with their forkes, that as the offspring of an heretic, it might burn
together with her? O blessed babe! to be no sooner borne, but as soon baptized
with fire; before thou art lapped in swaddling clothes, to be crowned with
martyrdom; and before thou fully breathest in the breath of life, thou happily
breathest out thine own innocent soul to God. But out upon such cruelty; such
transcendent outrageous cruelty. Are these Catholics? Are these they that hold
it for an article of their faith, that all children dying unbaptized are
damned, and yet would wittingly put this innocent child to death before it had
received baptism? Can any judge otherwise but that they purposed to have flung
this infant both body and soul into a fire on earth and the fire in hell both
at once? Cursed be their wrath, for it was cruel. And is it not yet fresh in
the memory of our fathers, how cruelly they dealt, not only with the quick in
burying them alive, as Marion at Burges Page 816.
; but also with the dead in vnburying them; as they dealt by Wickliffe Page
1780.
, digging up his bones one and forty years after his death, and burning them:
and so by Peter Martyrs wife at Oxford Page 1785.
, and Mr. Bucer and Phagius at Cambridge; besides others. And herein their
cruelty exceeds that which is in some beasts, Vrsi non sauiunt in cadauera.
which extends it self only to the living, and not unto the dead. But the rage
and cruelty of Sions enemies extends it self, even as the kindness of her
friends does Ruth 2.20.
, both to the living and the dead, to the one as well as to the other.

We find in History, that the first founders of Rome were nourished by a
Wolf: certain it is, that the offspring of that people have the hearts of
Wolves, being savage and cruel. Their City it was first founded in blood Aug.
de Ciu. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 5.
, the blood of a natural germane brother, Romulus slaying his brother Rhemus
to settle the kingdom in his own person. And as it was with the City, so was
it with the Papacy, for the foundation of that See was laid in blood, Suffoca^
Phoca imperium, stabilisque papatum. Guil. Stamph.
when Phocas slew his liege Lord and Emperor. And cruelty and bloodshed is at
this day the ensign and badge of that Church. The habit of that harlot is
according to her heart, Reu. 17.6.
purple and scarlet; and her diet is the diet of the Canibals: I saw her
drunken with the blood of the Saints. Can we think this to be the religion
that God does take delight in, which vpsetteth and vpholdeth it self by such
cruelty?

Reason.
But what is the reason why the enemies of the Church are so outrageous? Surely it
may soon be given; they are led by the spirit of the devil, and he does
participate of his nature unto them; he is 1 Pet. 5.8.
a roaring lion, a Revel. 12.
cruel dragon, a subtle serpent, a false accuser of the brethren, and he
labors to have his like him in cruelty and mischief. We hasten to the Uses.

Jacob, but the hands of Esau; words of a brother, but hands of an enemy: they
can salute with a kiss, but persecute with the sword. The Fisher baits the
hook, when he would deceive the fish; and the Fowler sings swetly, when he
would deceive the bird: So the enemies of the Church when they pretend greatest
courtesy, then they intend greatest villainy: when they offer treaties of
peace, leagues of marriages, and such like confederacies, then is it to be
feared the net is a spreading, and the snare a laying. It is wisdom therefore
not to trust them. No faith (says the Papist) is to be kept with heretics;
and we are rank ones, as they say; therefore no faith to be kept with us. Take
heed therefore of them, and though they seem now to be Foxes passant, and Dogs
couchant, yet were time and opportunity offered (which Lord for thy mercy sake
never suffer) they would show themselves to be Lions rampant, seeking only our
ruin and desolation.

And secondly, seeing the enemies of the Church are 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
unreasonable men, whose wrath and malice knows no end nor measure; being of
Hannibals mind, in whose eyes no sight was more pleasing, than a ditch
swimming over with man's blood. And seeing that by reason of our sins, we have
deserved great plagues, which we may daily look for and expect; let us pray
with David 2 Samuel 24.14.
, that we may rather fall into the hands of God than of man, because with him
is mercy; yea in his very correction Hab. 3.2.
he remembers mercy. But if we be given over into the hands of the wicked,
there is no mercy to be looked for, no moderation to be expected. They can
never find in their hearts to say that to themselves, which God did to his
destroying Angel; 2 Samuel 24.16.
It is enough, put up thy sword. Hitherto God has taken the rod into his own
hand, and smitten us himself, by famines, pestilence, inundations of waters,
and the like; but if he should deliver us into the hands of our bloody enemies,
the Papists, we should then soon discern the difference betwixt the loving
chastisements of a father, and the bloody strokes of an enemy. Let us
therefore turn to God with Israel, and pray with their words: Judge. 10.15.
We have sinned, O Lord, we have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever seems
good to thee, deliver us only we pray thee this day: Why should thou sell us
into the hands of idolatrous Papists, who will give thine honor to stocks and
stones, and not unto thy majesty, who gives them the victory. For thy names
sake be merciful to us our God, and if we must fall by reason of our fearful
sins, let thine own hand cast us down, not theirs, for there is mercy in
thy blows. Do thou then take us to do, O God, and show thy self a tender
and indulgent father toward us, by correcting us thy self, as hitherto thou
have done, and deliver us not to that merciless generation, whose Psalm. 30.14.
and 57.4.
teeth are swords, and their jaws as knives: who know no end of scourging us,
till they have also made an end of us whom they scourge. So shall we sing
praises to thy name, and say, Psalm. 124.6.
Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey unto their teeth.

Text.
And I will lay it waste.] Or, I will make it a desolation, so that it shall
have none to inhabit it. The people of the land shall be swept away with the
sword, and the earth shall be robbed of all her goodly ornaments: It shall
neither be inhabited by men, nor adorned with her beautiful fruits, as it were
with her princely coat of diverse colors, but become as a desolate and forsaken
wilderness: This is the meaning. And hence note we the misery of war.

Doct. War^^ is the forerunner of desolation.
War is that miserable desolation, which finds a land before it like Eden, and
leaves it behind like Sodom, a desolate and forsaken wilderness. The
fierceness and rage of it Moses expresses and describes, when he tells the
Israelites Deuteronomy. 28.49 -- 58.
of a Nation that should come from far, as swift as the Eagle flees; and of
fierce countenance, who should not regard the person of the old, nor show
favor to the young; who should eat the fruit of their cattle, and the fruit
of their land until they were destroyed; who should not leave them either
corn, wine, or oil; nor increase of Kine, nor flocks of Sheep; but should
besiege them in their gates, until their high and fenced walls came down
wherein they trusted throughout all their land: by reason whereof they should
be driven to eat the fruit of their own body, the flesh of their sons and
of their daughters, which the Lord their God had given them, in the siege, and
in the straitness wherewith their enemies should distress them. So that men
should have evil or covetous eyes toward their brethren, and wives of their
bosoms, and their children which they should leave, in not giving to any of
them of the flesh of their children, which they should eat for fear lest they
should have none left for themselves in the straitness of the siege. And the
tender and delicate women, who would not adventure to set the sole of their
feet upon the ground for delicateness, shall be as niggardly toward their
husbands, and toward their sons and daughters, and toward their young ones:
For they shall eat their children secretly and in corners, that none might get
any part away from them, because of the siege wherewith their enemy should
distress them. Fearful threatenings. But is it possible, that the misery or
mischief of war should be so great? Were not these threatenings made to keep
them in obedience only? Surely, nothing is there threatened, but war has
brought forth. To instance in that unmatchable instance of the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus and Vespasian, who besieged it for the space of five months;
threescore and eleven years after Christ's incarnation, or thereabouts. In
which time there passed many assaults and skirmishes, much slaughter and
bloodshed being made both on the one side, and other. The famine mean while
afflicting the City was such, as no History can parallel: Fame impellebantur
vt vel equorum lora, and suos baltheos, and calceos, and coria comederent.
Pontan. Bibl. conc. To^. 4. ad Dom. 10. Trinit.
Horses, Asses, Dogs, Cats, Rats, were good unto their tastes. But this food
failing, they were driven to eat courser fare, yea those things which
unreasonable creatures would not eat; as the leather of their shoes, and of
their targets, of their bridles, and of their girdles, and the like: Ox dung
was a precious dish unto them, and the shreddings of pot-herbes cast out, and
trodden under foot, and withered, were taken up again for nourishment. What
miserable meat was this? And yet as miserable as it was, the child would
snatch it from his parent Rapiebant parentibus filij, parents filijs, and de
ipsis faucibus cibus proferebatur. Egesip. de excid. Hieros. l 5. c. 18.
, and the parent from his child, even from out his jaws. Yea some to prolong
their lives, would not stick to eat up that, that others had vomited and cast
up. And yet harken to a far more lamentable accident than all this yet: The
mother takes her own child from her breasts; a harmless suckling, filly
infant, and thus speaks to it; Joseph. de bell. Judaico lib. 7. cap. 18.
Little infant, poor wretch, in war, in famine, in sedition, for whom shall I
preserve thee? for whom shall I save thee alive? If thou live, thou must be a
slave unto the Romans; but famine preuents thy servitude: yea and the mutinous
Jews are more cruel, than either the Romans, or the famine. Be thou therefore
meat to me; a fury to the mutinous, and even a mock of the life of man. And
when she had thus spoken, she killed it, and boiled the dead body of it, and
eat the one half, and reserved the other for another time.

The mutinous Jews drawn by the sent and savor of this meat, brake into this
woman's house, and threaten to slay her, if she bring it not forth unto them.
She tells them she has meat indeed, but she had reserved it for her self,
nevertheless seeing they did so urge her, she would bring it to them. So she
brings them the relics of her son; at which sight they standing amazed, and
shrinking back with fear and horror; the mother said thus unto them: This
meat you see is indeed part of my own son; it was my deed to kill it; eat
ye of it, for I have eaten. Will you be more tender than a woman? more
pitiful than a mother? Eat, I say, for I have eaten. If you will not eat, it
shall remain for me his mother. Oh fearful, horrid, inhumane act^

The famine still continuing, they are compelled to begin to issue out of their
City gates, and no sooner were they out, bur they were still taken and
crucified upon Crosses and Gibbets set up before the walls, that they who were
within might by beholding of this spectacle, be moved to give over; but yet
they continued obstinate and would not. Five hundred a day were thus hanged up,
till there were neither trees to be gotten, nor any more space left to set them
in: and desire being made to know the number of dead carcasses which were
carried out of the City for want of burial to be thrown in ditches as dung
upon the earth, they found the number to be numberless, so that no way could
it certainly be known; but out of one Gate the keeper had noted an hundred and
fifty thousand dead bodies to be carried out. And thus what with the extremity
of the famine, what with the fury of the sword, and what with sickness during
the time of this war, there perished in Jerusalem, and the Province
adjoining, as some credible Eusebius. in Chro. Orosius lib. 7.
Authors affirm, about six hundred thousand able men to bear arms: or as
others hold, Joseph. de bell. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 17.
who were present at the war, there died eleven hundred thousand; besides
others taken captive to the number of ninety seven thousand.

The Jews thus dead and scattered, what became now of their glorious City?
Their holy Temple it was burnt; their strong and high walls were thrown down;
all the City became waste and desolate, and so it remains to this day. And
thus we see what Moses there threatened, is here fulfilled to the utmost: both
which prove my doctrine and make it good, That albeit war find a land like
Eden, it will leave it like a Sodom, a desolate and forsaken wilderness. If
these be not sufficient, Lament.
read the whole book of Ieremiahs Lamentations, and there we shall find that
the mercies of war are cruel. As also what this our Prophet Isaiah says in
the ninth of this his prophecy, where speaking of the troubles that should
befall the people for their sins, says, Isai. 9.19, 20.
The people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother.
And he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry, and he shall eat on the
left hand and not be satisfied; they shall eat every man the flesh of his own
arm. Where we see war is compared to the fire, and it feeds upon and
destroys the people, as the fire consumes straw or wood: or like as an
hungry man, who snatcheth at the right hand and at the left, and is not
satisfied, such is the insatiable hungry desire of war; there is no measure
nor satictie of blood. Let us thus apply this point.

Admonition unto us all, that we be heartily and unfeignedly thankful for the
long peace and prosperity that we have enjoyed under the conduct of our worthy
Deborah, our late Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and still do enjoy under the
government of our peaceable Solomon, and Princely Ecclesiastes, who came unto
us like Noah's Dove, Genesis 8.11.
with an Olive branch of peace; and has shut their on gates of war, and
settled peace amongst us; so that we may sit 2 Samuel 7.1.
every one under our own Vines and Fig Trees, and there is none to make us
afraid. Which blessing is no common blessing that we of this little Island at
this day do enjoy. Our neighbors round about us are at this day whirled about
in tumultuous broiles, while our Britain, like the Center, stands still
immovable; in so much that it is hard to say whether other Nations more envy
or admire us. In peace our Merchants trade abroad, and bring home Psalm. 104.15.
Wines to make glad the heart of man, and Oil to make his face to shine. In
peace our Magistrates fit at home, 2 King. 7.
and give judgment in the gates of Israel, for maintaining of peace. In peace
the Messengers of peace Isay 52.7.
preach unto us the sweet tidings of the Gospel. In peace our Husbandmen James
5.7.
sow their corn in hope, and reap with joy. In peace Psalm. 144.12, 13, 14.
our sons as plants grow up in their youth, and our daughters are as corner
stones, polished after the similitude of a Palace. Our garners are full,
affording all manner of store: our sheep bring forth thousands, and ten
thousands in our streets. Our Oxen are strong to labor: there is no breaking
in, nor going out; there is no complaining in our streets. In a word, all
honest Occupations and honorable Professions thrive under the peace that we
enjoy. For which Peace what cause have we to be thankful to the God of Peace?
Especially considering how often by our sins we have broken our truce with
God, and given an Alarm to the King of heaven, by our Pride Isay 3.16.
, and contempt of the Gospel 2 Chro. 36.16, 17.
, two usual forerunners of the Sword. And therefore in the midst of this our
peace, let us not grow secure: we have not so many blessings, but we may
forfeit them all by our disobedience. When we most feared war, God sent us
peace: Now we most brag of our peace, we may well fear that God will send us
war.

Secondly, for Reprehension of such as grudge their wish and pray for wars.
Never good days since so much peace, say some; and would we had wars again,
say others. Fools that we are, that know no better how to use our peace, and
testify so great unthankfulness for so great a mercy. Had we been in the coats
of our forefathers, or did we feel the scourge of war, as our neighbors
do, we would better know how to esteem this blessing, and prize this garland
of Peace. We never saw our Towns and Cities burning, whiles the flame gave
light to the soldiers to carry away our goods: we never saw our houses rifled,
our Temples spoiled, our wives ravished, our children bleeding dead on the
pauements, or sprawling on the merciless pikes: we hear not the confused
cries of men sounding in our distracted ears; some dying, others killing;
other insulting; others resisting: we see not our highways strawed with
breathless carcasses; men and horses wallowing in their blood, and the ghastly
visages of wounds and death in every corner: these things we can only judge of
by report and hearsay; did we know them by experience, we would not so
repine at the peace we now enjoy. Were it not a woeful and lamentable thing to
see fire without mercy, and without quenching, consuming houses, and eating up
all things, making spare of nothing? How much more to hear, and see, and feel
the affliction of war, when all things are in confusion and combustion? When
2 Chro. 15.5, 6.
there is no peace to him that goes out or in, but great troubles to all the
inhabitants: when Nation is destroyed of Nation, and City of City, and all
are troubled with adversity. Alas! what good, what profit, what sweetness can
we find in these things?

And as these are to be reproved, so me thinks I find another sort of people
to be sharply censured, who go a degree further than the former, counting of
war but as a matter of sport and play. So speaks Abner, Captain of the
Host, 2 Samuel 2.14.
Let the young men now rise and play before us. His meaning was that they
should come forth and try their valor, one in hewing and cutting of another,
and so show them Vatah. and Iun. in loc.
a bloody play. Such were those sword-plaies, in use amongst the Romans,
wherein cruel spectacles were exhibited on each side in the shedding of humane
blood. Such also are our challenges made and performed by Fencers upon the
stage now in use amongst us, whereby Gods Image is oftentimes defaced, and
blood spilt as water upon the ground: and yet what running and thronging to see
such bloody sights; being counted by many but a sport, or matter of
recreation. Which kind of savage and beastly spectacles, Theodosius the
Emperor abhorred, and would never behold. And one Demonax among the Athenians,
hearing the people consult about such plays, told them they must first break
down the Altar of Mercy; because such sights were so merciless and cruel.
Let all such as fear the Lord beware of countenancing such by our presence,
lest we make our selves guilty of their sins, and stand as guilty before
the Lord of shedding that blood which they do shed.

Thirdly, for our Instruction this serves; Seeing there is such cruelty in
war, and fearfulness and devouring in the sword; let us take heed of the
beginnings thereof, and cut the cords of all contention and debate, living
peaceably one with another, as brethren ought to do. James. 4.1.
From whence come wars and contentions amongst you (says Saint James) are
they not hence, even of your lusts that fight in your members? These
distempered lusts are the cause of all strife and contention, causing a
continual war within a man, and oftentimes wars with other men, to the
ruinating not only of private persons, but of whole Families, Cities,
Kingdoms. The greatest wars have been kindled by private discords, as
Histories declare. Let every one then beware of sowing the seeds of division,
for in time they may come to yield a comfortless crop of cares and confusions.
Brawle not, chide not one with another; and as Saint James says, James 5.9.
Grudge not one against another: for these are the foundations of war, and
therefore have no hand in laying them. Civil dissentions ruinate a
Commonwealth, more than open war, as Jerusalem and Rome can testify, both
which by private factions made themselves a prey to the common enemy. The
French and we English also have some experience hereof in those homebred
garboyles which were between the house of Lancaster and York before they were
united; in which unhappy quarrel there were cruelly butchered fourscore
Princes of the blood royal (as one witnesses Cominaeus.
) besides an infinite number of the comminaltie that were slain. And thus we
see Saint James his saying true: Cap. 3.16.
Where envying and strife is, there is sedition and all manner of evil works.

Lastly, seeing there is misery and mischief in war, exhortation, that we
Romans 12.10.15.
mourn with them that mourn, and weep with them that weep. Our brethren in
France and Germany are whirled about in these bloody tumults; they hear the
dismal cries of cruel adversaries, crying kill, kill; the shrikes of women
and infants; the thundering of those murdering pieces in their ears; while we
lie Amos 6.4.6.
upon beds of Iuory, and stretch our selves upon our couches, and eat the
lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall; while
we drink wine in bowls, and anoint our selves with the chief ointments. We
are strangers to those miseries they undergo, in passion: I pray God we be not
strangers to their miseries in compassion, which I fear, I fear, we are. Let
us think we see the calamities of war with our neighbors eyes, and feel
them through their sides, and let not the afflictions of poor Joseph be
forgotten. And seeing they are in the valleys fighting against the Amalekites,
the cursed enemies of Gods Church and people; Exodus 17.8.
let us be upon the mountains lifting up our hands for their victory and
deliverance; praying with the words of David, saying, Psalm. 74.2.19, 20, 21.
Remember, O Lord, thy congregation which thou have purchased of old: the rod
of thine inheritance which thou have redeemed. O deliver not the soul of thy
Turtle Dove unto the multitude of the wicked: forget not the congregation of
thy poor for ever. Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the
earth are full of the habitations of cruelty. O let not the oppressed return
ashamed: let the poor and needy praise thy name. Psalm. 79.11, 12, 13.
Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee, according to the greatness
of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die. And render unto our
neighbors seuenfold into their bosom, their reproach wherewith they have
reproached thee, O Lord. So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture, will give
thee thanks for ever: we will show forth thy praise to all generations.

Text.
It shall not be pruned nor dug.] Look as Husbandmen neglect to prune, cut,
dig or dress such grounds and plants as they despair of and have not
pleasure in: so God here despairing as it were of this his Vineyard, tells them,
he will husband them no more, but he would withhold such means from them, as
formerly he had used for their fructifying. Whence learn we:

Doctr. Such as neglect the means, shall be deprived of the means.
When the Lord has used all means both by his word and works to bring a
people to good, and they nevertheless neglect and contemn those means of
their good; continuing still in carnal security, gross infidelity, and
impenitencie; then will the Lord deprive such a people of those means of their
good, and give them over to their own wicked courses, and hearts lusts, and
suffer them to fall headlong, as well into the evil of sin, as into the
evil of punishment. So we see here dealt he with this people: he depriueth
them of the means, withholding his pains, in pruning, digging, and the like:
as also the rain from falling on them any more, and so suffers them to bring
forth thorns and briers; noisome sins and lusts, even to their own ruin
and perdition. Thus in the first chapter of this prophecy we may read, how
that after God had bestowed many and great favors upon his people,
notwithstanding all which they continued obstinate and rebellious, and neither
by mercy nor misery would be reclaimed nor reformed, but would still
desperately persevere in their defection; he tells them plainly he would smite
them no more, seeing it was so that they were set upon evil, and had as it
were sold themselves to work wickedness; Isai. 1.5.
Wherefore (says he) should you be stricken any more; seeing you will revolt
more and more? q. d. To what end should I any more correct you? for full well I
see that you become worse after you are afflicted than you were before; and
therefore I will withold my hand, and leave you to yourselues. The like
judgment we find threatened in Hoseas prophecy against the apostate
Israelites: Hos. 4.14.
I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your spouses
when they commit adultery; seeing they would not be amended, he would lay the
reins upon their necks, and withold the means whereby they might have been
reclaimed. And thus when the Gentiles would not serve God according to that
light of nature which he had given unto them, Romans 1.28.
he gave them up to their own vile affection, and to a reprobate mind. And
upon such as having long had the means of knowledge, and regeneration, and yet
continue still in their unrighteousness and corruption, he passes that
definitive sentence, Revel. 22.11.
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, It is spoken, Prophetando non
optando. Coelius.
and he that is filthy let him be filthy still. And thus we see it to be
true, That God will remove and deny means of reclaiming, when having long
enjoyed them, we make no good use of them, neither are reclaimed by them.

Reas.
And why so? Because it is but lost labor and cost cast away, to administer
physic to such Patients whose diseases are desperate. Now God is a most wise
Physician, and knows with whom he has to deal; and therefore when he sees
men rend in pieces his prescripts, and pull off his plasters, and reject those
wholesome potions which he ministereth to purge men from their corruptions, he
gives them over to themselves to sink or swim, and suffers them to die and
perish in their sins, and in the sickness of their souls.

Quest.
But is it just with God to suffer such as are grown desperate in sin and
become incorrigible, to run on without punishment?

Resp. 1.
I answer first, we are not to understand what has formerly been spoken,
generally and absolute, as though he would inflict upon such no kind of
punishment; but more specially he would not lay upon them that kind of
punishment which is called chastisement and correction. He will not in
punishing them play Insignis poena est and vindicta impietatis conniuere Deum
ac indulgere peccantibus, and vindicta impunitatem sed and longam concedere
prosperitatem. Philo. lib. de confus. ling.
but rather of a Surgeon, cutting that clean off, which he has no hope to
cure.

Secondly I answer, They are punished even while they are spared, and that most
fearfully: For what greater punishment can be inflicted, than to be given up
to ones own hearts lusts, and so to have sin punished with sin; sin
foregoing, with sin following?

And thirdly, we are to know, that this world is more properly the place of
doing, than of suffering; Romans 2.5.
treasure up unto themselves wrath, against that day of wrath, wherein Eccles.
12.14.
every transgression of theirs shall receive its recompense, God may not be
thought to be unjust. Some sins are here punished, that we may know there is
a providence in God; others escape here unpunished, to assure us that there is
a judgment reserved, and a day of wrath appointed.

Thus is the point proved, and cleared; heart it now applied.

This concerns this our Land and people very nearly; Matthew. 11.23.
Capernaum have been lift up to heaven, and yet are so little bettered by the
means. Wherein has God been wanting to us either in word or deed? What
means can be devised to do us good, that God has not used? Is there any way
by which a man may learn, but by the same the Lord has taught us? By his
Precepts he has instructed us; by Requests he has exhorted us; by his
Mercies (great and many) he has allured us; and by his Judgments he has
terrified us. He has sent his servants of sundry qualities according to their
several gifts early and late unto us: Some like Moses to teach us; some like
Isaiah to comfort us; some like Jeremiah to mourn for us; some like David to
sing to us; all laboring to win us to repentance, that we might be saved. But
where is our repentance? where our reformation? If we look with an impartial
eye, we shall soon see all manner of sin to abound in stead of these. Does
not Pride, Gluttony, Drunkenness, etc. abound here? When I see and hear, I
must needs say unto my soul: Ier. 5.7.
How should God spare us for these? I pray God, that, that we take to be an
argument of his favor, viz. Peace and outward Prosperity, do not rather
strongly argue his fiery and hot displeasure.

More particularly, this may be for Admonition to given us, of what sort and
kind soever they have been; remembering always, that to whom much is
committed, of him much shall be required; the longer our day of learning has
been and the lighter, the more work and service will God expect at our hands,
and the better. We do not look for nor expect so much fruit of a tree that
has grown but a few years in a ground that is barren, as of that which has
grown many years in a soil that is fertile: and therefore it concerns such
as have been most and longest taught, to show themselves most zealous,
righteous, and devout.

In regard of the means, you in this famous City should be like Saul, 1 Samuel
10.23.
higher than others by the shoulders. A sin and shame then it would be for
you to come behind others in your obedience. Look then to it, for assure your
selves a lesser and smaller measure of knowledge, faith, obedience, etc. will
be accepted in others, than will or can be in you, because your means are
more. In this respect, Christ Matthew. 11.21, 22.
deemeth the damnation of the Capernaits to be more horrible and fearful than
that of the Sodomits, because the one had more means to make them good than
the other had: And so it will be with you; for if you bring forth no better
fruit, answerable in some sort to the means which God has bestowed on you,
the time will come assuredly that you shall wish, oh that I were a Sodomite, oh
that I were a Gomorean; yea you will envy their happiness in regard of your
own misery: and in the mean time you will be left of God as a desperate cure,
and be suffered to run on in a course of sinning, until you fall into that
bottomless pit of destruction, and gulf of condemnation.

Text.
I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.]

We have seen before what is meant by clouds and rain: The Prophets and
Ministers of Gods Word, are meant by the former, and the word they preach is
meant by the latter. I intend not to follow the Metaphors in the particular
resemblances wherein they may be compared, they having been touched before in
the Exposition. From hence I will only observe one point of Doctrine. And take
it thus briefly:

Ministers have no power nor ability of themselves to perform their
Ministerial function. Doctr. Ministers of themselves have no power to
discharge their Ministerial function.


It is of God and from God. It is God that will withhold these clouds (his
Prophets and Preachers) from dropping the showers of his word into the cares of
this people. He will command and they must obey. It is he that makes the heart
of the Priest fat, and Isay 57.19.
creates the fruit of the lips to be at peace. It is he that Revel 3.7.
opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. This S. Paul
acknowledges, that 2 Cor. 3.5, 6.
we are not sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of our selves, our
sufficiency is of God, who has made us able Ministers: and further confesses,
that though 1 Cor. 15.10.
he had labored more abundantly than the rest, yet it was not he, but the
grace of God which was in him. And of all Ministers whatsoever he says
indefinitely, 1 Cor. 3.7.
That neither he which planteth is any thing, nor he which waters, but God
is all in all. Thus Christ is said to have the Ministers as Revel. 1.16.
Stars in his right hand; not only for their defense, but also to make them
rise or set, when and where he pleases. Hence it is that the rain of the
Gospel, like the rain of the clouds, has sometimes gone by coasts, Amos 4.7.
raining sometimes upon one City and not upon another. Judge. 6.37.
Gedeons fleece has been wet, and no place else; and every place else, and
not Gedeons fleece.

Which being so, me thinks this should teach many the faithfullest laborers,
and workmen, are often tongue-tied; and though they be Clouds thick and full,
and likely enough to drop down showers: yet when they come to the place of
exercising this their Ministerial function, they are so withheld, that they
cannot be as a Reprouer unto their people. Now how do our people censure these
for their ignorance, negligence, fear, pride, unfaithfulness, and the like? I
deny not but these 1 Cor. 16.9, 10. Heb. 13.17.
, and every one of these do often stop the mouths of Gods Ministers. For Isay
6.5.
polluted lips are no lips of utterance. The lips of the Minister must be
touched with the coals of knowledge, zeal, and mortification. But certain I
am, that it is the sins of the people that most usually puts their Ministers
to silence: Ezekiel. 3.26, 27. Hos. 9.7.
Son of man, I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, and
thou shall be dumb, and thou shall not be to them a reprouer. Mark the
reason; For they are a rebellious house. You see then it was the rebellion of
the house of Israel that made Ezechiel dumb. When such an accident falls out,
condemn more thy own sins than thy Teachers negligence or ignorance; this
is thy best and safest course.

Pray for us Ephesians. 6.19. Coloss. 4.3. Crura thymo plena.
, that God would open unto us a door of utterance, that we may open our
mouths boldly to make known the mystery of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. What
is it for us to come unto you richly laden, and to be as full of good matter as
ever Elihu was Job 32.18.
if God be not with our mouths, as he promised Moses Exodus 4.12.
, and teach us what to say? Pray therefore, oh pray earnestly to God for us,
that he would excite us, stir us up, and enable us to utter such holy things
as we have studied and thought upon: For Pro. 16.1.
the preparations of the heart are in man, but the answer of the tongue is from
the Lord; and therefore except he do to us as he did to Jeremiah, Ier. 1.9.
stretch out his hand and touch our mouth, and put his words into it, there is
small hope that our tongues should so set out those wonderful works of God,
and those great things of his Law Hos. 8.12.
, as that the souls of Gods people may have any cause to bless God that ever
they did hear us.

Thirdly, what cause have such to bless God as are Doctrine drops as the
rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
and whose speech distills as the dew; as the small rain upon the tender herb,
and as the showers upon the grass. Oh that men knew but this gift of God, and
were answerably thankful for so great a gift! Satan grudges, yea enuies the
Church this gift, and sets himself by all means to withhold these clouds from
dropping, as knowing full well what a great disadvantage they are unto his
kingdom: hence is it that all Ephesus is in an vp-roare upon Paul's teaching;
and hence is that outcry of our people, Never was merry world since so much
Preaching: Oh! how cursed a generation are we fallen into? who repine at that,
as if it were some heavy plague, for which we are bound to bless God for, as
a special blessing: A day will surely come when such will wish to have but one
drop fall from these clouds to cool the heat and horror of their consciences,
and to case the agonies they are perplexed withal, but shall not obtain it.

And lastly, this may teach us who are Ministers of

The Vineyard of the Lord of Hoasts, Text.
is the house of Israel,

Division.
Here we have the Allegory explained and applied by showing

First, who this Vinitor is; and he is God himself, who is here described by
his Titles and Epithites; first, Lord: secondly, Lord of Hoasts.

Secondly, who this Vineyard was; and they are, first, the house of Israel:
secondly, the men of Judah, even all the whole body of them.

Thirdly, what were the fruits; first; which he expected, and they were
judgment and righteousness: secondly, which they returned, and they were
Oppression, and a cry.

Expos.
The Vineyard] We have seen before in the beginning of the Parable, the reason
why the Church is compared to a Vineyard, with the several concurrences
wherein he comparison stands, which is needless here again to recite:
therefore thither I refer you.

Of the Lord] God is called a Lord, because of his absolute power, dominion,
and authority that he has over all creatures: for (as we know) he is properly
called the Lord of any thing, that has interest, authority, and government
over the same: Now seeing God has an absolute, free, and eternal right, to
all things both in heaven and in earth, this title of Lord is truly and
properly given to him.

Of Hoasts.] He is called not only a Lord, but Lord of Hoasts: First, because
his creatures are many and a multitude, as an army consists of many troops:
Secondly, in regard of their order, which is admirable; as order makes an army
beautiful: Thirdly, and especially, in regard of their obedience; for no
soldier is so ready pressed at the command of his Captain, as all creatures are
ready to fulfill the will of God.

Is the house of Israel.] This name Israel God for honors sake gave to Jacob
Genesis 33.38.
upon a special occasion mentioned in his story; and it signifies a Prince
or preuailer with God. And he thought it an excellent blessing to have his
children called by his name (Israel) as we may see in that his prayer made for
Joseph's two sons Ephraim and Manasseh Genesis 48.16.
, The Angel which redeemed me from all evil bless the lads, and let my name
be named on them, etc. And this name was given to Jacobs seed as a title of
honor. See Romans 9.4. So that by the house of Israel is meant the seed and
posterity of Israel, they who came of that house, and issued from his loins.

And the men of Judah.] Though Israel was a common name to the twelve Tribes,
while they were but one kingdom; which was from the beginning of Saul's reign
to the end of Solomon's: yet after they were divided into two kingdoms, they
were called by these two names Israel and Judah. When and how this rent was
made, we find expressly delivered both in the books of the 1 Kings 12.
Kings and 2 Chronicles. 10.
Chronicles. For the time, it was after the death of king Solomon, and not
before. And for the Manner thus:

Rehoboam king Solomon's son (censured by Jesus the son of Sirach Eccles.
47.23.
to be even the foolishness of the people, and one that had no understanding)
succeeding in his fathers throne, did, upon advice given him by his young
counselors, threaten sharp usage and hard measure unto his people, so that
his little finger should be heavier than his fathers loins: and whereas his
father did burden them with a grievous yoke, he would make it heavier: his
father did chastize them with rods, but he would correct them with scourges.
Which unkind entreating of his people caused a rebellion and revolt: Ten of
the twelve Tribes much discontented, break forth into speeches of impatiencie;
What portion have we in David? we have no inheritance in the son of Iesse: To
your tents O Israel. Now see to thine own house David. So they forsook
Rehoboam their rightful Lord, and set up Jeroboam son of Nebat to be king
over them. Two Tribes, viz. the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, only continuing
their obedience. Thus was Israel divided from Israel: ten Tribes from the
other two, which made both the ten and the two miserable.

The ten revolted Tribes have diverse appellations in the sanctified writings of
the holy Prophets, as Hos. 10.15.
Bethel, Hos. 10.5.
Bethauen, Mich. 1.1.
Samaria, Amos 5.6.
Joseph, Hos. 2.22.
Iesreel, Hos. 4.17.
Ephraim, Hos. 10.11.
Jacob; but none more usual than this of Israel.

The two other Tribes Judah and Benjamin (called in Scripture but one Tribe,
because of the mixture of their possessions, as 1 Kings 11.13.) have in like
sort their diverse appellations, as sometimes they are called Ier. 6.1.
Benjamin, othertimes Mich. 1.1.
Jerusalem, and otherwhiles Amos 6.1.
Sion, and sometimes again we may find them called Zach. 12.7.
the house of David. But most commonly they are known by the name of Judah, as
here. And thus we see, the reason of these different names given to one and the
same people; for all came of Jacob, and issued out of his loins.

His pleasant plant.] That is, the plant which he took delight in. Now this is
not spoken, as if they of the Tribe of Judah were more approved of than were
the other Israelites, but rather to aggrauate their sin, in that God having
so many ways advanced that Tribe above the rest, and according to Jacobs
prophetical blessing Genesis 49.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
, made it Lord and king over the other Tribes, so that the right of the
kingdom belonged to it, and was to continue in Iudahs line until Shiloh came:
yea, and out of that Tribe should the Shiloh and Messiah come, which was a
special prerogative that that Tribe had above the rest: yet notwithstanding
all this, Judah should deal so ungratefully with God, as in stead of sweet
grapes to bring forth wild grapes.

He looked for judgment, but behold oppression.] The Prophet here as well as
in other places of this his Prophecy shows his Rhetoric, (...).
using a figure, whereby he does excellently adorn his speech; for we have here
a meeting together of words, which has a very good grace with it, and yet
cannot be so well expressed in any other tongue, as in the original: in sound
the words seem to be almost the same, and yet are of contrary significations,
and differing much in sense by the changing of a letter: the one signifying
Mishpat.
Judgment, the other Mispach.
Oppression: the one Tzedakah.
Justice, the other a Tzehhakah.
Cry.

These words especially respect Magistrates and their office; and may seem to
show unto us the wellspring of all that wickedness which was amongst them: It
came from the head, and so dispersed it self to the members.

He looked for Judgment.] That is, this he expected for all his many favors,
that Judgment and Justice should be administered, the cause of the innocent
should be heard and pleaded, the quarrel of the poor revenged, and the wicked
and ungodly sharply censured, and severely punished.

But behold Oppression.] Or, as some expound it, a Conspiracy: the Magistrates
themselves conspiring together with the wicked to oppress the poor, according
to that in the first Chapter, verse. 23. Isay 1.23.
Thy Princes are rebellious and companions of thieves, etc. So here, while
these Judges and Magistrates should punish such as did oppress the poor, they
themselves did conspire with the wicked, while they did accompany them in
dealing extremely and cruelly with them.

For Righteousness.] That is, that every one might have their due, and no man
wronged nor injured. And this has a larger extent than the former,
comprehending under it all the duties of love and charity which ought to be
showed unto our neighbor.

A crie] or clamor, to wit, of such as were unjustly oppressed by those
corrupt Magistrates; the cries of the widows and fatherless came into the
ears of the most high God. And this was wickedness with an Ecce Behold it;
yea, and again, behold it, for it is twice used, Behold oppression, Behold a
cry; which particle has a great emphasis with it, and being double, the
greater. It is as a watchword to awake us to the consideration of what is
said; we should not lightly pass this over, that there should be such
wickedness, to be beheld amongst them, beyond hope or expectation of God or
men. Thus much for Explication. Now come we to Observation. And first from the
Prophets practice, learn we in general, that

Doctr. Application is to be made of Doctrine.
Preachers are to apply their Doctrines in particular to their hearers. This
course took Nathan when he had to deal with David: He did not only in a
Parable make him condemn the sin, 2 Samuel 12.7.
He shall dye that has done this thing: but by particular application comes
home unto him, Vid. Dr. Hall on Nathan.
Thou art the man; and so makes him condemn himself. And thus did Saint Peter
in that Sermon, wherein he converted three thousand souls: Acts 2.23.
Whom ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. Verse 36.
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that
same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. Such was his dealing
with Simon Magus; Acts 8.22.
Thy money perish with thee: repent of this thy malice, thou art in the gall of
bitterness: It may be thy sin may be done away. The like was our Saviors
practice (whose example is without all exception.) Luke 13.3.5.
I tell you nay, but except ye repent, you shall all likewise perish. Cap.
11.44.46.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites. Woe unto you also you Lawyers.
And John to the Jews thus; Matthew. 3.7.
O generation of vipers, who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come?

because application is the life of doctrine. This leads it to the thoughts and
intents of the heart to discern them; if sinful, to captiuate them; if right,
to inflame them. This makes the word become ours, and causes us to taste the
sweetness of it. Without this no fruit in the threatenings for our humiliation:
no fruit in the promises for our restitution: No true understanding of either,
without our own faith mingling and truly applying both. That which is spoken
to all, is as good as spoken to none at all.

Secondly, Gods Ministers are compared unto Builders, are not only to lay the
foundation, but also to erect up the building. Now Doctrine is but the laying
of a ground, and Application is the rearing up of the walls, and as the
building up of a Christian in grace and goodness.

The Uses concern, first, us Ministers; secondly, you our Hearers.

We that are Ministers must labor herein, and not Bernards Faith. Sheph.
says one, is as a devised thing idly without end. And it is less cunning to
give a precept, than to show aptly the use thereof. We are Stewards; now,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
It is required in stewards that a man be found faithful. Faithful first, in
providing wholesome food for the whole family: and secondly, in a wise
distribution of the provision; giving to every one in the house their portion.
Thus must we, first see our provision be good and seasonable, delivering not
for Doctrine men's precepts, nor the fancies and inventions of our own brains,
which fill full of wind and not sound nourishment: And secondly, give every
one their part out of the wholesome word of life; Comfort to whom comfort
belongs, and Judgment to whom judgment belongs; making difference: not
serving all alike, nor sending that to the Masters board, which was provided
for the men (for there is no faithfulness in this) but setting before every
one what is fittest for him; giving the bread of consolation to the child, and
the whip and staff of reprehension to the dog. This is the course whereby holy
doctrine is fastened, as with nails, by the Masters of Assemblies. And the
want of this is the cause why many men's pains are so liuelesse, fruitless:
for as rich man discoursing of bread to a hungry beggar; or a Physician
describing his Patients disease, and leaving him to himself; so is a Preacher
not applying. Or as a whole loaf set before children would do them no good;
for they might starve well enough unless it be divided: So is a general
Doctrine amongst our auditors. In it self indeed it is nourishable, but being
not applied, it seldom is so to them. I end this Use with a Meditation of a
Worthy of our times: Dr. Halls Vows and Meditations, third Cent. Med. 35.
Those that are all in Exhortation, no whit in Doctrine, are like to them that
snuff the candle, but power not in oil. Those that are all in Doctrine, and
nothing in Exhortation, drown the wike in oil, but light it not, making it
fit for use, if it had fire put to it; but as it is rather capable of good,
than profitable in present. Doctrine without Exhortation, makes men all brain,
no heart. Exhortation without Doctrine, makes the heart full, but leaves the
brain empty. Both together makes a man: One makes him wise, the other good:
One serves that we may know our duty; the other that we may perform it. In
both which we must labor, and who can say in whether most? Men cannot
practice unless they know; and in vain they know, if they practice not. Let
none think I take upon me to task or censure any: I only, as my duty is,
and occasion given me by this our Prophets practice, labor to show what we
ought to do.

Hearers, let them learn to suffer with meekness the word to be brought home,
and applied close unto their consciences, and quietly to receive that which is
their appointment. In these misinding days (faith one) it is a hard matter to
ouerreach the Devil: if we let sin alone, his kingdom flourishes; if we
strike at him, and hit not the bough he sits on, we move him not: if we hit
him, by taking the very sin on the head, then we are judged partial,
personal, and wreakers of our own spleen. Hence grows the quarrel betwixt
us and you; for were it not for special application, we should please you well
enough; but because we tell you the truth, we are become your enemies. Beloved,
if it were profitable for you, it were peaceable for us to shoot at Rouers, and
speak at random; but both our duty and your necessity calls for particular
application. Art thou a blasphemer, a Sabbath-breaker, an ungodly usurer, or
such like? Why then thou have thy portion appointed thee, and that is brimstone
and fire: it is somewhat hot indeed; but this is the portion of thy cup Psalm.
11.6.
, as the Psalmist speaks; this is appointed for thee to drink. Art thou
angry with thy Minister for telling thee this? If then be, thou have little
reason for it: For where is the fault, in thee or him? I pray thee heartily
repent, and amend thy life, and such things shall not be spoken to thee: become
a child, and thou shall have a child's part, the bread of consolation. But
while thou continuest thus profane and dissolute, look for no other than the
whip of reprehension; and content thy self therewith, if thou will become no
better.

Yea let every one help the Minister in this his labor; and learn to apply
what is taught, to their own consciences, accusing or excusing. We usually
hear the word, as we do news out of foreign Countries, as not pertaining
to our selves; and come to hear Sermons, as women come to costly banquets, to
pocket up and carry away for others that are at home, more than for themselves:
or as they do at Feasts, laying liberally on their neighbors trenchers,
letting their own lie empty. Thus when we hear any sin threatened, or
disgraced, we can post it off to others; Oh such a one is met withal, and that
is for him. But hear not so idly: the Lord speaks to thee, and intends that
exhortation or reprehension to thy foul; take it then as spoken to thy self.
Is it comfort? Repent and believe, and it is meant to thee. Is it Judgment? If
thou repentest not, it is to thee as surely as if he had named thee. And this
is the way to hear sauingly. So much in general.

Text.
The Vineyard of the Lord of Hoasts is the house of Israel] God himself, as we
see here, is the owner of this Vineyard, who is called, A Lord, and, A Lord of
Hoasts. From the first of these we learn,

Doctr. God is an absolute Lord over all creatures.
God is an absolute Lord over all creatures: He it is that has all absolute
dominion, power, authority, and sovereignty over all. This Nebucadnezzar,
after he was himself, acknowledged, Dan. 4.3. and 2.47.
Whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation
to generation. David in his prayer makes an ample confession of it: 1 Chronicles.
29.11, 12.
Thine (O Lord) is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the
victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is
thine: thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all.
Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thy
hand is power and might, and in thy hand it is to make great, and to give
strength unto all. And in that form of prayer, which our blessed Savior has
given us, we are taught to acknowledge, Matthew. 6.13.
that kingdom, power, and glory is Gods.

Reason.
And no marvel, seeing he alone made all, Coloss. 1.16.
without any help: Yea he it is that does preserve and uphold Acts 17.24.
Revel. 4.11.
all things that are made: and therefore he must needs have absolute
sovereignty and authority over all.

Object.
But Satan is called 2 Cor. 4.4. Resp. 1.
the God of this world, and most obey him: How then is God so absolute a Lord?

Satan is so called; First, because he challenges it to himself, and not
that he is so; for Psalm. 24.1.
The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof; the world and they that dwell
therein. He only vsurps it, as he did when he told our blessed Savior, Matthew.
4.8.
All the kingdoms of the world he would give him, if he would fall down and
worship him. And thus the Devil is called the God of this world, as Absalom
was called King, by usurpation.

the wicked make him so, suffering him to rule over them, and reign in them;
giving him that honor and worship which indeed belongs to God. It is not then
Satan's power that makes him a God, but man's weakness in yielding to his
suggestions. Neither does this obedience, which most give him, make against
what is now taught: for we may not measure and esteem of sovereignty and
authority by the obedience or disobedience of subjects, but by the right of
authority which any has over a land or people. What if most men should not
obey their Prince, but his enemy; would it follow hereupon, that he should not
be their Lord, but that other whom they serve? Nothing less: So here. And
again, Satan himself is but Gods slave, serving as an executioner or
tormenter of the wicked: now we know Princes are as well Lords over such, as
they are over the very best. Now we come to see what Uses will follow hereupon.

And first, seeing God is absolute Lord over all that is in Capite. All (as we
see) is Gods, and if we hold not what we have from him, we are but as thieves,
robbers, and usurpers. Tell me then, thou worldly, wealthy, wise one; can
thou say of thy lands, possessions, leases, moneys, as Jacob did Genesis 32.10.
, that God has given them thee? I fear me nay: the bad means thou use for
the attainment of them will gainsay it: God gives what he gives by lawful
means; thy courses were sinful and unlawful, as lying, couzenage,
oppression, usury, extortion, or the like, whereby these were gotten. Whence is
it that Trades are called crafts and mysteries, but from hence, in that more
live by the craft and sin of their Trades, than by the Trade it self? Hence
also is it, that men are feign to be as wary in buying and bargaining with
most Tradesmen in these sinful days, as if they were fallen into the hands of
thieves and cut-purses. Will not these things witness against many, at the
last day, that they have not lawfully what they have? Will not these sinful
courses convict thousands of theft before the Lord? Yes questionless. Happy
were it for these, if they could in time see it, and repent thereof, and make
restitution of what they have thus unjustly gotten, while there is help and
hope; otherwise let such be assured, a day will come, when as they shall be
compelled to restore, and say to Satan and the world, as Judas did to the High
Priests, Take your silver, your gold, your wealth again; Math. 27.3, 4.
It is the price of blood: but shall find no better answer than that they gave
him, What is that to us? thou should have looked to it.

Particulars wherein we are to show our obedience to the Lord.
let this serve for our Instruction, and teach us all to show our allegiance
to him in the practice of these duties.

First, in carrying in our hearts a fear and reverence of his majesty, even
such a fear as does proceed from Mal. 1.6.
A son honors his father, and a servant his master: If then I be a father,
where is my honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear, says the Lord
Almighty.

by an open profession and acknowledgement that he is our Lord. Even as
servants by their liuerie make known to all men whose they are and whom they
serve: So do thou, both by words and deeds make known to whom thou do
belong; and be not ashamed of thy master, thou have no cause. He is far from
being a faithful servant, that can stand by and be dumb, in case his master
be dishonored.

in giving him absolute and universal obedience, cheerfully subiecting our
selves in all things, and at all times to his commands. Here must be no
reasoning about, no inquiring into his commandments, as may be into men's: for
they must be obeyed in him, yea disobeyed for him, if they command any thing
contrary to his will; but he must be obeyed absolutely in all the parts of his
will revealed. His sayings must be our doings: Ipse dixit, must be sufficient.

Fourthly, by acknowledging our selves to be accountable Still remembering the
goods we use are none of ours, they are our Lords, and we are but stewards,
Luke 16.2.
who must shortly be called to a reckoning: He that spends his own, need
care the less; but he that has a matter of trust committed into his hands,
and cannot spend but out of another stock, had need to look about him,
because he must be countable, and so enforced to make good whatsoever he
comes short in, in his reckonings. Ask then thy self, what have I that I
have not received of my Lord and Master? Whence had I these gifts of body,
mind, health, wealth, etc. but of him? And so carry thy self in the using of
these, as that thou may be able to hold up thy head before the Lord in that
day of reckoning. And thus we see some particulars, wherein we are to testify
our loyalty and obedience.

Lastly, this may be a ground of moderation and meekness Ephesians. 6.9. Coloss.
4.1.
have a master in heaven. As if he should say: Beware that you abuse not your
authori^ie; for know that you have a supreme Lord and Master above you, as you
are above these, who has more power over you than you have over them, and
therefore look unto your carriage.

The second attribute given to him is Lord of Hoasts. The reasons have been
before rendered, and this one of the principal, because all creatures are as
his Hoasts, executing his will and pleasure. Whence learn we:

Doct. God is a God of power.
God is a God of power. He has all creatures for his Hoasts, ready pressed to
fight his battles and revenge his quarrels.

Moses sings this forth and proclaims it abroad, that Exodus 15.3.
The Lord is a man of war, his name is Jehovah. Yea and that we might the
better observe it, Almighty God has spoken once and twice Psalm. 62.11.
that power belongs unto him. Verba toties inculcata, vera sunt, viua sunt,
sana sunt, plana sunt. Aug.
One text repeated twice, pressed again and again, must needs be plain and
peremptory; and therefore we will make no doubt of this truth, for if we
should, his mighty works of creation, gubernation, and redemption, would
convince us.

Psalm. 68.1. Call. in loc.
arise, for then his enemies shall be scattered. His soldiers are in a
readiness, and if he do but move his little finger it is enough. If he say
but to an host of frogs, or flies, or lice, or grasshoppers, or caterpillars,
to all or any of them, Go, they go immediately, and Pharaoh nor all his host
shall ever be able to withstand them. Oh beware then of offending this mighty
God, for he has his armies in the heavens, in the earth, in the air, in the
sea, yea in hell it self. A thousand ways he has to revenge himself upon us
if we rebel.

Have thou found me, oh my enemy? said wicked Ahab to good Eliah: so may they
say to every creature they meet withal, who have God against them. The number
of the stars in the sky, fowls flying in the air, beasts feeding in the
field, are numberless; how infinitely infinite then is the number of thy
enemies, who art enemy to God? In what a woeful and fearful estate art thou,
when all that is within thee, without thee; above thee, about thee; God and
man; Angels, Saints; fish and fowls; birds and beasts; and all creeping
things, are up in arms against thee, to revenge the Lords most just and
righteous quarrel? What hope of heaven? what hope of having access into Gods
gracious presence in time of need? Should thou come with a petition to an
earthly Prince, and find all his officers and attendants to oppose thee, thou
could have but cold comfort of ever speeding in thy suit. This is thy case,
yea far more woeful. Be not then secure, for thy case is wretched: What Cain
sometimes said thou have lust cause to fear; Genesis 4.14.
Every creature that meets me shall slay me. Thou walk all day long as it
were upon a mine of gunpowder; either by force or stratagem thou will be
surprised and taken. Oh that men would once learn to meddle with their march,
and beware of contending with him that is stronger than themselves, lest they
be consumed in the end.

And lastly, let the godly rejoice, yea let them sing for Lord of hoasts, Psalm.
24.
the Lord mighty in battle, on their sides to preserve and keep them. It is a
comfort to serve a Master that will take ones part in case of need; but to
serve such a Master as is able to defend one, is a far greater comfort. Such
a one is Dan. 3.17.
that God whom we serve, he is able to deliver us. England was sometimes said
to have a warlike George, but the Papists being offended with us (to do us, as
they suppose, a mischief) have robbed us of our George: And though to other
Countries they allot a several Saint, (imitating therein the Gentiles, who
going to war had their several gods for their Protectors) as to Spain, S.
James; to France, S. Dennis; to Ireland* S. Patricke; to Rome, S. Peter and S.
Paul, and the like; yet England shall go without. They will leave us God alone
to fight our battles, and revenge our quarrel: For which honor and favor all
English hearts are bound heartily to thank them. Dr. Boys Spr. part. p. 227.
Let them keep their George and give us this man of war, whose name is the
Lord of hoasts; in having him we have enough. If he be with us, we fear
neither their Hee-Saints, nor Shee-Saints, nor a thousand more of them, though
they be against us: And therefore as our Church has taught us in her Liturgy
to pray, so let us pray continually; O Lord save thy people and bless thine
inheritance. Give peace in our time O Lord, because their is no other that
fights for us, but only thou O God.

Text.
Is the house of Israel and the men of Judah his pleasant plant.

Having spoken of the Vinitor and who he was, it follows now to speak of
the Vineyard and who it is: The house of Israel and the men of Judah, says my
Text, is it; that is, the whole body of the Jews, both Israel and Judah, even
both the Kingdoms. Of both which we will speak jointly, seeing they were but
one body. The house of Israel and the men of Judah, that is, the seed and
posterity of Israel and Judah, those people who issued out of their loins.
Whence note we:

Doctr. Good progenitors may have a bad offspring.
Good progenitors may have a degenerate and unregenerate offspring.

Israel was good, but his posterity naught.

Of the first brace of sons which the worlds eye did see, Genesis 4.14.
one was a branded runnagate upon the face of the earth; such a one as was
undutiful to his father, unnatural to his brother, heretical toward his
God, damnable to his own soul. From Adam come we to Noah, and of his lease
of sons Genesis 9.22.25.
one was a Cham, who takes an advantage by his fathers weakness, discouers his
nakedness, and makes him the argument of his sport. Come we from him to
faithful Abraham, of whose great care in the well nurtering and training up of
his children Genesis 18.19.
, God himself does witness: yet his condition is no better; for of his two
sons, Ismael was a scoffer Cap. 21.9.
. And as it was thus with the father, so it happened to be no better with his
son. Unto Isaac is borne not only Jacob (who was this Israel) but also
profane Esau Genesis 25.32.
so branded as it were in the forehead by the Spirit of God Heb. 12.16.
, for selling away his birth right for a mess of pottage. And what shall I
more say? for the time would fail me to tell of 1 Samuel 2.12.
Ely, and of 2 Samuel 13.14.
Samuel; of and 15.16.
David, 1 Kings 1.5.
Josiah, and 2 Kings 23.32. Reason. Homo liberos gignit ex carne vetusta and
peccatrice, non ex spiritu: quocirca minime mirum si iustus iustos non gignat
sicut peccator peccatorem: Aug. con. Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Ezechiah, with other men of God, whose sons have been sons of Belial,
that knew not the Lord.

The Reason is; because that goodness which is in man, he has it not by
nature, but by grace. Now man communicates to his children that which he has
of nature, in begetting children according unto nature, and not that which he
has above nature, by the grace of regeneration. The grains of wheat which are
sowed in the earth, though they be never so well purged from all their
superfluities, having neither stalk, nor ears, nor chafe; yet when they
spring up again, bring all these with them, because as one of the Fathers
says, that purgation of the come is not made by nature, but by the art of man.
So here in this.

Which being so, let none think to be saved by their Hab. 2.4.
: The just shall live by his own faith, says Habakuk; not by the faith of the
father, no nor of his fathers father. How grossly then do such deceive
themselves, that run into all excess of riot, and think to have mercy
showed unto them, because of the godliness of their parents?

But we read that the promise of remission of sins Acts 2.39. Resp.
.

True, yet not to all of them, but only to so many of them as the Lord our God
shall call: for so it follows in the words immediately following.

1 Cor. 7.14.
The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is
sanctified by the husband; else were your children unclean, but now they are
holy. Now if they be clean and holy, then are they under the election of grace.

Resp.
There is a double holiness: First, of Regeneration: Secondly, of the Covenant.
In regard of the first they are rebellious; but in regard of the second they
are holy, whereby they are received into the Church visible, and made partakers
of the outward privileges thereof, as of the Word and Sacraments.

So then though thou be borne of godly parents, this will not profit thee to
salvation, except thou beleeuest and repentest: for as the sin of the father
preiudiceth not the believing child; no more does the righteousness of the
father save the unbelieving.

that Isay 1.2.
he had nourished and brought up children, but they had rebelled against him.
Grace is no inheritance, it cannot be conveyed by us to our children as our
land and houses can; neither can we leave it to them as we leave them a
possession to descend by a continued succession, from the father to the son,
and so to the sons son in one race and generation. It is Gods free gift,
and he gives it where he pleases, and to whom he pleases: Only let us use
the means to bring them unto God (for that we are bound to do) and then
commit the success to him with patience. A threefold duty of Parents toward
their children.
There is a threefold duty that we owe unto them, which we must look we
faithfully discharge. First, that we have a care of their education, to bring
them up in Ephesians. 6.4.
of the Lord, as Saint Paul requires us. Secondly, that by a godly life we
give them good derived sin unto them by propagation, let them not draw it
also from us by imitation. Thirdly, that we be A child of so many prayers and
tears cannot be lost, as one said concerning Augustine the son of Monica.
that he would be pleased to give them a new nature, and to take away the
corruption of the old, which in their first generation we communicated to them:
which duties if we neglect, we shall be guilty of their blood; but if we
perform faithfully and conscionably, we are free, and have delivered our
souls, and may comfort our selves in the testimony of a good conscience,
knowing that we only can use the means, it is God only that must give the
blessing thereupon.

Lastly, hence let me give a caution to every one, that

These people, as we see, were called by the name of Israel and Judah; good
names both, and honorable: one signifies a Prince, or Preuailer with God; and
the other signifies Confession or Praise: and yet this people were retchlesse,
dissolute. Hence learn we,

Good names and titles profit nothing at all, Doctr. Good names and titles
nothing worth without grace.
if our lives be not conformable to those names and titles that are given us.

Caine, a good name, signifying a possession; but what is he the better for it,
when he is a Murderer Genesis 4.8.
So Absalom which made war against his father, had the name and made
goodliest show to be his fathers peace, and yet he proved to be his greatest 2 Samuel* 18.33.
heart smart. Judas his name was good, and proclaimed him to be a Professor,
but what does that avail him, when by his deeds he showed himself a devil
John 6.70.
? Thus the Jews bragged, they were John 8.33.
Abraham's seed; but alas, will it profit them when they are the servants of
sin? surely it cannot profit them at all.

Reason.
And no wonder, for God respects truth in the inward parts, and not outward
titles; he regards substance more than shadows.

Use.
This being so; let none content themselves with their good names, or outward
titles of honor that are given them; but let them use them as a spur, to
stir them up to imitate such good men as have been before so named; and
surely this was one reason why this people were thus called by the name of
Israel; that they might hereby be put in mind of their pedigree, and so of
their predecessors piety; and consequently to make them ashamed of their own
apostacy; who were so far degenerated from those religious men of whom they
were descended. Neither content thy self with that honorable title of a
Christian, or of a Professor, or of a Protestant, unless thou make good
those names by a holy and godly life. Tell me then thou that art thus called;
have thou those gifts and graces which those names import? have thou received
an ointment from that holy one? has he opened thy eyes, quickened thy dead
heart, sanctified thy unclean affections? If it be thus, then indeed these
names and titles are well befitting thee: but if it be otherwise with thee; if
thou live loosely and profanely, thou may blush so often as thou hear
thy self called Christian or Professor, or the like: for thou art nicknamed
and miscalled: It is as if a Cobbler should be called worshipful; or a
Carr-man, honorable: and who could away with that? Nay more, it is a kind of
sacrilege, under those holy names to live an unholy life. Belshazzar sinned
against God by excess and intemperancie in his eating and drinking: but in
that he abused the holy vessels of the house of God, to serve him to such
profane and unholy uses, was a sin more fearful, and sacrilege most
horrible. Thus for thee, as thou art a man, to sin, prouokes Gods wrath, and
deserves damnation: but to sin under the Christian name, and commit
wickedness, as thou art a Gospeller, it is with Belshazzar to abuse and
profane the holy vessels of Gods house; and this must needs plunge thee into
the hottest fire of hell. Mountaignes Essaies.
To conclude this use, let me tell you what I have read of a libidinous
Gentleman; who sporting with a Curtezan in a house of sin, happened to ask
her name, which she said was Mary: whereat he was stricken with such a remorse
and reverence, that he instantly, not only cast off the harlot, but amended his
future life. Art thou called a Christian, and yet followest drunkenness,
swearing, etc. let that very name cause thee to be ashamed of thy folly. Let
all apply what I forbear to amplify.

Further, in that these people have these titles, Israel, Judah, (the names of
their forefathers) given them as titles of honor, and names of excellency, we
learn a third lesson: And observe another note, viz.

Good Parents and Progenitors are great ornaments to their posterity. Doctr.
Good Parents are ornaments to their posterity.
Parents that are godly and religious do no whit at all disgrace their
children by their piety and godliness, but much countenance and grace them by
it, insomuch that it is an honor for posterity to descend from such worthy
Ancestors.

Solomon's Proverb may be a sufficient proof hereof: Pro. 17.6.
Childrens children are the crown of the elders, and the glory of the children
are their fathers: to wit, if they be godly and pious. Besides sundry
instances and examples that might be brought, for the confirming of this truth;
as of Abraham, what an honorable title was it accounted to be called the son
of Abraham, and child of Abraham? The Jews brag and boast therefore, John
8.33. Matthew. 3.9.
They were Abraham's seed, and they had Abraham to their Father. And so it was
indeed to them that walked in his steps, and were like him in grace. And so
afterward in David, what an excellent prerogative was it accounted to be, to
descend from him and be of his Family?

Reas.
For such are the seed of Princes and lineage of Kings; for thus has God
advanced the godly to be Revel. 1.6.
Kings, Priests and Prophets unto himself: they come of the noblest House and
Family that is, whose original comes not out of some corner of the earth;
but they spring of Christ, of whom all the Families in heaven and earth are
called. And this is right and proper Nobility indeed.

reproves such Parents, as hope to bring credit and renown to their
posterities, by their lewd and sinful courses; they live miserably and deal
unjustly, and open the mouths of all to cry out upon their falsehood and
deceit, their covetousness and extortion; and yet think to raise up their
houses, and advance their names, and adorn their children with glory and
estimation. But this truth may discover unto such parents, their folly and
great madness; for, this is not the way to bring credit, but disgrace to their
posterities; yea when they are dead and rotten, their evil courses will be
cast as dung in the faces of such as they leave behind, as experience makes
good: Such a man (says one) was this childs father; What, that Usurer, that
Worldling, that Extortioner, that Drunkard, that Whore-master, says another?
How can thy child stand by and hear this without red cheeks? it must needs
be matter of shame and grief unto him. First step to Heaven. 42.
Would thou indeed be an ornament to thy child, and child's child after
thee? then see thou be righteous and religious, and so thy name shall be
remembered in them when thou art dead. Oh what a credit is it now accounted, to
be of the posterity of Latimer, Bradford, Ridley, and other of those men of
God, who suffered for the truth? How are such esteemed and accounted of amongst
all? Let experience make thee wise: and so live thou, that thy children also
may account it their honor, not their shame, to name thee when thou art raked
up in the dust.

Secondly, let Children who have had, or have, godly prouiso, that we their
children be adorned with their gifts and virtues. For though we descend from
godly and worthy Ancestors, yet if we Ezekiel. 18.10.13.
degenerate from them, as a base and bastard brood, it can be no honor,
credit, comfort nor commendation to us. Put case a man have a thousand pound
land a year left him by his friends, and he spend it all (like the Prodigal)
Luke 15.
in riotous and voluptuous living; what credit is it for him to brag that such
an estate was left him? nay is it not a shame? So if the virtues of thy parents
live in thee, it is then a grace unto thee, that thou descendedst from their
loins; otherwise the contrary. The very Heathen Ovid. Metam. lib. 13. Juuenal.
Sat. 8.
have rather choose to descend of unnoble parents, so themselves were noble and
renowned through virtue, than to come of worthy parents and progenitors, and
themselves to grow base and degenerate out of kind. So it is better to be
religious, and the son of wicked parents, than being the son of godly
parents to be wicked. Cain, Cham, Ismael and Esau might boast of Adam, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, the noblest parents; who on the other side might blush and
grieve at such degenerate issues. Walk then in the steps of thy godly parents,
and speak not of thy blood, Non genus, sed genius: non gens, sed men's.
but of thy good; not of thy parents virtues, but of thy own (for what has a
coward to do to glory in the valor of his father?) And I would that Papists
would consider of this, who brag that their Pope and Bishops are the
Successors of Peter, and the rest of the Apostles: Well, admit this to be
true, yet can they show us how they succeed them in their gifts and graces? If
they cannot (as all the world may see they cannot) their personal succession
is nothing worth, and they brag of an empty title without honor.

It remains now that we come to taka a view of the fruits which this Vineyard
brought forth: which is the third and last thing I propounded to be considered.

Text.
He looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but
behold a cry.] Here we see, first, what fruits they were which God especially
expected, and they were fruits of the second Table, Judgment, Righteousness.


And secondly, what were the fruits which they returned, namely, Oppression, A
cry.


I might observe hence from the Prophets elegancie, adorning of his speech
Rhetorically by a figure, thus much, that

Doctr. Rhetoric may lawfully be used in the handling of Gods word. Use.
Rhetoric is an Art sanctified by Gods Spirit, and may lawfully be used in
handling of Gods word. There might be brought diverse instances out of holy
Scripture, wherein all the parts of Rhetoric are used, and every approved
rule of it practiced, yea even in this very Prophecy. But I hasten toward a
conclusion, and therefore pass from this with a word of admonition to all,
that we beware how we condemn the lawful use with the abuse. For the Art it
self is to be approved, and only the abuse thereof to be condemned. But I
come to the particulars in my Text.

He looked for judgment, righteousness.] He does not say he expected
Oblations and Sacrifices, which this people were abundant in, as Chap. 1.11.
but he expected that Judgment and Justice should be administered; the cause of
the poor pleaded; and all good duties and offices of love should be showed
toward our brethren, and those who were in need. Sundry points might hence be
raised; but I will only observe this one, which is as the sum of all.

The works and duties of the second Table are in special manner expected and
respected by God. Doctr. The duties of the second Table God especially respects.
In the first Chapter of this Prophecy we may read how forward this people
were in the outward duties of the first Table, Isay 1.11.
offering multitude of sacrifices and burnt offerings of Rams, and the fat of
fed beasts, etc. But God he calls them off, and tells them he would none, because
they had no regard of the duties of the second Table: Verse 15.16.
for their hands were full of blood. Then exhorting them to repentance, he
wills them to testify the truth thereof, by bringing forth fruits meet for
repentance. And for their better direction he instanceth in some particulars,
making choice not of such duties as immediately concern himself, but of such
as especially concern our neighbor: Verse 17.
Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the
widow. As if he had said unto them; You offer multitudes of sacrifices, and
observe solemn days and Feasts, the new Moons and Sabbaths, and the like,
and are not wanting in the outward duties of the first Table: But I especially
respect the duties of the second; wherein you have been wanting: and therefore
labor to find out what is right, and seek after that justice that God
requires in his Law, dealing with others, as you would be dealt withal: give
over your cruelty, exercise mercy, and stretch forth your helping hand for
the releeuing and defending of such as are in need. And in the 58. of this
Prophecy, we may read how God reiects their Isay 58.6, 7.
prayers and fastings, because they regarded not to show mercy and kindness
unto the poor and needy: and withal shows them what manner of Fast it was
that he required, namely, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the
heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free. To deal bread unto the
hungry; to bring the poor that are cast out unto their houses; to cloth the
naked, and the like. This was the Fast that God did especially respect. In the
Prophecy of Micah we may read what large proffers the wicked make: Micah 6.6,
7.
They will come with burnt offerings and calves of a year old; they will offer
thousands of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil; they would give their
first borne for their transgression, the fruit of their body for the sin of
their soul; so that God would be pleased herewith. But yet all this would not
please him: Verse 8.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
without this all the former is nothing worth. Thus we see verified what we
find recorded by the Prophet Hosea, I desire Mercy, and not Sacrifice Hos.
6.6.
. It is better pleasing unto God to see the duties of Justice and
Righteousness, of Mercy and loving kindness performed to our neighbor, than
to have Sacrifices never so many or great severed from these done unto
himself. The works and duties that the second Table requires to be performed
of us are most expected and respected by him.

Reas.
For the touchstone of piety and true religion toward God, is our just and
righteous dealing with our brethren. 1 Ioh. 3.10.
Herein are the children of God known, and the children of the Devil:
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not
his brother. True faith is operative, Iam. 2.18, 26.
and works by love, and is to be manifested by our works, without which it
is to be judged dead, as S. James speaks. No marvel then if God do so much
set by the practice of these duties.

Use.
Which serves to reprove such as bring forth fair leaves of profession in the
first Table, but are little or nothing at all in the duties of the second
Table. In the outward and public exercises of religion they are very diligent;
as in repairing to the Congregation, hearing the Word, receiving of the
Sacraments, and the like: But look on them in those things which concern men,
and there you shall find them exceedingly faulty; being unmerciful, unjust,
and unrighteous, in their dealings. Certainly the religion of these men is in
vain; their best services do stink in Gods nostrils, when righteousness
toward man is wanting. Let all such as are in the place of justice (for to
them this is especially intended) advisedly consider of this, and beware how
Amos 5.7. and 6.12.
they turn judgment into gall and wormwood (as Amos speaks) and the fruit
of righteousness into hemlocke. I would such would often put Jobs question to
their soul: Job 31.14.
What shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer
him? It would be a good means to make them take up his practice; Verse 16.
Not to withold from the poor his desire, nor cause the eyes of the widow to
fail: Verse 21.
not to lift up their hand against the fatherless, though they saw their help
in the gate, and might do it undiscerned. Yea let us all consider this, and
endeavor to be conscionably just and upright in our dealings between man and
man. When the question is made to God, what manner of men should dwell in his
Tabernacle and rest in his holy Mountain, i. which should have a good estate
here, and an habitation in heaven for evermore; he describes them by their
innocent and harmless behavior toward their brethren: Psalm. 15.2, 3.
He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth
in his heart. Certainly he regards that work very much which he rewards
with such and so great wages: And he is well pleased with that person in this
life, whom he will receive to dwell with him in everlasting life. But I will
be sparing in prosecuting this, in regard of the near affinity which it has
with the succeeding Doctrine, to which I hasten.

But behold oppression] Text.
The clean contrary was found to that which God expected. He looked to have
the poor defended and their causes heard by such as were in place, but by none
so much as they were they injured and oppressed. A sin beyond thought or
expectation, and therefore set out with a note of admiration, Behold
oppression, etc. Hence our note shall be:

Doct. Oppression is a crying sin.
Oppression of the poor, especially by such as ought to be defenders and
releeuers of the poor, is a sin heinous, grievous.

In the first Chapter of this Book we find it to be of a bloody nature: Isay
1.15.
Your hands are full of blood. And in the third Chapter to make the former
good, we shall find oppressors charged with Cap. 3.15.
beating the people to pieces and grinding the faces of the poor. And in the
fourteenth Psalm, Psalm. 14.4.
with eating them up as one would eat up bread. The Prophet Amos Amos 8.4.
charge oppressors, with swallowing of them up. And Micah charge Princes
and Magistrates yet further, to wit, Micah 3.3.
with eating the very flesh of his people, and flaying their skins from off
them, and breaking of their bones, and chopping them in pieces as for the pot,
and as flesh within the cauldron. How fearfully was Iehoiakim threatened for
this sin? Ier. 22.13,-20.
Woe unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by
wrong: that uses his neighbors service without wages, and gives him not for
his work, etc. Shall thou reign because thou clothest thy self in Cedar? Did
not thy father eat and drink and do judgment and justice, and then it was
well with him? He judged the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well
with him: But thine eyes and thy heart are not but for thy covetousness, and
for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to do it.
Therefore thus says the Lord concerning Iehoiakim the son of Josiah King of
Judah, They shall not lament for him saying, ah my brother, or ah my sister;
they shall not lament for him saying, ah Lord, or ah his glory. He shall be
buried with the burial of an Ass drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of
Jerusalem. These are proofs fufficient for my Doctrine, strongly confirming
what I have now taught; viz. Oppression of the poor, especially by such as
ought to defend and relieve the poor, is a heinous and grievous sin.

For first, it is a sin against Nature and Race. Beasts Saeuis inter se
conuenit vrsis.
Lions fight not with Lions; Serpents spend not their venom upon Serpents; and
therefore it is more than brutish for man to devour man by this sin of
oppression. This made Cyprian (seeing it practiced by some) to cry out with
wonderment and admiration: Ferae parcunt, Aues pascunt, Homines saeuiunt. Cypr.
ser. 6.
Oh the detestable cruelty of man's malice! The fierce Lions spare Daniel in the
Den; the ravenous birds do feed Eliah in the Wilderness; but one man
exercises cruelty upon another, and only man to man is become pernicious.

Secondly, it is a sin against Religion and Grace: Tit. 2.11, 12.
the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared unto all men, teaching
us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly, in this present world. And this was prophesied of long
since, that in the time of the Gospel Isay 11.6.
the Wolf should dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard should lie with the
Kid, etc. and that none should hurt and destroy in all the mountain of the
Lords holiness.

Thirdly, (when it is practiced by great men) it is a Place. Now as there is no
impiety to that impiety which is committed Ier. 7.11. 2 Chronicles. 36.14. Inter
leges ipsas contra leges delinquitur. Cyp. ad Donat. lib. 2. epist. 2.
in Gods Sanctuary; so there is no injustice to that injustice which is
committed and practiced in the very seat and sanctuary of justice, and whereby
men amidst the Law, sin against the Law; as Ananias the High Priest did, Acts
23.3.
in commanding Paul to be smitten contrary to the Law. It therefore being a
sin against Race, Grace, and Place; I doubt not but on all sides it will be
confessed to be most heinous.

Reprehension, even of all those who use any kind of injustice either by
violence, or by color of law, or by any other cunning dealing whatsoever,
against such as are not able to withstand them (for that I call oppression)
whose teeth are as swords, and their jaws as knives, to devour the poor from
off the earth, and the needy from amongst men: who are Lions, Wolves, Kine,
Bulls, Beasts, yea monsters in the shape of men: with which beasts or monsters
many Countries swarm, as Egypt did with Frogs and Locusts. They abound both in
Foro, and in Choro; in Change and Chancell; Church and Commonwealth. To rip up
all the sorts of them were infinite: with some of the principal I will only
deal. And first to begin with them whom I have not least cause to think upon,
our Church oppressors, those greedy and Harpie-like deuourers of sacred things,
who prey upon their patrimony who pray for them; and unjustly turn the
revenues of the Church unto their own proper use: Against whom that kingly
Prophet David bestows a whole Psalm, Psalm. 83.2, 3.
and calls them Gods enemies, tumultuous, proud, God-haters, crafty enemies,
confederate enemies, who combine themselves together to annihilate a Church.
And that we might not be deceived in the persons, he describes them to us by
their words: Verse. 12.
They are those that say, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in
possession; they beat their brains, and spend their wits how to appropriate
that to them and theirs, which the Almighty is invested in. And that they have,
and hold; but by what right or title the very name of Impropriations does show,
as being altogether improper for them that have them, and held by an improper
title. For tithes are due only to the Church, and cannot be alienated to any
other use, they having once been passed over to God, and dedicated to the
Church; neither have the Laity ought to do herewith: for where tithes are
paid, there must be a matter of giving and receiving; the Minister gives Phil.
4.15. 1 Cor. 9.11.
spiritual things, says the Apostle, and receives carnal things. Now
because Laymen cannot perform the one, they have not to meddle with the
other: for not keeping the condition, they cannot claim the covenant. I do
not deny but it may be in the power of Civil Magistrates to allow any other
maintenance unto the Minister, so it be competent: but seeing tithes are by law
established amongst us for this purpose, to be the hire of the Lords laborers,
and the wages of his workmen, it is as great a sin to defraud the Minister of
his portion, as to keep back the meat or wages from an ordinary labourer;
yea far greater: and yet S. James faith, that is a sin Iam. 5.4.
that cries loud in the ears of God for vengeance. How many thousands then in
this Land stand obnoxious in an high degree to the judgments of God for this
same sin, which is the bane of our people, and blemish of our Church. Some
there are who rob God of his maine tithes, yet are content to leave him still
the lesser; they pluck our fleeces, and leave us the taglocks, poor Vicaridge
tithes, whilst themselves and children are kept warm in our wool, the
Parsonage. And others yet more injurious, who think that too much, would the
law but allow them a pair of sheeres, they would clip the very taglocks off.
These (with the deceitful Tailor) are not content to shrink the whole and
fair broad-cloth of the Church to a dozen of buttons; but they must likewise
take part of them away, and nimme the very shreds, which only we have left.
After they have full gorged themselves with the Parsonage grains, they can
find means, either by unconscionable leases, or compositions, to pick the
Vicaridge bones. Aelian. var. hist. l^b. 1. cap. 20.
And thus as Dionysius dealt with Jupiter Olympius, who took from him a massy
garment of gold, which Hiero had dedicated to him of the spoils of Carthage,
and gave him a woollen cloak, saying that the other was too heavy for summer,
and too cold for winter, but this was fit for both seasons: even so (I say) we
are dealt withal. And now our poverty is flouted at by them that have our
livings, as the Jews, who having spoiled Christ of his vestments, then mocked
him with baseness. Every Gentleman thinks Ministers mean, and yet all the
world sees that our means have made them Gentlemen. But let all such persons
know, as have any way intruded upon Church rights, God has a Quare impedit
against them, which one day they must make answer to.



Resp. Possidebant. Papistae, possident Rapistae. Cominaeus lib. 1. cap. 4.
True, from the unworthy they were taken, and from the worthy they are detained.
Wicked Papists had them; ungodly robbers have them. And as one observes upon
the battle of Montlecherye, some lost their livings for running away, and they
were given to those who ran ten miles further. Idleness has lost, and
oppression has gained.



Resp.
Thus is this Objection answered; These were given to religious uses, and for
the increase of true Religion and Learning. Now if they (by injury of the
time) through ignorance mistook the truth, it is no wrong, nay, it is great
right, to keep their general purpose with amendment of their particular error.



Resp.
Ezekiel. 18.14-19.
If a Father that has oppressed the poor and needy, and spoiled by violence,
etc. beget a son that sees all his fathers sins which he has done, and
considers, and does not the like, etc. he shall not die for the iniquity of
his father, he shall surely live, etc. And then that Objection is answered.

Yet Law is on your side, and you do no more than

Though the Laws of men are for you, Resp. In iure fori, non in iure coeli.
Aug. de vit. and morib. Cler.
yet the Laws of God, by which you must one day stand or fall, are plain
against you: And albeit it holds in the courts of men, yet it will never hold
in the Court of Heaven. Besides, the Civil Laws are not on your side; for
they hold, that the things of God (such as are our tithes and revenues of the
Church) ought not to belong to Lay persons. But say they were; yet what are you
the better that the laws of men do patronize you in it, when the Law of God
condemns you for it? Oh that all such as are any way guilty of this sin,
would in time bethink them, and call to mind the horrible examples of Gods
judgments in former ages for it. Dan. 32.-7.
Belshazzar king of Babylon, abusing the holy vessels of the Temple to profane
uses, was first wounded inwardly with terror of conscience, and afterward was
cruelly murdered. In both the books of the Maccabees, we read of Al^ymus 1
Mac. 9.54, 55, 56.
H^liodorus 2 Mac. 3.24, 25.
, Lysimachus and 4.39, 41, 42.
, Antiochus and 5.15, 16. cum 95.-11.
, Menelaus and 13.4.-8.
and Nicanor and 15.30.-34.
all notorious Church-robbers, and all came to fearful ends. The example
likewise of Ananias and Saphira Acts 5.2.
is not to be forgotten, who for withholding part of that money which was
consecrated to God by their own gift, were by the severity of Gods justice
struck dead, as inuaders of Gods right: thus according to Solomon's proverb,
Prou. 20.25.
It is a snare to a man that deuoureth holy things: and as a snare, first, it
catches suddenly: secondly, it holds surely: and thirdly, it destroieth
certainly. Let our Improprietaries apply it, and learn to be wise by others
harms. Let them beware how they Iewishly with the spoils of Christ purchase
fields of blood for themselves and theirs: For questionless the Churches goods
have proved more unfortunate to the Gentry of this land than ever did the gold
of the Temple of Tholossa to the followers of Scipio, of which whoeuer carried
any part away, never prospered after. This has been as that cole which hung
at the piece of meat which the Eagle stole from the Altar, wherewith she fired
her nest, and burnt up her self and young ones. Had it not been for this, it
may be thought many a fair Family had at this day stood, which is now
ruinated. God is as just as ever, and detesteth this sin as much as ever he
did: and therefore, let such as will not leave it and repent of it, assure
themselves, that they shall speed as others have done before them. To you then
that have any Impropriations in your hands, I say as Daniel did in the like
case to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.
Let my counsel be acceptable to you, break off this your sin by
righteousness: Make restitution of that which most unjustly you have so long
detained, that so there may be a healing of your error. Thou have taken away
the Churches dowry, and spoiled her of it; now it were but reason, if thou
should make her a iointer to recompense the wrong offered, and the loss she
has sustained. Moneo vt reddatis Deo sua, vt Deus restituat vobis vestra.
Chrysostom. in Matt. 3.
But howeuer restore to God his own, that God may restore to you your own.
For with what face can thou expect an inheritance from Christ in heaven, who
deteinest away from Christ his inheritance upon earth? what you get by such a
detiny shall be your fatal destiny; you shall leave the gold behind you, but
carry the guilt with you to everlasting fire. Multi in hac vita manducant quod
postea apud inferos digerunt. Aug.
And that which you devour here, you are like to digest in hell hereafter,
except by Restitution you vomit it up before. We do not crave that you would
with Zacheus restore fourfold (though it is apparent, that the tenths were
got in old time from us by most false and forged cauillations) we only crave
our own, we would ask no more, Mr. Crash. epist. Dedic. to Perk. treat. of
the duty and dig. of Min.
nor willingly take less: for our whole duty is still required, then why
should not our whole due be paid? And yet that the world may learn of us
contentedness, as well by our practice as our doctrine, we would for the
present take in good part, and rest contented with a part of our own: And some
competent portions out of the Impropriations (proportioned to the quantity of
the charge imposed, and the gifts and pains required) would for a time be a
reasonable satisfaction in our Ministry, until our state found it self,
either better enabled or more straightly tied in conscience to full restitution.
And therefore let all such as have Impropriations in their hands be hereby
moved to make some restitution, in whole or part, as their estates may bear,
as some already have done to the disburdening of their consciences, and good
example of others. But here I look to have that counsel given me which one
did once give Luther, when he first began to preach against the Popes
usurpation and tyranny; You had as good hold your peace: this wickedness is
so powerful, that you will never prevail against it: Get you to your study,
and say, Lord have mercy on us, and procure to your self no ill will. Well; if
the worst come, I can but speed as others have done before me. I fear indeed I
do but beat the air; for this devil is not easily cast forth. The sons of
Zeruiah are too hard for us, unless Christian Magistrates, who are Isay 49.23.
nursing fathers to the Church, do by their power, with good Neh. 13.11, 12.
Nehemiah, work a reformation, and compel them to bring their tithes again
into the house of God. It is the Kings evil, no hand but his can heal it. But
as the Prophet said in another case, Isay 62.1.
For Zions sake I cannot hold my tongue, and for Ierusalems sake, for the poor
Churches sake, I cannot cease: and I would to God that Gods Ministers were here
Boanerges sons of thunder, to thunder out Gods judgments against this
horrible sin of sacrilege: And that all we who have any thing to do with
any of these persons (how great soever) would Isay 58.1.
cry aloud against them, and not spare, that if it be possible they might be
rowsed and awakened out of this same sin, which in many places causes
prophesying to fail, and consequently Prou. 29.18.
the people perish.

Leave we now the Church, and come we to the Commonwealth, and there we shall
meet with more of this bloody generation. First, such as my text here
especially speaks of, corrupt Judges and Magistrates, Isay 1.23.
Who judge not the fatherless, neither does the widows cause come before
them; (as Amos speaks) who Amos 5.7, 12. and 6.12.
turn judgment into wormwood and gall, and the fruit of righteousness into
Hemlocke: who afflict the just, take a bribe and turn aside the poor in the
gate from their right. These the Prophet Zephaniah is not afraid to call Zeph.
3.3.
roaring Lions, and ravening Wolves. And our Prophet Isaiah being Romans 10.20.
very bold, calls them companions of thieves Isay 1.23.
; and why so? did they take purses by the highwaies? No, but they took bribes
in their chambers: Every one loved gifts, and followed after rewards, etc. And
(as the Prophet Hosea speaks) they loved to say with shame, Hos. 4.18.
Give ye. Now I pray you, what difference is there between Give ye, and
Deliver ye, except it be this; Give ye goes often in chains of gold, whilst
Deliver ye lies in fetters of iron: before God there is no difference between
theeuery and briberie. I doubt not but this kingdom will afford as worthy
Judges and Magistrates as any Land or people in the world: And as Justinian
said, so with a safe conscience many of our Rulers may, They can lift up their
hands clean to God; to the King; and to the Law: and make protestation with
just and vncorrupt Samuel 1 Samuel 12.3.
, They have defrauded none, they have oppressed none. Yet I wish (and therein
(I hope) do no man harm) that all could say so. Then would not Justice be
made a hackney to be backed for money, neither could a golden spur do any
thing to bring her to the desired iournies end of injury and wrong.

But oh the wickedness of these times! wherein with Solomon we may observe
Eccles. 7.15.
many a just man to perish in his righteousness, and the wicked to prosper in
their wickedness. Is a man well monied? then (says the Proverb) he is too
heavy to be cast: Pecuniosus damnari non potest. Cui vis est ius non metuit,
ius obruitur vi.
for what is wanting in the goodness of his cause, the greatness of the Fees
will make up: So that the rich may say unto the poor, as Aesops Wolf unto the
Sheep, when they were in contention together; Thou have a better cause than I,
but I have stronger teeth than thou. Gain and rewards be the Remora to the
ship of Justice: She cannot now be called the Speed, but the Delay. A Motion
this Term, an Order next; and instantly all is crossed. A writ of Error puts
all out of course. Iethro was not pleased (as it seems) to see causes hang
from Exodus 18.14.
morning to evening: had he lived in these days, how would it have grudged him
to see them hang from Term to Term, from year to year? And the best causes
to be used as sore legs are by unconscionable Chirurgions, held long in hand,
not for the difficulty of the cure, but for the gain thereof. The poor
Client is feign to trudge up this Term, and next; emptying his purse with
paying Fees to one and to another, and still the web of his suit is drawn out
of a greater length, till he want weft to prosecute it; and so after all his
pains and cost, is in the end enforced to let it fall: Or say he have the day,
Mayor est expensarum sumptus quam sententiae fructus. Aelian. lib. 9. cap. 18.
yet he makes no saving match, by reason the charges of his suit are greater
than the costs that shall be awarded. Oh the uncertain events of suits,
besides the trouble! I hope to see an end this Term of my suit, says the
poor bloud-drawne wretch; when alas, he sees no end the next Term, nor next
after that; yea oftentimes, the next and next year is past first: His suit is
a suit of Durance, almost an everlasting suit. And thus while the poor
oppressed runs to them, who should be as a Isay 32.2.
shelter from the wind, and a covert from the tempest: it oftentimes falls out,
that (with the silly sheep running in a storm to the hedge or thicket) they
are so ensnared amongst the thorns and briers, as that they can hardly wind
and wrest themselves out without loss of wool and coat: what with delays,
demurres, and a thousand tricks which money will find out; they lose their
fleece, and carry away their flesh whole upon their backs with much ado. If
this weather hold, many men will go nigh to be of the mind that Themistocles
was sometimes of, who professed that if two ways were showed him, one to hell,
and the other to the Bar; he would choose that which went to hell, and forsake
the other. See then all you that are in place of Justice, that you keep your
selves untainted of this sin. Isay 33.15.
Walk righteously, speak uprightly, despise the gain of oppression, shake
your hands from holding of bribes, stop your ears from hearing of blood, and
shut your eyes from seeing evil.

2. Merciless and cruel Landlords: who partly by racking and improuing of old
rents, and that without the old minds of our forefathers (I mean their
charity) (for so it is lawful to improve them) partly by enclosing of
Greenes, Commons, Woods, (or other of the like) which appertain of right unto
their tenants: partly by burdening them with cariages, and such like services
more than was couenanted or agreed upon: and partly by making their leases
void, when it pleases them; Pactu^ non pactu^ est, non pactum pactum est quod
illis lubet. Plaut.
so that a Covenant to day, shall be none to morrow; and that which is none
now, shall be one anon; they oppress their tenants, grind their faces, and
suck their bloods. The poor Farmer he is feign to endure the heat and burden
of the day: he rises early, goes late to bed, eats the bread of
carfulness, and sits with many a hungry meal, not being able to spare a
morsel of bread to others, nay hardly able to give food unto his family; and
all that he does or can do, is but as a prey to his greedy Landlord, Good
words, it may be, prayers, they shall sometimes have returned, as God help
you; bless you; and give you good of it, etc. but if their prayers were worth
a penny they would keep them to themselves; their tenants should not be
troubled with them,

And herein they are like Darius, who prayed for Daniel Dan. 6.16.
that God would deliver him, when he himself sends him to the Lions den.
These are Oppressors, and such ones as God has sworn Amos 4.2.
to take away with hooks, and their posterity with fish-hookes.

3. Ingrossers; whose practice is to compass sea and land to get a commodity
into their hands; which having once obtained, they set a price upon it as large
as their own consciences: Or else hoard it up only to make a dearth without a
scarcity. I deny not but it is lawful to buy the overplus of any commodity,
and when men's turns are served in times of plenty, to take the residue (as
Joseph did) that in time of dearth he may have to help the Commonwealth, with
some good and moderate gain to himself also: But these in stead of laying up
to prevent a dearth, do hoard up to procure one; which time is the Ingrossers
day, wherein he does enrich himself with the spoil of the poor. Against
these very persons Amos thus prophesies; Amos 8.4, 5, 6.
Hear this oh you that swallow up the poor, that you may make the needy of
the land to fail; saying, when will the new moon be gone that we may sell
corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, and make the Epha small,
and the shekell great, and falsify the waights by deceit? and buy the poor
for silver, and the needy for shoes; yea and sell the refuse of the wheat?
They had long (as it may seem) kept up the corn for this purpose, that it
might grow dear; and now they had a time to serve their turn in, and they
must set it to sale in all haste, so that they thought the new moon and the
Sabbath days appointed for Gods own service, too long until they were a
selling: And now they intend to prey upon the poor, for they will sell little
for much; lessening the measure, and enhancing the price. The poor shall buy
the refuse dear, which is little worth, and sell themselves cheap, even in a
manner for old shoes to pay for it. Here God sent corn, and the devil sent
garners: Nay, in some sort they were worse than the very Devil himself: for
he seemed to have some charity in him, when he would have had Christ, Matthew 4.
to turn stones into bread, and so make a plenty in time of scarcity: but
these endeavored, what in them lay, to make a scarcity in the midst of
plenty, turning bread into stones, a trick beyond the Devil. Are not these
Oppressors?

4 Usurers, who may well be compared to the Timber-worme, which to touch is as
soft as silk, but has teeth so hard, as that it eats the Oak: Or like the
Beuer, which biteth so sore, Iul. Solin. cap. 23.
as that he never loses his teeth until he have broken the bones. It may
be truly said of these, Isay 59.7.
Desolation and destruction is in their path: wheresoever they set foot, they
make havoc of all. The Prophet Ezekiel does hedge in this sin between
Bribery and Extortion: Ezekiel 22.12.
In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood. Thou have taken usury and
increase, and thou have greedily gained of thy neighbors by Extortion, and
have forgotten me, says the Lord: therefore I have smitten my hands at thy
dishonest gain. And in another place we shall find, that, It and Oppression
is made both one; Exodus 22.25.
If thou lend money to my people with thee, thou shall not be an Usurer, thou
shall not oppress him. Thus by Gods own testimony these are Oppressors. Not
unaptly may we compare the Usurer to the nether Millstone, which is slow and
stirs not; he sits at home and spends his time in a deuillish Arithmeticke,
in Numeration of hours, days, and moneys, in Substraction from other men's
estates, and Multiplication of his own, until he have made Division between
his soul and heaven, and divided the earth to himself, and himself to hell.
His Broker we may compare to the upper Millstone, (without which the nether
Millstone may seem unprofitable) that is quick and stirring, and runs round:
The Poor (like corn) who between both these is grinded unto powder. Surely
it is for our sins that God suffers Usurers amongst us: It may be he suffers
these a while, as he did the Canaanites in Israel, lest the wild beasts should
break in upon them; lest pride and a full estate should spill men's souls: yet
we may safely say of these, as Joshua did of those, they are prick^s in our
sides, and thorns in our eyes. Now the mercy of God rid us of them. Let them
bring what Excuses, Apologies, Mitigations, Euasions, or Distinctions they
possibly can invent: let them reply, Usury is no sin, many learned men are of
this opinion: yet what are they the better, if God himself be not of the same
mind those learned men are of? And let them tell me if their consciences can
be so satisfied. Would not the greatest Usurer willingly give an hundred pound
bag to be secured in this point? It is not safe wading far in a questionable
water. Oh yet that there were hope with any sayings to move, then I would spend
some time, and take some pains in persuading these men, who deal altogether
in letting out their money to men; their time to Mammon; their body to pining;
their mind to repining* their soul to Satan: that they would fall to
restoring, because the sin is retained until the gains of Usury be
returned. Which saying though it seem hard, Non remittitur peccatum, nisi
restituatur ab^atum. Aug.
yet it is most true. And what though they should in so doing restore all they
have? I would tell them as the Prophet did Amasiah, 2 Chronicles. 25.9.
The Lord is able to give thee more than this. A mansion in Gods kingdom is
worth all thy cash. But I speak to the belly that has no ears. Show me the
Usurer (except Zacheus) that ever repented truly: for as Humility is the
repentance of Pride; so is Restitution of this sin. I doubt not but there are
some, but they will be as dainty dishes in heaven, as Venison is on a Plowmans
table. Wherefore I will forbear any further dealing with these, and rather
speak in general to all Oppressors of what kind soever; (and so hasten to an
end) Let all such know as use any kind of injustice, vi or dolo, by force or
fraud, against the poor and needy, who are no way able to withstand them,
that they flay their skins off, they grind their faces; yea eat their very
flesh, as sometimes that poor lean widow told Baldwin, Acts and Mon. page 233.
an Archbishop of Canterbury (when she heard him boasting that he had never eat
flesh in all his days) that he had eat up hers in taking away her Cow, whereby
she lived. And let them call to mind the fearful woes that are thundered
out against them for this sin. There is a Isay 3.14, 15.
Woe from Isaiah: a Ier. 22.13.
Woe from Jeremiah: a Micah. 2.1, 2.
Woe from Micah: a Hab. 2.12.
Woe from Habbakkuk. Woe and alas then, that such can be secure. Oh that such
would now at length call themselves to account for their oppressions, that some
remorse might be wrought in their hearts, if it were possible! Such as these in
former times have been executed, Stow in his Summary.
as thieves are now amongst us. Catillus, a British King, hung up all
oppressors of the poor: And after him King Edward (commonly called good King
Edward) banished such the Land: Glanuil. lib. 7. de leg. and consu. Angl. cap.
37. Extra del Tur. cap. Quia in om.
And by the ancient Laws of England the goods of oppressors, dying without
restitution, were forfeit to the King, and all his lands unto the Lord of the
Town. And it is apparent by the Canon Law, that heretofore they have been
denied Christian burial. Were the same laws still in force, undoubtedly it
would be a good restraint. And yet what is all this to expulsion out of Gods
Kingdom? Oh that these would bethink them of that dreadful day of reckoning,
and of that terrible sentence which shall be then denounced; Matthew. 25.41.
Depart you cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
angels. There is the Reiection. Verse 42.
For, I was an hungry, and you gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and you gave
me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed
me not: sick and in prison, and ye did not rele^ue me. There is a Reason of
their Reiection. Oh then how fearful will their case be, against whom the
Judge may thus proceed in sentence? Depart from me you cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels: for I had meat, and by force you
took it from me: I had drink, and you spoiled me of it: I had a house, and
you thrust me out of doors: I had clothes, and you pulled them from my back:
I was in health, and you made me sick: I was at liberty, and you imprisoned
me. For if by that sentence they be damned, who have not done the works of
mercy; much more shall they be damned, who have acted the works of cruelty.
If by that sentence they be damned, who have not succored nor relieved the
poor; much more shall they be damned, who have oppressed and crushed the
poor. To wind up all in a word (and so to turn the use from Reprehension to
Exhortation) 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Let no man from henceforth oppress nor defraud his brother; for the Lord is
the auenger of all such things. Let us all so carry our selves, as that with
blessed Paul we may glory as he did: 2 Cor. 7.2.
We have wronged no man; we have consumed no man; we have defrauded no man.
And so I leave this (which especially respects the Agent) and come to what
remains, which especially respects the Patient.

Behold a cry] i. of the poor and needy; Text.
of the fatherless and widow, and such as were oppressed. Here we see,

The eyes of the oppressed ascend up into the Almighties ears. He hears their
groans, Doctr. God hears the cries of the oppressed.
and beholds their grieuances.

The Lord told Moses as much when he called him to be the deliverer of his
people Israel; Exodus 3.7.
I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have
heard their cry by reason of their taske-masters, for I know their sorrows.
Now therefore behold, Verse 9. and Cap. 2.23, 24
the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also seen the
oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them. Afterward when God forbad
his people to oppress the stranger, fatherless, and widow, he adds this as
a reason, Exodus 22.23.
I will surely hear their cry. Job avouches as much as I have delivered, Job
34.28.
They cause the cry of the poor to come unto him, and he hears the cry of
the afflicted. So does the Psalmist, Psalm. 34.17.
The righteous cry, when he is thus oppressed, and God hears him. S. James
likewise confirms it; Iam. 5.4.
Behold the hire of the laborers which have reaped down your fields, which is
of you kept back by fraud, cries: and the cries of them which have reaped are
entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

Luke 18.4.
If importunate clamor prevail with the unjust Judge, who neither regards
man nor fears God: shall not God much more avenge his own elect ones that
cry day and night unto him, for the wrong that is done unto them, through the
oppression of the mighty: I tell you (says our Savior) though he forbear
long, yet at length he will do it.

David furnishes us with another Reason: Psalm. 68.5.
A father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the widow is God in his holy
habitation. These are his Clients, he has taken them into his protection; he
is become their Judge; and Genesis 18.25.
shall not the Judge of all the world do right?

oppressors, and the oppressed. As for oppressors, they had need be well
advised what they do: for if they continue in their cruelty, the poor must
needs sigh and cry, and God will hear them; which if he do, he will cause
their oppressors to hear of him: Psalm. 10.17.
He will judge the fatherless, and the oppressed, that the man of earth may no
more oppress. Or suppose that they themselves cry not, but Lament. 3.27, 28,
29.
sit down by it, and thrust their mouths in the dust, Psalm. 39.9.
swallowing their grief with silence, yea praying for them, Psalm. 109.4 Acts
7.60. Luke 23.34.
who persecute and oppress them, rather than putting up any bill of complaint
to God against them; yet the sin it self will cry, though they be silent.

Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis and Sodomorum,
Vox oppressorum, merces retenta laborum.
Every sin indeed has its voice to discover it self to God (says one Omnis
namque iniquitas apud secreta Dei iudicia habet voces s^^s. Greg. Mor. 5. cap.
8.
:) and not a voice only, but feet also, yea and wings too, to make way and
speed into heaven for vengeance: but yet there are four sins, and but four
(as is observed Aquin. in Iac. 5.4.
) mentioned in Scripture, that are said to cry. The first is Homicide, murder
or manslaughter, whereof Almighty God thus speaks unto Cain, Genesis 4.10.
The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from off the earth. The second
is Sodomie, a sin against nature, whereof the Lord speaks thus unto
Abraham, Genesis 18.20.
Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is great, and because their sin is
exceeding grievous, I will go down now and see whether they have done
altogether according to the cry which is come unto me. The third is this of
Oppression, as the places before quoted show; as also that of Habakkuk Hab.
2.11, 12.
, where the very timber and stone from the building that is founded upon
falsehood and oppression, is said to cry for vengeance from heaven. The fourth
is, The keeping back of the laborers hire, as that place even now brought out
of S. James Iam. 5.4.
for the proof of our point, witnesses. These sins are not only vocal, but
importunate, they will have no nay, but hale down judgments upon the heads of
the miserable authors, and wretched actors of them. So then it is impossible
for oppressors to escape unpunished: and howeuer vengeance may seem limpingly
to pursue them, yet it will overtake them in the end without repentance hinder.

As for the poor oppressed, this may serve for their comfort; and it may teach
them patience. He that is ouerswayed with might against equity and right in
some one Court, yet is not out of heart nor hope so long as he may appeal to
some other that is higher; especially if he be persuaded of the integrity and
uprightness of that Judge to whom he makes Appeal. Art thou then wronged and
injured by the mighty? yet be not discouraged, for though thou can have no
help at man's hand, yet there is a higher to whom thou may appeal, even God
in his holy habitation, who beholds thy troubles, hears thy sighs, bottles up
thy tears, is acquainted with all thy griefs, and will right thy wrongs:
Psalm. 12.5.
For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise, says the Lord, I will set him at liberty from him that puffs at him.
Hear this you fatherless and widows, you poor and needy ones: and albeit
these mighty Nimrods ride over your heads, Psalm. 66.12.
and plow upon your backs, making long furrows there, and thus wound your
flesh, yet let them not wound your patience; but Isai. 35.3.
let your weak hands be strengthened, and your feeble knees confirmed: for
behold your God will come with vengeance, your God will come with recompense.
Commit therefore your cause to him who judges righteously; and see you assuage
your grief and sorrow when you are thus oppressed. He will come, he will come
assuredly in due time; he will come and deliver you from out the paws of the
bloud-thirstie and cruel man. Though Passion therefore possess your bodies,
yet let Luke 21.
Patience possess your souls.

And now for the Ecce, which is here twice used, Behold oppression, Behold a
cry: once using it is not enough; Bernard. Vega.
Behold, and behold again. One calls this a starrie note. Another compares it
to a hand in the margent of a book pointing to some thing of great succeeding
consequence. Pontan.
Another compares it to the sounding of a trumpet before some proclamation.
Another to the ringing of a bell before the Sermon of some famous Preacher. And
indeed as often as it is used (for it is used six hundred times in Scripture)
it is never used but in matters of great moment, worthy of our deepest and most
serious observation, being still put for a word of wonder and note of
admiration. So here; Behold the wonderful and unspeakable mercy and goodness
of the Lord toward this his Vineyard: how great things he had done for it, and
what means he used for the prosperity and welfare of it; yea in every one of
the former particulars behold it. Again, behold the horrible ingratitude of
this his Vineyard: Ingratitude in its full proportion, with all the dimensions
of its ugly stigmaticke form, in it behold. Yea we may move attention from
this word to all that has been said: For there is nothing in this Song, but
deserves to have this Character Behold to be stamped on it. Consider well of
all this Scripture; examine every parcel; let not one iod or tittle pass away
unregarded. God has commended, yea recommended what is here taught unto us
with this remarkable note, Behold, yea behold again. See therefore that you
have been here present with your minds, as well as with your bodies. And all
you that are here present, behold from the highest to the lowest, for it
deserves deep pondering upon. Matthew. 13.9.
Let him that has ears to hear, hear: And and 24.15.
let him that reads consider. Even so 2 Timothy 2.7.
consider we what has been said, and the Lord give us understanding in all
things.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL Table, for the readier finding out the chief and most
material things contained in this BOOK.
A
GOd cannot fail of his end in any of his Actions. Page 139 Affections of
people must be wrought upon by Gods Ministers. 58 Afflictions are Gods
Winepresse. 132 Not to be bettered by our Afflictions is dangerous. 199 Gods
holy hand is in all Afflictions. 223 Both the time, measure, and end of our
Afflictions are ordered by God. 224 Why God does use wicked instruments in the
Afflicting of his people. 225 How we may look upon second causes in our
Afflictions. 229 God is to be sought unto when we are Afflicted. 230 They do
not disable us from being Gods children. 236 Amoz the father of Isaiah, and
Amos in the number of the small Prophets, not both one. 16 The Angels watch for
the godly man's safety. 111 Application, is the life of Doctrine. 278 Arrogance,
a sin to be avoided. 101 Attendants of the godly honorable. 121 Authority
must be showed for what Gods Ministers do deliver. 64
B
BArren Professors are good for nothing. 79 The world is full of such. 159 Man
degraded beneath the Beasts. 85 Names of Beasts given to the wicked. 254
Behold, how often used in the Scriptures. 318 It is ever used in matters of
importance. ibid. The abuse of Gods Blessings causes the Lord to deprive us of
them. 238 Pray for a sanctified use of them. 166 Bribery is no better than
theeuery. 308 Busie-medling dangerous. 101
C
CHildren are not saved by the faith of their parents. 289 They should be
thankful for religious Parents. 295 Gods own Children chastised. 231 The
Church weak in it self. 79, 112 She is as a Garden enclosed. 73 It stands in
need of daily looking to. ibid. She is exposed to many dangers. 74 She is dear
unto the Lord. 75, 93 She is but one. 76, 99 The more the Church is afflicted,
the more she flourishes. 78 She is outwardly black, but inwardly glorious.
ibid. It is her privilege, that God is her keeper. 89 Why the Devil seeks to
persecute her, 93 She may be corrupted with Idolatry. 95 Church in England not
to be forsaken for some wants. 97 Which the Papists make to be the Catholic
Church. 99 Her enemies are but weak. 245 The miseries of the Church should
move us to pity her. 265 Christ only deserves our love. 61 Members of the
Church receive the sap of grace from him. 76 All that are in the Church are not
truly incorporated into Christ. 77 Comparisons may lawfully be used. 82 Company
of the godly to be frequented. 55 Man's Conscience shall justify Gods
proceedings. 182 The Conscience shall one day be awakned. 183 The Checks of it
not to be neglected. 183, 198 Contention and discord, the beginnings of war.
264 Conversation of Christians should be such as that our adversaries may
justify it. 185 The Creature is become man's Schoolmaster. 86 A double use to
be made of them. 88 They are a defense for the godly. 111 They are Gods hoasts.
286 All of them are against the wicked. 287 The godly Conquer when they seem
conquered. 253 God remembers mercy in his Corrections. 257
D
DEath of the godly, a forerunner of Judgment. 213 Necessity of Gods Decree,
no excuse for wickedness. 196 Discipline not wanting in our Church. 97 It is
not of the essence of the Church. 133 Dignity of the godly very great. 121 The
Devil has not power over any creature but by Gods permission. 246 How he is
the God of this world. 282 Authors of Division in the Church, sin fearfully.
102 We must receive nothing for Doctrine but what is grounded on Scripture. 165
Dowry, great, given by Christ to his Spouse. 62 Diversity of gifts given by God
for the good of the Church. 16
E
EArthly things afford heavenly instructions. 83 We may make resemblances
betwixt things Earthly and heavenly. 82 What Errors make a Church to be no
Church. 98 Envy, a sin unnatural. 101 The way how to become Excellent. 125
The wicked Excuselesse. 194 Excommunication a grievous censure. 115 Not to
pass for small trifles. 116
F
FAith is the root of other graces. 147 Personality of Faith needful. 149
Families to be purged of profane persons. 119 Famine, how grievous at the
destruction of Jerusalem. 259 Our own Faults propounded in another person
soon espied. 6 Nothing to be attributed unto Fortune. 227 Fruit, bring forth
to God. 94 By bearing Fruit we glorify God. 104, 142 Such as are Fruitful,
shall grow more fruitful. 106 Gods cost on us should move to Fruitfulness.
136 Every creature is in it kind Fruitful. 138 Fruitfulness of a Christian
the groundworke of prosperity. 139 If we be Fruitful, there is no Law against
us. 140 It is high time we should bring forth Fruit. 141 We must first be
transplanted and set into Christ before we can bear Fruit. 143 Such as are in
Christ bring forth Fruit incontinent. 144 The properties of good Fruit. 149
G
Garrison, strong about the godly. 112 The Godly are run to in the day of
trouble. 80 God is the Protector of his people. 111 He is the husbandman of his
Church. 89 God is not the Author of sin. 194 The Godly to be esteemed above
others. 124 They exceed all others in growth in grace. 77 God has little Glory
in the world. 34 Gods Glory should be our aim in all our actions. 32 The Godly
prefer it before their own salvation. 35 By Glorifying God we bring glory to
our selves. 36 Judgments fearful on such as rob God of his Glory. 36 We
ought to Grow in grace. 105
H
HOw God Hardens. 194 The godly Hated, and why. 93 Hearers must be careful
what they receive for Gospel. 65 They may not rashly censure their Teachers
for some disabilities. 271 They must pray for them. 272 Hearers must suffer the
word of application as well as of doctrine. 280 They may not find fault with
their teachers for their plainness. 83 Heavens are diligent, learned, and
Catholic Pastors. 34 Humane testimonies may lawfully be alleged in Sermons.
14 God Husbands his people. 89 Husbandry a commendable vocation. ibid. Submit
our selves to Gods Husbandry. 91 How to know whether God has Husbanded the
heart. 90 Hypocrisy in the end shall be discovered. 133 Humility and
tenderness of heart to be labored for. 145
I
IDolaters; not to be familiar withal. 118 Ignorance, no good plea. 86
Impropriations held by an improper title, where some objections answered. 304
Ingrossers are oppressors. 311 Irreligious persons enemies to King and State.
128 Isaiah a noble Prophet, and eloquent, together with his death. 2 He fainted
not in his function. 3 He was of Christ's kindred. 9 Judgments of God diverse
ways foretold. 212 The way to prevent Gods Judgments, is to Judge our selves.
184 Justice in our dealings, the touchstone of true Religion. 298
K
KIndred of the godly, noble. 120 Kingdom weakened by sin. 242 Knowledge of
God, a means to love God. 53 Sins against Knowledge, fearful. 199
L
LAndlords, many are oppressors. 310 Lawsuits are durable. 309 No Law against
the godly. 140 Leaves of profession, not enough. 146 Love God before all. 53
Christ only deserves our Love. 61 How our Love to God may be discovered. 42 The
way to bring our hearts to Love the Lord. 53 We may not answer God in any thing
except in Love. 54 Lewd Life of a Professor dishonours God. 37 Sinful Lusts
ouershadow the soul. 146 God is the absolute Lord over all. 282
M
MAgistrates, as the head, should govern wisely. 100 Private persons may not
meddle with the office of Magistrates. 101 Magistrates should back the
Ministers of the Word with the use of the temporal sword. 116 Meekness to be
showed in our dealing with sinners. 175 Sins against the Means, fearful.
197 The more Means, the more obedience does God expect. 270 To contemn the
Means, grieves the Lord. 200 No Means can reclaim the wicked. 201 Means
contemned, causes the Lord to deprive us of them. 267 Means to bring our
hearts to love God. 53 Means to make us fruitful. 143 It is fearful to make
our selves Merry with others sins. 202 Ministers are builders, stewards. 279
Wherein they must show themselves faithful. ibid. They must be painful in
their function. 109 They must woo for Christ. 58 They must deliver nothing but
by warrant from God. 64 They must attend their callings. 67 They should be well
provided for. 68 They are the subordinate Husbandmen of the Church. 89 Idle
Ministers like Harlots. 108 Ministers must seek to God for ability to
discharge their function. 273 They may not be discouraged so as to surcease
their pains. 11 Their life is a spiritual piscation. 11 They are not to be
blamed though they sometimes alter their method. 13 They serve the greatest
Master, and are employed in the greatest work, and shall have the greatest
wages. 18 Motives to fruitfulness. 138 Motives to singing. 28 Motives to seek
after Gods glory. 33
N
A Good Name how to get. 125 Good Names profit not without grace. 292 They
should be a spur to goodness. ibid. Under a holy Name to lead an unholy life,
is a kind of sacrilege. 293 Negative divinity not enough. 159 No goodness
comes from Nature. 289
O
OBedience is to be given to all Gods precepts. 156 Particulars wherein we are
to show our Obedience unto God 284 Omission of good duties, damnable. 159
Oppression, a sin against Race, Grace, and Place. 301 Oppressors, how
heretofore punished. 314 God hears the groans of the Oppressed. 315
P
PArents, to give thanks at meat, and not their children for them. 151 Good
Parents may have lewd children. 288 Their duties toward their children. 290
Parents are not too rashly to be censured for the loose carriage of children.
291 Wicked Parents disgrace their children. 294 Papists, their positions
dissolve all bands of humane fellowship. 117 Their practices agreeable to their
positions. 118 Their bloody cruelty. 255 A fearful sin to abuse Gods
Patience. 220 Gods Patience should teach us Patience. 222 Our Peace so long
enjoyed a great blessing. 262 Our works are to be brought to Perfection. 154
Perseverance in good, needful. 157 Presence of God still to be remembered. 54
Gods Proceedings are all just. 180 No Privilege will be are us out, if we take
liberty to sin. 189, 235 Privileges of those who love God. 56 Poesy is a
commendable Art. 23 Professors outward carriage, if holy, does much good. 80 The
lewd life of a Professor does highly dishonor God. 37 Prophesies of the
Prophets, how kept. 1 Before God does Punish he gives warning. 211 Why God
suffers the wicked to run on without Punishment. 268 Why God Pun sheth the
wicked, for doing that work he emploies them in. 226 Purposes made (for the
most part) like our Holiday Eeues. 155
Q
GOd fell not to Questioning until man fell to sinning. 190 Gods Questions
tend for the most part to convince the conscience. ibid.
R
THe godly come of noble Race. 120 Rage of the wicked limited. 250 Diversity
of Religion dangerous in a kingdom. 114 Religion is the strength of our Land.
130 Rhetoric lawful to be used. 296 Rich men rarities in heaven. 110 Riches,
to be esteemed in themselves as blessings. ibid. Why they are called the Mammon
of unrighteousness. ibid. Rome, her first foundation laid in blood. 255
Whether it be a true Church. 98 Rules to be followed in using Parables and
Allegories. 83
S
Safety of the godly very great. 250 To live in Safety, keep in with God. 249
Saints allotted by Papists to all countries, except England. 287 Security of
the wicked, blockish stupidity. 244 Separation not to be made from our Church
for some blemishes. 96 Senses of God troubled with man's sin. 170 Sin
corrupts all things. 165 Every Sin belcheth forth an evil savor. 171 It is a
makebate. 186 It breaks our Covenant with God. 241 It depriues us of Gods
protection. 240 It weakens a Kingdom. 242 It has both voice, feet, and wings,
to hasten judgment. 316 Four Sins in Scripture said to be crying sins.
317 Sins of weakness punished, much more shall sins of wickedness. 235
Things sinful afford resemblances to admonish of duty. 85 Singing Psalms or
other holy songs lawful. 26 Directions how to Sing. 29 Few Sing but they take
Gods name in vain by their singing. 31 Three kinds of Songs in use amongst the
Jews. 8 Sodom what it was, and what it is. 169 By our Speeches our love we
bear to God will be discovered. 49 Four Suitors that seek to get the soul 59
No Suter should speed but Christ. 60 Superiors must remember they have a
Superior. 285
T
DVties of the second Table to be especially regarded. 298 Time is to be
observed for doing good. 153 Some good duties are at some times unseasonable.
154 Tongue, the Interpreter of the mind. 49 Toleration of Idolaters, unlawful.
113 The godly, though not preserved from Troubles, yet preserved in them. 252
Why Trades are called Crafts and Mysteries. 283 Truth of God withold not in
unrighteousness. 199
V
THe Church compared to a Vineyard in diverse respects. 73 Verse, comprehends
much in a little. 24 Verse better remembered than prose. 5 Unity ought to be in
the Church. 100 That Unity be maintained, what must be avoided. 101 The wicked
are Unthankful to God. 162 Vows, not to be broken. 198 Usurers like the
Timber-worme, and like the nether Millstone, and their Broakers like the upper.
312 They will be Venison in Heaven. 313
W
War, a heavy judgment. 263 Waters of the Sanctuary needful to further our
growth in grace. 145 Weakness of grace should not discourage, if there be true
grace. 161 Wealthinesse and Wickedness not ever conioind. 109 Wicked, they
shall not ever remain within the Church. 105 Wicked preserve the godly, as
chafe does the Corn. 111 They charge the godly to be the troublers of the
State when it is themselves. 129 They turn Gods best blessings into poison.
165 They cannot please God. 171 They have no peace with him. 187 They shall not
escape Gods wrath. 233 They lie open to all dangers. 243 Witches are the Devils
drudges. 248 The Devil cannot do harm to any, to gratify a Witch. 247
Works testify, though not justify. 51 The godly abound in good Works. 81
Words of a Christian are of a healing nature. 80 Word preached is a Winepresse,
and does discover what is within the heart. 131 Word never preached in vain.
167 Our Works should be works of the Spirit. 152 The best Works of the
wicked are offensive to God. 170 World not to be loved if we would love God.
55 Worship of God is the glory and strength of our Land. 128
FINIS.

