ARCHAEOLOGIAE ATTICAE LIBRI TRES. THREE BOOKS OF THE ATTICK Antiquities
CONTAINING The description of the Cities glory, government, division of the
People, and Towns within the Athenian Territories, their Religion,
Superstition, Sacrifices, account of their Year, as also a full relation of
their Iudicatories.

By FRANCIS ROUS Scholar of Merton College in Oxon.

ARISTIDES. (...). When others have in the same Argument preoccupated men's
ears, they that speak afterward of the same subject, have a greater trouble to
consider what they must pass by unsaid then what to say.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, for EDWARD FOREST. M. DC. XXXVII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sr NATHANIEL BRENT Knight, Vicar General, and the
most vigilant Warden of Merton College in OXFORD, Health, etc.
IT is the custom of most, to impose a patronage of their errors upon some
eminent person. But it shall be my ambition in this my Dedication to manifest
my observancie. Others make their choice of potent men, thereby to shun the
darts of envy. It shall be my glory to be thought worthy of invidency; whose
ignorance is not so great but well knows that ever some will bite in secret;
and scourge these errors of my youth with private reproaches. But such
malignant tongues I will counterpoise with the wind; and set as lightly by as
they are vain. And although I am confidently persuaded that the covert of your
wings be sufficiently able to shelter my faults; yet had I rather to express
my duty toward you in these naked infirmities, whose goodness truly knows
how Au^s literatum ignoscere Vegetius in Prolog.
to pardon the bold adventures of learning. I present you therefore with
ATHENS, whose deplorable raggedness my papers well resemble* which may
challenge this excuse, that they assimulate themselves to the Treatise in them
contained. Which of all men, I my self am conscious most unfitly to have
handled. That City once the Cic. Epist*
nurse of reason; Patercul. in ^ne (...). ^.
which flourisht in eloquence, and brave atchieuements more then all Greece,
could not, unless in her miserable ruins, have without her disgrace been
spoken of by me. That ATHENS whence the learned Fathers of the Church sucked
rare literature, Basil his eloquence, Nazianzen his strength, and others their
flowing Oratory. That ATHENS which who had not seen is by Apud D^caearchum
(...)
Lysippus accounted a block. Accept, Honored Sir, these Relics of that
famous University, though by me offered, as Devotion paid to Antiquity, by
you well esteemed of, though among most of these our days accounted dirt;
whose labor it is to seek new fashions, and like naught but what may be
accounted novelty. Resembling the brute, of which Cicero. Ad id solum quod
adest, quodque praesens est se accommodat, paulum admodum sentiens praeteritum,
etc. never caring for what is past. But you weigh well the excellency of
talking with those Champians of Learning, hundreds of years since gathered to
their former dust. By whose pensils we see drawn the lively images of
deceased Monarchs, the forms of government, and very lives of states. Out of
which patterns, if you please to deem the least part of this to have been
taken, it shall heap to my joy that the following Tract will not seem a
spurious and degenerate* offspring. Upon presumption of which I fear not, as
the Eagles do their young, to expose my brood to the rays of the open Sun.
Thus with continual wishes for addition to your happiness, I take leave, From
my Study in Merton College Iun. 9. 1637.

Your Worships in all humility to be commanded F. ROVS.

To the Reader.
IT is not a thirst of empty glory that makes me run hazard of your censure,
but a consideration of the weakness of School* masters, who undertake to read
the Greek Orators to raw Scholars, themselves being not ripe in the Attick
customs. I have therefore so far endeavored as you see. If any thing may
afford a scruple to any, he shall engage me that will require satisfaction. If
any thing seem amiss, it shall be taken by me as a favor to hear of it from
any. For I am not of those whose ears are stopped, when their errors are told
them. If this please it shall add spurs to the finishing of this course
intended; and as occasion may give leave, you shall have the rest that may be
spoken.

Yours F. R.

Errata and inserenda.
PAge 5. line 5. read mysteries. p. 6. in Argum. read Circuitus. p. 11. in
Marg. for or r. nor. p. 13. in Marg. k. l. m. p. 16. l. 24. r. abject. p. 18.
in Marg. r. in Solone. p. 22. l. 12. put the parenthesis after Curialis l. 23.
r. (...). p. 23. l. 26. r. (...). p. 28. r. cap. 7. l. 17. r. (...). p. 29. l.
18. r. (...) p. 32. l. 1. after, (...) put the parenthesis. p. 34. in marg. r.
in the hist. p. 39. l. 24. r. from. p. 40. l. 25. r. (...) l 32* (...). p. 41.
l. ^. r. imminent. in marg* r. Frag. p. 46 l. 34. r. Polycleti. p 47. l. 15. r.
(...). p. ^5. l. 14. r. crier. l. 20. r. Muneris. l. 29. read thus (...) the
Hebrew which availes as much as to offer, and Missath an offering Deu. 16.
(...) missath nidhbath a free offering, taken it seems of prayer and praise.
Weichelius Est autem missa vocula Hebraica, quod nos Latin oblationem aut
munus vocamus, quod sponte propriis manibus defertur atque expenditur in veros
pietatis usus. p. 8. in Arg. r. Satyrica fabula. p. 9^. l. 2. after (...),
which were noted by letters. Other faults your candid judgments may amend.

ARCHAEOLOGIAE ATTICAE
LIB. I. CAP. I.
Iavan, Ias, Iaones, Ionia, (...). Athenae in acta, Cecropiae, Cranaae, Atthis,
Attica, Athenae sub Cecrope. Certamen Palladis and Neptuni, Plutarchi ea de re
sententia, alii sub Erectheo volunt nominari, I^stinus sub Amphictyone.
Salenos. Selines. Satinae. Sethina.

BY the sons of Noah Genesis 10. ^.
were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands, every one after his
tongue; when by their audacious folly they would have mounted up to heaven,
thinking to leave a name to posterity, by building Castles in the air. From
which attempt proceeded that which before they were jealous of, namely a
scattering abroad upon the face of the earth; he having so spoken it, whose
breath alone affords a fair wind: hoyst then they must their Sails, and
bidding adieu to the plain in the land of Shenar, seek out some new
habitation. Travelers they were of yore, and yet still must journey. Each one
in as differenta course, as of a diverse language. The sons of Shem their way,
the sons of Iaphet, theirs. Gomer and Magog, and Madai and Iavan, with whom I
purpose one furlong to keep company, leaving the rest on one side or other or
behind, looking only to my proposed scope. Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. c. 7. p. 13.
(...). From Iavan came Ionia and all the Greeks. And in Scripture we have
Iavan put for Greece; in Daniel twice, Dan 10. 20
And when I am gone forth, lo the Prince of Grecia shall come. And again,
Cap. 11. 2.
He shall stir up all against the Realm of Grecia. Where although the old
translation renders it not Iavan, yet it is so found in the original. He then
coming into the country called afterward Attica, left unto it his own name,
whence it was termed Ionia and Ias. (...). For Attica was anciently Strabo l.
9. p. 392.
called Ionia and Ias. In which words we still retain some relics of the
radix, notwithstanding the small difference of the termination. But if we
please to view after what title the sons of Iavan were styled Iaones we
shall come nearer home. Strabo in the above quoted place, (...). Homer when he
says, There the Boeotians and Iaones speaks of the Athenians. The Scholiast
of Aeschylus on these words,

In Persis p. 133.
(...)* It is to be understood, quoth he, that the Athenians are termed
Iaones, from one Iaon (he means Iavan) that was their king. Neither is it
strange that the vau or* (...) is left out; for though it be not written, yet
persuaded I am that it was as much pronounced, as other au Diphthongs were. For
the Donat. in ^er. p. 130.
antique Latins and the Greeks spoke it as broad a, as if it had been the
saros not the sauros. Sr Walter Raleigh is of opinion that Asia the less had
people before Greece had any, and that Iavan did not fly from Babylonia into
Greece, but took Asia the less in his passage, and from thence past over the
nearest way, leaving his own name to some maritimate province on that side as
he did to that part so called. In which, although the authority of so worthy
and judicious a man might move much, yet it shall be sufficient for me, only
to go so far, as antiquity will bear me out. Lib. 1. p. 2.
Thucydides reports that it is manifest, that all Greece was not (...), firmly
inhabited, but that there were continual pilgrimages, or remouings of the
inhabitants, forsaking their former places, being driven out by a stronger and
greater number. Wherefore when there was no safe traffic or commerce by sea
or land, each manured his grounds for to have provent, alone to serve for
present necessity, desiring no more then from hand to mouth; it being
uncertain, how soon they might be compelled to get them thence. Whereupon
they did more willingly change their seats; not taking grievous that sharp
charge, veteres migrate coloni. Be gone you ancient Boores. But the more
fertile soil had hard bickrings. Thessalie, Boeotia, and a great part of
Peloponnesus, except Arcadia, was often invaded, and the old Lords expelled.
(...). ^ Thucid.
But Attica, by reason of the thinness or barrenness of the ground, was
always inhabited by the same men (none it seems being willing to leave his
better, for a worse) not affording fuel to contention. Out of which peace
sprung up so great a multitude, that Attica, even now swarming, and (...), not
able to contain and feed so many, is constrained to send forth Colonies into
Ionia, a region of Asia the less, which is reported by the Greeks to borrow
denomination from Ion the son of Xuthus, or, as the Poets say, Apollo and
Creusa, who in the words of Euripides is thought to be In Ione. T. 2 p. 619.
(...), the maker or founder of Asia. The mother Ionia (for so I please to say)
kept not still her former name, For in process of time she owned Actaea; from
Actaeon, as Lib. 9. p. 397
Strabo says, or from Actaeus, according to In At* p. 2.
Pausanias, who was the first king thereof, by Page 23.
Tzetzes on Lycophron called Acteus. But Orat. 6.
Dion Chrysostom brings a more natural reason then this, why it was Actaea,
Acta signifies a shore, both in the Greek and Virg. Aen. 5. p. 214.
Latin speech. Now because all of it within a little was washed with the sea,
and Strabo. l. 9. p. 391.
(...), it might challenge unto it self Actaea. Dion (...). Hence (...) by the
Aenigmatical Poet in his Page 22.
Cassandra is put for this country. Tzetzes. Because it is (Acta) a cliffe,
that is cast forth and lying in the sea. And Athens her self by Plautus is
said Athenae in acta, pro Athenis Atticis, as In Sp^le* g^s.
Palmerius has noted. But this grew old after a season and Cecrops having
married the daughter of Actaeus glories in his Cecropia (and Athens Cecropiae,
and Cecropis civitas, and after that Cranaae from Cranaus the king that
succeeded him) This Cranaus among other of his daughters had one Strabo and
Paus. locis praed.
Atthis, from whom also was derived Atthis and Attica, next Posidonia and
Minervia, from Neptune and Pallas. In this region stood At^ens, Queen of
Greece, so called, from that victory which Minerva got over Neptune, when
Cecrops moved* with a prodigy of a sudden shooting up of an a Varro apud
August. l. 18. c. 9. de civit. De^.
Olive, and bubling forth of a salt spring in the Acropolis, consulted the
Oracle of Apollo, who taught them that the one did signify Neptune, the other
Minerva, taking therefore the men into suffrages for Neptune, and the women for
Minerva, who had most voices should carry it. The females being more the
Goddess bore away the bell. Lo here a witty Devil to bring in (...), Gods of
his own making, to infold the superstitious in an ignorant zeal. How ever let
us leave the shadow of poetical fictions, and take the true draught out of
Mythologie. Plutarch is of opinion that the ancient kings striving to draw away
their subjects from sea faring negotiations, and a desire to live by sailing,
unto tillage and manuring of ground, gave occasion of the speech that Neptune
and Minerva did alter cate about the city. (...). etc. Neptune is b In The^*
p. 87. l. 23.
put for the Sea and businesses thereof. Minerva for Arts and ingenuous kind
of life, nay says Ovid in his Calendar. Mill Dea est operum she is Goddess
of a thousand trades. Others say that the City was consecrated to her by
Amphictyon, and nomen civitati Athenas dedit. Lib. 2.
Iustine. Others in the time of Erecttheus, among which is Herodotus, will have
this name given. Which Author (...).
Marcianus Heracleota does follow, (...). This was that Erectheus, who in a
time of drougth over all the world except Egypt, brought co^ne to Athens, and
taught the Eleusinian mysteries. Beholding this City has been to Egypt for
other kings; to wit, A^stoph. (...) page 79. (...). in Lycoph p. 2^
Cecrops and Menestheus, for his father Petes was an Egyptian. In the time of
Diodorus Siculus and before him was it a received opinion that Athens was
peopled by the Egyptians, Sais in that tongue answering to Athene in Greek,
as Tzetzes out of Carax. Nay that they should be of the inhabitants of Sais,
they argue from this. Because that the Saitae and Athenians have diverse
customs alike. Witness Diodorus Siculus. But it pleases not me. I conjecture
that first it was called Athens, when the people began more seriously to addict
themselves to civil government, and study of good literature; knowledge and
art being ascribed to Minerva. (...). says Polit. l. 8. c. 9
Aristotle. Nay her name being derived from thence, (...) thena in the Chaldy
tongue signifying to study or learn: from which come thenaa and with an
article Hat thenaa as In Aristar. Sac. Synt. 1. c. 1 p. 27
Heinsius the most learned. As for the conceit of Goropius Becan, from ana the
number of three which notes eternity, and so from hat-het-ana. Athena. Because
wisdom does contain eternity, let us send it back into Germany. Lo now
Athens named from learning, which was once the Isidor.
shop of letters and the Muses, whereof it is now deplorably destitute, having
lost the glory of former Athens, nay the name it self. For if we believe some
they tell us, that now it is Salenos or Selines. To whom I accord not. Because
that I have read Selines for Megara called Nisaea, which is not many miles from
Athens. Furthermore in discourse with a native of Peloponnesus, who lived many
years in that City, I had no other appellation from him then Ateene, which
others write Satina corrupted as Portus and Meursius truly think for (...).
Nay In Hodaep. Byz l. 3*
Hugo Favolius who was there himself even to the same purpose names it Sethina.

Vndique sic miserae nobis spectantur Athenae
Daedala quas Pallas sese coluisse negaret,
Quas, Neptune pater, nunquam tua maenia dicas
Indigenae Sethina vocant --
We wretched Athens round do view, which now,
Though once ingenious Pallas love, 's her shame,
And to have been thine, Neptune, would disavow,
To which the Homebred give Sethina name.
CAP. II.
Athenarum situs. (...). Herbae lucentes, Murus, Pelasgicus and Cimonius,
Propylaea. Circuitus veteris urbis, and novae. (...) and (...). Piraeei
brachia. Murus Phalericus. Portae. Aer. Laus passim apud scriptores. Cephissus
Fluvius.

GReece, says In Panath. p. 171. 172.
Aristides, is placed in the midst of the whole earth, and in the midst of it
stands Attica; the navell whereof is Athens, by which all Greece, closeted in
the womb of time, received nourishment, before an happy birth had brought her
forth into the light. She is seated upon a very high rock, which habitations
do encompasse, as Lib. 9. p. 396
Strabo: on the top of which stands that renowned fabric even to this day,
which Cecrops from himself names P^n. Not. ^st. l. 7. c. 56.
Cecropia; of old (...) The City, by a kind of excellence, in a bravado of
their antiquity, concerning which they were in perpetual contention with the
Argivi. Witness In At. p. 13* l. 16.
Pausanias. Eunuch. act. 5. s^. 6.
Terent, An in astu venit? Donat. Sic Athenienses urbem suam vocabant, unde
ipsi incolae (...) vocantur. So, says he, the Athenians called their City,
whence the Citizens themselves are called astoi, after that they called it
(...) Attic. p. 24. l. 43.
Pausanias. Which in his time was called (...) or the high City, although it be
often interpreted Arx a castle* which ever were sacred to Minerva, as Orat. in
Minerv. To. 1. p. 21.
Aristides. Who therefore is by Catullus in his Argonauticks named Diva
retinens in summis urbibus arces. The Goddess that keeps the Turrets of
Cities. This only now remains, the succor and shelter of the barbarous
Athenians, being strongly furnished with men and arms, in which alone dwell
Ianizaries, to the number of seven hundred thousand, as Christophoro Angelo
told me, and avouched it, I fearing least he had mistaken the number. As for
the forces thereof Ho^. Byz. l. 3*
Hugo Favolius shall thus instruct you,

Arx tantum celebris hoc tempore montis eodem
Quaeque imposta iugo est, vastas prospectat in undas
Aequoris, and circum dispersa mapali^, and omnes
Externo indigenas nocuo tutatur ab host,
Nobilis arx, toto qua non est altera Graio
Nota magis regno, validisque instructior armis,
Ignivomoque magis tormentorum impete tuta.
A Castle only famous at this day,
Set on an hill, below which viewes the sea.
The scattered thatcht sheds, that stand it about*
The fort defends, and keeps invasion out*
And natives safe. A fort; none noted more
In Greece, which has a better warlike store,
Or it for fiery Canons goes before.
Upon the top of this Turret stand the fashions of Half Moons most rarely
gilded, after the manner of the Ishmaelites, who have the Moon in no small
honor, as my much honored Mr De D^s Syr^s Syn. 2. cap. 2. p. 288.
Seldom has observed. Of which Lunulets thus speaks Favolius,

Cuius inauratis long rutilantia Lunis
Ardua coelivagas feriunt fastigia nubes.
Whose tops with gilded Moons aspiring high,
Do knock the Clouds the pilgrims of the sky.
Neither may it pass obscurely which I have taken up being let fall from the
mouth of an eye witness; namely that on the side of this hill, on which the
Acropolis is built, grows a certain kind of herb, that far off, in the
night season, gives a most shining and glittering light, to which when a man
shall approach, he shall discern nothing but the herb it self. Of which
matter I seriously wish that I could testify the truth. It was delivered to me,
bona fide, with good credit. The walls that environ this, are none now, says
Favolius, but in former time it has been well fenced; some part thereof
erected by those two Tuscan brothers, who leaving their country, lived here
under the Acropolis, called (...), Pelargi, Storkes, (...), for their wandering,
Lib. 9. p. ^97.
Strabo, Not. hist. l. 7 ^. ^.
Pliny says their names were Euryalus and Hyperbius. The two that first built
houses of brick at Athens, when formerly they had Caves for dwelling places.
But by the authority of Pausanias, though the Printers and Scribes have done
both that Author, and the persons wrong, in putting a false name upon one of
them, I will do them none. Read then Laterarias domus constituerunt primi
Agrolas and Hyperbius fratres Athonis, etc. In Attic. p. 26. l. 34.
Pansanias. (...) From these was that part which they edified called
Pelargicum. Aristophanes in Avibus.

(...) The other part of the Acropolis which was left naked, Cimon the son of
Miltiades clothed. Pausanias in the fore quoted place. These walls admitted no
gate but one, so rarely beautified with that costly Propylaeum or porch, on
which Pericles is discommended by Tul O^. l 2
Demetrius Phalareus for disbursing so great a sum of money. Val* M^x. lib.
3. c. 1.
For which he was not finally troubled how he might give up his accounts to
the people; His Nephew Alcibiades therefore seeing him somewhat sad, and
demanding the cause, to whom when his uncle replied, that it was about giving
his accounts, seek rather, quoth he, how you may not give them. By which
counsel the Athenians were entangled with that neighbor war against the
Lacedaemonians, in which they found not vacancy for an audit. By the way it
shall be fit to acquaint you with thus much, that it was not permitted to a dog
to enter into the Acropolis, as (...) p. 175.
Plutarch, (...) it may be, for his heat in venerie and ill savor. Goats
likewise, says De re Rust.
Varro, came not thither, unless for a necessary sacrifice once, least they
should hurt the Olive which is said first to have sprung up there. The circuit
of this Acropolis is said to be threescore stadia. Now a Stadium is about some
Five feet make a pace, and a thousand paces a mile. ^sidor. Orig. lib. 15. c.
16.
six hundred and twenty five feet, eight of which make a mile, it being the
custom of the ancient Greeks, so to measure the length or distance of
grounds, or Cities, by the (...). The first City then is contained in seven
miles and an half. But to this were added more houses able to make a City of
themselves. And so indeed were they distinguished by (...) and (...), The upper
and the lower City. In Phoc. p. 549. l 47.
Plutarch, (...). Note here moreover, in the reading of your Greek Authors,
that when you meet with (...) in the description of a country, you presently
must conceive the higher part, if it be (...) Lib. 1. p. 6. ^
Thucydides. (...) And they prayed upon each other, and among the rest who were
not addicted to the sea, yet lived below, understand near the sea, Schol.
(...). The (...) then and (...) knit together made but one joint corporation;
both, as it were uniting Piraeum unto themselves, took up, as Orat. 6.
Dion Chrysostom writes, two hundred stadia, which is about five and twenty
miles. Upon which place, Morellus produces a Scholiast testifying that the walls
were (...) fifteen miles save one furlong. Where I wonder that the learned man
had not e^tsoone perceived the number to have been corrupt, and written (...)
for (...), twenty five for fifteen. For so it ought to be. Neither is it
strange that it had so large bounds. For consider that from Piraeum to Athens
were reckoned five miles, as you may see in Not. hist. l. 2 c. 85.
Pliny, From Athens to Phalerum, and so to the other side of Piraeum four
miles and a quarter. The utmost wall of which Thucydides speaks in his second
book consisted of five miles a quarter and half. The girdle of Piraeum and
Munychia had seven miles and an half more. All which being put together make
up but twenty two miles one quarter and one furlong. But Dion Chrysostom must
be here understood; and it behooves us to conceive that he spoke not barely of
the naked walls, for then it cannot hold; but I suppose some houses to have
been without ^o citato
(...) as he says, (...) In which I appeal to more judicious heads. Neither
can I silently pass by the opinion of John Meursius, who reading in In Arcad.
p. 244. l. 3^*
Pausanias these words (...), should presently obtrude to us, that Pausanias
teaches, that the At. Lect. l. 3 c. 4.
wall called Phalericus is but twenty stadia or two mile and an half. When
indeed he meant nothing less. For speaking of salt springs, which he calls
(...), he seems to involue a reason drawn from the neerenesse of the sea. For
when he writes of this brackish well, Among the Athenians, the sea which comes
up near Phalerus is distant from the City but twenty stadia at the most,
quoth he. Where Amasaeus has thus strangely do^ed. Athenae a Phalero absunt
stadia haud amplius xx. And that this was the meaning of the Author, proves
that which follows. He might have likewise consisidered that (...) with a
Dative case signifies not only juxt a and prope as I have translated it; but
supra sometimes, which will now serve better. And Meursius indeed blames the
number; but sees not into the words. Now it is not needless that the two
walls, which joins Piraeum and Athens at so long a distance, be somewhat
spoken of, seeing they are reckoned by ^b. 31. ^ L^b. ^. Eleg.
Livie among the multa visenda, Many things worthy of sight at Athens. These
are the (...), in 9. p. 192.
Propertius, -- Theseae brachia longa viae. In (...) Math. p. 125. ^ ^.
Appian of Alexandria, (...), and P^g ^55. l. 10.
Plutarch in Cimone. One lying toward the North, of which I^ (...) ^. (...).
^. (...).
Plutarch. The other toward the South, in height about forty Cubits, as In
Mith. p. 124. l. ult.
Appian testifies. These are called (...) by Orat. 6.
Dion Chrysostom, because Athens being at one end, and Piraeum at the other,
these were drawn forth between. And when writers speak of (...), it may be
conjectured that it is for distinction of that (...) in the Acropolis which
Cimon built, In Attic. p. 19. l. 8.
witness Pausanias. Aristophanes seems to bring authority for an opinion
that Themistocles built these. In P. 337*
Equitibus.

(...). Which his P. 338. A. col. 2.
Scholiast affirms. (...). For Themistocles added Piraeum to the City. We read
in In Them. p. 27.
Probus that he was the only agent in walling the City, and that he so hastened
the accomplishing, that they were feign to be as it were sacrilegious, and make
use of materials formerly consecrated to the edifying of Temples, and Monuments
of the dead. But In Them. p. 87. l. 25.
Plutarch gaine-saies this, and that he did only (...), (...) conjoyne the
City and Pireum, and put the land to take acquaintance with the sea. It seems
somewhat forward before. How ever, so fennie was the ground it was founded
upon, that the work soon came to great reparation, which Plut. in Cim. p.
355. l. 14.
Cimon the son of Miltiades undertook. For with stones of an huge weight and
lime he made the earth so firm that it could not give. Nay he was so liberal,
that he did out of his own expenses so great favors, to a people that some
years after gratified him with exile. Neither did he only mend the breaches;
but in after time Plut. p. 355. l. 12. unless (...) may have respect to Conon
who after the victory at ^nidus erected these walls as Pausan. in Atticis. p. 2.
l. 14. I would neither deceive my self nor the Reader.
finished the whole work, so that he may truly be said to be the founder of
them. Let us now come to the Gates of the City. Attic. Lect. initio. p. Dec. 4.
l. 1. p. 11. A.
Meursius has observed ten, but I fear they will scarce suffice to such a
vast City. Take then these. Dipylon or Thriasia, the fairest of all, velut in
ore urbis posita, placed as it were in the front of the City, says Livie mayor
aliquanto patentiorque quam caeterae est, greater somewhat and wider then the
rest. Hence I suppose named Dipylon as if it were as big as two gates. (...).
Piraicae Near the Temple of Chalcod^on. Here were buried some of those that
died in fight with the Amazons in the time of Theseus. In (...). p. 9. l. 20.
Plutarch. (...). Hippades. where the bones of Hyperides the famous Orator
rest with his progenitors, who being racked under Antipater, chose rather to
bite off his tongue, then to divulge the secrets of his country. (...) p. 456.
(...). Sacrae. the sacred gate. We read of this in (...). p. 45
Theophrastus's Characters but to my great admiration, that the Eagle-sighted
Casaubon had not espied a fault. For though it be true that there were such
gates at Athens as I (...), yet is there any that ever read (...), the dead to
have been carried out to burial through the Sacred gate? It makes not any
thing that it was spoken to a stupid fellow, for they spoke not as our vulgar
do, such as, When Christmas comes out of Wales. write then (...) are the gates
at which they went forth with their corpse at the solemnizations of their
obsequies, the reason of which shall be spoken hereafter. Page 715. number. 95*
Demosthenes, (...). The gate of Aegeus. It seems to have been in Delphinium
where he dwelt; whence the Hermes or Image toward the East end of the Temple
was called Plut. These. p. 4. l. 2^.
(...). The statue at the gates of Aegeus. (...). Melitides. Where lies
Thucydides the son of Olorus that wrote the Peloponnesian war, who after his
return into his country from banishment, was treacherously murdered, his
Sepulcher stands near these gates. Atti^s p. 21. l. 41.
Pausanias. (...). Ceramicae. These are called by Xenophon (...). The gates in
Ceramicus, where many of the Lacedaemonians were buried, which died in the
seditious war that Thrasybulus made against the Thirty Tyrants. (...). p. 279.
l. 43.
Xenophon. (...) The gates of Diochares. Of whom I have naught to speak.
(...). The Acharnan gates. I suppose they were called so from that Town or
Village near, named Acharnia, to which it is probable it looked. For so did
the ancients name their Gates from the Town to which they were near. The
Romans their porta Collatina from Collatia, a B^rge not far off. And happily
it is so here, Meursius has added two. ^toneae, and S^aeae. in Atti^s which I
never saw until I had written thi^ place as God and man is my witness. I (...)
^ake least a^y should think that I have stolen out o^ him be^ we me^t
as also in (...) Diomaea; for Diomus is a people of Athens not any great
matter distant from the City. (...). Thracia. These are all that ever I met
with named: others there are obscurely pointed at by Atticis p. 14 l. 11.
Pausanias, as that near the Gallery which from its various draughts they call
Paecile, where is the effigies of Mercury Agoraeus in brass. And others about
the beginning of his Attica, of which I had better hold my peace then speak as
good as nothing. Thus have we found twelve gates; which being opened enter;
suck that sweet air, whose excellent purity brought forth such acute wits,
Cassiod. Var. l. 12.
and prepared with a most happy bounty understanding judgments for
contemplation. Whence Medea. p. 460. 461.
Euripides may well strain to this note, that Venus sitting near, and
adorning her self, sends forth continually Cupids of learning, (...). Well may
he bless that clime stiling it, M^. p 459.
(...), which has been the Mother of the Muses (by the leave of Mnemosyne) or
at least the Nurse to them, for there are they said to have traveled with
Harmonia; as if there were no such melodious concent, as in the Sciences. Let
not ^n prae^. ^d ad Charact.
Theophrastus assertall Greece to lie under the same temperature and
disposition of the heavens, when at this day it may be spoken, as once
Aristides did of it. ^om. 1. p. 17^.
No ^oast so truly void of all earthly dregs, and participating more of the
celestial and defecated air. Not unworthily has Sophocles been lavish in
expressions. ^a. p. 57.
Famous, O^d. Col. p. 258.
The most renowned, O^d. Col. p. 26^.
Happy, ^a. p. 71^*
Sacred Athens. Pindarus. (...) p. 3^1
Wonderful. l Much spoken of. m Neat, etc. To the making up of her delight
comes to all the river Cephissus, which is able to bear vess^s of a good
burden, as I have been informed, but the Turk^ fearing least it mightbe
advantageous to an enemy that might invade them, have cut it into many and
sundry little streams, damming up with an innumerable quantity of stones the
mouth of the river for a mile in length. Thinking they have sufficiently
prevented, which they did but suppose could happen.

CAP. III.
(...) Mores, and Ingenia. (...). Quantum hodierni differ^nt a veteribus; and
qualem vitae rationem modumque habent.

THE Athenians by (...). p. 169.
Dicaearchus are divided into two sorts, (...), Atticos, and (...). Of which
though there were no difference in latter times, yet certainly of old there
was. In so much as one of the punishments, which the Athenians are said to
inflict upon their women (for the appeasing of Neptune, bringing in an
inundation upon their fields to their great damage, in anger conceived for
loss of the Title of the City) was this, Varro apud Aug. de Civ. Dei* l. 18.
c. 9.
That none should after call them (...), Athenians, but (...), Atticas. A
revenge I suppose opprobrious enough. For thus writes my Author. O^ (...).
Curious bablers, Deceitful, Calumniators, Observers of the lives of strangers.
(...). A sufficient witness of this is Act. 17.
St Luke, that faies, they did regard nothing more then to hear and speak
noveltie. To which end they often met in Barbers shops, where all the news,
that was going in those days, was current. Hence say we, verba in tonstrinis
proculcata: and in Greek (...), In Pluto p. 3^*
Aristophanes.

(...)
(...)
(...).
They that sat in the Barbers shops did talk much that he was suddenly
grown rich. The Scholiast seems to take the meaning as if the Comaedian had
quipped them for resorting to Barbers, and neglecting Barber* Chirurgions of
better credit. But I see no reason. They met in both to prattle. Aelian ^ar.
^st. lib.
(...) (...). Sitting in a Chirurgions shop, scandalous, and thirsty to speak
ill by all means. (...). men Italianated, who can smile, even when they cut
your throat. Such as Theophrastus d Cap (...).
has in his Characters drawn out, who can be affable to their enemies, and
disguise their hatred in commendation, while they privily lay their snares;
that salute with mortal embracements; and ^lasp you in those arms, which they
mean to embrew in your dearest blood. In sum, fair without, but rotten
within, like a wound which is healed above and seems sound, but putrifies
under the skin. And so much the word does import. (...). Given to false
accusations. The In Plut. p* (...).
Scholiast of Aristophanes writes, that it being forbidden to carry figs out
of Athens, and some nevertheless the decree being absolute against it,
presuming so to do, they set rogues in the gates that did appeach them, (as In
Solone p. 65.
Plutarch likewise) Hence came this word to be used for any crafty knave that
gets his living by promooting, Xenophon. (...). p. 271. l 20.
(...). One that meddles in every man's affairs, and therefore Pluto. p. 90. c.
p. 91. b.
Aristophanes has fitly brought one upon the seen terming himself an
Overseer both of private and public matters. If then such a person had espied
any tripping, and gotten him on the hip, he would as sure have fetched him
over for his coin, as any Summoner does a person delinquent toward the flesh,
or any Lawyer a credulous client, and having well plumed him, afterward give
him a dimissorie. (...) ( Sycophaniae) (...). Xenophon. Such were many in
Athens, in so much that Aristotle i (...) p. 272 l. 19.
being asked what Athens was, answered, (...), All beautiful, (...), in a
verse of (...).
Homer in the description of Al^inous his garden, but pears grew ripe after
pears, and figs after figs, meaning a continual succession of Sycophants.
This made Isocrates the Orator to compare the City to a Curtezan, with whom
few there were but would have to do, yet none dare take to wife; affirming it
to be the best place to soiourne in, but the worst to inhabit: By reason of
their Sycophants and trecheries of nimble tongued Orators. (...). I was once
half in an opinion that these words were to have been put to the former thus,
(...), And I think the sense will run well, Malicious observers of the lives
of strangers. The Athenians were (...) and held hospitality sacred, and I
doubt not but they had that Law, That* forrainers should receive no wrong,
(...). (...)* (...) ^8
Socrates in Xenophon. Now he discommends the (...) as ready to trouble and vex
strangers in law, duly marking and bearing an eye unto them to take them at an
advantage: As for the Athenienses they were (...), Brave spirited, single
dealing, and faithful friends. But as the words were at length confounded, so
did their ma^ners degenerate, growing into (...)* an Irregularitie of nature.
as Lib. 6.
Polybius. No (...) afterward* but haughtiness of spirit, magnanimity now
fallen. And when Dec. 4. p. 7. ^. 1*
L^vy says ex vetere fortuna nihil praet^r animos servare, he means* they had
nothing left but those proud spirits, which their ancient flourishing fortune
had puffed up. No (...), or simplicity, no Aristoph. p. 6^.
lamb like innocence, or mildness; but as (...). p 38^.
Plutarch speaks* people rashly angry, soon pitiful, rather inclined
sharply to take opinion, then quietly to be informed. And as they are ready to
help base and abject peasants, so friendly do they entertain childish and
ridiculous toys, rejoicing in their own praises, and nothing moved with
scurrility, Fearful and terrible even to their governors, humane toward
their enemies. Not unfitly then Lib ^ c. ^. p. 2^7.
Valerius Maximus, Quantam ergo reprehensionem merentur, etc. How deserve they
to be blamed, who though they had just laws, yet had most wicked disposition,
and chose rather to take their own courses, then put in practice their
statutes? As for their impudence, so great was it, that to express a
countenance void of shame, the Comoedian has put (...), An Athenian look, in
Page 189. g.
Nubibus. (...), So accounted in the time of Lib. 2* p 47.
Paterculus, that what was done in sincerity and faithful trust, the Romans
would say, it was performed fide Attica with an Athenian loyalty. Fear and
power might make them trusty, but how they brake their leagues, took part with
other Ilanders against confederates, and violated the laws of arms,
Historians are not dumb. As for their wrath it was (...), ever mindful, as
Aeneid. ^.
Virgil. mem^r ira. And the hatred they prosequuted the Barbarians withal was
so unquenchable, that it burned against Isocrat. in Pan. p. 109.
all Barbarians for the Persians sake; and they forbad them their sacrifices as
they used to do murderers among them. Where you must note that all that were
not Graecians were called of them Barbarians. But lo! How are they now become
all Barbarous! whether or no people of Africa or some of the Catelani I cannot
justly tell. Mahumedans all, poor and miserable, living by rapine, or fishing,
or tilling the earth, Hodoe p. Byz. l. 3.
Favolius Duraque coacti

Pauperie assuerunt vitam tolerare rapina*
Aut passim infestant furto, raptoque propinqua
Aequora piratae, sed quae pars aequior, hamis
Fallit inescatos tereti sub ar^dine pisces.
Aut desolatas exercet vomere terras,
Semper inops, misera, infelix, rerum omnium egena.
Oppressed with need they do their life sustain
By rapine, and anoy the neighbor maine
With pillaging. Who are more just and good
With angling do the silly fish delude;
Or plough the grounds made desolate before,
Unhappy, wretched, mis'rable, still poor*
CAP. IV.
De populidivisione, (...). Quid Atheniensibus cum Aegypt^is commune.

THere were at first but two kinds of people in Athens, So does Dionysius H^h
ca^nassens dt v^e them in (...) and (...) lib. 2. n. 2
two orders quibus inter gradus dignitatis fortunaeque aliquid inter lucebat,
in which there was difference of dignity and fortune: such as at this day are
in France either Peers or Peasants, or as in Venice Patricians and Plebeians.
And although Pollux calls them (...), three sorts, yet I make but two, because
the (...) were not any way more gentile for blood, surpassing for riches, or
happy for life. But because he has so set them, take them thus, as he speaks.
Pollux l. 8. (...) p (...)*
(...), Eupatridae, were such as were descended from the loins of those Heroes
famous in the Greek history, whose families were ever renowned, and posterity
propagated to many generations; such as Praxiergidae, Eteobutadae.
Al^moeonidae, Cynidae, Ceryces. etc. whom we may term Nobles, or men of good
birth. (...), Geomori, may not seem unlike our Yeomen, who had lands of their
own and sustained themselves with the fruit and commodity of these their
possessions. (...), Demiurgi, were men of some handi-craft, Tradesmen, such as
Tentmakers, Shoemakers Carpenters, Masons, and the like. But Solon made another
division. For when the Diacrii, which were those that lived in the upper part
of the City, (...), says Diogenes ^ In Solone*
Laertius; and the Pediaei which likewise are (...), such as lived in the
middle of the City, or the plain. And the Paralii who lived near the sea,
were at contention about government. The Diacrii leaning to a Democratie, as
Page 61. in Solome^.
Plutarch writes* the Pediaei to an Oligarchie, and the Paralii between both,
and had chosen Solon to arbitrate and determine the matter; he made these four
ranks. (...), Pentacosiomedimnos* Equites. Ze^gitas. Thet^s. d P^ut. p. 65
Pentacosiomedimni were those who (...), could make five hundred measures in
wet, and dry commodities alike. What Possardus then brings out of Uarro
concerning modium, has no place here, for he supposes that Pentacosiomedimnus
was he that had as much ground as fifty Medi^ni could suffice to sow, but here
I will confute him with a wet finger. (...). For he seems to sow upon the
waters. This is he whom the Elzevirii printed at Leyden Anno 1635 under the
name of Postellus who was sometime a Professor of Tongues in France, and author
of the Treatise de Magistratibus Atheniensium. Equites were such as were of
ability to keep an horse, or had the quantity of three hundred measures in
dry, and as many in wet: called likewise (...) Zengitae, were such as could of
wet and dry in all make but three hundred. Any of these three could bear
office in the Commonwealth. A fourth rank which he called Plutarch. loco
praedicto.
(...), Thetas, a name from servilitie, which had no power in the rule of the
weal public. But it had not been amiss if I had shown how the Egyptians
had divided their people into three classes as the Athenians did, as I have
spoken above. For the first degree or Eupatridae addicted to learning and
study, who were had in greater honor, answer to the Egyptian Priests. Plut.
These. p. 8. l. 18.
Nay those great houses in Athens had Priesthood by succession, as Eumolpidae,
Ceryces, Cynidae. For out of the stock were chosen Priests hence (...) in Page
741. number* 164.
Demosthenes. The Geomori who had lands assigned to them for the maintenance of
the war, are not dislike them in Egypt who hold possessions on these
terms, namely to provide soldiers when need shall require to fight. The
Demiurgi resemble those Plebeians who skillful in some art, did set out their
labor to daily hire: as Diodorus Siculus can testify.

CAP. V.
Tribus quatuor sub Cecrope mutata earum nomina. Augentur a Clisthene: duae
additae. (...)* Tribulum (...).

IN Athens there were but four Tribes under the rule of Cecrops. Cecropis,
Autocthon, Actaea, Paralia; which had other names put to them, Cranais, Atthis,
Mesogaea, Diacris. I suppose from the parts of Attica, it lying partly near
the sea, thence Actaea, partly hilly, thence Diacris, partly Mediterrane,
thence Mesogaea, the other name from the King that was then; whether the King
would honor the Tribe so much, or the Tribe glory in the name of the King, I
know not. It is probable that it was an honor to their governor, for as
Cecrops gave the first names, Cranaus the second, each assnming a title to
himself, Ericthonius called them after the name of Jupiter, Pallas, Neptune,
Vulcan. (...) But when Ion came to rule they were named after his four sons,
Geleontes, Aegicoreis, Argades, Hopletes, as In Terpsic. p 137.
Herodotus and In ^one versus si^em.
Euripides. though Plutarch says that they were so called In Solon. p ^5.
(...), from the courses of life which they first took. But Clisthenes a man
factious and wealthy is said by the Council of A^stides ^ 1. p. 3^6. A. ^ 3.
p. 352.
Apollo, Alomaeon being Archon to make ten of them, changing the ancient
titles, and taking new from some Demigods or Heroes borne in that land all,
except Ajax, whom though a stranger, he put to the rest* as a neighbor and
companion. In Terpsic. p. 137.
Herodotus. These then were called (...); as you would say giving names; the
word so signifies sometimes, as Minerva is said by Dion Chrysostom (...), who
gave the name to Athens. To these were erected Satues nere the Council place
of the Senate. Their names are these as In At^p* p. 4. 5
Pausanias has them. Hippothoon, Antiochus, Ajax Telamonius, Leo, Erectheus
that slew Immaradus the son of Eumol. pu^ in the Eleusinian war, Aegeus,
Oeneus, Acamas, Cecrops, Pandion. From these (...), O^nis, (...)* To which they
put two more, one called after Antigonus, the other after Demetrius his name,
in gratuitie to them for the favors received; which in process of time they
changed into Attalis, and Ptolemais, as Stephanus writes, (...), having been
courteously entreated by the These ^re reckoned among the Epenymes in P^us p. ^.
who had Statues likewise.
Kings bearing that name. Which being so, let us take heed that Livie deceive
us not, who at the time, when Attalus did succor the Athenians against Philip,
says they first thought of adding that Tribe to the ten, in thanksgiving
that the Rhodii rescued four fighting ships of the Athenians taken by the
Macedonians, and sent them home, Decad. 4. l. 1 p. 6.
Tum primum mentio illata de tribu quam Attalida appellarent, ad december veteres
tribus addenda. Thus have we seen that there were twelve Tribes in all. Let us
look back to the first institution. I suppose they were first ordained for the
better administration of civil government. In ^* b. page 181.
Eustathius writes that they were divided in imitation of the year, The four
Tribes according to the four quarters; each Tribe into three Fraternities,
which they call (...) or (...) answerable to the twelve Months, each (...) or
(...) into thirty (...) or kindreds equalizing the days. For so many only had
the year of old. Witness the Ridle of Laertius* p 63. l. 1.
Cleobulus concerning the year,

(...)
(...).
One Father had twelve Sons, and each son thirty daughters, and every
daughter black and white, meaning days and nights. Over these were governors
(...), Kings of the Tribes, who sat upon controversies between party and
party of their own Tribes. Each Tertian also had his overseer called, (...)
the Ruler of the Trittys or Phratria. The word may seem to signify a
Society, fellowship, or Company. It skils not whether you derive it from
(...), as Eustath, or (...), as Suidas, or (...), as others, which is a Well,
because they drew water from the same well. For the place being scanty of
Springs where Athens was founded, there being but one wellspring in Athens,
they were constrained touse (...), dug wells, as In Solonep. 6^. l. 33.
Plutarch. (...) are the men of that society, called by Tully, Curiales, of
the same Ward, speaking of Cimon, who gave command that his servants should
afford what they had if any Laciades should come into his Farm. In description
of which thing Plutarch uses (...), which then we are not to interpret
Curialis (For this is as much as (...) and (...)) but popularis. These at
festival days in Athens met in a place called Phratrion, as (...) (...)* page
181* and ^ ^. page ^29.
Eustathius observes, and Lab. ^. c. 4.
Pollux (where they brought their children to be engrossed in their books, as
shall be hereafter spoken with the reasons thereof) (...), Phratrizein from
hence comes which is (...), to meet, for so Eustathius in another place (...).
As for the (...), or kindreds we must not think that they were of one blood,
but from that near conjunction which they had each with other being admitted
into this society* (...) (every (...) or kindred consisted of thirty, whence
they were named (...)) (...). Not of affinity so called, but for their Synod;
which the Grammarians call (...), a Communicatiue familiarity, (...) being a
participating in one thing, or having an equal share in the same privileges.
Great was their care of each other; great was their mutual love; which that it
might continue, Solon their Lawgiver ordained certain feasts to be provided,
wherein they should kindly entertain each other. (...), and (...). (...)* l.
5 p. (...)* ^
Athenaeus. (...), etc. Of feasts celebrated at this day the Lawmakers have
appointed Phyletica for Tribes, Demotica for the people or popular, Moreover
Thiasos for Colleges (as Philosophers for the death of their Grand Masters)
and Phratrica for the same Ward. Hence (...) and (...). Of which in due time.
The reason of this the Dipnosophist gives. saying that wine has (...), an
attractiue and persuading force to procure love, and friendship.

CAP. VI.
Graecia vicatim habitata. (...) quid? Atheniensibus proprium habere (...).
Quot? Templ^ and sacra pagatim.

ALL Greece was inhabited (...), as Lib. 1*
Thucydides speaks, by Villages before there were any Towns; from whence
comes the word Comoedie. Donat. in Praef. in Te^*
At vero nondum coactis in urbem Atheniensibus, cum Apollini Nomio, id est,
Pastorum vicinorumque praesidi Deo, constructis aris in honor^m divinae rei
circum Atticae vicos, villas, and compita festum carmen solenniter cantarent:
orta est Comoedia (...), quod est, commessatum ire cantantes. The Athenians
being as yet not gathered into Corporations, when they sung sacred hymns to
Apollo Nomius, that is, the President of the sheepheards and neighbors, about
the villages, houses and cross ways of Attica, alters being built in honor
of the celebrity, sprung up a Comoedie (...) from revelling and singing. Others
will have it derived from an ancient custom they had, when any were injured
among them, for the party wronged to come to the street where the offender
lived, and in the night time to cry aloud Thomas Magister.
(...). Such a one does wrong, and commits such and such outrages, although
there be Gods and Laws* by which, these abuses were reformed. But the Anonymus
in a preface to Aristophanes says (...), that they were not called (...) or
villages by the Athenians, but (...) which they translate Populos, better in my
mind oppida or Towns. Cicero ad Lib. 7. Ep. 3
Atticum. Venio ad Piraeea in quo magis reprehendendus sum, quod homo Romanus
Piraeea scripserim, non Piraeeum (fi^ enim omnes nostri locuti sunt) quam quod
M addiderim. Non enim hoc ut oppido praeposui, sed ut loco: and tamen Diony
sius noster, qui est nobiscum, and Nicias Cous, non rebatur oppidum esse
Piraeea, sed de eo videro. Nostrum quidem si est peccatum, in ^ est, quod non
ut de oppido locutus sum, sed ut de loco: secutusque sum non dico Caecilium,
Mane ut ex portu in Piraeeum (malus enim auctor Latinitatis est) sed Terontium
cuius fabellae propter elegantiam sermonis putabantur a Caio Laelio scribi.
Heri aliquot adolescentuli coimus in Piraeeum, and idem, Mercator hoc addebat
captam de Sunio. Quod si (...) oppida volumus esse, tam est oppidum Sunium quam
Piraeeus. If so be we will have (...) to be Towns, Sunium as well as
Piraeeus is a Town. These were formerly kingdoms as A^icis p. 30 l 42.
Pausanias testifies. (...). Moreover I have written, that some of the towns
were governed by a King before the reign of Cecrops. And no marvel, for some
of them far surpassed other Cities, as Aristides affirms. These In Panath.
T. 1 p. 326.
were most peculiar to the Athenians, anciently called (...), as Nub page 225.
c.
Aristoph. Schol. or (...), as L. 8. p. 430*
Pollux, twelve belonging to every Tribe. But Clisthenes changed them into
(...), as out of Aristotle the Schol. of Aristoph. The number of them is, as In
^. b. page 215.
Eustathius out of Strabo, and ^n Athenae* um. l. 6. c. ^.
Casaubon, an hundred seaventie four. Some whereof having the same name are
distinguished according to their situations (...) and (...), as we may say the
upper and the lower Wakefield, etc. All of them are divided into Greater and
Lesser. The Pausan. A^ page 30.
(...) or less are these. Alimusii, Zoster, Prospaltii, Anagyrasii, Cephale,
Prasieis, Lampreis, Phlyeis, Myrrinusii, Athmoneis, Acharnae, Marathon,
Brauron, Rhamnus. The rest were greater. Take them promiscuous according to
their Tribes.

(...)
(...) Aexone. Dadalidae, Epiecidae, Xypete, Pithus, Sypalettus, Trinem^i,
Athmonon or Athmonia. Alae Aexonides. Phlya.

(...)
(...) Agraul^ or Agryle. Euonymia or Euonymus. Themaci or Themacus. Cephisia.
The upper Lampra. The lower Lampra, in which Sigonius erres calling one the
maritimate, the other the inferior, which to be one and the same I have shown
above. Pa^botadae. Pergase. Sybridae, Phegus, Anagyrus.

(...)
(...)* Angele, Cydathenaeum. Cytharum. Oa or Oeis. the upper Paeania, the
under Paeani^* Probalinthus, Stiria. Phegaea* Mlyrrhinus.

(...)
(...) Alae Araphenides. Araphen. Bate. Gargettus. Dionea* Erec^hia. Ericria.
Echria. Icaria or Icarius. Ionidae. Colyttus. Cydantidae. Plothea. Tithras.
Phegaea. Philaede. Chollidae.

(...)
(...). Agnus. Erisidae. Hermus or Hermi. Hephestiadae. Thori^us. Itea.
Ci^yana. Sphettus. Cholargus Cholargi Cholargia. Cephale. Prospalta.

(...)
(...) (...) Aethalidae Aethalia. Aphidna. Dirades. Hecale. Sypyradae. Cetti.
Cropia. Leuconium. Oeum Ceramicum. Paeonidae. Peleces. Potamus. Scambonidae.
Sunium. Hyba Hybadae. Phrearri. Marathon. Alimus.

(...)
(...) Azenia. Amaxan^ea. Anacaea. Acherdus. Decelia. Eleaeus. Eleusis.
Eraeadae. Thymaetadae. Ceriadae. Corydallus. Oeum Decelicum. Oeum ad
Eleutheras. Sphendale.

(...)
(...) Aegil^a or Aegilus. Alopece or Alopecae. Amphitrope. Anaphlystus. Atene
or Atenia. Bessa. Thorae. Crioa. Leucopyra. Melaeneis or Melaenae. Pallene.
Pentele. Semachidae. Phalerum.

(...).
(...). Oenoe at Macathon. Titacidae. Tricorythus. Rhamnus. Of this Tribe were
some towns take away and put to other, Aphydna, Perside, etc.

(...)
(...) Butea, Butadae. Epicephisia. Thria or Thrio. Hippotomadae. Lacia,
Laciadae. Lusia. Melite. Oe or Aea. Perithaedae. Ptelea. Phyle. Acharna.
Tyrmidae.

(...).
(...). Thyrgonidae. (...). Conthyle.

(...).
(...). Apollonienses. These are all which authors make mention of according to
their Tribes, others there are, which I know not how to distribute, none of the
ancients either directing or furnishing me. But these are they. Agra.
Anchesmus. Amphiade. Archilia, Astypal^a. Atalanta. Achradus. Belbina. Brauron.
Brilessus. Enna. Echelidae. Zoster. Thrion. Cale. Cedae. Cothocidae. Coele.
Cynosarges. Cerami^us without the city the same with Academia. Laurium.
Lenaeum. Limnae. Munychia. Parnes. Pnyx. Patroclus his ditch or trench. Scirum.
Sporgilus. Hydrusa. Hymettus. Hysiae. Phaura. Phormisii. Phrittij. Phoron.
Chitone. Oropus. To which are put the Islands, called Pharmacusae, two in
number, and Psyttalia. The Scholiast of In Rani^ ^ ^35.
Aristophanes speaks as if Io were a Demus, but I say not with him. The
greatest use we have of these among authors, is in their form of Law, matters
of contracts, and the like, that there might be no fraud or deceit; that none
either unjustly be taxed for any thing, or tax an other. Hence read we such
punctual clauses in their writs. N. the son of N. dwelling at Alopeca, (...),
of Caele. of Melite. of Cerameis. In these villages were Temples of the Gods.
Dee. 4. l. ^. p. 12. 13.
Livie. Templa pagatim sacrata. And again. Delubra sibi fuisse, quae quondam
pagatim habitantes in parvis illis castellis viisque consecrata, ne in unam
q^idem urbem contributi majores sui deserta reliquerint. So much witnesses In
Atticl^ p. 77. l. 40.
Pausanias; who tells us that they worshipped some peculiar Deity, and yet
nevertheless did (...), honor Minerva. Some of them had peculiar festivalls,
as Brauron the solemnities Brauronea, to Diana. Diomea to Jupiter Diomeus.
Chitonea etc.

CAP. VII.
(...). Atheniensium status mutati^* (...).

THe ancients had but three sorts of government. Tyrannis, Democratia
Oligarchia as In (...) p. 4.
Aeschines, which Polybius calls (...). where although the one names it a
Tyrannis or Tyranny, the other (...) the rule of a King, yet must we understand
the same. For in old time all Kings were called Tyrants, as Servi^s on Virgil
has observed. A word taken up by the Graecians about the time of Archilochus,
which neither Homer, nor Hesiod knew; and therefore are the Poets noted, as,
(...), for calling the Kings, or (...) before the Trojan wars, Tyrants or
Tyrannos. (...) or a Kingdom, is where obeisance is free, yielded rather out
of a good advice, then for fear or might. (...) an Aristocratie, when most
wise and just men are fitly chosen to sit at the* Helm of the Weal public.
(...) a Democratie, when the Laws and customs of the Country in matters
belonging both to Gods and men are truly observed, and that rules the roast,
which shall be approved of by the greater part, (...) ^aies Polybius; as that
may be said at a banquet to please all, which does relish well with the most.
But the grave Historian has observed changes in such government, as they use
to be, inclining to the worst Monarchies being turned into Tyrannies; as when
the people are led away by the perswa^ions of some pleasing A^ l. Pol. l. ^ c.
4.
popular man, and are as it were, willingly constrained to take the yoke that
his usurping authority shall lay on them, a Tyrant indeed said, Probus in
^iltiade.
Vicons^tus, who gets it by violence, Probu^d. ^. 17.
Omnes autem and habentur and dicuntur Tyranni, qui potestate sunt perpetua in
ca civitate, quae labertate usa est. But all are accounted and called Tyrants,
who have perpetual authority in that City, which formerly has enjoyed
liberty. The deprivation of which causing murmuring and rebellion, brings forth
an Aristocratie, or government of the best men, such as are well brought up, and
exercised in virtue. The end of an Aristocratie being, as Pol* l. 4*
Aristotle has it, Virtue, which of no long continuance does soon degenerate,
Pol^. l. ^*
(...), naturally enclining to an Oligarchie, or rule of few. These few being
chosen according to their riches. And because that many in a state cannot be
wealthy, therefore the number of them cannot be great. These are great Lords
and little Kings, whose power ^waies all, and not the Laws; who uniustly
favor those that are partially theirs, and oppress them that would defend
their liberty against them. All things being administered Aeschines in (...)
(...), by their presidents. Such dominion is taken away by the people set on a
rage, and not bearing (...), the injuries of their rulers. Hence comes in a
Democratie, which Sophocles calls (...), the power of a multitude; whose end is
freedom; when ^ll can equally partake of the same privileges and immunities,
who are true citizens: whence T^rence styles it aequam libertatem* for which
the Greek Orators have properly used the word (...), as In Domest. ^ 59.
Vlpian observes. But the vulgar for the most part strangely insolent, prone
to wrong, and ready to trespass against the Laws, bring in by a miserable
proceeding, the worst kind of government an Ochlocratie, the rule of
Ras^alitie. All these in their times did Athens feel, for they were governed
by Kings four hundred eighty seven years: the last of which was Codrus, who
in a fight between the Dori^nses and Athenians offered himself willingly to be
slain, it being foretold by the Oracle of Apollo that the Dorienses should be
conquerours unless the Athenian King were killed; he therefore clothing
himself famulari vest n^ posset agnos^i, says Tus^. Q. l. ^
Cicero, with a servants habit least he should be known, put himself among
the enemies, by one of which in a brawle he was murdered. After whom none
enjoyed the name of King, Justin* l. ^*
quod memoriae nominis eius tributum est, which was done in memory to his name.
For after that, Archontes or Judges ruled; in the Title (...), Archontes, but
in power Kings, whose authority was for term of life. These continued three
hundred and fifteen years. These being ended, it pleased the State to choose
a man, whose office should continue but ten years; seven succeeded each
other, and made up the number of seaventie years; who, because they abused
their power, were made but for one year, called therefore Justin l 2.
annui Magistratus, yearly Magistrates. These continued until Pisistratus,
for a fained fear of the seditious, begged a guard of the people for his
safety. For when the faction sprung up. Of which I have spoken in the fourth
Chapter, he cutting himself with lashes, and the Mules which drew his
Chariot, went into the place of meeting, (...), and beseeching the people to
afford him some defense against their violence, who did (but did not) assault
him, procured a company of chosen Citizens who armed with clubs, not weapons,
possessed the Castle, and so Tyranny came in, which Pisistratus enjoyed
Heraclides in Pol.
thirty years, and deceased, leaving behind him two sons, Hipparchus, and
Hippias, whom Heraclides calls Thessalus. Hipparchus was s^aine by Aristogiton,
after whose death the Athenians lived under a tyranny Herodotus l. 5. p. 135.
four years, from which they were delivered by the help of the
Lacedaemonians, the offspring of Al^maeon corrupting the Oracle, to the end that
whenever they came for counsel he should wish them to free the Athenians of
that servitude. The Democratie came in eight hundred sixty eight years after
Cecrops, established by Solon, who excluded the fifth rank of plebeitie from
office or honor by a law, afterward abrogated by Aristides. After this
Pericles brought in an Ochlocratie by weakening the power of the Areopagites.
Then after the overthrow in Sicily the (...) or four hundred took upon them
state, deceaving the people, as Pol. l* ^. 57.
Aristotle and L^. 8.
Thucydides affirm. For persuading them that they should reconcile
Tissaphernes and Alcibiades unto themselves by that means, and that the
Persian Monarch would afford supply for the war, they most willingly
condescended to this motion in the one and twenty year of the Peloponnesian
war. These Princes were called ^lat in All* (...). p. 148.
(...), Five thousand, though not exceeding four hundred. The reason is,
because they boasted that none should be rewarded, but who bare arms; nor any
admitted to public power but five thousand, such as with person and estate
could be beneficial to the Republique. Their authority was granted by an Xen.
(...) 274. l. ^8.
Act of the people, to which Theramenes was very forward, but after they were
inducted none more ready to drive out; whereupon they termed him (...)
Cothurnum, from a kind of start-up which did fit both feet. (...). c Xen. p.
27^.
The word may suit with a Jack of both sides. These (...) were constrained for
fear of Justin l. 5.
Al^ibiades to resign the right unto the people, and to go into wilful
banishment. But when Lysander had overcome A^hens (the Arist. Pol. l. 5. ^ 7.
Lacedaemonians ever affecting au Oligarchie, as the Athenians a Democratie) he
ordained these thirty to be chief. Xen (...). p. 270.
Polyarches, Critias, Melobius, Hippolochus, Euclides, Hiero, Mnesilochus,
Chremo, Theramenes, Aresias. Diocles, Phaedrias, Chaerileos, Anaetius, Piso,
Sophocles, Eratosthenes, Charicles, O^omocles, Theognis, Aeschines, Theogenes,
Cleomedes, Erasistratus, Phido, Dracontides, Eumathes, Aristoteles,
Hippomachus, Mnesithides. These began at first to put to death the worst and
most abhorred, says In (...). Co^p.
Salust, without trial of law; but afterward the good and bad alike; Xen. p.
272.
some for envy, others for riches. These to make their party firm chose
about three thousand to whom alone they permitted to have weapons, disarming
all the rest, to the end they might easily command their lives. But by their
laws for they made so^e, styled (...)
(...) (which were nullified by a decree, as we shall speak hereafter) none
was to suffer (...), who was registered in the list of three thousand. So cruel
were they, that the people fled into (...)
Phyle a castle in the Athenian borders; and making an head, under the conduct
of Thrasybulus, at last shook off this yoke, and remained free until the death
of Alexander even fourscore years, whom Antipater succeeded; who in battle at
the City Lamia gave the Athenians an overthrow; and gave them quarters on
these terms that they should submit to a few Peers, whose revenues amounted
to two thousand Drachm'es at least, the chief of who^ was Demetrius Phalereus;
that they should likewise receive a garrison into Munychia for the asswaging of
riots and uproares. But four years after, Antipater dying, the City fell
into the power of Cassander, of whom they often strove to acquit themselves.
But in vain* For he brought them to such an exigencie, that they were glad to
come to composition. And indeed he dealt fairly with them, giving them their
City. Territories, Tributes, and all other things, so that they would be
confederates to him* that none, whose revenewes come not to ten minae or
pounds, should undergo any function in the Commonweal; and he should be
their overseer whom he would be pleased to nominate. The man appointed was
Demetrius Phalareus, Vide Laert. in vita, and Stra bone ^.
who made the City to shine in her full luster, insomuch that they erected in
honor of him three hundred Statues. He wrote a Treatise of the Athenian
Republique, which had not time devoured, would have given no small light to my
poor endeavors. After he in trouble and vexation had spent fourteen years
he was put out by Demetrius the son of Antigonus surnamed Poliorcetes, who
restored the ancient customs to them again. To him they ascribed such
worship, as also to his father, that they changed the name of their Judge from
Archon into (...).
(...) The Priest of the Gods that saved them, calling the year after his
name, and adding * two Tribes to (...). (...) 8.
the Ten; whence the Senate consisted of six hundred* but five before, as In
Beren^e.
Stephanus, But when Cassander had overthrown the son and father, such was
the ingratitude and leviti^ of the Athenians, that they forbad Demetrius to
approach nere their City. After this Lacharis played the Tyrant, and was
expelled by Demetrius; whom they utterly cast off, assuming again the title of
Archon. Demetrius dying Antigonus Gonat as succeeded, who in the nineteenth
year of his reign put in presidiarie soldiers to the City, which ten
years after he took out. The Macedonians still kept some of the Athenians
forces in this space. Demetrius Antigoni Gone. F. and Antigonus Doson, out of
whose hands Plut. in vita.
Aratus the Sicyonian rescued the City, and made it stand by it self until
Phi^, the last king of the Macedonian Monarchy except one, did some what shake
it, as you may read in Decad. 4. l. 1
Livie. But he was expelle^t by the Romans, who took the Athonians into
league, with a maintaining of their ancient right. So they remained until the
war between Mithridates and the Romans. For by fear they were driven to
receive Vide Appianum Alex. in Mithridatico, circa page 122 123. etc.
Archestra^us* Mithridates his General, within their walls; against which
Sylla laid siege, and captivated the City, whence proceeded (...), a merciless
slaughter* says Appian, that the Plut. in vita p. 335.
streets did run with blood. But the Laws were not much altered by this
Conqueror; and therefore they lived in a near resemblance of their formet
s^ate; infavour with the Roman Emperors. Julius Caesar, Adrian, Antonius,
Gallienus, in whose successors time, Claudius, the second of that name, this
City was ransacked by the Goths, who when they had heaped up innumerable
companies of hooks to burn^ were dehorted by this reason, Cedrenus Baptista
Egnatius. Romans P^n. l. 1.
that the Greeks, spending their time in reading of (...), might (...) (...)
more ^nfit for war^ Constantine the Great likewise had this City in high
esteem^, taking to himself the Title of (...), as In Oration^ Constan^um
Iulia^ says, which in the words of Nicephorus G^egoras is Hist. Romans l. 7. p.
166.
(...) ((...)) the Grand Duke* whom simply afwards they called the Hist. Romans
l. 7 p. 167.
Duke of Athens, in that Historians time. Emperors have taken them wives
citizens of this place; and the (...)
daughters of their Dukes have been desired by that eminent rank. And indeed
no marvel. For they were potent. Raineri^s Acciajolus is said to have taken
the City from the Spaniards that inhabit Arragon, (...); f Cal^o. hon.
who having no issue male of his wife Eubois (...)
but an illegitimate named Antonius, by another woman, beq^athed by will
Boeotiae and The^es to him, but Athens to the In the time of Betro Z^m came
Ambassadors from Athens to do homage to the Venetian Senate. M* Leukenor in
history and lives of the Uenetian Princes.
Venetians, from whom his son recovered it again. Nerius succeeded him in
the Dukedom who thrust out Chalcocondylas his father. After him came in
Antonius Nerius brother to the former Nerius. Now about this time we must
know that Mahomet the son of Amurat the second got Athens, Chalcocon. l. 9.
p. 299.
whose beauty and building he held in admiration; which when he had made his
own, he continued the Title. For another Nerius from those above named dying,
leaving one son an infant, his mother in the child's Title exercised Tyranny.
This woman loved a Venetian Noble man (son to Petrus, Palmerius, to whose
government the City Nauplium was committed, he is called by Chalcocondylas
Priamus) who came thither for merchandise. Him by discourse and flattery she
intised into her love, promising that she would take him to her husband, and
give up the Princedome of Athens unto him. But upon condition, that he would
divorce his own wife. Whereupon the young man going to Venice slew his wife,
swelling with ambition and thirsty of honor. Which being done, he returns
to Athens, marries this woman, enioyes the government of the City; who being
hated of the Athenians, and complained of at the Court, to avoid envy termed
himself the Childs Tutor. And not long after taking the boy with him, went to
the Court; where Francus Acciajolus waited, expecting to be promoted to the
Dukedom. When the Emperor therefore understood the folly of the woman, he
gave the title to him. Who being enstalled* imprisoned the woman at Megara, and
afterward (by means not known to the Chalcocon. p. 300.
Author) slew her. This Francus in time was taken away from men by Zogan
governor of Peloponnesus, Mahomet having intelligence that the Athenians would
have delivered the City to the Prince of Boeotia. He was the last Duke.

LIBER SECVNDVS.
CAP. I.
Duodecim Dii Atheniensium Idololatria septifariam commissa. Dii Adscriptitii.
(...).

HErodotus in Page 48.
Terpsichore is of opinion that the Greeks derived their religion from the
Egyptians. But In Tractu (...). p. ^ ^9.
Plutarch does stoutly deny it. And not without good testimony may I affirm
that it seems to be a falsitie. For Orpheus is thought to have brought the
mysteries of piety into Greece; who was himself a Thracian, from whom the word
Sch. Eurip. in Alcest. page 66 1.
(...) is supposed to be drawn, which signifies devotion. (...), says (...).
in (...). 1.
Nonnus. They called (...), to worship God, etc. Appositely to which Page 2^.
Aristophanes (...).

(...). Orpheus showed us sacrifices and to abstain from slaughter. Nether is
^* 281.
Euripides disagreeing in Rheso.

(...)
(...)
Orpheus revealed the hidden mysteries. Herodotus names not the Gods, the
worship of Who^ the Greeks might borrow from the Egyptians; Twelve in number
they were, quoth he, but these only are reckoned. Jupiter. Bacchus. Hercules.
Apollo. Mars. Pan. Diana. Isis or Ceres. Sais or Minerva. Latona. as I have
gathered, which all at once to have been made known to the Greeks, and that
by the Egyptians is too hard a task for me to prove. The Athenians I am sure
had twelve Gods in especial honor, whose Paus. Attic. p. 3. l. 18.
pictures they had drawn out in a Gallery in Ceramicus; and had an Altar
erected, called Plut. in Ni^a. page 387. l. 26.
(...), on which a little before the Sicilian war, a man dismembered himself
with a stone; which was accounted prodigious. By these twelve would they swear
in common discourse. Aristoph. Equ. p. 300. A.
(...). The heathens thinking that they did honor those Gods, by whom they
swear; as I have elsewhere spoken. But they were not confined to so small a
number as twelve. For how could it be, when they ran through the seven sorts
of Idolatry? First worshipping the Sun, and punishing with death the neglect
thereof; as you may read in Vide Bo^num in Demonologia
Plutarch in the life of Pericles. Secondly, deifying the effects of God* as
bread, etc. For Clemens Alexandrinus interprets (...), Ceres, (...), corn or
food. Thirdly the poetical Gods. Furies, and revengers of wickedness, as
Alastores. Palamnaei. Fourthly, the Passions, as Love, Pity. Injury likewise
and Impudence, to whom Epimenides built an Altar at Athens. Fifthly the
accidents of grouth and nourishment, hence Auxo, and Thallo two deities, (...),
to increase, and (...) to flourish; to which may be put Clotho, Lachesis, and
Atropos, the three fatal sisters, and (...), Necessity, taken sometime for
death it self. 6ly, the Theogonie or pedigree of their Gods, able to makeup
the sum of which Homer speaks. (...), etc. Three thousand. Seaventhly an
ignorance of the providence and bounty of God toward them, fained Hercules the
repeller of evil, and Aesculapius the God of Physic. And if this serve not, I
can add an eighth way, namely hospitality and good entertainment of strange
Gods. (...) (...). says Page 471
Strabo. as the Athenians love forrainers, so foreign Gods. (...), etc. In
Panath. T^* 1. p. 1^.
Aristides. For they serve not only the most ancient Deities, in a peculiar
manner above all their followers, but have assumed adventitious ones; such as
Strab. p. 587
Orthane, Conissalus, and Tychon. So prone were they to conceive superstition,
that when Act. Apost. ^. ^7. v. 18.
Paul preached Jesus and the resurrection of the dead; they forthwith deemed
Anastasin, or resurrection to be a God. And least they should omit any, they
erected Altar to the unknown Gods, of which In Attic. p. 1 l. 35.
Pausanias. Neither may we doubt of it, the scripture bearing witness. The
cause of this they say to be a fearful vision appearing to Philippides, sent
Ambassador to the Lacedaemonians concerning aid against the Persians, and
complaining that he ( Vide Eurip. Sch. ^n Med. p. 4^2.
Pan, from whom (...) spectrum) was neglected and other Gods worshipped;
promising likewise his help, they therefore being victorious, and fearing the
like event, built a Temple, and Altar TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Another opinion is,
that a plague being at Athens hot, and the people finding no help from the Gods
they implored, surmising some other power to have sent the disease, whereupon
they set up this Altar, on which was written (...). TO THE GODS OF ASIA,
EUROPE, AND AFKICA, TO THE UNKNOWN AND STRANGE GOD. As Justin Page 137.
Martyr and Oecumenius. Much may be said of their Tutelar Gods, both for their
Cities and houses, much of their Heroes or Demigods. We will view them in order.

CAP. II.
Jupiter (...) Modii salis edendi, Tessera hospitalis seu Symbolum. Apollo
(...). Poean, and eiusdem verbi origo. Mercurius (...)

Above other of their Gods Jupiter was had in high esteem. And that commanded
by the Oracle. For when the Athenians were bidden to dissolve their kingdoms,
they were charged to make choice of Jupiter, Sch. Aristop. p 122.
(...). And so by In Nubibus
Aristophanes he is called (...). Him they worshipped as President of Law and
Justice, under the name of Jupiter Them. in Mid. p. 251.
Nemius (different from that of Corinth named (...)) Him as God of supplicants,
hence Vlpian in Them. p. 273. Paus. p. 18. l. 40. Who thinks Sylla to be eaten
with lice by ^ judgment* that slew Ari^on supplia^tly flying to the Temple of
Minerva.
(...), Him as Protector of Cities, hence (...). Him as Governor and director
of their counsels, hence (...). Him as chief of their Societies, hence (...),
and of their friendship too, hence (...) and of kindred likewise, hence (...).
To him they ascribed Thunder, henc Aristoph. A. v^b. p. 626.
(...), as much as coming down in thunder. To him they thankfully
acknowledged their delivery from the Persians, wrought by Themistocles, hence
Plut. and Paus.
(...). Him they confessed the greatest of all, hence Pausan.
(...): Him the overseer of their buying and selling, hence Aristoph. p. 317.
(...). To him stood an Altar sacred in the courts of their houses, hence
Jupiter Herceus, from (...) a wall, as if he were the watch and defender of
the house. Phavorinus. (...). There was also an Altar to him before the gates,
of which Metamorph
Ovid. -- Ante aedes stabat Iovis Hospitis ara, hence Jupiter Xenius, as if he
were the God of strangers and hospitality. So solemn were they in their
entertainements, that they would not receive a stranger without great
ceremonies, such as giving of the right hand each to other Eustath. in (...)*
(...), a most certain sign of fidelity, and security; as also washing and
cleansing with salt, or salt water, as (...).
Tz^zes on Lycophron; whence it is called (...)* Salt they highly esteemed of,
ever upbraiding violated hospitality with De^osth. p. 24^.
(...), etc. where is the salt? And yet it may be thought to be said of the
community of the table Tzetzes in ^oph p. 28.
(...), customs showing that fellow commoners, and such as feed of the same
table must not iniure one another, to which the old saying may well agree,
(...). de A^. Eu^ sa^es (...) it ceto^ love permanent. For (...) preseru^s
(...) as it is ^de of many lettings in o^ water, so they wh^ come ^ro d^vers
places by h^itality are male one. (...) p. 100.
multos modios salis simul edendos esse, ut ^micitiae (...) expletum sit, Men
must eat many bushels of salt together, before they can be perfect friends;
meaning that friendship is not to be soon established. But I take ^alt* of the
lustration, to which also they added fire, as you may see in In Acha^. p 414.
vide (...).
Aristophanes. Neither was this all, for they sacrificed moreover, calling
Jupiter to witness, and using these words in the time of sacrifice. Eustath in
(...).
(...). Let my trespass be against Jupiter Xenius, if I offend, contemn, or
neglect strangers. And for the continuation of this even to their posterity
they were wont to cut an huckle bone in two, the one party keeping one piece
the other party the other half, that when occasion or necessity should make
either of them stand in need of other* E^rip. S^h. p. 44^*
(...), bringing with them their half h^kle bone they might re^ new their
hospitality. This they call (...) Symbolum a token* which sometimes they would
send to their acquaintance in others behalf, as Jason in Euripides offers to
Medea to do. (...) And to send a Symbolum or token to strangers that shall
courteously entertain you. But of this enough, as also of Jupiter, whom
celebrated in As (...). (...) (...). (...) etc.
other Epithites I know by the Athenians. Apollo was next in request to
Jupiter, invocated in danger or sudden events, hence (...). (...) p* (...).
(...), from (...), to turn away, as if he should deliver them from eminent
evil, for which reason he is called Alexica^us. Macrob. Sat. p. 253.
Apollinem aspellentem mala intelligas, quem Athenienses (...) appellant. He
was one of the first Gods they had, hence is he termed A^stopli. N^b. p. 20^.
(...), but A^stop* S^h. p. 611. g.
others think because he was the father of Ion. Satu^. 1. p. 257.
Macrobius is of opinion, because the Sun the same with Apollo is the Author of
progenerating all things, quod sol humoribus exsiccatis progenerandis omnibus
praebuit causam. To him stood Altars in their streets, hence is he (...), as if
he were set over their ways Macrob. Sat. 1. c. 9.
Illi enim vias, quae intrapomaeria sunt* (...). This Agyeus was a sharp
pillar. Schol. Eurip Phae. p. 322.
(...). Although the Greeks, as Sat. 1. c. 9.
Macrobius says, did worship him as (...), exitus and introitus potentem, one
that kept the doors of their houses, yet I find no monument of that Title in
Pausanias. Famous he was for the name of Paean, of which though I have taken
occasion to speak elsewhere, yet this is a most proper place. I will not
trouble you with the trivial derivations of the Greeks, which you read in In
sin. lib. 14. Dip.
Athenaeus. When the Atbenians asked help of the Oracle at Delphos against the
Amazons, in the days of Theseus, The God bid them implore his succor in these
words (...). Macrob. Sat. l. 1. c. 17. page 253.
Hanc vocem, id est (...), confirmasse fertur Oraculum Delphicum Atheniensibus,
pet sntibus opem 'Dei adversus Amazonas, Thesco regnante. Namque inituros
bellum iussit his ipsis verbis semetipsum auxiliatorem invo^ari, hortarique. I
doubt not but the words are changed somewhat, especially if we consider the
ancient Io Paean. Paean says the In Pl^t. page 68.
Scholiast of Aristophanes is a song or hymn praying for the ceasing of a
plague, or war, nay for the preventing of apparent hurt The original of Io
Graec. Trag
Scaliger has already found, Iao, and Io being contracted by the Greeks for
Iehova; Paean then come* from (...) to look, so that Io Paean is in force
Iehova Penoh LORD LOOK UPON US* (...) being a craft of the Devil to come as
near as possibly he may to God, so to bereave him of his dear honor, if he
could. The remnants of these words the Vide Sir Fr. Drake.
Symerons a people of the West Indies use, who in their fighting dance, and
leap, and sing (...) Pe^o, at this day. Mercury is hallowed by the name of (...)
(...), deemed to be the God whose favor could enrich Merchants and Tradesmen.
He is the God of craft, so by consequence he that is cunning to cheat may soon
grow rich, wherefore this God is termed A^stop. (...)* p. 2^0.
(...), Uery profitable, from (...), an augmenting word, and (...) to profit.
He had a statue erected to him in the Market place called A^stop. 304
(...). The entry of their houses was sacred to him, from which he is named
^aus. p. 20. l 35.
(...), as likewise (...) from (...), to turn, because he was set up behind
the door to keep away thieves, that were wont to lurk thereabout, and then
afterward commit their villainy. More of his names you may read in (...). 1
(...)
Aristoph. Schol.

CAP. III.
De Saturno, Vulcano, Neptuno, Mart, Hercule. (...).

S^urne was worshipped by the Athenians, witness the feasts kept in honor to
him called (...); witness a (...) p. (...) (...).
Temple which he had in Athens. Of his antiquity I cannot much affirm any
thing. He seems to have been of old, as I conjecture out of (...) p (...)
(...).
(...), Saturninae animae, put for dotage proverbially. Vulcan likewise had his
honor there, and a Temple, of which (...) 3^. n. 2^
Demosthenes; where was one of the Athenian prisons; some controversies in law
in it decided, as I gather out of (...)
Demosthenes. Neptune was an ancient Patron of this City, which he loved even
to strife. He was feared for security in navigation, hence (...)
(...). A^stop. p.
Mars also had his worship, and Temple, and Hercules too, who in a dream
appeared to Sophocles, revealing unto him the sacrilege Paus. p. ^. l. ^7.
of one who had stolen a golden cup out of his Temple* called therefore Mn^ or
Index Hrrcules, as De divinati^ (...)*
Tully. Neither were they contented with such a quantity, but canonized more
daily, as the sons of Tynd^ us, Castor and Pollux, naming them (...) Plut.
These. ^ (...). 25.
(...). For they who have a care and watch of any thing do diligently observe
it (...). For which Kings perhaps are called (...), as keepers of their people.
In Hipp^l. p. 5^.
The Scholiast of Euripides teaches us that (...) properly signifies a
Savior. So Pan is said to be (...), the Tutelar God of Cyllene. And Apollo in
(...). ^.
Homer. (...). The word is simply put for God in ^n A^. page ^* ^.
Aristophanes, (...) S^* p. (...)*
(...). To these may be put Harmodius and Aristogiton. Lycus. Theseus. Alon.
Hesychus. Aristomac^us the Phyfitian. Celeus and Metanira. And many more (of
whom see (...) (...) (...) (...).
Meursius) made of Men, as Silanion and Paerrha^ius that made the statue of
(...) (...) (...) (...)*
Tho^us.

CAP. IV.
De Minerva, C^rere and Proserpina, Ba^. Venere. (...)* dibus, Hecate, Iu^ne,
Promethe^, etc.

Minerva the especial deity of the Athenians, had the Festivals called
Panathenaea, of which you may fully read in (...) (...)
Meursius. Next to her Ceres and Proserpina, whose rites long maximis and
occultissimis ceraemoniis continentur* In Verrem. ^
says Cicero* were greatest and most hidden: therefore called mysteria from
(...) (...) (...).
(...), to hide; (...) (...) (...).
death and a curse lying on him who should disclose those abominable secrets.
See Meursius in his Cap. 7.
Eleusinia* of the initiation into these stews. They were of two sorts. Austop.
S^h. p 85.
Greater to Ceres, less to Proserpina. Bacchus also the son of Ceres had his
Temple allotted and a double tide holy to him. Dionysia Aust. p. 222.
parva and Idem. p. 123
Magna. Venus had her honor, and sacrifice in which they offered to her Clem.
Alex. p. 19.
money the price of an whore Vide Aesch. (...) Eumen, and S^h. Soph^ O^d Col*
Eumenides were first adored by Orestes after he escaped the Judgment at
Athens in Areopagus for killing his mother Clytemnestra. These by In Theogo
(...).
Hesiod are called Erinnyes, by the Athenians (...), the venerable Goddesses.
To these they offered drink offerings, l Paus. p. 27. l. 3.
without wine though at midnight, a custom peculiar to them alone, as In
Eumen* p. 275.
Aeschylus witnesses, though I am not ignorant that Aristop. p. 228.
Bacchus his feasts were kept in the night, whence he is called Nyctelius. But
the Tragoedian.

Loco ^tato.
(...)
(...).
Scholiast: (...). By In O^dipo* Col. p. 271.
Sophocles the manner of oblation is set down. First having clean hands and
pure, the worshipper ought to draw out of a running fountain water, and having
filled three cups with water and honey (hence termed Aeschylus (...) praed.
(...)) the mouths and ears of which are to be covered with the wool of a
young sheep, turning himself toward the East, he powered out some of two of
them* but the third wholly; then with both hands setting thrice nine branches of
Olive on the place where he cast his (...), he uttered his conceaved
supplications. Other sacrisices they had as shall be shortly spoken. Vide
Interp. Hor^n illud Diva trifor mis.
Hecate was worshipped by them in triviis, where three ways met, supposed to
be the Moon in heaven, Diana on earth, and Hecate below. Aristop. Sch. p. ^3.
To her the richer sort every new Moon made a feast in the cross ways,
setting bread and other provision* which the poor greedily fed on* and were so
ravenous after, that Page 64.
Penia in Aristophanes complains, that they snatched it, before it could be
laid down. Reference to this has (...), to eat the cates of Hecate, in In
Orat. (...) p. 693 ^. 59
Demosthenes, which he seems to object, as a sordid or wicked thing, Indeed
(...), which signifies one that privily takes away any of the sacrifices from
the Altar, imports sometimes impious, (...). Schol. In Nubes p. 176.
Aristoph. And yet the same Scholiast tells us that the needy sustained
themselves by the sacrifices. In Plut. 63.
(...). Iunoes rites were performed in great pomp with hair over their
shoulders and down the back, in a vesture that swept the ground, their arms
bedecked with glorious bracelets, their paces so minced, that Vide Schottum in
Proverb. Isaacum Casaub. in Athen. l. 12. c. 5. p. 38^.
(...), Iunonium incedere is to go stately. Prometheus was worshipped in a
kind of Torch-dance, or running with linkes or lamps, it may be in memorial
of the fire, which superstitiously they believed him to have stolen out of
heaven. To say more of their Gods were needless either for you to read, or me
to write. More they had, among whom Pan was of a latter making, introducted by
Cl. Alex. p. 22.
Philippides, and Plu^. A^st. p. 240 l. 30.
(...). Sphragitides Nymphae, after the Persian overthrow.

CAP. V.
(...). Phacasiani Dii.

THE Athenians before their doors erected statues which they called Vide
H^sychium and Dionysium Petavium in The mistium.
(...), because they were exposed to the Sun. Neither had they these alone,
but certain others sacred to Mercury, named from Hermes Hermae* Mercurial^.
The fashion of them was diverse. For first they were not (...), porrecto
veretro, but made after to that form by the Athenians, who received it from
the Pelasgi, as In Euterpe. p 48.
Herodotus. Neither did they want legs, until the Athenians made the^ (...),
according to In Attici^ p. 22. l. 14.
Pausanias. The manner was this. A face of Mercury set upon a pillar of four
corners. The head only and neck were shapen, and therefore it was called
truncus Hermes, S^t. 8. v. 52.
Iuvenal,

Nil nisi Cecropides, truncoque simillimus Hermae.
Nullo quippe alio vincis discrimine, quam quod
Illi marmoreum caput est, tua vivit imago.
For which reason likewise the Greeks name them Vide Vip^an. in Them. p. 3^2.
and G. Langbame (...) Notis ad Longinum. (...).
(...), without limbs. On the lower part of them were certain verses engraven,
containing the praises of some well deserving men; but the Hermae on which they
wrote the exploits of those that had merited, seem to me to have been set up
in that gallery, which from the number of these images was commonly known by
(...) the gallery of Mercurials. At the consecration of these they used some
ceremonies, and sacrificed alkinde of gruell, which was of no great
preparation; Because they would not stand long about it. Hence (...) may be
said to sacrifice with that which costs but little. Page 693.
Aristophanes. (...)* Schol. (...). in Pace. Now to the erecting of their
Images it will not beunseasonable to add something of the form of their Gods;
whom they made standing with their hands upward, as if they were more willing
to receive then bestow any thing. To which (...) (...). 4^.
Aristophanes alludes, saying, -- (...) Even the Gods you shall know by their
hands and statues. For when we pray them to give us some good thing, they stand
with their hands upward, as if they would send down nothing, but rather take
oblation. To tell you likewise that these Idols were clothed, is no news
doubtless to one meanly versed in the Greek antiquities. To say that they
wear shoes too, is probable, whence they are named Di^ Phaecasiani, from
(...), a kind of low shoes which the Athenians called (...), from (...), dust,
and (...), the foot, because they were near the ground. (...) says (...) 2*
11. p. 1^.
Clemens Alexandrinus. But more sure I am that they were pictured with them on
their ^r. S^t. ^. v* (...)
Iuvenal.

Hic aliquid praeclarum Euphranoris and Polycle^
Ph^casianorum vetera or nament a Deorum.
CAP. VI.
De Superstitione Atheniensium, and vaticiniis.

LOng since were the Athenians taxed by the Apostle for superstition, which
though it properly signifies Donat. (...) Ter. p. 6^.
a worshipping of the Gods too much, yet under it these follies are
comprehended. Purification after fearful dreams, in Ra^s p. 2^4 vide and
Aesch. in Persis.
Aristophanes (...). In which sense some understand Persius. Noctem flumine
purgare. Wearing of rings against witchcraft as a spell, called Aristop. Pl. p.
8^. ^.
(...). I^noph. (...) p. 49.
Spitting into their bosoms thrice at the sight of a mad man, or one troubled
with an Epilepsie. Of which also Theocritus, (...). I know not whether the
custom of our silly people have reference to this foppery* who use to spit at
the naming of the Devil. Certain it is that anciently they did spit in
defiance, hence (...) is put for (...) and (...) to contemn or set little by,
as the (...).
Scholiast of Sophocles on these words, (...) Washing with water the head as
often as he shall go into the streets (...); Charact.
Theophrastus. Anointing of stones, diverse it seems from those heaps sacred to
Mercury, termed (...). This has been of old. Done indeed as a token of
thankfulness by Gen* ^8. ^8.
Jacob in Bethel, where he took the stone that he put for his pillowes, and
set it up, and powered oil on the top of it, in his journey to Padan Aram.
Hens crowing, the bold entrance of a black dog into their houses, Serpents
seen (...), says Theophrastus, of which In Phor. Ac. 4. S^. 4.
Therence. Introiit in aedes ater alienus canis. Anguis per impluvium decidit
de tegulis. Gallina cecinit. Put to these a (...). Theoph.
Cator Weesel (the word signifies both) crossing his way, the Mouse eating his
salt bag. Not unlike them now adays, whose clothes the Rats or Mice shall
chance to eat, deemed not long after like to live by our ignorant, or that he
shall have great ill betide him. Add the avoiding of obsequies for fear of
pollution. Antiquity was of opinion that sacred persons were defiled with the
sight of the dead, as Chemnitius has observed, and (...)
Euripides brings in Diana speaking that it is not lawful for her to behold
dying Hippolytus. Nay the standing upon a grave was a great religion; (...).
Furthermore observing of days good and bad, of which (...)
Hesiod, (...), that one is a stepdame, another a mother. (...). (...).
Amazement at the Eclipse of the Sun, as also the ^Line
Moon; not knowing the reason, why she did loose her light, at that time,
when she was in her full luster. Buying of Medicines or enchanted stones for
the quicker delivery in childbirth, in Aristophanes. (...). Of the virtue I
speak naught. Lib 4. c. 11.
Boemus relates that in Darien in America the women eat an herb when they are
great with child which makes them to bring forth without pain. Join to this
the sneezing over the right shoulder, or the rightside, (...) (...) (...) l. 2
3.
(...). Observation of (...), or sudden storms, as the In A^h. p. 37^. and p.
4 24
Sch. of Aristophanes interprets it, snow, hail, or the like. (...)
Cutting off their hair, and sacrificing it to rivers, as Cephissus, Marking
the flight of the owl, whence came the proverb, (...)
(...), The Owl has fled. And (...) for good luck* The Owl being a token of
victory to the Athenians. Zenobius.
(...). They ever accounting it so since the war at Salamis, where the
Greeks seeing an Owl took courage and beat the Barbarians. Appendix
Uaticana. (...). Other madness of theirs was sleeping in the Aristop. pp. 44.
66. T. 438
Temple of Aesculapius, who were ill at ease, supposing the deity to give, or
show them a remedy, Petronius.
for which in gratulation they were wont to offer him a cock. If I mistake not.
What shall I say of ^lian. (...). l. 5. c. 1^.
putting him to death who should cut down an Oak or an Holme (so Ilex which
in Greek is (...) may be taken, I think it an Holme) in the Heroum; And
punishing Atarbes capitally who being distracted had slain a sparrow sacred to
Aesculapius? Thus far have we gone. Let us proceed to their vaticinations or
prophecyings. Aeschylus brings Prometheus on the stage, vaunting how first he
taught men Vid^ (...). page 32.
(...). All which were practiced among the Athenians, as you may read in (...).
mi^o.
Xenophon. (...), the interpretation of dreams, is a resolution of those
doubts which we conceive of things offered to our fancy in sleep, as that of
Hecuba dreaming that she should bring forth a firebrand; and that of Atossa
before the fall of her son Xerxes, whom she saw striving to yoke the
Barbarian and Greek woman, one of which overthrew him. This the ancients
termed (...), Aeschylus, ascribing much to the truth of them, supposing them
to be sent from a Deity -- (...). Iliad. 1.
Homer. The skill in them is (...), c A schy. Pro. p. 33.
(...) ((...)) to truly tell the event. Which was no small art, certain books
written of that subject. Eust. in Il. a p. 36.
(...) as Artemidorus his Onirocritica. (...), Soothsaying by birds when such
or such fly either before or behind him, at the right or left hand, to show
what it does prognosticate. Page 33.
Aeschylus. (...). It was formerly styled (...). T. 3. p. 25.
(...) which the mind does suggest to the opinion. It is put for any
divination in Greek writers, but most properly (...) which Nonnus (...). l. 5.
(...).
Telegonus is related to have found according to Nonnus, but according to Not.
hist. l 7 c. 56.
Pliny, Car, whence it is called Caria. (...), looking into the Liver or
entrals, like the Latins extispicium, observing the color of them, Aesch.
loco (...).
(...); as likewise the soundness, hence taken as a prodigy (...), in Page
357. (...).
Plutarch, the extremity of the liver (like the outmost parts of the vine
leaf, says I^idor) not to be seen, or rather that which they call the head,
Ovid, caesumque caput reperitur in extis. (...), in marking the flame of the
sacrifice burnt, Aesch. loco citato.
(...), the Tragoedian calls them, by which they could foretell events. More
doubtless had they ways of witchcraft, as the other Greeks. (...), as when
one shall meet you carrying such or such things, then this shall befall you,
Aeschylus terms them (...) Sch. (...). See Scaliger in Tibullum, on these
words Puer e triviis. The Scholiast of In Au. p. ^74
Aristophanes on (...), They made, quoth he, whom they met first as it were
tokens of good hap. Whence it may be came up the salutation, which In Oed. (...)
Sopho^les calls (...), wishing luck, as (...) among the Greeks, and the
Latins Ov^d. Fast.
Est o bonis avibus visus etc. (...) is put likewise for sneesing, or the
conjecturing at them. Sternutament^m being accounted a Deity by the Romans,
but sacred to Sch. Aristop. loco citato.
Ceres, as the Greeks, whence proceeded that (...), which we imitate in our
God help you, as often as we see any man so purging his head. Which not to have
proceeded from any deadly disease, is sufficiently evinced by Casaubon on
Athenaeus. (...), at the sight of a Mouse, Serpent, Cat, or the like in the
house, or when the oil cruse is dry, honey, wine, water is spent, to guess at
future things. Of this Nonnus in Na^.
Xenocrates wrote. (...), Palmistrie, when by the length of the hand, or lines
of the table, they can judge of freeness in housekeeping, of marriage and
posterity, of which Nonnus.
Helenus once left a monument. (...), gathered out of the shaking of the parts
of the body as the shoulder, thigh, or right eye, in which kind Posidonius was
an author exposed to the world. (...), as that wherein the Witch of Endor was
experienced, out of the lower parts of whose belly the Devil spoke. The first
that practiced this among the Athenians was Eurycles, hence they who are
possessed with this spirit of prophesying are called (...). Euryclitae as the
In V^sp* (...) (...).
Schol. of Aristoph. who calls this ar^ (...). p. 502.
(...), the divining of Eurycles. (...), where after solemn sacrifices they
were wont to call up the souls of the deceased, demanding of them what
afterward should befall. As De Mag^s Inf. l. 2. c. 11.
Wierus. And no wonder, for they held the spirits of their parents and kindred
for Gods, quibus sacrificabant k Daemonomamae l. 2. c 3
(sai^s Bodin) and ad quorum sepulchra comedebant, in quos scriptura invehens
ac detestans, inquit, and comederunt sacrificia mortuorum, to which they
sacrificed, and at whose sepulchers they fed, against whom the Scripture in
veighing and detesting speaks, And they ate the oblations of the dead. Of
this In Avib. P 613. a.
Aristophanes makes mention, and Lib. (...).
Homer in his Odysses. This is that which most properly is called (...) from
(...) lamentation, by Wierus termed dirae execrationes, Nonn in Naz.
for with great mourning they invocated (...), wicked Gods for the
accomplishment of their divelish designs. It may most fitly have the name of
Nigra Magia, Vide Bodin.
for so the Wisards divide them into the black and white Magic. (...), from
whence the word Magic is derived seems to have been found by the Vide Non.
Medes and Persians, whose Priests were called Magi, great Philosophers as In
Prooem.
Laertius is witness. This is supposed to be the good Magic. Nonnus.
(...), is a giving of philtrum, a medicine for the procurement of love, or
rather enraging of lust, by bewitching something and giving it to be eaten;
which to have power over swine is credibly reported. (...) Tricks with a pair
of sheeres and sieve, of which Theocritus. Vide Odyl
(...) To take council of an hatchet, taking it and laying it on a piece of
timber flatwaies, which did the feat by turning round. Like to which is that
naughty use of a key and Bible. (...) by the casting of the dice to ask the
number of wives, children, farms, etc. which answer to the quantity of the
chance. Vide Theocrit. in Phar.
(...) and (...) done by corn, Delrio Disqui Mag. l. 4, c. 2 q. 5. sec. 7
(...), by taking the letters of the name, as when two were to fight, and by
the value of them to judge the conquest, As they said of Hectors being overcome
by Achilles. (...), making a circle they divided it into four and twenty
parts, and on each part made a letter, and putting wheat upon the letters they
brought in a Cock, and observing from from what letters he t^oke up the grain,
they at last joined them together, and so knew their successors, husbands, etc.
(...), opening a book of Homer and by the first verse that they lighted upon to
divine, as that of the death of Soerates, who so foretold it, meeting with that
verse of Homer, which speaks of the arrival of Achilles within three days at
Thessaly. Wie^* de Mag^* Inf. l. 2. c. 1^*
Ft quoniam poemata pro vaticiniis, etc. and because poems were accounted
prophecies, as Poets prophets, they were most busy in them. Hence in public
causes had the Romans recourse to the Sibylline Oracles, and the private
Grecians to the verses of Homer. And that Sors was put for the writing of
Oracles, is manifest out of the words Sorts Delphicae, for foretelling or
divination. Vide Sch. A^st. in Plut.
I know the she Priest of Apollo being inspired with akinde of holy fury spoke
to those who asked counsel. Whence the word Aristid. T. 3. page 25.
(...) at this time read for Soothsaying, was anciently called (...) madness.
And yet that their cunning men had a kind of lottery, is as clear as day, the
In Hippol. p. 580.
Scholiast of Euripides testifying; done it seems in matters of question, so
(...) may intimate as much as to undergo trial. Predictions there were, In
Il. a. p. 36.
says Eustath, out of signs and wonders, as also of the noise that leaves
make when they are burned. To which some add (...) or divination by the air,
quoting for it Aristophanes in Nubibus, which I now remember not.

CAP. VII.
De Templis and Asylis.

THeir Churches were of two sorts; sacred to their Gods in Greek, (...), or
(...). And sacred to their Demigods most properly (...). But the word is
promiscuously used by the Tragoedians. Clemens Alexandrinus is of opinion that
the first original of their Temples was the erecting of an edifice to the
honor of the deceased. V^de p. ^.
(...). Cecrops buried in the Acropolis, Ericthonius in the Temple of Minerva
Polias, the daughters of Celeus in Eleusiis, etc. They were divided into two
parts, the sacred and profane, this called (...), the other (...). In Theop.
Charact.
Casaubon telsus that (...) was that holy water set at the door of the Temple,
with which every one that entered into the Temple besprinkled himself, or was
besprinkled by those that sacrificed; of which in the next Chapter. But others
have written that it stood at the entrance of the Adytum, into which it was not
lawful for any but the Priests to come. The In Ded. ^yrannum.
Schol. of Sophocles thus describes the Church. (...), quoth he, is the place
where the Altar stands. (...), the Altar on which they offered their oblations,
(...), where they placed the Idol which they worshipped; in ancient time a rude
table or stock, Protreptico p. 23.
(...) Clemens Alexandrinus calls it, as that of Juno Samia, afterward made in
the magistracy of Procles to be a statue. At first named* Idem.
(...), from the shaving of it; but when art began to be so expert as to make
it resemble a man, they termed it (...), from (...) mortal is, whose shape it
bare At the setting up thereof they used these ceremonies: That a woman neatly
trimmed and decked in a purple vesture, should bring on her head a pot of sodden
pulse, as beans, pease, and the like, which they sacrificed in thankfulness
for their first food, Schol. Arist. p. 115.
(...). For as much as I conceive out of Pollux, they prayed not where this was
consecrated, or did divine honors, but in the (...) or (...), the body of the
Church, framing, as may be gathered, their gesture toward it. Lib. 1. c. 1.
(...).
(...), etc. Furthermore belonging to their Temples there was a kind of
Vestry, in Greek (...) by some translated summum templum, as if it were at the
upper end. This seems to have been a Treasury both for the Church, and any
soever, who fearing the security of his wealth would commit it to the custody
of the Priest, as Laertius in vita. p. 122. vide ad ^um locum Cas.
Xenophon is reported to have done at the Temple of Diana in Ephesus. Martial
points at this when he says,

Templa vel ar^ano demens spoliaverat auro. So reverently did they esteem of
these houses of their Gods, that to do those offices of nature, I mean
venting of excrements too shamelesly seen among us, in the Churchyards, as I
may call them, was an abomination; punished severely by Pisistratus. For when
he had taken tribute of all that the Attick ground had brought forth, they so
hated him for that taxation as they made the (...) of the Temple of Apollo
Pythius a ^akes; which although forbidden never was redressed. And yet so
secretly was it done, that he could apprehend none save at last one stranger,
whom he caused to be whipped, with this proclamation, THAT BECAUSE HE
CONTEMNED THE EDICT HE SHOULD DIE. Hence to a man that soundly smarted for his
wickedness, they were wont proverbially to say, He had better have eased
himself in the Pytheum, or if there were more, in the plural number. (...).
Nay so honorable held they these Churches that to them they granted privilege
of Sanctuary, to which who should fly, might not from thence be drawn out
under a trespass upon religion. Of this kind was the Temple of Minerva, and
Theseus, the Altars of the Eumenides, and Mercy, V^d Ros^n.
whose, image they would not have erected any where in their City, although in
the midst thereof she had a Grove. Polyd. Virg. in Eurip. they are pres^nted
setting ^eere the Attar. T. ^. p 472.
The first Asylum among the Heathens is held to have been in Athens, built by
the Heraclide*

CAP. VIII.
De Sacerdotiis.

OF holy orders among them I conceive to have been diverse sorts, (...),
Parasiti, a word had in latter times in great dirision, exagitated almost in
every Comoedie, put for a shark or smell* seast, Terent.
Edax Parasitus. But held once in good esteem. For when they had set aside
such a parcel of ^and as they thought the revenewes thereof would suffice for
the sacrifices of such and such Gods, they chose certain men who should
receive or gather the harvest. Crates, (...). d S^un. A^t. Dialecti. apud
Athen. p. 235
With the incomes of this were the charges of those public sacrifices
defraied. Hence (...) Introitus magni, great yearly substance, is used for
great sacrifice in Avib. p. 581
Aristophanes. Scholiast. (...). Ceryces, the same signifies a crioe, but in
sacred functions a Minister, who slew and offered the victim. Apud Ath. l. 14.
p. 661.
Anthenio the Comoedian ascribes much honor to them, as if they had first
taught men to sees victuals, the flesh of sheep and oxen, while before they
devoured each other raw. They take their name from Vide Salm. ^n Inscrip^.
Pollucem. l. 8
Ceryx the son of Mercury and Pandrosus. But In Athen. lib. 15. c. 23.
Casaubon, (...). A praestantiore partemu^eris quod obibant, sic dicti. Idem
namque and hostias mactabant, adolebantque, etc. They in the time of divine
rites craved the silence of the people in these words, (...). Be whist all ye
people. Good words, for so Casaub. in Theophrast. p. 321.
(...) signifies, as well as to say naught* which Horace fitly interprets when
he sa^es, Mal^ ominatis Parcite verbis. When sacrifice was ended they dismissed
the congregation with these words (...). To which custom he unfitly looked who
derived the M^sse from M^ssa est, ite, better fetched in my mind by In lib.
quem (...) sc^psit de Sacrament.
Wechelius from Mas^h the Hebrew which availes as much as to praise, (...), the
same with M^ursius E^. 13
(...)), who intiated them who desired to be admitted into the society of the
superstitiously zealous (who after they were entered, were not under a year
complete, permitted to see their Babble) In Stel. 1. p. 63.
Schol. Naz. (...). Hierophantae so called from (...). opening the holy things.
(...). L. Mounta^. of Ch^chester
The learned Bishop, upon that place of Nazianzen, notes that Moses among the
Israelites was an Hierophanta, showing unto them what they were to do in those
sacred businesses. (...), they who lighted the fire of the Altar, whose office
made them safe in ware and danger. Hence of bloody fight we say (...),
N^ignifer quidem, there escaped not he that served at the Altar. (...). The
Priests in the Great Mysteries, ten in number. (...) whom In Alexaph. p. 14^.
Nicander calls (...) from Aristop. S^. p. 125.
(...). to be decent, because they kept the Temples clean, and swept them as
Ion in T. 2. (...). 62 1.
Euripides speaks. These were the (...), whose charge it was to preserve that
which was sound in the Church, and to see that repaired which went to ruin,
says In Politic.
Aristotle. And yet we read that the Parasiti did sometime look to the mending
of it. There being a law enacted that what they laid out should be restored
again. (...) in In Plut. p. ^1
Aristophanes likewise termed (...). These are the Priests ever waiting on the
Gods, (...). ^n Theoph.
whose prayers the ancient required at their sacrifices; out of which they had
a fee, (...) p. 481.
the trotters and skins, as the (...). p. 101
Ceryces the tongues. And indeed there was no necessity, For there being tables
in their Temples, as Casaubon teaches us, whereon they might lay their
oblations, (and perhaps sometimes depart) of which the Priest according to his
stomach did share. Well known to In Plut p 71
Aristop. who relates the like of the Priest of Aesculapius. It was requisite
to this function that they who undertook it should be sound both wind and
limb, they being asked (...) before their creation, whether they were whole in
every member: which ceremony to have been used among holy orders of latter
days is well known, their neighbonrs wives bearing record, says In Aristoph.
Christian^, that they have not taken into their societies quid mutilum. There
were moreover she Priests as the (...), in Demosthenes, and the (...) whom in
all things Antiq. l. 2. n. 3.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus compared to the vestall Nuns.

CAP. IX.
De Sacrificiis.

THE father of Philosophy is of opinion that Sacrifices first began after the
ancients had ended their harvest. For then being free from care, they found
time for mirth and iollitie. In which they offered their first fruits called
(...), from whence (...) is read generally to do any sacrifice. Neither does
(...) import less, For Vide schol. Eur. in Phaen. p. 291.
(...) signifies the bend, or great chest of the garnet, wherein they laid up
the harvest thresht and winnowed; (...), the first or beginning, as if when
they began to treasure up their store, they first of all liberally paid some
devotion to their Gods. The Attick oblations, even to Draco, were nothing else
but the earths beneficence, but before Solons age, burnt offering; who willed
in his laws, that they should be (...), chosen and selected d Plut p. 65. l.
26. they called their lea^e sacrifices (...). horns and hair, (...) if naught
else, Arist. p. 584.
sacrifices. The rites performed in them were not different from those in the
days of Homer, but somewhat reformed. It behoved them that would take in hand
these holy things to purify themselves some certain days before, Demosth.
pp. 400. 476.
(...), the number of them is not set down. I take (...) here to abstain from
carnal delights, Tibull. -Discedite ab aris Quo^ tulit hesterna gaudia nocte
Venus) To which purpose Theano being asked when it might be lawful for a
woman, from the company of a man to go to sacrifice; answered, from her own
at any time, but a stranger never. Being thus prepared they came and stood
round the Altar, having with them a basket in which was the knife hid (covered
with flower and salt, in In pace. p. 695.
Aristophanes (...), in (...). with these (...) the greeks ever began
sacrifice, the Romans Far. Dionys. H^he l. 2. n. 4.
Homer (...)) with which they cut the throat of the victime. Then they purified
the Altar going about it with the right hand toward it. Loco laud.
Aristophanes. (...). This lustration was made with meal and holy water
sprinkled thereon. This water is called Athen. l. 9. p. 409.
(...) in which they quenched a firebrand taken from the Altar; with which they
bedewed the standers by, accounting it a kind of clensing. (Hence Sophocles
O^d. Tyr.
(...) was forbidden him whom they took for a polluted and for lorne rogue.)
Then they cast some of the flower on them. And having thus expiated, they cried
out Aristoph. p.
(...); Who is here, to which they made reply, (...). Many and good. Then they
prayed. (...)
Homer. (...). Among the latter they spoke with a loud voice (...), before they
began. Let us pray. Supplications ended they drew the victime so as (if it were
to the Gods above) the head might look upwards, which (...).
Homer, (...). Eust. (...). If it were to the Heroes or Demigods, with his
throat downwards. Then they slew him and skinned him, and cutting out the
(...).
huck shinbones and hanch, they covered them with fat, which is called (...)
(hence the Gods of the heathen are deciphered by In Stel.
Nazianzen, (...), rejoicing in the fat) to the end that they might burn all
out in a great flame. Eustath. p. 101.(...)*
(...). For the Grecians accounted it unluckie if it did not so consume, and
thought that it was not (...): upon the (...) they cast small pieces of flesh
cut from every part of the beast, beginning with the shoulder (which is in
Greek (...)) hence this is called (...). The reason Eustathius gives, Loco laud.
(...), that they might seem to consume all, which the Athenians did not,
being commanded by law to carry some of the sacrifice home. By reason of which
iniunction, they did so strain curtesy of their Gods, that the illiberall or
niggardly sort of people would sell that which was left, and so make gain of
their devotion. Th. Charac. (...).
(...) says Theophrastus, Where Page 336.
Casaubon notes. Coxam fere offerebant, aut intestina, aut aliud non magnae rei
persaepe. They offered the hanch bone or the entrals, or somewhat of no great
worth. Where by entrals you are to understand the spleen, the liver, and the
heart, which Homer calls (...), for though the word be taken for the bowels,
yet it signifies the heart too, in which sense we say (...) a pusillanimous
man, and (...) a courageous, as the In Aiacem Lo^atium.
Scholiast of Sophocles teaches us, and so (...) the bowels of compassion.
These the ancients did divide among them at sacrifice to feed on, and
afterward cut out the rest to roast. For when they had finished their
devotions, they let the reins loose to all manner of voluptuousness,
gluttony, and drunkenness. For often times they left nothing of their sacrifice,
especially when they offered to Vesta, whence the proverb, (...), is to eat up
all, like the Roman Lari sacrificare. To say that publicly they begun to Uesta
were more then I could well prove; but that they did so is plain. In their
houses they had Altars, and so I supposed once (...) to be taken, but this was
done in Libaminibus, in their drink offerings, as he on Vide p. 582.
Aristophanes. As for their meat offerings it was required that they should be
Vide Pollucem. l. 1.
sound and without blemish, whether it were an ox, sheep, goat, swine, calfe:
to sacrifice they simply termed (...) which our Latins have interpreted fitly,
Facere. In Bucolici^
Virgil, cum faciam vitula. Whose poverty was so great that he could not
afford a sheep, or the like, they thought the Gods would be well pleased if he
offered Molas, which the Greeks call Casaub. in Theop. p. 237
(...) meal, which by the richer was mingled with oil and wine, as the Page
901. D
Scholiast of Aristoph. The more wealthy instead of this did cast frankincense
on the Altars. For the sacrifices of Pallas the tithes were set a part, as Page
3^8.
Demostenes. In their oblations the (...) or cooks gave the ^chol. Arist. p.
304.
10 part to the Prytanes. So (...), put for (...) where the Gods cannot have
their allowance. Schol. Aristop. on (...), etc.

CAP. X.
De Anno Attico.

THE ancient Greek year consisted of three hundred and sixty days, each
month consisting of thirty. Rude antiquity ignorant of celestial
contemplations, deeming the Moon to finish her course in that space. Which
according to De Doct. Temp. l. 1. c. 1.
Petavius seems false. Lunaris enim non fuit, sed eius menses tricenis diebus
constabant singuli. By which reckoning, had they not used intercalations, they
had soon found a maine difference in the times, when they ought to have
celebrated their festivals. They made therefore a Tetraeteris, in which when
they found seven days deficient, they supplied them by adding Negat Petitus
Miscel l. 8. p. 192. Petav. assirmat.
2 to every end of the year, called (...), M. Seldom. in Apparat. ad Graeco
Epoch Chro.
eo quod per illud biduum Athenae Magistratibus careban^, Because for those two
days Athens was without Magistrates. But the last of these four had but 359
days, besides the two (...), in respect to the Olympic games, ever kept in
the Olympic games, ever kept in the ^d est, The fifteenth day ^ De D. Tem. ^.
1. p. 4.
full moon, whieh could not have happened, had they not began the Tetraeteris
with a new Moon. Nevertheless the Sun and Moon appearing 14 days odds in
a Tetraeteris, they made every eighth year an interiection of one Month, that
this time being ended, the course might still return the same. This all Greece
observed, says Petavius, by the Athenians termed (...), by the people of Etis
an Olypiad. What kind of Lunary year was in use among the Grandsires of
Greece, is not truly known; by (...) Chr. p. 225. Petav. goes not so home. Lib*
de doct. Temp. 1. c. 6.
Petitus delivered to be of D: 347. every Month 29 D: except one, which like
our February had but 28 D: Every two years one Month was inserted, once of 29
D: another time of 28 D: But because in two years this each of these two
years severally taken was called ver tens, ^oyned annus magnus.
magnus annus surpassed the Moon 15 D: itaque Tetraeterida fecerunt. This
co^sisted of 1445 D: 723. and 722. make 1445. So many days 354. four times
doubled has, if ^ou please to adjoyne 29. Of this sort of calculation does he
understand Elem. Astro. c. 8. p. 36.
Geminus. (...). That must be fitly understood, quoth he, for they did number
the Months as if they were 30 D: when notwithstanding e Loco laud.
they had but 29. In Auct (...)
Petavius is otherwise conceited, who takes the Scholiast of Aristophanes in
that sense, as meaning 29 D: full ones, when indeed exactly taken according to
Loco cit^o
Geminus you may account 29.. 1/33. and In Arg Orat. contra And. p. 380.
Ulpian, (...)* 29. ^. And yet are we not destitute of authority, that a Month
was supputed 29 D. In Arat^ D^osem. p. 74.
Theon. (...). But that the fragments were left out, the words are plain,
(...). He means a day the space of a night and a day, for according to such
Months did they administer their civil affairs. And now it is in request
among many of the Greeks. But of this enough. Soon was the Tetraeteris found
faulty; therefore was made a Kalander of eight years, in which doubling eight
times the difference of the Sun, to wit, 11 D:. made up three Months,
inserted every third, fifth, and eighth year. But the scruples coming short in
sixteen years 3 D: they intercalated three. And seeing still they could not
make it even. Geminus p. 38. Whom I follow. Not ignorant that Meto^ was the
first that made the Cicle of 19. years. Hence (...). Met^ns year is put for a
long time proverbially*
Euctemon and Philippus made an Almanac for nineteen years, which by
Callippus was produced to 76. Months 940. of them 28. (...), says Geminus.
This was the progress of their reformation. But we must look back again and
consider that they counted their year two ways. First of Then were (...)
(...) months (...) (...) D. as (...) may see in (...). Aristop. A^h (...) p.
412. c.
CCCLX, as has been already spoken, next CCCLIIII, when they made the Months
interchangeably (...), full and deficient, that is, one 29. the other 30 days,
yet both Lunary. For that is proved even by the names of their days. The
first, wherein the Moon appeared new, called by a Synalaepha or contraction of
the words (...). The second (...). The eight (...), or half full: the full
(...). The last (...) (...). p. 32.
(...), because that in the days of Thales Milesius, (...) in (...)*
who was the author of that term, the Month had 30, and no more, but ended,
whence I suppose ^ux l. 1.
(...), signify the dead, the period of whose life has been come to. Though
Diogenian gives other reasons. And by the way we must not think, that they had
no regard to the course of the Sun; Peu^. Eccl. (...)* p* 215.
sed tamen ut annus fieret Solaris, etc. But nevertheless that the year might
be correspondent to the Sun, they put five days, called (...) epacted, to the
last Month Scirrophorion, for the supplying of the defect. And so the year had
365 D: which was the true and just measure. But he might have added, sometimes
366, by reason of that which Geminu^ acknowledges the Greeks to have reckoned,
although they accounted their Months but 30 D. This is that annus implicitus,
which In (...). p ^8.
Aratus styles (...). To this point the Greek Authors, telling the years by
seed time. In Antigon. p 213.
Sophocles -- (...). For the ancients, says In Aratum p. 78.
Theon, took the year three ways, either by the Sun; or seasons; as spring,
summer, autumn, winter, In O^dipo Tyran. p. 183
( Sophocles. (...) --) or thirdly by the Moon: whose irregularity Solon is
reported by In vita page ^6. l. 15.
Plutarch first to have marked. Observing therefore that she on the same day
overtooke and surpassed the Sun* Plutarch.
(...), he caused that to be called Laert. in vit*
(...) the old and new, because that remnant, which was before the conjunction,
he thought belonging to the precedent Month* and that remnant which was after
the conjunction, appertaining to the subsequent. (These pieces In Diosem. p.
125.
Aratus calls (...)) in which matter he is thought to have had Homer in sight,
who in his (...) page 164.
Odysses terms the thirtieth day, as Didymus expounds it, (...). Where we may
note that then they had no (...), but counted from one to twelve in the ordinal
numbers, used by Contra T^mocratem. p 446. n. 39*
Demosthenes in one Oration, (...) and (...). Then putting the lesser to the
greater they said (...), the third above ten, the fourth upon ten, and so to
twenty, Vide Plutarch. loco nuper lauda^.
But when at the one and twentieth day they perceaved the wane of the Moon to
be great, and the light almost lost, they changed the order and used (...),
etc. the tenth of the decrease, the ninth of the decrease, and so to the
twenty nine, (...), the second of the decrease, or from the end, going lower
in number still, as the splendour of the Moon was diminished, but the thirtieth
they called (...) for the cause above. Here likewise they take the reason why
the Month ending was (...) Vlpian (...) Them. p. 210.
(...). Because the days and Moons do as it were die, according to that of
Horace. Novaeque pergunt interire Lunae. Macrobius Sat. l. 1. c. 1^.
Macrobius, quid aliud nisi illum (...) dicit, cuius paulatim deficientis
supputatio in nomen desinit secuturi: and (...) illum, qui praecedit numerum
successurus priori in defectum meanti. (...) standing to supply the place of
the departing Month; fixed and still waiting until the Moon shall have
iournied to the completing and ending of the precedent time. Thus the last day
of our lives is said to stand. Virgil, Aeneid. 10. p. 330.
Stat sua cuique dies, as unto which we must pass through all the rest, and
once approach. Thus squared they their times and state matters to the Moon.
Hence read we (...), to count the Month as they do, who manage politic
businesses, or belonging to government. In which course they made their year
of CCCLIIII days, which divided into ten parts make ten times 35, which space
each A^gum. O^. (...) contra Androt. page 3^0.
(...) ruled in its turn, the four that abounded were called (...), in which
they chose Magistrates, being for that time destitute of them. The year thus
disposed, the Months must of necessity be (...) cavi and pleni, as Elemen. A
st. o^om. p. ^1
Geminus. (...). If a Month have 29 D: ^, two have 59. Because there fore the
two halfes might be made one whole, they so ordered it that now it should be
29 D. then 30 D: The Athenians counted their day from the setting c Macrob. l.
1. (...). (...) Pl^n. not h^st. l. 2. (...). 77.
of the sun on this day, until the going down of the next. In respect to
which In (...).
Nicander may be thought to say of noone sleep, -- (...). To take rest at the
beginning of the even. I know that the ancients wrought but six hours in the
day. Lib. 4. Ep 8.
Martial, sexta quies lassis septima finis erit. Which f In (...). ad (...).
Eustath affirms in his Commentary on Homer. And therefore Z. H. (...) I were
the notes of the 7. 8. 9. 10. hours, which joined unake (...), as if they
should have said to the Laborers, Rest. The beginning of the year was (...).
in A^hen. p. 931.
Hecatombaeon, July, the eight, says Chronol. ^clog.
Petitus. They ever accounting that to be the first Month. In which order I
have found them set down in a In 4o number. 24. p. 264.
Manuscript in our public Library, only M^macterion is to be put above
Pyanepsion.

Roman. Macedon. Hebrew, Egypt. Hellen. Athenian. (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...) (...). (...). (...). (...). (...)
(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...). (...).

In which table although Hecatombaeon be compared to the Julian. Month
January, yet it appears not that Hecatombaeon was ever so removed out of his
place, as Eclog. Chr. p. 214.
Petitus will have it, Epiphanius contradicting, of which by and by. Indeed
when the Christians in honor of their Easter began the year in April, they
called April Hecatombaeon, as Loco (...).
he himself testifies. But that Hecatombaeon was always the first Month is
not probable. For when the Athenians under the dominion of Alexander the
Great's successors changed the head of the year from July to the seventh of
October it is like that they began at Maemacterion according to this Ex M^.
Biblioth ^nae in 80. n. 8.
rule,

(...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...) (...). (...). (...). (...).
(...).
Vide (...) in Ep^phan. p. 138.
Certain it is that the same Atti^k Months are sometimes Lunary, and
sometimes not, but of 30 D: or Julian; When they are Lunary they have no sure
seat, but are now at this time, then at another. And this has been the reason
why the same Months have not been suited to ^he Julian, by writers. Vlpian on
Demosthenes parallels Hecatombaeon to Page 21.
January, and in the Oration for Ctesiphon, to March, and again to Page 163.
April. In Olynth. 3
March he calls Boedromion, which also he interpret^ Page 148.
June. Elaphebolion Page 140.
November, Page 167.
September (in the margin February) and Page 120.
December. Page 167.
Thargelion, April. Munychion January. Scirrophorion, March. Which errors are
cursorily noted by Eclog. Ch^. l. 1. c. 6. p. 213
Petit in part, to no great satisfaction. But when by the decree of Augustus
Caesar they were charged to conform their year to the Julian, they Vide Pe^av.
in Epiphan. page 139.
thus numbered.

Menses Attici. Menses Iuliani (...). March. (...). April. (...). May. (...).
June. (...). July. (...). August. (...). September. (...). October. (...).
November. (...). December. (...). January. (...). February.

But of this, so much only. We must handle their Lunarie year because
according to them were their feasts kept. From whence sometimes they would
count, as Aristoph. p. 800. c.
(...). So much and as long since the Bacchanals; speaking of the age of a
girl. For a more compendious way of comprehending their holy days view this
Almanac.

Hecatombaeon. July.
1 (...)* 2 (...). 3 (...). 4 (...). 5 (...). 6 (...). 7 (...). Kept in memory
of the return of (...) out of Creet, after he had slain the Minotaure. In
v^ta p. 12
Plutarch. The solemnity Metamorp. l. 7. F^b. 23. Vide (...) ^ligenter. (...)
erit operae pre^um.
Ovid seems to describe: Nullus Erecthidis fertur celebratior illo Illuxisse
dies, etc. the eight day of every Month was sacred to him. He had also a
festival called Theseia, in honor of gathering together the dispersed people
of Attica.
(...). 8 (...). 9 (...). 10 (...). 11 (...). 12 (...). Of these, as also of
the day, speaks Page 446. contra Timocratem.
Demostenes. Then did the Masters wait on their servants, as in the Roman
Saturnals. In Annalib. vide (...). Satur. l. 1. c. 7. versus finem
L. Accius. Maxima pars Graium Saturno, and maxim Athenae Consiciunt sa^ra,
quae Cronia esse iterantur ab illis, Cumque die^ celebrant, per agros, urbesque
fere omnes Exerc^nt epulis laeti, famulosque procurant Quisque suos. 13 (...).
14 (...). 15 Then were kept the (...) in memorial of their transmigration.
Plu^. p 8. l. 9. By some it is termed (...) Austop. page 700. Plut. ini^ Them.
l* 12.
(...). 16 (...). 17 (...). 18 (...). 19 (...). 20 (...). Hence was this Month
called by the ancient Athenians, (...); afterward Hecatombaeon, from (...),
sacrifices to Jupiter or Apollo, as some think with the blood of an hundred
beasts: For so were they pro^use in their sacrifices. Metamorph.
Ovid. Taurorum sanguine centum. 21 (...). 22 (...) 23 (...). 24 (...). 25
(...). 26 (...). 27* (...). In Il. (...). page 6.
The Scholiast of Homer says that Hecatombe may be used for sieve and twenty
beasts, whose feet make up the number of an hundred, (...). 28 (...). 29 (...)
To Minerva the protestresse of their city, as has been before said,
instituted by Theseus, as In (...) p. 8. (...).
Plutarch. (...) (...). At first they had the name (...), by Ericthonius, or
Orpheus. In the time of solemnization there were rare shows exhibited to the
people, such as horse races, wrestling, dancing in armor, called (...), from
Pyrrhus that invented it; Then carrying in procession the Peplus, or robe, in
which was wrought the fight of the Giants. All which you may read in In
Panathenae^s.
Meursius at large, and Page 140. 1^7. 180. 181 467. 580* 650 74^.
Aristophanes his Scholiast.

The second of this month is called (...), because it has but 29 days, and
so always in cavis.

Metagitnion. August.
From the sacrifices of Apollo, called (...).

1 (...). 2 3 4 (...). 5 6 7 (...). 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 (...)* 18 19 20
21* 22 23 24 25 26 (...). 27 28 29 30 ^ T^ this ^th came the (...) (...), (...)
Thescus overthrowing the Amazons. Plut. p. 9 or I^n help^ the Athe^s (...)
(...) (...)* (...) (...) (...) they made a cry. A^istophan. (...). Lucian.
(...). ^tim Quiritari hence ^lp c^e in.

* Boedromion September.
1 2 (...). When Pausanias and Aristides overthrew Mardonius, Xerxes his
General near Plataeae, a city of Baeotia, a Herodotus, b Justin. 3 4 5 (...)
Miltiades leader of the Attick forces got the upper hand of the Persians. In
which battle when Cynaegirus pursued the flying enemies to their ships, he
caught hold of one with his right hand, which lost, he made use of his left;
that cut off, he in token of his prowess spared not his teeth, to the
eternizing of his name for valor against his enemies. 6 (...). 7 8 9 (...). 10
11* (...)* 12 13 14* (...). 15 * In thankfulness for the delivery of Greece,
at what ^ Calhop. p. 234. b. lib. 3.
time Darius and his Fleet went homeward. Tom. 1. page 25^. see Plut. in
Aristi^ p. 241.
Aristides describes the joy at full, and the erecting of an Altar to Jupiter
that freed them. 16 17 18 19 'The greater in which they were made (...). Arist
p. page 247.
(...). or admitted to the sight of that they worshipped. The first day was
called (...), perhaps from the con^lux of the 20 21 22 * (...). people. The
second (...), Here I look on Meursiu ^r bre^ities ^ake but (...) you please to
read severally see Anstop^. (...) p. 5. 98. 131 1^8. 455. 5^* 647* 142 218.
227. 228 2^1. 233. 217 2^2. 264. 510 Aristid. T. 1* p. 32^. C^em. Alex in P^o.
trep. p. ^0.
because the Crier then warned them to go to the sea. The third day they
sacrificed a Barble, because it devoutes the sea hare, an enemy to man. The
fourth, two Oxen drew a basket representing Proserpine gathering fl^wres, which
women following cried (...)* Hail Ceres. The fifth they ran with torches.
Hence (...), and (...). The sixth Bacchus was carried in pomp. Hence is it
termed (...). The 7th day they exercised in feats of activity and he that
overcame had wheat give^ him. The 8th was Epidauria from Aesculapius his
coming from Epidaurus to Athens to be initiated. In the ninth they filled two
measures of corn, and setting one at East and the other at West, they powered
them out, one looking to heaven and crying (...), the other to the ground,
saying, (...). Thus Meursius. That day was (...). 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
The second of this Month was left out ever, says Sympos. Q ^. 9. q. 6. and
^l. (...). p. 331.
Plutarch, instead of which some are persuaded, the name only was omitted, as
(...) for (...), which was recompensed by (...), or (...) as in a defective
Month (...), for the twenty. Of this judgment is the ^b. de doct. Temp. 1.
c. 5. p. 11. D.
worthy Petavius.

M^ ^e. ^on (...) to be inserted here.
Pyanepsion. October.
This month took denomination from the feasts Pyanepsia. For mingling the
remainder of their food after their ariving, they put it into one pot, and
seething it, were loviall altogether at the same.

1 2 (...). 3 4 5 6. 7 (...). After that Theseus had buried his father, he paid
the vow made at Delos, to wit, if he returned safe from the death of the
Minotaure, he would sacrifice unto him a pot of sodden beans. Hence (...), as
it were, (...). For the antiques called beans (...). 8 9 10 11 (...). 12
(...). 13 14 (...). In Aulul^.
Plautus calls this festival vigilias Cereris, which the Attick Dames kept
most sober and chaste, strowing their beds with ^onyza for that purpose, it
being an enemy to lust. They prepared themselves with fasting, but after that
took their liquor freely. The number of days were three allotted, as some, or
four, as others. When Castellanus says that Ovid makes them nine, is false;
for that was the Mysteria, as we above have shown. They were done in honor to
Ceres, that gave laws first, as she is termed (...). Of these you may read
Page 611. 770. 782. 783. 819. 820 829.
Aristophanes and his Scholiast. 15 16 17 18 (...). 19 20 21 22* 23 24 25 *
(...). Kept this month. When the Parents brought their children to their
Tribes, to be enrolled* I suppose for fear of deceit in patrimonies. Then they
made merry for four days. The first was (...). The second (...)* The third
(...). The fourth, (...). In honor to Minerva. Graecia Fe^ l. 1.
Meursius teaches us that they were celebrated the 17 of this month, but
Petitus has thus placed them. 26 27 28 (...). 29 30 (...).
Maemacterion. November.
This month is to be placed before Pyanepsion, as I have above given notice,
but in this Almanac I follow Petitus, who so has set it, though much against
the opinion of other learned: as M. Seldom, Petavius and others, whom I would
have you Reader to accept as for most approved.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (...). 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 (...). Plutarch in the life
of Aristides, says that the Baeotians, nay and Greeks send yearly some to
sacrifice to the memory of those that died at Plataeae, and every five year
they have great pastimes, which Page 241.
he sets down the manner of. 18 19 20 21 22 23 (...). This month is derived
from Jupiter Maemactes: for I suppose they first found Gods, afterward
festivals to them. Not the months first, and then named the Gods from them. 24
25 26 27 28 29
Posideon. December.
From Neptune, who is Posidon. For the first day of this month was sacred to
him, as In Theop^. Char. (...).
Casaubon. Hence he thinks it to be called (...).

1 2 3 4 (...). 5 (...). Dionysia (...). Without the city, It seems when they
had gathered in vintage and pressed their grapes. (...). Then were they most
jocund, as may appear out of that. Like the voice of them that tread the wine
press, and in (...). v. 127.
Oppian. (...). On which words Pagina. 18.
Conradus Rittarshusius takes (...) to be January. 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 (...).
14 15 16 (...). A feast to Ceres. The day doubtful. Demosten. Page 743*
17 18 19 20 21 22 23 (...). 24 25 26 (...). 27 28 29 (...). 30
Gamelion. January.
1 From the marriages first made by Cecrops, of whom before we have spoken, and
more you may read in Tzetzes on Lycophron. That month wherein this people
coupled, hence is called Gamelion, from (...), nuptiae. It is sacred to Juno,
who by the Poets is called Pronuba and coniugalis, President of weddings and
the marriage bed. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 (...). 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 (...)* 19
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 (...). 29
Anthesterion. February.
1 2 (...). 3 4 5 (...). 6 7 8 9 10 11 (...). Kept in great mirth for three
days in Of this you may see Aristoph. p. 293. 417. 419. 422. 222.*
the honor of Bacchus. The first (...) from (...) the tubs, and (...), to
open, for at the broaching of their vessels they drunk stiffely. The second
(...) from Chus, a good capacious vessel. In this he that could drink down the
rest The day was called (...) likewise, but not in the sense spoken.
of his companions had a golden crown. The third (...), I suppose different
from (...). From this Festival the month is named. The twelfth of which
Dionysia in Limnis were kept, called (...) and (...). The 13th were acted
Comoedies, begun the 3d year of the 93 Olympiad, when Callias was Archon. But
after they were taught as In Terent. p. 289
Donat and In Demost. p. 184.
Vlpian witness, and Page 143.
Aristophanes, (...), says one. 12 13 14 15 (...). 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
(...). 25 26 27 28 29 30
Elaphebolion. March.
1 2 3 4 (...). 5 6 7 (...). 8 9 10 (...), 11 12 13 14 15 16 (...). Of these
Contra C^esiphont.
Aeschines makes mention, and you shall have them obvious every where in the
Greek Authors. 17 18 19 20 (...). 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 (...).
Munychion. April.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 (...). 11 12 13 (...). 14 15 16 (...). Munychia were
observed to Diana, who was so called, and had a Temple in Munychia, by Athens.
The month bears the name. In this month were the causes of strangers judged.
A vib. p. 609
Arist. Sc. To Jupiter Meilichius. The greatest day that the Attick route was
kept in. See of this Page 150. 174.
Aristophanes and Ismen. and Ism. l. 1.
Eustathius. 17 18 19 (...). 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 (...). 27 28 29 30
Thargelion. May.
1 2 3 4 5 (...). 6 (...). To Apollo and Diana; holding it to be their
nativitie. On this day did they expiate for the sins of the people. For they
were wont to nourish some base men, and of no account, at the public charge
whom in time of pestilence, or the like they sacrificed for the sins of the
city, Two in number, says the In Equites page 353.
Scholiast of Aristophanes, whence they were called (...): but more properly
(...) and (...), In Ranis.
Aristophanes. 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 (...). 16 17 18 (...). 19 20 (...). To
Diana, who by the Thracians is named (...)* 21 (...). Not much different from
the greater. See Meursius. 22 (...). 23 24 (...). Petitus places it on the 24
day, others will have it the 25. To Minerva, on which they take off the
ornaments of her statue, and wash it I suppose, Page 152.
Plutarch, (...). p. 257.
Xenophon. 26 27 28 29
Scirrophorion. June.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 (...). To Minerva* from (...), a Canopie, under
which her Priests did walk in pomp at that time: or from the statue of Minerva
found in Scirus. Page 497* 725.
Schol. Aristoph, 13 14 15 (...). It was not lawful anciently to kill an Ox:
wherefore when one had slain that beast eating the meal provided for the
sacrifice, he slew him and fled, in memory of which this day was kept.
Afterward they did mitigate the Law, and gave license to butcher an Ox, so
that he was not for the plough. To which Saty. ^10 v. 268.
Iuvenal may allude. Vt vetulus bos Qui domini culoris tenue and miserabile
collum Praebet* ab invito iam fastiditus aratro. 16 17 18 19 20 21 (...). 22 23
24 (...). 25 26 27 (...), etc. 28 Where Petitus makes the four first Tribes to
govern each his day, on those four that abounded above the year, Athen. Rep.
l. 2 c ^
Sigonius seems to agree, and In Nous ad Harpo^ra.
Maussacus approues 29 30 proves it. Neither is it misliked by (...) (...).
(...). l. 2* (...)
Petavius. (...) (...). (...). lib. 1.
Scaliger has falsely taught us other wise, who makes each Prytaneia to rule
36 days, which none ever are to have done, except the first four.
CAP. XI.
De Tragoedia, Satyrica, and Comoedia.

IT is taken for grant among the Ancients, that Homer, who lived V^d Can. Chr^.
ad G^* (...). Mar. At^nd. p. 97.
9 7 years before Christ, was the first that taught (...).
(...), to speak in Tragoedie; comprehending great and weighty matters in few
words and very concisely, being more large and using circumlocution in matters
of less consequence, which Hermogenes acknowledges to be the property of a
Tragoedian. This foundation being laid, following ages stilibuilt built (though
rudely) a structure to small perfection. Nam post idius tale tantumque
documentum, etc. says (...). de (...) and C^ (...). (...). Terentio.
Donat. For after that Homer by the Iliads had represented a Tragoedie, by the
Odysses a Comoedie, most ingenious imitators took those Poems and set them in
order, and divided them, which at that time were inconsideratly, and without
judgment written, impolisht* and in the first rudiments not so neat and trim,
as in process of time they were made. For Poesy was a great while in her
minority, and very rude, after the first publishing of plays. For we see
little or nothing of Marmo. Arundel* and ad ^a seld C^. (...) (...).
Susarion, the first Comoedian, worth our time: some few verses only, and so
few as may but witness such an Author. The original of the word Comoedie is
supposed to be taken from diverse reasons: First, because in their revelling,
kept in honor to Bacchus, they sung them, and so it may be derived from (...),
commessatio* (...).
(...), signifying (...), to sing basely (...) Naz. (...). ^ p. 106*
at the cup. Secondly from (...), sleep; because when any of the Attick husband
men had been injured, it was the custom (as before has been spoken) for the
party abused, to come in the night season into the streets, and with a loud
voice cry, such and such rejoice in wrong, and commit such outrages, though
there be Gods and Laws. And after that, proclaimed the parties name, who on
the morrow was sought out by the husband men and much shamed; by which these
wrongs were redressed. Thirdly from (...), a street, because when the old
Athenians would note a wicked man's life out to the world, meeting merrily in
the streets and high ways, they laid open every man's life and concealed not
his name, Donatus de Tra. and Com.
In vicos and compita ex omnibus locis laeti, alacresque veniebant: ibique cum
nominibus singulorum vitam publicabant. These verses were first sung Idem ibid.
in the green Meddowes, In Synop^ (...) (...) The (...).
about the beginning of the spring; When the husband men kept the festivals of
Bacchus the God of Wine, to whom they sacrificed a Goat, because his biting is
an enemy to the vine, the skin of which they took and sowed up close, filled
with wine, and anointed it with oil to make it slippery, and so hopped with
one leg upon it, making themselves laughter at the falls they often to^k. This
sport they call (...) from (...) a skin and (...), to leap, (...). p (...)
Aristophanes. (...)* Geor. 2. p. 71.
Uirgil has fitly set it out.

Non aliam ob culpam Baccho caper omnibus aris
Caeditur, and veteres ineunt proscennia ludi:
Praemiaque (...). (...) in (...)* ^d (...), interprets (...)
ingentes Pagos and compita circum
Theseidae posuere: atque inter pocula laeti
Mollibus in pratis unctos saliere per utres.
After Susarion, sprang up Thespis, the first that made Tragoedies, which by
Horace are termed Lachrymosa poemata, sad poems; because they represent humane
miseries, the misfortunes of Kings and great men especially, there being no
place for a poor man, but only to dance, as In (...) (...).
Arrian has observed. Which thing gave an occasion to (...) V^. (...)*
Socrates, when he saw the most worthy and rich put to death under the thirty
Tyrants to say to Antisthenes, does it not repent thee that we in our lives
never did some famous exploit? So in Tragoedies we ma^ke that such as Atreus,
Thyestes, and Agamemnon are slain; but what Poet was yet so impudent as to
bring a base fellow on the stage sacrificed? Not supernumerary is that of
Euripides for K. Archelaus, desiring that he would write a Tragoedie of him,
who prayed that nothing proper to a Tragoedie might happen to him; meaning
sorrow and lamentation. For so is (...) used, as (...).
(...) for joy and mirth, and glee conceits. The first Tragoedie that Thespis
taught was that of Alcestis repriving her husband from death by her own, as Ad
Marm* A^nd
Mr Seldom has coniectured. This Thespis was forbidden by Solon to act his
Tragoedies, as L^ert. in Solone. p. 40.
(...), a fruitless lying. Horace of him thus speaks.

Ignotum tragicae genus invenisse camaenae
Dicitur, and plaustris vexisse poemata Thespis.
Quae canerent agerentque peruncti foecibus ora.
Upon which words some have written that his Poems were so voluminous, that he
was constrained to bring them upon waines. But alas a poor conceit* In Horat^
Poe^cen.
Franciscus Lusininus Uticensis is of opinion that Thespis carried his scene
upon carres: and Acron; That the Chorus carried about in waines acted
Tragoedies. Chori plaustris circumducti Tragoedias agebant. Schol* Arist. p 142.
I avouch that at the first the Poets acted alone their own Fables; And to me
it seems a ground for to stand on, the Greek Authors by the word (...),
intimating a Poet. O^ (...), etc. The ancients, says In Demost. p. 40.
Vlpian, called the Poets Hypocritas actors, which we now term Tragoedi, such
as Euripides, Aristophanes, etc. The place in which they sung their Poems, was
a Scene upon a waine drawn in procession to the honor of their God Bacchus*
as among the Greeks the ^ (...) (...) page 107.
custom was, says the Scholiast of Nazianzen. Of the manner in those ancient
times, (...) p. 343.
Plutarch shall thus inform you. (...), etc. A pot of wine and a vine twig,
then one drawing a Goat, next another with a basket of figs, and last of all
the Phallus. In which solemnity the Poets in waines following the pomp, might
without control laugh, scorn, and deride any they met, says Antiq Romans ^7.
Dionysius Halicarnassaus; or were wont, as the Loco laud
Schol. of Nazian. to rail upon each other. whence (...), is as much as to
convitiate impudently, (though in a good sense sometimes Hermog. Meth. de
Eloqu^, c. ^* p 519.
to celebrate the pomp, or go in procession in honor to the festival) and
Them. pro Coron. p. (...).
(...)* a scandal or reproach. (...). Whence likewise came the Greek proverb,
Schol. Aust. p. 142.
(...) tanquam ex plaustro loqui, and Vlp^an. in loc. (...). Them.
(...), tanquam ex plaustro convitiari, to give reins to the tongue, to be
free in abuse. Which that they might do the better without shame, or blushing,
sometimes would they anoint their faces amurca, olci face, with the dregs of
oil, says Donat, or of wine (for so I interpret (...)) from which Poets by
Nubibus p. 141.
Aristophanes are called (...). Horace -- Peruncti^foecibus ora. Sometimes
would they put on vizards, Vlp^an. (...) Them p. 254
which least they should hurt the head, were defended from the skin with a
woollen cap, named (...). A word elegantly used by De fal^a (...)*
Demosthenes, in a Metaphor drawn from the liberty and impunitie of the
persons that wore it. (...). Think not to escape scot-free for such villainy,
though you get a pileum on your head. We may apply it in threatening to any
slanderer, of whom we surely intend to be revenged. But I seem to forget the
Poet, while I speak of the stage, I will therefore return to him. Thespis, as
I said, was the first that invented Tragoedies; so called, as Donat tells,
because (least there should be rewards wanting, by which good wits might be
stirred up to write, and men encouraged to get them ^nable voices ad dulcedinem
commendationis) they gave the Actors a Goat. Caper (...), pro dono his dabatur.
(...) is a Goat, and (...) a song. Horace, Carmine qui Tragico vilem certavit
ob hircum. Before that time some say that Epigenes the Sicyonian made
Tragoedies, but the most received opinion is this which Horace has set down
of Thespis. Before him there was no art of poesy Tragical, but at their
festivals, when they ascribed all their mirth and delight to their Gods, they
did it especially to Bacchus (and so afterward, when Actors are called (...),
and (...) simply by Orat. (...). p. 242
Demosthenes, by Donat Artifices. The word is used for Iuglers, and such as
Hokus Pokus in (...).
Theophrastus) they would feast, and afterward scoff and deride each other,
which grew afterward a part of their solemnity. They would moreover dance at
rude Music, and from thence suppose they the Chorus to have sprung up. They
would likewise cast forth (...), as they term them, in Georg. 2.
Virgils language, versus incomptos, Casaub. de S^t. Poesi. l. 1.
Numeros innumeros ^o temporc fundi solitos and fine art. For they had of old
but two sorts of verses, Heroicks, in which they sung the praise of Gods and
Noble men, and from this in a short time, with small care grew a Tragoedie; the
other sort was Iambicks as toying and laseivious as the Phallica, but biting
too and from hence came a Comoedie. At first small was the difference between
a Tragoedie and Comoedie, ^asaub. ib.
constat sane, primis temporibus ignoratum fuisse discrimen inter Tragoediam
and Com^diam, and the reason is, because even Tragoedies had their wantonness
and petulancy. At first they sung in honor to Bacchus D^thyrambicks, and
afterward neglecting him they praised their Demigods, which when the people
saw they cried down, with (...), whence our proverbiall adverb is fitly used
(...), for nothing to the purpose. But to give content to the people, the
Satyrs did (...). But after that, when a Tragoedie took state they excluded
the Satyrs, and were only for sad and serious persons; by which mournful
poems the people were wont to be cast down, sympathizing with the person
represented, therefore to cheer them a Chorus of wanton Satyrs were brought
in by Thespis as (...)
Horace.

Mox etiam agrestes Satyros nudavit, and asper
Incolumi gravitate, iocum tentavit, eo quod
(...) erat and grata novitate morandus
Spectator, functusque sacris, and potus and exlex.
In a Satyrick play, Satyrs have a Chorus place, or else the persons are
Satyrick and ridiculous, and for the easing of the minds of the spectators,
they would bring in Satyrs for sports sake; and many of their Tragoedies had
some mixture of Satyrick sport, says P 1^9 de (...) Poes^.
Casaubon. Fuisse aliquando pluribus Tragicis Dramatis interjectas Satyricas
fabulas. Of this I say Thespis was the first inventer, who likewise to ease the
Chorus ( L^eit. p. 220
for that acted only) brought one actor upon the stage, to whom Aeschylus added
one, and Sophocles another, so the number was three, Aeschylus's is (...),
Sophocles his (...), a word put for an obscure and base fellow in 184.
Demosthenes, Vlpian, (...), speaking of Aeschines, if I remember. Tully calls
them Actors secundaris and tertiarum partium. In divin^t.
Ut in actoribus Graecis fieri videmus, s^pe illum qui secundarum and tertiarum
partium, cum possit aliquanto clarius dicere, quam ipse primarum, multum
summittere, ut ille princeps quam maxim excellat. But let me speak what I
have to say of a Tragoedie. Plutarch. (...) vita X ^het. p. 452 B.
None was permitted once to act Aeschylus, Euripides, or Sophocles his
Tragoedies, but they were to be recited by the Scribe, that the Actors might
(as I conceive) repeat them. (...). And to this purpose by a law of Lycurgus
the Orator were they commanded to be transcribed, and kept under custody
(...). Yet the Iuxta (...)
Author of the life of Aeschylus writes, that the people made a decree, that he
should receive such a sum of gold, that would (...) the plai^s of Aeschylus
after his death. I put the word (...), docere. Because Tragoedians as well as
the Comoedians were said (...), to labor in teaching the people. And for this
end did the ancients lay out so much money upon their Theaters. Heinsius Poleg
ad A^ Sacrum.
Sed immane quos quantosque sumptus, i^ Theatra, in Comoediarum ac Tragoediarum
repraesentationem fecerit antiquitas. Cum non mores tantum ab utrisque
emendari, ac prudentiam conferri, sed and scripta antiquissima and formas
Reipublicae, ac vitam magistratuum, cum summo spectatorum fructu, in Comoedia
examinari, factiones componi, ac gravissima subinde publico suppeditari
crederent consilia. Not unfitly therefore did the Poet reply to the people that
carped at him in the Theater. I came hither to teach you, not to be taught by
you. Hence of a Tragoedie or Comoedie the Greek writers say, (...) Dip. l. 6.
page 2^8. vide Ca^.
(...), docetur fabula, and (...), docere, as sometime (...), as you may see in
Page 270.
Athenaeus. The following Poets did not always represent their own Fables,
but oft-times their predecessors; so says Lib. 10.
Quintilian, the people permitted the works of Aeschylus to be dealt with,
because in many places his verses were not set in order. He brought great
grace to the stage, and first taught (...), the painting of the Scenes; which
some think Horace to aim at, when he says, Modicis intravit pulpita cignis.
Which because it was perfected by Sophocles, is thought (nay spoken
affirmatively by some) to have been invented by him. Sophocles indeed did
(...), bring in many new things. such as leaving out the action of the Poet
(for before the Poet himself acted) by reason of the badnesse of his own
voice; he found out white shoes, which the Actors and Dancers wore; he made
the number of Dancers fifteen, before but twelve; he fitted likewise his
Tragoedies to the natures of the Actors, etc. but that he invented (...) I
cannot find. Somewhat likewise was added by Euripides: T. Magister.
as to set out the Argument of the Fable in the beginning of the Tragoedie, as
you may observe; leading the Auditor, as it were, by the hand to the last and
principal point of that one action which he would represent, which by the
glory of our nation, In the de^ence of Poesy.
S^ Philip Sidney, is not past by, as frivolous, without noting. These three
were the Princes of Tragic style, who exhibited to the People every year at
some certain solemnities their Poems, striving who should get the victory by
the approbation of Judges, chosen for that purpose, called Heinsius in Proleg.
ad A^ (...).
(...), and (...) (...). C^esiph
(...); Ten in number, think some, at first, gathering out of Plutarch, in
the life of Cimon, authority for it. Because when he had brought the Relics
of Theseus out of Scyrus, Aphepsion the Archon, in gratulation to him, chose
not the Judges as soon as the Theater was filled, and spectators placed; but
presently after Cimon entered the Theater with nine more of his fellow
Captains, of each Tribe one, after accustomed sacrifice he swore them Judges,
who gave the victory to Sophocles, but then young; for which Aeschylus grieving
went into Sicilie, where he died, and was buried near P^ot. (...) p. 352. l 39
Gelas. But out of this place we cannot prove that the number of these Critic
Judges was always Ten. This we acknowledge done in testimony of high
acceptance of Cimons service. And yet in judgment upon Tragoedians, the
number might be so great. For there seems to be a difference between the
Judges of Tragoedies and Comoedies. The number of Tragic Judges, grant we
happily to be such as we speak; the power incontrolable, as from whom there was
no appeal to others. Heinsius loco (...)
Cum neque provocatio ab iis ^sset, neque de quibus illi iudicarent,
magistratus caeteri sententiam pronunciarent. The Comic Judges were in number
but five, from whence came the Greek proverb, Z^nobius.
(...). sub quinque Iudicibus lis est. The A^ Aves p. 562.
Scholiast of Aristophanes speaks somewhat uncertain. Judges, quoth he, pass
censures upon the Comoedians, and they who had five voices were happy. Those
wereall. For if there had been ten of them too, it would have made nothing
to the Poets felicity to have had equal voices. For the odd gave a great
stroke. Hence wishes the Chorus in the behalf of the Poet* (...), to be
Victor by one voice only. Another difference is that, whereas the Tragic
Judges had free liberty of suffrages beyond the power of the people, the Comic
had not: For when Aristophanes taught his (...), they so much took the people,
that they applauded the Poet, cried him up Conqueror, (...), says Var. H. l.
2.
Aelian and commanded the Judges to write Aristophanes uppermost (as the
fashion was, which Avib. p. 562.
Aristophanes calls (...), the most excellent first, the next to him second, and
next to him third (which was no small praise, according to that of Quintilian,
as I remember, Honest^m est in secund is tertii^ve consistere) and no other.
For which cause I suppose the Poets before reciting, were wont to sacrifice,
and pray for the favor of the Judges and spectatours. (...).
Aristophan.

(...) (...) -- Where the Scholiast interpret^ (...) truly as it is to be
understood, (...), to supplicate. And good reason. For if they pleased not the
people in reciting, they were overwhelmed with stones. To which use (...)
Aristophanes points. saying -- (...); nay sometime would they hiss them,
which they term (...) and (...), sometime stamp them out of the Theater, which
they call (...)* by (...).
Pollux interpreted (...). Another difference is that (...) contra ^siph. p 9^.
the Comic Judges were punished if they judged not right, the Tragic not so.
And for these reasons have ^ome conjectured, nay positiuely written, that their
Judges were of two sorts, old and new, in which matter, if there be place for a
conjecture, mine is, that they confounded both, making no odds between the
Critic Judges of Tragoedies and Comoedies. But of this, Reader, you may
determine as your Authors shall afford authority. Before Judges, as I said, the
Poets in emulation presented their labors, and they who in their opinion lost
the day, were said * (...), by (...).
Casaubon interpreted non stare. The time of exhibiting their Tragoedies, were
the holy days of Bacchus called Dionysia in agris, or Lenaea, in the month
Posideon, on the Anthesteria, or Dionysia in Limnis, in the (...) Anthesterion,
on Dionysia in urbe in the month Elaphebolion, to which I find added the
Panathenaea by Thrasylus in (...).
Laertius, which some deny, yet the same write that when Sophocles exhibited
but one, it was at this festival. I say but one, because it was a custom
among the Poets of ancient days to entertain their people with more plays
then one. Mos autem Tragicorum Graecorum fuit Athenis, ut modo singulas
committerent fabulas, modo plures, says De (...) (...) (...) p. (...).
Casaubon: Sometime in the same year three, and then was it called (...);
sometime four, and then they styled it (...), (...) (...) (...).
(...). Whereof, says mine Author, the fourth was a Satyricall play, the three
other now treating of the fortunes of one and the same man, as those of
Aeschylus, named therefore Orestia; to wit. (...). Which are all extant; the
fourth was Proteus Satyricus. At other times they were not of the same subject,
as that of Euripides. Medea. Philoctetes. Dictys. The fourth was (...), says
the Author of the argument to Medea. Where the interpreter seems to me not to
reach to the expression of the Greek word (...); Messores, Satyros; he ought to
have rendered it thus, Messores, Drama Satyricum. For that the word bears this
sense is sufficiently dilucidated by L^b lauda^
Casaubon. That the greatest task of action lay on the Chorus, is as apparent
as the Sun at noone. The number of them in Comoedies were twenty four, and
six iuga (each iugum consisting of four; but (...) four, each (...) six men)
in Tragoedies fifty, until the time of Aeschyius his Eumenides, the number of
which so ^ed the people, Author (...) (...).
that the children and younger sort fainted, and the women suffered abortion;
for which reason, says Pollux, the number was lessened (which some deny) by
law. They were by that Act brought to fifteen, five iuga: I say iuga, because
they were divided into (...), and (...) was when the Chorus entered by three,
and then it was called (...), by file. (...), when they came on the stage in
rank five at a time; and this they term (...). Sometime one of them entered
alone, which they say (...). Of interlocutors the ancients for the most part
never had above three; but if a fourth spoke, that they named (...); and if the
Chorus supplied the part of a fourth actor, it was styled (...). To speak of
the several verses of Tragoedies, is actum agere: and I had rather speak of
the action, then the art in composing and yet not much, only this of their
motions, termed (...) and (...), says the Scholiast of Pindar, is a turning
from the right hand to the left, in analogy to the motion of the universe
(...), from the East to the West; because Homer calls the East the right hand,
the West the left: Contrary to the Hebrews, who term the South (...), which
signifies the right hand, and the North they counted the left. (...) was a
turning from the West to the East, that is from the left hand to the right, as
the Planets move. Another posture they had in their Epodes, for (if it be so in
Tragoedies, as in Lyrick Music, which I believe) to express the immobility of
the earth they stood still. They used Epodes for the most part at the end of
the Acts, when the players avoided the stage. Thus much of Tragoedies; the
authors of which were highly of old esteemed of; insomuch as after the dismal
discomfeit of the Plut. in fine Vitae Niciae.
Athenians in Sicelie, they were relieved, who could repeat somewhat of
Euripides. Nay, by a law made by Plut in vit. x. Resp. Paus. (...). p. 18.
Lycurgus, and established in Athens, Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides had
statues erected in brass for the continuation of their memory. After
Tragoedies had proceeded to perfection, Comoedies were with great applause
taught, as De art Poetica.
Horace,

Successit vetus his Comoedia, non sine multa Laud -- He says, vetus
Comoedia, because a Comoedy was divided into three, or if you please so to
speak, two sorts, the Old and New. I said three sorts, because Grammat. (...).
the old was different from it self. The meaning is, that the old Comoedie, of
which Susarion (by some named ^annyrion,) was author, tended only to laughter,
being without order and decency. For the Chorus now walking, now dancing about
the smoking Altars, sung simplex carmen, some naked verse, says Donat. Which
by Cratinus was redressed; for he ordained three Actors, and mingled with his
sport, profit, I mean for instruction. For under the Democracie it was lawful
to exagitate and propose for a laughing stock Captains and corrupt Judges,
Citizens given to bribery, and such as lead a dissolute life, naming the men
upon the stage and fitting the Actor^ with vizards, bearing the shape of those
whom they intended to deride. But as the state grew to an Oligarchie, that
license was taken away, Eupolis being cast into the sea by those, against whom
he wrote his Comoedie Baptae, and so drowned. Nay, there was a law enacted not
Hermog. (...). p. 76.
(...), to name any whom they wrote the Comoedie of. Of which Horace,

* Sed in vitium libertas excidit, and vim
Dignam lege regi. Lex est accepta, Chorusque
Turpiter obticuit sublato iure nocendi.
But when Alexander of Macedon grew potent and a terror to Greece, the Poets
fearing least any of their abusiue wi^ might displease the great Macedonian,
they changed the Argument of their plays, and instead of abusing states and
people, they fell upon ancient Poets, or some part of History not truly
written, personating the Actors so as to be most ridiculous: Donat. Ge^ ad
omnes ^nes qui medioc^bus fortunis agunt* etc.
sometimes scoffing on the stage at mean men, and this they termed (...), the
new Comoedie. But afterward it was a piece of the Athenian policy to forbid
that the people should be tossed on the stage, unless they would themselves,
says Athen. Rep.
Xenophon; knowing that none were wont to be brought thither but* the wealthier
sort, (...). Some are of opinion that no Player came on the stage until
thirty or forty; I dispute not the matter; sure I am that Sophocles taught
his first Tragoedie at twenty eight, in which doubtless himself came on the
stage. It being among the Athenians no disgrace* as the Romans accounted it, to
appear there. Praefatione ad vitas. p. 2.
Aemilius Probus. In scenam vero prodire, and populo esse spectaculo nemini in
eisdem gentibus (Graecis) fuisse turpitudini: quae omnia apud nos partim
infamia, partim humilia, atque ab honestate remota, ponuntur. The place where
the people beheld these plays and pastimes was in the market place* (...).
(...). (...). l. 4 c. ult.
where they nailed scaffolds to a black *poplar tree. For in ancient time they
had no Theater of stone, only of wood which they call (...). (...). (...).
Aristophan.

-- (...)
(...) --
These were built by some, who upon some consideration of money admitted any to
a seat, named therefore (...) in (...). p. 245.
(...). Once it seems places were not hired. But there grew great enormities
and abuses. For striving to get places, there rose wrangling and brawles, and
fights; wherefore the Attick Senate ordained that each place should be hired
for two oboli (in the Consulship of Diophantus, a Drachme, say some, whence
rose the Proverb, (...).
(...); because at the establishing of it, there fell hail) This money they
called (...), from (...): because with it they did (...), buy a seat to behold
the show exhibited. Now because the poor people had not to give, and so were
deprived of the spectacle, Pericles desiring to be popular, made a law that
they should receive out of the Cities revenues two oboli each man. (...). Leo^.
p. 617. n. (...). 51.
For the right of exacting which money, they were to produce the authority of
the Lexiarchicall Rolls, as appears out of Demosthenes. For the distribution
of this were certain officers appointed, named (...). But afterward
Apollodorus strove that in war and public necessity, these ^ummes might be
employed in military affairs, but he endeavored in vain; Eubulus in
^lattery to the people, enacting it capital for any that should attempt that
which Apollodorus did; Which makes (...). 1. p. (...).
Demosthenes desist, willing, yet not daring to persuade to convert the money
to the use of the Army. But see the folly of them! (...) apud Plut. Mor. p.
421.
For they spent as much on these sports as in obtaining the Masterie and
liberty of Greece. And the end was miserable: for they became (...), and so put
their necks under the Macedonian yoke. Lib. 6. fine.
Justin of the death of Epaminondas. Siquidem amisso, quem aemulari
consueverant, in segnitiem torporemque resoluti, non ut olim in classem
exercitusque, sed in dies fest^s, apparatusque ludorum, redditus publicos
effundunt: and cum auctoribus nobilissimis, (...) ^atra celebrant, frequentius
scenam, quam castra visentes. ^ficatores Oratoresque meliores, quam duces
laudantes. Tunc vectigal publicum, quo ante milites and remiges alebantur, cum
urbano populo dividi c^ptum est. Quibus rebus effectum est, (...) inter otia
Graecorum, sordidum and obscurum an^ea Ma^edonum nomen emergeret, etc. Of the
Theater I will say little, as also of the stage: Only that the places in the
Theater were not promis^uous. For there was a distinction between the
Senators and younger sort. The Senators was named (...). p. 578.
(...) among which it is probable the Judges had the first place, as (...). 4.
(...) / 1^. p. 202.
Pollux. The seats for the youth were called (...). One part of the stage was
Orchestra, in which was (...), either a Tribunal or an Altar. That upon all
their stages there was an Altar sacred to Bacchus, is apparent out of Donat: he
says it stood on one side of the stage, before the doors, Pollux: who names
it (...). There was moreover a Table called (...), on which before the time of
Thespis some body ascending in the Poets place, did answer the Chorus. De
Musica. p. 441.
Plutarch thinks (...) to be derived from (...), because that before the
building of Theaters the ancients embracing Music only for institution of
youth and praise of their Gods, sung the commendation of good men, and honor
of their Deities in Temples.

LIBER TERTIVS.
CAP. 1.
De Legum latoribus Atticis. (...). De sanciendis Legibus.

AS Lib. 2, p. 27
Justin has been too forward in relating the mutation of the Athenian
government, passing by the perpetual and decennal Consuls, and naming only the
yearly: so has he erred in the original of their Laws, making Solon the
father of them. But it seems otherwise. For, as Arist. Plut. (...). 67.
Gerardus has observed, Theseus gave Laws to the Athenians. And In Thesco p.
8. l. 2.
Plutarch witnesses, that when he congregated the Attick people, and
constituted a Democracie, he reserved only to himself the government of war
and custody of the Laws. (...). Add to this, that before the knowledge of
letters and writing, it was a custom among the ancients to sing their Laws,
least they might forget them, used in the days of Problem. (...). (...). 189.
b.
Aristotle by the Agathyrs^, a people near to the Seythians. Whence afterward
the rules of Music, for the true keeping of time, singing, and playing, are
supposed to be called (...). Neither may it be thought otherwise, because all
the notes of the Vide (...) (...) (...).
Lydian, Hypolydian, etc. Dorick, Hypodorick, etc. Phrygian, Hupophrygian,
^onick, etc. songs were distinguished by the Alphabet. Yet (...).
Plutarch is of opinion, that they derived the word from those bounds, which
the Musicians of old prescribed, for the tuning of voices or instruments, least
they might be confounded; and therefore he calls it (...). (...).
Idem. (...). The Greeks, says (...).
C^cero, think the cause of this word, ius suum cuique tribuendo, intimating
(...), which signifies to distribute, because the Law gives every man his due.
Thus see we, that there were Laws of yore, let (...).
Justin say, Nullae civitati leges tunc ^rant, quia libido regum pro legibus
habebatur; That the City was without Law, because the wills of Kings were
Laws. In succeeding ages, and before Solon too, Draco gave Laws, living about
the three (...) (...). (...). (...).
hundred and ninth Olympiad. His Acts, says (...).
Aelian, were called (...). Now (...), by (...). (...). (...).
Vlpian is interpreted (...). A Law giving in precept how to make a Law. And
yet (...)
Aristotle calls them (...), giving them this commendation, that they are not
worth remembrance, but for their great severity. Which gave occasion to (...).
li. (...). l. (...). c. 44.
Herodicus to say, that they were not the Laws of man, (...), in a double
sense of the word, which is also put for a Dragon. And Plut. in (...). p. 6^.
l. 2
Demades, that they were not written with black, but blood. For he punished
every peccadillo almost with death, those that were convicted of idleness, or
stealing of pothearbs, alike the sacrilegious and man-slayers. Wherefore were
they made of none effect by Solon. ^or he abrogated all, except those which
concerned murder, entitled (...). p. ^0.
(...). Him succeeded His (...) (...) 100 (...), says Plutarch. in strength.
In Solone p. 66. and afterward by little and little decayed. (...). Var. (...)*
l 2. c. 22. If any (...) against them, he had c^rpo rall punishment.
Solon, a man so well tempered, and equal betwixt the Commons and the Peers,
that he was beloved of both, having still a care, least while he should side
with one, he might displease the other. Whom, for his uprightness, (...).
Iuvenal styles Iustum, and for the care of the Republique, which (...) (...)
(...).
Demosthenes averres he had in all his Laws, (...). 190.
Aristophanes terms, (...), a lover of the people. In (...).
Plato brings him learning his Laws from a Barbarian: And In (...) (...) 6. 1.
31
Plutarch tells us that he traveled after wards into Egypt. But it seems by
L^b. 22.
Ammianus Marcellinus, that in the making of his Laws he had the approbation
and judgment of the Egyptian Priests. Et Solon adiutus sententiis Aegypti
Sacerdotum, latis iusto moderamine legibus, Romano quoque Iuri maximum addidit
firmamentum. (...)*
Diodorus Siculus relates two things brought from thence to the Athenians by
him. First, that all the Egyptians were compelled to bring to the governors
of the countries their names written, and by what means they sustained
themselves; wherein if any were found false, or that lived by unjust gain, he
fell into danger of life. Secondly, it was a custom among them, that payment
should be made only with the goods of the debtor, and that the body should not
suffer. For they thought the estate alone to be subject to the creditor, the
body addicted to the Cities in which they lived. Neither was it fit that
Soldiers, who were to undergo hazard for their country, should for usurie be
committed to prison, or the country be in ieopardie for the avarice of some
one man. Which induced Solon to make the first decree, as (...) vitae Solon^s.
Laertius and In Solone p 62. l. ^.
Plutarch say, of freeing the bodies; which, if there were not where withal to
satisfy the craving loaner, were compelled to serve. He therefore cut off all
use, Pint^h. p. 6^.
as some write, or else Androtio.
lessened the burden of it, making it more moderate by his Law (...): so
called from (...), to shake off, and (...), an heavy weight. Forgiving himself
first, (...) laud.
as Laertius, seven talents; or, as (...). 62. (...) (...) (...), (...).
Plutarch, five. But this seems to have been done for the avoiding of the
aspersion cast upon him as accessarie to the injuries of some, who having an
inkling of his intent, borrowed much money with hope of never making
restitution. In Laert. (...) 14.
Casaubon is conceited, that this was not his first exploit, but long after he
had sat at the stern of the Weale-publique. Yet it seems probable; There
being no more compendious way to make a man popular, then to give liberty to
the common people. Which he, to bring in an innovation of Laws, did willingly
invent; and they afterward lovingly accepted. For in testimony of their
approbation, they kept a festival named Plutarch. p. 62. l. 43.
(...). Here likewise may you observe the ancient flattery of the Athenians
toward their own vices, putting gilded names on those things, which
themselves were ashamed of, calling Plutare. loc^ laudato.
(...) etc. as our blades name drunkenness good fellowship; whores, she
sinners; and niggardise, thriftinesse; springing from this root of Solons, who
called (...). Demost. p. 477.
To these Laws two ends were proposed, mutual commerce, and direction of
behavior toward the state. Idem p. 484.
To curb wickedness, and uniustice; and to punish offenders that they might be
bettered. And although they were the ordinances of Draco and Solon, yet may we
fitly call them the Athenian Civil Law. Each City, as Insticut (...) Tit. 2.
Sed (...) quidem civil ex unaquaque civitate appel latur, veluti Atheniensiu^.
Justinian teaches, giving a denomination unto her Statutes. Nam si quis velit
Solonis vel Draconis leges appellare ius civil Atheniensium, non erraverit.
They were engraven in tables of wood called Sch. Apollo. Rho. Argo. 4.
(...), triangular, if we may believe the In Avibus page 604.
Scholiast of Aristophanes, who quotes Aristotle and Apollodorus, witnessing
that they were called (...) also, (...), from the elevation. Vide Plut. page 66.
Some are of opinion that the Rites pertaining to the Gods and their worship
were written in the Cyrbes, and Laws belonging to men in the Axones.
Apollodorus says that all decrees are called Cyrbes, because they were written
in stone, and so set up, (...).
which from their standing, were termed (...). I know that decrees, merits,
praise and dispraise too, were written in* stone. Whence Vide Nonnum in N^.
(...),
(...) may be put for a Treatise tending to a man's disgrace. But this by the
way. These Tables were kept in the Acropolis, translated afterward to the
Prytanaeum by Ephialtes, where to the days of In Solone page 60.
Plutarch, some relics of them were to be seen. The Autographon or coppie
written with his own hand was not removed, but those that were transcribed by
them. Because in matters of doubt and controversy they might have recourse
unto them. Poll^. x. l. 8. page 4^8.
For the distinction of which, some think that (...) is used in Demosthenes for
that in the Prytaneum. Others for the Law in the lower part of the table; but
to me it seems improbable, for then the number of the table ought to be
cited; and indeed, one Table sometime could not contain a Law. For we read in
Solone page 63. l. 37.
Plutarch, that the eighth Law was cut in the thirteenth Table. I am not averse
from the guess of Petitus, who supposes the Orator to mean the Law which
afterward he quotes; not ignorant of the opinion of some, who think that it is
to be understood of the under line. For the Laws being written (...), couverso
sive retrogrado literarum ordine, says In Pausaniam p. 426.
Silburgius; which In Eliacis page 174.
Pausanias explaines, (...), from the right hand to the left, Eodem lib. page
165*
or more significantly, (...). When the second verse begins at the end of the
former, as in the race which they call Diaulus, or if I shall speak nearest to
the word, as husbandme^ turn their Oxen when they plough, as for example.
(...). (...)

See those that have written of diverse ways of writing.

They therefore take the lower, that is tvrned, (...). After this manner were
the Laws written, and doubtless there were some customs as strong as Laws.
For although the Lacedaemonians governed by tradition of custom* and the
Athenians by written statutes, as Contra App^onem Vide Iusti^anum. Inst. l. 1.
tit. 2.
Josephus, yet surely had their customs great force, insomuch as In Avibus
page 576.
Aristophanes uses (...) for (...). Page 577.
Scholiastes. (...). So did the Vide Iustinianum.
Greeks divide their Laws into (...), written and unwritten. The unwritten,
sine scripto ius venit, quod usus approbavit, use. The In Aiacem Locarium.
Interpreter of Sophocles thus. (...). A Law is a written custom, and a
custom an unwritten Law. Besides these there were decrees, which they termed
(...), psephismata, a word used by In Orat. pro Flacco.
Cicero, nothing different, (...). Cont. Lept. p. 296.
Demosthenes. who means in virtue and power. For they differ much. Aristides.
Tom. 2. p. 30.
A Law maintains justice once found, common for ever. A Psephisma follows the
necessity of the time, as it differs in events: it directs not warlike
affairs, but is applied unto the occasion of arms, and as laws can be
abrogated, so degrees changed. And here ought we to note, Demosthen page 416.
that no decree is greater then a Law. Of decrees there were two sorts;
Demosth. (...). P. 417.
(...), such as the Senate by it self established, which were but of twelve
months continuance; to the confirming of which, the people were not
convocated, or their consent required, termed Vlp. in Them p. 418.
(...), which Demosthenes proves to be (...), Ulpian. (...). Like to the edicts
of the Roman Praetors which lasted but a year. In Verr* 1.
Cicero. Qui plurimum tribuunt edicto, Praetoris edictum legem annuam esse
dicunt. In other decrees the opinion and good liking of the people was asked,
for the giving of the authority unto them, which endured in force a longer
time. Vlpian loco laudato.
(...). And therefore we may easily know a probuleuma from a decree of the
peoples confirming, by this observation. (...) only, gives us to wit, that it
is a probuleuma. (...), in the beginning of a decree, shows it to be (...).
The Senate always sat in consultation about that which was to be enacted,
whether any damage might accrue to the State by it or no, the Law commanding
that no decree should go forth without deliberation. Vlp. in Arg. Orat. And.
p. 181. Vide Them. p. 182. n. 10. vi. Plut. Solone. p. 63. l. 31.
(...). Which done, the Prytaneis took certain Tables and wrote on them Such
or such a day about such a time there should be an assembly to consult of these
and these affairs: and this they called Sch^ Naz. (...) page 55* vid. Vlp. in
Them. p. 240.
(...). When then they were assembled* and the people purified, the decree was
read; which if the people allowed of* stood; if not, decayed. It was forbidden
that any should raze out a Decree of any Table. And he was brought in question
of life, who should presume in making a decree to pretend a fallacy. Now
because future time might happily perceive some inconveniences to arise by
oversight in their Law giver, and that as abuses should happen, which in his
days were not discerned, so there would be a necessity of making new
statutes: It was ordained therefore that every year there should be (...),
which Demost. p. 445.
Ulpian expounds (...). A consideration of what ought to be done concerning the
Laws. V^d. Them. loco (...).
The manner was thus. Every eleaventh day of July in the assembly after the
Crier had made his prayers, as his fashion was, and shall anon be spoken of,
the Laws were read over in order. First those which concerned their Senate,
next the weale-publique, and thirdly the nine Archons, and afterward the other
Magistrates. Then was it demanded if there were Laws enough for the Senate,
and so for the Commonweal, etc. If any of the Laws in force were to be
abrogated, it was adiournied until the last of the three days of the three
Co^vocations. On which the Prytanes, appointed for the revising and reciting of
the Laws, were to take the matter in hand. The Proedri chief of the Assembly,
were to (...) Demosthen. Vlp. expe^ds (...)* to report.
acquaint them with it. Five men at the first meeting, were chosen out of all
the Athenians, who should patronize the Law to be abolished; and according to
the judgment of the Nomothetae, chosen out of the Council of five hundred,
was the business carried, that the Laws should be of none effect, or full
strength. Whosoever would bring in a new Law, was to write in a Table, Cont.
(...). p. 446.
(...) Demosthenes, the form thereof, and set it up at the Statutes of the
Heroes before spoken of, D^most* p. 297*
(...) which standing in a place conspicuous, that some certain days before
the Sessions, any Citizen might read what was to be handled; and if any so
pleased, he might at the proposal of the Law declare his mind either for* or
against it, as at the preferring of a Bill in our High Court of Parliament,
where it is not denied any Burges, or Knight of a shire, to speak his opinion
pro or con, either with any whole Bill or some part thereof, or in opposition
to it, or some one clause. Provided likewise, that he, who attempted to enact
a new Statute, should take care for the disanulling of the old, that might
contradict it, otherwise he came within the compass of (...)* a writ of
Transgression of the Laws: which was of two sorts. First, when time is not
observed in writing the^, Vlp. in Them p. 297.
(...). Next when one is made that is adverse to a former. And if it so happened,
that any persuaded the people to make a Law that was not commodious to the
weale-publique, he might be questioned within Them* Orat. Arg. con. Lepunem.
a years space* Them. p 419
but if the time was expired, he could not. Idem p. 468.
Nay, they slew Eudemus, a Cydiathenian, for bringing in a Law they liked not;
scarce different in that one example from the Lo^ri; among whom, he that would
propose a Law, should do it, his neck adorned with a halter, that if his
request pleased not, he straight way powered out his soul under the hands of
the hangman. Their Orators, which are called Geli^s (...) c. 13. Is.
Ca^listratus Athe nis Orator (...)* it, quos (...) (...) appellant. Livie Dec.
4. of Athens. ub^ Oration plurimum pollet, favore multitudinis alitur. Vlpian.
(...)*
(...), because they lead the people with their Rhetoric and flattery, wrote
Laws and decrees, as we learn out of Page 468. ^. 225.
Demosthenes; and therefore are they deciphered by Dipnos, l ^
Athenaeus, (...).

CAP. II.
De Comitiis. (...) and (...). etc.

THE Assemblies were called by the Prytaneis four^ time (...) (...) thirty
days. (...)
In the first they confirmed the Magistrates in their offices, if all things
were managed well by them, otherwise they put them out. They heard public
causes, looked into confiscate goods, and possessions left by inheritance. In
the second, any one with leave might freely speak of private and public
affairs. In the third they gave audience to Ambassadors, who before ought to
deliver their letters to the Prytaneis. In the fourth, they treated of holy
things, such as belonged to their Gods and worship of them. The first meeting
was the eleaventh day of the Prytanea; the second the twentieth; the third the
thirtieth; the fourth the three and thirtieth. I find a difference between
the In Achar. p. 371.
Scholiast of Aristophanes and Vlpian in the day on which they came together,
one making the first day of the Month to be the day on which the first
assembly was, the other h In Them. p. 445.
the eleaventh of the Prytanea, which seems truest. And whereas they both
write that every month there were three lawful assemblies, to wit, on the
first, tenth, thirtieth; or tenth, twentieth, thirtieth, we are not so to
reckon them* but according to the Prytanea, it being the Prytanes charge to
congregate the people. They seem to have been called (...), because in them
they did (...), establish decrees, as the In Acharn.
Scholiast of Aristophanes. Other assemblies there were which are termed Vlp.
and Sch. Arist. loc. laud
(...), when war, or any sudden accident troubled the State, then the people
were called together over and above those four times in a Prytanea. They are
styled (...), because the people of their own accord met on the other days;
but when they would have a Convocation some went about the City and called
them. There is likewise Poll. p. 405.
(...), when they were summoned out of the fields to go to the Assembly. It
seems to me that the Crier in the streets on their lawful assemblies gave
some token when they should hasten; and so much In concionantib. p. 725
Aristophanes witnesses, bringing in the women speaking that it is high time to
be stirring, because the Crier -- (...), had cried the second time. And indeed
need was th^e of some warning, and compulsion too; for so slow were they in
coming to assemblies, that the Logistae were feign to thong them to the
meetings, as the Schol. of Aristophanes on these words, In Achar* p. 406.
(...). Sometimes they took a rope, and dying it with red earth, they sent two
slaves into the market place, who should one of the one side of the way, and
the other of the opposite, pursue the people, and to whose chance it fell to be
marked with the paint, paid a certain piece of money. Hence in the Aristoph.
Achar. p. 371.
Comoedian -* (...). Up and down they shun the cord stained with Vermilion.
And again -- (...). Jupiter, the red earth which flew about made laughter.
Schol. Arist. loco laudato.
Sometimes would they take Hurdles* and barracado all the streets except those
that led to the Ecclesia: Sometimes take away all their saleable wares which
they brought into the market, least peoples intent on their traffic should
absent themselves from the Assemblies. When they had met often times the company
would be dismissed at some prodigious sign, as thunder, lighning, tempest,
and the like, which they called Vide Arist. p. 379.
(...).: Plut. p. 386. l. 7. and 384* l. 34.
and earthquakes, or other occasions, deferring the Assemblies meeting until
the next day. When they were come together, and the Senate ready to sit, one
man sacrificed; which rites were called Demosth. (...). 241
(...), because they were done at the entry of the Council. Vide and Vlpian. p
351.
Vlpian. (...). I will not justly say that it was the purification made with a
young pig, before the bench was sat* and yet I may presume to aver it; the
Grammarian that interprets In Concion p. 728. A.
Aristophanes witnessing that immediately preceding the Sessions this custom
was observed by one, whom they named (...), from (...), which signifies
cleansing, because by that he purged the Assembly, Theater, and congresse of
the people. After they were sat, Demosth. (...). 213
the Crier did pray for the good of the people* Demosth* p. 418.
and cursed those who should offer to deceive the Senate or people. After this,
he spoke with a loud voice, (...) Austoph. p* ^ (...). D^od. Si^. l. 15.
(...); Who will make a speech; whereupon one of the Demosth. p. 29. Aeschines
contra Ctes. initi^.
Elders arose that gave his verdict, it being not permitted to any to utter his
opinion, before the reverend hoary head had spent this judgment* Whence by
Philippi^. 1.
Demosthenes they are styled (...), those that were wont to orate. After they
had finished their sayings, others had leave to declare themselves. Neither
must we omit the fashion they had to exclude all private men from their
assemblies sometimes, when the Senate alone sat, or the Areopagitic all
Council; sometimes to debar all servants, strangers, and men deprived of
their liberties from their convents, which at other times they admitted, and
then was it called Plu^. p. 552. I 11* 17.
(...), an open Theater to all comers. The place of meeting was called (...),
Pnyx, (...)* from the frequent concurse of people there. It stood on a rock,
and therefore by Aristophanes is called (...). 345. Sch. (...). There was a
stipend for them that came to Assemblies, as you may see in Demosth. contra
Timoc. And (...). Because they might be at leisure without damage. Aristot.
Pol. l. 1. c. 13. They assembled also in Piraeeus. Vlp. in Them.

CAP. III.
SECT. I.
De Tribunalibus Atticis, and primum de Senatu (...).

When the mutiny between the faction of Megacles and Cylo disturbed the
Attick common wealth, Solon persuaded the people that those, whom for their
audacitie in drawing away the suppliants from the Altars they named (...),
should undergo judgment, there were chosen (...). Sol^, p. (...) (...).
three hundred men, (...)* according to their worth, to sit upon the case. But
these were not a perpetual iudicatorie For when the people murmured at the
cutting off of the usurie money, then was the l Grand Council ordained; out of
every Tribe, which were then but four, an hundred chosen, who by their advice
should direct the people in those things which were to be handled, least any
thing should be inducted, or proposed to the Assembly, without due
consideration. Who from their office in a Democracie, Polit. l. ^. c 8.
Aristotle says are more properly called (...), but where the Rout rules,
(...). But when Clist henes, who by Plutarch is termed (...), had augmented the
number of the Tribes from four to ten, eighty six years after Solon's
Laws were received, he made the number five hundred, taking fifty of every
Tribe, which doubled ten times make up the fumme. This Council by Aristotle is
described (...). The Mistress of all the rest, and I am not of opinion that
(...) in In Solo^ p. ^3.
Plutarch, is to be understood of the Areopagus, as if that were above the
Senate, but as instituted first by Solon, and so related by the Author. And yet
I know Possardus. false* for Pausanias calls (...) (...). in At. p. 27. l. 1^
one writes. Tam dignitate, fama, quam officio, secundum post Areopagitas locum
obtinu^. To this Council none was chosen under thirty years of age, which
time is styled (...) by In Arg. orat. con. Androt.
Libanius. And doubtless Vita d^cem Rhet. p. 378.
Plutarch iustifies it speaking that Demosthenes wrote his Orations against
Androtio, Timocrates, Aristocrates, (...), when he had not attained to the
managing of state business, because he wanted two or three of thirty years.
Agreeing to this is Stobaeus sermon. 112.
Iuneus, who says that Solon admitted none very young, though very wise to
Magistracy or Council. Nay the In Nub. p. 157.
Scholiast of Aristophanes tells us that green heads were not permitted to
speak publicly. The Law prohibiting any to attempt it under forty, or as some
say (which is truest) thirty, on these words,

(...). Which to be otherwise understood by some, is not hidden from me* They
were called likewise (...), as well as (...), and their Tribunal (...), from
the word Vlp. in Demos. p. 445.
(...), which signifies to throng together, because the people were frequent
there. But the more probable reason is, Vlp. lo^. (...) ^ide and Austoph. S^.
(...), because the place was open and exposed to the Sun. And in respect of
this (...). Page (...).
Aristophanes makes that cold conceit branded by Didymus, (...), In the morning
thou shall (...) in the sun shine. At their admission they had this oath given
them. Them. Orat. (...) Tim.
(...). etc. I will give sentence according to the Laws, and decrees of the
people of Athens, and Council of five hundred; I will not consent to be a
Tyrant, or bring in an Oligarchie: Neither shall my approbation be to any that
will dissolve the Democracie of Athens by speech or decree I will not cut off
private use, or suffer a division of the Athenian lands or houses. I will not
bring back exild men, or those that are condemned. I will not thrust out of the
city any innocent against the Laws and Statutes of the Athenians and Senate
of five hundred* neither by my self or suffer any other. I will not create a
Magistrate, who has not given an account of his former office, whether of the
nine Archons, or agents for the holy things, or they, who at the same day are
chosen with the nine Archons by lot, Ambassadors and assistants. Neither shall
the same man bear the same office twice, or two in one year. I will not take
gifts for judgment, neither my self or other for me, or others with my
privacy, by fraud or deceit. I am not younger then thirty. I will hear both
parties, the accuser and defendant alike* I will pass judgment aright on the
thing prosecuted. I swear (...)
by Jupiter, Neptune, Ceres. *There is also another oath which they took; some
clauses whereof, we have left in record. To ratify the Laws of Solon.
Plutarch in Solone, page 62. To give counsel for the best of the people. To
advise according. (...) the Laws. I will not bind any Athenian who shall give
three (...) of the same revennewes, unless for treason, or he conspire the
subversion of state popular, or buy custom, o^ b^ engaged, or gather public
money and not pay it. I will sit in that order which lot shall direct me to. I
will not permit any unless ^anished, to be accused or imprisoned for what is
past. This last was made after the driving out of the 30 Tyrants, when Vide
Xeno. in (...). (...). P^l. 1. (...) (...) ^ 2. p. 84. (...) Sch. in (...).
(...). ^ont C^siph.
Thrasybulus gave them to oath (...), not to remember ancient wrongs, which
they call (...). The authority of this Council was great, for it handled causes
of war, tributes, making of Laws, civil businesses and events, affairs of
confederates, collections of money, performance of sacred rites, accounts of
offices discharged, appointing keepers for prisoners, and (...) of Orphans, as
Xenophon. See Sir Th. Smith in the Common wealth of England*
Resembling our b Athen. Rep page 407.
Court of Parliament in England, by whose consent all Laws are abrogated, new
made, right and possessions of private men changed, forms of religion
established, Subsidies, Tails, Taxes, and impositions appointed, waights and
measures altered, etc. As not unlike also the Venetian Gran Consiglio, or
Senate, of which the Contarene. As Eranch^ Andi^ has trans^ated (...). lib. ^.
fol. 34. B.
Tutta la cura del govern^ della Republica appertiene al Senato, etc. The whole
manner of the Common wealths government belongs to the Senate. That which the
Senate determines is held for ratified and inviolable. By their authority and
rule is peace confirmed and war denounced. The whole rents and receipts of the
Commonwealth at their appointment collected and gathered in, and likewise laid
out again and defrayed, etc. In a word, I may say of these five hundred, as In
Pandect. P^o. p. 298.
Budaeus of the Parliament of France: Amplissimam ^am curiam causarumque omne
genus disceptatricem iustam ac legitimam esse, that that Court is most ample,
and justly and equally decided all sorts of controversies whatsoever. Them. p.
385.
To their charge was committed the making of new ships, for which at the years
end they were to be rewarded by the people. To this alludes Av. b. p ^46
Aristophanes. (...); -- (...). A^. p. 93.
Without their consent could the people do naught, as indeed they made not any
thing sanctum against the peoples wills. Hence in Page 234.
Demosthenes, (...). In testimony of their pre-eminence are they termed
Demosth. (...).
(...). and Idem (...)
(...). The Lords of sentence. In time of war they would send Commissions to
their Captains, as they thought requisite. Plut. in Cimone p. 3^6. (...).
Such as in the battle between the Lacedaemonians and their country men in
Tanagra, where fearing least Cimon banished by Ostracisme should betray them to
the Laconians, they sent to the Commanders not to entertain him in the Army.
This honor was not during term of life, but every year changed. Apostolius.
(...). Which Anonymus in Arg. Orat. contra Androt. expresses by (...). The
manner of choosing them is this. Ve^o Emmius in Descript. Re^p. Athen.
The chief of every Tribe, on an appointed day before the beginning of the
month Hecatombaeon, brought the names of all their Tribe that were capable of
this dignity, and cast them written into a vessel, and into another they put
an hundred white beans and all the rest black; Then drawing out a name and
then a bean, to whose chance the white bean fell to be extracted with his
name, was designed Senator. This they did when they had but four Tribes, and
so four hundred Senators. But when they had ten Tribes, there could be but
fifty white beans, to the making up of the tenth part of five hundred. This
differs not from the election observed by the Cont^en. l. 1. fol. 11. ^.
Venetians upon the fourth day of December, when the names of all the young men
that have not by lot obtained the right of citizens, 'nor passed twenty five
years old, are put into a pot, and carried unto the Prince, and there the same
set before the Counselors, with which there is another pot, wherein are round
balls equal with the number of the names written in the first, every one
having his marks, the fifth part of these bals is gilded with gold, the rest
with silver. The Prince takes out of the first pot the ball, which if it be of
the golden sort, the young man whose name is drawn, is presently admitted to
public authority, they to whom the silver chance, loose it for that time,
expecting it the ensuing year, unless in the mean space they accomplish
twenty five, at which age all the young Noble men partake of the Cities
liberties. So every year the fifth part of the yo^kers is chosen to give voice
with the other Citizens. The use in choosing I deem the same, and shall until
I find authentike writers co^tradict it. But the number, as augme^ted by
Clisthenes according to their Tribes, so by his successors. For when they added
two, the number was increased 100, by reason of the Tribes Antigonis and
Demetrias after named Attalis and Ptolemais in honor to the Kings of that name
which were benefactours to the State; Stephanus (...).
(...) Arist* ^hol. p. ^7.
Out of these were their Judges chosen; but such as were above three score
years old. For although juniors were admitted into this company, yet none
judged under that age. (...). To these was any business referred, of which the
Senate and people were in suspense what to determine. In Verpis. p. 471.
Aristoph, (...). When the Council and people are in doubt how to judge a
great matter, They decree to deliver over the guilty to the Judges. And no
marvel. For the office of a Judge is (...), prerogative in sentence, says
Pol. l. 3. c. 1^ (...).
Aristotle, that is, to state those Questions which the Law has not decided.
The order of their giving sentence before the third year of the ninety second
Olympiad I know not. Afterward they sat by t^rne in their own Tribes every
one as his lot fell. For there being formerly ten Tribes in Athens, they chose
out of each five men, and to which one of them the chance happened, he sat
Judge. I cannot say that the manner of election was like that of the C^ V^rrem
A^t ^.
Syracusans concerning the Priest of Jupiter, who taking the names of so many
as were nominated, and casting them into a pot, created him, whose name should
first be drawn, of that sacred function. But of our own must I speak. A^st
p^an. (...). p. 30.
When then they were appointed, they met, every of them bringing with him a
Table and a wand on which was written a letter that did betoken some
Iudicatorie, (For there being ten Tribunals every one of them was noted with a
red letter, A,, G, D, E etc to K over the door) time calling them to sit, they
drew lots, and he to whom A. was taken out, sat in the Court noted with A. and
B with B, and so to K. This done, they showed their lot to the Praeco of the
Iudicatorie, who gave them their Wand and Table* This they did, least any
should rashly attempt to sit, and pervert Justice. I know not whether I may
better call that rod of authority a wand or staff: because that Suidas proverb.
(...), was a proverb used in dirision of the Judges. Sch. Aristop. (...). 30.
This staff at the days end they brought to the Prytanes, who gave them their
wages; But the In Equites. page 301.
Scholiast teaches us otherways, saying that the Demagogi paid them, it being
manifest out of Cleon's words the Orator, (...). - Judges which I feed. Their
pay was not always the same, (...), In Nubes page 174
says the Interpreter of Aristophanes. First they had obolum, which
Calistratus, surnamed Parnytes was author of. Hence the proverb Appendix (...).
(...). Afterward it was augmented by Callicrates, and from him grew the word
(...), it may be for a pretty sum of money. Nay it d Zenobius.
changed, for now I read of (...) one, and anon (...) three, a Sch. Aristop.
page 487.
Drachme to two. And therefore may we conclude that it was sometime more,
sometimes less. Thus having spoken a little of their Judges, I proceed to
their cases of Law, in which I shall add.

When any had received wrong in Athens, it was their custom to make their
cases known to a Magistrate, whose office it was to report to the Iudicatory.
And this they did by a Table in which was written, (...) Them p. 343.
(...). I accuse H. B. and cite him to the Court by W. N. not unlike the Romans
proceeding, who brought the name of the delinquent to the Magistrate before the
accusation; to which Asinaria Act. 1 p. ^4.
Plautus alludes. Ibo ego ad tres viros vestraque ibi nomina Faxo erunt.- when
this note was given up, the Magistrate asked the Plaintiff, whether he had
witnesses and would prosequute the matter, who answering that he intended it,
had thereupon authority to summon the Defendant to his appearance, and this he
did either by himself, or other, called therefore (...), Sch. Arist. 100.
for (...) is (...), a bringing into suit. (...). The word signifies a witness
also. For when they warned any to the Tribunal, they bad any that stood by to
testify that they had admonished them. Sch. Arist p. 442.
(...). You may ^use (...) for an apparator, Sergeant, Bailiffe or the like.
Sometimes they would run straight to the Court, as it were headlong, in (...)
p 596. (...)
Demosthenes his phrase, sometimes the Suitor would forth with draw the
Defendant, if he were loath to come, as you may see out of In Vespis page 487.
Aristophanes. (...)-. But if the party could put in two (...), sufficient
bail, he was dismissed. Hence in the A^st. Concio. p. 75^.
Comoedian. (...). I will procure thee a couple of able sureties. Sometimes
they would appoint a day of appearance, that might be a week or more, after
the vocationem in ius, at which time if the Defendant were not personally at
the Judgment seat, he came within compass of (...), a Writ of Eremodicium,
refusal to come in and answer. Which was avoided by suing for a (...) in ten
days after. For when the party to defend was absent, he was condemned
indict^ ^ausa, so In (...) and (...). No. ad (...).
Budaeus expounds (...), by this therefore the case was renewed, and stood as
at first* the sentence that before past, being made of no force; and for this
was it termed (...), Vlp^ D^m ^ ^43.
(...), because in the beginning it seemed to carry some power, but at last was
nothing: The business then made a new, the party that was cast by an (...),
after that he had obtained a (...), was (...). l ^ (...).
within two Months to set the Law on foot, which they term (...), or else the
sentence given before was ratified. Whosoever should offer to call any man to
the Court, unless upon good grounds, was liable to (...), a writ of
molestation for a false cause. Having thus far proceeded, the Impleader gave in
a Libell, which held contents of his action, and the sum of the defendants
answer. This the Greeks call (...)
(...), Antigraphen. Though I know also that all cases in law were termed
Aust. Nub. p. 1^4 v. Sch.
(...). They took this course because the Defendant might know what to
answer. And because it was ordinary in Athens for kna^es to accuse out of envy,
which is (...), they made a Demost. p. ^6. n. 7.
Law, that whosoever accused and had not the fifth part of the voices, should be
fined a thousand Drachmes. And he that could not prove his objections was also
punished in the purse a certain sum; Arist. Schol. p. 170.
which if he paid not at the constituted time, was four fold; and if his
ability reached not so far, he suffered imprisonment. At the presenting of the
Antigraphe, testimonies were also delivered, (forms of which you shall often
meet with in Vnum (...) Stephan. (...). p. 622. and p. 624. 629.
Demosthenes) and a copy of an oath, which the Suitor gave, in these words
Sch. Arist. Vesp. 505.
(...), that he would justly accuse. (...), that he would according to truth
make his Apology: and this they name In Vesp. p. 467. 505.
(...). These writings were cast into a certain coffer, forth coming as
occasion should require; all which In Ves^. p. 504.
Aristophanes in one verse comprehends. (...). They joined or put together
oaths, citations, and testimonies. I so interpret it against the Scholiasts
mind, who will have. (...) to be exhortations given to the Plaintiff and
Defendant to come to composition. But I know that Sch. Arist. 2^9.
(...), to accuse, in ius rapere, Idem p. 195
and (...). The chest or coffer was called (...), and of this are the words of
the Greek Orators to be understood D^nosth. 622. n. (...). 629. n. 8^. 640.
n. 22 6^ n. 65. 6^5 n. 66.
(...). Ch^act (...). p. 2^.
Theophrastus of a mad man that would entangle himself in any thing, (...).
Having an Echinus in his lap^, and a bundle of libels in his hands. Pollux
makes a different exposition of this oath from that which other Grammarians
do, confounding, as is most probable, the (...) and (...) with (...). For
(...) is that first oath which the Plaintiff gave to prosequute, the party
prosequuted to answer, which on the defendants side was called (...), and
generally on both. (...) was a Sacrament taken by both, the Impleader that he
did ^nol. A^stoph. Vesp. 5^5.
(...), follow the delinquent in law: the defendant (...), to stand stiffly to
it that he did not trespass. And yet ^a Demost. p. 28^.
Ulpian makes both these one. After this were they that sued one another
admitted to the Iudicatory, it being first demanded of the Suitor V^de (...)
Them. pp. (...). 341
whether he would persequi, follow the suit, and had sufficient witness for
evi^ence; in causes capital it was asked if there were need of any, who could
not then be present. This interrogation was termed Bud. in An no^. Rel. ^. Pan.
p. 341.
(...). If then any thing was deficient the judgment was prorogued by an
Vlpian in Demp. p. 226 the Scho. of Aristoph. Ma^es it the ^ame with (...).
(...). P. 75.
(...), or oath, which the Plaintiff took, that for the present he could not
perform it, but certainly would. Vlpian in Demost. 341.
Perhaps for that time pretending sickness, death of friends, or some urgent
necessity, on which their fortunes might depend. When then all things were
ready, and at hand, they proceeded toward the Tribunal, the Judges first
swearing Pollux. l. 8. page 406.
that they would give sentence according to the Laws, and in those things
concerning which there were no Laws, according to conscience and equity (which
the Greeks call (...)) Them. page 628.
and of those things only concerning which they did debate. This oath seems to
have been taken at the Altar, from whence they brought their little stones (of
these by and by) with which they gave sentence. Page 122.
Plutarch. (...). The oath is called (...). Then went the Judges to their
seats, Aristoph. Sch. p. 239.
neatly spread with mats, in Greek (...) and (...), and all others being
warned by the Praeco, to go without the Bars* in this form Demosth.
(...), they sat down. For we must know that the Athenian Iudicatories were
environed in, as the Romans, with lettice I suppose, by them called Pollu^.
lib. 8. p. 407.
(...) Cancellatae, by the Greeks (...) Pollux loco citato.
though (...) more properly signify the door of the (...), before which was
This is (...). Pollux.
a rope of fifty feet length drawn, and public servants set, that none might
enter, but who had business. The partition I think was but weak, and therefore
by Demosthenes called (...). Within which none was permitted to come but the
Judges. And therefore p Page 485.
when Plutarch. in Vita.
Demosthenes did long to hear Callistratus plead concerning Oropus, he over
entreated his Paedagogue that he would bring him, where he might have the
happiness to be an auditor. The Paedagogue therefore acquainted with the
public officers that opened the doors, (...), procured him a place where he
might hear and not be seen, (...). When then the Judges had gone within the
bars, least any should be wanting the Praeco cried Aristoph. page 494.
(...), if any Judge be without the door of the place of Judgment, let him
enter. Aristoph. Sch. Ibid.
Because if any came after the case began to be pleaded, he could not have
admission. Being then seated the Crier read the Indictment, (...), (a copy of
some part of which you have in (...) P. 567.
Demosthenes. (...); etc.) in which according to the custom of the Boemus De.
Costum delle Genti lib. 1. cap. 5.
old Egyptians, were given up to the court in writing all the reasons of
accusation, the wrong received and the manner of it, with an estimation of the
damage; The several heads of which the Judges wrote down, least the
Impleader and defendant should swerve from what they had in hand. Then stood up
the Suitor in a pulpit on the left hand of the Tribunal, and spoke an
accusatory oration, made for the most part by some of the Attick Orators:
which use brought in by Arist. Rhet.
Antiphon the Rhamnusian, 1. c 33. (...) not. 1. page 226.
Clemens of Alexandria calls (...), ^a Bruto.
Cicero, scribere aliis causas, quibus in judiciis uterentur, such as Lysias is
reported to have done for Socrates: Which least it should exceed in length, was
limited to a certain time, by a vessel, in the bottom of which was a small
hole for water to run, as sand does in our houre-glasses, thence called
(...), into which was poured an equal measure of water; and least there should
be deceit, there was an officer made for that purpose, named Pollux l. 8. p.
404.
(...), filling alike for the Impleader and answerer. Vlpian in Them. p. 356.
When therefore the glass was run, it was not lawful for them to speak
farther, Demosth. (...). p. 586.
nay for scantinesse of time they were compelled to pass by many things; and
for that reason were they chary of their water, bidding that it should be
stopped at the reciting of Laws, or the like, which Demosthenes intimates
in-(...) is to stop the nose in In Pluto.
Aristophanes. Apologia.
Apuleius. At tu interea dum legit, aquam sustine. Pancirollus. Ne si aqua
interim effluxisset, amplius sibi dicendi praebita foret facultas, least he
might not have leave to speak any more, if the water were spent. If any would
give way to another to speak while his glass was running, he might; which
Demost. testifies, (...). But if he would not permit it, he bad the Praeco cast
it forth Demosth. (...).
(...). Ulpian. (...), From which kind of pleading it grew into a proverb
Aristoph. page 617.
(...), Tusc. Qu. l. 2. in fine.
Cicero, ad clepsydram, to speak by the hour or an allotted time. His speech
being ended, he sat down. Vlpian in Them. 226.
The defendant then sitting all that while over against him, until he had
finished, after addressed himself to his answer, which he made from the right
hand of the Iudicatorie; where he had a pulpit, and station; For this reason
says Problem. (...).
Aristotle, because they would make both parties equal, For the Suitor having
the better part, they gave the upper hand to the defendant. Or because (...) or
defendants, were for the most part in custody; If therefore the guard stood on
the right hand, the defendant stood there also. Thence then he pleaded for
himself; in which plea, he was only to wipe out those accusations which his
adversary laid against him, Vlpian in Demosth. p. 252
(...), And in that had the plaintiff a prerogative. For he might object what he
would; nay and as Loco ^to.
Aristotle, forecast all before he commenced his suit, and feign to himself
what he pleased; The defendant, perhaps innocent, was at that instant to clear
himself, Demosth. ^.
either by witness, or probabilities, of all doubts, whatsoever the plaintiff
could cast in. Sometimes the Plaintiff and Defendant would desire Advocates of
the Judges* (...), hence Clemens Al^nd. These (...) certain pe^oggers under
them, that ad^ the Laws and ^es of action. Cicero apud Graecos infimi homines
mercedul^ adducti mi* nistros se praebent in judiciis Or^toribus i^, qui apud
ill^s (...) ^ntur.
(...), to plead for a fee. In the time of their pleading, witnesses were
called, who came in, and gave their testimonies* and after they had uttered
what they had to say, they went to the Altar (as it seems to me, either in, or
very nigh the Iudicatorie) and swore. Corneliana Vide at A^i (...). l. 1. c. 1^.
Cicero. Athenis aiunt cum quidam apud eos sancte graviterque vixisset, and
testimonium dixisset public, and, ut mos ^raecorum est, jurandi causa ad aras
accederet, una voce omnes Iudices, ne is juraret, reclamasse. They report that
in Athens when a certain man ( Vide (...) in (...) (...)*
Xenocrates) who had lived Godly and gravely among them, had given witness,
and as the fashion of the Greeks is, approached to the Altar to take oath, all
the Judges with one voice cried that he should not. (They would not, it seems,
have belief rather be bound with religion then truth) Fit to this is the
answer of Pericles to a friend of his desiring him (...) to testify a lie,
which he was to avouch with an oath, I am your friend, quoth he* to the Altar,
that is, as far as conscience, religion and honesty shall permit* hence (...)
usque ad aras, grew, I suppose to be a proverb. Plut. Apophth. p. 112. Whether
in this ceremony they touched the Altar, I cannot justly say; in delivering
their testimonies they were wont to touch the tips of the ear (for reason to
me unknown;) called (...) from (...), etymologicon; (But I rather may suppose
it to be a Roman fashion, where the Plaintiff was wont to pluck his witness by
the ear, for remembrance sake. Horace lib. 1. Sat. 9. Licet attestari? ego ve^
auriculam -- To which Virgill looked, saying Cyn^us ^urem ve^it and admonuit.
F^log. 6.) and at the end thereof wish all destruction to themselves and house
if they dealt Falsely. Which if they did, they were subject to a writ (...), of
false witness, and he that suborned them (...). Sometimes the witness was not
present at the doing of the wrong, but took it from others by hearsay, which
the Greek Lawyers term (...) as Demost^. pp. ^. ^.
(...), when they take it from those that are dead, which went for current, and
was allowable: But to bring a testimony from the Mouth of one that was alive,
and within the territories of Athens, it would not pass. As neither theirs who
were discarded the liberties of the City, (...); or servants, or any man in
his own cause. V^ in Demost^ ^.
The manner of witness was twofold, either by personal appearance and
testifying (...), and then he was called (...), in no case liable to the Law,
(...): or else by writing, by which he offered himself to his questions or
attachments in Law, against whom he witnessed; if he were not true; and this is
(...). Both parties being heard and the altercation ceased, the Praeco cried,
To whom E. N. has seemed to violate right, (so they interpret (...), jus
violare) let him cast in the black stone, or ho^low, to whom he seems not,
the whole or white. For we must know that anciently the Greeks gave their
sentences with black and white pebles, called Aristoph. 438.
(...) (which the French semblably term Porcellaines, (...) porcus) Metamorph.
15. ^. 1.
Ovid.

Mos erat antiquis, ^iveis atrisque Lapillis,
His damnare reos, illis absolvere culpa.
The antique fashion was with white stones to absolve, with black to condemn
the accused. Pertinent to which is the saying of Alcibiades, when he was called
out of Sicilie to go home and answer for his life, counting it foolish to go
thither, whence he never was like to escape; when one asked ^n. (...). lib. 1^.
c ^* Plut M^ p* 1^.
(...); Will thou not trust thy country which begat thee to be thy Judge?
(...), quoth he, (...). No not her, that brought me forth. For I fear least
she being ignorant, and not conceiving the truth, mistake the black for the
white stone. The black made tristem sententiam, and was so named; the sad
sentence; the white candidam or acquitting. They used likewise black and white
beans; in respect of which Pythagoras is thought to have spoken as a riddle
(...), not to eat beans, by In N^z. Stelit. (...).
Nonnus interpreted (...), Not to undermine justice with bribes; or that men
should get by the perverting of equity. I see no reason, but that I may think
he means men ought not to be forward in getting places of Judgment. For
Pagina 290.
(...) in Aristophanes is by the Scholiast expounded (...), and Lysistrata. p.
^70.
(...) is used for a Judge, which properly signifies an eater of beans. But
afterward they had little pellets of brass; The bloody ones of them were
peirced through, therefore termed, Pollux. l. 8. page 407. Vlpian. in D^m. 47^.
(...): the saving were whole, (...). Of these every one took, of each one,
from the Altar, as I have said, Vlpian in Them. p. 162.
where laying their hands upon the (...), or bals, they intimated by a
transposition of them (as from the black to the white, and from the white to
the black again) that they would not for envy or by respects, but
indifferently and truly judge. When then they were ready to pass sentence
Aristoph. 485
the Praeco carried about the (...) or (...), a certain pitcher (for so Page
263.
Xenophon calls it, (...)) having on the mouth of it a conveiance like a
Tunnell, named (...), but the top thereof was covered close, except a little
hole for one pellet at a time to be put in, made for avoiding of deceit, I
suppose, least one man might cast in more; and therefore were they to touch the
(...), only with the forefinger, middle, and thumb. Page 43^. vide Scholiast.
Aristoph. (...). But we must know that the black and white pellets were not
promiscuously cast into one pot, but two; Aristoph. Vespis 500.
The one which freed was made of brass called (...), whether because they
first threw into it their voices, or because it may signify the better, I know
not; The other that condemned, being wooden (...). After the Crier had gone
round with both, because some would keep their bals, and for favor not give
their voice against a friend or great person, therefore he cried Aristoph.
Vespis.
(...), Who has not cast in his ball? let him rise. So he rose and threw it
in. Then they took them out and numbered them; and in matter of lands, money or
the like, whose vessel (for there were as many set as the number of the
litigants came to) had most; got the upper hand. At the counting of them a
Magistrate stood by with a rod, and laid it over those that were told, least
they should mistake the one for the other or wittingly do it. For so were they
wont to do; thence named Schol. N^* in (...).
(...). Which Sophocles A^acc. p. 68*
Teucer objects to Menelaus about Ajax, when by his deceit the armor was given
to Ulysses; and therefore he calls him (...). Sch. (...): not amiss (...).
Schol. Arist. 438.
When the number was known, if the white or solid bals were more, they took
their tables, which they had in their hands, and drew a short line, as a token
of absolution; if the black or hollow were more, they drew a longer line, as
condemning. Hence Aristoph. Vesp. loco. cit.
(...), may be used, for to condemn every body. The thing it self they termed
Page 491.
(...), as Aristophanes. By this the one party being overthrown ( Aristoph* p.
472.
as none ever was without the sentence of the Judges) his adversary wrote down
what damages he should pay, which they term (...). (...). ^. 454.
Plutarch* (...). Schol. Arist. in (...). page 5^.
For it was a use of old for those that went to Law to make agreements (I know
not whether by oath, for they did swear by three Gods (...), (...) and put it
into the Echinus, that they would stand to such and such conditions, before
sentence, that he that was cast should undergo somewhat; and afterward (...),
that is set down what loss of limbs or life, or means etc. For although they
did Schol. A^st. 74^.
(...) give their estates as pledges to answer and meet at the Court; yet it
may be that might be less or more then the fine. There was in causes capital
an other proceeding, like to that in the City of Contaren. de Rep. (...). lib 3.
Uenice; where they gave two sentences. In the first they determined whether
they should condemn or free; If in the first he was condemned, the manner of
punishment was ordained in the second. But if in the first they found no cause
of death, they bad the accused to fine himself, which Apolog. Socr. p. 265.
Xenophon intimates by (...), and if it were too little the Judges doubtless
made it more, as the Scholiast of Aristophanes, if I forget not: The custom is
set down by De Orat. 1 ^ol. 61. b.
Cicero, speaking of Socrates. Ergo ille quoque damnatus est etc. And he too
was condemned: nor only by the first suffrages, but also by those which by the
appointment of the Laws they were to give the second time. For in Athens the
accused being found guilty, if the offense were not capital, they weighed and
considered the penalty. When the sentence was to be given by the Judges, they
asked the defendant, what he thought himself to have deserved to forfait, etc.
(In the Venetian Commonwealth this is not observed.) In trial if there be
more for the prisoners liberty, then against him, he is straight acquitted, but
if more then half be in the pot of condemnation he suffers. ^tius in (...) p.
115
Socrates at the first had two hundred eighty and one more against him, then on
his side; and at the next eighty more were added to the former, so in all he
had three hundred threescore and one condemnatory suffrages. But fewer might
have done as much. For we read in Page 436.
Demosthenes of Cimon like to be punished with death (...), if three had not
been wanting. And again Page 430.
(...). Nay one was sufficient, Page 338.
Demosthenes. (...). But Vlpian on the place (...), says, that he was lightly
punished. Aristoph. p. 244.
If the voices were equal, then was the prisoner loosed; because sometimes he
might be accused upon. suspicion; or of those things which he did not willingly
commit, or perhaps was sued out of envy, and many other reasons given by Probl.
(...).
Aristotle: therefore did the Lawgiver leave some place for pity and
compassion. To which the Judges were often moved. And therefore would they
plead the Them. p. 492.
deserts of their ancesters; their own lives formerly well led. Aristid. T. 3.
p. 292.
Sometimes showed they their wounds; and brought n Aristid ^oco cit. (...).
the venerable gray hairs of their parents, but Them. p. 493
mothers chiefly, to intercede in silence: Sometimes embracing their children
in their arms, they held them up in the Judges view; or caused them to
Aristop. pp. 469* 499.
come up into the (...), or pulpit, and supplicate with tears; which wrought
so much upon the Judges, that Vesp. p. 499
Aristophanes in a scoff presents one (...), drowning his sentence in weeping.
Then in compunction would the Judges speak to the prisoner, Sch. Ar. 500
(...), wishing him to go down from the (...), a token often of mercy; though
now and then it proved otherwise. Nay it was a word of displeasure too, as when
L^ert. Socr. p. 115.
Plato would have been Advocate for Socrates. (...), they thundered out, (...).
Neither may I forget Aehan Vor hist. l. 5. c. 19.
Amynias the bro there of. Aeschylus the Tragoedian, who, when the people would
have stoned his brother for some impiety brought on the stage, held up his
elbow and arm without a hand, lost in the fight at Salamis: by which spectacle
the Judges calling to mind the merits of Amynias, dismissed the Poet. Neither
may I omit what Athen. Rep. (...). P. 404.
Xenophon objects to them, that they cared not so much for justice, as regarded
what might conduce most to their own profit, and be convenient: Apol. Socr.
initio.
And that they condemned innocents, and spared offenders that could speak
well. Furthermore another fault of theirs was the prolonging of cases a whole
year, says Athen. Rep 406.
Xenophon, and (...). 752. 753. They are tran slated foolishly into latin.
(...) is what the Proctours in the Civll Law usually mean by in proximum, in
proximum.
Aristophanes. (...). Now we do not handle suits of above threescore years,
but we are put off until the next day. (...). For we come to trial within
twenty years. This Xenophon imputes to the multitude of their imploiments. As
long as the case hung in suspense, the name of the accused was (as among the
Romans, whence Budaeus in Pand. No. Re^ p. 31.
Rei penduli) exposed in a public table to the view of all men; which they
term (...). Demosthenes. (...). l Demost. in M^d. 347.
Vlpian. (...). You see here the place too, viz. at the Statues of the Eponymi.
Before a man was convicted, all that they objected to him was but (...), by
Cont. An^o. 388.
Demosthenes termed (...), a bare report; but after proof (...). After
judgment past, Them. p. 406
(...). An indictment of sacrilege, theft, murder, treason, is but (...); the
evidence and conviction makes it (...), the sentence (...).

CAP. III. SECT. II.
De Areopago, and eius appellatione. Areopagitae.

ON the hill, on which the Acropolis was built, stood the Areopagus, in the old
translation of the Acts of the Apostles rendered Vicus Martius, by our
Englishmen, Mars his Street, Falsely. For When Tullius had divided the Roman
field he made on high hills and places portified by nature, refuges for the
hasbandmen and called them (...):. Dion. Hal 4. Not as if it signified a
village, but as it was situated. For Pagus ^lla rustica comes from (...).
Because built near a well. Perot.
(...) bears not that signification, but what In Acta p. 136.
Justin Martyr interprets, (...), an eminent place. (...). For that Iudicatory
was on a high rock. Therefore named by Eumenidib. p. 296.
Aeschylus, and Elect. p. 836.
Euripides, (...), by Metamorp. l. 6. fab. 2.
Ovid, Scopulus Mavortis, and Vide Scalig. in conject.
Ennius, Areopagitica petra: so called, as fond Antiquity would have it,
Demost. p. 413. Paus. p. 26. Simeon Met. and Pachyman vit. Dionvs. Areopag.
from the judgment of the twelve Gods upon Mars, for killing Halirrhothius the
son of Neptune. But Loc citato.
Justin Martyr, because he was there arrained of advoutery, (...). But alike
true. It pleases me well to consider the superstition of the ancients, that
consecrated high places to their deities, and erected the statues of their Gods
upon hills. As Paus. At^. p. 31.
Parnes, Hymettus, Anchesmus, whence Jupiter Parnethius, Hymettius, Anchesmius.
And as in Athens, Neptune had a hill (...), Saturn another (...), Pan another.
(...), Mercury another, (...) so Mars his Areopagus. Eumen^. p. 290.
Aeschylus gives it a nomination from the Amazons, sacrificing to Mars there,
when they came and fought against Theseus. Or if you will receive the opinion
of others* it takes the name from the cases in it handled, of blood wilfully
shed: so Hesychius, (...), That when Satyr. 9. v. 100.
Iuvenal calls it Curiam Martis, you may interpret it, The Court of murder,
but willingly committed. This is termed by the Aeschylus page 297.
Tragoedian, the most incorrupt, sharp, reverend council, then which nothing
is more constant (says Ad Atncum. l. 1. ep. 11.
Tully, comparing to it the Roman Senate) nothing more severe, as by De bello
Tro. l. 6. p. 147.
Pseudo Dictys Cretensis it is styled Iudicium severissimum per omnem Graeciam.
Then which none judged better, more just, or honest, says (...). p. 44^.
Xenophon. In Solone page 63.
Plutarch writes that this Court was ordained by Solon, and Offic. l. 1.
Cicero received the like opinion; but that seems to contradict it, which
Plutarch presently brings, quoted in the thirteenth table, that they who had
lost their liberties should be restored again, unless they were condemned by
the Areopagites, Ephetae, Prytanes, Basilois, of murder, slaughter, tyranny,
when that Law was enacted. And by and by Loc. lau^
(...), etc. Who were condemned in Areopagus before Solons time (if he first
instituted the Areopagites.) Pollux. l. 8 p. 4^.
Others are of opinion, that Solon added the Areopagites to the Ephetae (Judges
so called because when formerly the Basileus made inquisition after murder
unwillingly committed, Draco made it (...), that is* translated it to the
Ephetae, their number was but fifty one. And though they judged in five Courts
once, yet by little and little they became ridiculous.) De (...) M^g. p. (...)
Possardus says, he abolished their severity* and substituted the Areopagites.
But De Rep. ^ (...)
Vrbo Emmius more probably, that Solon was not the Author of this Senate* but
brought it into a better form, made it more strong and firm, and augmented
the power of it. For Draco it seems lessened the authority of it, deriving it
to the Ephetae; Solo^ restored that authority and made it greater. Vide Maximum
in Prolog^ad S. Dionys. opera and (...). lib 2. in vita (...).
To this company none were admitted, but wise, wealthy, and noble men; (...)
famous for good life, and innocence, (...), whom no man could justly charge
of misdemeanour. Nay, men, whose behavior was intolerable, (...). in (...) p
133.
(...), after they were chosen into the College of the Areopagites, abhorring
and blushing at their former dispositions, (...), changed their natures, and
embraced virtue. The number of them is uncertain. L^co supra laud^to.
Nicephorus makes them but nine; as Maximus too out of Atth^d. l. 2.
Philochorus; Pachymerius fifty and one. But what Maximus produces after, is
somewhat, that they consisted of fifty and one, beside the Nobility most wise
and rich. (...). By which words he seems * They were of those Magistrates
that were chosen by Lot, as the (...), The* smothetae, Basil^us, Po^. for which
cause (...) was not of that number because he never attained to these (...).
Plut ^n (...). p. 113.
to aim at the nine Archontes, Anonym. in Argu. Oration. Androtia.
who when they had governed one year, and given an account of their offices,
and had administered all things justly, were chosen yearly into this society.
For which election annual, the number was doubtful. For some might die in that
space; or all live, and in the next year be increased. Uolaterran out of an
old inscription in Acropolis, that they were three hundred; (...), etc. To the
most famous Rusius Festus, Proconsul of Greece and Areopagite, the council of
Areopagus consisting of three hundred; and the people of Athens set up this
monument for a testimonial of his good will and benevolence. But that might
only happen when this was erected. Anonymus lo^o (...).
They continued all their life time in this dignity, and were never put out,
(...), unless for some grand offense. De statu Italiae adversus Mach^avel.
Bozius tells us (how true I wot not) that they were all Priests. Athenienses
olim, etc. The Athenians, quoth he, did strive to challenge to themselves the
prerogative of wisdom, and to them is it bent what the Apostle says, The
Greeks seek after wisdom. Nevertheless their Areopagus, who had the power of
all things consisted of Judges that were Priests, and the High Priest of all
that asked every of their sentences, took the suffrages. Their authority was
unlimited. For (...) Solon. p. 63.
they were overseers of all, (...). Va^. l. 15. c. 1^. Them. p. (...).
Judges of wilful murders, wounds given out of pretended malice: which would
make some, having a desire to drive a man out of Athens, go to a Surgeon
and make an incision in their heads, that they might sue him who^ they hated,
upon an action of battery, as Demost. ^n Orat. (...).
Mantitheus against Baeotus. They sat upon incendiaries, and impoisoners, if
the party died that took their doses. Them. p. 445.
They saw that the Laws b (...).
should be put in execution, such as Contaren would have in Uenice to be
Guardians to their Statutes. In Sympos. unless I am extremly ^orgetfull. It is
quoted likewise by Athenaeus (...).
In a word all great delinquencies came under their censures. They inquired
into the behaviors of men; and we read in 4. p. 167.
Xenophon that they sharply reproved a young man for his loose living. (...),
etc. says the Dipnosophist. Lib. 2. c. 6.
Valerius Maximus. Est and eiusdem urbis Aristides T. 1. p. 331. (...).
sanctissimum consilium Areopagus etc. There is likewise in that City the most
sacred Council Areopagus, where they were wont most diligently to enquire,
what every of the Athenians did, by what gain he maintained himself, and what
his trade and actions were. That men, knowing and remembering that once they
must give an account of their lives, might embrace honesty. Anon. Arg. O^at
Androt.
The Greek author tells us that except in great cases of necessity they meddled
not with state affairs, but it seems otherwise. For if any one say, quoth De
natura Deorum. 2.
Tully, that the Attick Republique can be well governed, without the council
of the Areopagites; he may as well say that the world may be governed without
the providence of the Gods. When the Medes and Persians invaded Greece, Est
enim bellum (...) ^onsilio (...). C^cero (...). 1.
by the advice of them was the war waged, wherein Themistocles purchased an
ever lasting memory of a victory. Plutarch. in (...). page 84 l. 3.
And when their public Treasury was bare, they furnished each man with eight
Drachmes, and stored the ships with Mariners. Which advise, when they had won
the day, was a cause, says Poli^. l. 5. c. 4
Aristotle, (...), to give strength and sinews to the Commonwealth. Isocrates
Reop. p. 132.
Under their sight were all the youth of Athens. For this reason especially,
because that when they were reckoned among men, and were come to age, they
needed more care to be had of them, then when they were children; not observed
by our countrymen in sending their sons young to the Innes of Court) youth
and heat of blood, unstaidnesse in judgment, rashness in adventures, and
pronenesse to vice, leading, or rather carrying headlong tender years to their
own destruction. To them appertained blasphemies against their Gods, violating
of religion, and divulging mysteries, as when ^aert. lib. 2. ^n A^istippo. p.
(...).
Euryclides the Hierophanta in answer to the question of Theodorus, (...); who
offended against the mysteries? (...), replied, such as open them to those who
are not initiated. Therefore quoth the Philosopher, art thou impious. For which
crime, had not Demetrius Phalereus befrended him, the Hierophanta was in
danger, (...), to have been brought before the Council of Areopagus. By
virtue of which a^thority St Paul was here judged for teaching strange Gods (as
they supposed.) (...) Met^phrast.
For although that the Athenians were under the Romans, yet their Lords made
them (...), sui iuris, and permitted the^ to keep their ancient customs. The
manner of proceeding in this Court, was thus. After the fellon^e committed, the
appellant brought his indictment to the Basileus, who giving the prisoner and
his accuser audience once a month, at three several times to debate the
business, in the fourth month, brings in the accusation to the Areopagites,
(...). (...). 8.
and putting off the crown which he was wont to wear, sat down as judge with
the Areopagites in the dark: for they judged by night, says Hermot^m. p. 5^5.
Lucian, that they might not regard the speaker, but what was spoken. It being
there forbidden (...). page 4^5.
(...), to move to compassion, and use Proems, as in other Courts, wherein they
craved the Judges favor and attention, which by Demosthenes are termed (...)
V^p. in D^most. page 396
(...). This f Aristotle calls (...), to speak beside the matter. Before the
trial both parties swear (which they style P^llux loco (...). Them. cont.
(...). p. 413.
(...)) The appealer standing upon the testes of a Goat, a Ram, and a Bull
(usual to the Greeks, as Tyndareus swore the Suitors of Helena, that they
should revenge any wrong done to her and her predestined husband, Pausanias
(...). p. 103.
(...), and Hercules to the children of Heleus (...)) took oath, therefore
named (...); in which he maintained that he dealt justly and rightly, and that
he was joined in affinity to the slain man; Demosth. p. 608 and 41^. These
agreed, sa^es Possard. about the punishment, according to the damage received.
De Athen. Mag. p. 449.
which if he were not, he could not prosecute, the Law forbidding. The reason
why he stood (...), I suppose is, because they are the instruments of
generation, and in that oath, if he were not true, he wished an extirpation of
his house, (...) and his posterity. In which if he were perjured, he was liable
to no punishment, as among the Romans. Idem ^niacis. p. 126.
Iurisjurandi contempta religio satis Deum ultorem habet. For swearing is
punished by a revenging God, but if any swore false by the life of the Prince,
he fell under l Lib. 2. C. de r^b. cred.
the Julian Law, Laesae Maiestatis. After this the prisoner swore; which among
us will not be allowed. Then setting each of them upon Paus. Attic. p. 27.
two silver stones, one of which was named (...), the stone of injury; the
other (...), by Adrian Iunius thought (...) of innocence, not impudence. Then
the appealer asked the prisoner three questions, which Eumen^d. p. 292.
Aeschylus calls (...). First, whether he were guilty or no, Ibidem.
(...); to which he answered, (...) or (...), yea or nay: secondly, (...); for
what reason he did the murder. Thirdly, (...); who were the Abettours. Then
arose there certain Lawyers, (...), who showed whether the murder was
committed Es^hylus p. 293.
(...), in justice. ( Demost vid. p 647.
For in Athens there were such Councillors, to whom in matters of difficulty
they had resort) By (...), you must understand those causes, in which Demost.
p. 312.
Draco thought it lawful to kill a man. As taking him committing uncleanesse
with wife, mother, sister, daughter, or concubin, or any whom he accounts among
his children; the party so offending might V^d. Demost. cont. Aristoc^.
be slain in the manner by him, against whom he had trespassed. Likewise, in
the defense of a man's goods, if the thief were killed, impunity was granted.
After this inquisition, they passed to sentence, which was given very privily
as Iuvenal intimates. Ergo occulta teges, ut Curia Martis Athenis; without
speaking (as the Tabellares sententiae of the Romans, in V^ Sylvium (...) O^at.
pro (...).
which they wrote C. if they condemned. A. if absolved. N. L. if the case were
not manifest) hence (...), for one that is close and silent; and (...), for one
that is grave, and who can hold his peace, and in whose countenance is ^entius.
tristis severitas. (...). Whatsoever they concluded of, stood irrecoverable,
(...). P^hymerius.
neither could there be any appeal to another Tribunal. And no marvail. For
so upright was their sentence, Demost. con. Aristocrat. p. 413.
that none, either Appellant or prisoner, could ever say, that he was uniustly
condemned. Nay both parties, as well those that are cast, as they that cast,
are alike contented. Aristides To ^. 1. p. 185
(...). After doom the prisoner was to suffer death. In which execution also
the Areopagites had a care least the innocent should be punished with the
guilty. Aelian Var. hist. l. ^. c. 13.
When therefore they had condemned a woman for poisoning another, they deferred
the execution, because she was great with child, and straight way after her
delivery put the mother to death. Which custom is by us also observed at our
Assizes. Valor. Max. p. 322.
It will not be amiss to relate one memorable thing done in the time of
Dolabella Proconsul of Asia, who, when a dame of Smyrna was brought before him,
for killing her husband and son, who had deprived her of a hopeful youth,
begot of her by a former husband, referred the audience of the matter to the
Areopagites; who commanded the woman and her accuser to appear some hundred
years after; that by such a bottom of time, scarceable to be unwinded, they
might show, that neither would condemn nor acquit the woman. One thing more
Lib. qu^to.
Quintilian tells us, that they condemned a boy for putting out the eyes of
Quails. Because it was a sign of a mind, likely to prove most pernicious.
Their power was shaken and somewhat plucked down by Plutarch. V^. p. 355. and
Mor. 391
Ephialtes, a sore enemy of Oligarchicall government, and more enclining to the
people, who was secretly slain by Plut. in Pericle p. 113.
Aristodicus of Tanagra. They sat three days every Month, (...).

CAP. III. SECT. III.
D^ Iudicio (...).

AFter the siege of Troy some of the Grecians came with Diomedes, Dictis
Cretensis de bello Tro^ano l. ^. p. 14 P.
who kept the Palladium, to the coast of Attica, and arriving by night at
Phalerum, supposing it to be an enemy country, went to make a prey. Where
Domopho ignorant that they were Grecians came to aid and defend his own; and
slew many of the Argivi, which they cast out unburied; whose bodies when no
beast had touched, ( Libro octavo page 406.
(...) says Pollux, the interpreter, nullus vivus, I better think it no
creature, either foul or beast) Acamas showed that they were Argivi having the
Palladium; Being warned then by the Oracle (who named them (...), that is,
Schol. Soph. in O^d. Tyr.
neither knowing nor known) they buried them; and in that place consecrated the
Palladium; where they made also a judicatory, for murders unwillingly
committed, and called it It is simply so called Palladiu. Aelian. Var. l. 5. c.
15. (...).
(...), juxta Palladium, as some. Here was Demopho first tried, who returning
from this battle, killed with his horse, somewhat diverting, an Athenian;
Pausan. Attic. page 27.
For whose kindred some think he satisfied the Law, or generally for the Argivi.
Demosth. contra Neaer^m. page 727. Vide 647.
If any had stricken a man or woman, and the party chanced to dye, he was
judged in this Court. Demosth. page 329.
In such cases the Law was very favorable; for the party offending was not
punished with perpetual exile, (...), as in wilful felony; (kept by us in
England once, called Abjuration, (where the guilty had his life upon oath, that
he would never return) but he did Demosthe^es* Midiana.
(...), in a gentler term. Eust. in Il^ad. 1. (...). etc.
For it was a custom of old, to give a certain sum of money (the Attick Law
(...), in wilful, all was confiscate) to the kindred of the slain, that they
might not depart their country: but if they could not purchase an abode they
went somewhere else. D^ Ponto lib. 1. Eleg. 4
Ovid. Caede puer facta Patroclus Opunta reliquit. Their discontinuanc^ was but
for one year, (...). The money disbursed n Eustath. But Demosth. (...) Vuti^
he obtained remission from some of the ^nred of the slain.
on such occasions was properly called (...), qu^si (...), from (...) murder,
as if it were the price of blood. And the Scholiast of Sophocles tells us that
(...) is spoken only (...) of payment of money, but abusively of any punishment.
Demosth.
If the party wounded had forgiven the offender before his death, or the allies
of the man desperately hurt, none could afterward compel him to f^ee;
otherwise he ^ed. And in that flight he betook himself to some acquaintance;
by whom he was cleansed from the guilt with certain ceremonies of washing,
which the Romans call Februa. So was Patroclus, Peleus, Medea, Alomaeon
purified. (...) 2. ^o
Ovid.

Graecia principium moris fuit: illa nocentes
Impia lustratos pon^ facta putat.
Actoridem Peleus, ipsum quoque Pel^a Phoci
Caede per Aemonias solvit Acastus aquas.
Vectam fraenatis per inane draconibus Aegeu^
Credulus immerit^ Phasida fovit open;
Amphiaraiades Naupacteo Acheloo
Solve nefas dixit, solvit and ille nefas.
Ah nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina caedi^
Fluminea tolli posse putatis aqua.
In this ceremony they did (...), sacrifice, says (...). P. 414.
Demosthenes, (which custom likewise was observed by the Pau^n. (...). p. 74
(...)*
Traezenians in the lustration of Orestes from the blood of his mother, which I
gather by the feast which they presently celebrated there, and yearly observed
afterward. This manner was done with water, as you may read, taken out of the
well Hippocrene, made by the foot of Pegasus; the sprinkling was with a littell
bough of Laurel, as I suppose, by the words following persuaded to it, which
tell us, that when the (...) were buried, there sprouted out of them a Bay
tree, and after that (...). This as I said was in his slight. (...). The
proceeding in this court, was first, (...), such as before I mentioned, an oath
of each party, accuser and defendant: secondly (...) their speeches of both
sides, thirdly (...), Judgment. If the prisoner were found guilty, that is,
unwillingly to have murdered, then had he a time appointed him, how long he
should flee, as above said, until he had made peace and gotten pardon from the
Cousins of the deceased.

CAP. III. SECT. IV.
De Iudiciis (...).

AT Athens there was a temple erected by Plutarch. page 4. l. 19.
Aegeus (who lived in Delphinium) to the honor of Apollo Delphinius and Diana
Delphinia, Schol. Arist. page 333.
where was the Tribunal named (...), or (...). Aelian. Var. l. 5. c. 15.
In this Iudicatory were heard cases of murder, when the party confessed the
fact, but pleaded that it was legitimate. Demosth. contra Arist. page 410. 411.
For the Law required no punishment of any man that should kill another taking
him commiting adultery with his Wife, or uncleanness with his Mother, Sister,
Daughter, Concubine, or free Children. Likewise if in preservation of his goods
or own defense he spilt blood it was not capital. The first that was arraigned
here was Theseus, maintaining the right he had to slay the thieves, says Lib.
80 page 406.
Pollux (I know not whether he mean Sciron and Procrustes etc.) and Pallas with
his children, d Pausan. At. p 27.
who were rebels. Before this trial of Theseus, whosoever had stain any body
was compelled to flee the country, or staying dye, were the cause never so
just. (...). Here they sat on things inanimate. As if a stone timber, iron, or
such like, fall on a man, and kill him, if the party that ^ung this be not
known, sentence was past on that thing which slew him; and the Pollux loco
cit^to.
(...), that were the Masters of this court* were to see this thing cast out of
the Territories of Athens* to which Contra Et^siph. p. 103.
Aeschines alludes. (...). The first thing that here was judged was an axe,
where with the Priest, whom they call (...), had s^ain an ox on the altar of
Jupiter Polieus in the time of Erectheus. (...) In that part of Pireaeum which
is next the Sea, is a place which they name (...), from Phreatus an Heroes, some
think; not because it stood in a pit, whence Lib. octav. 4^6.
Pollux names it (...). Here they were judged who having fled out of another
country for unwilfull murder Demosth. contra Aristocr. 415.
(...), they that drove him out not acquiting him, if in the space of his exile
it happened that he wittingly ^lew another, he answered here. The proceeding
was in this sort. The Judges assembled in (...), in a place seated on the Sea*
Demost. ib.
(...); where the guilty drawing near in a boat or bark, was to make his
apology, (...), not coming to land or touching it, neither casting anchor
Rodolphus G^lterus out of Pollux interprets it S^alam te^ (...), putting (...)
a l^der; the (...) (...).
or moaring his bark; and if he were found guilty he underwent deserved
punishment: if he were not found guilty they cleared him of that fact, not
discharging him of the former, (...).
(...). I know not whether I may be of that opinion that others are in this,
that if he were cast in this trial, he was exposed to the cruel mercy of the
wind and waves. These last quoted words seem to contradict it. The first that
ever answered here was Teucer, proving himself to be innocent of the death of
Ajax; D^ cre^ d^ (...) (...) l. 6* p* 145.
whom treacherously circumvented because he defended not, his father Telamon
drove out of Salamis, unto which that he might be restored he made appeal to
this court. Which gives light to Pol^ticon (...). 17.
Aristotle (...). Iudicatories concerning men flying for murder, that care for
their bringing back again, such as in Athens, (...). When the party
prosequuting will not admit of reconciliation.

CAP. III. SECT. V.
De Tribunalibus reliquis. (...).

BEsides these Courts of blood and causes criminal, there were for civil
matters these, Heliaea, of which before for the excellency of it I treated.
(...). Of this name there were two, (...), the greater and the middle. In this
Court were handled matters ^aies Petit that exceeded not one drachme, to which
Polit. lib. ^. c. 17.
Aristotle might be thought to look speaking of Iudicatories, (...) etc. And
this was the meaning of Atticis. page 27. l. 13.
Pausanias, (...). Suing here for the least occasions. The Vndecimviri were
Judges of the Court, which made Petit to suppose that it was not to be reckoned
among the (...). It stood (...) ^dem.
(...), in an obscure place of the city; whence (...)* in Page 450.
Demosthenes, is by Ulpian expounded, privily, by a Metaphor taken from the
situation of this Iudicatory, or* (...), from goods secretly hidden. (...),
from the form of it, which seems to have been triangular. (...); and (...),
from the colors that were painted (...)* Athen. Rep. (...) A^t. (...) page 31.
(...) upon the post of the entry, answerable to which there was a staff given
to the Judges, that they might know in what court to sit; For they presently
went to that court which had the same color with their staff. (...). From the
statue of Lycus on Heroes, which was there setup, having the face of a wolf;
where likewise the statue of Juno stood visaged in the same manner. But we
must not omit that the image of Lycus was erected in every court; hence
Zenobius.
(...), Lyci december, for sycophants and such as corrupt judgment, because that
such persons were very frequent and busy there; And so think I Pollux is to be
read Lib. octavo p. 406. The place is extremely cor^, as you (...) perceive
(...) (...) false Greek.
(...) (understand (...) or the like) at which they who bribed the Iudicatories
met Zenobius helps my conjecture (...). The (...) V^p. p. 457.
Scholiast of Aristophanes writes that this noble Lycus had a Temple near the
Iudicatory, where the Judges divided their money for pay, three oboli, to each,
a day. Pollux lib. ^
(...). This was a great Iudicatory; so named from Metichies an artificer,
which built it. Here, who had passed thirty years of his age and was well and
nobly descended and owed nothing to the public treasury, might be chosen
Judge. ^r of such they all consisted. (...). Some have falsely supposed that
there was a Tribunal so called; neither did (...). At. l. 2. c. 12. p. 121.
Meursius think otherwise, when he translated these words of Lib. 8. page ^ ^6.
Pollux, (...), apud tribunal Ardettum. The fault crept in by the negligence of
the transcriber; for the place is thus to be read, (...) The Iudicatories were
wont to take oath or be sworn in Ardettus. Ardettus is a place near the river
Ilissus, so named from Ard ^tus a Peer, who swore the people, being in
sedition and mutiny, to love and amity. Where afterward, as is most probable,
the Judges took oath (I cannot justly say presently after their election) to
give sentence according to the laws; and concerning things to which no Laws
were enacted, in aequity and justice, (...).
by Apollo Patrius, Ceres, and Jupiter Rex. And this the Et^mologist affirms,
speaking of Ardettus, Etym. mag. p. 14^.
(...) (...). The Judges in this place took their oath touching the discharge
of their office. From whence among the Ancients such as would presently swear,
were called Casaub. Theoph. Char. p. 178.
Ardetti, proverbially; as also those who were perjurious and forsworn. Etym.
Mag. loco laudato.
(...). Thus have we viewed the Athenian Iudicatories, in number ten. For
Murder, Areopagus, Palladium, Delphinium, Prytaneum, and Phreattys. For other
matters, Heliaea, Trigonum, Parabystum (not the Medium but Majus) Metichi
forum, and ad Lycum, where the (...) were wont to sit, says De Mag. Athen. p.
540
Possardus; of whom; because Descrip. R^ip. Ath. p. 41.
Emmius numbers them among Iudicia quatuor praecipua the four chief Courts, I
will now speak. But of every Tribe were chosen Vlpian in Them. p. ^42.
forty our men, Pollux l. ^. p. 4^7.
above threescore years old, who judged in several Tribes, as it fell to them
by lot. And if any refu sed to s^t according to his lot, he was deprived of the
privileges (...). Athenian Citizen. Pollux ib.
In former time there came no ^ontroversy into the Courts, which had not first
past through their hands (if it exceeded ten drachmes. Although Demosthenem
loco citato.
Vlpian tells us that they determined of petty businesses) but that seems to
be, (...), holy matters, if Pollux be so to be read. For some things there were
which came not under their jurisdiction. What ever the (...) judged, if the
plaintiff and defendant, or either of them liked not the award, they might
refer it to the Senate (as appears out of the Page 67^.
Argument of Demosth. Orat. contra Callippum, and Lib. 8. p. 4^7.
Pollux) at which removing of the suit they were to cast their suffrages into a
pot as they gave them, on what side soever, for the plaintiff by themselves, and
for the defendant by themselves. Vide Them* M^. etc. Vlp^n in illum. p. 34^
When they were appointed for the hearing of a case, they were to meet at the
place for them ordained, there to expect both parties until the even, at which
time if neither, or but one was present, it was in their power to fine them
according to the Law. At the time they entered the suit, and wrote the
accusation, with the ^ine which was required for damages; they received as a
fee from the plaintiff one drachme, which they called Pollu^ l. 8. c. 10. p. 408.
(...), as also another from the defendant, when they gave him his oath. This
office was but annual; And because they would pervert justice, (as Orat. in
Baeo^um pro do^e.
Demosthenes is witness, Idem page 682 (...) 4^.
although they were not to judge before they had sworn) give sentence according
to favor, envy, or for gain, therefore (...) loco (...). 342.
at the years end they made an account of their function upon the last day of
(...) Mis^ l. 8. p. 211.
Thargelion, on which it was lawful for any to speak what he could object
against them; and if any were faulty, they were (...). Thus much of the (...).
There were other (...) likewise, such as our Civilians call Arbitri
compromissarii: and we in english Arbitrators: whom two parties choose with a
resolution to stand to their determination; whether in matter of debt,
covenant, or other controversy soever. Such by the Attick law any might
request, but with a necessity of abiding at their judgment. (...) legem (...)
(...). p. (...).
For they could not appeal from them to any other court. To refer matters to
their arbitrament, the Greeks term (...). And it will not be superfluous here
to relate the story of Bunas an Athenian, whom when the Ele^ and Calydoni^ had
chosen arbitrator in a differency, after he had heard both parties, he
prolonged the sentence until at last he died. Whence it grew to a proverb,
Zenob^us.
(...), Bunas judicat, Bunas judges, of those that defer to pass sentence,
and hold a case long in suspense.

CAP. IV.
De Nominibus Iudicialibus.

HAving thus treated of the Attick Courts, it follows that I speak of their
Terms of Law, Writs, and Accusations. These were of two sorts, private and
public. The public were properly termed (...), says Descr^p. Re^p. A^h. p.
(...).
Emmius. Of (...) there were diverse sorts. (...) says In Demost. pro Corona.
p. 159.
Vlpian is (...), of any trespass against the Law, by which the Statutes of
the Commonwealth are violated; and most properly, Orat. contra (...). p 2^6.
quoth he, elsewhere, it signifies an accusation made according to the Law; or
to come nearer, it is the same which in English we call a (...) (...) ^om.
Wealth of Engl. l. 2. (...). 10.
Writ or Right, in Latin Actio or Formula, as in In Vi^ellio.
Sueton, Iniuriarum formulam intendere, to serve a man with a Writ. Pollux l 8.
p. 3^7.
(...) is a kind of an Information made against any for abuses in the Mines,
or Custom houses, for converting Tribute money to a man's own use, or the
like. Which offenses were brought to the Archon in writing, with the names of
the accuser and accused, and the fine which the parties convinced should
undergo, to be paid to him to whom the wrong was offered. But if the Informer
had not the (...) part of the suffrages, he was to lay down the ^ixt part of
the fine; which the d Orators call (...), from (...), h Demostner. cont (...).
p. 699. n. 6. cont. Everg. and Mn^sib. page 646. n 9^. cont. Steph (...). A. p.
622 n. 9. contra (...). (...). p. ^28. n. 19. (...). Apho^. (...). p. 508. n
(...).
because it signifies the sixth part of a Drachme. At the end of the accusation,
the informer was to subscribe the names of the witnesses that were present. In
general, all discoveries of private injuries are called (...), which in Latin
you may name delationes. For which the Romans allotted the fourth part of the
forfeit, whence they are styled Quadruplatores; but among the Athenians not so,
if Onom (...) (...). c. 6. p. (...).
Pollux say right. (...). The amercement fell to the person injured, although
another accused for him. If the fi^e were written down a thousand Drachmes, and
the Accuser had not the fifth part of the voices; he paid two hundred and one
Drachme; if it exceeded; a thousand, four hundred and one. (...) is a Writ
against those that owe to the City Treasury, and yet go about to bear
office, says In Demos^. (...). (...).
Ul^ian, which by the Attick Law was utterly forbidden. The In Equit. p. 303.
Scholiast of Aristophanes, takes it for the accusing of any that did amiss in
public affairs; and the P^g. (...).
Interpreter of Demosthenes in another place, (...) for men disfranchised. But
Onom. l^b. 8 p 388.
Pollux teaches us that it is a declaration made to the Archon against one
taken in the manner; which the Greeks term (...), In (...). 1.
Schol, Nazianz (...), Pollux expresses by (...), when the offense is
confessed. Because men so apprehended were forced to condemn themselves; no
further evidence required then from their own mouths. By which acknowledgment
of their guiltiness, without greater trial, they received their doom: (...)
T. Smith (...). (...) Engl. l. 2. c. 26. p. 281
as among us when a prisoner arraigned, confesses his indictment to be true, no
twelve men go upon him: there rests but the Judges sentence of the pain of
death. Whence grew our proverb, Confess and be hanged. Loco (...).
Pollux (...). He that thus made his declaration, was to subscribe his name,
that if he were false, he might be liable to the Writ, (...). The declaration
was against men who were not present. (...), is a carrying of a man before the
Magistrate, being taken in the fact, whom otherwise he was to accuse by
declaration in his absence. By which a thousand Drachmes were endangered. In
this (...); they brought not all offenders to the same Magistrates, but
according as they were made Judges of such and such offenses; V^p in Them p. 389
sometimes to the eleven, sometimes to the I^em p. 407
Thesmothetae, sometimes to the Archon. Now if a man had found out any indebted
to the public Treasury, or bound for those places or countries, where it was
not permitted for him to go, or one who had committed murder, if by reason of
weakness he durst not venture to apprehend the person, and (...), he would
perhaps fetch the Archon to the house where such a party lay hid, which the
Attick Lawyers term (...), is when a fellon has committed murder, and flies
for succor to any; ( Them. p. 416
as the Law suffered any to receive him) if the kindred of the slain or others
had required the malefactor to be delivered to the^, and the protector would
not, it was lawful to enter into his house, and carry away any three persons,
as some translate it, or all sau^ three, (...), as others, who were to answer
(...) Idem cent. (...). p. 415.
for the outrage done. But who so entered uniustly, was not to (...) unpunished.
(...), says In Them. p. 58.
Vlpian, is an accusation concerning great and public matters, such as Eund.
p. 453
elsewhere he speaks of, to wit, the dissolution of the Democracic; or if an
Orator had spoken what was not for the benefit of the weal public, if any
went to wars before they were sent, or betrayed a Garrison, army, or fleet.
In other accusations, if the accuser had not the fifth part of the suffrages, he
was fined a thousand Drachmes, and lost the privileges of a Citizen, in this
he was uncontrolable. But in after time, because men would accuse presently for
none, or small offenses; therefore was there a Law enacted, that whosoever
accused by (...), and had not the fifth part of voices on his side, was fined a
thousand Drachmes, although he lost not the privileges of a Citizen. This
(...) contained no written crimes, but was only by bare word of mouth; and as
the accusation was given, so was the defense made according to the Law called
(...). The Senate was Judge ( Pollux says that Solon made a thousand to sit on
this, and Phalereus 1500. Where the interpreter erres. For (...) is 500 to
them, as (...), in Demosthenes, and somewhat more) and whom they found
delinquent, if in small faults, they (...); but if the offense were heinous,
they committed him to prison. Thus much for public actions; private were
these that follow, more properly called (...).

(...). is an Action against a man, who when two shall s^uffle gives the first
blow, which the D^m. p. 410 v d: Vlp ibid. and A^g Orat. cont. Everg. p. 6^7.
Greeks call (...). (...) (...). (...) p. 745.
The matter was heard before the Iudge^; and though the Law ordained not any
set sum of money for damages, yet it was permitted for the party smitten to
write down what he thought fitting. Them. (...). Con. p. 690.
The reason why these actions were so strictly looked into, was least any not
able to defend himself with his hands, should seek to revenge himself with
stones, or other hurtful weapon.

Idem ibid.
(...). Somewhat near our proviso of giving the lie, least by taunting and
reproachful words, men be provoked to blows. (...). Is when any man receives
damage and hurt in estate by another man. Arg. Orat. Them. contra (...) m.
As to turn water into his ground, by which it is anoyed; Them. cont. Call. p.
p. 680 n. (...).
To refuse to pay money where it is required, or to give it to another. Them.
cont. ^m. p. 659. n. ^5.
To promise to bear witness in a suit, and then not be present, by which the
case falls, and the like. (...). About pawnes* I suppose, which men that needed
money were wont to leave with the usurers* Sch. Aristo. (...). E.
as clothes, housholdstuffe, etc. Or about money put to the Banck, which the
exchangers did employ to the advantage of the owners, as I gather out of Cont.
Ph^. p. 555. n. 7. 8.
Demosthenes. The word imports both. (...). Of divorce. Vide Cujacium. Observe.
l. ^. c. 15.
For they were wont to put away their wives, in former time, upon discontent or
hope of greater portions; which divorce they called (...), and as Lysias (...)*
on the husbands side, and on the wives (...); for he did as it were turn her
away, she was said to forsake him. (...). Of ill usage of parents, as not
releiving them if they were poor. Of wives against husbands, of Pupils against
Tutors. (...) of theft, after what manner soever. Which if it were by day, was
not capital, but by night was deadly. (...). Such as our Act of Parliament
has allotted for extortion, it being by This is reckoned among the Laws which
were m^e (...) pri^ men. Vlp in Them. p. 481.
Law provided in Athens that none should take too much use, although once
allowed by Solon, that any might make the best of his money: which he terms V^
Casaub. ^n Theoph. p. 191. Ch^* (...).
(...). Of usury I shall speak more in Chap. of money. (...). When men had
bargained and would not stand to it. (...)
Aristotle. (...). When men broke the Articles which they made to each other,
about dividing of inheritance between man and man, or between city and city,
concerning free trading, as that of the Carthaginians with the Romans. Arist.
Pol. 3. ^. 6. or the like Them. p. 651 n. 1^.
These (...) were usually confirmed by oath to each other. (...). V^* in Them p
(...) and (...).
a contention about bearing office, in which they seek to have a time
appointed, when a man shall enter into it. For the discharge whereof they are
to prove him fit. (...). When parents died and left their daughters
inheritrices, the kindred was wont to sue each other, to make it appear who was
nearestioyned in blood, that he might marry her. Hence a Virgin to whom an
inheritance falls is called (...), that is, Controversa. o Pollux l. 3. c. 3.
p. 136.
(...). About letting of houses. (For Herodotus terms that (...), which other
Greek writers (...), it is as well to set to hire, as to take to rent, (...)
and (...), to let out. Which they often did for want of money, which that they
might obtain the quicker, they wrote over their door as we use to do, This
House is to be let. Which custom Menedem^s in Heaut. Act. 1. Sc. 1.
Terence expresses * Inscripsi ilico, AEDES MERCEDE) This Writ was properly
against Guardians of Orphans (not concerning men of years, such as immediately
is before spoken) who having taken the charge upon them of Tuition, were to
employ for the benefit of their Pupils what was left them: they therefore made
known to the Archon that such a house was to be let, he then put it out upon
some pledge for security. But if the house were let under the yearly rent it
could bring in, or was suffered to remain void of a Tenant, to the loss of
the Pupil, then was it lawful for any man to sue the Guardian in the Archon's
court? upon a Writ of (...). I have observed it to have been a custom among
the Ancients, when they perceived themselves to draw near to death, to call
for some one, to whose care they would commit their children, and delivering
them into they hands, beseech them to have a tender eye over them, and to
provide for them what should be most convenient: such as Oedipus in Oedip. Col.
p. 314.
Sophocles entreats of Theseus in the behalf of his daughters - (...). Not
unlike is that of the Ter. And^ Act. 1. Sc. 5.
Comoedian under the person of Chrysis, committing Gly^erium to the Tuition of
Pamphilus.

Accessi: vos semotae: nos soli: incipit:
Mi Pamphile, huius formam atque aetatem vide:
Nec clam te est, quam illi nunc utraeque inutiles
Et ad pudicitiam, and ad tutandam rem sient.
Quod ego t^ hanc per dextram oro, and ingenium tuum,
Per tua^ fidem, (...) huius solitudinem
Te obtestor ne abs te hanc segreges, non desera^*
Si te in Germani fratris dilexi loco;
Sive hae^ te solum semper fecit maxumi,
Seu tibi morigera fuit in rebus omnibus.
Te isti virum do, amicum, tutorem, patrem:
Bona nostra haec tibi committo, and tuae mando fidei.
Hanc mihi IN MANVM DAT, mors continuo ipsam occupat.
But among the Athenians the use was to nominate in their Testaments and last
Wills, whom they would have to be Guardians. Which office after they had
undertaken, if they should defraud the Orphans of their patrimony, or any part
thereof, they were sued with a Writ (...), as Plut. in vita (...).
Demosthenes did sue his as soon as he came to age. But if the matter were not
questioned within five years after the pupil was admitted among the number of
men, by the Demosth. p. ^24. (...). 22.
Law the Guardian could not be taxed. (...), Of a Master against a Servant
ungrateful for his manumission, not doing his duty to his Master. Because, as
Page 46^.
Demosthenes witnesses, it was the nature of servants once made free, not only
to be ungrateful, bu^ also to hate their Masters most of all men, as those who
(...) ^een conscious to their servitude. It was enacted therefo^ that whosoever
was convicted of ingratitude should again be made a bonds^aue Valerius
Maximus. Age, quid il^ (...).
^titum Athenarum, quam memorabile? quod convictus a patr (...) libertus
ingratus, iure libertatis exuitur. The Romans did not only acquit them of the
liberty of the City (which the Athenians gave not) but made them also slaves,
which punishment they term Justin. In^. l. 1. T. (...).
Maximam capiti^ diminutionem. (...). If any man put away his wife he was to
restore her portion again; if he refused he was (...), that is* every month
for one pound to pay nine oboli which the Atticks term Demost. p. 733*
(...), the revenew of her dowry. The Writ whereby he was sued was (...), for
the repayment. Them. page 655 n ^8.
(...), If any went to Law, as clayming Title to an house, he was first to
serve him that dwelled in it with a Writ (...), by which he demands his rent
for the time the defendant had the house: if it were for any parcel of land,
there was a Writ (...) given out, for the provent and fruit thereof; afterward
(in both cases alike) they proceeded to an (...), in which they claymed right
and title to the house or land. Although in all these trialls the defendant
were cast, yet could he keep justly either house or land: but if in a third
trial, which they call (...), he were overthrown, he was compelled to
relinquish his possession. This (...) also is a Writ against those that would
cast an inhabitant out of his house, it being termed from (...), to throw
forth. Vlp. in Them p. 340.
It is also a Writ of Execution against any overthrown in the Court, and fined
a thousand Drachmes, which at such a day he was to pay; and if he laid it not
down upon the nail, there went forth a Writ (...), to make enter upon the
lands and possessions of him so cast. It is also a Right against any who will
not suffer him, who has bought any thing of the public, to reap the fruit
thereof. Who either withholds any thing from the owner, or violently takes from
any, etc. (...) When two had been partners in estates, and one of them would
have a dividence made, if the other refused, he might be constrained to it by
the Writ. (...). Because the Market place among the Greeks was the fittest to
cheat and cosen in, as Apud Laer. p 74.
Anacharsis was wont to say, therefore the Athenians enacted that none should
buy in the market place; (to which the Scythian wiseman pointed likewise,
sayng* that they forbad to speak false, and yet did (...)) if any man had
bargained for any thing, and another sued and doubted of the right of it,
P^llux l. 8. c. 6. p. 385.
he might require the seller to confirm the lawfulness of the thing sold, and
maintain it ^inst all controversy, otherwise the seller was liabl^ ^o (...).
For although in Athens they bought for the most part Graeca ^ide* with ready
money; as In Auson. Lect l. ^. c. 6.
Scaliger and In Theoph. Ch^. p. 312.
Casaubon truly interpret it, Adve^ ^um l. 4. ^. 13
Turnebus, Repraesent at a pecunia: yet sometime gave they Earnest only to
make the thing sure, which the Greeks and Latins call Don. Quod p^us datur^ut
reliquum reddatur. in Ter. Heaut. Act. 3. S^. ^.
(...), from the Vide Dasq in B^sil Sell.
Hebrew (...). This seems to me to have been the hundredth part of the money
which was to be paid for the thing bought, as Sermon 4^*
Stobaeus out of Theophrastus. Where you may read likewise that it was the
custom, when any thing was to be sold, to bring a note thereof to the
Magistrate some threescore days before. (...)* For the laying open of any
thing, concerning which was a suit in law, by O^omast l. 8. c. 6. p. 384.
Pollux his words I may conjecture, goods or money privily taken away. (...).
When any should offer to take another man's servant, and make him free against
the will of the Master, which the Greeks term Demost. p. 718. n. 29.
(...) is a suit about neerenesse of blood, in matter of inheritance, when a
man dies without issue of his own body* (...)* When a man went to prove that
he was to challenge the inheritance of right, as near of blood; or upon some
other conditions: from (...); because he laid down the tenth part of the
inheritance, which if he were cast in Law, he was to pay, if the cause were
private, says Pand. P^o. p. 100.
Budaeus: but if public, the fifth. Them p. 620 ^* ^8. Here to ^oweth the
terms* p^ ^s, ^ate and public which are pub* li^ue an^ lawful ^or any to
prosequute: see P^liux, page ^86.
(...). When any shall protest that an inheritance does hang in controversy,
and is (...), as a true heir being still alive, of which thing chiefly treats
the Oration of Demosthenes against Leochares. (...). When any shall try to
falsi^ie the (...). When men went to Law about kindred* as to prove themselves
of such and such houses

(...). All strangers in Athens were compelled by the Law to get them Patrons
(as my most worthy Schoolmaster the glory of his time In Epist. Dedic. suo
Euchaitensi prae^ixa ad Richar. Cantuariensem Atchiepiscopum.
Mr Matthew Bust has observed, whom for honors sake I name) or else they
might be questioned, and if they were convicted their goods were sold and put
into the City Treasury. (...) of ingratitude against those who showed not
themselves thankful to those who had well deserved of them. (...) the same
with (...), when any will reckon himself among the number of Citizens who has
never been made free, by which he purchased imprisonment until such time as
there was a Court kept, and then he was sold. (...) when a man is eye witness
of a matter. (...), When an other witnesses from the report of him that saw it.
(...) false witness, which to prosecute in Law they term (...) when one was
eyewitnes and promised to testify, yet would not appear at the appointed time;
which they were wont to compel them to do, which they call (...), after which
citation the party was to be at court, or forswear that he saw not the matter,
or was not present; otherwise he was to pay a thousand Drachmes, in which sum
to be ^ined the Atticke Lawyers give the appellation (...), When the Judges
were corrupted with bribes. (...) against those that did corrupt them. (...) of
a man convinced of idleness, which once taken Draco punished the delinquent
with loss of the City privileges, Solon not unless he were thrice
delinquent. (...), When any of the mariners ran away from their ships. (...),
When the Mariners that stayed in the ships would not fight, if occasion
required. (...) when any would falsely accuse, there was likewise against them
a writ (...) Against those that unjustly cite to the Court. (...) when any is
accused of encroaching into the number of Citizens, and gives gifts to escape
free* (...) when any was accused of making a decree or Law contrary to former
statutes. This accusation was called (...); because the accuser swore that it
was against the Laws or unjust or inconvenient for the Commonwealth. (...)
was an examination of the Magistrates whether they were fit to govern or no.
Whether the Orators were not given to Lust and incontinency, whether they had
not spent their patrimonies or dealt unkindly with their parents or lead a life
any other ways blameable, whereupon they were discarded the privileges of the
City and not suffered to plead or speak publicly. (...) An account of
public offices borne, laying out of money and dispatching Ambassages, made to
the Ten Log^stae (for the breach of which went out a Writ (...) Rationem
reddere) if concerning injuries given to the Judges. (...) an accusation
against those who are ill affected toward the Commonwealth, made by the decree
of the people, and such as are welwillers to the state. (...) likewise are
accusations against men injurious (...), Lib. Arg. in Medianam.
and such as are delinquent against their festivalls, as the oration of
Demosthenes against Midias. (...), An oath which the accuser took that he would
justly accuse Vlpian in Them. 226.
(...), The defendants oath that he had done no wrong. (...), an oath of
Ambassadors or men chosen for state service, that by reason of sickness they
cannot give attendance. They may do it by a proxy if they please. It is
likewise the oath of one called to witness, wherein he swears that he knows
nothing of the business. (...) When others shall swear that pretended
weakness was only a shift to put off the burden of public office which the
state laid on them. (...) an accusation of a Law or decree unprofitable,
against the motioner, as above said. (...) and (...) when a man shall object a
case not to be entered rightly, that the writ ought to be such and such, and not
as it is ex. gr. for a man that runs away from the Army, which is (...), and
I accuse him of leaving his rank, to wit (...), or objection of the time past
within which space the suit was to be commenced, or that it should be handled
in such a Court and not in such, as wilful murder in Areopagus not Palladium,
by which evasion if the case fell it was termed (...), when he that is sued
puts in a bill against the plaintiff in like manner. But if the defendant (I
call (...) so) were cast he paid (...). Vlpian in Them. 343.
(...), when a man is summoned to answer before the Arbitri a controversy, if
he swear that he is sick or pretends a journey from home, and appears not at
the day appointed, he was cast in (...) Eremodicio, as if he scorned to come or
were obstinate, he ought within ^enne days to sue out (...), wherein he
reproved the sentence and made it of no effect so as it came to its first state
again. But if he could not obtain a (...), having before sworn that he would
stand to the award of the Judges, their determination stood in full strength
and power, and he was constrained to pay a thousand drachmes, as In Them. p. 340.
Vlpian* which was the mulct appointed by tho law, for the discharge whereof he
put in good security* (...), When any was absent from the Court or heard not
his name called by the Crier to answer thereunto he was fined, as conscious of
Eremodicium, and if within the space of two Months he did not renew the suit
(which is (...)) he was sure to pay the fine. (...), when any man will challeng
out of goods forfeited and publicly sold somewhat as debt to him, or say that
part belongs to him, the state would narrowly search into it, which thing they
term (...) is a citing of one before the Archon in controversy about
inheritance, or a virgin left inheritrix. Now if the plaintiff did not warn the
defendant (...), the suit died, and such actions are called (...) Them. p. 6^*
(...) is as letting a case fall or dissolving it upon some witness, oath,
confession extorted by torments, and the like. (...) is an appeal from one
court to the other, as from the Senate to the people, and from the people to
the Senate again, or from their Iudicatories at home to some forrainers in
another country. (...) when there is no more fine laid upon a man then what his
adversary did (...), write down at the lower end of his indictment: of which
custom somewhat has before been spoken. (...)* Against such as stole ox dung
out of their neighbors lands; whence of those that are put in the conrt for
trivial matters the proverb Austoph. S^h* p 328. Laertius in vita.
(...) of impiety against their Gods, as Aristotle for his hymn on Hermias,
Tyrant of the Atarneuses, which he engraved on a statue at Delphos. For
revealing my^eries, or imitating them as Alcibiades. Of which if a man were
convicted he was put to death; as on the contrary the accuser if he got not the
better. (...), of being false to the state, the punishment was death, and after
that, that they should be cast out of the Territories of Athens unburied. Them.
cont. Theocr. page 72^ ^. 76* ^7.
(...), If any owed to the City Treasury, and his name were registered, and
before the discharge of the money his name were blotted out, they sued him
before the Thesmotheta (...), but if his name were never entered he was
prosequted by an (...) proper only to such as dealt in the mines, like to the
Stanneries in the County of Cornwall my country, and Devon-shire her sister.
D^. con. P^ntae. p. 568. n. 51. 52.
Liable to this Court were they who should thrust any man from his work, who
should dig within another man's liberties, who should bring weapons thither, I
suppose to take away Minerals by violence, who should kindle any fire in the
Mines etc. Who should offer to take away the props that upheld the weight of
the incumbent earth, which to do was death, as In vitis December. Rhet. p. 453.
Plutarch tells us. There was likewise (...) against the laborers in the Mines,
who if they intended to begin a new work were to acquaint the overseers
appointed for that end by the people, that the four and twentieth part of the
new coin might come to the public Treasury. Now if any presumed to work who
had not made it known to the officers it was lawful for any to accuse him
(...). About money put out to the money changers. Argum. Phorm. Orat. p. 554.
For (...) among the Atticks is the same that (...) in the lawyers of latter
time, in Iure Graeco-Rom. Sometimes indeed they used (...) for* means, and
sustenance Sch. E^rip* Med. p. 368
(...) and (...) have this difference, that Vlpian in Med. p. 368.
(...) is the Judge that gives sentence, (...) is he that put in the
controversy, to be the means that the sentence past against the defendant.
Idem in Them. p. 450.
(...) is when a man deeply indebted pretends that he is not able to discharge
all and therefore desires the people that a part thereof might be remitted.

FINIS.

