DOCTOR Merrie-man: OR, Nothing but Mirth.

Written by S. R.

AT LONDON, Printed for John Deane, and are to sold at his Shop at
Templebarre under the gate. 1609.

Doctor Merry-man, or, Nothing but Mirth.
A Citizen for recreation sake,
To see the Country would a journey take,
Some dozen Mile, or very little more;
Taking his leave with friends, two months before
With drinking health's, and shaking by the hand,
As he had trauail'd to some newfound land.
Well, taking Horse with very much ado,
London he leaves for a day or two;
And as he rides, meets upon the way
Such, as (what haste soever) bid men stay:
Sirrah says one, stand, and your Purse deliver;
I am a taker, thou must be a giver.
Unto a Wood hard by, they hale him in,
And riffle him unto his very skin.
Masters (quoth he) pray hear me ere you go,
For you have robbed more now then you do know:
My Horse in troth I borrowed of my Brother,
The Bridle and the Saddle of another:
The Ierkin and the Bases be a Taylours,
The Scarf (I do assure you) is a Saylours:
The falling Band is likewise none of mine,
Nor Cuffes as true as this good light does shine:
The Satin Doublet and Rays'd-veluet Hose
Are our Churchwardens (all the Parish knows)
The Boots are John the Grocers at the Swan,
The Spurs were lent me by a Seruing-man:
One of my Rings (that with the great red stone)
A Mony-monger choice of Suerties had,
A Country-fellow, plain in Russet clad;
His Doublet Mutton-taffaty, Sheeps skins,
His Sleeves at hand buttoned with two good pins,
Upon his head a filthy greazie Hat
That had a hole (eat through by some Rat)
A Leather Pouch, that with a Snap-haunce shut,
Two hundred Hob-nayles in his Shoes were put:
The Stockings that his clownish Legs did fit,
Were Kersie to the calfe, and the other knit:
And at a word, th'apparell that he wore,
Was not worth Twelue-pence, sold at, Who gives more?
The other Suertie, of an other stuff,
All Silk and Velvet, in his double Ruff,
Made Lawne and Cambricke, both such common ware;
His duble set, had Falling-band to spare.,
His fashion new, with last edition stood,
His Rapier hilts embrew'd in Golden blood:
And these same trappings made him seem one sound,
To pass his credit for a Hundred pound:
So was accepted, Russet-coate denay'd:
But when time came the Money should be paid,
And Mounsieur Usurer did haunt him out,
Strange alteration struck his heart in doubt:
For in the Counter he was gone to dwell,
And Brokers had his painted Clothes to sell:
The Usurer then further understands,
The Clown refused, was rich* and had good lands;
Ready through rage to hang himself, he swore,
That Silken knaves should cozen him no more.
A Wealthy Misers Son, upon the way,
Met a poor Youth, that did entreat and pray
Something of Charity in his distress;
Help sir (quoth he) one that is Fatherless.
Sirrah (said he) away: be gone with speed;
I Will help none such; thou art a Knave in deed.
Do thou complain, because thou want a Father?
Were it my case, I would rejoice the rather:
For if thy Fathers death, cause thee repine,
I would my Father had excused thine.
A Country fellow had a Dream,
Which did his mind amaze,
That starting up, he wakes his wife,
And thus to her he says.
Oh Woman rise, and help our Goose,
For even the best we have,
Is presently at point to die,
Unless her life you save;
On either side of her I see
A hungry Fox does sit,
But staying, upon courtesy
Who shall begin first bit.
Husband (quoth she) if this be all,
I can your Dream expound,
The perfect meaning of the same
I instantly have found.
The Goose between two Foxes placed,
Which in your sleep you saw,
Is you your self that prove a Goose,
In going still to law.
On either side a Lawyer comes,
And they do feathers pull,
That in the end, you will be left
A bare and naked Gull.
Wife, in good troth (quoth he) I think,
Thou art just in the right,
My Purse can witness to my grief,
They do begin to bite:
I do resolve an other course,
And much commend thy wit;
I Will leave the Gooses part for them
That have a mind to it:
And if thou ever find that I
To lawing humors fall,
Let me be hanged at Westminster,
(Wife) I Will for-sweare the Hall.
AN idle fellow that would take no pain,
Looking that others should his state maintain,
Was sharp reproou'd by an honest friend,
Who told him, Man was made to other end
Then only eat, and drink, and sleep, and play.
To whom the lazy creature thus did say;
(Sir) I do nere intend to labor much,
Because I see the bad reward of such
As take most pains: Horses that labor great,
Are cast in ditches for the Dogs to eat.
A Crafty kind of knauish fool,
Where of there plenty be,
Did break his Mistress Looking-glass.
And swore it was not he:
His Master did examine him,
Demanding who it was,
(Sir) if you will be content (quoth he)
I Will tell who broke the Glass.
With that, he brought him in the Hall,
To Fortunes Picture there,
Saying, Sir, it was Fortune did the de^d,
She ought the blame to bear.
His Master took a Cudgel,
And belabour'd him withal,
Who crying out for mercy, down
Before his feet did fall.
Nay (quoth his Master) it is not I,
To Fourtune you must speak,
For even she that cudgels you,
The Glass before did break.
A Sort of Clownes for loss which they sustained
By Soldiers, to the Captain sore complained,
With doleful words, and very woeful faces,
They moved him to compassionate their cases.
Good Sir (says one) I pray redress our wrong,
They that have done it, unto you belong:
Of all that ere we had, we are bereft,
Except our very Shirts, nothing is left.
The Captain answered thus; Fellows hear me:
My Soldiers robbed you not, I plainly see:
At your first speech you made me somewhat sad,
But your last words resolude the doubt I had:
The greatest Monarch that on earth we find,
Puts off to me: Mower you come behind.
The Other replied, Barber in vain you jar,
I have a privilege exceeds you far;
For when by me, the Grass with Sieth is shorn,
Or that my Sickle cutteth down the Corn,
Upon the stumps I boldly can untruss:
What Barber on his work, that dare do thus?
AN humorous fantastic Ass,
Whose Wit and Wealth were spent,
Did in all companies he came
Boast of his great descent.
And all the Gentlemen he knew,
Unto his blood were base:
For he could prove from Noes great Flood,
His stock of royal raze.
Pray Sir (quoth one) take no more pains
In this same worthy thing,
For it is most apparent plain,
From what old House you spring.
You may just prove your Pedigree
From Noah to this hour:
Your Ancestors good Masons were,
That wrought on Babell Tower.
And were I as your Worship is,
In spite of Bricklayers hall,
I would give Trowell in mine Arms,
A Ladder, Tray, and all.
GEntlemen that approach about my stall,
To most rare Physic I inuit you all;
Come near and harken what I have to sell,
And deal with me all those that are not well.
In this Box here, I have such precious stuff,
To give it praise, I have not words enough:
If any Humor in your Brains be crept,
I Will fetch it out, as if your Heads were swept.
Almost through Europe I have shown my face,
In every Town and every Market place;
Behold this Salve; I do not use to lie,
Whole Hospitals, there have bin curde thereby.
I do not stand here, like a tattered slave,
My Velvet and my Chain of Gold I have:
Which cannot be maintained by men's looks:
Friends, all your Town is hardly worth my Books.
There stands my Coach and Horses, it is mine own;
From hence to Turkey is my credit known:
In few I cannot boast as many will;
Let nothing speak for me but only skill.
See you that thing, like Ginger-bread lies there?
My tongue cannot express to any ear
The sundry virtues that it does contain,
Or number half the Worms that it has slain.
If in your bellies there be Crawlers bred
In multitudes, like Hairs upon your head:
Within some hour space, or thereabout,
At all the holes you have, I Will fetch them out,
And ferret them before that I have done,
Even like the Hare that forth a bush does run.
Here is a wondrous Water for the Eye,
This for the Stomach: Masters will you buy?
When I am gone, you will repent too late,
And then, like fools, among your selves will prate,
Oh that we had that famous Man again,
When I shall be supplied in France or Spain:
Now for a Stoter, you a Box may have,
That will the lives of half a dozen save.
My Man is come, and in mine ear he says,
At home for me, atleast are hundred stays;
All Gentlemen, wet for your good you see,
I make them tarry and attend formee:
If that you have no Money, let me know,
Physic of alms, upon you lie bestow.
What Doctor in the world can offer more?
Such arrant Clownes I never knew before?
Here you do stand like Owls and gaze on me,
But not a penny from you I can see.
A man shall come to do such dunces good,
And can not hare his meaning understood,
To talk to senseless people is in vain,
I Will see you hanged ere I come here again:
Be all Diseased as bad as Horses be,
And die in Ditches like to Dogs form:
An old Wives Medicine, Parsely, Time, and Sage,
Will serve such Buzzards in this scuruy age:
Goose-greafe and Fenell, with a few Dog-dates,
Is excellent for such base lowzy mates:
Farewell, some Hempton Haulter be the charm,
To stretch your necks as long as is mine arm.
ONe came to court a Wench which was precise,
And by the spirit did the flesh despise,
Moving a secret match between them two;
But she in sooth and sadness would not do.
He did reply, so sweet a fair as she,
Made of the stuff as all frail women be;
Ought by the law of Nature to be kind,
And show her self to hear a woman's mind.
Well Sir (quoth she) you men do much preuail^
With cunning speeches and a pleasing tale;
It Is but a folly to be over nice,
You shall: but twenty shillings is my price:
Abrace of Angels if you will bestow,
Come such a time, and I am for you, so.
Well, he took leave, and with Her husband met,
Told him by bond be was to pay a debt:
Entreating him to do so good a deed,
As lend him twenty shillings at his need*.
Which very kind he present did extend,
And the other willing on his Wife did spend:
So taking leave with her, he goes his ways*
Meeting his Creditor within few days,
And told him, Sir, I was at home to pay
The twenty shillinges which you lent last day:
And with your wife (because you were not their)
I left it pray you with my holdnesse bear.
It Is well (quoth he) I am glad I did you pleasure,
So coming home, questions his Wife a Measure:
I pray sweet heart, was such a man with thee*
To pay two Angels, which he had of me*
She blush't, and said; he has been (...)ed in deed,
But you did ill to* lend; Husband take heed:
The falsehood of the world you do not spy,
It is not good to trust before we try:
Pray lend no more, for it may breed much strife,
To have such Knaves come home to pay your Wife.
A Crew of Foxes, all on theeuing set,
Together at a Country Hen-roost met,
Where the poor Poultrie went to grievous wrack;
For there they feasted till their guts did crack,
Having well sup't, ready to go away,
Without demanding what they had to pay;
Says one unto the rest: Friens hark unto me,
Lets point where our next meeting place shall be.
With a good will says one above the rest,
At such a Farmers house, his Lambs be best.
Nay (quoth another) I do know a Clown,
Has even the fattest Geese in all the Town:
Well Masters, said a grave and ancient Fox,
Had bin the death of many Hens and Cox,
The surest place to meet, that I can tell,
Will be the Skinners shop: and so farewell.
A Shepherd that a careful eye did keep,
Unto the safety of his grazing Sheep;
Perceived a Wolf through the hedge to pry:
Sirrah (quoth he) pray, what make you so nie?
Why (said the Wolf) thou see I do no ill,
Thy Flocks are far enough upon the hill.
What Justice now a days these people lacks?
The Crows ride boldly on thy Cattels backs,
And not a word thou say to them at all;
Yet but for looking on, with me do braule.
The Prouerb's true, for now I find it well,
Which once I heard an ancient old Wolf tell:
He that upon a bad ill name does light,
Is even half hanged, as good be hanged outright;
And I my self by proof can now allege,
Some better steal, then some look ore the hedge.
THe Devil did complain he was not well,
And would go take some Physic out of Hell:
To England, France, and Spain, with speed he got,
Where all refusde him, he did burn so hot.
In haste he then to Germany did hie,
The cunning of a Quack-salu^r to try;
Where in a market place, upon a Stage,
He found a fellow could all griefs assuage.
Doctor (quoth he) I want some of thy skill,
For I do find I am exceeding ill:
And any thing for ease I will endure;
What, will thou undertake my pain to cure?
If thou can ease the malady I have,
Thou shall have Gold, even what thy self wilt crave.
Gentleman (said this Doctor to the Devil)
Upon my life, I Will rid you of your evil;
Make unto me those griefs you have but known,
And with the curing them, let me alone.
Why Sir (uoth he) my Head with Horns does ache,
My Brains does Brimstone-like Tobacco take;
My Eyes are full of euer-burning Fire,
My Tongue a drop of Water does desire;
About my Heart does crawling Serpents cre^pe,
And I can neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep:
There Is no Diseases whatsoere they be,
But I have all of them imposde on me.
All torments that the tongue of man can name,
Within, without, in a continual flame.
Quoth the Quack-saluer, Sir, I Will undertake
A sound man of you in a month to make:
Wilt please your Worship, show me where you dwell?
Marry (quoth he) my Chamber is in Hell:
Thy charges in the journey I will bear,
And I Will prefer thee to the Devil there.
With speed get up, I Will take thee on my back.
The World may spare you, and in Hell we lack.
A Bishop met two Priests upon the way,
And did salute them with the time of day:
Good Morrow Clarks, unto you both (quoth he.)
Sir (they replied) no Clerks, but Priests are we.
Why (said the Bishop) then I will consent
Unto the title of your own content:
Since you deny to carry Scholars marks,
Good Morrow to you Priests (that are no Clerks:)
ONe climbing of a Tree, by hap
Fell down and brake his Arm,
And did complain unto a friend
Of his unlucky harm.
Would I had counseled you before
(Quoth he) to whom he spoke;
I know a trick for Climbers,
That they never hurt shall take.
Neighbor (said he) I have a Son,
And he does use to climb,
Pray let me know that same for him,
Against another time.
Why thus (quoth he) let any man
That lives, climb nere so hie:
And make no more haste down, then up,
No harm can come thereby.
AN aged Gentleman, sore sick did lie,
Expecting life, that could not choose but die:
His Fool came to him, and in trateth this?
Good Master ere you go away from us,
Bestow on Jack (that often has made you laugh)
Against he waxes old, your walking-Staffe.
I will (quoth he) go take it, there it is;
But on condition Jack, which shall be this:
If thou do meet with any while thou live,
More Fool then thou, the Staff thou shall him give.
Master (said he) upon my life I will,
But I do hope that I shall keep it still.
When Death drew near, and faintness did proceed,
His Master calls for a Divine with speed,
For to prepare him unto Heavens way.
The Fool starts up, and hastily did say:
Oh Master, Master, take your Staff again,
That prove your self the most Fool of us twain:
Have you lived now, some fourscore years and odd,
And all this time, are vnprepat'd for God*
What greater Fool can any meet withal,
Then one that is ready in the Grave to fall,
And is to seek about his souls estate,
When Death is opening of the prison-gate?
Bear witness friends, that I discharge me plain*
Here Master, here, receive your Staff again:
Upon the same condition I did take it,
According as you wil'd me, I forsake it.
And over and above, I will bestow,
This Epitaph, which shall your folly show.
Here lies a man, at death did heaven claim.
But in his life, he never sought the same.
A Simple Clown in Flaunders,
As he travailing had bin,
(Having his Wife in company)
I have my Seruing-men that wait
Upon me in blew Coats:
I have my Oars that attend
My pleasure, with their Boats:
I have my Champions that will fight,
My Lovers that do fawn:
I have my Hat, my Hood, my Mask,
My Fan, my Cobweb Lawne:
To give my Glove unto a Gull,
Is mighty favor found:
When for the wearing of the same,
It costs him twenty pound.
My Garter as a gracious thing,
Another takes away:
And for the same a silken Gown,
The Prodigal does pay.
Then comes an Ass, and he forsooth
Is in such longing heat,
My Busk-poynt even on his knees,
With tears he does entreat:
I grant it, to rejoice the man,
And then request a thing;
Which is both Gold and precious stone,
The Wood-cocks Diamond Ring.
Another lowly minded youth,
Forsooth my Shooe-string craves,
And that he puts through his ear,
Calling the rest, bace slaves.
Thus fit I Fools in humors still,
That come to me for game,
I punish them for Venerte,
Leaving their Purses lame.
In Newgate some take lodging up.
Till they to Tiburne ride:
And others walk to Wood-street,
With a Sargeant by their side.
Some go to Houns-ditch with their Clothes
To pawn for money lending:
And some I send to Surgeons shops,
Because they lack somemending.
Others pass ragged up and down,
All tattered, rent, and torn;
But being in that scuruy case,
Their companies I scorn.
For if they come and fawn on me;
There Is nothing to be got;
As soon as ere my Merchants break,
I swear, I know them not.
No entertainment, nor a look,
That they shall get of me:
If once I do begin perceive
That out of cash they be,
All kindnesses that I profess,
The fairest shows I make,
Is love to all that come to me
For Gold and Siluers sake.
To forward men, I forward am;
Most frank unto the free:
But such as take their wares on trust,
Are not to deal with me.
The World is hard, all things are dear,
Good-fellowship decays:
And every one seeks profit now,
In these same hungry days.
Although my trade in secret be,
Unlawful to be known;
Yet I will make the best I can,
Of that which is mine own.
For seeing I do venture fair,
At price of whipping cheer,
I have no reason but to make
My Customers pay dear:
Our charge beside, is very great
To keep us fine and brave,
A Whore that goes not gallantly,
Shall little doings have.
Therefore all things considered well,
Our charges, and our danger:
A daily Friend shall pay as much
As any Terme-time stranger.
A Rich man and a poor did both appear
Before a Judge, an injury to clear:
The Rich did tell a tale most tedious long,
Mending (as he supposed) with words, the wrong:
And ever when the Poor man would have spoke,
With bold out-facing speech he did him choke*
The woeful wight at length could bear no longer,
But boldly raised his voice both loud and stronger:
My Lord (quoth he) pray now bid Dives stay,
And hear but what poor Lazarus can say:
My Ox came in his field, which he does keep,
And swears for that, he will pay me with a Sheep.
FINIS.

