A TREATISE OF GODS EFFECTVAL CALLING:

WRITTEN FIRST IN THE LATIN tongue, by the reverend and faithful servant of
Christ, Master ROBERT ROLLOCK, Preacher of Gods word in Edinburgh. AND NOW
FAITHFVLLY TRANSLATED for the benefit of the unlearned, into the English
tongue, by Henry Holland, Preacher in London.

2. PET. 1. 10. Give diligent heed to make your calling and election sure.



AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1603.



THE AVTHORS EPISTLE TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince, JAMES the sixth, now
by Gods free mercy, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of
the faith, etc. grace and peace by Jesus Christ.
AFter some aduising with my self, in whose name I should publish this little
work, your Majesty (my most dread Sovereign) above all others came first
into my mind, for that you may justly challenge as your own right, the first
fruits of my labors, of what kind soever they be. Having then heretofore
consecrated the first fruits of the first kind of my writings unto your
Highness: I thought it meet also, that this second kind of meditations (in the
common places of divinity) should be presented to the same your Majesty. From
this purpose although many things feared me, among which your princely Majesty
(to speak as the truth is) adorned with rare knowledge of divine things, did
most occupy my mind: your Majesty, I say the greatness whereof, my own
meannes, and the slendernes of this work, were not able to endure. Yet when I
recounted with my self how great your courtesy and gentleness was always
accustomed to be toward all men, but especially toward my self; I
determined rather to incur some suspicion of overmuch boldness, then not to
give testimony of my duty, and of my most humble devotion toward your
Majesty, even by the dedication of this small work of mine how mean soever
it be. Respect therefore (most noble King) not so much this small work, as the
testimony of a mind most dutifully affected toward your Majesty in the Lord,
and as my duty requires, most ready according to my small ability, with all
lowlines to do your Majesty most humble service in any thing that I can during
life. But what is there wherein I can do your Majesty better service then in
striving with my God, with continual and earnest prayers, that through his
grace and singular goodness you may for ever maintain, continue, and make good
that excellent opinion which you have (not undeservedly) already gotten, in
foreign nations amongst such men, as are most eminent in this our age, both
for learning and godliness: that so you may have a happy reign in this present
life, and in that other life may be a fellow heir of that heavenly kingdom:
in comparison of the glory of which kingdom) that I may speak this by the
way) I my self a good while since, have heard you despise al these earthly
kingdoms, at such time as amongst other matters, in a certain familiar
conference, where there were but a few present, you discoursed of many things
learnedly (I speak the truth to the glory of God, without any flattery) and
godlily, and delightfully, concerning Christ, and of praying to him only, and
not to Angels, or Saints departed out of this life) you may, I say, be a fellow
heir together with your head, even that most high King, Lord, and heir of all
things Jesus Christ, whose grace, mercy and power defend and protect you both
in body and soul, from all your enemies, bodily and ghostly for evermore.

Your Majesty's most dutiful Servant, ROBERT ROLLOCK.

TO THE RIGHT GODLY, LEARNED, AND HIS REVERENT GOOD FRIEND Master John
Iohnston.
I May seem slow in aunswering your letters (good Master Iohnston) for that
they were long in coming to my hands; I understood by them, to my great joy,
that you are safely arrived in your own country: and have found your Churches
there in ablesscd and peaceable state, wherein, I desire in heart, they may
long continue. And why may I not confidently hope that this my desire shall be
fulfilled? specially seeing they were from the beginning The blessing of God on
the Churches of Scotland.
so happily, soundly, and excellently founded by those faithful and worthy
servants of God, those skillful maister-builders which begun the work: and
they whoseconded them, brought no stubble or hay, but silver, gold, and
precious stones to the building: Nay which is more, the Lord himself having so
clearly and apparently favored, and furthered their holy labors, that
whosoever have stumbled at this building, have not only missed and failed of
their purpose, but have been (as it were) by the strong, and powerful hand of
God, scattered and throne out into utter darkness. To these we may add that
singular, and most precious gift of God, which the same good God has bestowed
upon you, I mean your worthy King, Master Bezas judgment, and commendation
of the Kings Majesty in the happy government of the Churches of Scotland.
whom he has likewise miraculously preserved from many and great perils, who
has joined to his singular, and admirable care, and watchfulnes, in defending
the Gospel, and preserving the purity, and unspotted sincerity of this
Church, so great and exact knowledge of Christian religion from the very
grounds and principles thereof, that the Lord it seems has made his Majesty
both a Prince and preacher to his people: so that your Our blessed King may in
verity, be well accounted a second Solomon, who was both King and preacher.
Realm of Scotland is now become of all other most happy, and may justly hope
for increase of tranquillity and felicity, if only (as we are persuaded she
will) she can discern, and thankfully acknowledge the great blessing she
inioyeth; and as she has begun, so continue to direct them all, to the right
scope and end, which is to his glory, who is the father and fountain of all
goodness.

And I assure you, I rejoice from my heart, that occasion was given me to
congratulate by these my letters your happy condition with the rest of my
reverend brethren, both by your country man Master David Droman, a man both
godly, and well learned, whose presence though but for a few days, was most
acceptable to us here, who is now upon his return to you with these letters;
as likewise in that I chanced of late to meet with a great treasure, which I
know not by what mishap being frequent in other men's hands, has hitherto
missed my fingers. For why should not I esteem as a treasure, and that most
precious, the commentaries of my honorable brother Master Rollocke, upon the
epistle to the Romans and Ephesians, Master Beza commends Master Rollockes
works.
both of them being of special note among the writings Apostolical? for so I
judge of them, and I pray you take it to be spoken without all flattery or
partiality, that I never read, or met with any thing in this kind of
interpretation more pithilie, elegantly, and iudiciously written: so as I could
not contain my self, but must needs give thanks, as I ought, unto God, for
this so necessary, and so profitable a work, and rejoice that both you and
the whole Church enjoy so great a benefit; desiring the Lord to increase with
new gifts, and preserve in saftie this excellent instrument, especially in
these times wherein through the scarcity of skillful workmen which labor in
the Lords vineyard, and by the decease of those well exercised and experienced
soldiers, and worthy Christians, Satan and his companions begin again to
triumph over the truth.

Concerning the estate of our Church and school, we yet continue, and proceed
in our course, by the mighty hand of our God and Savior, protecting us, which
is admirable to our very enemies, being delivered from the iawe of death. But
in truth, for ought we see, it is like to last but one year, our estate
depending on those acts which shall be concluded in the Or meeting at Roane.
Or the Prince our neighbor.
diet of Roane between the French King, and our neighbor Duke, either
concerning peace or war, wherein we hope to be comprehended upon equal
condition. In this frail, and uncertain estate that is our principal
consolation, that we are sure this slender and twined thread, whereupon we
rest, is sustained by the hand of our good God, who will not suffer that to be
falsified which we have learned of the Apostle, that all things work together
for the Romans 8.
good of those that love him. In the mean while I beseech you brethren
continue your remembrance of us in your daily prayers. I for my part, for some
months, though I be not much pained with any Fever, Gout, Stone, or any of
those sharp diseases which be the usual companions of old age, yet I feel my
self so infeebled and weakened, that I am constrained in a manner to give over
both my public duties, to keep house and home, looking every day for that
joyful and happy dissolution whereunto age it self calls me, being now
seventy eight years old. And herein I desire your prayer with the rest of my
brethren, by name of my reverend brother Master Meluin, and Master Peter
Iunius, whom (unless memory fail me) Master Scringer of blessed memory,
was wont to call his cosen: unto whom, remembering withal my hearty
commendations, I desire you to communicate this my letter, desiring the Lord
(my dear, and loving brother) to preserve your whole Church there with his
mighty, and blessed hand, against all both foreign, and domestical dangers.
Fare ye well from Geneua the Calends of Nouemb. after our old computation.
CIC. IC. XCVI.

Yours wholly THEODOR BEZA.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND HIS VERY CHRISTIAN LOVING FRIEND, MASTER
WILLIAM SCOT of Ely, grace and peace by Jesus Christ.
WHen I had finished my last summers work of reuising, and correcting Master
Rollockes readings on the Colossians, I was inwardly much affected with the
holy spirit of the man, which I found as in that, so in the rest of his works.
Then my heart desired that as foreign Churches greatly rejoice in him, and
bless God for him; so the Churches of England and Scotland, might to their
greater joy hear him speak yet more unto them in their own native language.

This is the cause (right worshipful) that moved me the winter past, to gain
some hours from mine ordinary labors, to give this little book a new coat,
that it might be known also in all this Island, where it was first conceived
and borne.

It has the protection of our most mighty King, for saftie and free passage
into other parts of the world, where it has been entertained with kind
acceptance: and so now, no doubt, it shall be no less in both these
kingdoms, when as all true hearted subjects shall see, with what christian
affection our most noble King affected this faithful servant of Jesus Christ,
and his holy works. Now blessed be God for being thus mindful of us; and for
annoynting his sacred breast with such a measure of the spirit of judgment, as
an 2. Sam. 19. 27. Phil. 19. 10. Esa. 11. 3. 4.
Angel of God, to discern the things that differ, and so to respect the meek
ones of the earth, to the unspeakable joy of the good, and terror of the wicked.

Behold now, praise the Lord with us, and let us magnify his name together,
for the Lord has done great things for us: the Lord has so set the wheels of
his admirable providence, and so carried his blessed hand this year past in
all his proceedings round about us, and so touched the hearts 1. Sam. 10. 26.
of all this kingdom, as having a purpose to accomplish a great work in the
building of his Church, and in his good time to lift up such strokes as shall
destroy for ever, every enemy that does evil to the sanctuary. Psalm. 74. 3.


The Lords compassions fail not: O Lord withdraw Psalm. 85. 3. 4.
thine anger, and turn back the fiercenes of thy wrath: Turn us O God of our
salvation, turn thou us Lam. 5. 21.
unto thee that we may be turned, and cause thy face to shine upon us, that
we may be saved. Cease not to pray for us, that we may not return to our old
security and unthankfulness any more, but that we may attend what the Lord
says, for now he begins to speak peace unto his people, and unto his Saints,
crying in their doors even as it Prou. 1. Psalm. 85. 8.
were in the open streets, that they return not again to folly.

Now we see that the counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and that the
thoughts of his heart shall continue throughout all ages: for he has broken
the counsels of the wicked, who have ever sought to be possessed of Gods
habitations: but the Lord shall make them as stubble before the wind, the Lord
will persecute them with his tempest, and make them afraid with his storm. O
Lord fill their Psalm. 83. 16.
faces with shame, that they may seek thy name. Finally, the Lord has made
our corners full and abounding with diverse forts of blessings: he has made
Psalm. 144. 13.
the bars of our gates strong, and has settled peace in our borders: he has
stablished his Gospel and holy covenant with us: he has taught us to observe
his judgments, and his wonderful administrations both of his justice and
mercy: he Psalm. 147. 13.
has not dealt so with any Nation round about us. Wherefore, O praise the Lord
with us: let England and Scotland now with one heart, as with one mouth praise
God in all the assemblies: Psalm. 6. 8. 26.
O praise the Lord ye that are of the fountain of Israel, praiseye the Lord.

To return to our purpose, as touching this sweet treatise in hand, I say no
more but this, (I trust the reader shall find my words true) that so many
common places of divinity as be here briefly couched, as branches appertaining
to this one head, the religious and wise (I hope) shall find them as
iudicially, comfortably, and compendiously set down and knit together, as any
one thing of this kind as yet extant in the English tongue.

Next, as for the argument of this book, our effectual calling is one
principal link of the golden chain of the causes of our salvation. And it is
the very first (in the execution of Gods eternal decree of our election) which
manifests the everlasting love of God in Jesus Christ unto the heart of every
believer: that almighty God should love him being his enemy, seek him, and
find him, when he wandered in the maze and vanity of his own mind, quicken
him when he lay dead in sin, loose him when he lay fast bound in the bonds
of death, inlighten him when he sat in extreme darkness: giving him the
spirit of grace, and of faith by the Gospel, to attend his holy calling, and
in time to rejoice with an exceeding joy Romans 5. 2. 3.
therein.

Lastly for the translation, albeit I have not followed the authors words, yet
have I endeavored faithfully to deliver his meaning, in the plainest form, and
in words most in use among the people. Horat. art. non verbum verbo curabis
reddere fidus interpres.
The Lord give it a blessing, wheresoever it shall rest, among Gods elect of
both these kingdoms.

Now (right Worshipful Master Scot) I come unto yourselfe: your most
christian and holy love in these cold and evil times, as unto all the Saint,
so specially to this good servant of Christ, like as it comforted him greatly
in his latter days: so assuredly it shall much refresh your own heart, not
only all your life, but also much more (I doubt not) in the very hour of
death.

There be three infallible notes knit together in one Scripture, to justify
our precious faith unto our own hearts, that we may be truly persuaded we are
possessed of that faith which shall justify us before God: love to the brethren,
hospitality of love, and christian sympathy to the Saints in their 1. 2.
afflictions. Love to the holy members of Christ, 3.
is often commanded and commended in Joseph, in Moses, in Nehemias, in Daniel,
in David, who being advanced to great dignities, yet esteemed they nothing more
then the good of the Church, and to become serviceable (as it were) by all
means to the Saints. To love the servants of Christ, and to be beloved of Romans
15. 31. Philip. 1. 9.
them, it is (as Saint John says) an infallible argument that God has taken
us by the hand, loosened our 1. John. 3. 8.
bands, and translated us from death to life, and from 1. Pet. 2. 9.
darkness into the glorious light of God. All that talk of Charity, do not
love the Saints, that is, the living members of Christ on earth. We may
discern our love to be sound by these notes. First, it is a flame which comes
down from God into our Romans 5. 5. Luke 7. 47.
hearts, kindling (as it were) within us, and giving us no rest, till we
perform duties to the Saints. And this is that which the Apostle means, when
he wills us to Heb. 10. 24.
stir up one another unto a paroxysme of love. Secondly, hence it comes to
pass, that love to the Saints, being never cold, is never idle in well doing,
and therefore proceeds the second note which the same Apostle calls Heb. 6.
10.
labor (...). Psalm. 16. 4, 5.
of love: for that this love travails by all means possible, to do good to
the members of Christ. Thirdly, next, this love is sincere Romans 12. 9.
void of all dissimulation. Fourthly and lastly, it is Hebr. 13. 1. Act 2. 42*
46.
constant, consuming, as a fire, all offenses, Phil. 1. 9. 10.
and cannot be quenched.

The second mark, in the same Scripture, of our most holy faith, is Hebr. 13.
2.
hospitality of love (as the Syriack translation has it) not of lucre. The
Lord gave often Romans 12. 10. 11 1. Pet. 4 9. 1. Tim. 3. 2. 15. 20.
charge by his Apostles concerning this, foreseeing the necessity and
afflictions of the Saints in the ten bloody persecutions, which even then
began and were to follow. The practice Hilariter excipere, affabiliter
tractare, ami^^ dimittere.
of this we see commended in all ages: in Abraham and Lot receiving Angels,
they receive them cheerfully, they intertaine and use them courteously, they
dismiss them lovingly. So did Bethuel Eleazar, so did Iethro Moses, so did
Manoah the Angel of God, so did the good old man of Gibeah, the Leuite and
his wife; so did Obadiah the Prophets, so did the widow of Zarephath Elias, so
did the Sunamite Elisha, so did Mary often receive Christ, so did the Tanner
and Cornelius Peter, Lydia and the Iayler the Apostles, Aquila and Priscilla,
Paul; Phebe, and Stephanus many, and Gaius the whole Church at Corinth. All
these are Chronicled in the book of God as most memorable presidents for all
ages.

The third note of the precious faith of Gods elect, in the same place annexed:
is Christian sympathy to the servants of Christ in all their afflictions. This
grace is found, when love has set on fire our very Matthew 9. 36. Philip. 1. 9.
(...).
bowels (as the holy Ghost speaks) that in all their passions, it fills us
with a feeling and a tender compassion. This stirs up men to Matthew 25. 36.
visit the members of Christ in all their miseries, to consider Psalm. 41. 1.
wisely of their afflictions, to Romans 12. 15.
mourn when they mourn, to Romans 12. 13.
distribute to their wants: and so to proceed on to the duties of instruction,
admonition, consolation, instant and Iam. 5. 13. 20
fervent in prayer, and to add confession of sins, with fasting, if the
state and heaviness of the affliction so require.

These things I write unto you (right Worshipful) first not so much for your
instruction, as for the edification and confirmation of others, in this frozen
age, wherein carnal and self love, and all iniquity increases, and love to
the Saints decreaseth and waxes cold, as Christ has Matthew. 24. 12
forewarned us: a manifest sign that saving faith fails, in most places,
even where it is professed most. Secondly, I write thus unto you, for that you
have been taught of God (as I hear) to practice these things, and to observe
the Canons of Christ in his Gospel concerning love to the Saints. This holy
servant of Christ Master Rollocke, if he were living, could and would testify
of your sincere love, when you entertained him into your own family,
respecting his wants with all compassion and tenderness of heart.

The most provident ruler of Heaven and earth, which has shed, by the working
of his holy spirit, this precious love into your heart, will fully repay and
recompense this your love, with manifold comforts of his spirit, even then
specially when the comforts and props of this present life shall most be
wanting. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that
ye may abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost, that so ye may
persevere in this your holy faith in Christ, and love to the Saints unto the end.

Amen.
Yours to use in the Lord Christ Jesus, HENRY HOLLAND.

To the Reader.
ALthough the greater part both of authors and translators of books may be
taxed of officiousnes, and not a few of ungodliness: yet are there some whose
merits in this kind do out-way the demerits of the other. These are either
those worthy lights themselves, or else those second candlestickes to
translate the light into, which God specially in these latter years has
bestowed as gifts (to use Saint Paul's word) upon his Church to the edification
of it. It is true indeed in one sense, that both the one and the other are but
candlestickes, for the light is Gods: but otherwise comparatively the author is
the light, and the translator is as it were an other candlestick, to translate
the light into, and that for those which thorough ignorance of the tongue,
could not attain to the light when it shone out of the authors own lamp. Now
although there seem no great gifts to be required in a translator; yet the
truth is, that if he be not of good discretion, to choose the fittest works,
of good speech to express the authors sentence with fittest words, and of so
great apprehension, and former store, that by that which he sees in the
author, he has attained to more, then paraduenture the author himself saw or
minded: his defectiuenes will bring him in danger of showing what gifts are
required in a translator: for a good translator is neither a paraphrast, nor a
periphrast, which is committed by needeles changing or adding words. He so
behaueth himself that the comparing of the original, will commend his
fidelity, and that they which know of no original would take the translator
for the author himself. He must naturalize his translation for the reader,
without miuring the gift of the author in the native work. But these seem
critic rules to the irregular, which offend against their authors, to please
themselves: for as there are many translations of unworthy works; so are
there many transportations of worthy works, which like plants ill taken up,
rejoice not to grow in the soil into which they are translated. And yet
nevertheless it cannot without injury be denied, that this age has afforded
many excellent translations of excellent and learned authors to the benefit of
our people: amongst whom Master Rollocke the reverend Author of this work
deserves an eminent place, as also this work it self is very acceptable
together with the translators godly labor in this, and other things commodious
to the Church of Christ. This inclined me the rather to commend it to thee, in
these few lines, not as taking upon me any thing, but as a poor man where he
is better known, is sometimes engaged for a rich. This labor is become ours
not only because it is thus well englished, but also because the Author is a
Scottishman, which is now to the wise hearted a synonymie of an Englishman. And
it shall be to the praise of both the Nations to receive both mutual and
common benefits, without that emulation which was betwixt Israel and Judah. It
is a comely thing, (to speak in the words of that King that was so
miraculously restored) to declare the signs and wonders of the high God, which
we see this day, even this unanimity in receiving the King wrought (no doubt)
by divine instinct, rather then grace in some, which otherwise, mendaciter
deduntie, as David says. Let us on the otherside go out in our sincerity and
meet the King of Kings with Hosanna. And I beseech you by the wonder of our
neighbors, which is our innocent aggregation to this scepter: let the solution
of an objection by King Henry the seventh of noble memory, and of so renowned
wisdom, be our satisfaction, that the sovereignty is deuolued where it is,
(not only by the providence, but also by the ordinance of God) to the
comfortable uniting of that Nation, rather then Nations which at the first upon
the matter was indeed but one, though for some years past it were divided by
conceit. Let us take up the argument of Abraham: We are brethren, etc. And as
this is a work of vocation, so let us hold the coming of our King to be the
work of reuocation, to call us back to unity. And so gentle reader I commit
thee to the God of peace and unity.

Thine in Christ, Francis Marbury.

To the Reader.
CHristian reader, I pray thee pardon all faults in this first impression: I
could not well be present with the workmen for their direction. Some school
points and phrases of school men do not so well relish in the English tongue,
nor could be rendered to my content, whatsoever is wanting in word or matter in
this edition I will amend in the next if the Lord permit: farewell.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Henry Holland.

The Contents.
1 OF our effectual calling. 1 2 Of the word of God, or of the covenant in
general; and of the covenant of works in special. 6 3 Of the covenant of
Grace. 11 4 Of such as be comprehended in, may truly be said to be under, the
covenant of God. 27 5 A comparison of our judgment and of the adversaries,
concerning both these covenants. 31 6 Of the written word, or of the written
covenant of God. 38 7 Of the number of the controversies which are concerning
the written word: and first whether the scripture be the word of God. 40 8 How
it may appear that the scripture is the word of God, 45 9 Of the first
propriety of the sacred scripture. 54 10 Of the second propriety of the
sacred scripture. 57 11 Of the third propriety of the sacred scripture. 62 12
Of the fourth propriety. 66 13 Of the fifth propriety of the scripture. 70 14
Of the sixth propriety of the scripture. 74 15 Of the seventh propriety of the
scripture. 77 16 Of the eight propriety of the scripture. 80 17 Questions more
accidental concerning the holy Scripture, and first of the books wherein the
same is contained. 82 18 Of the authentical edition of the Bible. 90 19 Of the
Greek edition of the new Testament. 97 20 Of the translations of the old
Testament. 102 21 Of the Syriacke translation of the new Testament. 108 22 Of
the Latin translations of both testaments. 110 23 Of the translation of the
Bible into the mother tongue. 113 24 Of sin in general. 127 25 Of original
sin. 133 26 Of concupiscence. 144 27 Of actual sin. 146 28 The
controversy concerning the sin against the holy Ghost. 153 29 Of justifying
faith. 158 30 Of the improper significations of faith. 167 31 The opinion of
the adversaries concerning faith 176 32 Of hope. 191 33 Of Charity or Love.
198 34 Of Repentance. 202 35 How far a wicked man may proceed in repentance.
210 36 What the judgment of Papists is of repentance. 213 37 Of man's
free will. 216 38 Concerning the free grace of God. 226 39 Of the means
whereby God from the beginning has revealed both his covenants unto mankind.
238
A TREATISE OF OUR Effectual Calling, and of certain common places of
Theology contained under it.
CHAP. 1. Of our effectual Calling.
GOds effectual calling is that, whereby God calls out of darkness into 1.
God calls by his word preached.
his admirable light, from the power of satan unto God, in Christ Jesus, those
whom he knew from eternity, and predestined unto life, of his mere favor,
by the promulgation of the covenant of grace, or preaching of the Gospel.

Such also as be called by the same grace of God, answer, 2. Man answers by
believing.
and believe in him through Jesus Christ. This answer is of faith, which is, in
very truth, the condition of the promise which is in the covenant of grace.
Wherefore our effectual calling does consist of the promise of the covenant
(which is under condition of faith) and in faith also, which is nothing else but
the fulfilling of the condition.

Therefore there be two parts of our effectual calling, the first is the
outward calling of such as are predestinate Two parts of our effectual calling.
unto life, from darkness unto light, and that of Gods mere grace; and that,
I say, by the publication of the covenant of grace or preaching of the Gospel.
The latter part is their inward faith wrought in them by the same grace and
Spirit of God, whereby they are converted from Satan unto God: for I cannot
see how this second part of our effectual calling, can differ from faith it
self.

In the first part of our effectual calling, first we are to consider the
persons, calling and called. The person which calls us, properly to speak,
is God himself: for he only promises in his covenant, calling those things
which be not as though they were, Roman. 4. ver. 17. The persons called, are
they whom God knew before, and has predestined unto life; for whom he has
predestined, them he has called, Romans 8. Secondly, in the first part of our
effectual calling, the cause which moved God hereunto, is his own special
grace: for the cause of all Gods blessings upon us is in himself. For as he
did predestinate us in himself, according to the good pleasure of his own
will, Ephe. 1. 5. so has he called and justified us in himself, and shall
glorify us in himself, to the praise of the glory of his grace; that all
glory may be wholly ascribed unto him. Thirdly, we be to observe the instrument
of our vocation, which is the covenant published, Instrument of our vocation.
or the Gospel preached. Fourthly, in this former part of our effectual
calling, we be to consider the estate from which; and the estate whereunto we
be called. The condition from which we be called, is darkness, the power of
Satan, and that miserable plight, which is without Christ in sin and death.

The state whereunto we be called, is light, God himself, and that blessed
condition of man in Christ. Hence it is evident that these common places of
Divinity, Of Gods word, and of sin, and the misery of mankind, must be
referred to this argument of our effectual calling, as to a most general head
in religion.

In the second part of our effectual calling, these branches must be noted.
First, that the cause wherefore we answer Gods calling, or believe in God, is
Gods own grace, which works in us this faith by the holy Ghost, which is
given us with his word: For like as God of his mere grace calls us outwardly
unto himself; so the same his grace and free love in Jesus Christ kindles
this faith in us, whereby we answer his heavenly calling.

And in this 2. part of our calling (which we say does 2. Part of our calling
faith.
consist in faith) if we desire yet more deeply to search it, there is a double
grace or working of God in our hearts* The 1. is when he inlightneth us by his
holy spirit, pouring a new and a heavenly light into our mind before so blind,
as that it neither saw, nor could see the things which do belong to the Spirit
of God. 1. Cor. 2. 14. 15. The natural man perceives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them. In
the will which is altogether froward and quite fallen from God, he works an
uprightness, and in all the affections a new holiness. Hence proceeds the
new creature, and that new man which is created after God in righteousness and
true holiness Ephe. 4. 24.

The Papists call this first grace in the faith, and work of the holy Ghost,
not the creation of any new creature, which was not before, but the stirring up
of some goodness and sanctity, which (as they say) was left in nature,
Free Will.
after the first fall of man, which they call also free will, which (they say)
was not quite lost in the fall, but lessened and weakened. But this free will
whereof they speak, is in very truth nothing else, but that holiness of
nature and life of God, and the spiritual light of man in his first creation
and innocence. But of this more in place convenient. This they say then, that
after the fall, man retained not only the faculties of his soul, but also the
holy qualities of those powers, only hurt and weakened. And this is that
free will, which they say is quickened by Gods preventing grace, which they
define to be an external motion, standing as it were without, and beating at
the door of the heart.

In this first grace of God, which we call a new creation of divine qualities
in the soul, man stands mere passiuely before God, and as the material
cause of Gods work. For in this first renewing of the soul of man, what
divine virtues has man to work with Gods Spirit, or to help the work of
grace? Yet we say not that man in this new birth is no more then a trunk or
dead tree: for that there is in man (that so I may speak) a passive power to
receive that divine grace, and life of God; as also the use of reason, which
dead trees have not. The adversaries say, that in quickening of free will,
there is a liberty or strength in it to reject, or to receive, that grace
which they call preventing grace. Therefore they give a fellowworking unto
grace, and a fellow-working unto freewil.

The second grace, or the second work of Gods spirit The action of faith.
in the second part of our effectual calling, or in faith, is the very act of
faith, or an action proceeding from this new creature, the action of the mind
enlightened in knowing God in Christ; of the will sanctified, in embracing and
apprehending God in Christ. And here the principal agent is that very Spirit
of Christ, who after the first grace and creation abides and dwells in us,
not idle, but ever working some good in us, and by us. The second agent working
with Gods holy Spirit, is the very soul of man, or rather the new man, or the
new creature in the soul and all the faculties thereof. By this the holy Ghost
(that so I may speak) knows God; or otherwise to speak the same; to know
God, the holy Ghost uses the new creature in man: and by this the holy Ghost
does embrace and apprehend God in Christ. Thus speaks the Apostle, Romans 8. The
holy Ghost (says he) makes intercession for us with sighs which cannot be
expressed. Observe here how he ascribes this action of sending forth sighs
unto the Spirit, as to the principal agent.

In this second grace, which is the action or work of faith, we stand not as
mere passiuely, but being moved by the holy Ghost we work our selves, as
being stirred up to believe, we believe; and in a word, we work (...).
with Gods Spirit working in us.

The Adversaries say, this second grace in faith is an action of free will,
when as we by our own free will dispose and prepare our selves to a justifying
grace, in believing, in hoping, in repenting. In this action they say, not the
holy Ghost is the principal agent, or any motion (to use their own word) of
the Spirit; but free will it self, which (as they say) goes before, when as
that motion of God working together with their free will, must follow after.
They speak not a word here of Gods Spirit, either in the first or second
grace, who works effectually in both, as is aforesaid: but in steed of the
holy Ghost they talk of, I know not what motion standing without and knocking
at the door. They say, this motion stirs up free will; they say it works
with free will when it works, and prepares us unto the grace of justice or
justification. This their doctrine is strange; it sauoureth not the holy
Scripture of God, nor the phrase of Scripture. Thus far of Gods grace in
faith, or of the second part of our calling, and of the two special branches
of it.

Next, in it we are to consider of the points or conditions before noted, which
are the very same with those in our calling afore-going. To this second part
of our effectual calling, refer the doctrine of faith, which in very truth
is the same with it. Hope, love, and repentance follow faith; and Free Will is
a common place in divinity subalterne, or to be referred unto that of
Repentance.

CHAP. II. Of the word of God, or of the covenant in general, and of the
covenant of works in special.
THE common place in religion which is concerning The common places of religion
how they follow in order.
Gods word or covenant, is to be referred unto this of our effectual calling,
as to a most general head: next follow these points, of sin, and of the
misery of mankind: thirdly, that of faith; then follow hope, love, and
repentance.

Now therefore we are to speak of the word, or of the covenant of God; having
first set down this ground, that all the word of God appertains to some
covenant: for God speaks nothing to man without the covenant: for which cause
all the scripture both old and new, wherein al Gods word is contained, bears
the name of Gods covenant or testament.

The covenant of God generally is a promise, under Covenant defined.
some one certain condition. And it is twofold: the first is the covenant of
works; the second is the covenant of grace. Paul Galath. 4. verse. 24.
expresselie sets down two covenants, which in the old Testament were shadowed
by two women, as by types, to wit, Hagar the handmaide, and Sarah the
freewoman: for says he, these be those two covenants. Let us then speak
something of these two covenants, and first of the covenant of works. The
covenant of works, which may also be called a legal or Covenant of works, the
first ground of it.
natural covenant, is founded in nature, which by creation was pure and holy,
and in the law of God, which in the first creation was engraven in man's heart.
For after that God had created man after his own image pure and holy, and had
written his law in his mind, he made a covenant with man, wherein he promised
him eternal life, under the condition of holy and good works, which should be
answerable to the holiness and goodness of their creation, and conformable to
his law. And that nature thus beautified with holiness and righteousness, and
the light of Gods law, is the foundation of the covenant of works, it is very
evident: for that it could not well stand with the justice of God, to make a
covenant under condition of good works and perfect obedience to his law, except
he had first created man pure and holy, and had engraven his law in his heart,
whence those good works might proceed. For this cause, when he was to repeat
that covenant of works to the people of Israel, he first gave the law written
in tables of stone: then he made a covenant with his people, saying; Do these
things, and ye shall live. Therefore the ground of the covenant of works was
Note.
not Christ, nor the grace of God in Christ; but the nature of man in the first
creation holy and perfect, endued also with the knowledge of the law. For as
touching the covenant of works, there was no mediator in the beginning
between God and man, that God should in him, as in and by a mediator, make his
covenant with man. And the cause that there was no need of a mediator was this:
that albeit there were two parties entering into a covenant, yet there was no
such breach or variance betwixt them that they had need of any mediator to
make reconciliation between them: for as for the covenant of works, God made
this covenant with man, as one friend does Note.
with another. For in the creation we were Gods friends, and not his enemies.
Thus far of the ground of the conant of works.

The thing promised in the covenant of works, is life eternal first, not
righteousness: for that man, in his creation, was even then just and perfect, by
that original justice, as they call it: unless you will say that the
righteousness of works was promised in that covenant, for which righteousness
sake, after that man had wrought it, God would pronounce and declare him to be
just. For we are to understand, that in this covenant there is a double
righteousness: the first is that original justice, which is nothing else but
the integrity of nature in that first state of man. This justice out of all
doubt is not promised in the covenant of works, for it is the ground of it. The
second justice is that which was to follow the good works of nature in that
integrity, and might be called the justice of works: for after that man had
lived godly and justly according to Gods law in that integrity, then he might
be said to be just again, and to be declared of God to be just by his good
works well pleasing unto God, and so eternal life might be said to be given
unto him, as justified by his works. For Paul to the Romans teaches, that there
may be some imputation of righteousness by good works, if so be that works be
perfectly good: Hence come these manner of speeches; Abraham was not justified
by his works: by works no flesh shall be justified. Thus far of the promise
Romans 4. 2
of the covenant of works, or of the things promised in the covenant of works.

Now to come unto the condition: the condition of ye covenant of works, is the
condition of good works; of good works, I say, not which proceed from Christ,
or from his The condition of the covenant of works.
grace, but from nature only in the integrity thereof, and being informed with
the knowledge of the law, and perfectly good, as it was in the first creation;
proceeding, I say, from that ground of the covenant of works. Therefore works
mere naturally good, only are required as the condition of the covenant of
works. So then by this condition, do you exclude hence faith in Christ? I do
so. And do ye except here from the condition of the covenant of works, all the
works of grace and regeneration? I do except these also. But the covenant of
works is often propounded in the Gospel, to such as be in grace and in Christ
Jesus? for how often is the reward of eternal life promised to such as do well?
wherefore it may seem that the works of regeneration appertain also to the
covenant of works, for that such works be required of them which be under
grace? I answer, the antecedent is false: for if at any time we hear or read
in the Gospel of grace, that good works be required of them which be in Christ
and justified by him, to that end that they may obtain eternal life, we may
not think that God speaks Note.
unto them after the form of the covenant of works: for in the Gospel, good
works are required of them which be in Christ, not such as proceed from their
own nature, or such as they can yield of their own strength, but only such
as proceed from the grace of regeneration. For we never find in the new
Testament, that they which are in Christ, be commanded to do the works
aforesaid of the covenant of works, which be naturally good; or that the
covenant of works is set before the^, that by it, and the works thereof acted by
the strength of nature, they may receive eternal life. For thou shall never
find it said to them which are in Christ: Do this of your own strength, that
so ye may live: which is the very sum of ye covenant of works.

As for that place Math. 19. 17. where Christ said to a certain young man,
which called upon him, saying: Master, what good shall I do that I may have
eternal life? The Lord answered, and said. If thou will enter into life,
keep the commandments: I grant that here he understands the covenant of
works, and that the Lord propounds to the young man the form of the conenant
of works. But observe that the Lord so answers to one that sought his life
and salvation by the law, and which did before cleave unto the covenant of
works, and trusted to works as meritorious. For so the covenant of works and
the rule of the law of works must be set before every one which is without
Christ, seeking righteousness by the law and the works of the law, to this
end, if it may be, that by the sense of sin and the feeling of his own misery,
he may be prepared to embrace the covenant of grace in Christ. For to return
unto his words: that young man said to the Lord, What good shall I do?
Therefore he sought salvation by works, and not by faith in Christ. So then
the Lord answered fitly to his question, Do this, and thou shall live: Which
manner of speaking is never wonted to be propounded in the Gospel to them
which have once embraced and professed Christ. For those good works of nature
be never required of them, according to the form of the covenant of works,
neither be the promises made unto them under condition of any such works.

I confess good works be required of them which be in Christ, and justified
by him: but all such works belong to grace and regeneration; to grace, I say,
only; and they be not the works of free will nor of nature. Know this the^,
that to such as be in Christ, the covenant of works to the^ is abolished, and
of none effect so far forth as by it justification and salvation is obtained. I
grant, the law abides which is the rule of those works, which properly and
specially How far the law is abolished.
did first appertain to the covenant of works: but now it has another
special use; for it serves for our direction in the works of grace and
sanctification. So then the law has ceased, as it was the rule of the works of
nature required in the covenant of works: but it is still in use to them which
are in Christ, as it is the rule of the works of grace. For the same justice of
God is unchangeable: and the law of God is the very image of divine justice:
wherefore the law of God must abide for ever, albeit it have not ever the same
use, nor be not always the rule of the same works. But of this we shall speak
more at large hereafter. It is a question here, whether in the first creation,
good works in the covenant of works, were required of man, as meritorious for
the promised life? I answer, not so: But they were due in the creation, as
pledges of thankfulness in man to his creator, for that excellent work of
his creation, and to glorify God his creator. But it may be objected, that
Paul to the Romans disputing against the works of nature (for in that epistle he
disputing principally against this kind of works) he reasons against the^, as
seeming meritorious, and not as duties and testimonies of man's thankfulness unto
God: wherefore it may seem they were commanded unto man in his creation as
meritorious. I answer, true it is, Paul disputes there of the^ as of merits,
not for that this was his judgment of them, but because the Jews had that
conceit of them, which were so far blinded, that they thought the good works
of nature were not only good and just, but also might merit justification and
life. But of this blindness of the Jews, we shall speak more at large
herafter. Thus far of the condition of the covenant of works, and of this
kind of covenant accordingly, and as we purposed in this present treatise.

CHAP. III. Of the covenant of grace.
IN the free covenant of grace, or of the Gospel, the first ground is our
mediator Jesus Christ, 1. Ground of the covenant of grace.
crucified also, and dead: or (which is the same in effect) the blood of the
mediator, the virtue whereof is twofold. The first serves to satisfy the
justice and wrath of God for our sins, for the breach of that covenant of
works. The second is, to purchase and merit a new grace and mercy of God for
us. And this grace or mercy of God 2. Ground.
obtained by the blood of the mediator, is ye second ground of the covenant of
grace, whereby we stand reconciled unto God, and in grace with him. Wherefore
the first immediate ground of the covenant of grace, is Gods free savor or
mercy (whereby man's misery is presupposed) and not nature, or any good thing
in it: For that all our natural goodness, after the breach of that covenant of
works, is quite vanished: that is to say, nature as touching holiness, justice
and wisdom is utterly lost. For we are not to approve their judgment which
say, that the freedom of will, that is, the goodness and holiness of nature, is
much worn and weakened (as they speak) in this corrupt nature.

And thus far of the ground of the covenant of grace. Upon this ground I say,
first of the blood of Christ; next of God free mercy in Christ, the covenant
of grace (usually so called) is founded.

The first and principal grace promised in this covenant, is righteousness;
which must necessarily here have the first place, for after the breach of the
covenant of works, that one first original justice (as they call it) was quite
lost; and injustice did succeed into the place thereof. And this justice which
is here promised in the covenant of grace, is no inherent righteousness, as
that original justice was: but it is the righteousness of our mediator Jesus
Christ, which is ours by faith, and by the imputation of God; for which cause
the Apostle calls it the righteousness of God: for without this imputative
justice we can not Romans 3. 20.
possibly stand before the tribunal of God; and by the imputation of this
righteousness are we said to be justified before God. Next after this kind of
righteousness which is by imputation, there is another kind of inherent justice
promised in the covenant of grace, even such a sanctity and goodness of nature
as was lost in the fall of man, and this is but begun in this life, but
perfected in another. And this inherent justice is nothing else but life
eternal in us, begun, I say, in earth; and perfected in heaven: And this
heavenly and spiritual life does proceed from that righteousness of Christ
which is imputed unto us by faith: For that righteousness of Christ is
effectual in us unto eternal life by the spirit of Christ, who sanctifies
and quickneth us. And thus far of the promise, which is in the covenant of
grace.

Now it follows that we see what the condition is of this covenant. The
very name of the covenant of grace, might seem to require no condition; for
it is called a free covenant, because God freely, The condition of the covenant
of grace.
and, as it might seem, without all condition, does promise herein both
righteousness and life: for he which promises to give any thing freely, he
binds not to any condition. But we are to understand, that grace, here, or
the particle freely, does not exclude all condition, but that only which is in
the covenant of works, which is the condition of the strength of nature, and
of works naturally just and good, as we may call them, which can in no wise
stand with Gods free grace in Christ Jesus. For neither that freedom of will,
which does import some purity and holiness in nature, nor the works of free will
as they call them, can agree with the grace of God in Christ Jesus. What is the
condition then, which this word grace or freely, will admit in this covenant of
grace? I answer, assuredly none other the^ that which may stand with Christ,
and with Gods free grace: and that is faith only, which is also by grace (for
it is Gods free gift, Phil. 1. 29. It is given unto you, not only to believe
in him, but also to suffer for his sake) having Christ first the object
thereof; and next, Gods free mercy in Christ: for faith embraces Gods mercy
in Christ, and makes Christ effectual in us unto righteousness and life. For
this cause Paul, Romans 4. 16. says, our inheritance is by faith, that it might
come by grace. Ephe. 2. 8. Ye are saved by grace, by faith, and that not of
your selves: that is, as he after expounds it, not of works: so he
concludes, that salvation, because it is of Gods free grace by faith, is the
free gift of God. Wherefore we see faith stands best with the grace and mercy
of God; as without Romans 6. 23.
which, Christ, and Gods mercy in him, cannot be effectual unto
righteousness and life. For if we receive not Christ by faith, and Gods mercy
in Christ; Christ and the mercy of God can profit us nothing unto
justification and life. Howbeit we be here to remember, that whereas God
offers righteousness and life under condition of faith; yet does he not so
respect faith in us (which is also his own gift) as he does the object of
faith, which is Christ, and his own free mercy in Christ, which must be
apprehended by faith: for it is not so much our faith apprehending, as Christ
himself, and Gods mercy apprehended in him, that is the cause wherefore God
performs the promise of his covenant unto us, to our justification and
salvation. Wherefore the condition of the covenant of grace is not faith only,
nor the object of faith only, which is Christ; but faith with Christ, that is,
The condition of the covenant of grace.
the faith that shall apprehend Christ; or Christ with faith, that is, Christ
which is to be apprehended by faith. Note then briefly this, how these three
are one in substance, the ground of the covenant of grace; the condition of it;
and the cause wherefore God performs the condition: yet in reason they differ
something. For Jesus Christ is the ground, being absolutely considered, without
any respect of application unto us. But Christ is the condition of the
covenant, as he is to be applied unto us, and must be embraced by faith: for
every condition is of a future thing to be done: And the cause also of the
performance of the covenant, is Jesus Christ already embraced, and applied
unto us by faith, Whereas Paul then says, that we are justified by faith, his
meaning is, that we are justified by Christ applied unto us by faith already
in our effectual calling; which by order of nature goes ever before the
benefit of justification.

It may be here demanded, whether the works of grace and regeneration (as
they are called) have not some place in the condition of the covenant of grace:
for all the good works of nature are hence excluded. I answer, that the very
works of regeneration are not contained in the condition of the covenant of
grace. First, for that the covenant of grace is made with the unjust and
unregenerate: now how can their works be just and good? Next, in the covenant
of grace both regeneration it self, and all the holy fruits thereof are
promised: for in it all the benefits of Christ be promised the believers: Now
then, the promise of the covenant must necessarily differ from the condition of
the covenant. But this you will Objection.
say: It is evident, and that in many places of the new Testament, that life
eternal, or, as they say, the reward of eternal life is often promised under
the condition of good works, that is, the works of regeneration, as 1. Timoth.
4. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promises both of this
life, and of the life to come. Luke 14. It shall be repaid thee in the day of
the resurrection of the just. Matthew. 5. Your reward is great in heaven. Matt.
19. He shall not lose his reward. Gal. 6. Let us not be weary in weldoing, for
in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. Ephe. 6. Knowing this, that what
good soever every man does, that he shall receive of the Lord. Heb. 6. The
Lord is not unjust to forget your work, and the love which ye ministered unto
the saints. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Notwithstanding it is a righteous thing with God to
render affliction in like manner to them which afflict you, and unto you which
are afflicted rest with us. To these I answer: In my Answer. Three kinds of
promises in the Gospel.
judgment there are three distinct kinds of promises in the Gospel. The first,
is the promise of the covenant of works, wherein eternal life is promised
under condition of works done by the strength of nature. Thesecond, is the
promise of the covenant of grace, which is propounded under condition of faith.
The third kind of promises, are those particular and special promises, which
are to be referred to the covenant of grace, found every where in the Gospel,
and made under condition of the works of grace and regeneration.

These three kinds of promises differ first in condition; next, in propriety;
thirdly, in subject; fourthly, in end and use. First the^, they differ in
condition: for ye promise in the First difference.
covenant of works, is under condition of ye works of nature, and the strength
thereof: In the covenant of grace, the promise is under condition of faith in
Christ: In the promises which I call particular or special promises, there is a
condition of works indeed, but of the works of grace and regeneration, and not
of the works of nature, or any natural faculty. Secondly, these promises
differ in propriety: for the promise in the covenant of works is Second
difference.
merely legal, and requires the condition of works done only by the strength
of nature, commanded in the law, and to be done according to the strict rule
of Gods law: and the works of nature, or wrought by natural strength, are
properly called the works of the law, Romans 9. 32. And the promise in the
covenant of grace is not legal, but merely Evangelical, for the condition
here is not of any work moral and natural, but of faith in Christ, and of
Christ himself to be apprehended by faith. Lastly, those particular promises,
they are partly Evangelical, partly legal: for the condition is of works
which proceed from grace and regeneration, and therefore of such works as in
regard of their original, may truly be called Evangelical works: but because
the law moral is the rule of them, in this respect they may also be called
legal works. Thirdly, these promises differ in subject, because Third
difference.
the promise in the covenant of works, is propounded to them, which now after
the breach of that first covenant of works, lie dead in sins and offenses,
having notwithstanding Ephe. 2. 1.
for the time no sense of sin nor death. The promise in the covenant of grace
is given to them, which are also dead in sins and transgressions, but having
some feeling of sin, of death, and of their own misery wrought in them, by
the law and legal covenant: and as for those particular promises, they are
proposed to them which are already justified and renewed by faith in Christ.
Lastly, these promises differ in use and end; for the end of the covenant of
works is, that wretched sinners, which 4. difference.
are void of sense of their sin and misery, may be awakened to feel and
acknowledge their own sin and misery, that is (as the Apostle speaks Romans
7. 9. 10.) that sin may revive in them, and that they may die, that is, they
may feel that they be dead in sins and offenses. Of this use of the law, see
Romans 3. 19. 20. 11. 32. Gal. 3. 22. and 5. 23. This is the use then of the
covenant of works, to work in us the sense of sin and misery, and to
prepare men to receive grace. Therefore the doctrine of the Gospel begins with
the legal doctrine of works, and of the law moral: for the Gospel should
preach and promise in vain righteousness and life to the believers, if they
were not first prepared by feeling their own corruption, and miserable
condition to hear and receive grace by the Gospel. For this cause Christ
himself first, Matthew. 5. 17. and after; freeth and restores the law as pure
from the leven of the Pharisees, expounding (...).
the perfection and exact severity thereof, for this very cause, that men by
this light of the covenant of works and law moral, might acknowledge how
miserable they be by nature, and so might hereby be prepared to embrace the
covenant of Grace. So did Christ prepare that rich young man (which came unto
him to be schooled, as he made show) to entertain the covenant of grace: Will thou (says he) enter into life? Keep the commandments. Paul begins his
doctrine in the Epistle to the Romans from the law and covenant of works, and
spends near his three first chapters of his Epistle in this doctrine, to this
end, that he might conclude all under sin and condemnation, and so might
prepare men to the doctrine of grace, which begins Romans 3. 21. So Gal. 4. 21.
he teaches the Galathians that would be under the law (as he speaks) their
miserable servitude, which be in that condition; and how at the last they are
cast out of Gods kingdom: for this very cause, that the Galathians renouncing
all confidence in that righteousness, which is by the law and covenant of
works, might lay hold on that righteousness which is by faith and grace. This
might appear by many arguments, which now I willingly pass over. The end and
use of the promise in the covenant of grace is, that men cast down and humbled
in the sight of their own sin and misery by the legal covenant, might be
raised up and comforted by hearing and receiving that righteousness and life,
which is freely promised and offered to the believers in the Gospel. Of this
use read Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with
God. This is the proper end of the Euangelical doctrine: therefore the second
and principal part of the Gospel does consist in the doctrine of the covenant
of grace, which is properly and principally to bear this title of an
Evangelical doctrine; teaching us what Christ our mediator is; what his
humiliation first, next his glorification; and then what benefits, life, and
righteousness we get by him: and these be the special branches of the Gospel,
and of that joyful message of our salvation. Last of al, the use of those
particular promises is, that Gods Elect, justified, renewed, comforted, and
quieted in their consciences, may testify their thankfulness by their holy
obedience and good works. The Apostle notes this end, Tit. 2. 11. 12. 13. 14.
For that grace of God which brings salvation unto all men has shined:
teaching us, that renouncing ungodliness and worldly lusts, we live soberly,
justly, and godly in this present world. And for that this is the end of these
promises, they have also their place in the third part of the doctrine of the
Gospel, which concerns the life and Christian conversation of the Saints: for
which cause ye have these promises often in the Gospel, annexed to
exhortations, admonitions, and instructions concerning manners, as Gal. 6.
after that (verse. 6.) he had given in charge, that he which is catechized in
the word, should minister unto him which teaches him, of all his goods: he
forthwith adds, verse. 7. and 8. a promise and a threatening. Again, verse. 9.
having warned them not to wax weary in weldoing, he adds this promise, We
shall reap in due time, if we faint not. So, Ephe. 6. after that his charge
given to servants to serve their masters in all vprightnes, ver. 5. 6. 7. he
adds a promise v. 8. Whatsoever good thing every man does, that shall he
receive of the Lord. The like testimonies are every where, in which ye may find
admonitions, exhortations and instructions confirmed with promises and
threatenings. Of this kind then are al those promises before mentioned, which
must be carefully discerned, first, from the covenant of works; next, from the
covenant of grace, wheresoever we find them in reading the new Testament.

And finally, concerning the aforesaid promises we are to observe, first, that
the condition of the works of regeneration and grace is required of believers,
not as merits, but as duties only, and testimonies of their thankfulness to God
their redeemer: like as the condition in the covenant of works is not of
merits, but of duties only, and of testimonies of their thankfulness to God
their creator. I grant that the works of regeneration are necessary unto
eternal life promised in the Gospel, but not as merits, or meritorious
causes: but as the means and way, wherein we are to proceed on from
justification and regeneration unto glory and life eternal. They may also be
said to be causes, after a sort: for they please God in Christ, and in some
respects move him, but not as merits, but as effects of the only merit of Jesus
Christ, whereof they testify. But of this we shall speak in place more
convenient. Secondly, note in this third kind of promises, that the condition
therein is of the works of regeneration, which are also most perfect in their
kind: for the great justice of God cannot bear the least defect. The rule also
of all works is the justice of God, whereof ye have a certain express image
in the moral law. Wherefore the condition here is of works most absolute, but
not in themselves, but in Christ, and in the perfection of his satisfaction and
merit. If ye object: Does not the law require that perfection of works, which
is in works themselves? I answer, it does so; of them which are under the
covenant of works, under the law, and without Christ: but as for such as be in
the covenant of grace and in Christ, it does not require a perfection in the
works of regeneration, but is content with the good beginnings which the
believers have, the perfection of whose obedience is supplied, and to be found
in Christ Jesus. For like as he justified us of his mere grace in Christ, and
by his merit, being his enemies: so now much more will he accept us, Note. Romans
5. 9. 10. 11. 12.
being justified and regenerate; I say, much more will he accept us, being his
friends, and our obedience in Christ even for his merit sake. For so the
Apostle concludes, Romans 5. 9. Being justified therefore by his blood, we shall
now much more be preserved from wrath by him. And thus far of these three
kinds of promises which are distinctly set down in the New Testament.

And here this might also be demanded, whether these 3. kinds of promises be
not as distinctly to be found in the old Testament? I answer, they may so be
found; yet not without some difference: for that the old Testament did serve
specially to prepare men to receive Christ, which in his appointed time was to
come. For the law was a schoolemaister unto Christ, Gal. 3. Therefore the
greatest part of the old Testament is spent in propounding, repeating,
expounding the covenant of works. And because Christ was not as yet manifested
in the flesh; therefore the doctrine of the covenant of grace, is more
sparingly and darkly set forth in it. Finally, as touching the faithful in
the old Testament which embraced Christ the mediator of the covenant of grace,
howsoever then but shadowed before their eyes in types and figures; to them, I
say, being justified in him which was to come, and regenerat by his grace, the
promises of eternal life were made under condition of the works of
regeneration: as this promise made to Abraham Genesis 17. 1. Walk thou before Rom
4*
me and be thou upright, and I will make my covenant with thee. This promise was
made to Abraham being before justified by faith and renewed by grace. The like
promises are often in the old Testament annexed to moral precepts, as in the
books of the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes. And thus far of the covenant of
grace, the ground thereof, the promise thereof, and the condition thereof.

Now it remains that we answer a question or two concerning this covenant:
The first, whether the covenant of works be abolished, and of none effect to
such as 1. use of the covenant of works or of the Moral law.
be under the covenant of grace? I answer, the covenant of works has two ends
and uses. The first and proper end and use of the covenant of works is, that
men by it may be justified and saved, or otherwise, condemned. The covenant of
works had this use in Adam before his fall, that Adam by it might be justified
and live: After the fall, it has the same use in the unregenerate, elect and
reprobate, to wit, to justify and save them, or to condemn them. And for as
much as it can not justify them because of their corruption, Romans 8. 3. it
follows that it must necessarily condemn them: And the very unbelieving
and unregenerate do otherwhiles feel this condemnation in themselves. Of this
use, read Romans 3. 19. where he says, that by the law Every mouth is stopped,
and made obnoxious to the condemnation of God. And of the experience of this
condemnation read Romans 7. 10. I, says he, when the commandment came, was
dead, that is, condemned in my conscience; so that I felt in my self present
condemnation and death. And albeit this first use of the covenant of works be
common to al unregenerate, elect and reprobate; yet this wants not some
difference: for in the elect the acknowledgme^t of sin and condemnation which
they have by the covenant of works, is unto them a preparatiue to embrace the
covenant of grace: but in the reprobate it is the way to extreme desperation.
Thus far of the first use.

The second end of the covenant of works is this: It 2. End of the covenant of
works.
serves to drive on and to stir up al believers to march on forwards in all
faith and godliness. This use it has I say in the regenerat, who in the
legal covenant, or moral law do desire principally to behold as in a glass
evermore first the holiness, majesty and justice of God. 1. The use of the
moral law to the believers.
To. 7. 12. Therefore the law is holy, and the commandment is holy, just and
good. Next they see here that which they call the original holiness and justice
of man, to wit, 2.
the same which was in the creation, which is defined to consist, of justice,
holiness, and wisdom. Thirdly, they behold here that life eternal, which was
to follow that 3.
first original justice. Fourthly, they see that corruption and unrighteousness
which is now in nature after man's 4.
fall, but this they see by consequent, as we say, one contrary is discerned and
known by another: for while we consider first that infinite justice of God;
next our original justice, which are properly discerned by that glass of Gods
law and covenant of works, by the light and brightness of these, I say, we may
take a view of the gross darkness, filthiness, and deformity of our corrupt
nature. For this cause it is said To. 3. 20. By the law comes the knowledge of
fin. Fifthly, they see herein Gods wrath kindled against yt deformity of
nature, so contrary both to Gods justice and to man's original justice: For
this cause it is said, Romans 1. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men: and Romans 4. The law causes
wrath. Sixthly and lastly, they behold how present death follows that wrath of
God: To. 1. 32. Which men though they knew the law of God, how that they which
commit such things are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but also
favor them that do them: and Chap. 7. 9 10. When the commandment came, I
dyed.

The regenerate when they consider these things in the law and covenant of
works, they are forthwith terrified with that heavy spectacle 1. of their
sin; 2. of the wrath of God against sin; 3. of eternal death which
follows Gods wrath: And then do they more and more relinquish and renounce
1. that legal righteousness required in the covenant of works; 2. that
original justice and all opinion of free will; 3. that life and safety which
follows that legal righteousness of works. And having renounced all confidence
in these things, with like in devour they follow hard after Christ by
conversion and faith, to this end, that they may find in him, first that
mercy of God in Christ, contrary to that justice of God: secondly, they
seek for that imputative justice (as they call it) so contrary to their own
righteousness, and to that original justice of the law or of works. Thirdly,
they labor for that sanctification and regeneration, that so they may bring
forth the fruits of the spirit. Fourthly, they wait for to attain that life
eternal, which is given us of Gods free grace in and by that imputed
righteousness of Christ.

If we were possessed in this life of a perfect faith in Christ, A perfect faith
we have not.
and so of perfect holiness; then I grant the believers should not need this
terrible glass of the law and of the covenant of works. But because unbelief
still rests in this our nature, and the relics of that inherent contagion
still abide in us, and for that so long as we live here, neither our faith nor
holiness can be perfected: Therefore to weaken more and more our vnbelcefe and
inherent sin in us, and more and more to increase faith and holiness, we
have ever need of this terrible glass, as a continual severe Schoolemaister,
which ever casting many fears before us may drive us to the faith of Christ,
and to sanctimonie of life.

Now then seeing it is evident that there is a double use of the covenant of
works, the answer to the question aforegoing is easy. For this we avouch,
that, as touching the former use, the covenant of works is abolished to them
which are under grace. To this the Apostle points when he says To. 6. 15.
Ye are not under the law, but under grace. Gal. 4. that he might redeem them
which were under the law. Romans 7. Being dead to the law we are now free from
the law. 2. Cor. 3. 11. For if that which should be abolished was glorious. But
as for this second use it is not abolished. This distinction is commonly
received, that the law and legal covenant is abolished, as it is a condemning
tyrant: and not to be abolished as it is a Schoolemaister to chasten us, and
with terrors to drive us unto Christ. For this second use we have an example
in Paul after his regeneration. To. 7. 14. etc. For when he considers in the
glass of Gods law the spiritualitie (that so I may speak) the holiness and
goodness of the law first: next his own carnalitie (to use that word) and
rebellion, and lastly death it self: first he breaks forth into these words,
Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Next he flies to the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, saying, I give God thanks
in Christ Jesus. And 2. Cor. 5. 11. Paul says of himself, he was enforced and
moved forwards to do duties in his calling because of the terrors of the
Lord set down and offered unto him in and by his law: Knowing therefore the
terror of the Lord we bring men to the faith. The same Apostle Galath. 4. 21.
when he saw that the Galathians which began to believe in Christ,
notwithstanding not to cleave unto him only by faith, but to make a mixture of
the law with Christ; he sets before them this glass of Gods law, or of the
covenant of works: wherein he lays open first the miserable bondage of such
as are under the law; next their final reiection: to this end and purpose,
that they might be moved by this fearful speculation to stick to Christ
only, and to the covenant of grace.

Hereunto refer those co^minations which we find partly annexed to the covenant
of grace in the second part of the Evangelical doctrine: partly put to the
particular promises, instructions, exhortations in the 3. part of the doctrine
of the Gospel. For this is the duty of the moral law and of the covenant of
works, to contain ye believers with threatenings and terrors within the bounds
of the grace of Christ, and of his Gospel. Io. 3. 18. we have a commination of
the law or of the covenant of works, added to Note the office of the law to
believers.
the covenant of grace: He that believes in him, is not condemned, this is the
conenant of grace: He that believes not, is condemned already: This
commination does properly appertain to the law or covenant of works. Romans 8.
13. He conioineth a threatening of the law or covenant of works with a
particular promise, wherein life is promised unto sanctimonie. If ye live
according to the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye mortify the deeds of the body
by the spirit, ye shall live. See Gal. 6. 8. And thus far of the first
question.

The second question is this: whether the moral law, which we call the
decalogue, be abolished to them which The 2. ques. whether the law be
abolished to the regenerat.
be under the covenant of grace? I answer by way of distinction: The moral law
as it commands works done by the strength of nature, and as it is the rule
of all works of this kind, to wit, of such works as be required in the
covenant of works, that is, in respect of the first and proper use thereof (for
it concerns properly the works of nature, which make the condition in the
covenant of works) in this respect (I say) the moral law it self also is
abolished to them which are in Christ, even in like manner as the covenant of
works is cancelled and of none effect against them. For which cause Paul uses
these phrases, We be not under the law, we are dead to the law, we are freed
from the law, to wit, either as touching justification, or comdemnation. And
look how far the covenant of works serves for their use which be in grace;
so far the law of works is in use for them: And what use the believers have
of the covenant of works, we have already showed. Again, look how far
forth the same moral law serves to give rules for the works of grace, and
attends not on the covenant of works, but of grace, and of the Gospel; so
far it rests in use for the servants of Christ. For there is but one rule
and law of all good works whatsoever, whether they proceed from nature or from
grace: like as there is but one and the same justice of God, ever like it
self, whereof the law of God is a very express image, or a lively
representation. Thus then the law moral abides for such as be under the
Gospel, yet in some respect (that is in use) changed: for like as all things
are become new in Christ Jesus; so also the law it self after a sort is
renewed. And that the law serves and is in use for them which be under the
covenant of grace, it is very clear by many scriptures. This may appear by
those very testimonies which are before produced for the covenant of works, and
other scriptures many, where the works of the law are commended. Romans 13. Love
one another; for he that loves another has fulfilled the law. Gal. 5. 13. 14.
By love serve one another, for all the law is fulfilled in one word, which is
this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: See James 2. 8. etc. And thus
far as we purposed, have we spoken of the covenant of grace.

CHAP. IIII. Of such as be comprehended in, or may truly be said to be under,
the covenant of God.
NOW it follows that we speak briefly of such as be under the covenant of
God, or (if I may so speak) confederates with God. Every reasonable creature
must of necessity be liable to one of both covenants, either that of works, or
this of grace. For the very Angels are under the covenant of works: but because
the Scripture speaks so sparingly of them, therefore we say this only in a
word, that they also be under the covenant of works, Again, man must be
under some one covenant. Adam in the state of his innocence, was under the
covenant of works: man after the fall, abides under the covenant of works; and
to this day life is promised him under condition of works done by strength of
nature: But if he will not do well, death and the everlasting curse of God is
denounced against him, so long as he is without Christ, and without the
Gospel. And being freed from the covenant of works, he is not become a
libertine, or not subject to Gods people in grace be not law-les libertines.
any covenant, or as it were law-lesse, but forth with he is admitted to the
covenant of grace, and thence forth lives under it. Therefore concerning
Angels and men, it is evident, that they are under some one covenant.

It is a doubt indeed concerning Christ, whether he were then under any
covenant, when he dwelt among men, and did converse on earth? I answer, there
be two natures in Christ, a divine and humane: Christ as he is God, and the
Son of God, is not under the covenant of works or of grace: for that he is no
creature, but the blessed Creator, to whom, to whose covenant and law every
creature is and must be subject. But as he is man, he is under the covenant of
works; and that in two respects. First, Christ under the couenat of works in
what respect.
in respect of himself, because he is a creature; because he is a servant, and
made man, and was in the loins of Adam, when that covenant of works was first
made with him. But we be to speak sparingly of that state of the man Christ,
which is in respect of Christ himself, whether that his humane nature as
touching itself, were under the covenant of works? whether this nature did
purchase for it self life eternal by observation of the covenant of works?
Next, I say the Or christ the Mediator has subjected himself in his humanity
to the law for our sake.
humane nature of Christ, is under the covenant of works in respect of us; for
being united to that divine nature, it is become a mediator for us, to make
intercession and peace between God offended, and man offending. For Christ our
Mediator, albeit he be God and man in that personal union, yet was he made
subject to the covenant of works, and to the course of the law for us, properly
in respect of his humane nature, that, as the Apostle speaks, he might
redeem us from the law, and the curse of the law. See Gal. 4. 4. and 5. After
that the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son made of awoman, made
subject to the law, to redeem them which were under the law. And Galath. 3.
ver. 13. But Christ says he, has redeemed us from the curse, while he was
made a curse for us. Christ therefore our mediator subjected himself unto the
covenant of works, and unto the law for our sake: and did both fulfill the
condition of the covenant of works, in his holy and good life, even in the
highest degree of perfection, as being God and man (even that most holy one of
God) in one person: and also he did undergo that curse, which was denounced
against man in that covenant of works, if that condition of good and holy works
were not kept: for in the covenant of works ye have together with the promise
of life to him who does well, a commination of everlasting death to him who
does not well. For this cause Christ our mediator, both did well according to
the promise, and died also according to the curse denou^ced. Wherefore we see
Christ in two respect, to wit, in doing and suffering, subject to the covenant
of works, and to have most perfectly fulfilled it, and that for our sake, whose
mediator he is become.

It may be demanded, Had it not been sufficient for our good, and to the end
he might redeem us, if he had only lived well and holily, and not also so to
have suffered death for us? I answer, it had not sufficed: for all his most
holy and righteous works had not satisfied the justice and wrath of God for our
sins, nor merited the mercy of God, reconciliatio^, righteousness and life
eternal for us: the reason is, for that the justice of God did require, for our
breach of Gods covenant, that we should be punished with death eternal,
according to the condition denounced and annexed to the promise of that
covenant. Therefore no good works of our own, or of any Mediator for us, after
the breach of that covenant of works, could have satisfied the justice of God,
which of necessity after asort required the punishment and death of the
offender, or certainly of some mediator in his steed. If then all the good and
holy works of the Mediator could not satisfy that wrath and justice of God for
sin, it is clear they could not meritany new grace or mercy of God for us.

But you will say, that the good and holy works of Christ our Mediator have
wrought some part at least of that satisfaction, whereby Gods justice was
appeased for us: and some part of that merit whereby Gods favor was purchased
for us? I answer, these works did serve properly for no part of satisfaction or
merit for us: for that to speak properly, the death of Christ and his passion
only did satisfy Gods justice, and merited his mercy for us.

If any will yet further demand: May we not divide the satisfaction and merit
of Christ, into his doings and sufferings, that we may speak on this manner,
Christ by his death and passion has satisfied Gods justice, and by his good
and holy works he has merited Gods mercy for us, that so satisfaction may be
ascribed to his death, and merit to his works; that the righteousness
wherewith we are justified before God, may be partly the satisfaction which
Christ performed by his death for us, partly the merits which he obtained by
his works for us? I answer, to speak properly, the satisfaction and merit
which is by the only passion of Christ, both He says, we are justified only by
the passive righteousness of Christ.
was and is our righteousness, or the satisfactorie and meritorious death of
Christ, or the satisfaction which was by Christ's death, or the merit of his
death, or the obedience of Christ, as being obedient to his Father unto the
death, the death also of the Cross; to be short, that justice of Christ,
which he obtained when in his passion he satisfied his Fathers wrath, this is
our righteousness. For we may say, that either the death of Christ, or his
satisfaction, or his merit, or his obedience, or his righteousness is imputed
unto us for righteousness. For all these are taken for one and the same thing.

But here it may be replied: If the works of Christ cannot properly procure
for us any satisfaction, nor merit, nor any part of satisfaction or merit;
then it may be demanded: What has been, and what is the use of Christ's
works, or of his active obedience, or of the obedience of his life? I answer,
that the holiness of the person The active obedience of Christ, or the
righteousness and holiness of his person and life, how it is the ground of the
satisfactorie and meritorious passion of Christ.
of Christ, and of his natures divine and humane, and of his works, is the
very ground or foundation of the satisfaction and merit which we have in the
passion of Christ, that is, the excellency and worthiness of that person, and
of his works did cause that his passion was both satisfactorie and meritorious:
for if this person which suffered, had not been so holy and excellent, as also
his life so pure and godly, it is most certain that his passion could neither
have satisfied Gods wrath, nor merited mercy for us. For which cause the
Apostle Heb. 7. 26. speaking of this ground of this meritorious passion of
Christ, says, that such an high Priest it became us to have (which is) holy,
blameless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens.
And thus far of Christ, and how he may be said to be under the covenant of
works.

And that he was not under the covenant of grace, the matter is so clear, that
it needs no disputation. For the covenant of grace was made in him, and
established in his blood, and the promise in the covenant of grace is made to
them, which were unjust and dead in sin, because of the breach of that
covenant of works: and lastly, Christ not under the covenant of grace.
the condition in the covenant of grace is faith in Christ the mediator.
Wherefore if ye respect either the ground, or condition, or promise of the free
covenant, Christ can not be said to be under it. And thus far of both
covenants, and of them which are under the covenant of God, either of works, or
of grace.

CHAP. V. A comparison of our judgment and of the Adversaries, concerning both
these Covenants.
NOw we be to compare a little our assertion with the adversaries, and to
consider which of both sides is of soundest judgment touching both these
covenants of works and of grace. A rule to try the opinion of the adversaries
and ours by, can none better be found, the^ the doctrine of Paul, specially
that in the Epistle to the Romans, and namely, in that disputation which he
has of justification in the 3. first Chapters, against the Jews of that time.
If after conference we shall find that our assertion does consent with Paul's
mind and doctrine, and that the adversaries are of the same mind and judgment
with the Jews which lived in Paul's time; then it shall plainly appear, that
our judgment is better then the adversaries concerning the covenant of God.

Wherefore in this disputation of Paul, we are to consider first the mind and
purpose of ye Apostle; next by Paul's doctrine we shall gather what the opinion
was of those Jews, against whom he disputed: this done we will apply both
his and their assertion, to our selves which live in this age, and to the
doctrine and conclusions which we maintain concerning both these covenants. By
this means if it shall appear that our doctrine is agreeable to Paul's mind,
and that our adversaries follow the Jews; themselves being witnesses, it shall
(I say) be manifest, that our judgment is better then theirs in this argument.

To come then to the point: Paul in that place to the Romans, disputes against
those Jews which were obstinate and perverse, defending first Christ and his
merit, which is the first ground of the covenant of grace; next he disputes
for grace or the mercy of God, which is the Paul's disputation. Romans 1. 2. and
3. Chap.
second ground of the free covenant; thirdly, he avouches against those
adversaries, that the covenant of grace was founded in Christ, and in the grace
of God; fourthly, he proves the justification of man, and so consequently the
salvation* which is according to the covenant of grace: he disputes, I say,
for these things, first against nature, which is the ground of the covenant of
works; next against the very covenant of works it self founded on nature;
thirdly, against the justification of man, and salvation which is by it,
arising of the just and good works of nature, according to that covenant of
works. I grant he does expressly fight against that justification and
salvation, which is by the works of nature, required in the covenant of works;
and for the justification of faith, which is required in the covenant of grace:
but by one and the self same disputation he concludes both against nature and
the covenant of works, and for Christ, and for Gods grace in him, that is, for
the covenant of grace. For the doctrine of antecedents must necessarily be
included in the doctrine of the consequent.

By this purpose of Paul, we may see what was the drift of those adversary
Jews, and what was their judgment against whom he disputes in the Epistle to
the Romans Those Jews, they on the contrary part did strive for nature, as
being the ground of the covenant of works; as also for the very covenant of
works or of nature; for justification and salvation by works, and according to
the form of the covenant of works: They did (I say) contend for these things,
against Christ, against the grace of God in Christ, and against the covenant of
grace, and against justification and salvation of men, which is according to
the covenant of grace. Igraunt, that (as is aforesaid) the question was of this
last point, which is justification: but this question includes all the former
branches, as is before showed. Wherefore let us consider again that old
controversy, and the very ground thereof.

In this controversy, by the way note how great the The state and blindness
of the Jews in Paul's time.
blindness was of the Jews of those times: first they did not understand,
that man's nature after the fall was lost, as touching goodness: they saw not
their own corruption, neither were they touched with any sense of sin or of
their own misery. Next, they knew not Christ the mediator, and the mercies of
God in him. Thirdly, being so blind in the premises, they could not conceive
also how that covenant of works was abolished in Christ. Fourthly, they
understood not that there was any covenant of made with man in Christ Jesus.
Fifthly, they did not consider that those works of nature (whereby they would be
justified, according to the prescript form of the covenant of works) they did
not consider, I say, that they were but duties only, and testimonies of
thankfulness, according to the first institution of that covenant; but they did
ascribe some meritorious virtue unto them: for which cause the Apostle
disputes against the works of nature, as against merits, because of this
blind conceit of the Jews. And that they were of judgment that these works
were meritorious, may appear by their glorying in works, against which the
Apostle speaks often. Where is then the glorying or reioicing? it is
excluded, To. 3. 27. If Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to
glory, Romans 4. 2. Not by works, least any should glory, Ephesians. 2. 9. For he which
glories, does not deem that he has received that of God, for which he
glories; and therefore he judges it to be meritorious: What have thou, that
thou have not received? And if thou have received it, wherefore boastest thou,
as if thou had not received it? 1. Cor. 4. 7.

Thus far of the question in controversy, which was between Paul and the
old Jews of his time, concerning the covenant of God. How like to this is
that, which at this day is controuersed between us and the Papists? We in this
age conclude wholly for the only merit of Our defense at this day against the
Papists.
Christ, for the sole and mere grace and mercy of God in Christ, for the
covenant of grace, for justification and salvation by Christ only, by grace
only, by faith only (for all these Phrases serve to one effect) we dispute, I
say, for these things against the strength of nature, the liberty of free will,
that is, the goodness and holiness of nature, against the covenant of works,
against justification by works, even that which is according to the rule of the
covenant of works. The Romanists of this age defend that nature is holy in it
self; yet hurt, impouerished, and weakened (for this is their freedom of will)
they defend, I say, the covenant of works, and the works which proceed
Free Will.
from free will, Justification by works of free will, meritorious also
according to the covenant of works; for they say, the ground of every merit,
whether it be of congruitie or condignitie (to use their own terms) is
free will: These things, I say, they strive to defend, against Christ only, and
his merit, against the only grace of God and mercy in Christ, against the only
covenant of grace, against justification which is by Christ only, by the grace
of God only, by faith only: for all these have one respect and purpose.

Observe then here by the way, what the palpable blindness of the Papists is,
in this clear light of the Gospel. Popish blindness.
First they see not how nature is plainly lost, as touching sanctity.
Secondly, they know not the sole grace and mercy of God, neither do they
understand what the excellency is of Christ's merit. Thirdly, they perceive not
how that covenant of works is abolished to them which are in Christ, as
touching justification. Fourthly, they conceive not, that the only covenant of
grace is made with mankind after the fall, specially now after the
incarnation of Christ, in the Gospel, and that unto justification and life
eternal. Fifthly, they see not that the works of free will; as they call them,
if there were any such, to be duties only and testimonies of thankfulness,
according to the first institution of the covenant of works, which be done by
the strength of nature: but ascribe some special meritorious virtue unto them.
Wherefore we conclude concerning these men, that albeit they be not just of one
mind with those old Jews, against whom the Apostle disputed in the Epistle to
the Romans; yet they hold much on their side, striving to defend that nature is
in part good and holy, so contending against the pure and only grace of God,
and to divide justification and The popish justification.
man's salvation, between Christ and Gods free grace and the virtues and works
of nature: whereas notwithstanding these two, nature and grace, can never stand
together in the work of our salvation. For whosoever shall conioine or make a
mixture of grace and nature in this matter, shall quite overthrow and
extinguish grace, which either is alone, or not at all, as Romans 11. 6. If it be
of grace, it is no more of works; for otherwise grace were no more grace. And
in the Epistle to the Galathians, he does purposelie dispute against those
Jews, which did couple together in the matter of justification, the gifts and
works of nature, with Christ, with the grace of God, and with the Gospel: And
these Jews (as I judge) the Papists seem most to resemble; I mean those
Jews, against whom he wrote in the Epistle to the Galathians. For in that
other epistle to the Romans, he disputes against such Jews, as did openly
deny Christ, and reject him: but to the Galathians his disputation is against
such Jews as were not content with Christ only, but would have Christ and the
law joined together. Thus far of the comparison between Paul and us on the one
side, the old Jews and the Papists on the other.

Now because it will be demanded, what Paul thought of the works of
regeneration, and what we, and what the adversaries think also; therefore I
will touch this question in few words. Here then, some one will say, did Paul
then in that disputation to the Romans and to the Galathians oppugn the works of
grace and regeneration? I answer, Paul's chief purpose in that disputation is
against the works of nature, which the Jews thought to be holy and just, and
also meritorious: he did not reject the works of regeneration, as they be
duties and testimonies of thankfulness unto God, but in that respect commends
them, Romans 6. 7. 8. Chapters, and in other places. But as touching the cause of
justification, he would not have these works (as we call them) of
regeneration, coupled with the grace of God, or with Christ, or with faith, as
any cause, or as part of any meritorious cause of salvation. To this purpose
he says Romans 4. that Abraham himself being regenerate, was not justified
before God by any works of his regeneration: And Romans 6. having commended the
works of sanctification, in the end verse. 23. where he attributes death to the
merit of sin, he does not there notwithstanding ascribe life eternal to the
merit of the works, or fruits of sanctification: but when he had said, that the
wages of sin is death; he does clearly avouch it, that eternal life is the
free gift of God in Christ Jesus. In which place, if the Apostle had been of
this judgment, that the works of regeneration be in any respect meritorious,
assuredly he would not so pass over the commendation of the works of
regeneration, specially for that this here is principally intended. Wherefore
the Apostle to the Romans so rejecting the works of nature, which the covenant
of works requires: yet he understands also all kinds of works, moral, and
natural going before grace and faith, as also all ceremonial works, and the
very fruits of regeneration which follow grace and faith; that faith only,
Christ only, grace only, may herein be all in all. Thus far of S. Paul's
judgment.

We at this day are of one and the same mind with the Apostle concerning works
of regeneration. Our adversaries, granting there be such works, ascribe too
much unto them: for they will not have them to be duties and testimonies only
of thankfulness unto God, but also that they be meritorious causes of that
justification, which they call the second justification.

Again, we are to remember, that the adversaries judgment concerning works of
regeneration is, that they proceed not only from infused grace, and first
justice (as they speak) but also from nature and free will, which works
together with that justice, in respect whereof also they account good works
meritorious (as was before The popish opinion of good works.
showed) so ascribing their good works in part to that their first grace, and
in part to free will. And thus far of this comparison: whereby it appears,
whether we or our adversaries have the better, or the more sound judgment
concerning both covenants, of the grounds of both, nature, grace, and Christ:
as also of the effect of both, which we call man's justification. And lastly,
for that this is the most fundamental point of true religion, we may hereby
discern also whether we, or the adversaries, have the religion and worship of
God the more purely and soundly established amongst us.

CHAP. VI. Of the written Word, or of the written Covenant of God.
THe word in both covenants was for a long time in the world, even from Adams
time till Moses, unwritten; delivered as from hand to hand, and continued by a
lively voice: for I pass over such matters as Joseph records to be engraven
in columns before the flood, as also the Apocryphals of Henoch.

And when as in continuance of time corruptions grew, by these traditions, and
the purity of the doctrine of the covenant could not thus be preserved, and yt
God would no longer follow the former course only, he began in Moses time to
ordain and to publish another form, to wit this, to preserve and to continue
the purity of the celestial doctrine in written books, approved and sealed by
divine authority and testimony; and the more to commend his written word unto
men, in all succeeding ages, God himself with his own hand did first write in
tables of stone the words of the Decalogue: Next after this, he gave it in
charge unto Moses, that he should afterward write and record all things which
he received at Gods own mouth: and that the people of God might be assured
that the books of Moses came not by man's will, but were given by divine
inspiration, the Lord sealed 2. Tim. 3. 16,
and testified these writings to be his heavenly oracles, by many great
wonders, before they were written, when they were written, and after they were
written. And Moses wrote the Word of both covenants; of both I say, Legal and
Evangelical: but whereas he gave, but as it were, the first lineaments of the
Evangelical covenant, he set forth the Legal covenant clearly and in full
measure. For the legal covenant in the books of Moses is clearly recommended
and urged, but the Euangelical more darkly set before us. For which cause all
the doctrine of Moses is said to be legal: The Law came by Moses, Ioh. 1.

After Moses, God stirred up his Prophets, whose writings also he confirmed
with his great miracles, and gave them great authority: yet were they not to
set forth any thing diverse or contrary to the doctrine of Moses and the
Patriarchs; nor to publish any thing, but what was grounded in the books of
Moses: but by divine revelation they did ad more clear interpretations, as the
morning star of the new testament did more nearly approach. These holy men
wrote the sum and chief heads of their doctrine, even so much as God
himself thought meet to be reserved for posterity. And these records being
written, were laid up with the holy books of Moses, which were kept in the
side of the Arc, Josh. 24. 26.

Finally, after the incarnation of Christ, the Evangelical doctrine, or the
Gospel first began for certain years to be delivered by voice, and to be
preached by Christ himself; and then after by his Apostles: And lastly, the
same was written by the Apostles. The works of Gods law, and nature are
commanded in the books of the new Testament: And the very moral law is
expounded by Christ himself, and freed from the leaven and corruption of the
Pharisees: but the works of the law and nature, are not recommended to the end,
that by them men might be justified and saved; but they be commended, either to
prepare men to intertaine grace offered, or to quicken them to proceed and grow
in grace received, as is before showed. Again, the works of regeneration be
commanded, not for justification, but as testimonies of that justification
which is by faith, and of thankfulness unto God: for which cause, so soon as
the Apostle has taught the doctrine of faith, he descends to the works of the
law, teaching men that their life and conversation must be worthy that high
calling, whereunto we are called in Christ Jesus. See Ephe. 4. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
12. But faith in Christ is that, which is principally required in all the books
of the new Testament. And thus far generally of the written word of the
covenant.

CHAP. VII. The number of the controversies which are concerning the written
Word: and of the first controversy, whether the Scripture be the word of God.
THere be two kinds of controversies concerning the holy Scripture. The first
kind is of such controversies as be more essential, that is, which concern
the very essence (if I may so speak) or being of the Scripture. The second
kind is of those controversies which be more accidental, and do not so
nearly concern the essence of the Scripture. Of the first kind there are ten
controversies or questions: the first is, Whether the Scripture Prophetical
and Apostolical be the word of God? The second is, How it may appear that
this Scripture is Gods word? The third is, Of the antiquity of it. The fourth
is, Of the perspicuity or cleerenes of it. The fifth is, Of the simplicity or
plainness of it. The sixth is, Of the viuacitie, quickening power, or life of
it. The seventh is, Of the simple and evident necessity of it. The eight is,
Of the perfection and sufficiency thereof, that it is sufficient and perfect
in it self, without all unwritten verities, or traditions whatsoever. The
ninth is, Whether the Scripture may be the judge to determine all
controversies? The tenth is, Whether the Scriptures Prophetical and
Apostolical must have the chief place of excellency, and be in authority
above the Church.

As for those eight controversies which follow the two first, they are touching
the properties of the holy Scripture; and these, when we shall have proved
that the Scripture is Gods word, will appear evidently: for they are necessary
consequents of that Theoreme. For grant we this, that the Scripture is Gods
word; then these things must follow necessarily; first, that it is most
ancient; secondly, most clear; thirdly, most simple or pure; fourthly, most
powerful; fifthly, most necessary; sixthly, most perfect; seventhly, the
greatest and best judge of all controversies without exception; eighthly, most
excellent. But for as much as the adversaries deny these eight properties,
therefore (as is a foresaid) there is of every one of them a special
controversy.

We are then to handle these controversies in order: and first of that which by
due right, and naturally is to have the first place: Whether the Scripture be
the word of God? The Adversaries grant generally that the holy Scripture is
the word of God: but when they are brought from the general to a special,
they break from us. To speak more plainly: the word of God at this day, is
twofold in the Church of God, 1. immediate. 2. mediate. I call that the Gods
written word.
immediate word of God, which does proceed immediately out of Gods own mouth:
and that I call mediate, which the Lord speaks by his preacher or Minister. We
hold then and avouch, that the holy Scripture is that immediate and primarie
word of God, and to be unto us in steed of that first, immediate, and lively
voice of God himself: yea, that it serves us in place not only of that lively
voice of God, but also of the secret and insearchable mind of God, and of Gods
unspeakable mysteries. Our arguments are these: 1. For that this is the very
will of God. They have Moses (says he) and the prophets, that is, the books
of Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16. 29. 2. If we had nothing to supply the
defect of the lively voice of God, then doubtless our state were worse then
that of the old Church of the Jews, which had the oracles of God: but it is
against all light of reason so to Romans 3 1. 2.
affirm. 3. Our third reason is this: The first ground of our faith must be,
either the lively voice of God, or the very mind and counsel of God, or
something to supply the want of Gods lively voice, and of the secret mind of
God, which must also be unto us no less certain and firm, then if we heard
God himself speak, or did behold and read the very mind of God; yea the
very divine oracles written in Gods own breast: but now we have not the lively
voice of God; now we see not the secret mind of God: therefore it must follow
that we have something to supply the want of the lively voice of God, even
means to reveal unto us the secret mind of God: and nothing can do this, but
the sacred Scripture: therefore Gods holy written word is, and must be unto us
as the very voice, and as the very mind or will of God himself manifested
unto us. The fourth reason. The Scripture contains all those things which God
has spoken in elder ages, and what God himself has decreed in his secret
counsel (so far as is meet for us to know) concerning our life and
salvation: Ergo, etc. Thus far of the immediate word of God. The mediate voice
of God, we call the voice of the holy and true Church of God: for albeit men
speak, yet the word spoken, is the word of God himself.

Here the adversaries rise up, and contend, that the voice of the Church must
have the priority of excellency, and that it supplieth the want of Gods lively
voice, and the manifestation of his mind, rather or better then the Scripture:
for, say they, the voice of the Church is a Popish Objection concerning the
testimony and the authority of the Church before the Scripture.
Scripture written, not with the pen of any Scribe, but by Gods own finger
in the heart of the Church: therefore the voice or testimony of the Church,
ought to be accounted the principal voice of God: For it is a lively voice,
proceedings from the living heart of the Church, wherein God has engraven all
truth with the finger of his own Spirit: whereas the Scriptures of the
Prophets and Apostles, albeit they were delivered, and spoken by God himself,
yet they were not written by Gods own hand, but by the Prophets and Apostles,
which were the penmen: Again, they were not written in ye living hearts of
men, but in papers, and books, or tables. Hence therefore it follows, that
this scripture, which is found in the heart of the Church, is the principal
Scripture of God, and that the voice of the holy Church, is that most excellent
voice of God, and ought to be unto us, as the immediate voice of God, and in
steed of the secret counsel of God.

I answer: true it is, the testimony of the Church is a lively voice,
proceeding from a living heart, sanctified by the holy ghost (for we speak of
the true Church:) But first I say, that the only Scripture prophetical and
apostolical, is to be accounted that Scripture which was written by Gods own
finger, and that immediate word of God. Next, I say, that the heart of the
Church is taught and sanctified by the Spirit of the Scripture; and that the
Scripture which is in the heart of the Church is nothing else, but a certain
transcript (that so I may speak) or a copy, which the holy Ghost has written
in our hearts, according to that ancient and authentical copy, which is the
holy Scripture. For the holy Ghost teaches the Church nothing now, but that
which is written; and does by the scripture after a sort, beget the Church: and
the Scripture is the mother, the Church is the daughter; the Scripture is the
mistress, the Church is the scholar. Thirdly, I add that the knowledge of
the truth, which is in the heart of the Church by means of the scripture, is
not so perfect nor so absolute, as is the holy Scripture. And lastly, I say,
that the Church being enlightened and renewed but in part, may err from the
truth, even in the greatest matter of weight, and that it does err so often as
it forsakes the canon and rule of the sacred Scripture.

Their former assertion being thus cast down, it is evident that the voice of
the Church (I understand here the true church only, not that whoorish church of
Rome) the voice of the Church (I say) is not that primarie and most excellent
word of God, nor ought to be unto us in steed of the lively and immediate voice
of God; nor to be reputed for Gods mind and counsel; but this prerogative is
due only to the sacred Scripture. I ad further, that if thou do first not so
much respect the truth it self, which the Church speaks, as the instruments
of the speech uttered, which are men: next, if ye compare the voice of the
Church speaking with the sacred Scripture it self, it does not deserve at all
to be called by the name of Gods word, but may more properly be called the
word and testimony of man. For Christ himself calls that testimony which
John the Baptist gave of him, the testimony of man. I receive not, (says he)
or desire not the testimnoie of man, Ioh. 5. 34. Be it so, that the testimony
of the Church be true, and agreeable to the holy scripture, notwithstanding it
is truly called an humane testimony, whether ye respect the men which speak,
or compare their testimony with that, which does proceed from the mouth of God
and Christ himself.

But it may be replied, that the very Apostles and Prophets, which writ and
spoke all these things, which we have in the Scriptures, were men in like
manner: and therefore all the Scriptures are but an humane testimony. I
answer, that I deny not all is objected, if we were to esteem the words or
writings of an Apostle or Prophet, as they are instruments and Ministers, or if
this were to be compared with the very lively voice of God and Christ himself.
For in respect of the instruments, (if we compare the words or writings of
these men, with the words and writings of God himself) theirs (I say) must
come after and give place unto this, and must bear the name of an humane
testimony: for so the testimony of John Baptist himself, as being an
instrument in comparison of Christ the Lord of life, was called the record of
man. Wherefore when we avouch that the Prophetical and Apostolical Scripture
is the immediate testimony of God himself, we make no comparison with the
lively voice of God himself; neither do we so much respect what Organs the
Holy Ghost used to set forth the Scriptures: but we consider the matter it
self, and the divine oracles which be written, and we ponder in what
estimation God himself will have us to accept the sacred Scripture; not as the
writings and sayings of men, but as the writings and words of God himself. And
we consider this also, as in a comparison made with the Church: For to use that
comparison again, the voice of the Scripture is Gods own voice; but the voice
of the Church of Christ, is called an humane testimony, as the word or writing
of a Prophet or an Apostle compared with the lively voice of God, is called the
record of man, as Christ himself testifies, 10. 5. And thus far of the 1.
controversy.

CHAP. VIII. How it may appear that the scripture is the word of God.
THE second controversy is, by what argument may it appear, that the
scripture is the word of God. Like as then the first question was this: whether
the Scripture be Gods word? So the question in hand is this; how and by what
evidence this may appear, that the Scripture is Gods word? To this I answer on
this manner: That we have no need simply of any other light, or of any one
special evidence to demonstrate this matter, but that very light which is in
the Scripture. For the Scripture (being the first and immediate word of God) is
of authority sufficient in it self, Scriptura est (...).
and so likewise of it self m^st clear and evident, and the only cause of all that light which is in the Church, and in the hearts of men. For like as the
light of the sun is not perceived nor to be seen by means of any S.
other light, for that it so far exceeds al other bodily and external Note.
light: So that spiritual light of the Scripture, has no need in it self of
any other light to set forth the same, for that of all spiritual lights to
inlighten the mind withal, it is the most bright and most beautiful in the
world. But whereas evidences and demonstrations be here demanded for the proof
of this matter, to confirm the Scripture to be Gods word, that is, to be the
very light: the cause of this doubtfulnesse is in our selves, for that we be so
bleere-eyed and so blind by nature. Wherefore the arguments which are brought
for this purpose, ad no light to the light of the Scripture, (which is of it
own nature so clear, and can not be made to shine more bright by any addition)
but al serve to this end; to make that thing manifest unto us which is most
evident in it self, and that our eyes may be opened to see that most full, and
most glorious light of the sacred Scripture: that is, to behold the divine
majesty of God shining bright, and speaking S.
unto us in the holy Scripture. Like as if a man were to prove to a blind man
that the Sun did shine, he would not produce arguments to commend the
excellency of the light of the Sun, but rather provide such things, as
whereby (if it were possible) he might open the eyes of the blind, that with
his own eyes he might look on the glorious light of the Sun. Wherefore in a
word, whatsoever arguments, men ask of us to demonstrate the light of the
Scripture, they ought not to be demanded, because of any defect in the
Scripture, but in respect of us, because we be so blind, having need of all
arguments and helps, every way, to open our eyes, that our sight may be
quickened to behold this glorious light.

The arguments and helps whereby our eyes may be opened to behold the light of
the Scripture, or God speaking and shining in the Scripture, these arguments, I
say, which the godly and learned use for this purpose, be not of one sort, but
many in number. But if the Holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture, do not first
of all inspire our Ephesians. 1. 16. 17.
minds, and open the eyes of our understanding (for he alone can do it)
assuredly it is but lost labor to speak of any other argument, or help; if we
be not taught of God, and by his Esaias.
holy spirit, all other means shall profit us nothing at all. Wherefore the
first and most principal cause to effect this, yt we may behold the light of
the Scripture (so bright in it self) must be the holy ghost, teaching us
inwardly in our hearts, and opening our understanding, that we may behold that
light of the Scripture, and may acknowledge the voice of God, and of Christ
himself speaking in the Scripture. And the holy Ghost also himself in this
work gives no new light to the Scripture, which is clear and glorious in it
self, as is aforesaid; but inlightens our minds, to this end, that we may see
the great light of the sacred Scripture. Again, the holy ghost in this great
work of our illumination, effects it by certain means and instruments,
whereby it pleases him to work in our hearts and minds.

The means which the H. G. uses for this work, are of two kinds. The first
is internal: the second is external. The inward mean, is in the very
Scripture it self; the outward is without the Scripture. The internal mean is
the principal organ, or instrument of Gods spirit in this work, and it is that
very light which shines in the Scripture. The holy Ghost then does first of
al open How the holy Ghost first teaches us to know the Scriptures.
the eyes of our understanding, by the light of the Scripture, to discern that
light of the Scripture, so bright in itself, and so unknown unto us. And he
cleereth our understanding to see the light of the Scripture, by the very
scripture it self; and by the light of the scripture, many ways: For partly
he effects this by producing 1
certain testimonies of Scripture, which plainly testify Inward means to see
the light of the scriptures.
of this great light of the Scripture, and of God speaking in the Scripture, as
that place, al Scripture is given by divine inspiration, 2. Tim. 3. 16: partly
by suggesting into us, that we observe the spiritual matters which are 2
therein described: partly by admonishing that we note 3
the spiritual words, whereby the same spiritual matters are expressed and
set before us: partly by warning us to 4
observe the truth of the divine oracles by the complement of the prophecies:
Again, he sets before us the 5
beautiful harmony of the Scripture in the old and new Testament, the one
sweetly testifying of the other: And 6
here he omitteth not the miracles which be recorded therein, whereby the
celestial doctrine had in the beginning a confirmation. He puts us also in
mind of the Martyrs, which sealed ye same truth with their blood, as we read
in the same Scripture. By these means and such like, the spirit teaches us
out of the very Scripture, that the sacred Scripture is Gods word, by clear
evidence manifesting that great and excellent light which is in the Scripture.
Ad also unto the aforesaid means, the worth and holiness of those men which
wrote the Scriptures, as the same is testified and recorded in the Scriptures.
And this is the internal and principal mean and instrument of the holy
Ghost, whereby he teaceth us, and breeds faith in our hearts, whereby we be
certainly persuaded that this Scripture is the very word of God.

There are also other means without the Scripture, External means to prove
the scripture to be God* word.
whereby the Spirit proves the same thing: as the constancy of the Martyrs,
which daily seal with their blood the truth of this heavenly doctrine; and
the persecution raised by the enemies of the Church against it; and the enmity
of Satan against it; and the preservation of the divine oracles of God unto
our times; and to be short, the testimony of the true Church of God for it.
All these are without or beside the Scripture, and give us a secundarie kind
of demonstration, whereby the holy Ghost works also, as it pleases him, and
opens the eyes of our understanding, inlightening us to see and hear God
himself speaking and shining in the Scripture.

But here we be to observe, that the holy ghost does God rather by these means
the testimony of the Church and couersation of the saints, prepares us to
receive the precious faith.
not beget faith in our hearts, properly and principally, by this second kind
of external means (for the proper and principal instrument of God to breed
faith, is the very word of God himself: for it must be necessarily, either
the lively voice of God, or the sacred scripture which serves us in steed of
the lively voice of God himself) but either prepares our hearts only to
receive faith afterward Io. 4. 1. Pet. 3. 2. 3.
wards by the word of God; or to confirm the same in some sort, being already
engendered in our hearts by Gods word. For this cause this second kind of means
sometimes is sent before the voice of God in the scripture, whereby the holy
Ghost otherwhiles makes men's minds ready to intertaine faith and grace offered.
This we read of Augustine; for he speaks it of himself (I would not have
believed the gospel, but that the authority of the Catholic Church moved me
thereunto) by which words he means, that when he was a Manichee, he was
prepared by the authority and testimony of the Church, to believe the Gospel.
Afterward notwithstanding, the same holy spirit, which thus prepared him by
the testimony of the Church, I say, the same spirit did beget faith in
Augustines heart, by the very scripture of the gospel; whereby he did believe
that the gospel was the very word of God. For this cause he speaks else where
of himself: And let us follow them (says he) which do inuit us first to
believe that which we cannot behold Augustines words.
as yet, that being strengthened by faith it self, we may be worthy to
understand what we believe, not by the relation of men, but by the grace of God
himself inwardly confirming and inlightening our minds. So the woman of
Samaria Io 4. as a member of the Church, did by her kind of preaching prepare
the Samaritanes to the faith of Christ, and they having heard Christ himself,
said to the woman: We believe no longer because of thy sayings, for Io* 4. 42
1. Pet. 3. 2. 3. Win them with your conversation, which are without the word.
we have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ the
Savior of the world. By which words they plainly testified, that they were
prepared only by the woman's testimony to embrace the faith, and that faith was
engendered in their hearts by the powerful voice of Christ himself. Wherefore
it is clear, that sometimes this kind of mean and argument (as is aforesaid)
goes before faith is begotten in the heart to prepare us, and sometimes this
follows faith, for confirmation: And sometimes also this kind of argument
goes before faith, and follows after it; it goes before, I say, for
preparation; it follows after, for confirmation. For the spirit teaches us
many ways, applying himself to diverse men in diverse Note well Io. 3.
manners, as it seems good unto himself, and as men's infirmities do require.

And here we be to observe, that there is no absolute necessity of this
secondarie kind of argument (which is external and less principal) to beget
faith in us. For it ought to suffice us, if the spirit teach us only by Gods
word: but to help our weakness the same spirit adds the other secondarie
kind of argument: as Christ plainly teaches us, Io. 5. where he says, the
testimony of John Baptist concerning him, was not simply necessary, but that
God so provided to help their weakness and unbelief, ver. 33. John gave
testimony to the truth, but I desire not the testimony of man: Nevertheless
these things I speak that ye may be saved. And that John's testimony was but a
secondarie argument only, and that Christ's own record of himself was the
first, he shows plainly in the words following. ver. 36. But I have a greater
witness then the witness of John: for the works which the Father has given me to
finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father sent me.
And this is our judgment concerning this argument; whereby we prove the
Scripture to be the word of God, and our answer to the question, wherefore it
is so, as we avouch it.

What the Papists think in this matter, it is easily seen How the Papists
prove the scripture to be Gods word.
by their words and writings: Their judgment briefly is this. The mean and
principal argument, and in a manner the only way with them to demonstrate the
scripture to be Gods word, is the testimony of the church, not only the
catholic (as they speak) but also those of their church which have preserved
the faith (as they speak) by contiall successions from the Apostles unto our
times: and here they understand principally the Popes, who (as they say)
succeeded Peter and his chair. These men will have the Church the judge and
interpreter of all Scriptures, from whose judgment it may not be lawful for
any man to depart for an appeal to any other judge: And they ascribe this
dignity and prerogative to the testimony of the Church, because they will have
the Scripture which is written in the heart of the Church, to be the principal
Scripture, and that we account and esteem of the voice of the Church, as the
very lively voice of God himself; as if God now spoke first principally in his
Church, and by the voice of his Church. If they will have it so, that the voice
of the Church, be the primarie voice of God, and the primarie Scripture of
God; it is evident, that they deem the greatest light we have, is to be found
in the voice of the Church, and the same to be most clear and demonstratiue,
not only to us, but also in and by it self: and therefore that this light
inlightens the sacred Scripture, not in respect of us only, but in respect of
themselves also. For which cause one of them has said, that the The blasphemy
of Papists.
Scripture is of no more validity without the authority of the church, then
AEsops fables. For the voice of the church being unto them the primarie voice
of God in all respects, for as much as it is lively and vocal; and for this
cause both by nature and to us most manifest: it follows, according to their
judgment, that it yields light unto the Scripture, not only in respect of us;
but also in respect of the Scripture it self; and yet is it in verity but a
certain secondary Scripture, and a certain secondary voice. For (as they
avouch it) the voice of the Church is as Gods own voice sounding from heaven,
serving to confirm the voice of the Scripture (which now is but man's voice
only) and to ratify and make authentical the very Scripture, as being written
but by certain Scribes, and published only by the hands of men: This must be
the consequent of their principles, or conclusion of their premises, albeit
other men be of another judgment.

As for our selves, like as we deny the conclusion which they infer upon the
former principles, so we reject also their very principles. For we deny and
refuse their first ground, to wit, that the voice of the Church is to be
accounted the lively voice of God himself, and that the Scripture written in
the heart of the Church, is to be accounted for that scripture which was
written by the very finger of God: And we affirm that the only prophetical
and apostolical scripture is to be esteemed as the lively voice of God; we
avouch it, I say, that this Prophetical and Apostolical scripture only
serves us in steed of that scripture, which was written by Gods own finger:
We add also that the sacred Scripture is unto us a book of revelation of
those divine mysteries which were hidden in Gods own breast from eternity:
for this is the very will of God, that we attend on him speaking in the
scripture, as it were in his own lively voice. They have (says he) Moses and
the Prophets, Luke 16. verse. 29. that is, the books of Moses and the prophets.
And God will not have this scripture in no less account then that scripture,
which he wrote in times past with his own finger in tables of stone. The
voice of the Church (I mean the true Church, not the lying papisticall
synagogue) is but as the voice of the handmaide, or as the voice of a crier,
which is to publish and to proclaim that voice of God, full of excellency,
speaking in the scripture: But the scripture in the heart of the Church, that
is, the Maxims of Gods truth written in the hearts of the faithful, they be
nothing else but a certain secundarie scripture, taken out by the holy ghost,
out of that primarie and most sacred scripture, and engraven in the minds of
men. For how much, think you, of that full measure of the Prophetical and
Apostolical scripture is there taken forth and engraven in our minds? I say,
that if all men's hearts were bound together, yet all they could not comprehend
all those things fully and perfectly, which be recorded in the Prophetical and
Apostolical scriptures: For the catholic Church, so long as it is conversant
on the earth, is not capable of all that light which shines in the sacred
scriptures of ye apostles and the prophets. Let their first principle be thus
beaten down, and their Corolatie, or second conclusion (to wit, that the voice
of the Church is most manifest, both in it self, and unto us) will fall to the
ground of it own accord: and so both principles being shaken, their conclusion
which they infer, is of no strength to stand, but must fall away.

CHAP. IX. Of the first propriety of the sacred Scripture.
WE are now to proceed, and to make it manifest, that the holy scripture is of
greatest antiquity: and this is the first propriety The 1. propriety of the
scripture, most ancient.
before ascribed to the Scripture. Here first we be to find out the diverse
acceptations of this word Scripture. This word Scripture may be taken, either
for the matter only, and Acceptance of the word scripture.
the very substance which is contained in the words and letters; or not only
for the matter and substance, but also for the very writing it self, or the
form wherein that substance is expressed and set before us. Now if by this
word Scripture, ye understand the very substance it self, it is without all
controversy, that the Scripture is most ancient: because it is the substance
of those divine oracles, which not only Patriarchs and Prophets have spoken,
but also God himself uttered; which things also were hidden in Gods mind from
eternity. But if ye understand by this word, not only the substance, but the
very writing, and in this respect also, the scripture may be said to be most
ancient. For as touching the Prophetical and Apostolical scriptures, in
respect also of the writing and manner of revealing of them (as we said often
before) it is Gods will that we so esteem them, not only as the lively voice
of the Prophets and Apostles, nor only as the lively voice of God himself, or
as a book written with his own hand (as the Decalogue was set down with his
own finger in tables of stone) but also that we so accept them as the very
mysteries, and if I may so speak, as the very divine notions, which were
engraven in Gods own mind from eternity.

To clear this point a little; The verity kept secret in Gods mind from
eternity, was in time manifested many ways, or in diverse forms; for it was
revealed partly by the lively voice of God himself, partly by the voice of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles (to pass by Angels in silence) and partly
also by the scripture which was written by the Prophets and Apostles. The
lively and immediate voice of God did cease long since; neither have we that
copy which God himself wrote: the Patriarchs How to esteem of the written
word of God.
also, and the Prophets, and ye Apostles have ceased to speak: the writings
only of the Prophets and Apostles remain to this day. Wherefore this we hold
as necessary unto faith, that we accept these writings or books, first in steed
of the lively voice of the Prophets and Apostles: 1
Next, in place of the lively voice of God himself: 2
Thirdly, of the Scripture written with Gods own finger: 3
Fourthly and lastly, as that holy verity and divine mysteries 4
which are recorded in Gods own breast: which Oracles being simply without
comparison of greatest antiquity, it is very manifest that the Prophetical
and Apostolical scripture is after a sort most ancient. For what may be
avouched of the lively voice of God himself, or of the Oracles of his mind,
the same in some respect may be said of the scripture, supplying unto us their
defect. For Substance of the scripture, simply most ancient.
if I may truly say in some sort, the scripture is the lively voice of God
himself, do I not as truly speak also in like manner, the scripture is most
ancient, for as much as the voice of God is most ancient? But it shall suffice
us to commend the antiquity of scripture, to consider the substance only of
the scripture, which without all controversy is most ancient. But the very
scripture and writing it self has his excellency also, for that the
scripture in respect of the very writing, is said to be given us also by divine
inspiration. For there is not a jot or prick in the Scriptura, est (...).
very writing, which is not by the inspiration of God.

Here the Adversaries take exception, and as else where often, so here they
prefer their Church before the scripture, and they affirm the Church is more
ancient then the scripture: For they say there was a Church two thousand A
Popish objection.
full years before Moses, the first writer of the scripture. And since Christ's
coming the Church for many years wanted the scriptures. But that which has
been already written, and is aforesaid, can easily solue this objection: For
if we understand by this word Scripture, not only the characters and books, but
also that substance and matter contained in them (for we have the Prophets and
Apostles speaking in the scriptures, and we have their lively voice, we have (I
say) the lively voice of God himself, and the very express mind of God
contained in them) if I say, we understand by this word that substance; it
cannot the^ be denied, but the scripture is more ancient then the Church, which
was borne not of mortal seed, but of immortal, even by the word of God, who
lives and endures for ever, 1. Pet. 1. 23. I say (the premises well
considered) it shall appear, the scripture is not only more ancient then the
Church, but to be of greatest antiquity, and to have been with God from
everlasting. But if by this word ye understand both the matter and writing; in
this respect also, it shall be no disparagement to avouch it to be of greater
antiquity then the Church; yea to be most ancient, as we have at large before
showed. And thus far of the first property of the sacred scripture, and of the
third controversy.

CHAP. X. Of the second property of the sacred Scripture, where begins the
fourth controversy.
THe second property of the sacred scripture is opened sufficiently in a
manner already, in the second controversy before handled. This property is
this; that the Scripture is most clear in it self, and most easy to be
understood: for it being the very word of God (which word every man must
necessarily grant, to be in it self most clear, most manifest and most
perspicuous, whether you respect the words or the matter contained in the
words, if men will not offer extreme injury to Gods holy Spirit:) assuredly it
must follow (I say) that the holy scripture is in it self, and of it self,
most clear and evident in every part, and in every respect. Of this great
perspicuitie of the scripture, the holy ghost testifies often, Psalm. 119. The
word of the Lord is a lantern to my feet. Psalm. 19. The precept of the Lord,
says the Psalmist, is clear, and inlighteneth the eyes. Prou. 6. The
commandment is a lantern, and the law is a light. The Lord by the Prophet
Esaias, chap. 45. 19. says, I have not spoken in secret: and 2. Pet. 1. 19. he
says, We have a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye do well that
ye take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place. Wherefore the whole
scripture, and al places of the scripture, are by themselves, and in themselves
most manifest, most clear, and applied also to the capacity of the vulgar
sort, and of the most unlettered among the people. For it is certain, that the
Lord in the scriptures does as it were lispe with us, Io. 3. 12. If I have
spoken to you of earthly things, and you believe not, that is, I have spoken
unto you, after an earthly and plain manner, and I have applied my self to
your capacity, etc.

I have avouched that the sacred scripture is in it self clear and easy:
True it is, if ye respect men, as they are All the scripture clear and easy
to the weakest believer. 1. Cor. 2. 14.
men, that is, natural and carnal, the holy scripture unto such is altogether
obscure and strange: For the natural man does not conceive the things which
appertain to the Spirit of God. But if ye consider the spiritual man, and
such as be taught of God, I grant to such it is partly obscure, because they be
as yet in part carnal: And for this cause the godly put up continually
supplications unto God (as feeling the relics of their natural blindness and
corruption) and making requests, that the eyes of their understanding might be
opened, that they may behold the bright shining light of the scriptures, and of
every place and portion of the scripture, being otherwise most evident in it
self. All the religious and godly in their prayers are so far from laying
any imputation of hardness and obscurity on Gods word; that they do ever
accuse and condemn themselves, and their own blindness and dullness.

And albeit this be true, that all the scripture, and all places of the
scripture be simply and in themselves most Note.
clear and easy, and only dark and hard by reason of our corruption and
blindness, yet this cannot be denied, but that some places of scripture be
more clear in themselves, then others, more easy and more evident; as those
scriptures, concerning faith and manners, which be so necessary unto
salvation: they be (I say) so clearly set down, so often repeated, and in so
many places expounded, that we need not many rules for interpretation, or to
find out the knowledge of them. But these places also require the grace of Gods
holy spirit: for without him, spiritual things which be most perspicuous and
evident, cannot be understood of any man on earth. Wherefore he that is
ignorant of the most clear scriptures, which do so much concern his
salvation, is altogether blind, and lies as yet in the woeful state of
perdition, for so the Apostle speaks: If that the Gospel be hid, it is
hidden to them that are lost, 2. Cor. 4. 3. 4.

As for other scriptures which are more hard in appearance, for that they do
not so much concern the necessary articles of faith, and rules of life and
conversation, we may be ignorant of them without danger of faith and salvation:
albeit the knowledge of such places might bring some light for the better
understanding of the How to interpret and expound hard scriptures.
scriptures, which of necessity must be known concerning faith and manners.
And we may attain some tolerable interpretation of these scriptures,
analogicall unto faith, if we observe those rules of knowledge and
interpretation, which are commonly recommended by the learned, ever making Gods
holy spirit our first and principal guide for our inward illumination and
instruction. The rules which follow this, are but the means which the holy
Rules.
Ghost uses; and they are borrowed partly out of the 1
holy scripture, as by conference of places of the scripture, 2
either the very same, or the like in sense and phrase: partly 3
from else where, as of the common places of divinity, 4
of the testimony of the Church, of the Grammar it self, 5
specially, the Hebrew and Greek: and good rules and 6
helps are had from Rhetoric and Logic; which teaches us to consider not
only of simple arguments set apart, 7
but also of the disposition and connection of arguments, bound and knit
together in Axioms or propositions, in syllogism and method. For Logic
teaches us the coherence of Antecedents and consequents, which serves not a
little for the unfolding and opening of hard places. And to pass over other
things, some little insight in Ethickes and Physickes, etc. may give some help
hereunto. But above all things we must remember to put up unto God contiuall
and fervent prayers, to open and to enlighten our minds by his holy Spirit. If
men observe these means for the interpretation and understanding of the
Scriptures, and hard places of the Scripture, we shall not lightly err from the
truth of God.

Here fume the adversaries, and endeavor to prove by The drift of Papists in
affirming the scriptures to be obscure.
many arguments, that the Scriptures in themselves and of themselves are
obscure, even in those places which are necessary, and appertain to
salvation: to this end and purpose, forsooth, to withdraw men's minds from
reading the Scriptures, that they may attend and trust to their dreams, and
that they may obtrude their glosses on the Church, even what please them, and
what for the most part they prefer before the text it self; writhing as it
were, and drawing rather the text of Scripture to be their gloss, then giving
any light of interpretation by or from the text it self. And here they
contend against us with testimony, first, of the Scriptures themselves; next,
of the Doctors and Fathers of the Church; and lastly, with arguments of their
own: all which may easily be answered, if we observe well the grounds before
set down. It shall suffice us now to hear only one or two of their arguments
refuted.

They demand, whether for these Scriptures now extant of the old and new
Testament, we have no need of commentaries, which are now in the world very
many, written by many men? I answer, that the divine Scriptures of themselves
have no need of the comments and interpretations of men; for the Scriptures we
account the^ to be the lively voice of God himself: and what is there that can
make this voice of God more clear and evident in it self? Can either man or
Angel speak any thing more clearly, then God himself? or does God
purposely affect obscurity? both which to auoch is very blasphemous. As for
the Commentaries or expositions Commentaries,
of the godly learned, which have spent some good time in the Scriptures of
God, we grant they help the ignorant and the common sort very much, and that
they serve well to dispell the clouds of our natural corruption.

But this may seem a greater question and more doubtful, touching the
preaching of Gods word, and the expounding of the Scriptures, by Pastors and
preachers in the public assemblies: whether preaching be not necessary, I
mean the lively preaching of Pastors and teachers? I answer, the Scriptures of
God, which we account as the lively voice of God, have no need of this means
in themselves; I say, that God and his word in themselves need neither this
preaching nor interpretation of the scriptures: But the necessity of the
ministry and of preaching is only in respect of us, and of our blindness and
ignorance, which be but as children, yea as infants in a manner, all the days
we live on earth Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 13. And when as we shall become men in the
world to come, then shall we have need of no such ministry: for we shall rest
contented (being filled with that The state of the elect in heaven.
only light of God, and of Christ) without any further instruction of men or
Angels. And thus far of the second property of the Scripture, and of the
fourth controversy.

CHAP. XI. Of the third property of the sacred Scripture, whereof arises the
fifth controversy.
THE third property of the sacred Scripture is this, It is most Simplicissima
plain and pure, whether ye respect words or phrase: neither has it any
ambiguitie or doubtfulnesse in it. This property differs from the former
herein, for that whereas perspicuitie extendes it self, and concerns words
and matter; this simplicity or plainness (as I may so speak) is of words
only. This we avouch then, that the sacred Scripture is of it self most single
and plain, void of all ambiguitie, and Circumlocution by speech.
Amphibologie, or that it contains nothing doubtful in one place, which is
not expressed in another, if there be any obscurity in it. For the word of the
Lord and his spirit be ever single and sincere; neither does God at any time
speak to catch men with ambiguous and doubtful speeches, as do Devils and
Sophisters; but to teach men his holy truth. For the spirit of truth leads us
into all truth, Io. 16. 13. And the Scripture is given of God by inspiration,
and is the very word of God, as is before showed: Wherefore if we will not
offer God extreme injury, we must necessarily grant, that the Scripture in
it self is most plain, and If the scriptures seem doubtful, condemn thine
own sin and corruption.
simple in sense and signification. I say, the Scripture in it self is plain,
as touching the sense: for if there be any ambiguitie in any words of
scripture, that diversity or darkness may not be imputed to the Scripture,
but to the blindness and ignorance of men, even of such also which do not of any
evil purpose of heart pervert the Scripture. For there be many which impiously
wrest the same to the one side and the other; when as they know right well
notwithstanding, the sense of the same Scripture is only one, plain and
evident. To approve this plainness and simplicity of the Scriptures, first
the Son of God himself, in his disputations against Satan and all his
adversaries, borrows hence his weapons, by his own example recommending the
sacred scriptures to all men. Next after him the Apostles, and their
successors, and the Fathers themselves have drawn their arguments from the
sacred scriptures against Heretics, both for confirmation of truth and
confutation of error.

The adversaries here contend against this property of the sacred scripture,
and they hold that that is doubtful, ambiguous, and blasphemously report, that
it has a nose A lutae instar.
of wax, and may be turned here and there: For which cause they affirm it is
the book of Heretics, and that of it spring heresies, and that al men seek
to maintain their errors by it. But these blasphemies are easily answered, by
that which is before showed. For this ambignitie, and flexiblenesse is not to
be imputed to the scripture, which is given of God by divine inspiration, and
serves us in steed of Gods own voice: but must be ascribed either to the
ignorance or malice, or malapertnesse of men, who either cannot apprehend the
simple and true sense of scripture, or malitiouslie pervert and turn the same
into a strange sense.

Here they object, that the scripture is full of tropes, allegories, Ob.
parables, words of diverse significations, amphibologicall sentences, visions;
all which have their ambiguity. I answer, that this matter may the better be
cleared, we are to look a little more soundly into it. The A.
ambiguity which is contrary unto simplicity, being in the words and not in
the matter: for the words are ambiguous, and not the matter: Let us reduce all
ambiguity 5. Principal heads.
which is in the words, unto 5. principal heads. For first there be simple or
common words of diverse acceptations: secondly, there be tropicall or
figurative words: thirdly, there be whole speeches or sentences, which carry a
doubtful signification: fourthly, there be allegorical speeches consisting of
the continuation of tropes: fifthly, there be also typical words and sentences
concerning types and figures.

Of all these, this I say generally; that in all such places the holy Ghost
has but one only simple sense and meaning. For as touching words of diverse
significations, if any such words be found in scripture in the originals,
Hebrew and Greek (as that can not be otherwise, but there must be such in the
scriptures) first I say that such words have but one signification only in such
places, and that the holy Ghost purposes and intends, but one thing by them.
For the holy Ghost desires not to use any fallacion or sophistication. Next I
answer, that we may deprehend that one signification, and that one plain How
to understand a doubtful word, Phrase or sentence in scripture.
meaning of the word (we desire to find) either by the drift of the holy Ghost
in that place or text, where any such word is; or by conference of other places
of Scripture, where the like word is to be found; or by other Scriptures,
expressing the same sense and matter in other words; or by observation of
Grammatical accidents, accents, points or pricks, and such like. And where we
find tropes and words borrowed and drawn from their proper and native
signification in any text of scripture, I say that there such words are used by
ye holy ghost, purposely to express in a more significant and lively manner,
but one sense and meaning. As where it is said (this is my body) by the
Metonymie, which is in the word body, the spirit speaks more significantly,
then if he had said; This is a sign of my body: For by that metonymicall
phrase, the holy Ghost plainly avouches the sacramental union, which is of
the sign and of the thing signified. Next I say, if the trope seem somewhat
obscure and strange, that ye may find the signification of the same trope by a
word of proper signification, either in the same scripture, or in some other
scripture, where the like trope may be found.

If ye meet in scripture with a sentence seeming ambiguous, A sentence in
scripture seeming ambiguous
first be well assured that Gods spirit does not purposely speak doubtfully, as
sophisters do, but has ever one single and plain meaning: but men do both
give and receive an evil construction of the context, either ignorantly or
maliciously. Next, I say, that other places of scripture do more clearly set
forth the self same matter: Finally; if you find allegories in scripture, of
them this I affirm, that first they serve for illustratio^: next, that they
have but one signification or sense: and the same is either manifest and
needs no further exposition, or if it be obscure, it is more clearly
expressed some where else in the scripture. And as for scriptures concerning
types, I say of them also first, that they have but one signification, and A
typical speech in scripture.
signify types only, and not also the matters signified by them: next, that one
very sense of the types is applied to signify another thing, that is, the body
it self: for the types themselves carry in them the signification of the things
signified, and shadowed by the types, and not the words themselves which are
used to set forth the types: for in that history recorded, Gal. 4. this name
Sarah signifies Abraham's wife, that is, the type only: next the type
signifies the covenant, that is, the thing shadowed, figured, and signified by
the type. And thus far of the third property and fifth controversy.

CHAP. XII. Of the Fourth property, and Sixth controversy.
THis we say also concerning the sacred scripture, that it is most effectual,
most lively, and most vocal, sounding to every man an answer of all things
necessary unto salvation. The life which here I understand, is not any fleshly
or carnal life, as the life of man; but that spiritual life, as the life of
God: and by a lively voice I mean, a spiritual voice, speaking not so much to
the ear, as to the mind of man. For first if ye respect the substance of this
divine revelation, this which I avouch, is without all controversy. For the
scripture contains in it the word of God, which is lively and powerful, etc.
Heb. 4. Next in respect of the form of the revelation thereof, that is, the
very writing of God, this is evident in like manner; for it was given and
written by divine inspiration: and whatsoever is of this kind, must
necessarily be in it self both lively and spiritual. Again, this Scripture
is unto us, if not the lively voice of God; yet certainly in stead thereof. For
we have none other lively voice of God but this: for as for the voice of the
Church, pastors and teachers in the Church, the same may err; neither may it
properly be called the voice of God. The voice of God we must avouch of it,
that it is a lively voice: ergo, etc. Thirdly, the very Scripture speaks of it
self, as having a lively voice, as we may read, Romans 9. The Scripture says
etc. Again, Esaias Scripture is said to cry concerning Israel, Romans 9. 27.
Fourthly, so many as propound questions of any matter necessary to salvation,
be sent to it: Esaie. S. Should not a people inquire at their God? from the
living to the dead? Turn rather to the law and to the testimony: If they
speak not according to this word, there is no morning light in them. Again,
the Son of God himself, so often as any propounded questions unto him of the
law, of diuorcement, of the Sabbath, of the Messiah, of regeneration and of the
resurrection, or how to attain eternal life: he always gave them answer out
of the sacred Scripture, and ever he sends such as move any such doubts, unto
the Scripture. How read thou? says he: and have ye not read? Have ye never
read? How is it written?

Again, the Apostles of Christ for all their assertions, bring proof and
testimonies out of the old Testament. Apollos was a man mighty in Scriptures,
He strongly confuted publicly the Jews, with great vehemence showing by the
Scriptures, that Jesus was that Christ, Act. 18. 24. 28. The men of Beraea
received the word with all readiness, and searched the scriptures daily,
whether those things were so. Act. 17. 11. Thus the primitive Church, and the
fathers refuted heresies by the Scriptures. To conclude this point, most
memorable is that worthy fact of Constantinus the Great, who propounding the
Bible to the Fathers assembled in the Nicene council, spoke on this manner:
Here I set before you the writings Evangelical, of the Apostles, and the
sanctions of the ancient Prophets, which can inform us concerning the sacred
law of God. To beat back therefore the dint of the sword of the adversary, let
us learn how to answer all objections of the adversary, out of the words
which are given us of God by divine inspiration. Lastly, this I have said, that
the Scripture is in it self lively and vocal: for as concerning deaf and
dead men, that is, the natural never taught of God, unto such (I say) it is
but as dead and mute.

Here the adversaries blaspheme and reply, saying, that ye sacred scripture is
but as a dead letter, mute, and not able togiue answer to any man, not able to
decide questions and controversies in religion: And contrarily they glory that
the voice of the Church, which proceeds from the Scripture (as they speak)
which is in graven by Gods own Spirit in the hearts of men; they boast, I say,
that this is vocal, and able to answer the demaunders of all questions
appertaining to salvation, and that this cannot be wrested nor perverted, but
ever abides the same in all respects. The answer to this calumniation and
blasphemy, is clear of that which is before showed: for we made it clear and
manifest, that the sacred Scripture is most lively and vocal in it self. And
whereas controversies are not so soon decided by the Scriptures, the cause is
not in Gods word, but in men, which be either so naturally blind and dull, that
they cannot hear and understand the Scripture, speaking, answering, yea crying
in their ears: or they be so malicious and obstinate, that they will not hear
and understand; yea that they will full often, against their own conscience,
wrest the voice of the Scripture into another sense, and that to their own
perdition. Wherefore we conclude this point, that the scripture is in it self,
2. Pet. 3.
and by it self, most lively and vocal.

And further we be to remember, that to the end it may speak as a lively voice
unto us, and to the end we may understand it concerning all controversies in
religion, we must use the means before mentioned, and our very Gra^mar Means
to be used for the understanding of the scripture.
is one special instrument for this purpose. For our eyes and ears are opened
by such means to understand the Scripture, and to attend unto Gods voice
speaking in the scripture, if it shall seem good to the holy Ghost to work
effectually by them in our hearts and minds. If so be that the spirit work
effectually by the aforesaid means, then the Scripture shall answer to all
controversies concerning faith and religion, with a more clear, lively,
intelligible, and distinct voice, then all the men in the whole Church shall
answer, who can avouch nothing sound and certain, unless first they have
received it from the mouth of the Scripture, and answer in the very words of
the scripture. For whereas these men say, the voice of the Church is lively,
and vocal, heard of all men, and cannot be perverted and wrested: To this I
answer first, that the voice of the Church, (as is aforesaid) does depend on
the voice of the scripture: Next, that the voice of the Church is subject to
errors and change: so that they may this day answer one thing, and to morrow
another: and this serves no better in a manner, then a Lesbian rule, to decide
controversies concerning faith and religion. As for the church of Rome, they
have so long and so corruptly answered concerning faith and religion, that they
have carried the world from the truth to lies and errors, and infinite
heresies: that there is now no cause wherefore these men may so put forth to
sale, the voice and sound of their Church, which is become so corrupt and
adulterous.

CHAP. XIII. Of the fifth property of the Church, and of the seventh
controversy.
NOw it rests that we prove, that the sacred Scripture is simply most
necessary. Here then I say, that if by Scripture ye understand the substance
and the very matter contained in the words written, it cannot be denied that
the scripture is so necessary, that without it there can be no Church in
earth, for the church is borne and bred, not Fifth property, Scripture is most
necessary.
of mortal, but of immortal seed, which is the word of God, 1. Pet. 1. 23.
But if ye understand by the scripture, the very writing and form of
revelation, I say, that in this respect also it is so necessary, that without
this there cannot be a Church. For the lively voice of God is simply
necessary: The scripture after a sort, is the lively voice of God: therefore
simply necessary.

I grant it, that when as the lively voice of God did sound, and was heard in
the Church; this writing, and this form of revelation was not then so
necessary: but when as God did cease to speak, and that the scripture came in
place of Gods own voice; then the scripture was no less necessary, then the
lively voice of God. For the voice of God must ever be in the Church, that the
church may have her being, and may continue on the earth; yea this voice must
be heard by the Church, either by it self, or by that which may best supply
the want of the lively voice of God. Before Moses time, this voice it self was
heard: after his time, this voice sounded and spoke in, and by the voice and
writings of Moses, and the Prophets: When Christ was come, his own lively
voice was heard: After Christ's ascension, for a time the 2. Cor. 5. 19. 1. Pet.
2. 19.
preaching of the Apostles, and the books of the old Testament were received
for the lively voice of God himself, and of his son Jesus Christ. Then
followed the Apostolical Scripture, which together with the holy scripture of
the old Testament continue in the Church, to supply not only the lively voice
of the Apostles, but also of God, and of Christ himself. By the premises it
is evident, yt it is simply necessary at all times, that the lively voice of
God sound ever in the Church of God, either by it self, or by this supply,
which we now avouch to be only the sacred Scriptures of the old and new
Testament. Wherefore we plainly conclude, the Scripture is most necessary.

The Adversaries oppose themselves against this assertion, as against the
former, and they deny that the scripture is simply necessary: it is necessary
(say they) that is, it is profitable or commodious for the well being of a
Church; but is not so necessary for the being; nor no such thing as without
which the Church can have no being. And for this cause do these men deny the
necessity of the Scripture, that they may open the door to their authority
and traditions, that is, to their own dreams, which they say, be simply
necessary, and prefer them before the scripture. They are easily answered by
the rules before set down. For if by scripture they understand the substance
of the scripture, it cannot be denied that the scripture is simply necessary:
but if they understand not the substance only, but also the very writing; in
this respect also, we have showed it by clear demonstration, that the
scripture is simply necessary; for that it is unto us in place of ye lively
voice of God himself. Wherefore their assertion is false, howsoever they take
this word Scripture either in this sense or the other.

But they say, the Church wanted the scripture near two thousand years, all
which time religion was preserved by tradition only: Therefore the Scripture is
not simply necessary. I answer: If you understand by Scripture the very
substance of the covenant, then your argument follows not: for the substance
of the scripture was in those very traditions, whereby the Church was edified
and kept. But if by this word ye understand the very writing; then I grant the
scripture was not extant so many years: and I say, that it was not then
necessary, for that then the lively voice of God it self was heard. If they
conclude, that because it was not then necessary, therefore it is not now
necessary; or that it was not necessary, after that God had commanded it, and
after that it began to be extant: surely the consequence is very evil: for as
ages and times have changed, so diverse forms of revelation were necessary.

Or we may more briefly set down this controversy in this form.
THe scripture is necessary not only for the well-being (as Popish
Schoolmen speak) but also for the being of the Church: Et hactenus est
simplex necessitas.

And this necessity is in respect of time only: for there was not a necessity
of the scripture in all ages; I understand The word written not necessary in
all ages. Heb. 1. 1. 2.
by the word Scripture, not only the substance of the written word, but also
the manner or form of revelation: but this simple necessity must be avouched
of the substance and form of revelation in diverse respects. For the scripture
as touching the substance of it, was necessary to the Church in all ages, but
in respect of the manner of revealing the same, it was necessary for a
certain time only, to wit, until it seemed good unto Almighty God to teach
his church by the scripture. ARG. 1. For the Lord God had not given his Church
the Scripture, if he had not thought it necessary euu^ for the being of his
Church. ARG. 2. The lively voice of God was necessary in the time appointed
for it: ergo, the Scripture also is necessary in the time the Lord has decreed
for it: for there is but one and the same reason of both. ARG. 3. It is
necessary that Gods will be revealed and communicated to the Church at all
times in one form or other, either by Gods own lively voice, or by writing, or
by both: but now the lively voice of God has ceased: therefore now the word
written is necessary.

The adversaries deny this absolute necessity, moved hereunto with these
arguments following. First, from Adam to Moses there was no Scripture: Ergo. I
answer, the Lord God thought it not necessary for all that time. But when as
the Lord himself began to write, and that the 2. Pet. 1. 18. 19. 21.
holy men of God were acted and moved by the holy Ghost, first Prophets, then
Apostles; then the Scripture began to be necessary, and even simply necessary.
ARG. 2. From Moses unto Christ, Job and his friends both believed and were
saved without the Scripture. I answer, It is most like these also read the
scriptures; as may appear by the Eunuchs story, Act. 8. Next, I answer, that
so many as were called without the visible Church, God dealt with them in an
extraordinary manner. ARG. 3. They did more attend the traditions of the
Fathers then the written word, even in the second age. I answer, this is false.
ARG. 4. In the third age there was no scripture of the new Testament extant for
a long season. Ergo. I answer, the Apostolical scripture began not long
after Christ: Next, all that time, I grant it was not necessary; but when the
Apostles were dead, and when their lively voice ceased, then began it to be
necessary.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the sixth property of the Scripture, and the eight
controversy.
THE Scripture is perfect, containing in it all things necessary for faith and
manners, not only sufficiently, but also abundantly: for this is the
perfection which here we do avouch. The sense then of the Proposition is
this: This kind of revelation contains all things, etc. The proof is this.
Argument 1. The lively voice of God contained all articles or instructions
concerning faith and manners: Ergo, so does the Scripture. The reason of the
argument is evident; for that nothing, in respect of substance, was spoken by
that lively voice, which is not recorded in the Scripture. ARG. 2. If the
Scripture contained not all things necessary perfectly, then evil were the
condition of our Church, and of our time, which hears not the lively voice of
any man speaking by divine inspiration, nor of any prophet or Apostle. ARG. 3.
The religious and such as be taught of God, have an holy experience of the
sufficiency of the Scriptures, and of the fullness of it. Add to these
arguments these divine testimonies. Deuteronomy. 4. Ye shall not ad to the word that I
speak, etc. Revel. 22. If any shall add to these things, God shall Verse. 18.
add unto him the plagues which are written in this book. Albeit these
sayings are to be understood properly of particular books, yet the same reason
serves for all books of the canonical scripture: and surely the reason binds
more strongly: for if we may not ad to particular books, how much less is it
lawful to add to the whole Canon. Prou. 30. Thou shall ad nothing to his
words: This seems to be understood of the whole Scripture. Matthew. 28. Teaching
to observe all things which I commanded you. Gal. 1. 8. If we or an Angel from
heaven shall preach unto you another Gospel, or otherwise then that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Ioh. 20. These things are written
that ye may believe, etc.

And as for the judgment of the Adversaries in this matter, which affirm that
the scripture is lame and maimed, chiefly note Bellarmine and his arguments for
this purpose. They teach the scriptures to be defective and weak, that we
might give place to their traditions and forgeries: wherefore let us a little
consider this matter of Of Traditions.
traditions. The word Tradition is general, and signifies any doctrine
written or unwritten: and so this word is used both in the sacred scriptures,
and in the ancient Writers: albeit the Papists affirm that the Fathers use
this word only to signify a doctrine not written. Testimonies of scripture
which clear the general acceptance of the word, are these. Act. 6. 14. And
shall change the ordinances which Moses Quos nobis tradidit Moses: (...).
gave us, or which we had from Moses by tradition. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Keep the
tradition or doctrine Traditam doctrinam. (...).
delivered unto you, which ye were taught, either by word, or by our Epistle.

The word tradition in Scripture is given other whiles to things ncessarie and
continuing; and sometimes to things not necessary and temporary. The
testimony which is 2 Thessalonians. 2. verse. 15. is of necessary doctrine. The place
which is cited out of the Acts, 16. 4. is of ceremonies: for here the Spirit
speaks of a decree of the Council holden at Jerusalem concerning blood, and
things offered to idols, and that which is strangled: Of which Act. 15. 28. As
touching traditions which concern necessary points of faith and manners, they
were first delivered by the lively voice of Christ and his Apostles: and then
the short sum of them recorded in books, as may appear by that speech of
the Apostle concerning the Lords supper, 1. Cor. 11. 23. And again 1 Thessalonians.
4. 2. (...).
where he gives rules of an honest conversation. And again 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
And as touching traditions which be not necessary, but ceremonial, they were
either recorded, as of Ecclesiastical rites, 1. Cor. 11. 14. or not recorded.
1. Cor. 11. 34. Other things will I set in order when I come. He promises
here to set in order, but ceremonies, and namely such as did concern the
Lords supper. Of ceremonies, only this I will say, they did no way exceed,
neither were Of Ceremonies. Good rules.
they unprofitable, neither were they delivered with any 1
opinion of necessity to bind men's consciences, neither 2
were they contrary to those things which were written: 3
yea, this I avouch, yt there was nothing delivered by way 4
of tradition; or touching ceremonies by the Apostles, which had not good
ground and warrant in Gods word, that is, in the books of the Prophets, and in
the doctrine of Christ, which not long after was written by the Evangelists and
Apostles. And as for Popish traditions Popish traditions and ceremonies.
and ceremonies, there is no end of them; they are unprofitable; they are like
old wives fables; all for the most part delivered with an opinion of
necessity; and most of them most repugnant to the Apostolical doctrine. And
thus do we distinguish traditions.

The adversaries understand by Tradition, their unwritten verity, not that
which is no where found written, but that which is not written by the first
author thereof, that is, by him which delivered the same by his own lively
voice. This then the Papists do here profess, that they cannot find their
traditions in the Scriptures, nor prove them by the Scriptures.

CHAP. XV. Of the seventh property, and ninth controversy.
THE sacred scripture is the judge of all controversies: I mean such
controversies, as are concerning religion. Now there be two principal
controversies concerning religion; the first is of the scripture it self, who
shall be judge here, or how it may be tried, that the scripture is the word of
God. The second The judge of the scripture.
is of the sense and interpretation of the scripture, who shall judge of that, or
how it may appear that this, or that, is the very natural sense of the
Scripture. I mean by judgment here a definitive sentence pronounced and given
with such authority, as that all men must herein rest. By the word scripture, I
mean not only the substance thereof, but also the form of revelation, which is
also by divine inspiration. Again, this manner of speaking is improper, when
we say of the scripture, that it is the judge of controversies. For to speak
properly, the holy Ghost is the judge; for the judge must be a person, and the
holy Ghost he is the third person in Trinity. The Scripture therefore is not
properly said to be a judge: but it is the voice and sentence which the Judge
has given the principal instrument or mean, whereby ye spirit sets forth his
judgment, and whereby he teaches us, and works faith in our hearts. And the
spirit here judges freely in and by whom he pleases, being not tied to any
one kind of men, as Pastors and Doctors, but in and by whom it seems good to
him. Here then three things must be considered of us: First, whether the holy
ghost be a judge. Secondly, whether the scripture be his principal voice whereby
he gives First, whether the holy Ghost be a judge.
sentence, or determines any question. Thirdly, whether he judge in and by any
man without difference or respect of persons, or be bound to one certain kind
or sort of men. For the first question, I answer; the holy Ghost is a Judge,
first, for that he was promised of Christ Io 14. Math 28. Mar. 16.
unto his church, at his last departure from the Apostles, and is given and as
it were deputed Christ's vicar on earth, both to teach and to judge, etc.
Secondly, for that among other offices of the holy Ghost, this is one, to
judge. But because the adversaries do not much gainsay this assertion
concerning Io. 16.
Gods spirit, that by him all things are to be judged and tried, and that by
him the scriptures are to be interpreted, therefore we will be brief in this
point. Now for the second point, that the holy scripture is the primarie
Secondly, that the holy scripture is the principal voice of the judge
voice of this judge, iudiciarie, and proper to him, whereby he begets faith in
our hearts; may appear by these reasons following. First, the scripture is the
word of God. Secondly, it is most ancient. Thirdly, it is most clear or
evident. To these I ad the testimony of the scripture it self. Ioh. 14. 25.
26. He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to Suggeret.
remembrance which I have told you. And hereunto may also be added the common
experience of the Saints. There are other means to prove this, but less
principal, among which the testimony of the Church is one. The adversaries
withstand this conclusion, and infring it, with these arguments. First the
scripture is not written in men's hearts with the finger of God, neither is it
the primary voice of God. Secondly, the scripture is of no antiquity. Thirdly,
it is obscure. Fourthly, ambiguous, etc. Bellarmine ads more to these, of which
ye may read in him. They conclude, that the voice of the Church is the
principal and proper voice of the holy Ghost, as he is the Judge of
controversies. Their proof is this: The scripture is written in the heart of
the Church with Gods own finger, and this is the primary voice of God: And
whatsoever excellency we do ascribe to the scripture, that they attribute to
their own Church, which is nothing else but a den of thieves.

And that the spirit being this great judge, is not bound to one sort of men,
as those of the Ecclesiastical function, the Pope and Councels (as they speak)
but does perform this office without all respect of persons, in whom and by
whom soever it seems good unto himself; this is manifest, first: for if the
holy Ghost be not the Judge both of the very context of the scripture, whether
it be Gods word, and of the interpretation of scripture; if he be not (I say)
in man himself, assuredly there can be no faith. For the spirit only begets
faith in man's heart. Secondly, the holy Ghost executes his other offices
freely in and by any man; therefore so may he this function of judging. What is
meant by judging in the holy Ghost*
For I demand, what else is it to judge, but to inlighten, and to teach that the
scripture is given of God by inspiration, and that this is the natural sense
of this scripture. Thirdly, the same we be taught by our experience: for we
find it true by experience, that he does freely judge in and by whom it
pleases him. Testimonies of scripture prove also this assertion. 1. Cor. 12.
11: And all these things works even the self same spirit, distributing to
every man severally as he will. And Esaias, 54. All thy children shall be taught
of God. Ier. 31. I will write my laws in their hearts. The adversaries impugn
this truth of God with some arguments of their own, of which ye may read in
Bellarmine. And these men bind the holy Ghost to the Pope, and to councels
confirmed by him, which point our men impugn also and refute with many
arguments, of which this is one: that of their conclusion, this must be the
consequent, that the Pope and his councels must be above the scriptures: which
thing is absurd to be granted. See more arguments of this subject in their
disputations.

CHAP. XVI. Of the eight property, and the tenth controversy.
LASTLY, we avouch that the sacred scripture is of highest authority,
excellency and 10. Property.
dignity on the earth. Here again by this word scripture, we understand both
the substance of it, and the writing. And here we mean it has such
excellency, as makes it most worthy of credit, and whereby also it gains
authority and estimation to the Church. For which cause the Church is called
the Pillar and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. And it has many other titles,
which are given to it often in the scriptures. This is proved by the former
demonstrations, as these: The scripture is the word of God, it is most
perspicuous, it is most pure and simple, etc. Ergo.

The adversaries vary in judgment touching this authority of Scripture: For
some of them detract from this sovereign authority of it, affirming that of it
self it is not authentical, but takes authority and estimation from the
Church. Of this mind are these, Eckius in Enchiridio. Pighius in his book de
Hierarchia, and one Hermannus an impudent Papist, he with a black mouth
avouches it, that the scripture is of no more validity without the testimony
of the Church, then AEsops Fables, etc. Others, more late writers and more
subtle, say, that the scripture has authority in and by it self, and is
authentical; but not to us, before the church approve it, and ascertain it to
be so. Of this judgment be these: Bellarmine, Coclaeus, Canus, Stapleton,
Canisius, etc. They which speak thus, that the written word of God is not
authentical to us, before the judgment of the Church be manifested: these men
(I say) have this meaning, that we be not bound to believe that the Scriptures
be authentical, before the judgment of the Church be past of it; and that we
sin not at all, if we believe them not before the definitive sentence of the
Church. But we hold this to be false also, to say that the scripture is not to
us authentical, without the authority of the Church: For it is the holy Ghost
that teaches every man to know and believe that the scripture is authentical,
and has sovereign authority in it self. And this he teaches, not by any
external mean How the holy Ghost teaches us what authority the scripture
has.
first, but by the very sacred scripture, by which alone he properly breeds
faith in our hearts to believe and apprehend this truth of God. And so we
resting on this illumination of the holy ghost, teaching us by the scripture,
that this is the excellency and authority of the scripture, do believe this
to be so, albeit the whole world did oppose it self against us. And thus far
of the more essential questions concerning scripture.

CHAP. XVII. Questions more accidental concerning the holy Scripture: and
first of the books wherein the same is contained.
THE first question is concerning the books of holy scripture: These books are
commonly called (for the excellency of them) The Bible. The Bible, as it is
commonly received and carried in hands, contains in it two sorts of books: the
first is of books Canonical: and the second is Apocryphal. Regular or
Canonical books are such, as give rule and direction touching faith and
manners. The books of Moses are the first Canon, or president sent from God,
First Canon.
which may not be judged or tried by any other external Canon whatsoever: For
there was no book extant before the books of Moses. The authority of the
writer so holy, and the evidence of the spirit so powerful, and the holiness
of these books (to pass by other arguments) so great, has gained these books
this high estimation and authority in the Church. The books of the Prophets
make up the second Canon: which be adjudged canonical Second Canon.
by that external Canon of the Mosaicall books, by which they were examined.
Next, they were and are discerned (of such as be taught of God inwardly by the
holy Ghost) by the great evidence of Gods spirit which is manifested in them
both in words and matter. The third Third Canon.
Canon are the Apostolical books of the New Testament, which are adjudged and
approved as Canonical, partly by the Canonical books of Moses, partly by the
books of the Prophets, partly by the spiritual evidence they carry in
themselves, which the Sons of God instructed by his holy spirit, can easily
discern. The Canonical books of the Bible are either of the Old, or of the
New Testament. The Canonical books of the Old Testament are these.

1. The 5. books of Moses. 2. Joshua. 1. book. 3. The book of judges. 1. 4.
Ruth. 1. book. 5. The books of Samuel. 2. 6. The books of Kings. 2. 7. The
books of Chronicles. 2. 8. Ezra, 1. book. 9. Nehemias 1. book. 10. Hester.
1. book. 11. Job. 1. book. 12. Psalms. 13. Proverbs. 14. Ecclesiastes. 15.
The book of Canticles. 16. Esaiah. 17. Jeremiah. 18. Ezechiel. 19. Daniel. 20.
The twelve small Prophets.
The Canonical books of the New Testament are these, which are commonly.
received.

1. The Gospel according to S. Matthew. 2. The Gospel according to S. Mark. 3.
The Gospel according to S. Luke. 4. The Gospel according to S. John. 5. The
Acts of the Apost. 6. S. Paul's Epistle to the Romans. 7. S. Paul's Epistles to
the Cormthians. 2. 8. The Epistle to the Gal. 9. The Epistle to the Ephesians.
10 The Epistle to the Philippians. 11. The Epistle to the Colossians. 12. The
Epistles to the Thessalonians. 2. 13. The Epistles to Timothy. 2. 14. The
Epistle to Titus. 15. The Epistle to Philemon. 16. The Epistle to the Hebrews.
17. The Epistle of Saint James. 18. The Epistles of Saint Peter. 2. 19. The
Epistles of Saint John. 3. 20. The Epistle of Saint Jude. 21. The book of the
Revelation of Saint John.
And whereas some have doubted for a time of some of these books, as of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of Saint James, the last of S. Peter, the
2. and 3. of S. John, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse: yet they were
never utterly rejected, but for a time only doubted of, whether they might be
accepted as Canonical. These Canonical books of the Old and New Testament were
written by holy men, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. 21. And
of these, some are called the Prophets, which wrote the books of the Old
Testament, so called, because they were governed by the spirit of prophecy:
Some be called Apostles, so called, because of their function, and these wrote
the books of the New Testament. The books of the old and new Testament some
have their writers names expressly set down, or noted by special characters
or signs: some have no names at all annexed, whereby the holy Ghost would
signify unto us, that these men were but instruments only, and not the very
authors of such books: wherefore we be not so much to respect their names, nor
so busily to inquire after them, if they be not expressed. Thus far of the
Canonical books.

Now as concerning the Apocryphal books: they be so called, because the
Church would have them kept hid, and not to be read or taught publicly in the
Churches; the private reading of them was only permitted. The Apocryphal
books are such as were found only annexed to the old Testament, and they be
eleven in number.

1 Judith. 2 Tobit. 3 Esdras third and fourth book. 4 The Wisdom of falsely
so called.
Solomon. 5 Ecclesiasticus. 6 Baruch. 7 The Epistle of Jeremiah. Apocryphal
books.
8 Additions to Daniel. 9 The Prayer of Manasses. 10 The two books of
Machabees. 11 The supplement of Hester, from the third ver. of the tenth chap.
Among these some there are, which the very adversaries account to be
Apocryphal. First, the prayer of Manasses. Secondly, the third and fourth
book of Esdras. Thirdly, the third and fourth book of Machabees, whereof
Athanasius makes mention in his Synopsis. But we are to prove, that all these
before named, be Apocryphal. The first Argument is from the Writers: All the
Canonical books of the old Testament were written by the Prophets: But these
were not written by the Prophets: Therefore they be not Canonical, but
Apocryphal. I prove the Proposition, Luke 16. They have Moses and the Prophets,
that is, the books of Moses and the Prophets. Luke 24. 27. of Christ it is
written, that he began at Moses and at all the prophets, and interpreted unto
them in all the Scriptures, the things which were written of him: Therefore
Moses and the Prophets were the writers of the old Testament. To the Romans 16.
He calls the scriptures of the old Testament, the Prophetical Scriptures. And
2. Pet. 1. 19. The most sure word of the Prophets. And for the assumption: But
these were not written by the Prophets, (...).
I prove it: Malachie was the last of the prophets: and between Malachie and
John the Baptist there arose no prophet. But these books were written after
Malachies time, and this cannot be denied of some, as of Ecclesiasticus, and
the books of ye Machabees: Ergo. 2. ARG. This is from the language wherein all
the canonical Scriptures were written. They were written (I say) in the
language of Canaan, in the Hebrew tongue, which was the speech of the Prophets,
wherein they wrote their prophecies: But these books be not written in the
Hebrew tongue, but all for the most part in Greek: therefore our proposition or
assertion is manifest. The Assumption is evident, that I shall not need to
cite either the testimony of the Fathers, or the adversaries own confession.
ARG. 3. is from the testimony of the old Church of the Jews. If these books
were Canonical, the old Hebrews had heard some thing of them: But they never
heard of them: Therefore they be not Canonical. The Proposition is clear: I
prove the Assumption. In Ezraes time all the canonical books were gathered
into one volume; and the Jews care was such of them, that they nu^bred all the
letters which were found in the Prophets, and set down the sum of the^: how
much more would they have had care of these whole books, if they had heard of
them. The 4. ARG. is from the testimony of the late Church of the Jews, which
was in Christ's time. If these books were canonical, then the latter Rabbis or
Jewish Writers would have accepted them: but they did not receive them, but
reject them: Therefore they be not canonical. I prove the Proposition: For
out of all question, if they had not received the Canonical books, Christ
would have taxed them for it, for that he so reprehends them for their sinister
and false interpretations of the Canonical Scriptures. The Adversaries grant
the Assumption. The 5. ARG. is from the testimony of Christ and his Apostles.
If these before named books were canonical, then Christ and his Apostles would
have cited them somewhere for confirmation of their doctrines: but that can
never be found they did, no not in all the new Testament: therefore they be
not Canonical. The proposition is manifest: The matter it self will make sure
the Assumption. The 6. ARG. These Apocryphal books contain some things
differing from the canonical scriptures, some things contrary, some things
false, some things fabulous, and some things impious: Therefore these books be
not canonical. I prove the Antecedent. Tobit. 3. 8. and 3. 25. 5. 15. and 11.
12. Judith 8. 6. and 9. 2. and 9. 13. and 16. 8. Baruch 6. 2. the Additions of
Daniel 13. 1. and 14. 32. the Additions to Hester 15. 1. 2 Match. 2. 1. 7. 8.
27. and 12. 43. and 14. 37. and 15. 39. The 7. ARG. These books contain
contrarieties, and points repugning one another. Confer 1. Match. 6. 8. with
2. Match. 1. 16. and 2. Match. 9. 5. Confer 1. Match. 9. 3. and 2. Machab. 10.
1. Confer 1. Machab. 4. 36. and 2. Match. 10. 1. Confer 1. Match. 6. 17. and
2. Match. 10. 11. The 8. ARG. is taken from an humane testimony, first, of
Councels: secondly, of Fathers; the ancient first, next, the latter writers.
The Councels which give canons touching the canonical books, and the
Apocryphal, are these for the most part: The Laodicen Council, which was held
in the year after Christ's incarnation 300. The 3. Council of Carthage in the
year 400. The Trullan in the year 600. The Florentine in the year 1150. The
Tridentine in our age. Of these we may reason thus: The Laodicen Council (the
most ancient here numbered) reiects these books as Apocryphal: See the 59.
Canon of that Council: Ergo. But the adversaries object here: that at this
time before the third Council of Carthage, the canonical books were not
distinctly known. I answer, first, that this council was not held till four
hundred years after Christ: but it is absurd to say, that there was no Canon
known, or that the canonical books were not discerned till this time. Ergo.
Secondly, I answer, that Council was not general, but provincial: But a
provincial Council may not prescribe any canon for the Catholic Church:
Ergo. But, they say, this Council was confirmed by that of Trullan. I answer,
that the Laodicen Council also was approved by this: and that the Trullan
Council is rejected by the Papists themselves in many things.

Thus far of Councels: now for the ancient Fathers: they also did reject these
books, as Apocryphal: Ergo. I prove this by an induction. 1. Athanasius in
his Synopsis. 2. Cyril of Jerusalem. 3. Hilary Bishop of Pictauia. 4. Melito
bishop of Sardinia. 5. Nazianzen in his poem. 6. Hierom in his prologo Galeato,
which is prefixed before the books of Kings. 7. Gregory the Great. 8. Joseph
against Appian. 9. Ruffin in the exposition of the Symbol Apostolical. 10.
Augustine. The adversaries here except, saying: But these men have spoken of
the canon of the old Testament of the Hebrews (say they) and not of Christians?
I answer first, as if the Hebrews had one canon and the Christians another?
Secondly, they did approve that very canon of the Hebrews. But it may be (say
they) that then peradventure there was no Canon known or determined of by the
Church. I answer, and I demand then, when was this decreed? and in what
Council? was this done in the Council of Trent? but this is too late, for
this Council was even in our age. Was it decreed in the Florentine Council?
that is but little elder. Was this Canon agreed upon in the third Council of
Carthage? But that Council, 1. was but provincial. 2. and this is rejected of
the very Papists themselves in some things, as in the canon of the high Priest,
which in number is the 26. They will say, this Council was confirmed by the
Trullan Council. I answer. 1. So was the Laodicen. 2. So the canon was
concluded or established later, to wit, in the year of Christ 400. 3. The
Trullan Council is rejected in many things of the very Papists. 4. After the
Trullan Council there were Fathers which would not receive the Apocryphal
books. And so now let us come to the second class of Fathers, that is, to the
latter Writers.

Here then I reason thus: The late Writers do not reckon these books among
the Canonical: Ergo. This I prove by an induction. Lib. de Officiis*
Isidore, John Damascen, Nicephorus, Leontius, Rabanus Maurus, Radulphus,
Lyranus, Carthusianus, Abulensis, Antoninus, Hugo Cardinalis, Erasmus in some
of his writings, Cardinal Caietanus. All these were after the Trullan
Council; yea some of them were reputed for sons by the Church of Rome after
the Florentine Council.

By these testimonies first of Councels; next, of Fathers, it is evident, that
none of these books was accepted for Canonical in any lawful judgment: for
if there had been any such matter, so many ancient and late Writers would no
doubt have so acknowledged. Wherefore these books are Apocryphal, and so to
be accounted.

The adversaries for their defense allege also humane testimonies, and this in
a manner is all they can say: They cite the Councels before named, as the third
of Carthage, the Trullan, Florentine, and the Council of Trent. But we reject
the two latter as tyrannical, and congregate purposely to oppress the truth
and light of God. And touching the Trullan, and the third Council of Carthage,
we have set down our judgment. And as for Fathers, they bring forth for this
matter principally the Popes themselves, as Pope Innocentius, and Gelasius, and
Augustine in some place. But I answer, that they cannot bring so many as we
can, nor so ancient for themselves. Secondly, when these Fathers, which they
name, call these books canonical, which we reject as Apocryphal, they take
the name of Canonical books, more largely then we, to wit, for books which
have some such sanctity, as in profane Writers cannot be found; and they call
them so, not for that they mean that they are of like authority with the
Canonical books of Scripture. And we deny not, but that in many of these
such holiness may appear, as cannot be found in the books of profane
authors. And thus far of the Apocryphal books.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the authentical Edition of the Bible.
WHereas there be extant many Editions of the Bible in diverse languages, as the
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and other proper tongues, it is a question which of
these must be reputed for authentical? I answer, the Hebrew edition of the
old, and the Greek of the new Testament, is authentical; and so must be
accounted: so that all things are to be determined by these, and all other
editions must be approved so far as they agree with these. We will therefore
first speak of the Hebrew edition of the old Testament: we avouch then, that
the Hebrew edition of the old testament is authentical. This proposition shall
have his confirmation, after we have given a short preface touching the Hebrew
tongue, and the writing of the old testament in that language, and the
preservation of these books of the old testament, written in the Hebrew tongue
to this day.

The Hebrew tongue was the first, and the The Hebrew tongue only before the
flood. Genesis 11. 1.
only language on earth to the flood, and to the building of the tower of
Babel, Genesis 11. 1. 9. The whole earth was of one lauguage, and of one speech,
or Et verba erant eadem.
had the same words. At the building of Babel began the confusion of languages,
and from the Hebrew, as from the mother of all the rest, all other tongues had
their first beginning: for all other languages are nothing else in a manner, but
as Dialects to the The Hebrew tongue mother of all the rest.
Hebrew tongue, of which some resemble their mother more then other: some be
more estranged from her. In that confusion of tongues, the Hebrew was preserved
as the womb or mother (as Hierome speaks) of all the rest; this was
preserved (I say) in the family of Heber, who was the fourth from Noah, and
lived that very time Hebers family kept the Hebrew tongue.
that the tower of Babel was built, and when the confusision of languages
began. The Hebrew tongue then was so called first of Heber, and from him it
came to his posterity, not to all, but to them only of whom came Abraham: and
from him continued to the very last of all the Prophets: for Haggai, Zacharias
and Malachie wrote their prophecies in this very language. Thus far of the
Hebrew tongue.

The old testament was written first in this Hebrew and holy tongue. The first
writer was Moses: the prophets The old testament written in Hebrew.
followed him: of whom some wrote before the captivity; some in the
captivity; some after the captivity: and they writ all in Hebrew, except
Daniel and Ezra, which wrote some things in the Chaldee tongue. And this
lets not but that we may say, that all the old testament was written in the
Hebrew tongue, for that the Chaldee and Hebrew have no great diversity.

Now to speak of the preservation of these books of the old Testament: the
books of Moses and the prophets, that is, the old Testament written in Hebrew,
was kept by the admirable providence of almighty God unto this day. They were
preserved (I say) in most perilous and hard times, as in the burning of the
city and of the temple of The admirable providence of God in the preservation
of the Bible.
Jerusalem, in the captivity, and in that most grievous persecution of
Antiochus Epiphanes: for he raged also against these very books; and in the
great persecutions which were after Christ, under the Roman Emperors.

But here it is demanded, whether the same very books which were written by
Moses and the Prophets before the captivity, be come into our hands? I answer,
for this matter, diverse men have thought diversely. For there were that thought,
that those books which Moses and the prophets left, were lost when the temple
and the city were destroyed with fire, and that these which we have, were
repaired and written over again by Ezra the Scribe, inspired by God, and
called extraordinarily for this purpose. Of this judgment are these, Epist. ad
Chilonem.
Basil, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Lib. de Offic.
Isidorus, Rabanus Maurus, Leontius. It may be they were thus minded, because
of that story or fable rather, which we may read Esdras 4. 14. But that book
is Apocryphal, and rejected not only of our Church, but also of the Church of
Rome. The point may be thus refuted. If Ezra had written over these books
again, then assuredly it is most like, that he would have written them, not in
the Hebrew, but in the Chaldee tongue, or in a mixed language of Hebrew and
Chaldee together: for that Ezra did write two books in that mixed manner, even
those two books of Esdras. Secondly, Nehem. 8. Ezra is said to have brought
forth, and to have read, not his own books, or books which he had written,
but the books of the law of Moses. Thirdly, it is not like, but some godly
man, or Prophet, or some other was left, which in that time of the fire,
preserved these sacred books, or kept some copy of them: and the rather, for
that the^, out of al doubt, Ezechiel and Daniel the prophets lived. 4. The very
name which Daniel gives to the Chaldee monarchy (calling it the golden empire)
does argue that this did not so rage against the sacred books of God: for if
this monarchy had laid such violent hands on Gods books, assuredly the holy
Ghost would not have given it a name of such excellency. Therefore that
assertion is false: and the contrary is true, to wit, that the books of Moses
and the old Prophets were preserved from danger, when the Temple and the City
were consumed with fire, as also in the captivity, and so be reserved by divine
providence, and so delivered by Gods own hand at last into our possessions.
Neither yet do we gainsay, what the godly have recorded, that is, that Ezra
after the captivity, did reuise the books of Moses and the Prophets, digested
them into one volume, and set them down in this certain order. Thus far of
this question.

Now it rests, after the premises, that we prove the Hebrew edition of the
old Testament to be only authentical. That edition which was written in the
first language that ever was, and first in the primarie language, and has
been preserved in that tongue, purely and fully, even unto our times; I say,
that edition of the old Testament is authentical: But such is the Hebrew
edition: Ergo.

The adversaries cannot deny, but that it was written, in the first language
and mother tongue, and also that it was first written in it; and they cannot
deny, but that it was preserved in some purity even unto this day: but they
will not grant, or allow it this excellency of sincerity and purity which we
avouch. Bellarmine has observed out of all the old Testament, 5. places only,
whereby he would prove that the Hebrew fountain has lost some part of this
purity. The first place is Esaias, 9. 6. And he Vajikra Schemo Pele.
shall call his name (to wit, the Lord) Wonderful. But the vulgar Latin
reads, and he shall be called, which reading Calvin approoueth: And therefore
by Caluins confession, here the Hebrew fountain it self is not clear. I
answer first; the sense is the same, whether ye read shall call or shall be
called. Secondly, the letters are the same in both words in the Hebrew, shall
call, and shall be called, the Vajikra.
points being diverse do not make the body of the word to be of diverse
significations. Thirdly, the Hebrew Doctors, as Uatablus, say often, that with
the Hebrews a verb personal of the third person, is taken for an impersonall,
as here, shall call, for shall be called. Fourthly, Tremelius and Iunius retain
the Hebrew reading, and say thus, and he does call his name, etc.

The second place is Ier. 23. 6. And this his name, wherewith he shall call him,
the Lord our righteousness: But the vulgar Vezeh Schemo asher jikreo, Jehovah
Tsidkenu.
Latin edition says, that they shall call him, the Lord our righteousness: and
this translation also Calvin approoueth: Therefore by Caluins testimony, the
very Hebrew text is here corrupted. I answer, the sense shall not de greatly
unfitting, if ye read whereby he shall call him, to wit, the Lord our
righteousness: The name going before is the name of a people of security, of
a people that dwell safely, as Tremelius and Iunius understand and read the
place. Thirdly, Jeremy leaves it to our free choice* Fourthly, the Hebrew
Doctors Vatable, Pagnine, Arias Montanus, read vocabit, he shall call; and yet
turn the word, vocabunt, they shall call.

The third place is in the 22. Psalm. 17. ver. They pierced Caari Iaddai
Veraglai.
my hands and my feet. In the Latin edition it is, Foderunt, they dug or
pierced, and so read all Christians; but the Hebrew is, Sicut Leo, as a Lion:
Wherefore in this place the Hebrew text is corrupted. I answer, ye Masorites
testify that they have read in some Hebrew copies Caru, which signifies to dig
into or to pierce. They also which have ye word Caari in their books, say it is
not to be taken here in Caari.
the proper and common signification. The Chaldee Paraphrast does knit both
particles together: As a Lion smites with his teeth, so have these pierced,
etc. But these were before Ierom, I mean the Masorites, and the Chaldee
Paraphraste: therefore it is false, that this place was corrupted by the Jews
after Ieroms time. Ierom in his Psalter keeps this reading Caari, and yet he
translates the word, foderunt, they dug or pierced. Lastly, a certain
Popish writer one Augustine Iustinianus, who set forth the book of Psalm.
coliected of many languages, does plainly avouch it, this place is not
corrupted, but that there is a defect of a word which the Chaldee Paraphrast
has supplied.

The fourth place is Psalm. 19. 5. Their line is gone forth Becol haarets iatsa
kauuam. (...).
through all the earth. Here not only the vulgar, but the Septuagint also, whom
the Apostle to the Romans 10. follows, do read, their sound is gone etc.
therefore this place is corrupted. Let Genebrard alone answer this in his
observations on the Psalms, who says, the Septuagint and Paul, did rather
express the sense of the word, then the proper and natural* signification
thereof.

The fifth place is, Exo. 2. after the 22. ver. in ye vulgar Latin edition, all
this place is read of a second son of Moses. And she bare a second, whose name
he called Eliezer, saying, the God of my Father is my helper, and has
deliuer^d me from Pharaohs hand. But all this place is not to be found in the
Hebrew text: Ergo. To this I answer: the very Louaine editions have here their
marginal note, to put us in mind that this place has crept into the text, and
the better sort of the Papists are of this judgment, that this place is not
the natural or very text of Gods word, as Caietanus, who writes of this place
in this manner: All this clause of a second son is superfluous. Wherefore
Bellarmine can not conclude by these places, that the Hebrew edition is
corrupt, and therefore is not authentical.

I shall conclude contrarily with this one argument, that the Hebrew edition is
not corrupt: If the Jews corrupted it, it was before Christ or after: But not
before Christ; which point (to pass by all testimonies of ancients) The Jews
before Christ did not corrupt the Hebrew: Christ is witness, and so the
apostle, Romans 3. 1.
I make evident with this one reason. If the Jews had corrupted the Hebrew
text, Christ would have texed them for so horrible an offense: But we never
find that Christ so charge them for any such cause: but contrarily, we read
that he sends them to that very Hebrew edition, which they had in their hands:
Search the scriptures, says he, Io. 5. 39. The Scripture was not corrupted
after Christ's time: which assertion I prove (to pass by the authority of
ancients) with this one argument. The Jews could not corrupt all the Hebrew
copies, albeit they were never so willing to effect it, for that they were now
for the most part come to the hands of Christians. Hence it follows, that if
the Hebrew text was not corrupted neither before Christ's time, nor after his
coming; then was it not corrupted at all. But happily they will say, that the
Jews corrupted it after Augustine and Ieromes The Jews could not corrupt the
Hebrew after Christ's coming
time? I answer, in what places? For as touching Bellarmines 5. places, we
have already showed, that both in Ieroms time and before, these places were
thus read, as we read them this day. Wherefore we conclude, the Hebrew edition
is most pure, and consequently in the old Testament, this edition only is
authentical.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Greek edition of the New Testament.
WHereas there be many editions of the new Testament, we say the Greek only
is the authentical: which first I demonstrate on this manner. First in Christ's
time and the Apostles, the Greek tongue among the Gentiles was of greatest
excellency. Secondly, and as it was accounted of best note; so was it most
famous and most common in the world: For albeit as then the Roman Empire was
most large and great; yet the Latin tongue was not so common, as is testified
by a good Cicero in oratione pro Archiae poeta.
writer of that age. Thirdly, the Idolatry and superstition of the Gentiles,
and all the Philosophy of the Greeks was written in the Greek tongue. The Lord
having these and such like respects, no doubt, at what time it pleased him to
carry his Gospel from the narrow bounds of Iewrie into the great and spacious
field of all the world: It was the Lords will and pleasure, I say, at that time
that the Gospel should be written principally in the Greek tongue.

The writers they were, some of them, Apostles; some Evangelists; al which
first wrote in Greek, except Matthew and the author to the Hebrews. For first
concerning Matthew, In Synopsi.
Athanasius says, he wrote first in Hebrew; the same says Lib. 3.
Irenaeus, and Incarmine.
Naztanzen and Ierom, In Praefat. in 4. Euang. ad Damas. et in Catalog. in Math.
who says that Matthew first in Hebrew.
in his time Mathews Hebrew copy was reserved in the library of Cesaria which
Pamphilus the Martyr built. Athanasius says, that Saint Mathews Hebrew edition
was translated into Greek by James the Apostle: others say, by Saint John the
Apostle: others by Matthew himself. Thus write the Fathers, but their assertion
has no strong grounds. For when Christ lived with his Apostles, all the Jews
spoke Syriack, that is, a language mixed of Hebrew and Chaldaiack: Therefore if
Matthew had purposed to write in any other language but the Greek, he would no
doubt have written specially in the Syriack tongue, and some Papists of this
age are of the very same judgment. Wherefore it is uncertain whether Matthew
first wrote in Hebrew, Syriack, or Greek: yet is it more probable that he did
first write in Greek, both for that this tongue was not unknown to the Jews;
and other Apostles first wrote in it, not only to Jews and Gentiles
indifferently, but also particularly to the very Jews As Saint James and Saint
Peter 1. Epist. Matthew in Hebrew. In Catolog. in Paul.
. Well, howsoever it is, the Greek edition which we have in the Church at this
day, is authentical; for that it was both written and approved, while the
Apostles were yet living: For as touching the Hebrew edition (if there were
any) I doubt now, it can no where be found. And as for this Hebrew copy which
is in many hands, it is not the true copy.

As concerning the Epistle to the Hebrews, Ierom says, that first it was
written in Hebrew: next, turned into Greek either by Barnabas, or Luke, or
Clement: but it is uncertain, and it is more like to be true that this Epistle
also was first written in Greek. Howsoever it be, this Greek edition of this
Epistle which we have at this day, is authentical.

Now the New Testament written in Greek by the Apostles and Evangelists, has
been so preserved by the admirable providence of God, even in the midst of
persecutions and heresies, unto this age, and in all former ages so freed and
kept by godly and Orthodoxall writers from the corruption of Heretics: the
Lord God, I say, has so provided that it is come into our hands most pure and
perfect. Thus then I reason. That edition of the New Testament which was
written in the best language and first, and originally written in it, to wit,
the Greek, I say the same must be accepted, as authentical of all men: But
such is the Greek edition of the New Testament, Ergo.

The adversaries except only against the purity of this edition. For albeit
some of them, the latter, and the better learned, as Bellarmine, do not say
that the Greek edition of the New Testament is altogether corrupt, as some of
them have blasphemed; yet they say it is not so pure, that they can grant it
to be authentical, because in some places it is corrupt. Bellarmine brings
forth seven places, whereby he endeavors to prove this assertion, that the
Greek edition is corupt; and therefore cannot be authentical.

The first place is 1. Cor. 15. 47. The first man is of the earth earthly; the
second man is the Lord from heaven. But in the vulgar (...).
Latin edition, it is, the second is from heaven heavenly; and this reading is
approved: therefore the Greek edition is corrupt and not authentical. I answer,
first, albeit we read as the Greek is; yet the sense is good and orthodoxall,
and the same with that which is of the vulgar reading, differing in word only,
and not in matter. Secondly, the Arabic and Syriack translation so read the
place. Thirdly, the Fathers, Chrysostom and Theophylact so read. Fourthly,
Epiphanius citing Haereseon. 22. 2
all the places which Marcion corrupted, yet remembers not this place. But
(says he) Tertullian says, that Marcion Tert. lib. 5. contra Mar.
has corrupted this place. I answer, that Tertullian in that book and place,
reads these words in the very same manner, as we do: The Lord from heaven.

The second place is 1. Cor. 7. 33. He that is married cares for the things of
the world, how he may please his wife. The (...), etc.
wife and the Virgin are distinctly set down. So reads the Greek. But the
Vulgar thus: He that is joined to a wife cares for the things of the world,
how he may please his wife, and he is divided: but the woman that is unmarried,
and the Virgin bethinketh of the things which please the Lord both in body and
spirit: Wherefore the Greek edition is here corrupted, and so can not be
authentical. I answer. First, that the sense which is by the Greek, is not
only sound, but also more fitting in this place, then that which is by the
Vulgar translation. Secondly, the Syriack translation so reads these words.
Thirdly, Theophylact, the Greek Scholies, and Basil so read the words. But he
says that Ierom Lib. 1. contra Iouinan.
avouches it, that this Greek reading is not Apostolical: I answer, the same
Ierom in another place Contra Heluidium and Eustochium.
reads these words as we do: wherefore seeing he changes his mind, he is not
fit to judge for this scripture.

The third place is To. 12. 11. serving the time: But the old Latin is, serving
the Lord: Ergo. I answer. First, albeit (...).
ye read so the place, yet the sense is good and sound. Secondly, the reading
varies in many Greek copies, as witnesses Origens Interpreter, who reads the
Lord, (...) and he notes it, that in many books he found, (...) the time:
the same says Ambrose, who reads (...), serving the time, yet says he in
some books we find, (...), the Lord. Thirdly, the Syriack, Chrysostom,
Theophylact and Basil read (...), the Lord: which reading we best like: For
which cause our Beza translates the word, Domino, the Lord.

The fourth place is Ioh. 8. where in the beginning of that Chap. many Greek
copies want the story of the adulterous woman, which the common translation in
Latin has, and the Church approues it as canonical. I answer: First, that
our Greek books which we have and hold for authentical, have this history
also, and our Church receives it. Secondly, yet we deny not, that this has
been gainsaid by some, and the Syriacke translation has it not.

The fifth place is Mark. 16. where, in many Greek copies, that whole chapter
is wanting, which notwithstanding the Latin edition retains. Ergo. I answer,
first, that all our Greek books, which we account authentical, have also
this chapter, and our churches receive the same as canonical. Secondly, Jerome
some-where moves some doubttouching it, but to no purpose.

The sixth place is 1. Ioh. 5. 7. where the seventh verse (which contains a
worthy testimony of the Trinity) in many Greek copies is missing, but in
the vulgar it is retained: Ergo. I answer, first, our Greek books, which we
hold for authentical, have this verse, and our Church receives it. Secondly,
we deny not but some have gainesaid it.

The seventh place is, Matthew. 13. For thine is the kingdom, (...), etc.
power and glory, Amen. But this place is not in the vulgar translation: Ergo.
L. Valla answers, this place is not added to the Greek, but detracted from
the Latin: and I pray you, what heretical or unsound matter has this place?

Thus we see then the* adversaries cannot prove by these places, that the
Greek edition of the new Testament is corrupted, and so not authentical.
Wherefore it rests, that the Hebrew edition of the old Testament, and the
Greek of the new Testament, is only authentical.

CHAP. XX. Of the Translations of the old Testament.
NOw it rests that we speak of the Translations of the old and new
Testament. And first, of the translations of the old Testament. The old
Testament was first written in Hebrew, and afterward translated into diverse
languages, specially the Chaldee, and Greek: First concerning the Chaldiacke
translation; next, of the Greek: and for the Chaldiack, we be to consider
first, what manner of translation it is: Secondly, by whom this was done:
Thirdly, what authority this has. For the first, the Chaldiacke translation
is rather a Paraphrase, then a translation word for word. The Rabbis call this
Authors of the Chaldee paraphrase.
paraphrase the Targum. For the second point, by whom this Paraphrase was set
forth: Rabbi Aquila translated the Five books of Moses.
Pentateuch, and this they call Onkelos: the rest of the books of the old
testament were translated, partly by Rabbi Jonathan, partly by Rabbi Joseph
blind.
Caecus: they lived not long before Christ, or about Christ's time. For the
third point: The Chaldee paraphrase with the Ancients was ever of great note
and authority, specially that part of the Pentateuch: for as for the rest of
this Paraphrase, one Praefat. in Biblia complu. tensia.
Ximenius a Cardinal avouches it to be full of Jewish fables, and of the
vain conceits of the Thalmudists. And thus far briefly of the Chaldee
paraphrase.

Now touching the Greek translation of the old testament: there were diverse
translations of it into the Greek tongue. Some number nine translations. Of
these the first and principal is that of the Septuagint, which those 72.
Ancients did at the appointment of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus: for whereas Lib.
stromat.
Clemens Alexandrinus writes, that the Scripture was translated long before
into Greek, and that Plato had read the same, it is not like to be true: for
neither Plato, nor any of Pythagoras sect ever saw the sacred Scriptures. To
speak then of the interpretation of the seventy interpreters, and to bind our
selves to certain questions, six in number: the first may be this, whether
there was ever any Greek translation set forth by the 72. interpreters.
Secondly, if there were any, when it was done. Thirdly, of what books.
Fourthly, how this was done. Fifthly, what authority this translation is of.
Sixthly, whether this be the true translation of the 72. Interpreters which we
have at this day?

For the first question, the answer is easy: for there is no doubt but that
there was a Greek translation by the 72. interpreters, for that all antiquity
accords to this. This is testified by Lib. de mensuris and ponderib.
Epiphanius, De praeparat. euangel.
Eusebius, In dialog. cum Tryphone.
Justin Martyr, with many others. And as for the second question, the answer
also to it is easy,: for all men do agree that this translation was done in
the reign, and at the appointment of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus: this write and
avouch these men, Joseph, Philo, In Synopsi.
Athanasius, Epiphanius, Tertullian, In historia sua de hacipsare.
Aristaeus, and many others. And for the third question, what books were
translated by them, the answer is not so easy: for some think they translated
but the five books of Moses only. Of this mind is In pro^^io antiq.
Joseph, and Jerome seems to incline this way. Others say, they translated all
the Scripture: and this is likest to be true: For first it is not like that
king Ptolomie could have contented himself with the Pentateuch only. Secondly,
the Apostles of Christ used the Greek translation in citing testimonies out of
the prophets: but in the Apostles time there was none other translation, but
that of the Septuagints. Thirdly, there had been no matter of admiration, in
that this work was done with such expedition (if the Pentateuch only had
been translated) and finished in the space of 72. days: for they say his
translation was miraculous. Fourthly, Chrysostom and Theodoret, among the
Fathers, are of this judgment: Wherefore it is best we hold this as most
probable, that all the old Testament was translated by them.

And as for the fifth question, what authority this translation had? Hereunto
men answer diversely. For some ascribe too much to it, as In lib. de mensuris
and ponderib.
Epiphanius, who says, they were not interpreters only, but in a manner
Prophets. Augustine is too much in the commendation of it, he says; It was
done by a special dispensation of God, and thinks it to be set forth by divine
inspiration. Others ascribe not so much to it: In praefat. in Pentateuchon.
Jerome says against Epiphanius, they were no prophets. And often in his
Commentaries, he taxes it not only as corrupted, but as very faulty in it
self, which thing he would never have don, if he had thought this work had
been done by divine inspiration. What authority soever this translation is
of, assuredly it can have no more, then what may, by good right, be given to an
interpretation: for we may not avouch it to be given by the inspiration of God,
nor make it of equal authority with the Scripture.

As touching the sixth question, some think that the old translation of the
Septuagint is as yet extant; but to Old translation of the 70.
be so corrupt, that it is no wisdom to correct either the Hebrew or Latin
copies by it. Bellarmine is of this mind. Others affirm, that the ancient
translation of the 72. interpreters is lost, and that this which we have is
mixed, and very corrupt. This also they prove by an induction of certain
places corrupted. First, the Greek Bible numbers from the creation of the
world unto the flood, 2242. years, as we may see, which Augustine, Eusebius,
and Nicephorus in his chronology: but the Hebrew verity says, the number of
years be 1656. therefore the Greek number exceedes the Hebrew in years 586.
Secondly, from the flood to Ahraham, the 72. interpreters reckon of years
1082. but according to the Hebrew text of Gods word, there be no more years
but 292. so the Greek exceedes the Hebrew verity 790. years. Thirdly, in the
Greek copy, Adam is said to have lived 230. years, and in some books 330.
when he begat Sheth: but the Hebrew Bible says, Adam begat Sheth when he was
130. years old. Fourthly, according to the Greek copy Methusalem lived
fourteen years after the flood, which is very ridiculous: for where lived
he? or how was he kept from the waters? In the arc? That cannot be, for but
eight souls only entered into the Arc, among whom Methusalem is not reckoned.
The Hebrew bible speaks far otherwise of Methusalems Methusalems life and
death.
years and age: for by it we gather that he died that very year, the deluge
came on the whole earth, to wit, the year of the world 1656. Fifthly, in Jonas,
the Greek copy denounces destruction to the Niniuits after the third day, As
yet three days, and Niniuie shall be destroyed: but in the Hebrew text we
read, Yet forty days, and Chap. 3. 4.
Niniuie shall be destroyed. By these places we see there is great difference
between the Greeks and the Hebrews in their numbering: but all agree that they
Hebrew numbers are true. De ciuitate Dei lib. 18.
Augustine fames, I know not what mystery in this diversity of numbers, to
defend the authority of the 72. Interpreters, which notwithstanding he could
not maintain in the place concerning Methusalem. Jerome deals more plainly
and faithfully, saying, that the Septuagint have erred in their numbers. By
these before cited places, and many such like corrupted, we conclude, that
this Greek translation which is now extant, is not that which the 72. ancient
Jews wrote; or if it be the same, that it is so corrupted, as we may reckon it
to be of very small authority.

Thus far of the Greek edition of the 72. interpreters: now we are to
consider of other Greek translations, which were written after that the
Gospel was published far and near among the Gentiles. And there be eight
several translations numbered. The first was Aquilas written in Adrian the
Emperors time, as testifies Epiphanius. This Aquila was first a Pagan, and
after turned Christian, and was baptized: after this being admonished, Aquila
Synopensis, and his apostasy.
for his studies in judicial astrology; and at last cast out of the Church
for his obstinacy; he fell away to the Jewish religion: and conuersing with
the Jews, he learned the Hebrew tongue, and then and there translated the old
Testament out of the Hebrew into Greek, but with a perverse and froward mind
(as says Theodoret) purposely intending to obscure the doctrine of Christ, and
to color his apostasy.

After this translation of Aquila, followed Theodotions, in the reign of
Commodus the Emperor, as Epiphanius also writes. This man was of Pontus, and
of the sect of Marcion the heretic, after a time renouncing his sect, and
abiuring all Christian religion, he fell to Iudaisme; and having learned the
Hebrew tongue, he translated in like manner the old Testament into Greek, but
with a malicious heart, and unfaithfully (as Theodoret speaks) intending the
confutation of his own sect.

After this translation of Theodotion, followed that of Symmachus, in the
reign of Seuerus Augustus. This man Symmachus translation.
was a Samaritane by birth and country, and for that he could not attain
some superiority he desired in his own country, he fell in like manner into
Iudaisme, and was circumcised the second time: and how this was done,
Epiphanius notes it out of 1. Cor. 7. 18. to wit, by gathering his
uncircumcision, after his first circumcision; that so there might be matter for
a second circumcision. This man translated the old Testament out of Hebrew into
Greek; but unfaithfully (as Theodoret says) intending most the confutation of
the Samaritans, of whom he had his first beginning.

After this translation of Symmachus, there were two others, whose names be
not known. The one was found in Jericho, laid up in great vessels for the
preservation of it, in the reign of Caracalla the Emperor. The other was
found at the North-Nicopolis, in the time of Alexander the Emperor, the son
of Mammaeas. This Apud Nicopolia Aquilonarem, because there were three of that
name.
is testified by Epiphanius, Theodoret, and others.

After all these followed Origin, who lived in the year of Christ 261. in the
days of Valerian and Galienus the Emperors. Origin labored exceedingly in
the conference of such translations as he found extant before his time: for he
gathered into one volume four translations, to wit, first, Aquilas: secondly,
Symmachus: thirdly, the Septuagint: fourthly, Theodotions: and set them down in
four distinct columns, and this was Origens Tetrapla. This dove, he added to
these four columns, Origens (...)
two more of the Hebrew text; the one set down in Hebrew; the other in Greek
characters: and this was Origens Hexapla. Lastly, to the six former columns,
he annexed (...).
the two editions before noted to be of unknown Authors: and this was called
Origens Octapla, a work of (...).
great labor and excellency, the loss whereof has been, no doubt, no small
damage to the Church of God. Origin in these his works had his marginal
stars, to observe what he liked: his long strokes, to put out what he
disliked: his little labels for addition, and his second labels for a second
addition, according to the variety and diversity of his copies. A certain
godly man complaining for the loss of these works, said, Well we may deplore
the loss of these works, but restore the same we cannot.

After Origin there was one Lucianus translation about Lucianus.
Diocletians time. This man was a minister of the Church of Antioch, and a
martyr. A copy of this edition (as I have read) was found written with this
martyrs own hand, and kept in a marble chest at Nicomedia. Hierome also
writes, that in his time there were Greek copies, which were called by
Lucians name.

Finally, after Lucians translation, followed another edition, set forth by one
Hesychius, which corrected the interpretation of the Septuagints, and gave it
to the Hesychius.
Churches of Egypt. And thus far of the eight Greek translations which were
after Christ, all which be lost: howbeit the Papists sell for good Canonical
Scripture, certain remnants (as they say) of Theodotions translation, Dan. 13.
and 14. chap. a fragment which that foul heretik and Apostata left in their
safe keeping. For as concerning this Greek edition of the old Testament which
is now extant, howsoever it comes to us, we have none pure, but mixed and
corrupted, as we have before observed. And thus far of the translations of
the old Testament: first the Chaldee Paraphrase; next the sundry Greek copies
of all ages.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Syriacke translation of the new Testament.
NOw let us come unto the translation of the new Testament. The new Testament
being first written in Greek, was translated into the Syriacke tongue, which
in the days of Christ and his Apostles was the proper and natural language of
the Jews, by reason of their long captivity in Babylon, and for that the
Assyrians were so transported to the possession of Jury. It is uncertain who
was the Author of this translation, as also at what time it was done: Tremelius
thinks it most like to be true, that this was done: in the primitive Church, in
the very beginning; and that by the Apostles themselves or their Disciples. He
proves also the reverend antiquity thereof, First by the elegancy of the
tongue. Secondly, by the defects and loss of certain books and places of the
N. Testament, which Syriack translation anncient.
are to be found in the Syriack translation: as the 2. Epist. of S. Peter. The
2. and 3. of S. John. The Epist. of James and of Jude, the Apocalypse, and the
story of the woman taken in adultery, which is found in the beginning of the
8. Chap. of the Gospel according to S. John. By this defect he gathers, that
seeing the Syriack translation was extant before the Church accepted these
books as canonical, the Syriack translation must be very ancient. Again, he
says he found a singular faithfulness in the Syriack translation, by
conferring it with the Greek and original: which experience any shall find,
if they shall please to confer both languages together. Of the premises the
conclusion is this, that the Syriack translation both was in elder ages, and is
now at this day of great authority in the Church. Thus far of the Chaldiack
and diverse Greek translations of the old Testament, and of the Syriack
translation of the New.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Latin translations of both Testaments.
WE be now to speak of the Latin translations of the New Testament, and of the
Old. The Latin translations of the Bible were very many. This say De doctrina
Christ. lib. 2. cap. 11.
Augustine and In prooemio in lib. Iosuae.
Ierom, who complains much of the variety and diversity of Latin
translations. Of all the Latin translatio^s, the first was an Italian: De
doctr. Chri. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Augustine preferres this before all the rest, as keeping most strictly to the
words of the original, and being more perspicuous then others in sentences.
This was not that translation of Ierom: for it is evident, this was far more
ancient then that translation of Ierom. And who should be the Author of this,
it is uncertain.

After this Italian translation, Ieroms followed next: who is said to have left
a double translation in Latin of the old Testament. In the first, he followed
the 72. interpreters: in the latter, the Hebrew original text. For as touching
the New Testament, Ierom is said not to have translated it into Latin, but to
have corrected the old Latin translation: as himself affirms it in many
places. This edition of Ierom, when it came forth first, it began forthwith to
be Aug. Epist. 10. ad Hicron.
accepted, and read publicly in the Churches; but with no contempt of that
old Italian copy. For as Gregory says, these two translations, that elder
Italian, and the latter of Ierom, were of greatest note in the Latin Churches,
and most used. At length all those old Latin translations together with that
Italian, were not respected; and Ieroms translation only remained, if we may
truly avouch this to be Ieroms translation, which at this day is used, and is
carried about in his name: for the learned greatly doubt of this matter. Here
therefore we be to consider of this point: And two questions principally are
to be answered: First, who was the Author of this: The second, what authority
it may have in the Church.

As touching the Author of this Latin translation, diverse men speak diversely.
Some think it was Ieroms, and that it is pure without any mixture: So think al
Papists for the most part, specially the Jesuits. Others think it not to be
Hieroms, as Sanctes In praef. in Interp. Bibl. ad Clement. 7. Pontif.
Pagninus, and Forosemprouianus.
Paulus a Bishop; to pass by Erasmus, Munster, and other popish writers.
Others deem it to be Hieroms, but not to want corruption: of this judgment are
these men, Ioannes Driedo, Sixtus Senensis; and Bellarmene seems to incline
this way, as may easily be gathered by his propositions and reasons touching
this matter. We say, it is neither Hieroms, nor yet Not his in whole, nor yet
in part.
pure, nor mixed: and this we prove on this manner. Hierom translated the old
Testament out of the Hebrew into Latin accurately, or exactly: But this vulgar
edition is not exact: therefore it is not Hieroms. The proposition is evident:
for Hierom himself testifies in many places of his works, that he had labored
and done this translation very exactly: as in his preface before the 5. books
of Moses; in his Preface before the books of the Kings; in his Preface on the
Psalter: in all which places he says, he changed nothing, but followed
faithfully the Hebrew text, and he appealeth to the Jews to testify of the
faithfulness of his translation. And De ciuitate Dei lib. 18. cap. 43.
Augustine affirms it, that the very Jews did confess his translation was
sound and true. Hispalensis* lib. 6. Etymolog. cap. 5.
Isidore preferres Hieroms translation before all men's, for keeping himself
more strictly to the words of the Hebrew text, and for his perspicuity of
phrase: wherefore if we may believe these men, Hieroms translation was exactly
done. So far the proposition, the assumption follows: But the vulgar Latin
edition is not accurate; neither does it agree with the original the Hebrew
text, yea it so far dissenteth from it, that necessarily one of these two
assertions must be true, either that this Latin edition is most corrupt, or
that the Hebrew fountain is most troubled and disordred: And this last point
Bellarmine himself dare not avouch, but taxes such as do so affirm, and that
worthily.

It rests therefore that we prove this great disagreement, between the
Latin edition and the Hebrew text. And this can no otherwise be done, but by
conference of the one with the other. Let the comparison begin at the book of
Genesis; and compare not al places which dissent (for that were infinite) but
some special places, whereby ye may soon conceive of the rest, and judge what
they be. And by this conference of places, you shall discern that the defaults
are not of one kind, but of diverse, as for changing of words and sentences,
for defect and superfluity. For so many ways the vulgar Latin edition is
faulty. In my judgment this comparison cannot better be found by any man, or
means, then by that vulgar Latin which was corrected by John Benedict a
divine of Paris, whom (that I may pass over this point briefly) I recommend
unto thee gentle reader. By this conference that shall appear, both that this
is not Hieroms translation, and that this vulgar Latin edition is not
authentical; so as we shall not need to spend* any time in handling the other
question.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the translation of the Bible into the mother tongue.
IT remains now that we speak of such editions and translations as be in the
usual mother tongue. I understand that translation to be in the mother tongue,
which is done in that language, which is vulgar and common among the people of
that country, whose language it is; as the Dutch, Italian, French, English,
Scottish, and Spanish translations, etc. We may move three questions of these
translations. First, whether it be lawful to translate the sacred Scripture
into every mother tongue. Secondly, whether the leiturgie or common prayers of
the Church ought to be in the mother tongue. Thirdly, whether it shall be
lawful for the common people to read the scriptures translated into their own
language or mother tongue.

To the first question we answer, that it is lawful, yea also that it is
expedient it should be so: and this we prove by some few arguments. First, the
sacred scriptures must be read publicly before all the people: therefore must
they be translated into their own known language: for otherwise it were in
vain to read them. The antecedent is proved Deuteronomy. 31. ver. 11. 12. The Lord
commands that the books of Moses be read to all indifferently, when they were
assembled, Men, Women, and Children with the strangers. Ier. 36. charge
Baruch the scribe, that he should read before all the people the book which he
had Translating of the scripture into the vulgar tongues. First argument.
written from his mouth. But some will here object, that this precept was to
endure but for a time. I answer, the end shows it must be perpetual, Deuteronomy.
31. The end being this, that this people may hear, learn, and fear the Lord.
This end is perpetual, therefore so is the law in like manner, specially
seeing that the reading of the Scripture is the ordinary and necessary means
whereby we be to come to this appointed end. So the antecede^t being thus
cleared, it follows necessarily that the scripture must be translated into
our known mother tongue.

Arg. 2. The people are permitted to read ye Scriptures: Second argu.
therefore they are to be translated into the vulgar tongue: for otherwise the
common people could never read them. The antecedent I prove thus. The Sacred
Scriptures do furnish us with weapons against the Devil, as we be taught by
Christ's example, Matthew. 4. who gave Satan the repulse, using none other
weapons against him but testimonies of Scripture. Ioh. 5. chap. Christ
commanded the multitude to search the scriptures. Acts chap. 17. the
Christians of Beroea are commended for searching the scriptures, whether the
points were sound and good, and agreeable to the sriptures, which were taught
by the Apostles. But see more of this antecedent in the handling of the 3.
question.

Arg. 3. The very Papists grant, the scriptures may be read before the people;
but they say it must be done in an Third argu.
unknown tongue: wherefore, I reason thus. If the scriptures must be read
before the multitude in an unknown tongue, that shall be fruitless, and
without all edification: therefore they must be translated into their known
language. The Antecedent is proved by, 1. Corin. 14. 6. If I shall come unto
you speaking in tongues, what shall I profit you. q. d. nothing. And after in
the same Chap. ver. 19. I had rather speak five words with my understanding,
that I might also instruct others, then ten thousandwords in a strange tongue.
But of this point more hereafter.

The fourth argument: God requires in his people wisdom, knowledge, and
instruction: Therefore the scriptures Fourth argu.
must be read, and therefore translated into the vulgar tongues. The antecedent
I prove thus. Deuteronomy. 4. God will have his people to be wise and of
understanding, that the nations round about hearing of this, might be smitten
with an admiration, and say, ver. 4. Only this people is wise, and of
understanding, and a great nation. The Apostle, Col. 3. 16. will have Gods
word to dwell in them richly, or plenteously. Paul in his Epistles every where
requires the Churches to whom he writes, to be filled with all knowledge. The
adversaries contend and dispute much against this knowledge which God requires
in the common people.

The fifth argument. Christ while he lived among the Jews, spoke and preached
unto them in their own mother Fifth argu.
tongue: The Apostles of Christ in like manner did preach the Gospel in their
vulgar tongue, as in the day of Pentecost, and after; and for this very cause,
that they might speak to every nation in their own known language, that gift
of tongues was given them. Thus then I reason; If to preach the Gospel in the
vulgar known languages, was no profanatio^ of the Gospel; then so in like
manner, to write the Gospel in the vulgar known languages, is no profanation of
the same: for there is like reason of both.

The sixth argument is from the perpetual use and practice Sixth argu.
of all the ancient Church. For in the Primitive Church, the sacred Scripture
was translated, near hand into all languages, as the Chaldiac, the Syriac, the
Arabian, the Armenian, the Egyptian, the Ethiopian, the Indian, the Persian,
the Scythian, the Sarmatian tongue. There are not a few do avouch this; Homil.
1. in Io.
Chrysostom, De corrigend. Graecorum Affectib lib. 5.
Theodoret, De doctr. Chri. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Augustine, with others. And at this day there be extant the Chaldiac, the
Syriack, the Arabic, the Egyptian, and the Ethiopian translations; all which
the learned say, were done in the Apostles times. Chrysostom turned the sacred
Scripture into the Armenian tongue, as Sixtus Sene^sis reports. Ierom
translated the scripture into the Lingua Dalmatica.
Dalmatick tongue, as these men do testify; Alphonsus a Castro, Eckius, Hosius,
Erasmus. Methodius translated it into the Sclauonian tongue, as says Auentine
in his Chronicle. Socrates tripartita historia.
Vlphilas Bishop of the Goths, translated the same into the Goths language.
De ciuitate Dei lib. 15.
Augustine writes that the old Testament was translated into Syriack. Harding
against Iuel, and Eckius write that the Muscouites, and the people of Russia
had the scripture in their own mother tongue. The history of England written
by Beda affirms, that the scriptures were translated into the English tongue
before his time. Beda says, he translated part of the new Testament himself.
Thus far the practice of the old church, whereby as by the rest of the
arguments before going, it follows, that the sacred Scripture is to be
translated into every country vulgar language.

Now it rests to see what the Papists answer to this question we have in
hand. Some few years past they utterly denied that the sacred Scripture might
be translated into any mother tongue. De choris canonicis.
Petrus Asoto, Censura Coloniensis, and Harding before named, these write that
some are of this judgment: The Scriptures are not to be translated into the
vulgar languages. And for this cause such as translated Scriptures, they were
banished and condemned by the Pope: and their books were prohibited and burnt.
And when they saw this to be odious to all men, these grave Fathers changed
their minds, and now forsooth they avouch the Scriptures may be translated into
the vulgar languages, yet by the Popes permission. And this, albeit it seem to
be something diverse from the former assertion, yet in effect it is the very
same. For the Pope will permit no man to do this, but to such a one as shall
turn all the corruptions which are to be found in the old Latin edition into
the vulgar tongue, and so recommend the same to posterity. This is Bellarmines
judgment, and the Rhemists. But we avouch the contrary, to wit, that every
godly, learned man, skilful in the tongues, may translate the Scripture without
the Popes permission: yea, albeit he prohibit the same. And that it shall be
lawful for the Church of Christ, to accept of the same translation after
examination, albeit the Pope give none authority nor approbation hereunto. For
in the ancient Church, when the authority or tyrannical jurisdiction of the
Pope was unknown, the translations before specified, were both done and
received of the Churches without the Pope. And thus far of the first question.

It follows in the second place, whether the Leiturgie or common prayers of
the Church, are to be celebrate in a known tongue? I mean the public service
or worship of God in ecclesiastical assemblies: as the public prayers, the
reading of the Scriptures, the administration of Sacraments, singing of
psalms, etc. These be called by the name of (...).
divine service. To the question we answer affirmatively, that this public
service of God is to be done in the vulgar tongue. Our first argument, we take
from the 1. Cor 14. where, from the 6. ver. to the 21. the Apostle teaches,
that nothing is to be done in the Church in an unknown and strange language.
But Bellarmine excepteth saying, that in that chapter the Apostle understands
principally, a collation and exhortation, which in the old Church followed
after the public prayers: and to this end he shows out of Apolog. 2. Note
the order of the old Church on the Lords day.
Justin Martyr, the custom of the old Church. The Christians assembled on the
Lords days, and first, the Scriptures were read: then after this, the chief
minister of the place preached: after this the Sacraments were administered:
lastly, they did use conference of divine arguments, or of godly questions. I
answer, the Apostle here entreats generally of all ecclesiastical duties,
and that in this order; first, ye have a general doctrine from the sixth verse
to the fourteenth. Next, there follows a special instruction how prayers must
be conceived, how to sing psalms, not in an unknown tongue, but in a known
or common language, to the ninteenth verse. After this, he returns to his
general doctrine again.

Bellarmine excepteth again, that Paul here speaks of songs, which in that
meeting they sung, which were endued with some extraordinary gift of the holy
Ghost. I answer, the Apostle distinctly names prayers and songs: again, he
speaks of those prayers and thanksgiuings, whereunto the people did answer,
Amen: now the people did not answer Amen, but to the public prayers: wherefore
he means here public prayers conceived in the divine administrations, in the
public assemblies.

Bellarmine again obiecteth: The public prayers at Corinth were in the Greek
tongue, a speech well known to the people, and that the Apostle knew: and
therefore If in Greek, not in Latin.
there was no need to prescribe any such rules for their divine service. I
answer, albeit it be granted that the common prayers, etc. at Corinth were
done in the known mother tongue; yet it follows not but that the Apostles
doctrine is general, of all Ecclesiastical offices to be done in the public
assemblies. Next, it is most like, that there were at Corinth some which had
the gift of tongues, which abused it to vain ostentation, even in the public
administration, and that is it which the Apostle taxes in that Chapter. And
thus far of the first Argument.

The second is of the same Apostle, in the same chap. v. 6. If I shall come
unto you speaking with tongues, that is, unknown Argument. 2.
tongues, what shall I profit you? Hence I conclude, the public worship of God
must be not in an unknown, but a known language. Bellarmine answers, that
he which administreth the public prayers in an unknown tongue, shall profit
others: for it is sufficient that God understand him: And this he goes about
to clear by a similitude: Like as (says he) if a man speak for a rustic or
rude man, ignorant in the Latin tongue, in Latin to the king, this shall
suffice if the king understand him, to confer any benefit by the king upon
the same ignorant person. I answer, what is this else but to say, that the
public administration does profit the people by virtue or merit of the work
done, albeit in the mean time the Opus operatum.
people be without faith and knowledge of the true God: but of this in place
appertaining.

The third Argument is of the same Apostle in the same chap. verse. 11. He that
speaks unto me in a strange 3. Arg.
tongue, shall be as a Barbarian: therefore the public administration of the
word and Sacraments, and of all Gods worship and service must be in the vulgar
and known tongue. Bellarmine answers, that he which speaks Hebrew,
Greek, or Latin, albeit he be not understood; yet is he not to be reputed as
a Barbarian, because these tongues be not barbarous: but if he speak in any
other language, he is to be accounted barbarous. I answer. If the speaker (who
speaks in these tongues) be not understood, he shall be to him that
understands him not, as barbarous. For so the very Poet avouches it of
himself, When, says he, he was in exile in Pontus, he complains, that
albeit he spoke Latin, yet he was accounted of those strangers as barbarous:

Barbarus hic ego sum, quia non intelligor vlli.

And when it was objected to Anacharsis the Philosopher at Athens, that he was
barbarous: he answered, The Athenians are Barbarous unto me.

The fourth Argument is of the same Apostle in the 4. Arg.
same chap. ver. 16. When thou blessest with the spirit, to wit, speaking in an
unknown tongue, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say
Amen, at thy thanksgiving; seeing he knows not what thou say? Whence it
follows necessarily, that all public prayers and service of God, must be
done in the known vulgar tongue. Bellarmine answers, that it suffices, if
some of the people understand and answer Amen: yea, it suffices, if he who^
they call the Clarke, say Amen for the people. I answer, this was not the
custom of that old ancient Church, which never knew what a Clearke meant.

My fifth Argument is of the same Apostle in the same 5. Arg.
chapter, verse. 40. Let all things in the Church be done decently, and in
order: But if ye Minister shall pray in an unknown tongue, and the people shall
conceive other prayers differing from the Ministers: then shall the Minister in
the public congregation have his prayers, and every one of the people his own
prayers also, and not the same with the Minister. What good decency can be in
this, when the people are so divided in prayer, which in the public assembly
should offer up with one mind, and with one mouth, one and the same prayer unto
God?

The sixth Argument is from a point which Bellarmine himself yields. He
grants that the public administration 6. Arg.
of prayers, etc. at Corinth, were done in the known Greek tongue: wherefore
then may not all other Churches in the like manner have their Leiturgie in the
vulgar known language? What can he answer here, but this happily, that the
public administration at Corinth was done in the mother tongue, not for that
it was the vulgar tongue, but because it was Greek: for Papists give the
Greek tongue (when they please) some prerogative.

The seventh Argument is from another point which 7. Arg.
Bellarmine grants. The Collations (as himself speaks) and the
exhortations ought to be done in the mother tongue: wherefore in like manner
may not the public administration of Gods worship be done in the mother tongue
best known to ye people? He answers, that the reason is not the same of the
collation and service; For (says he) the collations tend to the instruction
and consolation of the people: but the public service principally concerns
Gods worship. I answer, Does not all the people worship God in the public
administration or service of God, and therefore ought they not to worship God
in a known language, if they will worship their God in faith?

The 8. Argument is from the practice of the old and best Church. In elder
ages, so many translations were done principally to this end, to celebrate the
public service of God, and that herein the Scriptures might be read to every
man in his own known mother tongue. Lib. de origin Bohemorum.
AEneas Syluius writes, that to Cyril and Methodius it was permitted, that the
people of Morauia should have their common prayers in the mother tongue. And at
this day the people of Armenia, AEthiopia, Egypt, and the Muscouites have their
common prayers in their known tongue. Here Bellarmine answers, all these are
heretics. I say they be no more heretics then Papists. Assuredly as
touching public prayers, I had rather be in this heresy with them, then with
the Papists, as they think, to mean well. And thus for our judgment in this
matter.

The Adversaries say, that the public prayers may not be in a known tongue,
but in Hebrew or Greek, as in the East and Greek Churches; or in the Latin
tongue, as in the Latin and West Churches. The arguments they produce for this
purpose, be first from the prerogative of tongues: the first is this, Christ in
the title of his Cross, gave honor to these three languages, therefore
public prayers ought to be done in these. I answer, albeit we grant the
antecedent, the consequent will not follow: yea rather we may infer the
contrary. The Lord would have the cause of Christ's death to be manifested to
all people in those languages, which then were best known: which cannot be
denied of the Greek and Latin: therefore public prayers ought to be done in
the vulgar tongues, and known to the people.

The 2. Arg. These three tongues Hebrew, Greek and Latin are of greatest
excellency, antiquity and authority* therefore the common prayers and service
of God ought to be done only in these tongues. I answer. Grant the Antecedent
be true, yet the fequele is not good: for that very gift of tongues, which was
given the Apostles in the feast of Pentecost, plainly proves, that every
tongue, be it never so base, is sanctified of God for holy uses, and Note.
for the execution of public and ecclesiastical offices and service unto God.

The 3. Arg. The Scriptures was originally written in these three tongues:
therefore the public prayers ought to be done in these only. I answer, first,
the Antecedent is false: for neither the whole Scripture, nor any part thereof
was written first in the Latin tongue. For whereas they say, Saint Marks
Gospel was first written The Papists say Saint Marks Gospe^ was first written
in Latin.
in Latin, it is false: but of this point else where. Next, I answer, that it
will not follow of that Antecedent, that public prayers should be said in
unknown tongues; but rather the contrary follows: for that whereas the
Scripture was first written in these two tongues, Hebrew and Greek, for this
very cause, for that even then, and in those times, these two languages were
most common, and best known to the people: hence it follows rather, I say,
that the public prayers ought to be in the most common and best known
tongues.

Thus far we have heard of arguments drawn from the prerogative of tongues:
now follow arguments from the practice and use of the Church. The first here is
this: From Ezra until Christ the Scripture was wont to be read in the Church
of the Jews in the Hebrew tongue, that is, an unknow tongue: Ergo public
prayers may be said in an unknown tongue. I answer. I grant the Scriptures
were read in the Hebrew tongue: but I deny that this was an unknown tongue.
For Nehem. 8. it is very clear, that the sacred Scripture which Ezra read in
Hebrew, was understood by the people which were present and heard it. Whereupon
the contrary consequent must follow: The Scripture was read in the Church of
the Jews in elder ages in a known tongue: therefore it must be read at this day
in popular and known tongues.

The second Argument is from the practice of the Jewish Synagogue of these
times. To this day (says he) the Scripture is read in the synagogue of the
Jews in the Hebrew tongue: therefore public prayers must be celebrate in an
unknown tongue. I answer. The Argument follows not from the evil example of
the synagogue of the Jews; for that this reading of the old Testament in an
unknown tongue, is the cause wherefore so many of them hold back, and will
not be converted to the faith of Christ.

The third argument is from the practice of the primitive Church. In the
primitive Church the public prayers were said in one of these 3. tongues:
therefore the conclusion follows. I answer, the Antecedent is false, for that,
as has been before showed, in the time of the old Church, yea in the very
days of the Apostles, the Scriptures were translated in a manner into all
languages.

The fourth Argument is from the continual practice of the catholic Church:
for in it the public prayers were ever either in the Greek or Latin tongue.
I answer, if by catholic Church, they mean the Church of Rome, then I weigh
not the example and practice thereof: but if by this word they mean the true
catholic Church, then it is clear already by that which is before delivered,
that the Antecedent is false. And thus far of these Arguments taken from the
practice and use of the Church.

To the former Arguments, they add more from a final cause: The public
administration of Gods service and worship being performed of all or most
Churches in one tongue, to wit the Latin, this might serve well for the
preservation of the unity of faith. To this I answer, this serves notably for
the continuance and increase of unbelief and ignorance. Again, our very
experience teaches (by Gods good blessing in these times) that notwithstanding
the great variety of tongues in the reformed Churches, yet they agree well (to
God be praise) in the unity of faith.

Next, they reason from the little good which hence ensues, as they imagine:
It profits the people nothing at all that the Scriptures be read in the vulgar
tongues: for they understand not any sentence of Scripture, albeit they know
the words? To this I answer: Every one of the unlearned, if they come to hear
the Scriptures with Gods fear and reverence, they shall reap and receive some
profit by it.

Again, from another danger which may happen, they reason thus: The reading of
the Scriptures in a known tongue may more hurt then profit the people: for
devotion has rather decreased then increased, since public prayers or service
of God has been celebrated in popular tongues. I answer, the consequent is
not good: The sacred Scripture read in the mother tongue hurts many; therefore
it is not so to be read at all: because accidentally, and through the default
and corruption of the people, it hurts, and profits not. So the preaching of
the Gospel is the savor of death unto death unto many; therefore the Gospel
is not to be preached. Furthermore, be it known that this is no religion, nor
true piety, which is so coupled with ignorance, but a damnable superstition,
when as the sacred Scriptures are read, and prayers administered in a strange
and unknown tongue. Thus far these three Arguments from the final causes and
effects.

Again, they reason from an inconvenience, first, on this wise. If the
scriptures must be read in the vulgar tongue, then translations must be
renewed in every age: for ancient words wear out of use: and this is
inconvenient. I answer, what loss is it, if translations be reuised and
renewed in every age? for the whole translation needs no renewing, but some
words which happily are become obsolete and out of use.

Again, an other evil which might follow this conclusion is this. The Pope
understands not all vulgar tongues: But the public prayers must be
celebrate in a language which the Pope knows: Ergo. I answer, it is not
necessary that prayers be in that tongue which the Pope knows. This they
prove Vne concesso errore mill consequuntur.
because he is the universal Bishop: And this I deny also. Wherefore there is
no damage shall follow, if public prayers be contained in a language which the
Pope knows not. And thus far the 2. question.

The 3. question follows: whether it is lawful for the lay people, as they
call them, or the vulgar sort, to read the holy scriptures? We avouch that it
is lawful for every one, even of the basest of the people to read the holy
Scriptures. For this point see Deuteronomy. 6. Chap. and 11. c. and 17. c. Josh. 1. c.
and 10. c. 5. Search the Scriptures, says the Lord Christ. Acts. 17. the men
of Berea searched the Scriptures, and for this cause are commended by the holy
Ghost. Matthew. 4. The example of Christ (who resisted the Devil with no other
weapons, but of the scripture) teaches us that the scripture ministers unto
us such a furniture, as every man must be provided of to withstand Satan in
his assaults against us. Lastly, this is proved by the practice of the Church:
For wherefore were the scriptures in the old church translated into so many
popular languages, but that they might be read and understood of the people?
And this is our judgment in few words. What say the adversaries? Some years
past they taught it was not lawful at all for any of the common and lay people
(as they usually term them) to read the holy Scriptures. Afterward when
they saw how odious Vide Censuram Coloniensem.
this was, they changed their mind: and now forsooth they say, it is lawful to
read the scriptures, but with condition if it be permitted: permitted, I say:
of whom? They answer, by the Pope, his Bishops, or inquisitors. I demand:
what, of these only? They answer, not of these only, but of them with the
aduertiseme^t of the parish Priest or confessor. Well, I understand who be to
permit the reading of the holy scripture: now I ask, to whom is this
permitted? They answer, not to all indifferently, but only to such as the
parish Priest, whom they call the Curate, shall well discern, both by their
confession, and by their whole carriage of their life, to be a true Catholic,
that is, a stubborn or stiff-necked Papist. I see then to whom they yield
thus far the reading of the scriptures. I demand in the next place, what
translations be allowed them? They answer, they will not have them to read all
translations indifferently, but such only as some Catholics have published,
such as at this day, the English Rhemish translation of the New Testament is.

Thus far briefly of that permission, which has so decreed the condition of
this liberty of reading the scriptures. And this is their meaning according to
the decree of Pius Quartus the Pope, which decree is confirmed also by the
council of Trent, and commended by the Rhemists, in the preface of their
English translation. And this is Bellarmines judgment; who differs in words
only a little from the former popish assertion, but in matter and purpose is
the same in effect: for what difference is there, if there be no permission at
all, and to be thus permitted with such a condition, as is aforeshewed?

And thus of the 3. question, and as touching the controversies which are moved
at this day, concerning holy scripture, I remember not any that we have left
untouched. We have therefore spoken of the word of God, which is the word of
both covenants: as also of the sacred scripture, which is a certain mean,
whereby it pleased God to manifest his word and will unto men. It rests now
that wespeake of sin, and of man's misery.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of sin in general.
THE common place of sin, as also the former before handled, is subalterne to
the place or general head of our calling. For calling is the transferring of a
man out of the state of sin What our calling is.
and misery, into the state of righteousness and happiness. Therefore we
shall speak of sin first in general; after we shall come unto his kinds or
parts. The name of sin signifies a certain thing compounded of his own
matter and form. The matter of sin, to speak thereof in the first place, is
a certain being, or thing that is: and that being is not a substance, but an
accident; and What sin is.
that is either a quality or action: and this quality or action belongs not to
every creature, but only to the reasonable creature, Angel or Man: for God
gave his law unto these only. Of this being, which we say is the matter of
sin, God himself is the author and principal efficient: for it is he alone
that calls those things which are not, as if they were; and that creates all
things, both substances and accidents: But the creature neither is, nor is
called the principal efficient of any being. Therefore that being, which is
the matter of sin, seeing God is the principal efficient thereof,
necessarily in, and by it self, is good: for that whatsoever God creates or
makes, has an ingrafted form of goodness in it. Genesis 1. 31. When God (says
he) saw whatsoever he had made, behold it was very good. This form of
goodness is so natural and essential to Being, whether quality or action,
which God made, that there from it can never be separated. But now I grant
that this same Being has put on another form, to wit, (...). The cause of sin.
Lawlesnesse, the cause whereof is an evil instrument, as we shall show
hereafter: for this Lawlesnes is from another cause; neither does it destroy
that essential form of the goodness of being it self, which proceeds from
God the creator and maker thereof. For as for the being which God makes,
nothing can be put to it, or taken from it, that in it self it may be better
or worser. So much concerning the matter of sin.

Now as touching the form: The form of sin is called Lawlesnes, that is,
the want of conformity with the will and law of God. 1. Ioh. 3. Sin by his
form is thus The form of sin.
defined. Sin is the transgression of the law. This Lawlesnesse or
transgression, which we call the form and (...).
manner of sin, is not a being, or a thing positive, but a thing merely
privative, to wit, a privation, and want of conformity with the law of God.
This trangression happens through the cause and fault of an evil instrument,
which God uses in that being, or in doing his own work: and this instrument
is either the Devil, or an evil man and unbeliever. For when the Devil or an
evil man concurreth with God, to bring forth his work, he is not the
principal efficient of the being it self, or of the work done, but only an
isntrumental or ministerial cause; but the Devil or man is the principal
efficient cause of the transgression, or of the deformity or sin of that action.

And this transgression, the efficient whereof is an evil instrument, is evil
either for that the action it self, or Causes of sin.
work is contrary to the law of God: as when a man commits murder; the
action of murder is expressly Causes of sin.
condemned by the law; Thou shall not murder: or for that the fountain and
beginning of the action or work is against the law of God, although the action
in it self be conformable to the law: for as the law of God commands the
action or work it self, so has it regard of the fountain and beginning of
the action; commanding that the whole work which is commanded by the law,
proceed from a pure, holy, and believing heart of that instrument, which God
uses in doing his work. An example of this kind of transgression may be this:
When any man gives alms, which work indeed is commanded of God, and yet not
done of charity, it is rejected: see 1. Cor. 13. Or lastly, it falls out to
be a sin, for that the end, which the evil instrument in doing or working
together with God proposes to it self, is against the law of God. For as the
law of God commands the work it self, and the fountain and beginning of the
work; even so it commands the end, as the chief and principal, to wit, the
glory of God himself: Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all
to the glory of God, 1. Cor. 10. And in this respect a man sins, when he
does ought, not for God, nor for his glory; but for himself, his own profit,
and only for his own glory.

Here it is to be noted, that whosoever sins, as touching the fountain and
original of the action, the same man always sins touching the end; and so
contrarily. Wherefore these two last ways of transgression are always joined
together. Again, it is to be noted, that he who sins touching the original
and the end, does not always sin in the action it self: For the action or work
of any instrument, how evil soever in it self, may be good and The person must
please God, otherwise the work shall displease.
conformable to the law. Wherefore the first way of transgression, and the two
last are not always conioined. Now then this transgression (which we call the
manner and form of sin, coming, or put to that Being, the author whereof is
God, and which in it self is good, whether it be a quality or an action)
makes up that which we call sin, and which is so called of the form
thereof, and not of the matter, seeing all things have their denominations from
their forms.

These things thus declared, it shall be easy to gather some definition of
sin: That sin is a quality or action of a reasonable creature, lawless, or
contrary to the law of God. The general propriety of sin, or the
consequent thereof, is guiltiness; and guiltiness is that which meriteth or
deserves punishment: as therefore guiltiness follows after sin, so after
guilt follows punishment, both temporal and eternal.

Let this suffice concerning sin in general; which being known, it is easy
to answer those questions, which are wont to be made touching sin; and namely
to this Three questions concerning the causes of sin.
which they ask, If Sin be of God? or if God be the author of sin? Answ. In
sin there are two things; a Being and a transgression. God is the Author and
principal efficient of that Being; but of that transgression God is not the
author; but the evil instrument is. Again, it is asked, whether this
transgression be any way from God? Answ. It is from God, not effecting, but
permitting it: for he suffers it to be done by an evil imstrument. Thirdly, it
is demanded, if God permit sin, in as much as it is transgression of his law?
Answ. Not so, which even by this one reason may be showed: He permits it
unto his glory: and all the means of Gods glory, so far as they have such
respect, are good; and darkness it self, as it is permitted of God unto the
glory of his name, becomes light.

Again, if here it be asked: If therefore the transgression of Gods law, in so
far as a transgression, be not permitted of God, does it not of necessity
follow, that sin in respect, or as it is a transgression, is done against Deo
inuito, whether he will or no.
Gods will? Ans. It follows not: for that which is done against Gods will, is
said properly to be done against Gods decree, and not against his revealed will,
or express law: but sin, as it is a transgression of the law, is not done
against any decree: therefore sin, as it is a transgression of the law, is
not done against Gods will. The Assumption is showed, because God decreed not
from everlasting, that sin as it is a transgression of his law, should not be
done of an evil instrument. Therefore thou say, he decreed that it should
be done? Answer. It follows not. 1
For both these are true concerning God: God has neither decreed that
transgression, as it is transgression, 2
should not be done; neither has he decreed that transgression, in so far as
it is transgression, should be done. For there is no decree of God extant,
either in this or that respect touching sin, as it is a transgression, or
breach of the law of God.

But thou may ask, is not sin effected as it is transgression, some way by
the permission of God? Answ. A thing is said to be done two ways by Gods
permission; either by it self, or by accident. That, which by Gods permission
comes to pass by it self, must of necessity respect, and put on the nature
of good; seeing God proposes and directs the same unto a good end: but that,
which by an accident is done, God permitting it, or forsaking the creature,
nothing hinders, but that, as it is such, it is evil: for God leaving the
creature, and evil instrument to it self, the creature does that which is
evil, as it is evil: neither can it otherwise do, being left of him, who is the
Author of al good. But now, in respect of God permitting and leaving, that
evil, as it is evil, is done by accident, not by it self, because God in
forsaking, purposed not evil, as it is evil; but on the contrary, so far
forth as it respects good, and is a mean of his glory, of that especially
which is the consequent of his mercy: for all means, whether wrought by God
himself, or suffered to be done of evil instruments, in the first place are
both ordained of God himself, and directed to the glory of his mercy,
arising from the salvation of the creature: God has shut up all under sin,
that he might have mercy on all. And in the second place, for the hardness of
man, and because of the heart that cannot repent, sins and evils which are
done by an evil instrument, serve to that glory, which God gets unto
himself, by his justice and just punishments.

If on the contrary thou object: God suffers sin, that he may punish the
same: but he punishes sin, in Or, I would answer the mayor, That God
suffers not sin to punish it (for that he respects not) but for that be
has a purpose to manifest his own glory in the punishment of sin.
that it is sin, or transgression: therefore he permits sin, as it is
sin. I answer unto the Assumption: Sin, as punishment follows thereupon
(which in it self is good, and turns to the glory of God) in this, sin (I
say) has not respect unto evil, but unto good, producing a good effect; for
an evil cause, as it is evil, cannot bring forth a good effect: But if that
cause, which in it self is evil, be also considered as the cause of a good
effect, it must needs in some sort, take unto it the nature of good. I
confess indeed, that sin, as it is sin, is the cause of punishment: and
the punishment, as it is the effect of an evil cause, must needs it self be
evil. And indeed punish meant, Punishment in it self is evil.
which is inflicted, is considered two ways: first, as a thing in it self
evil: for there is some transgression How punishment is evil.
in every punishment, and every punishment after a sort, is also a sin.
Again, it is considered as a thing that is good, to wit, as a mean of Gods
glory. This I say in a word: that all means (which in, and by themselves are
evil) in respect of God propounding, and of the end, which is the glory of
God, in some sort are good. And that whole chain of means (which is between
God propounding, as the head and beginning, and the glory of God as the end)
is the order of things, which either by themselves are good, or at the least in
some sort, may be so accounted. For those two extremes change all darkness
after a sort into light.

CHAP. XXV. Of Original Sin.
THVS far of sin in general: the first division of sin is into original
and actual. To speak of original sin first, we be first to observe the
reason why it is so named. It is called Original sin why so called.
original, because it is in us and with us from our first being, conception,
and nativity: for it comes by propagation, and is derived from parents to
children, as an hereditary disease, as a leprie, the stone, or any such like
malady of the body.

And that there is such a kind of sin, it is most manifest: for there is none
so fottish, and so void of all sense, that he feels not this hereditarie
sickness in himself, as the infection and corruption of his nature. But the
holy Ghost, who best knows what is in man, does clearly avouch this in many
scriptures. Genesis 5. 3. When as Adam (says he) begat a son, according to his
own image. Note here the propagation of that corrupt image, which was in
Adam, into his son Sheth. Job. 14. 5. Who can bring forth a clean thing of
an unclean? not one. Behold here the propagation of uncleanness. Psalm. 51. 7.
Behold I was formed in iniquity, and in sin did my mother cherish Tremel.
fouit: kept me warm in her bed.
me. Behold the sin which we have from our mothers womb. Ioh. 3. 6. What is
borne of the flesh, is flesh: Behold the propagation of flesh, that is, of our
corrupt nature. Romans 5. 12. Like as by one man sin entered into the world, and
by sin death. etc. Observe here the propagation of sin. Ephesians. 2. 3. We were by
nature the children of wrath: Note here our corrupt nature, and therefore how
subject it is to the wrath of God. And thus far we see that there is a sin
which we call original.

Now let us consider what the subject thereof is. The subject of original
sin is the whole man, body and soul: which thing is taught us clearly by
that one name Soul infected with Orig. sin.
which is given it, To. 6. 6. as else where, that old man: whereby nothing else
is signified, but the whole man corrupted: or the corruption of the whole man.
That the mind is infected with this sin, first we be taught it by very sense
it self; next, by many testimonies of scriptures. Genes. 6. 5. When the Lord
saw all the imaginations, that is, all the thoughts of his heart, were only
evil continually. Genesis 8. 21. Albeit the imagination of man's heart be evil
from his youth. Ephesians. 2. 3. Fulfill the will of the flesh and of the mind.

And that the body is infected with this poison, see Romans 6. 12. Let not sin
reign in your mortal body. And that every The body and all the members
poisoned with original sin.
one of the members is infected and poisoned with the same sin, is showed v.
13. Neither give your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin.

Again the very names of this sin, show the subject thereof, or where it
rests: As when it is called flesh, concupiscence, the law of the members, the
body of sin, the body of death. And thus far of the subject of original
sin.

Now we be to come to the parts of it: and because it is as a compound thing,
we are to consider, first, The material cause of original sin, threefold.
what the matter thereof is: next, what the form. The matter of original sin
is threefold: The first part of the matter thereof, is that apostasy wherein
we fell all away from God in the loins of Adam: This we receive from our
mothers womb; for we are al born Apostates and backsliders from God. For that
the first apostasy was not Adams only, but did appertain to us al; first,
reason it self may sufciently convince it: for we were all as then in his
loins, and as parcelles of the substance and nature of the first man; and so
we all fell in him and with him from the living God. For this very cause Heb.
7. Leui is said before he was borne, to pay tithes to Melchisedeck because he
was then in the loins of Abraham. Abraham's fact was therefore Leui his fact
also, and of all his posterity, which then were in his loins. Next, this is
testified by scripture, as by name in that place which is Romans 5. 12. In whom
(to wit Adam) all men have sinned.

That first Apostasy, I grant, is past and vanished away, as every action
passes away: yet after a sort it is said to continue still, for albeit the
fact be past, yet the How the Apostasy of Adam continues still.
guilt thereof remains still: for every man is borne guilty by nature of that
first Apostasy. The same is to be said of every other sin; Murder,
Adultery, Theft, etc. For whatsoever it is, it may be truly said to remain
still, so long as the guilt remains, which is consequent thereunto. Wherefore
every man is guilty of that first defection and falling from God, until this
guilt be taken away by the blood of a mediator. And that we be such Apostates
by nature, the scripture testifies. Romans 5. 15. By the offense of one, many be
dead. Wherefore many must be guilty that one offense. To. 5. 16. The fault came
of one offense unto condemnation. And thus far of the first part of original
sin, that is, of the first backsliding and our falling away, which we bring
forth with us from our mothers womb into the world.

The second part follows of original sin: which is a certain defect, or a
certain want of original justice, Second part of Original sin.
that is, of that righteousness, or integrity wherein man was created, according
to the image and example of the righteousness which is in God the creator. For
he created man after his own image, wise, just, holy. For the Apostle to the
Ephesians. 5. and Col. says, that in these respects man was like to God himself in
his creation. This want, I speak of original justice, is the first effect of
that apostasy before showed. For that apostasy, whereof we are al by nature
guilty, depriueth us in our first birth, eue^ in our very conception, of that
original justice and image of God. This part of the matter of original sin
very sense shows, and many scriptures testify of it: I mean such as speak
of sin negatiuelie or priuatiuelie. For Proof of our want of original
justice by 1. sense. 2. by scripture.
all such places show plainly what defect is in us, and what want of
original justice. Romans 3. 23. All have sinned and are deprived of the glory of
God. To. 7; 18. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good
thing. And a little after. I find no means to perform that which is good.
Romans 8. 7. The wisdom of the flesh is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be. 1. Cor. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the
spirit of God, neither can he know the. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves. Ephesians. 4. 18.
Having their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God. And
thus far of the 2. part of the matter of original sin, to wit, the want of
original justice.

The third part follows: and this we say is an inclination The 3. part of the
matter of original sin.
or quality contrary to that original justice and integrity before mentioned,
succeeding even in place thereof. This is, that which they call our natural
corruption, and it is the second effect of the apostasy of Adam, in Paradise.
For that rebellion of our first parents, first depriueth us of original
justice and of the image of God: next, in place there of by Gods just
judgment, it infecteth us with a quality clean contrary to that
righteousness, whereby we are made prone and apt to al evil. This contratie
quality or inclination unto sin to be in us, very sense procues it, with many
testimonies of the holy Scripture: all which speak of sin affirmatively; or,
that I may so speak, positiuely. To. 7. 7. I had not known concupiscence, but
that the law says, thou shall not covet. Romans 7. 23. I see another law in my
members, rebelling against the law of my mind. Ephesians. 2. 3. Fulfilling the lusts
of the flesh and of the mind. Ad to these the places before cited, Genesis 6. and
8. And thus far of the third part of the matter of original sin.

And here as touching the want of justice, and inclination unto sin, which
were two parts of the matter of original sin, ye must be advertised: that
there is no faculty A special note.
of the soul of man, which is not infected with both these evils together. We
reckon as principal powers of the soul, the mind or understanding, the will
and the affections. These two last the scripture often understands them, in
the word, heart: because the will and affections be seated in the heart. The
first defect then is in the mind, and this is the want of light and knowledge:
here is also the want of holiness, that is, of a quality, wherewith our very
knowledge and light must be affected, and assuredly was affected with, in the
first creation.

The light of the mind or knowledge is twofold; natural A two fold light of
the mind. 1. Want of natural light.
and spiritual: In the mind there is a defect of light or of natural
knowledge, not in whole, but in part: for there do remain even in the
unregenerate, certain general notions of good and evil things, which are
commanded and condenmed in the law: but they be such as serve only to make men
inexcusable, for that they are but lame and corrupt. Romans 1. 19. The mind also
wants spiritual 2. Want of spiritual light.
light, not in part but in whole, for it is utterly void of this light: for as
concerning those things which appertain to the kingdom of heaven, the
understandings is so darkened, that it does not only not perceive them, but
also has no power to conceive them. 1. Cor. 2. 14. To be short, the mind
wants holiness; for the things it understands, 3. Want of holin^sse in the
mind.
it neither conceiueth them rightly and holily, but impiously and profanely
all things, even the things which in and by themselves are good: For the
faculty of understanding albeit it be not utterly lost, yet that holiness of
this faculty, wherein it was created after the image of God, was utterly lost
in the fall of man. This want of this natural light, the Apostle shows Romans
1. 21. Because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God. These latter
words plainly show that the natural light of the mind is but a dim light,
and soon vanishes away. The want of the spiritual light, the Apostle shows
1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God.
The want of sanctitiy in ye understanding, the Apostle shows Romans 8. 7. The
wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, even then when it understands
those things, which otherwise be in themselves true and good. 2. Cor. 3. 8. Not
that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing, to wit, well and
holily. Ephesians. 4. 18. Having their cogitation darkened, and being estranged from
the life of God. And there ver. 23. And be ye renewed in the spirit of your
mind. And thus far of the want or defect which is in the mind.

There is also a quality in the mind, which has succeeded or stepped in place
of that light and holiness, which was lost in the fall of man: For darkness
has taken possession in the very seat of light. Ephesi. 5. 8. Ye were in
times past darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord. In place of sanctity and
integrity have crept in impuritie and a certain malitiousnesse of nature,
which evidently appears, when it is said Romans 8. 5. For they that are after
the flesh, savor the things of the flesh: This wisdom is of some evil
quality. 1. Cor. 1. 18. The preaching of the cross is to them that perish,
foolishness. And 1. Cor. 2. 14. For they are foolishnes unto him. This word
foolishnes argues the perverse judgment of the mind.

Thus far of the want of the mind, and the contrary quality crept thereinto.
Both these in like manner are to be seen in the will and in every affection.
The want of integrity The will corrupted.
and vprightnes in the will, the Apostle testifies saying, I find no means to
perform that which is good, Romans 7. 18. and Phil. 2. 13. It is he which
works in you both the will and the deed. The corruption and frowardnes of the
will, and of the motions thereof, is testified by many scriptures. As Genesis 6.
5. 6. The conceit of a man's heart is only evil. Ephesians. 2. 3. Doing the will of
the flesh and of the mind.

Finally, this I say, that man's will is more poisoned by this original
corruption, then the mind is: for which Video meliora proboque, deteriora
sequor.
cause the very heathen could say: I see and approve (by the light of reason)
the better things, but (through the corruption of my will) I incline to the
worser. And this the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 18. Affirming that the ignorance
The will worse then the mind.
which is in men, is by reason of the hardness of their hearts. and Romans 1.
28. They regarded not to know God, therefore God delivered the^ unto a
reprobate mind. Note, how the obstinate will resists the light of the mind,
and causes the mind to be ouerclouded.

And thus far of the threefold matter of original sin. These parts of the
material cause of original sin, because they are so many Beings Entia.
, and are of God, every one of them must retain in them some goodness (as we
say) in respect of their being: for that very apostasy and falling away was
good in it self: as so the want of original justice, because it is athing in
nature, and a consequent of that Apostasy, this want (I say) as it is of God,
is good in it self: and to conclude, that positive quality, which succeeds
in place of that holiness and image of God, for the being thereof, is of God
as principal efficient, and is good in itself.

The form of original sin follows. And this is a The form of original
sin.
very special repugnance against the law of God, causing a very special kind
of sin. And like as the matteriall cause of original sin is threefold; so
there is in it a threefold (...).
repugnance against God and his law: For every part of the material cause has
a repugnance against the law in it, and so a form which is from another, in
respect whereof it is sin: The first Apostasy has in it a repugnance
against God; and so the want of original justice; and the positive quality
also, which succeeded in place thereof. This threefold iniquity Or breach of
Gods law.
, is not of God as efficient, but from the evil instruments, the devil first,
next Adam, and lastly, the very man, which is of Adams progeny: For we also
which are sick of this hereditarie evil, are the very causes of our sickness.
And thus far of the form of original sin.

Now we be to define original sin of the matter and form thereof, on this
wise: Original sin is an apostasy from God, a want of Original justice,
and a certain positive quality, repugning against the law of God. The
threefold Original sin defined.
material cause stands for the genus of it; and for the form the threefold
breach of Gods law. And like as guilt in general, is the consequent of sin in
general; so a special guilt Guilt following original sin.
is consequent to original sin: and this is threefold also, as the matter and
form of this sin is threefolde: For the apostasy has his special
guiltiness following it; so also the want of original justice; and that
positive quality. And every guiltiness merits death, and eternal damnation.

It rests now, that seeing we see this sin original is derived by
propagation from the parents to the children, that we search out the manner
thereof: and this may be expressed on this wise. The propagation of sin must
be, by one of these 3. ways: for it is derived either by the soul, or by the
body of the parents, or through their default. It cannot be said that the
propagation of this sin is by the soul, for the soul of the Father or Mother
is not derived by propagation to the children, in whole or in part, as is very
evident: wherefore this sin coms not by the soul of the parents.

But it may not unfitly be said, that there is some deriuation How sin is
derived from parents to their children.
of this sin by the body of the parents, to the body and soul of the child
begotten by them. This propagation of sin by the body of him which begets,
into the body of him which is begotten, is easily discerned: for the seed of
the parents, being in the child, is corrupted and infected with sin: whence it
follows necessarily, that the body which is begotten of such corrupt and
unclean seed, must also be corrupt and unclean in like manner.

The propagation of sin by the body of him which begets, into the soul of
him which is begotten, is more hardly expressed: yet I deliver what seems most
How sin infefecteth the very soul.
probable unto me, on this manner. After that by the body of him which
begets, sin is derived into the body of him which is begotten; now the
body begotten being corrupt, and infected with sin, this body, I say,
infecteth and poisoneth the soul, created even then of God, before, and
infused into it that very moment of time, wherein it was created. Here you
demand, whether the soul were pure and clean the time it was created, and so
Quest.
infused into the body: and then afterward so defiled by the contagion of the
body? I answer, it is not like to be so: for that the soul is created,
infused, and corrupted, in Ans.
the very self same moment of time. This corruption of the soul is, partly by
reason of the desertio^ of God, partly by reason of the contagion of the body
whereinto it is infused: for God the very same moment of time wherein he
creates and infuseth the soul, in his just judgment forsakes it, and gives it
over to the body to be so defiled with sin: wherefore this I avouch, that
the soul is created, infused, forsaken of God, and defiled by the body the
very same moment of time.

The manner of the propagation of this sin, which is said to be through the
default of the parents, follows; and this I express on this wise. Adam by
that his first offense, did derive, as by a certain conduit, whatsoever
corruption was in him to his posterity: for this cause the Apostle, Romans 5.
12. says, By one man (to wit, sinning) sin entered into the world.

Here it may be demanded, whence proceeds this efficacy or power of that
first sin, to engender, as it were, and to derive sin into all and every one
of Adams progeny. I answer, this efficacy of that sin, is by reason of that
word and covenant which God made with Adam in his creation, as it were in these
words: If man will stand and persist in that his innocence, which he had by
creation, he shall stand for his own good, and for his progeny: but if he do
not stand, but fall away, his fall shall turn The Covenant of God in the
creation.
as to his own damage, so to the hurt of his posterity: and whatsoever evil
shall be tide him, the same shall ensue to all his offspring after him. And
this last way of the propagation of original sin pleases me best, and ought
to content all sober wits, for that this is grounded on the authority and words
of the Apostle. And thus far our judgment concerning original sin.

Now let us briefly see what the old heretics, and late adversaries of Gods
truth say concerning this sin. First The opinion of the heretics concerning
original sin.
here we be to meet with the heresy of Pelagius the Monk, and Caelestius
his Disciple, which said, there was no original sin: that Adam by his fall
did hurt himself only, and not his posterity, excepting only by his example.
They said his posterity sinned, not by propagation of his sin, but by
imitation of their father Adams preuarication.

When it was objected against them, that young infants died; which could not
be, but that they are infected with original sin: They answered, that Adam
himself also had died by the law of nature, albeit he had not sinned. And this
was the Pelagians principal argument against The Pelagians argument against
original sin.
original sin. If sin be by propagation, then it must needs be derived to
the posterity by the soul, or by the body: but not by the soul, for that it
is not by traduction: and it is not by the body, because it is void of reason;
neither can sin be said to be first and properly seated in it: and not by
both united, because it is not by the parts: therefore there is no original
sin at all. The answer is easy of that which has been before set down in
this chap* touching the form or manner of the propagation of this sin.
First, their proposition Answer.
does not number all the forms and means of the propation of this sin: for
there is besides those means a deriuation of sin, which is through the
default of the parents. Next the Assumption is false, for albeit there be no
propagation of sin by the soul, yet it may well be by the body, as is
before showed. And thus far of Pelagius and Caelestius heresy.

Next, the Schoolmen had diverse opinions of original Schoolemens opinion of
original sin.
sin: for some said, that original sin consisted only in the guilt of
Adams apostasy: others said, it was but the want of original justice. But Peter
Lombard rejecting these opinions, avouches it to be also a positive evil
quality, contrary to that first original justice. Albertus Pigghius, and
Ambrosius Catharinus said, that it was nothing else but that first transgression
of Adam. And out of this conclusion, they drew forth three other opinions: the
first was this: Original sin is one and the self same only Three gross
opinions of papists concerning original sin.
in all men: 2. This sin in Adam was real and actually his; but it is ours
only by imputation: the third, that infants in verity, have nothing in them
that has any appearance of sin: for they said, that guiltiness, want of
justice, and the spots of nature, and such like things, seem rather to be
punishments then faults, if ye speak not happily improperly, as when ye apply
the name of the cause to the effect.

Bellarmine following all these, first blames Lombards conclusion concerning
his positive quality; and next, Bellarm. object* against Lumbard Answer.
condemns Pigghius assertion as heretical. One of his principal arguments
against Lombard is this. God is either the cause of that positive quality, or
not the cause: if the cause, then is he the cause of sin: if he be not the
cause of it, then is he not the author of all things. Therefore there is no
such positive quality at all. We answer to the Assumption: in that evil
positive quality two things must be respected. First, the quality it self, or
the being of it; next, the euilnesse, or irregularity, or deformity thereof: God
is the the author and principal efficient of the first: but the devil and
the evil instrument is the author and cause of the second.

This done, at last the Jesuit sets down his own judgment, auouching that
original sin consists in two things: Bellarm judgment of original sin.
first, in the first transgression of Adam, not as he was a certain private
person, but as being then the person of all mankind: next, he says, it is also
a want of that gift of original justice. And thus far he speaks well,
affirming that there are two parts of original sin: but herein he erreth, for
that he omitteth that evil positive quality before mentioned. And thus far of
the judgment of the Adversaries concerning original sin.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Concupiscence.
But because there is some controversy touching concupiscence, which is the
third part of original sin; therefore we be to speak something of it apart.
The word Concupiscence, does first and properly signify that coveting, or
lusting, which is said to be in the baser faculty of the soul, to wit, in the
sensible and the natural power thereof: and tropically it signifies our
natural corruption, and that evil positive quality, which rests not only
in the concupiscible faculty of the soul, but in all the powers thereof also,
eue^ in reason it self. For the word Concupiscence in Scripture is as general
as the old man, or the flesh: for Paul uses these words indifferently for one
and the same matter, the old man, the flesh, concupiscence, and the law of the
members, to wit, for the third part of original sin, which is that evil
positive quality. And that concupiscence is properly and truly a sin,
appears plainly out of the Epistle to the Romans, chapter 7. 7. I had not known
lust, except the law had said, thou shall not lust. And this briefly is our
judgment touching Concupiscence.

Pelagius reckons Concupiscence in the number of the good things, or benefits
of nature: for he denies original sin. Our adversaries the Papists, by
Concupiscence understand nothing else, but that concupiscible faculty of the
soul, which is in it self good, or atleast indifferent, but evil
accidentally, and in some respect: to wit, for that now the bridle or original
justice is let loose, whereby Concupiscence ought to have been curbed: so then
this curb being lost, it inclines (say they) to sin. This is the judgment of
the Council of Trent, The judgment of the papists concerning concupiscence.
concerning Concupiscence, that it may not be said truly and properly that it
is a sin, but that it is so called, because it proceeds from sin, and inclines
to sin. But that Concupiscence is sin, is more manifest by Paul's doctrine,
then that it needs any proof at all: and that it is a sin not only in the
unregenerate, but also in the regenerate. And thus far of Concupiscence, and
of original sin.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Actual sin.
Actual sin is the fruit, and effect, and the punishment also of original
sin. The first and principal division of actual sin, is into Actual sin.
internal and external. The internal I call the sins of soul, and of the
faculties thereof. Internal sin is partly of omission, partly of commission.
A sin of omission, in the mind, is the want of a holy and good motion: and
the root of this is the want of original justice. And like as that defect of
original justice is in all the powers of the soul; so this internal Sin of
omission what.
sin of omission, is of all the powers of the soul. Of the sin of omission
the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 2. 14. when he says, that the natural man
cannot conceive the things of the Spirit of God. Lo here the want of a holy
motion in man's nature: the fundamental cause whereof he adds in the next
words, saying, neither can he perciue them: In which words ye have the want of
that power and faculty, whence a holy motion does spring.

The internal sin of commission follows: and this is a perverse and evil
motion of the mind. And this proceeds from the third part of original sin,
to wit, that A sin of commission.
evil positive quality, or natural corruption. And like as yt positive
quality is of all the faculties of the mind, so that internal sin of
commission is of all the powers of the soul in like manner. Of this sin the
Scripture speaks every where. Romans 7. 5. When we were in the flesh, the or
affections.
motions of sins which were by the law, had force in our members, to bring
forth fruit unto death. Where three things are to Three things, Romans 7. 5.
be observed: first, the flesh, which is original sin: Secondly, Affections or
motions, whereby understand the internal sin of commission: Thirdly, the
fruit of those motions (...).
or affections: whereby he means every external actual sin. Again, ye
have the same three things knit together, Ephe. 2. 3. Fulfilling the will of
the flesh, and of the mind. 1. the flesh, that is, original sin. 2. Next, the
thought or lust of the flesh, which is the internal commission of sin. 3. To
fulfill the same, and this is external sin. The same things ye have Iam. 1.
15. When concupiscence has conceived, it brings forth sin. Concupiscence
is original sin: conception is actual internal sin: the birth thereof is
an external sin. And thus far of actual internal sin.

The external actual sin follows, which is a sin of the body, and of
the members thereof: and this sin External actual sin.
also is partly of omission, partly of commission. The external sin of
omission is, when things to be done are omitted: and this proceeds from the
internal sin of omission: And here also, like as the internal sin of
omission is of all faculties of the mind, so the external sin of omission is
of all the members of the body. Of this sin the Apostle speaks Roman. 7. 9. I
do not the good which I would do. The external sin of commission follows.
This is when that is done, which ought not to be done: External sin of
commission.
and it proceeds from the internal sin of commission: This is also of all
the parts of the body, like as the internal sin of commission is of all the
powers of the soul. The testimonies of Scriptures before cited, prove this,
Romans 7. 19. The evil which I would not, that do I.

The external sin of commission is twofold, partly of error and ignorance,
partly of knowledge. It is of ignorance, when a man ignorantly commits any
thing: This was Paul's sin, 1. Tim. 1. 13. For I did it ignorantly through
unbelief. This ignorance is either of the law, or of the fact. The ignorance
of the law, is to be ignorant of Gods will: Of this Sin speaks Christ Luke
12. 48. He that has not known his masters will, and has done things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. This was also Paul's ignorance, when
he blasphemed and persecuted the Church of Christ, 1. Tim. 1. The ignorance of
the fact, is when a man knows not what he does: And a man may be said not to
know what he does, or to err in the Sin of ignorance.
fact, either when he does a thing negligently, or when a thing is done by him
(as we say) by fortune or chance, or rather by the inevitable providence of
God. An example of sin of negligence may be this, as when a ship is lost by
the negligence of the Governor or master thereof, An example of a sin by
fortune, or Gods providence, may be, as when one casting a stone, kills a man
passing by, of whom he never thought: for this sin in the old Church, the
cities of refuge were appointed, Numb. 35. 23. Thus far of the external sin
of commission, which proceeds of error or ignorance.

The external sin of commission follows, which is committed in knowledge,
or as we say, wittingly: and this is when a man knows that he does evil:
hereof speaks Christ, Luke 12. 47. That servant who knows his masters will,
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

This sin is either of infirmity, or of contumacie. An example Actual external
sin committed willingly.
of a sin of infirmity is in Peter, who three times denied his Lord and
master for fear of death and persecution. An example of a sin of contumacie
we have in Judas the traitor. Again, a sin of contumacie is either done in
hypocrisy, as when a man is not openly rebellious, but hides his sin under
the cloak of hypocrisy: this the Apostle taxes Romans 2. 5. Thou (says he)
after thy hardness, and heart that cannot repent, do treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath. Again, it is an open rebellion or pride; when a man
ioynes to his contumacy, pride against God himself: for which cause he is said
to sin with an high hand, Numb. 15. 30. This manifest rebellion and Heresy.
pride, is either against the second Table of the law, as open murder, known
adultery; and this is the lesser contumacie: but if it be a proud rebellion
against the first Table, the sin is intolerable: And of this latter kind is
Open rebellion.
heresy first, when as a man in a proud obstinacy, will defend any opinion
against the manifest truth of Gods word.

Of all the sins before specified, this is one property, that a man may
repent of them, or for them all: whereupon follows another property, that they
are all pardonable. But if ye add to knowledge, pride, frowardness, a
malicious heart, striving against the holy Ghost inlightening a man, and
teaching inwardly: then the great sin arises, which they call the sin
against the holy Sin against the holy Ghost.
Ghost: the property whereof is this, that he which so sins, cannot repent
him of his sin: whereupon it follows that this sin is impardonable. And
this sin is called irremissible, not for that the greatness of it exceeds the
greatness of Gods mercy and grace in Christ; but Wherefore impardonable.
because final impenitence is the reward and punishment, which by Gods just
judgment is inflicted upon this sin. Read of this point Matt. 12. 21. Heb. 6.
4. 5. and chap. 10. 26. 1. Ioh. 5. 16. And thus far of actual sin.

Now it remains to see what the adversaries say of actual sin. Here the
greatest controversy is of the division of actual sin into mortal and
venial. We avouch that every sin by nature is mortal, that is, that the guilt
Sin mortal and venial, a popish doctrine.
of eternal death follows it: And that if any sin be venial, that is, may
find pardon of God, this comes to pass, not for that it is so by nature, but
of Gods mere mercy in Jesus Christ. Many scriptures approve our assertion.
To. 6. 23. The wages of sin is death. He speaks here of sin in general, and
of eternal death. Matthew. 5. 19. Who soever shall break one of the least of
these commandments, and shall teach men so, heshall be called the least in the
kingdom of God, that is, he shall have be of reckoning in heaven. Observe then
here, how for the least sin a man deserves to be shut forth out of heaven.
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Cursed be he that abides not in all things which are written in
the book of the law: Therefore there is no sin which deserves not the curse
or malediction of God. For in that the law denounces an execration against
every sin, there is no exception we see of any, even the least sin. I am. 2.
10. Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet fails in one point, he is
guilty of all. Therefore if ye rest in any one sin against the law, ye sin
against the whole law, and stand guilty of all sins, which are committed any
way against the law: So there is no cause why we should measure our guilt by
any one sin, even the very least. For even the very least sin we live
and lie in (without faith and repentance) The least sin merits hell.
caries with it the guilt even of the greatest sins, as may clearly appear
by that place of James. Matthew. 5. 26. Thou shall not depart thence till thou
have paid the utmost farthing: Therefore God in his accounts respects even
the least parts of sin, and the smallest sins that are. The tenth law
condemns even the least motions of concupiscence. Matthew. 22. 37. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind: Therefore the law requires an exact or perfect obedience. Wherefore
he that offends even in the least point, is a transgressor of the law: and
that everlasting curse follows the breach of the law, if redemption be not
purchased by Jesus Christ. Matt. 5. 18. Till heaven and earth perish, one jot,
or one tittle of the law shall not escape, till all things be fulfilled. Note
here, there shall not pass away one jot, or one tittle, that is, the least
branch of the breach of the law, which shall escape without satisfaction either
by our selves, or a mediator. And thus far touching our judgment of this matter.

The adversaries for actual sin, respecting it either according to the
greatness thereof, or for the punishment it deserves, they divide it into
mortal and venial. They call that mortal sin which does extinguish charity,
Mortal sin defined of Papists.
or justice, making us enemies unto God, and therefore guilty of eternal
death. They call that venial sin, which does not quench charity and
justice, nor does not cause an enmity betwixt us and God: but does a little
stain justice, which they place in charity, and they say it A popish venial
sin.
spots it a little: wherefore this sin (say they) is soon pardoned, and
expiate with a light punishment: as in this life, with the repetition of the
Lords prayer, the smiting of the breast, satisfaction or penance imposed by the
priest or which men do of themselves voluntarily undergo. After this life all
venial sins be expiat in purgatory, if they be not pardoned in this life, by
the means before expressed.

They say, venial sin is twofold: the first venial sin is so called,
because it is so by nature, and for the substance Venial sin 2.
of it, as an idle word, or immoderate laughter. The next venial sin, they
say, is that, which is not so by nature, but for some imperfection, for that
sin by nature is mortal: but because it is imperfect for the measure or
quantity of the evil, therefore it is venial. This imperfection, say they, is
twofold: for this imperfection is either by reason of the will, as when there
is not a full consent of the will unto a secret motion of concupiscense: In
this kind of venial sin they reckon all evil secret motions, which stir in
the affection, before the mind can think of them, and which get not any full
consent of the will, as the motions of lust, of anger, of envy, etc. Oragaine,
there is an imperfection in respect of the matter of the sin, to wit, when
the matter is so small and light, that it makes the sin venial, as for
example; if a man steal a halfpenny, or some such trifle, whereby the neighbor
is little or nothing touched, and charity is not violate.

And they go about to prove their opinion concerning venial sin by diverse
kinds of arguments. First by testimonies of the scripture, and of the Church:
next by reasons of their own: in refutation of which arguments my Popish
arguments for venial sin.
meaning is not to insist. For venial sin they cite Mat. 12. 32. Whosoever
shall speak against the holy Ghost* it shall not be forgiven him, neither in
this world nor in the world to come: Therefore say they, there is a kind of
sin which shall be pardoned after this life: and the same is venial sin, which
is purged with the fire of purgatory. But let Mark. chap. 3 29. be the
interpreter of this phrase which Matthew has in this place. Whosoever (says
he) shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost, shall never have forgiveness, but is
culpable or guilty of eternal damnation. Therefore where Matthew says, neither
is this life nor in the life to come, it is the same, as if he said: It shall
never be forgiven him.

They bring also the place which is. Mat. 5. 22. Whosoever is angry with his
brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of judgment; and whosoever says unto his
brother Raca, shall be worthy to be punished by the Council: and whosoever shall
say fool, shall be worthy to be punished with hell fire. There are here 3. kinds
of sins, say they, of which he adiudgeth one kind only worthy of hell fire:
wherefore the two former are to be expiat with some light punishment, and
therefore be venial sins. I answer, this place teaches us that there is an
inequality, first of sins, next of punishments; and those also spiritual and
infernal, which Christ expresses here by an allusion to civil and politic
penalties which were unequal.

They reason also on this wise: No man (say they) will deny that one sin is
lesser then another by nature: Therefore Popish reasons for venial sin.
is not the lesser sin venial by nature? I answer, it follows not, for
that the least sin by nature meriteth eternal death, and eternal
punishment, albeit not the greatest punishment. For we deuie not the
inequality of the pains of the damned.

Next say they, is not one sin less then another in quantity? And therefore is
it not venial in respect of the imperfection thereof? I answer; it follows
not, for every sin howsoever imperfect, meriteth eternal death: or if it be
venial, it is not for the imperfection of it; but for Christ's sake, and his
satisfaction for it.

Thirdly, they say, is not that sin venial which does not destroy or overthrow
justice, charity, or inherent grace? But there are some sins which do not
overthrow or extinguish justice: Ergo, there be some venial sins. The
assumption is proved. The just man falls 7. times in the day and rises again:
Behold here one sins, and yet cease not to be just. I answer: The
proposition is false: for that very sin which does not extinguish the grace
of Christ, and inherent holiness, that very sin by it own nature is mortal:
And in that it is pardonable, and does not abolish holiness, that is not to be
imputed to the sin it self, but to the free mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XXVIII. The controversy concerning the sin against the holy Ghost.
THE adversaries say, there be 6. kinds of this sin: The first sin is
presumption, when a The Papists say, there be six kinds of the sin against
the holy Ghost.
man presumes overmuch of the grace of God and of faith, in the mean while
denying his faith by his works: This is the man whom James taxes in his
Epistle, Chap. 2. verse. 14. and after. Thesecond is desperation, contrary to
presumption: this was Cain and Judas sin. The third is to impugn the known
truth: hereto belongs the blasphemy against the holy 3
Ghost; this was the sin of the Pharasies, Matthew. 12. The fourth is to envy
or to repine at the graces of God in our 4
brethren: this was the sin of the Jews, which did repine and grieve at the
grace of God given the Gentiles. The fifth is obstinacy, when as a man shall
persist in a known sin with an obstinate mind. This was Pharaohs sin, and 6
the obstinate Jews. The sixth is final impenitency, when as any shall die in
contempt of the sacrament of penance, and of any satisfaction imposed upon him
by Ecclesiastical order. Of this they understand that place, 1. Ioh. 5. 16.
There is a sin unto death, I do not say, that ye should pray for him. They say,
a man sins against the holy Ghost al these ways, and that all these sins be
inexpiable: and that these sins are called irremissible, because they be
seldom and hardly forgiven; as men seldom and hardly repent them of these
sins. But the last which is final impenitency, they think that only is
properly said to be impardonable, because it is neither forgiven in this life,
nor after this life. And this is their judgment of the sin against the holy
Ghost.

But we avouch that the scripture does teach us, there is but one sin only
against the holy Ghost, Matthew, 12. 32. Mark. 3. 29. Luke. 12. 10. called the
blasphemy against the holy Ghost. Ye have a description of this sin, Heb. 6.
4. and 10. 26. 27. the Apostle calling it an apostasy or backslyding from God.
It is so also described, 2. Pet. 2. 20. And 1. Io 5. 16. It is called a sin
unto death. As for the other kinds of this sin before specified, some of them
are consequently of this sin, which we call a blasphemy, and appertain unto
it: for desperation and final impenitency are the punishments of this sin:
Obstinacy is in the very nature of this sin, for it caries with it an
obstinate maliciousness. And as for the other kinds I cannot see how they may
be called sins against the holy Ghost: for as for presumption, what is it else
but hypocrisy? To Presumption.
repine at the graces of God in our brethren, is a sin against our neighbor,
and against the second table of the law. Therefore let this rest, that there is
but one sin against the holy Ghost, so called, to wit, the blasphemy against
the holy Ghost, or an apostasy from the grace of the spirit once received: for
these are one and the same, to blaspheme against the holy Ghost, and to fall
from grace received. Notwithstanding I deny not, but that this sin, which is
but one in substance may have his increase or growth: for then it is come to a
height, when as it fights against all the known truth which is according to
godliness. Next we say, that this one sin is impardonable, not for that it
is seldom and hardly pardoned; but for that it is never pardoned, because such
a one can never repent him of his sin, that he has committed. For this man's
heart grows to such a hardness (and that by Gods just judgment) as can never
after be mollified.

And that this sin is simply impardonable, is manifest by ye very words of the
lord in ye gospel, before cited: for where it is said in Matthew. it shall not be
forgiven him neither in this world, nor in the world to come: and in Mark* This
sin is never forgiven, but is culpable of eternal damnation: Do not these
words cut off all hope of pardon? So as I cannot but wonder at the Rhemists, so
impudently to extenuate Rhemists impudency. (...).
the force of the words of the lord. To the Heb. 6. he says, it is impossible
that he which so sins should be renewed by repentance: then he adds a
weighty cause and most necessary, for (says he) This man crucifieth again to
himself the Son of God, that is, as much as in him lies.

Which point, the better to conceive it, we must know there is a difference
between all other sins, and this sin against the holy Ghost, as touching the
remission and expiation of them. For to expiat all other sins, the sacrifice
of Christ once offered, is sufficient for them all, and the virtue thereof
extends it self to purge all sins for ever. But when a man has once
sinned against the holy Ghost, and profaned that precious blood, the virtue
thereof will never after be effectual for the expiation of his sin. Wherefore
he stands in need of some new sacrifice to purge his sin; which thing shall
never be granted him: For if this were granted, then must Christ be crucified
again, or some other sacrifice must be offered: but neither can Christ be
crucified again, neither can any other sacrifice be offered for him, as it is
written Heb. 10. 26. For there remains no more sacrifice for sins.
Therefore this sin can never be expiat, because a new sacrifice can never be
given for it: And this is the cause of the impossibility of the pardon of this
sin.

The adversaries, namely, the Rhemists in their observations on this place, do
thus interpret this impossibility: they say, there is a double repentance, or
renewing, or purging of sin: They say, the first is easy and light, in and by
Baptism: where (say they) all the sins before Baptism, are purged by that
light washing of baptism. The second they call penance, or the purging of
sins, Popish sacrament of penanc.
as they say, by the sacrament of Penance: and in this Sacrament (as they
speak) such sins are purged which are committed after baptism; and this is
hard and painful, as consisting of fastings, prayers, satisfactions, and other
corporal afflictions. If you grant them this distinction, then they say, this
impossibility of being renewed, is in respect of that repentance, renewing,
and purging of sin which is in baptism: For (they say) it is impossible that
a sin committed after Baptism, some baptism being iterated, should be
purged: for we may not be rebaptized. As for the latter, penance and renewing,
they say, there is a possibility in it: For the greatest sin after baptism
may be expiat by it. Therefore they affirm, the Apostle speaks covertly to
such as sin after baptism, sending them to the Sacrament of Penance, that by
virtue of that Sacrament their sin may be expiat, and that they may be
renewed: But by this their interpretation 2. Pet. 3. 16
they pervert the holy Scripture to their own destruction. For this is
certain, that the Apostle here takes away all possibility of being renewed,
as the reason annexed manifestly proves.

Finally, it is evident by that place of John before cited, that this sin is
impardonable, and that this is proper to that sin, that it can by no means be
pardoned. For John says, we may not pray for that sin: If we may not pray
for it, there is no hope of repentance, or pardon for it. I know what the
Rhemists here would say, to wit, that by this sin unto death we must
understand final impenitencie: final impenitencie is not remitted, because
here wants repentance, and therefore we may not pray for such a one after his
death: for he died in impenitency, contemning the Sacrament of Penance. But
they affirm it to be lawful to pray for other sins after death.

This again is to pervert Scripture, for the Apostle speaks not of prayer to
be or not to be after his death which has so sinned, but that prayer must not
be conceived for him whilst he lives, after that it has manifestly appeared
unto the church by infallible arguments, that such a one has sinned unto
death. As for Julian the Apostata, for whom the Church prayed not while he
lived, yea it prayed against him, in his life time, after it was clearly
discerned, that he had sinned unto death, that is, had blasphemed against the
holy Ghost. I pass over that place of Peter before cited, where the Apostle
speaks of no difficulty, but of a mere impossibility of being renewed, of
repentance, and of remission of sins, where it is said, Their latter state is
worse then the first: and as it follows, but it has happened unto him (as it
is in the true proverb) the dog has returned to his own vomit, and the sow
to her wallowing in the mire. And thus far of this second controversy, and
so much shall suffice concerning sin.

CHAP. XXIX. Of justifying Faith.
Our effectual calling is effected, first by ye Law, then by the Gospel. The
whole doctrine of the Law may be reduced to this or form of reason.
syllogism: Cursed is he that continues not in all things which are written
in the book of this law, to do them: But I have not continued in them:
Therefore I am accursed. The proposition of this reason is the voice of the
Law: and that commination which is added to the covenant of works: which is
thus conceived, Do this, and thou shall live: but if thou do it not, thou shall
die. THe assumption of this reason, is the act of every ones conscience that
applies to it self the transgression of the law. The conclusion likewise is
the act of each ones conscience, applying to it self the just punishment and
curse of God for sin. This form of reasoning belongs not so much to the
calling it self, as to our preparation to that Our preparation to our
effectual calling.
effectual calling, which is properly effected by the doctrine of the Gospel.
For by the doctrine of the Law, which is comprehended in this argument, we are
amazed, and affected with the feeling of our misery, which feeling is the
first degree unto salvation,

Now the doctrine of the Gospel may be comprehended in this form: Whosoever
believes, shall be justified and live: But I believe: therefore I shall be
justified; An Evangelical syllogism.
and live. The proposition is the voice of the Gospel, or of God himself
calling. For therein is contained the first part of an effectual calling,
which is nothing else but a proclaiming of the free covenant, the form whereof
is contained in this proposition. The Assumption is not indeed the act of the
natural conscience, but of every ones supernatural says applying to
himself Christ Jesus the Mediator of the covenant, and him first crucified,
and next glorified. The Conclusion also is the act of faith, applying to every
one the benefits of Christ, his righteousness and salvation by him. This
reason does properly belong to Calling: and the Proposition of it is the first
part of calling: and the Assumption and conclusion is the second part. And
seeing the assumption and conclusion are the acts of our faith, whereby we do
as it were make answer unto God that calls; surely we shall not without cause
say, that the second part of effectual calling is nothing else but faith:
Wherefore the common place of Faith must be comprised under this of our
effectual calling.

It follows therefore that we speak of Faith, yea of that faith which is
properly and simply so called; that is, of faith which they call justifying
faith. For as touching the other kinds of faith, which are commonly numbered, as
a Justifying faith.
dead faith, etc. they are so termed, not simply, but in some respect, and with
an addition, dead faith, temporary faith, etc.

Now in the declaration of faith, the first thing that offers it self to be
considered, is the object thereof. The The object of faith.
object is generally whatsoever is contained in the word of God, that is, the
whole truth of God. But specially and properly, the object of it, is Jesus
Christ with all his benefits.

There is a twofold consideration of Christ and his benefits: for first Christ
with his benefits is considered as he is offered in the word and Sacraments:
that is, as he is offered unto us, as in a looking glass; and yet not so much
Christ himself, as a certain image or picture of him. Of this looking glass
of the word and Sacraments ye read, 1. Cor. 13. 12. We see now as it were in a
glass, and by a dark speaking. And 2. Cor. 3. 18. But we with open face
beholding the glory of the Lord as in a glass, are transformed into the same
image from glory to glory. Now Christ so considered, The glass wherein we
may find and see the face of Christ.
is nothing else but Christ preached in the word, and represented in the
Sacraments. We (says he) preach Christ crucified, 1. Cor. 1. 23. For the
Gospel preached does set Christ in a manner before our eyes. Gal. 3. 1. To
whom Jesus Christ was before pictured before your eyes, and among you crucified.

Next, we be to consider Christ without this glass of the word and Sacraments,
as he is in himself. Of Christ so considered the Apostle speaks 1. Cor. 13.
12. But then we shall see him face to face. And 1. Ioh. 3. 2. But we know that
it shall come to pass, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him,
because we shall see him as he is. As there is a twofold consideration of
Christ, so the knowledge and apprehension of him is twofold. The first is
called Faith, the A twofold know ledge or apprehension of faith.
latter Sight. Of both these ye read 2. Cor. 5. 7. For we walk by faith, not
by sight. These two ways of knowing and apprehending, do agree one with
another in nature and essence: for both of them are the knowledge and
apprehension of Christ: but they differ in quantity, and as they use to speak,
more or less: for the knowledge of faith is the lesser, as also is the
apprehension: whereupon 1. Cor. 13. 9. it is said, that we know in part. But
the knowledge and apprehension by Sight is the greater; and so perfect
knowledge and apprehension: and this shall have place in the next world. Of
this perfect knowledge is spoken in the same chap. verse. 10. But after that
which is perfect is come. And verse. 12. Then shall I know even as I shall be
taught.

These things thus laid down and known, it is easily perceived, what the
special and first object of faith is: namely, Jesus Christ with all his
benefits, and even so, as he offers himself in the word and Sacraments. Or
the object of faith is the word it self, or the promises which are made of
Christ, which is all one. Hence it follows, The necessity of the word
preached.
that whenever the preaching of the word, and admistration of the Sacraments
shalcease, this faith also whereby we now walk, must also cease. See 1. Cor.
13. Then shall that which is in part be done away.

To conclude, it is to be noted of this object of faith, that it is special,
that is, offered to me, to thee, and to every man specially and distinctly.
For albeit the words be generally conceived; yet they are specially to be
taken, as spoken to me, to thee: or of me, and of thee. Thus much touching the
object of faith.

Now we are to speak of the subject thereof; namely, wherein it is, and from
which it proceeds. The subject of faith is the soul of man; and in the soul
of man the The subject of faith.
reasonable and principal faculties: those I term, first the mind; then the
will. For as touching the other inferior faculties and affections of the soul,
faith is not so much said to be resident in them, as to sanctify them, and to
stir them up unto good, and as a Lady, to govern them. Whereupon it is said,
After that by faith he had purified their hearts. Now that faith belongs to the
mind, it is apparent by those titles which are given to faith every where in
the Scripture, as when it is called knowledge, understanding, sight: as when it
is said, We see now in a glass. And that it is in the will, it is evident by
that which is said To. 10. 10. For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness. And Ephesians. 3. 17. that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith:
for the seat of the will is attributed to the heart. Furthermore, the names
whereby faith is termed in the Scripture, do sufficiently convince, that the
seat of it is not only in the mind, but also in the will and heart: as when it
is called an apprehension, and when it is termed a certain embracing, and such
like names, which signify the office of the heart and will. Thus far of the
subject of faith.

Now let us come nearer to the nature thereof, and to the parts of the nature
of it. The first part of faith, is the knowledge or understanding of the mind,
whereby the mind does plainly understand some sentence or proposition of the
Gospel, and by name that proposition which is in the syllogism of the
Gospel, which we alleged before: for the proposition of that syllogism is as
it were an abridgment of the whole Gospel. From this part, as the principal,
namely knowledge, faith is named every where in the Scriptures.

The second part of faith, is the judgment, or as it is commonly called, the
assent of the same mind. Of this judgment the scripture speaks every where,
as 1. Cor. Parts of faith.
2. 15. The spiritual man judges all things. 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Try the spirits
whether they be of God. This judgment is twofold, the first, of truth; the
second, of goodness. The judgment Judgment twofold.
of truth, is when the mind assenteth to the proposition of the Gospel, that
it is true: of this judgment see Ioh. 3. 33. He that receives his testimony,
has sealed that God is true. 1. Tim. 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and
worthy by all means to be received, etc. To conclude, this judgment of truth
is gathered out of all places of Scripture, wherein there is mention made of
the truth of Gods word. The judgment of goodness is, when the mind assenteth
to that thing, which is in the proposition of the Gospel, that it is good; and
therefore to be followed. For it must be known, that all the propositions of
the Gospel The sayings of the Gospel be practical.
be practical, as they say; in the naked speculation and contemplation of which
none must set up his rest; but they are to be drawn out into the manners and
life every day. Of this judgment of goodness, ye have that Romans 7. 16. I
consent to the law that it is good. 1. Cor. 1. 18. The preaching of the cross
is to us which are saved the power of God. And in the same chap. verse. 24. We
preach Christ, to them which are called, the power and wisdom of God. And
thus much concerning the twofold judgment, which (as we have said) must be of
the general proposition of that Evangelical Syllogism: of both which, this
last of all is to be held, that it is not only general, but also special;
whereby I do judge that those things which are spoken in the Gospel, are true
of me, and good to me. For, as we said before, those things which are published
in the gospel, are to be understood to be spoken specially of me, and of
thee. And this special judgment is properly that which is called (...).
full assurance. After this follows (...).
confidence, which belongs to the heart and will: whereof we will speak in the
next place.

There follows therefore in the third place, the choice or hold-taking of the
will, which is, when any one does with his will or heart peculiarly apply to
himself that The third point of faith.
which he has judged, first true; then good, not only in general, but also
in special. This apprehension or application, is in the Assumption or
conclusion of that syllogism of the Gospel, alleged before by us. For after
that the mind has seen and judged the proposition of that syllogism, then
the will of every one does particularly apply unto himself in the assumption
and conclusion, those good things which that general Proposition did concern.
Of this apprehension ye have 1. Tim. 6. 12. Lay The apprehension of faith.
hold on eternal life. Phil. 3. 12. I follow, if I also may apprehend it. 1.
Tim. 1. 15. This is faithful saying, and worthy by all means to be embraced
by us. To conclude, this third part of faith is to be understood in all those
titles, whereby the choice of the will is signified in the Scripture. From this
part faith is termed a special confidence or trust: for the nature of faith is
chiefly seen in it.

These things thus declared, it will be easy to gather a definition of faith.
For Faith in Christ with all his benefits, Faith defined.
as he is offered in the word and Sacraments, is first aknowledge of the mind;
then an apprehension of the will or heart. In this definition we have first the
object of faith; then the subject of it; thirdly, the parts. Under the
knowledge of the mind I understand also the judgment or assent of the mind,
and that twofold, whereof we have spoken before. It is to be known that faith
thus defined by us, is improperly taken for the function and work of faith,
seeing faith is properly an infused habit (as they call it) or an holy
quality, first of the mind; then of the will or heart.

Now this quality in the mind, what is it else but that light, of which the
Scripture speaks every where? Ye were once darkness, but now ye are light in
the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. The eyes of your mind being opened, that ye may know
what Faith a light.
is that hope of his calling, Ephesians. 1. 18. God which commanded that the light
should shine out of darkness, is he which has shined in your hearts, to give
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2.
Cor. 4. 6. But God has renealed those things unto us by his Spirit: for the
Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God. 1. Cor. 2. 10.

And this light ofye mind, which is the first part of faith, seems to be not
only a restoring of that natural light, which was impaired in Adams fall: but
also a certain supernatural light put into the mind by the Spirit of Christ,
to this end, that the mind might behold and see those things which excel all
natural knowledge. Whereupon Ephe. 3. 18. 19. it is thus said, That ye being
rooted and grounded in love, may be able to attain with all Saints, what is
the length, and breadth, and depth, and height, and to know that love of
Christ, which passes all knowledge. I do not think that this knowledge was
in Adam, in his first creation, before his fall. For all the knowledge in Adams
mind, Adams knowledge before his fall.
before the fall, as it was holy; so it seems it was natural: it seems it
was a natural knowledge of God himself; it seems it was a natural
knowledge of the things created. Neither did he before his fall see God in the
mediator Christ, nor was it needful he should see him so. Besides, this light
which I speak of, is kindled in our mind by looking on the face of Christ the
Mediator, as it were in the glass of the Gospel. 2. Cor. 3. 18. We all with
open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are transformed into
the same image from gloxy to glory. Also 4. chap. ver. 6. To give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. But Adam before
his fall, as he heard nothing concerning the Gospel of Christ, so he saw not
his face in the glass of the Gospel. Besides 1. Co. 15. 45. of Adam it is
said, the 1. Adam was made a living soul: but of Christ, the last Adam was
made a quickening spirit. Out of which words the difference betwixt Adam and
Christ is seen, that Adam was made only natural, yet holy: but Christ was
made spiritual and supernatural: for spiritual things are supernatural.
Again, out of this difference we gather that that spiritual and
supernatural light, which we have only by the benefit of Christ, that is, the
second Adam, was not in Adam before the fall. For in the same place verse. 48.
49. Our heavenly or spiritual condition is ascribed unto Christ. But of this
thus far, and but sparingly.

Also in the will or heart faith is a supernatural ability; put into it by
the Spirit of Christ, of which Or the says of the operation of God. Ephe. 3.
20 According to the power that works in us.
Col. 2. 12. By the faith of God that works mightily in us. This power also,
as I think, was not put into Adams heart before the fall, being induced by the
same reasons which we alleged before. And seeing that light of the mind, and
efficacy of the heart are supernatural, it follows also that the functions
of that light and efficacy, namely, the knowledge of the mind, and the
apprehension of the heart, are likewise supernatural. Wherefore unto that
definition of says before set down, we add this branch (supernatural) as the
last: so that justifying faith in Christ, with all his nofits offered unto us in
the word and Sacraments, is not only Justifying faith defined.
an holy, but also a supernatural knowledge of the mind, and apprehension of
the will. Thus the^ we define faith, as we admonished before, as the name of
faith is taken for the function and work of faith: For so the Divines do
commonly define it: so also in the Scriptures is the name of faith wont to be
taken, namely, for the function or work of faith, as it is termed 2 Thessalonians.
1. 3. But if the description of faith properly, and as it is taken for an
infused quality, do like any man better; thus also he may have it described:
that Faith is a light of the mind, and an (...).
effectual action in the heart supernaturally, put into them both, for the
knowing and apprehending of Christ with all his benefits, offered in the word
and Sacraments.

Now it remains that we speak something touching the effects of faith. That
knowledge and apprehension of Christ which we speak of, since the seat of it is
in the principal and reasonable faculties of the soul, namely the mind and
the will, it cannot be idle, neither does it Effects of faith in the mind and
heart. etc.
contain it self within the bounds of those higher faculties of the soul,
the mind and the will; but is effectual also in the lower heart, that is, in
all the affections: and there is not any of all the affections, but is affected
some way or other by this knowledge and apprehension, being not only sanctified
by it, but also rapt up above it self and the nature thereof. For as we said of
faith, yt it is a supernatural knowledge and apprehension, the same is true
also of the functions of all the affections: for they are al not only made
holy, but also supernatural, by a certain supernatural faculty put into them
by the Spirit of Christ.

But to speak distinctly of the effects of Faith: Christ with all his benefits
being once known and apprehended, an hope of good to come, and a fear of
evil to come, Note the specivll effects which follow faith.
the love of Christ, and the desire of him, and joy and gladness, are in a
wonderful manner kindled in the soul, as 1. Pet. 1. 8. Believing in him ye
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. Grief also which is according to
God, is kindled, with groans which cannot be expressed, To. 8. 26. To conclude,
the whole heart burns to Godward. By faith also our affections toward our
neighbor are stirred up, and that for God and Christ: as love of our
neighbor, and delight in the Saints, Psalm. 16. 3. And these are the first
effects of faith, and those are inward in the lower heart or affections.

There be also outward effects of faith, having their being in the body, and in
all the members of the body; and those are outward actions of the body, into
which the inward motions of the affections break forth. And those are, first,
such as respect God: then, such as respect our neighbor for Gods cause. And
thus much of the effects of faith, both inward and outward, as also of faith,
which is properly so called, which they commonly term justifying faith.

CHAP. XXX. Of the improper significations of Faith.
IT follows that we speak of the improper significations of faith. For this
word, faith, is Diverse acceptions of faith.
ambiguous, and signifies many things. Properly 1
it signifies this faith which they call justifying: for that is properly and
simply termed by this name. Secondly, it signifies that faith which 2
they call historical, or dead; which is nothing else, but as it were the
carcass of justifying faith: for it lacks the soul, that is, the full
assurance of the mind, and the confidence of the heart in the special assent
of the mind, and in the trust and apprehension of the heart.

Thirdly, it signifies faith which they call temporary, 3
which is as a certain Ape of justifying faith, Fourthly, and 4
last of al, that faith, which they term miraculous.

These three last significations of faith are improper, and the name of faith
is but by an Homonymie or improperly put upon them, to signify these things.
For not any of these may be called by the name of faith, unless you say in
some respect, in part, and after a sort, and with an addition: for example; the
knowledge of history is termed faith, but with this addition, historical or
dead; and so of the rest. Now a general notion of this word faith is that
which is Heb. 11. 1. And that is a knowledge in general, with assent and
agreement to all those things which are comprehended in the word of God, and
that whether general or particular. I mean by a particular word, when any
thing is revealed to any one peculiarly out of order, by which kind of
revelation it came to pass that miracles were done by some. We must speak
therefore in the first place concerning historical or dead faith: and first
for the testimonies of scripture touching it. Iam. 2. 15 Faith if it have no
works, is dead of it self. 1. Cor. 12. 9. Unto other, faith by the same
spirit. The coherence of the text Historical or dead says.
and comparison made with other gifts of the holy Ghost, which in that place
are numbered, do show sufficiently that the Apostle speaks of historical
faith. Hitherto belongs that place which is 1. Cor. 13. 2. If I had all
faith, so that I could remove mountains. Here he does not only mean the faith
of miracles, but also the historical: for he says all faith; and after he
sets down one kind, as if he had said by name, miraculous faith to remove
mountains. The reason of the name is this: It is termed historical, because
it is only a bare knowledge of the holy history, concerning God, Christ, the
will of God, and his works, and not an holy apprehension of the things known.
And why it is called dead, James renders a reason in the place before cited,
namely, because it has no Dead faith.
works: the reason is from the consequent or sign. For want of works or
actions, argues and shows that faith is as it were dead, and without life,
and if I may so speak the carcass of faith: even as if there be no motions nor
actions in a man neither inward nor outward, thereby it is declared, that the
man is dead, and the body without life, or but the dead carcass of a man.

Our adversaries, that I may speak of this by the way, when they hear out of
Iam. 2. 16. that says is therefore The papists touching faith.
called dead, because it has no works, by and by conclude, that charity, and
the works of charity, is the soul of faith: but this follows not, that
charity, and the works of charity are the soul of faith: but this follows,
that charity, and the works of charity are the signs and tokens of the
soul, that is by name, of that apprehension of Christ which is in the heart:
for this is indeed the soul and form of faith. I will declare this thing by
a like example. A man, if he have no works, no actions, neither inward nor
outward, that indeed argues, that there is not a soul or form in him, out of
which actions do proceed: but it does not argue that works or actions are the
soul and form of man.

But they think that the words of James, chap. 2. 26. do make for their
opinion. For out of that that James says, As the body without the Spirit or
breath is dead, so also faith which is without works is dead: thus they infer:
Therefore as the Spirit is the form of the body, so are works the form of
faith. But this consequent is not of force. For the comparison and similitude
is not in that, but in this, that even as the body without the soul or breath
is dead, so faith without works is dead: The body without the spirit, as her
soul and form, is dead: faith without works, as the signs and tokens of the
soul, is dead. Even as therefore the want of the Spirit or the soul, does
argue the death of the body: so the want of the sign and token of the soul
of faith does argue the death of faith: It is therefore a comparison of the
spirit and works in the like effect, and not in the like nature: For both have
the like effect, which is death; but both the things are not of the same
nature. Hitherto of the reason of the name. The object of historical faith, is
all the holy story, that is, the whole truth which is according to godliness,
and the word of both covenants: wherein this faith differs from justifying
faith, which has the word of the Gospel, or of the covenant of grace for the
object thereof.

The subject of this faith is the mind, which knows and judges: but the
judgment of the mind, does only Subject of an historical faith.
reach to the truth of the history, as I think, and not to the goodness of the
things themselves, which are contained in the story. For although an hypocrit
do profess that al those things, of which the Gospel speaks, are true; yet he
does not assent to the^ in his mind, as good things: Note well.
which is the first step of practice or action. For after the judgment of the
goodness of a thing, follows the apprehension thereof, which belongs to the
will; out of which after proeede the motions of the affections, and out of them
last of all do issue the outward actions of the body. Therefore this dead
faith, does not sincerely at the least assent to those things which are in the
word as good things, but rather does indeed reject them, and count them as
evil. So the devil, who has this faith, is said to tremble, Iam. 2. 19. Out
of which it is manifest, that the devil does reject Christ and all his good
things. For this horror arises out of rejecting and hating of the thing.
Therefore in one word, this historical faith pertaines only to the mind, and
has that for the subject of it.

It follows, that we speak of the nature thereof. By these things which have
been spoken of the subject, it The nature of an historical faith.
may easily be learned what is the nature of it. For it is wholly comprised but
only in the general knowledge of the mind, and judgment of truth: it has
therefore one or two degrees of justifying faith. Out of all these things which
we have spoken of an historical faith, it is easy to gather the definition
thereof. For historical faith is a knowledge in the mind of the whole truth
both of the Historical faith defined.
law, and of the Gospel, and the judgment of the mind made thereupon, as
far as concerns the truth thereof. And thus far concerning historical or
dead faith.

Next follows a temporary. Of this faith ye have these texts. Matthew. 13.
20. 21. But he that received the seed 3. Faith a temporary faith.
in stony ground, is he who hears the word, and by and by receives it with
joy, yet has no root in himself, but is for a time, and when persecution and
trouble arises because of the word, is offended presently. To the same
purpose read I. uk. 8. 13. Of this faith see also Heb. 6. 4. 5. For it cannot
be, that they which have been once enlightened, and tasted of the good word of
God, and of the powers of the world to come, if they fall away, etc. To
conclude, of this faith ye have Ioh. 5. 35. He (namely John) was a burning and
a shining candle: and ye would for a time have reioiced in his light. The
reason of the name is this: it is called Temporary, because it endures but for
a time: and it endures but for a time, because it has no root.

It has the same object with justifying faith, and which is properly so
called, namely, Jesus Christ with his benefits, offered in the word of the
Gospel and in the Sacraments; wherein it differs from historical faith, which
has for the object thereof the universal truth. It has The subject of a
temporary faith.
the same subject with justifying faith: for it has it scat both in the mind,
and also in the will and heart.

Last of all, it has as many parts of nature as the justifying faith has. For
it is a knowledge of the understanding, conjoined with both the judgments of
the mind, and it is the apprehension of the will or heart: whereout follweth
also the stirring of the affections, as of joy, delight, etc.

But that I may speak a little more largely of this apprehension, which is in
Temporary faith, and of this joy. First, it is certain by the scripture, that
these things are in the Temporary faith. For Christ says in Matthew. That he
which is but for a time, does receive the word, and that with joy. And in Ioh.
The Jews are said to have reioiced for a time in the light of John Baptist:
And to the Hebr. How the historical and temporary says differ one fro
another, and both from the justifying.
there is attributed to this faith, not only the enlightening of the mind, but
also the taste of the heart, and that performed not only by the word, but also
by the Spirit: for he says; They which have been made partakers of the holy
Ghost. Therefore in Temporary faith there is indeed a kind of apprehension,
there is indeed a certain joy, wherein Temperarie faith differs from
historical faith. For in historical faith these things are not indeed, but he
that has it, does feign, and dissemble and lie, in his outward profession that
he has these things: wherefore he is a shameless hypocrite. But he that has
temporary faith, has these things indeed, apprehension (I say) and joy,
after a certain manner: neither does he so feign or sie, as he that has an
historical faith: yet he is an hypocrit, because this apprehension and this
joy, are not sincere, albeit after a certain manner they be true.

I say, they are not sincere, because they are not for that cause for which
they should be, that is, they are not for Christ himself, offered in the
preaching of the Gospel; they are not for Gods sake, they are not for his
glory, nor for those heavenly benefits of Christ, his righteousness and eternal
life: but they are for other causes, as for the newness of the Gospel, which
is to be understood in that place, Ioh. 5. 35. He was a burning and a shining
candle, and ye would have reioiced for a time in his light, namely, for the
newness of the matter: Secondly, they be, because of a licentiousness to
sin, which men by and by snatch to themselves, upon the hearing of free
justification by Christ, and Christian liberty: To conclude, they are for
riches, honors and other commodities of this life. Now seeing the Temporizing
professor has these causes propounded to himself in hearing and receiving the
word, and in rejoicing, it must needs be that these are not sincere in him.
For nothing is done sincerely, unless it be Synceritie.
done in respect of the glory of God. And herein differs Temporary Faith,
from justifying: For the justifying Faith does all things for Christ himself,
for God himself, for the heavenly and spiritual benefits of Christ, as much
as it can for man's infirmity.

Out of this therefore it follows, that the Temporizer is also an hypocrit,
seeing he is not sincere, and that the Temporizer is an hypocrit.
temporary faith is hypocritical, seeing it is not sincere. Out of that
again, that it is not sincere, another thing follows, namely, that it is not
sound and firm: for nothing that is not sincere, can be sound. For those
causes upon which it depends, are not sound: as for example, those worldly
things, as riches, honors of the world, etc. In which thing temporary Faith
differs from justifying Faith: for justifying Faith, as it is sincere, so it
is sound. For of that it is said Col. 2. 5. And the steadfastness of your The
difference between a temporary faith, and true justifying faith.
faith in Christ. For justifying Faith is, as it were, a solid body,
consisting of three dimensions, length, breadth, depth: for it possesses the
depth, and lowest of the heart: but temporary Faith is not a body with three
dimensions, but only a surface, sticking in the upper part of the heart: for it
is not either a sound light, enlightening all the heart, or a sound
apprehension, arising from the bottom of the heart; or to conclude, a sound
joy possessing the whole body: but all these things are only superficial in
the temporary Faith. Whereupon Heb. 6. that apprehension of heavenly things
which is therein, is compared to tasting, or slight touching, seeing that the
heart does but as it were with the tip of the tongue lightly taste those
heavenly things, and not quite drink them up, and receive them into it self.

Again, out of this, that temporary Faith is not sound, another thing also
follows, namely, that it does not endure for ever, but only for a time. For
that which is not sound, is not durable and perpetual; but only temporary.
Wherein also it differs from justifying faith, which as it is sound, so it is
perpetual and constant. From this property this faith took her name, and was
called temporary: now this property does presuppose the two other going before;
namely, first that it is not sound: secondly, that it is not sincere, albeit
it be in some sort true.

While I consider somewhat more diligently of the cause of these three
properties, I found that it is not to be imputed so much to those outward
things for which this faith does apprehend Christ in the word, and reioiceth in
him, as to the inward evil affection of the heart. For the heart of man, as
Christ says, is stony ground, that is, it is neither good nor honest of it
own nature. Now we measure this goodness and honesty, chiefly by simplicity
and sincerity, which is opposed to hypocrisy and dissembling. Therefore a
deep hypocrisy, which is contrary to sincerity possesses the heart of this
man. Now the heart so affected, does believe, apprehend and rejoice, not
sincerely for a true cause, for which it ought to do these things, but for
other worldly causes. It follows therefore, that the cause of these evils
does lurk in the heart. Wherefore, if any man will not be a temporizer, A good
admonition for a temporizer.
let him above all things look to his heart, and sift and examine it
diligently night and day, so long till he feel that the faith of Christ takes
root in the bottom of his heart, and does throughout possess the whole
heart, as much as may be.

Out of these things which we have spoken, touching the properties of this
faith and of the cause of them, a mark may be taken, whereby any one may
discern true and justifying faith from temporary. And that is, in a word,
sincerity in doing, in believing, in apprehe^ding, in reioicing, Synceritie.
and in doing all things throughout the whole course of the life. Now sincerity
is known by this, if all things be done and performed by us for God and for
Christ, whether those things be of small or great moment. Whether ye eat or
drink, or whatsoever ye do; do all to the glory of God, 1. Cor. 10. 31. By
these things which have been spoken, it is easy to gather a definition of
this faith. For Tempor. F. defined.
temporary faith is a knowledge in the mind, and an apprehension in the will,
of Christ with all his benefits; but yet te^porary, or enduring but for a time.
And thus much of temporary faith.

The miraculous faith follows, which is the third improper signification of
the word of faith. Touching this faith these are testimonies. Matthew. 17. If ye
have faith as a grain of mustard seed. 1. Cor. 13. If I had all faith, so that
I could remove mountains. The reason of the name is this: 4. Miraculous faith.
It is termed miraculous from the effect of it, because it is powerful to do
miracles.

The object thereof is not the bare general word of God, but rather a special
promise or revelation made to some one, touching the doing of some certain
miracle. Now that the bare general word suffices not, it appears hereby,
for because many holy men have had faith in the general word, yea they have
justifying faith in the promise of grace; and yet could do no miracles. Simon
Magus believed by an historical faith in the general word, and yet he could
do no miracles: therefore he would have bought this faculty with money for a
price. Act. 8. 31. Unless therefore unto the general word, there be added a
special promise or revelation, it is no miraculous faith; which is a certain
special and extraordinary gift of the Spirit. Wherein the Adversaries do err
very much, who think that the general word suffices for this, to make a
miraculous faith. The subject of it The subject of a miraculous faith
is the mind, first understanding, and withal judging the special promise:
and then the will or the heart apprehending that which is promised.

The parts of the nature thereof are; a knowledge with a judgment of the mind,
and an apprehension with the will and heart. Out of these things now spoken, I
gather this definition of this Faith: that Miraculous faith is a Miraculous
faith defined.
knowledge in the mind, and an apprehension with the will of a special promise
or revelation, for the doing of a miracle. Thus far of miraculous Faith; and
in sum, of the true doctrine of faith.

CHAP. XXXI. The opinion of the Adversaries concerning Faith.
IT follows now that we see briefly, what the adversaries do hold touching
Faith. First, they do not acknowledge the diverse significations of Faith: they
entreat only of one faith, and that they term justifying, that is, as they
expound the word, that The Popish opinion of Faith.
which disposes us to justice, being to be infused after in the time thereof.
Thus thinks Bellarmine in his Treatise touching faith.

In this doctrine of faith, which they term justifying they differ from us,
first about the object of it. Indeed they do not deny, that the object of
faith, is the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, offered in the Gospel, that is,
that it is the Gospel, and the promises of grace concerning Christ, and Gods
mercy in him. But they will have the object to be not only the word of the
Gospel, but equally the universal word of God.

To confirm this opinion of theirs, they allege that definition of faith
which is set down Heb. chap. 11. 1. Faith (says the Apostle) is the ground of
things that are hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen. This
(say they) is the definition of justifying faith: But this definition
stretches it self, not only to Christ, to the promises of God, and to the
Gospel concerning him; but also to the whole word of God, and to all things
that are contained in the word of God. For example: it stretches it self to
the word of God, which is concerning the creation of the world, as is evident
by verse. 3. which follows in the same chap. By faith we understand that the
world was ordained by the word of God: Hence they conclude, that justifying
faith has the whole word for the object of it. But to this we answer, that not
only justifying Faith is defined by the Apostle in that place, but that that
definition of Faith is common to all the significations of faith, as is plain
enough by that induction of examples which follows in that place and chapter.

Neither is that their argument, which they gather out of the coherence of the
text, of any force. They say that that faith is defined, of which the Apostle
spoke in the last verses of the chapter going before: Now the just shall live by
faith, etc. But there the Apostle spoke of justifying Faith: therefore here in
the 11. chap. justifying faith is defined. I answer, this definition, I
confess, does belong to justifying faith, but not to that alone, but it is
common to it with other significations of Faith, as with historical Heb. 11.
1. A general definition of faith common to all kinds of faith.
faith, and miraculous, etc. as is evident by the induction that follows.
Seeing therefore that this definition does not only belong to justifying
faith, it follows that out of this definition they get not that they would
have, namely, that the object of justifying Faith is equally the universal
word of God: Therefore let the object thereof properly be that which it
apprehends: and that is the Gospel, and the promise concerning Christ.

Secondly, they dissent from us about this same special object, namely, the
mercy of God in Christ. For we say and affirm, that the object of justifying
faith is, not only a general mercy, nor only a general promise touching
Christ, but much rather a special mercy, and a special promise: that is,
mercy offered in the Gospel, not in common to all, but peculiarly to me, or to
thee. For albeit the promises and sentences of the Gospel be conceived
generally; yet it is certain, that they are to be received particularly by
every one, as if they were spoken to every one in several: as for example,
Ioh. 3. the promise of the covenant of grace is conceived generally in these
words, Whosoever believes in the Son shall not perish, but have life
everlasting. This promise is indeed generally conceived, but it is to be
understood particularly and singularly by every one, as if it had been spoken
to me, or to thee: If thou beleeuest in the Son, thou shall not perish, but
have everlasting life. The Apostle 1. Tim. 1. does understand this general
sentence, namely, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, no
otherwise then if it had been pronounced only concerning himself: whereupon
he does apply it particularly unto himself, assuming by name, that he is the
sinner, and concluding, How the believer is to make a syllogism in form.
at the least secretly, that Christ came into ye world to save him by name. We
may make trial of this thing by those promises that are made specially in the
Gospel to save certain men: as to the man sick of the palsy, Matt. 9. to
the woman that was a sinner, Luke 7. to the Adultresse, Ioh. 8. to Zacheus,
Luke 19. to the thief, Luke 23. For the Spirit of Christ, when any general
promise or sentence touching Christ and his mercy is alleged, does no less
particularly now apply the same to every man, by speaking inwardly to the
heart of every one, then at that time Christ did by his lively voice apply
those particular promises to some certain persons. Roman. 3. When the
righteousness of God is said to belong to al believers, and that without
distinction, it is plainly signified that that righteousness is offered to men
of every sort and condition, and also propounded to every several person. 1.
Tim 2. after he has admonished that we are to pray for all men, he adds,
that God will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.
Out of which it follows, that in the publishing of the Gospel, God has
respect, not only of all men in common, but also distinctly of every several
person: which regard also he will have us to have in our prayers. What need
many words? For if there were nothing else that did The mercy of God in Christ
offered generally to all the world, particularly applied to every one by the
Spirit, is the object of justifying faith.
teach this, the administration of the Sacraments alone has force enough in it
to prove, that the mercy of God in Christ is offered specially to every one.
For in both the sacraments, the seals of that mercy are given and offered to
every one severally. And let this suffice, to show that special mercy (as it
is called) is the object properly of justifying Faith, against which our
adversaries hold.

The object of justifying Faith being made to be a general mercy, it
follows that faith, in the opinion of our adversaries, is general, and not a
special assent. For seeing there is only a general mercy propounded generally
to the Church, and not offered particularly to the several members thereof, how
can any particular man challenge that particularly to himself, which is not
spoken and offered particularly? But we affirm, that justifying faith is that
whereby every believer does particularly, not only assent to the promise that
it is true in it self, but also apprehends with the heart the promised thing,
and applies it properly to himself. For this being made plain, that the
mercy of God was particularly offered to every one, it follows, that faith
must be particular. But for the proof hereof there are almost infinite
testimonies of the Scriptures: we will be content but with a few. Gal. 2. 20.
And the life that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God,
who loved me, and gave himself for me. Mark here, he does by faith peculiarly
apply to himself the Son of God, and his life, his love and his death.
Neither is there any cause why any one should say, that this might be lawful
for the Apostle, who had some extraordinary revelation of that thing, but that
it is not lawful to the common sort of Christians: in as much as the Apostle
does in this place bear the person of every Christian and believing man. Romans
8. For I am persuaded that neither death nor life, etc. Mark here that
special trust and particular application is pointed at by the verb of the
singular number. Beside, that which is cited out of Habakuck by the Apostle,
The just shall live by faith, does sufficiently insinuate a special faith: for
thereby is signified that every just person does live by his faith, that is, by
a special assent to, and application of the righteousness of God in Christ.
Matthew. chap. 9. a particular faith is commended to the man sick of the palsy:
to whom it was said, Son be of good comfort, thy sins be forgiven thee.
Ioh. 3. when it is said, He that believes in the Son has eternal life;
that very same special faith is signified, which is when every one does
assent particularly to, and apply to himself everlasting life offered to
himself. What need many words? The same thing does that verb (I believe)
which is found in the Apostles Creed, teach: For to believe, is there
specially and particularly to believe.

Out of the general mercy, and general faith of the adversaries, follows
the uncertainty of particular faith, and of Gods peculiar grace, which they
defend. For it is easily discerned, that uncertainty does follow necessarily
out of that generality, first a doubtfulnesse of mercy; then of faith. For when
as mercy is propounded and offered, not specially, but generally; and when
there is only a general assent of faith, how can I be certain of that mercy,
which pertaines not certainly by name to me?

But that there is a certainty of faith, against which they hold: first it
easily appears by those things which have The certainty of faith.
been spoken of Gods special mercy, and special faith. For seeing mercy is
offered particularly to thee and to me etc. and I again assent particularly to
it; now am I certain of that mercy that it is mine, specially, seeing I do
already by faith and special application possess it. For Christ dwells in
our hearts by faith, that is, we now possess Christ, and do enjoy him as
present. Of this special certainty, see Romans 4. 16. The inheritance is of
faith, that it may be by grace, to the end the promise may be firm to the
seed. And in the same Chapter, ver. 18. Which Abraham against hope believed
under hope. But hereof there is a notable place, Heb. 6. 18. That by two
immutable things, in which it is not possible that God should lie, we might
have strong consolation, which have our refuge to holdfast the hope that is set
before us. Where you see, first that God has promised it: secondly, that he
has bound himself by an oath, that is, that he has declared the
unchangeableness of his council for saving of us by two immutable things, to
this end that we might have strong consolation. Now the comfort is not strong,
unless it rise out of our firm and certain assent, whereby we consent to the
truth of Gods promise. For if our assent waver and be uncertain, certainly
there Note.
can no strong consolation arise out of our assent: Secondly, that it may be a
strong consolation, some general certainty of our assent is not sufficient,
but it must needs be a special and particular certainty of assent, whereby,
to wit, I am certain, that that which is promised, is true of me. For what
consolation at al, much less a strong consolation can that be, when as I am
certain that the promise concerning Christ does belong only in general to the
Church, and not to my self also in particular? Nay rather, in that very thing
is the grief increased, when one sees that the benifites of Christ pertaines
to other, but not to himself at all.

But to the end that this which we speak of, touching certainty and
uncertainty, may be the more manifest, we must search into this point a little
more deeply. In general therefore certainty, is either of the thing, or of
the person. Concerning the certainty of the thing, and the firm truth thereof,
there is no question. The certainty of the The certainty of faith.
person apprehending the object is nothing else, but the firmness of the
judgment, or the assent of the mind, consenting to the truth of some thing or
sentence. Wherefore certainty is nothing else, but a certain property of the
judgment, or of the assent of our mind. And seeing the assent of the mind is
twofold, either general, when I generally assent to the truth of some sentence
that it is true, as for example; concerning the universal Church: or it is
special, when as I assent to the truth of any sentence, that it is true, even
of me and of each particular: seeing, I say, there is a twofold assent of the
mind, it follows that there is a twofold certainty, one general, namely, the
property of a general assent: the other special, namely the property of a
special assent.

Now that we may come to the state of the controversy, What the controversy is
concerning a particular faith.
the question is not concerning general certainty, but all the controversy is
of the special certainty of a special assent, which they call the certainty of
grace, or of special mercy. For we do affirm and defend the certainty of
special grace: but they oppugn this same certainty of special grace; but I
pray with what arguments? First they say, that in the Gospel no mercy is any
where offered and promised to any particular or any one man: Therefore, there
can be no certainty of special grace. I answer, and do inuert the argument. In
the Gospel grace is promised and offered, not only in general to all, but in
special to every one, as we have taught before: wherefore the certainty of a
special grace is required in every one. Now to those things which we said
touching special mercy offered to several persons, I add these few things,
to the end that the whole matter may more clearly appear, and to the end that
we may learn by sense and experience it self, that grace is offered to every
one by God. The spirit of Christ only is Christ's vicar on earth, who teaches
and instructs us in those things which Christ spoke, and The spirit of Christ
is his only vicar on the earth
which are written in the Gospel. Now this spirit teaches, not only generally,
that the promises and sentences in the Gospel touching Christ and his
benefits, are true of the whole Church; but much more that they are true of
that special and particular man whom he inwardly teaches. And since the spirit
of adoption does testify with our spirit that we are the sons of God, To. 8.
this testimony of the holy Ghost is not general concerning the whole Church,
that they which are in the Church be the sons of God: but it is a special
testimony of me, and of thee, that I am the son of God, and that thou art
the Son of God. Besides 1. Corin. chap. 1. it is said of the Spirit, that he
searches even the deep things of God, that is, the spirit which is given to
every one and which dwells in every one, does search that grace and mercy in
Christ Jesus which lies hid in the deep, and makes it to be known to every
one. For the spirit of God dwelling in me, reueales to me that, which is hid in
the very heart of God. Now I demand whether he reveal to me some general mercy
only, belonging in general only to the Church; or whether he reveal to me
that special mercy hid in God, which belongs to me peculiarly? Certainly there
is no man, to whom this spirit dwelling in him has at any time revealed any
grace that lies hid in God, but he will constantly affirm, that by the holy
spirit there is revealed to every one, not a general mercy I know not what
rough draught of mercy: but a special mercy belonging particularly to
himself. Wherefore these same defenders of general grace and mercy only,
Defenders of general grace are but mere natural men.
seem to me to be only natural men and not spiritual; of whom that of the
Apostle may be truly spoken: The natural man perceives not the things which
are of the spirit of God.

Secondly (they say) that it is not expedient that every one should be certain
of his own grace, righteousness and salvation: for certainty breeds pride,
but uncertainty humility. I answer, certainty is a gift of the spirit
regenerating, which is bestowed only upon the elect. I speak of true and sound
special certainty, which is the property of true justifying faith. Can it
therefore be spoken without blasphemy, that the holy spirit and justifying
faith, is the cause of the greatest of al evils that are, and that the worst of
al, that is, of pride? Nay rather the uncertainty of a man is utterly the
property of one that exaltes him self against God, even, when he promises and
offers special mercy, and binds it with an oath.

Thirdly, they say, certainty of special mercy, is a special prerogative of
some certain men, to whom God was pleased to reveal extraordinarily, some
special mercy proper unto them. Is therefore a special prerogative which
belongs but to some, and but to a few men, to be reckoned among Gods common or
general graces? I answer: It is false that the certainty of special grace,
is a special prerogative of some certain men. For if justifying faith be
reckoned among the common good things and gifts of all Christians, and this
special certainty be the property of justifying faith, with what face dare
any deny this gift of special certainty to the common sort of Christians? Is
it because it was revealed but to some certain and few of them, that their
sins are forgiven, as to that man sick of the palsy, to that sinner, to
Zacheus, to the thief, is therefore this gift of certainty no other but
special and extraordinary? Nay we have already said, that the special mercy
of God is no less now promised, and offered to every several and particular
person, as to me, and to thee, then it was offered in times past to those men
by Christ's express words.

Fourthly, the holiest men (say they) have bewrayed with a lamentable voice at
the very point of death, and do bewray daily the uncertainty of their
salvation: Therefore there is not that certainty of mercy and life, which we
say there is. I answer: there is much difference between that which is, and
that which ought to be: This argument does only conclude that which is, that
is, that there is an uncertainty, but it concludes not that there ought to be
an uncertainty; nay, it concludes against it, that it ought not to be. For
they that weep and lament for the uncertainty of their own salvation, do
thereby declare, that there ought not to be an uncertainty: but our adversaries
doereckon the uncertainty of our own salvation among the chief Christian
virtues. Secondly I answer, that out of that complaint of holy men, being ready
to give up the Ghost, the certainty of special mercy M. Rollock argues of
the conflicts of the godly in their death, that they have a good faith.
does never a whit the less follow, then the uncertainty. For that speech
rises out of that war that is between the Spirit and the flesh, between
faith and unbelief, between certainty and uncertainty. Wherefore it is no
less an argument of certainty, then of uncertainty: nay, it argues that in
that war certainty has the upper hand.

Fifthly, they say, the best may fall from grace and faith; therefore what
certainty can there be of special mercy and salvation? I answer. They which
are endued only with temporary grace and faith, both may indeed fall, and do
fall away: but they which are endued with true justifying faith, and with
regenerating grace, can neither Of falling from grace.
fall away totally nor finally. Now that comes to pass, not in regard of the
men themselves, for of their own nature they are prone to final and total
defection (such is their infirmity and weakness) but it comes to pass, by the
nature (as I may speak) of that grace and gift of God, which is given in Christ
Jesus: For the gifts and calling of God are such, as that he cannot repent
himself of them. Romans 11.

Sixthly, they object testimonies of Scripture, these chiefly which comme^d unto
us care, thought and endeavor for the keeping and preserving of grace. As, He
that stands, let him take heed least he fall, 1. Cor. 10. 12. Also 2. Cor. 6.
1. Paul exhorts the Corinthians, that they receive The Papists cite it thus
ever, but falsely: for the text is, (...), etc. and so it is against them. Phil.
2.
not grace in vain. To conclude, Christ admonishes that we should watch and
pray: To say nothing of those places wherein fear is commended to us, as Romans
11. Thou stand by faith, be not high minded, but fear. And in another
place, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling.

Out of these and the like places, they say, follows doubting of a man's own
grace and salvation: for why should there be such commandments given, unless
it might be so, that one might fall from grace, and faith; and therefore that
he ought to doubt of his own grace and salvation. I answer, that out of these
and the like places Christian care and fear how good.
it follows, that there is no perseverance in grace, unless there be joined
a care, thought and labor to keep grace. For care and thought, is set (God so
ordaining it) to be as it were the keeper and watchman to grace; forbidding
that a man fall not into carnal security, which is the enemy of grace: and
this thought and care is given with grace, yea and it self is a kind of
special grace, and a companion of grace, which never departs from her side:
for where grace is, there is always surely some thought and care to retain
that grace, which is never all quite lost, even as grace it self is never
wholly lost: for it is ever in proportion to the grace. For when there is great
grace, there is great care: and when there is but a small grace, the care is
but little. And because God knows how necessary this care is, which is ye
companion and preserver of grace, therefore does he so often in the Scriptures
stir us up unto care, and commends it unto us. And all these exhortations are
nothing else but so many outcries, as it were, whereby this care, which we said
is the watchman and keeper of grace, is stirred up and provoked to do her
duty, that is, to keep grace, and to drive away carnal security, which is
an enemy to grace, and which would, except care stood upon* her watch, utterly
abolish grace it self, as faith, regeneration, righteousness, and life.
Therefore out of these and the like places, care and not doubting, virtue and
not vice do follow. For doubting has been ever reckoned in the Scriptures
among the worst evils, and of most enmity to God and man.

Now let us speak of the subject of justifying faith, what that is, according
to the mind of our adversaries. They Subject of justifying faith with Papists.
make the mind only to be the subject; and in the mind only one faculty
properly, which is that that judges and assenteth to the truth of any
sentence: But of the will and heart they speak nothing, when yet justifying
faith does chiefly belong to the heart, as we have said before.

For the parts of the nature of justifying faith, they make not so many as we.
For as touching knowledge, which is the first part of justifying faith, either
they say, yt Parts of the nature of justifying faith with Papists.
it is not necessary, or else that some obscure knowledge will suffice: which
thing they labor to prove by this reason. There is (say they) a double assent
of the mind, whereby we consent to the truth of any sentence. The first assent
is, when we consent unto it for some reason or cause: and this is termed
knowledge: this assent does necessarily require knowledge to go before it, to
the truth whereof we assent. The latter assent is, when we assent to the truth
of a sentence, not for some reason, but for the authority of him that
speaks: this assent is is called Faith; but it does not require that the
knowledge of that thing, whereto assent is given should go before it, being
content only with the bare authority of the speaker. Out of this distinction
and difference of assent (say they) it follows, that in faith there is no
need of knowledge, seeing faith is an assent, whereby we do agree to the truth
of some sentence, being induced not by any reason or cause, but by the
authority of the speaker.

To this reason we answer, and first we do grant this difference of assents:
but we deny, that that assent which is yielded because of the authority of
the speaker, has no need of knowledge to go before it. For that it may be
justifying Faith to us, it is required that that which is spoken by God
himself be some manner of way understood by us. For God does not require that
of us, that we should assent to his word and voice, because of the bare
authority of him that testifies, when as we understand them not at all.

Secondly, they reason out of that definition of faith, Heb. 11. Faith is the
ground of things that are hoped for, and the evidence of those things that are
not seen. Here, say they, we see faith of things unknown, namely of such
things as are to be hoped for, and as are not seen. But (say I) these two words
(...).
ground, and evidence do argue sufficiently, that those very things which are
hoped for and not seen, are in the mean time in some sort present, and seen
of us. Whereupon Paul 2. Corinthians. chap. 4. says: Why, we look not on those
things which are seen, but on those things which are not seen. Here you see,
that The popish implicit faith.
even those things which are not seen, nor object to these eyes of our bodies,
are yet seen and beheld with the spiritual eyes of our faith. And this is
their opinion touching the knowledge of faith, which tends to this purpose,
to establish that faith which they term implicit or infolded faith.

Concerning that assent which we said is the 2. part of justifying faith, they
do place the nature of faith only in that assent, which is yielded in regard
of the truth of a thing: for they speak nothing of the assent or judgment of
goodness: and they make that same judgment of truth which they hold, to be only
general: namely, whereby one does judge that some sentence is true, not of
himself, but in general of the whole Church: when as notwithstanding that
judgment, as well of truth as of goodness, which is the property of faith, is
rather particular; yea a very peculiar grace, which in the Scripture is called
that full assurance, as we have said before. (...).


Touching the third part of faith, which we termed the confidence of the
heart, they do not acknowledge it. For they say that confidence is nothing else
but hope strengthened, and a certain effect of faith, whereas notwithstanding
confidence which the Greeks term (...), is a certain motion of the will or
heart not expecting, but in present apprehending some good, and depending
thereupon, and reioicing therein as present. Furthermore, Confidence and faith
of the same root in Greek.
(...) and (...), that is, faith and affiance are of the same root: For both
of them come from the verb (...) which signifies to persuade. Besides the
verb (...) is taken every where by the Apostle for, to be persuaded, to
believe and not to hope. Romans 8. (...), that is, I am persuaded, that neither
life, nor death, nor things present nor things to come, etc. Phil. 1. (...), I
am persuaded that he that has begun in you a good work, etc. 2. Cor. 5.
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, (...), we persuade, or draw men to the
faith. I grant that the name (...), is some times taken for confidence which
is a consequent of faith, and a certain property of it: for it comes to pass
that he which believes or trusts, does depend on him in whom he places
his trust. Of this signification of (...), read Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have
freedom and access with confidence, (...), by faith in him.

Out of these things which we have spoken, it is easy to gather a definition
of faith, according to their opinion: who take justifying faith to be nothing
else, then that whereby every one does in general assent to the truth of the
word of God, and that for the authority of the speaker: A popish definition of
faith.
which definition what else is it I pray you, then a general notion of faith,
and such as is common to all the significations of faith, which we set down
before. From this definition of justifying faith they gather, and that truly,
that justifying faith may be in every wicked and most heinous A popish
definition of faith.
sinner: For in him this general assent may be, which cannot be denied to the
very devils, as James witnesses. The Devils, says he, believe and tremble:
and yet they call this, justifying and true faith, though not living. For they
distinguish between true and living faith. True faith (they say) is even that
which works not by love, yea though it be dead: but a living fatih they term
that which works by love, as by her form, and not as an instrument:
whereupon they term this by another name formed faith.

But we do utterly deny this distinction of true and living faith: for we take
true faith and living faith for one and the same; even as one and the same man
is true and living: and as true or living man is so termed from his soul or
form: so also true or living faith is so termed from her soul or form, which
consists in full assurance and trust, as we have said, without which, faith is
nothing else but a carcass, even as a man without a soul is not so much a man,
as a carcass and dead body.

But they endeavor to prove out of James. 2. last verse, that even dead faith
and not living, is nevertheless true faith. As the body is to the soul, so is
faith unto works: but the body without the soul is a true body, albeit not
living: therefore faith without works is a true faith, although not living. I
answer, that this is a sophistical argument: for the comparison of the body
and faith, which James makes, is not in the truth, but in the death of the^:
and James assumes and concludes out of that proposition: But the body without
the spirit is dead: wherefore also faith without works is dead. For between
faith and the body this is the difference: one and the same body may be both
dead and true: but faith is not both true and dead, even as a man is not both
true and dead: for as a man is a compound thing of his body and his soul; so
faith is a certain compound thing, as it were of her body and of her soul,
the tokens or signs whereof are the actions. Wherefore in James the comparison
is made between a simple and a compound: the simple thing, which is the body
void of the soul: the compound which is faith. And the comparison is of force
in that wherein it is made, namely, in the death of both and not in other
things. And so much of justifying faith according to the opinion of our
adversaries, as also of the whole doctrine of faith.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Hope.
HOPE follows faith: for that apprehension of Jesus Christ with his benefits
offered Hope.
in the word and sacraments, which is the property of faith, does give hope
unto us that we shall one day enjoy Christ present. The Apostle, Romans 5.
says, that experience breeds hope. Now by faith we get experience, and as
Peter says, we taste how good the Lord is: wherefore it must needs be that
faith begets hope.

That we may therefore speak of hope: it must first of all be seen, what is
the object thereof. The object of faith and hope is the same in substance,
namely, Jesus Christ with his benefits. Heb. 11. It is said that faith is the
Object of hope the same in substance with the object of faith, and how they
differ.
ground of things that are hoped for. It may be again said, that hope is of
those things which are believed or which have after a sort a being by faith. By
these things it is evident, that the object of faith and hope is the same thing
in substance or effect.

Yet the object of hope differs in reason from the object of faith. The
chief difference is this, that the object of faith is Christ in the word and
sacraments, or the word concerning Christ and the sacrament, which shadoweth
him: Wherefore the object of faith is a certain image of Christ, which is
propounded to us to be looked upon in the glass of the word and Sacraments.
Whereupon 2. Cor. 3. we are said with open face to behold as in a glass, and
to be transformed into that image, which we behold in that glass.

But the object of hope, is Christ with his benefits, not indeed appearing to
us in the word and sacraments, but appearing as he is, and as I may say, in his
own person. For hope is not settled upon that image of Christ which we behold
in a glass by faith, but upon the face of Christ himself which we hope we
shall see at the last. Phil. 3. 20. from whence also we look for the Savior
our Lord Jesus Christ. Tit. 2. Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious
coming of the great God our Savior Jesus Christ. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. Because we
shall see him as he is: and whosoever has this hope in him, that is, he that
hopes that he shall see him as he is. By these things it appears, that hope
has for it object the very face of Jesus Christ. There be three things which
are conversant about one Christ, Faith, Hope, and Sight, 1. Faith. 2. Hope. 3.
Sight.
but each in a diverse respect. For faith is properly of his image; hope is of
his face, but to come and appear hereafter: and sight is likewise of his face,
but present.

The second difference between the object of faith and hope, is a consequent
out of yt first, and this is it, that faith is of present of things, namely, of
Christ and his benefits, or rather of the image of these things, which we
behold present in the glass of the word and sacraments: whereupon Heb. 11. it
is called A ground and an evidence, which words signify the presence of those
things which are believed. But hope is of things to come hereafter: for hope if
it be seen, is no hope, that is, if it be of things present, it is no hope.
For why should a man hope for that which he sees? To. 8. 24. Beside, hope is of
his face, which is not yet seen. The third difference follows also out of the
first: for faith is of the thing only in part, seeing that it is of the image
and as it were of the shadow, and as I may say, of the earnest, which is but
part of the sum. See 1. Cor. 13. We know in part. But hope is of the whole
thing, it is of the face, of the compleme^t; to conclude, it is of the whole
sum, the hope whereof that earnest which we apprehend by faith, gives unto
us. And thus far of the object of hope.

The subject follows, which is not the mind, or some faculty of the mind,
whether of understanding or iudgeing; Subject of hope.
nor is it the will, for faith has made her seat in these. But hope being
content with the inferior seat, has it a biding in the heart. For it is an
affection of the heart, even as fear is which is opposed to it. If we speak
of the nature of it, it is not judgment or assent; it is not an apprehension or
trust: for all these belong to faith, but it is an expectation which follows
faith, and is begotten by faith.

The property of hope, is not that certainty properly which is of faith, or of
that assent which is in faith. For faith is properly said to be certain: but
hope is not properly How hope is certain.
called certain; but it is termed certain because of the certainty of faith.
In scripture I find that patience is attributed to faith, as a certain
property thereof. Romans 8. 25. But if we hope for that which we see not, we do
with patience (...). Patience of hope.
abide for it Heb. 6. it is said of Abraham, that when he had patiently tarried,
he obtained the promise. 1. These. 1. 3. there is mention made of the patience
of hope, or of patient hope. And this patience is it, whereby hope does
sustain all the crosses and afflictions of this life, and does as it were go
under them: For all the promises of heavenly things are made with an exception
of temporal afflictions. Wherefore, whosoever hops that he shall obtain
those heavenly promises, he must needs make himself ready to bear and
sustain all the calamities which are incident to this life. Wherefore patience
is so necessarily joined with hope, as that hope cannot be without it.

Out of these things which we have spoken, the definition of hope may be
gathered: that hope is a patient abiding Hope defined.
of the heart for the face of Christ or fulfilling of the promise. It is to be
noted that this is the definition of hope, as the name is taken for the work,
and office of hope, which properly signifies an affection of the heart, and
that a sanctified one; and not only so, but an affection carried up above
nature. For when we are regenerated by the spirit of Christ, we do not only
recover that holiness of nature lost in Adam, but also in regeneration there is
not a faculty of the mind or an affection of the heart, but some supernatural
power or quality is put into it, for the exercising of supernatural functions.
For our regeneration is not so much effected according to that image which was
entire and holy in Adam before his fall, as according to the image of Christ.
1. Cor 15. 49. We shall bear the Image of the heavenly man: Whereupon the
motions of What affections a man regenerate has in him.
our heart are termed unutterable, and such as cannot be declared. Romans 8. they
are called groans which cannot be expressed. 1. Pet. 1. Joy is called
unspeakable and glorious: and the faculties of the mind and the affections of
the heart regenerated are carried to those things which are incomprehensible,
and which I think, could not be comprehended by Adams holy nature; such as
these are: The unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. the love of Christ
which passes all knowledge, in the same Chap. verse. 19. As those things which
the eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor ever entered into man's heart, 1.
Cor. 2. 9. But we have spoken of these things already in the doctrine of faith.

This last of all is to be observed concerning hope, that there be many degrees
of it: For there is a certain more Degrees of hope (...).
earnest or vehement hope, which is called by the Apostle Romans 8. 19. the
fervent desire of the creature. Phil. 1. 20. Paul does profess this kind of
hope and earnest looking for. And thus much of hope according to the judgment
of our Churches.

Now be advertised in few words, what our adversaries Popish opinion of hope.
think of it. They make the object of hope to be those things which belong to
him that hops; for this difference they make between hope and faith, that
faith is of general mercy, and not of proper: but that hope is of proper
mercy. But this difference is false: For as well faith, as hope, is of proper
grace and mercy. They say with us, that the subject of hope is the heart: For
they teach that hope is a virtue put into the heart.

They make the nature of it to consist not in knowing nor in judging, but in
expecting. Bellarmine makes a difference between hoping and expecting. We hope
(says he) for those things which we do not know certainly that we shall
obtain. Whereupon the blessed souls in heaven are said to expect the
resurrection of their bodies, because they know certainly that it shall come to
pass. But Paul. Romans 8. seems to take the words of hoping and expecting for
one and the same thing: If we hope for that which we see not, then do we with
patience expect it. You (...).
see that with Paul, to hope and to expect, are one and the same.

They make the property of hope to be certainty: For they say that hope is
certain: but they teach, that this certainty belongs to the understanding. For
it is the understanding that does know certainly that salvation will come to
pass; and because of the certainty of the understanding, hope is said to be
certain, and the heart hops certainly that salvation will come. Therefore
this certainty is not properly in hope, but hope presupposes it. They say that
this certainty is not simple and absolute. For they say that no man is simply
and absolutely certain of his salvation, or does certainly know that he
shall obtain salvation: Nay contrariwise they teach that there is simply and
absolutely an uncertainty of hope, and he that hops (say they) is simply and
absolutely uncertain of his salvation. But he that hopes (say they) is certain
of his salvation not simply and absolutely, but after a certain manner and in
some respect. First in regard of the foundation of hope, that is, the promise
of God which cannot deceive, and for which, if there were not other causes of
certainty, one might be said to be simply and absolutely certain of his
salvation. But seeing there be other causes of certainty, beside the promise of
God, a man cannot be said to be simply and absolutely certain of his own
salvation for the promise of God only, and the infallible truth thereof.
Secondly, a man is said to be certain of his salvation in respect of charity,
which they say, is the form of faith. For he that has charity, is in this
part, and in this respect certain of his salvation: For charity is a sure
cause of salvation, and if it could be that a man might never fall from
charity, even for that cause alone he might be simply and absolutely certain
of his salvation. But seeing any man may fall from charity and leese it,
therefore there is no absolute certainty of hope in respect of charity neither.

This is then their opinion, that hope is likewise uncertain, but yet that it
is certain in some respects. First, in respect of the promise; then in respect
of charity: and therefore that the certainty of hope is always mixed with
uncertainty. For what time it is certain because of of the promise of God, at
the same time it is uncertain for other causes which are in our selves: as in
regard of our repentance* in respect of our works and merits, which are also
required to make hope certain. Again, what time it is certain because of
charity, at the same time it is uncertain, because of the changeableness of
charity. This is their opinion. But we hold thus, that hope is called certain,
because of faith going before it, and for the full assurance Certainty of hope
of that faith. For certainty does properly belong to faith; and it is faith
whereby every one of us does certainly know, that salvation belongs unto us:
Hence comes the surenesse of hope, and the certainty thereof. Secondly, we
say, that this certainty of hope, which is for Faiths sake, is simple and
absolute: and we deny that hope is in one respect certain, and in another
respect uncertain, which thing they affirm: but we affirm that it is
certain in all respects, at least that it so ought to be, in respect of Gods
promise, in respect of charity, and of our whole regeneration, in respect of
our perseverance: and so of the rest. For all these things are certain and
sound, upon which hope depends, and for which it is said to be certain: and
these things do depend upon Gods unchangeableness, whether they be out of us,
as the promise of God; or within us, as charity and all regeneration: for grace
once given in Christ Jesus, can never be totally and finally lost.

Our adversaries do place some cause of certainty in our selves, and in our
strength, and in our works and merits. And therefore it is no marvel, though
they say that hope is not simply and absolutely certain: for there is nothing
more uncertain then these things, in which they place some, or rather the
chief cause of the certainty of hope.

Concerning the absolute certainty of hope, these be some testimonies of
Scripture. Psalm. 31. In thee, O Lord, have I hoped, let me not be confounded
for ever. He that trusts in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, which shall not
be moved for ever, Psalm. 125. Romans 5. We rejoice under the hope of the glory
of God. And after. Hope makes not ashamed. Romans 8. We are saved by hope. Phil
1. 20. According to my earnest expectation and hope, that I shall not be
ashamed. Romans 9. Whosoever believes in him shall not be confounded. And thus
much of hope.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Charity or Love.
AMong the principal effects of Faith, charity is reckoned in the next place
after hope: and Paul knits them together, as the three special graces of the
holy ghost, Faith, hope, charity, 1. Cor. 13. There are three (says he) faith
hope, and charity, and the greatest of these is charity. The Apostle knits
these together, and we do not sever them, specially for that Gods love is a
certain bond uniting us to God, together with the bond of faith, which is the
primary and principal. For this cause Peter says, that our communion with
Christ now absent from us, does consist love and faith. And this moves us in
the third place after faith, to entreat of Charity, in this treatise of our
effectual calling. And charity or love proceeds from that sweet
apprehension and taste of the Lord: for that taste stirs up in the heart an
exceeding love of the Lord, Whence love proceeds.
and of our neighbor for the Lords sake. And when as Charity has received
this life by Faith, it becomes the instrument of Faith, whereby it works
other effects of the Spirit; as the gifts of knowledge, of prophesying, of
tongues, and of miracles. These also are the instruments and means, whereby
justifying faith works; but the principal is love: for which cause it is
said, Gal. 5. that faith works by love, and love with the works or fruits
thereof, among all signs and testimonies, gives the surest evidence Love the
best evidence of faith.
unto faith.

If this be compared with other graces of Gods Spirit, it must be preferred
before them all: for it has the third place after Faith. Therefore if ye set
aside Faith and hope, love has the first place of all the graces of ye holy
Chost, and is, as it were, the soul of all gifts which follow after it. For
this cause the Apostle 1. Cor. 12. 13. having numbered diverse gifts of the holy
Ghost, says, That if these graces wanted love, they were either as dead, or as
nothing, or should profit nothing. Whereby he gives us to understand, that all
other virtues have no soundness in them, if ye sever them from love, but to be
only certain dead shadows of virtues. We may therefore justly call charity
the life of all gifts and graces which follow it.

If the adversaries had contented themselves with this prerogative of Charity,
they had not erred: but for that Popish charity.
they avouch it to be also the life and form of faith, herein they sin
greatly, that faith rather contrarily is the life of charity, for that without
Faith, there is no man has but the dead shadow of Love. Wherefore the faith
of Christ is the principal life or soul both of charity, and of all other
virtues for without it they are all but vain and counterfeit, and very sins
before God: for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

The primarie object of love is the same with the object of faith and hope: For
what we first apprehend by faith, and next expect in hope, the same we embrace
in Object of love.
love. The secondary object of love is our neighbor, who^ we love in and for
the Lord. The subject of love is the heart: for we love with the heart: as the
Apostle speaks, Love out of a pure heart. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.


The nature thereof is not in knowledge, nor in hoping, but in loving. In love
two things are principally to Nature of love.
be respected: first, a diligent endeavor for the prescruation of that we love:
next, an earnest affection to be united and conjoined with it: both which we
see are to be respected in the love of God and of our neighbor.

The properties of love are many, 1. Cor. 13. 4. etc. For whereas love is,
there is a heap of virtues: for Charity is never alone in any man, but has
ever many other virtues as companions and handmaids attending on it. Of the
premises ye may gather some definition of faith; as namely, that Love is an
holy endeavor for the preservation of that which is beloved, whether God, or
man, with an earnest desire Love defined.
to be united unto it: For love is that bond (as the Apostle speaks) whereby
the members of the body are knit together. And it serves also in some sort and
place to unite us unto God and Christ; notwithstanding that the communion of
Christ the head of his body the church, be principally to be ascribed unto
faith. And in this respect love goes before justification, and is a branch, in
our effectual calling, ever going together with faith, hope, and repentance.
For which cause principally, I thought good to speak of it briefly in this
Treatise, after faith and hope: for that faith, wherein we say consists the
second part of our effectual calling, has these for inseparable companions,
faith, hope and repentance: after which follows our justification by order,
not of time, but of nature. But in another respect love follows justification,
and appertains to the grace of regeneration: but of this we shall speak in
fit place.

Now to return to our purpose: the definition given before, is not so much of
love it self, as of the work and function thereof. For Love is properly an
affection, holy A larger definition of love.
or sanctified: and not so only, but also supernatural, carried up to love
those things which are above nature, and exceed all natural affection: for
like as faith is of those things which excel all natural knowledge and
apprehension; and hope is of those things which excel all natural
expectation: so Love also is of those things which be above the reach of all
natural affection. For as we have often before admonished, this our new birth
in Christ Jesus, is not so much a restoring of us to that image of Adam, which
he had before his fall, as unto the image of Christ, who is a spiritual and an
heavenly man, in whom, and by whom we have not only (so to speak) a natural
sanctity or holiness: but also do receive from him a certain heavenly and
supernatural virtue and efficacy infused into all affections and powers of
the soul. But this our supernatural condition as yet appears not unto men,
neither do we sufficiently feel it and find it our selves, but it shall be
seen in another life, when as we shall put on, and bear the image of that
heavenly man, 1. Cor. 15. 49. Now we are called the sons of God, but as yet
it appears not what we shall be: but we know it shall come to pass, that we
shall be like unto him, when he shall appear. 1. Io. 3. 2.

The Adversaries spend all their labor in setting forth the commendations of
love, and they be too long in extolling charity: For they adorn it with the
spoils of justifying faith, so gracing it with stolen colors, and not with it
own proper beauty, ascribing the justification and salvation of man (which
they take away from faith) unto charity: as shall be seen when we come to
speak of the doctrine of free justification. And thus far shall suffice of
charity or love.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Repentance.
REpentance follows faith, as the effect follows his cause: For that godly
sorrow which is according to God, and works repentance, is the daughter of
Faith, as we shall see afterward. Of this benefit there are diverse names in
diverse languages. The Hebrews do call it TESCHUBHAH, the Grecians, (...), and
(...). The word (...) is of a verb which signifies to be wise after a thing
is done, to retract his sentence, to change his mind, and to return to a right
mind. Whereupon Repentance is nothing else but an after wit, a reuersing of
judgment, and change of determinations. The word (...) is of the verb (...),
which signifies to be careful and anxious after a thing is done: Whereupon
(...) is nothing else but a trouble and disquietnesse of heart, after a thing is
acted. Therefore these two Greek words differ, for that the first concerns
properly the mind or understanding: the second, the heart and affection. They
differ also in another respect, in that (...) comprehends the whole work and
benefit of Repentance (for the change of the mind, which is implied in this
word, does necessarily presuppose the sorrow of the heart: and that same (...)
(which is a contrition and an axnietie after the fact committed:) whereas (...)
is rather restrained to signify only a part of this benefit, namely, the
first, which consists in sorrow, in contrition, and the disquiet of the heart
after a thing is done: for it follows not, that wheresoever this same
co^punction of of heart be, there should presently follow that sound
Repentance; as it is necessary that wheresoever sound Repentance be found,
there also must be that compunction of heart. Some there are which make a third
difference between these two, affirming that this sound Repentance properly
belongs to the godly, and to the Elect, and only to them; for the elect only,
properly, and in very truth become wise after their falls, and they do only
change their minds, and their purposes, and return to a sound mind; whereas
some compunction, and disquietnesse of heart does not only belong to the godly
and the elect, but also to the wicked, and to the Reprobates, in whom there is
found after a sin committed, some grief, and disquietnesse of heart, not so
much for the sin committed, as for the punishment of the sin. But we are to
understand that wheresoever this same sorrow is attributed to the wicked, there
is not understood hereby that godly care and sorrow which is according to God;
but a worldly sorrow, and a sorrow which is unto death. In which sense it is
attributed to Judas, Mat. 27. 3. Judas repented himself: but contrariwise,
when it (...).
is attributed to the Godly, thereby is signified not so much a sorrow for the
punishment of sin it self, as for the offense and displeasure of God. Thus
far of the Greek names of Repentance.

The Latins do call it a Conversion, an after-wit, to return to heart and
understanding, and repentance. Conversion Conuersio. Resipiscentia.
does fitly answer with the Hebrew word: and it is a word which the Prophets
have used in the old Testament, Teschubbah.
Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be converted, Ier. 31. Even as Christ and his
Apostles themselves use the foresaid Greek words in the new Testament, of
Repentance and Compunction of heart. A change of the mind is properly signified
in the Greek word (...), for to (...).
change the mind is to begin to be wise after the deed done. Penance is
signified in the Greek word (...): for it is derived of the verb Poenitere,
which signifies a punishment: for in this kind of repentance, that sorrow and
anxietie of the heart is a punishment. For as the Greek word (...) does differ
from the word (...), so does poenitentia, penance, from the word Resipiscentia,
Resipiscentia.
Repentance. For to pass by other differences, the word Penance signifies
properly one part only of this benefit, to wit, sorrow, disquietnesse, and
anxietie after the deed done. But the word Resipiscentia, which is a change of
the mind, does comprehend this whole benefit: for the change of the mind, and
to become wise after our falls, does necessarily presuppose the sorrow of the
heart, as the efficient cause. The old Latin translation does translate both
the Greek words every where Poenitentia, Penance. The adversaries do
earnestly contend, that the word Penance is every where to be retained, to
wit, that they may defend the Sacrament of Penance (as they call it) even by
the very name it self, to consist in external and corporal affliction. The
word Resipiscentia, which signifies a change of the mind, is more used by our
Divines when they speak of this grace. And thus much concerning the names of
this benefit.

The parts thereof are generally these, first sorrow, then after sorrow a chang
of the mind and purpose, which Parts of Repentance.
is properly (as is before said) signfied by the Greek word, used for
repentance. We are therefore first to speak of sorrow, which is the first
part of repentance, and this sorrow is of two kinds. First for the punishment
of sin, which 2. Co. 7. is called The sorrow of the world, and also a sorrow
Sorrow twofold.
which is to death: Secondly, it is a sorrow for the sin it self, and
because of the offense which is committed against God, which in like manner is
called of the Apostle A sorrow according to God. Of both these we will speak
severally. The principal efficient of the first sorrow which is conceived in
heart, for the punishment of sin, is the holy Ghost, which Romans 8. verse 15.
16. is called the spirit of bondage to fear, that is to say, which testifies
unto us of our servile and miserable condition without Christ, and therefore
does beget fear and horror within us.

The instrument whereby the spirit does work this sorrow in our hearts, is the
preaching of the law. The sum whereof is in that syllogism, concerning the
which we have spoken in the doctrine of faith: the proposition of which
syllogism is this. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things,
which are written in the book of this law to do the^. The assumption is by
every man's conscience thus annexed. But I have not continued in them: and the
conclusion therefore is this: I am accursed. From hence does that sorrow, or
rather that horror of the heart arise or spring, not so much for sin which is in
the assumption, as for the punishment, and fear of the curse, which is in the
conclusion. And this is that which is called the prick of conscience, which by
means of the conclusion before showed, does not only prick a wounded mind, but
also pierce even through the heart. And this legal sorrow, if the grace of the
Gospel did not put an helping hand between it and us, would drive a man into
utter desperation. And thus much concerning that first sorrow.

The very same spirit of God is likewise a principal efficient cause of the
latter sorrow, but not proceeding as before: for now he becomes the spirit of
adoption, Whereby we cry Abba, Father. Romans 8. that is, testifying of our
adoption in Christ, and therefore does enlarge both our heart and mouth to call
upon God familiarly, as upon our Father.

The instrument whereby the holy spirit does work this faith in our hearts, it
is the preaching of the Gospel: the sum whereof is contained in that
syllogism concerning which we have spoken in the doctrine of faith. The
proposition of this syllogism is, He that believes shall be justified, and
shall live; whereupon faith does assume, saying: But I do believe; and
concludes saying: Therefore righteousness and life pertains unto me. In
this conclusion there is I confess, matter of joy, and of unspeakable
gladness: but it is as true that there is in it matter of sorrow also; which
is conceived after we have known the mercy of God in Christ to be so great, and
does arise in this respect, because we have offended so merciful and so loving
a Father. It is then a joy mixed with sorrow, and with the unspeakable and
glorious joy of faith having joined with it sighs that cannot be expressed.
And thus much also of the later sorrow.

Now let us see how both these kinds of sorrow belong unto sound repentance:
That first sorrow which is of the law, and is conceived by reason of the
punishment which follows sin: I confess it is no part of this holy change
and conversion unto God: for of it own nature it does rather estrange us from
God, then convert us to The terror of the law a preparatiue for the Gospel.
God; and in very deed it does altogether alienate the wicked from God as
from a terrible judge. Notwithstanding in repentance it has his use for it
prepares the elect by giving them sense of their misery, to that grace and
mercy which is propounded in the Gospel. The latter sorrow which is according
to God, and is effected by the Gospel, is properly a part of repentance and
does effect that change of the mind, and reason before specified. And
therefore the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 7. that the sorrow which is according to
God, causes repentance. And thus far of the first part of this benefit which
is found to be in sorrow. The other follows which is called properly by the
Apostle 2. Cor. verse. 7. a Change of the mind. For there follows after that
godly sorrow a certain wonderful change of the mind, of the will, and of the
heart. As touching knowledge, and that illumination Second part of repentance.
of the mind, this goes before the sorrow we have spoken of, and is an
acknowledgment wrought in us first of sin and of our misery, by the law: next
of mercy, by the Gospel. Therefore the change of the mind which follows
this sorrow: it pertaines to the faculty or judgment of reason, which also is
called the counsel and purpose of the mind Act. 11. 23.

He exhorts them that with one purpose of heart they would cleave unto the
Lord. And the judgment or counsel of the mind is changed in this sort: The
mind disalloweth the evil which is committed, and allows the good hereafter
to be practiced. There are therefore two parts of the change of ye judgment or
counsel, the first is the disallowing of the evil committed: the second is
the The change of the mind has two branches.
approving of the good to be done. After the change of the judgment, or
counsel of the mind, there follows a change of the will in this manner: The
will rejects that evil which is committed, or it declineth from it, and
allows the good to be done hereafter, or inclines thereunto. There are there
two parts of this change, first a declination from the evil committed:
secondly, an inclination to the good which is, or ought to be done. After the
2. Change of the will.
change of the will follows the change of the heart, which is on this manner:
The heart hates and detesteth that evil which it has heretofore done, and it
loves, and affects the good, which hereafter it ought to do. There are
therefore two parts of this change, the first is the detestation 3. Change of
the heart.
of evil done and committed: the second is the love of that good which ought
to be done.

In general therefore there are two parts of that chang of the mind, which is an
effect of sorrow, the first is a change from evil, and from sin committed:
the second is a change to good hereafter to be practiced and followed. Commonly
these parts are called mortification, and vivification, but I know not how
rightly and justly: for mortification and vivification are properly parts of
regeneration, which does differ from repentance, as shall be seen Regeneration
and repentance differ.
hereafter.

By that which has bin already said, we understand what be the especial points
of repentance, from whence it proceeds, and whereunto it serves. The point from
whence it proceeds, is the evil, or sin committed; the point to which it
tends, is the good hereafter to be done. Repentance therefore stands
between two actions, past, and future; and it does differ from regeneration:
for the points thereof are not deeds and actions, but qualities, to wit, the
corruption of nature, or the old man; and sanctity, or the new man: but of
this we shall entreat afterward, when we come to speak of the difference of
repentance, and of regeneration.

Ye see the^, after that great sorrow, how there is a change in the whole mind
of man. Next, ye see by that has been said of this benefit of repentance,
that repentance does begin from the heart and does proceed by the reasonable
faculties of the mind and will; and last of all, it does end and rest in the
heart: To conclude, it may easily be gathered by that which has bin said in
the the treaty of the parts of it, what the definition of repentance is, that
it Repentance desined.
is an after-wit, after the deed, and evil committed, and a sorrow, because
God is offended, and from that sorrow a certain change of the whole mind from
evil unto good. The effect of repentance is in the outward life, to wit, an
amendment of life bringing forth fruit worthy of repentance, Matthew. 3. verse. 8.

There is question concerning repentance, whether it be the same with
regeneration or new birth; for the common oipnion of Dimnes is, that the
benefits of regeneration, and new birth differ not in matter it self;
notwithstanding it appears unto us that there is a difference between these
two, and it shall appear to them also who diligently Repentance and
regeneration differ.
consider the ends of both; for repentance is to be referred to our effectual
calling, and it is an effect of faith which is another part of our effectual
calling: for as many as believe, they repent, they change their counsel and
return to a better mind. But regeneration is the beginning of our
glorification, and the beginning of a new creature. Repentance goes before
justification, even as faith and hope; for of the Baptist it is said, That he
preached the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, Mark 3. 4. Luke
3. 3. But regeneration follows justification, for being justified we receive
the spirit of sanctification whereby we are renewed, and as it were find a new
creation begun even in this life: Repentance is the cause, regeneration is the
effect: for therefore God does renews us in How reneneration and repentance
differ.
Christ, and make us new men, because we repent us of our old life, and begin
to be wise after sin committed. Notwithstanding in the middle place betwixt
repentance and regeneration, comes in justification; when as God does of his
mere mercy and grace account, and repute us as just. The name of repentance
employeth sorrow, but the name of regeneration gladness. To conclude, the points
of repentance, as whence it proceeds and whereunto it tends, they are deeds,
the evil or sin committed; and the good which ought to be practiced: but the
bounds of regeneration are qualities, inherent corruption, and sanctity or
holiness, which is wrought in us: the old man, and new man renewed in Christ.

But you will say, in repentance there is a change from evil to good; a change
I say of the mind and heart: I answer, in our effectual calling there begins a
change of ye mind of man. Notwithstanding al Divines distinguish calling, and
faith from regeneration, why then should they not in like manner distinguish
between repentance, (which follows faith and our effectual calling) and
regeneration? for every change of the mind is not to be deemed forthwith How
repentance follows regeneration.
regeneration, but there are certain changes of man's mind which go before
regeneration, and which prepare the mind, and so the whole man unto
regeneration, and to that new creation: in which kind repentance is an
especial grace. These things are to be distinguished not in time but in nature:
for at that very same instant, we believe and be effectually called, and do
repent, and be justified, and be regenerate.

CHAP. XXXV. How far a wicked man may proceed in repentance.
Having thus far spoken of repentance, which is proper to the elect and godly,
we are next to consider how far the reprobate, and ungodly man may proceed in
repentance. All wicked and ungodly men do not make like progress: for they
profit some less, some more in the work of repentance. We will first speak of
them which be least proficient These first have a sorrow, or horror in their
minds, which Degrees of repentance in the impious.
comes from the law, and that not for sins or any offenses committed
against God, properly and truly: but because of the punishment of sin
properly, and for sin accidentally, because punishment follows sin. Next
after this sorrow there follows in them some dislike in mind of the sin
committed, but because of the punishment: Note this distinction.
but as touching affection to the good which ought to be don, so far they come
not. Further, yet there follows in the will a declining from evil committed
but because of the punishment; for in the mean while their will is not bent,
or inclined to the good which ought to be done. After this little change of the
will, there follows in the heart a detestation of evil committed, but in
regard of the punishment; for all this while the heart does not proceed to
love justice, or the good which ought to be done. And as touching the outward,
life there is no good change or holy amendment in it.

In this kind was Judas the traitor, of whose repentance read Mat. 27. where
first it is said, that Judas did repent him of that he had done. Note here in
this word his sorrow, Judas example.
and anxiety of heart. Next, he is said to have brought again ye 30. pieces of
silver to the high priest: whence may necessarily be gathered a change of the
will, of the mind and of the heart: which thing also by his own confession may
appear, because he said afterward, I have sinned, betraying the innocent
blood: for this word does argue a dislike of sin in some sort, and a
renouncing, and detestation of sin, albeit not sincere, but principally in
respect of the punishment; accidentally in respect of the sin, because sin and
the punishment thereof go together: finally, whereas he cast the silver pieces
into the temple, it appears there was in him an inward dislike, and
detestation of evil, and yet that no amendment of life followed this change of
mind, it appears in this, because presently going aside he hanged himself.

There are other impious men, who proceed a little further in repentance then
these, having in their minds some change unto good, their minds allowing that
which is good, and their will choosing the same, and their heart affecting it:
yet these things be not sincere in them, but proceed from fear of punishment.
And as concerning the amendme^t of their outward life, they begin that also:
but as the Prophet says: Their goodness vanishes as a morning cloud, and as
the morningdew. Amos. 6.

Of this number was Saul. Sam. 15. and Achab. 1. Kin. 21. Saul.
And of this kind also, it seems was Esau, Genesis 27. His sorrow appears by
his tears shed: the change also of his mind in some sort unto good appears by
that it is said, he would have obtained the blessing, he sought the blessing:
but there was nothing sincere in him. For forthwith after he returned to his
old haunt, or wonted course again. The wicked which yield best signs of
repentance, are those, who have attained the temporary faith, whose sorrow also
does arise from the Gospel, and the acknowledgment of the mercy of God in
Christ; and the change of the mind unto good, is in some sort for the good it
self: for they taste after a sort the sweetness of God in Christ, and are
delighted in it. And as concerning the amendment of outward life, that also is
in them a little longer then in those before described They do also return and
relinquish many sins.

Of this kind it seems Herod was, of whom it is written Mar. 6. 20. Herod
feared John, knowing that he was a just and an holy man, and he received him,
and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly: And thus far
of these 3. steps of impious men in repentance, and here also I end the
doctrine of sound repentance.

CHAP. XXXVI. What the judgment of Papists is of Repentance.
IT follows now that we consider what the Papists do think of their Penance:
for they reject the very name of Repentance T: heir errors are many which
they hold, we will take view of some few of them, and briefly confute them:
first, they say, that Repentance is a Sacrament. But A Sacrament.
I ask, if it be a Sacrament, what sensible sign has it? They answer, that
the sign is partly the act of ye penitent person; and partly the words of the
Priest, whereby the penitent is absolved. But I answer, in a sacrament there
must be not only an audible sign, but also a visible: there must be also a
certain element, and not a ceremony only: as in Baptism, and the Supper of
the Lord. Besides the ceremonies and rites, there are elements, water, bread,
and wine. Concerning this error this shall suffice.

Secondly, they affirm that the use of Repentance is this, to abolish mortal
sin committed after Baptism, 2. Error.
and to make him, who of a friend, through sin, was become Gods enemy, the
friend of God again, that is, a just man. To this I answer. To the restoring
and repairing of man, who has sinned after Baptism, we have no need of any
other Sacrament then Baptism, the force and virtue whereof is perpetual, and
effectual throughout the whole life of man, for the washing away of sin to
regenerate men: for it is false that in Baptism these sins only are washed
away, which were committed before Baptism; seeing Baptism reaches to the
whole life of Baptism effectual to the regenerate all his life.
man, and the remembrance thereof is effectual for the remission of sins,
and our regeneration, even then, when a man gives up the Ghost, and departs
this life.

Thirdly, they say that the Repentance which was in the old Testament, and
before the resurrection of Christ, 3. Error.
is not the same with the repentance which followed the resurrection of Christ;
for that was no Sacrament, but this is: I answer, that the doctrine of
Repentance, and of our conversion to God, is one and the self same; which all
the Prophets, John Baptist, Christ before and after his incarnation, and the
holy Apostles have preached.

Fourthly, they say that the principal efficient cause of Repentance is
free will, and the strength of nature stirred 4. Error.
up by a preventing grace, and that grace is but only our helper, working
together with nature or free will.

I answer, that it is clean contrary: for the Spirit, or grace of God is the
principal efficient cause of Repentance, but the instrument are the faculties
and powers of the mind, not such as they are by nature, but as they are
sanctified by the Spirit: which may appear even by this testimony, Ier. 31.
Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be converted: where the principal efficiencie,
and cause of the work is given to the Lord himself, and to his grace. But of
us, it may well be said, that we become active in repentance, being acted and
moved by the holy Ghost.

Fifthly, they divide Penance essentially into the act of the Penitent, as the
matter; and absolution of the Priest, 5. Error.
as the formal cause: I answer, that there is no necessity why repentance
should be so parted between the penitent or confessing sinner, and the Priest
absoluing. For the sinner who does repent him of his sin, may privately
confess unto God, and of him also be absolved, without any conceived or set
form of absolution by the Priest. We repent daily, and yet there is no need
that the matter should be daily so performed by the sinner repenting, and the
Priest or minister absoluing. Wherefore repentance is not to be restrained to
this form and dialogue, or communication, which must pass (as they say)
between the sinner repenting, and the Priest absoluing.

Sixthly, they divide Penance materially into Contrition, 6. Error.
Confession, and Satisfaction: for these three parts do (as it were)
appertain to the acts of their Penitents, which be the matter of their
Sacrament of Penance. I answer, concerning Contrition, which is nothing else but
a sorrow of heart, we verily admit of it, but without any opinion of merit,
which they attribute thereunto.

And as touching Confession, first we say, that it is not Signs of Repentance.
properly any part of Repentance, but an outward sign of Repentance, which is
wrought inwardly in the mind: for amongst the signs these are numbered;
confession of the mouth, tears, humbling of the body, and other actions of
like kind. Again, we say that their auricular Confession, wherein all, even
the private sins of a man must be numbered, as near as they can remember, and
whispered into the ear of the Priest; we affirm, I say, that such a
Confession is the invention of man's brain, whereof there is no commandment or
example extant in the whole Scripture: Yea verily the will of God is, that
many private sins, unto which we alone are privy, should be concealed, and
not uttered, even as God does cover the multitude of our private sins of his
free will and mercy, wherewith he embraces us in Christ Jesus.
Notwithstanding this, he requires of us that we privately repent of them, so
often as we shall remember them.

To conclude, concerning Satisfaction, we utterly condemn and renounce it: for
by it (as they teach) we satisfy of ourselves the wrath and justice of God,
and that by temporal punishments, which we willingly suffer for our sins.
This we do utterly condemn, as an opinion which does derogate from the merit
and satisfaction of Christ, whereby alone the wrath and justice of God is
satisfied for our sins. And as for these temporal afflictions of the godly,
they are not truly satisfactions for their sins, but by them God does
mortify the remnants of sins, and by that means provoke us to earnest
repentance; hereby curbing, and keeping us from falling into sin again.
Finally, as all things work for the best to them that love God, so these
things which are not so much punishments, as crosses do work together for the
best for the godly. Neither is that distinction of temporal and eternal
punishments to be allowed: for it is certain that whosoever are punished
temporally for their sins, and in that respect, and for that cause, such also
(without repentance) shall be punished for their sins eternally: for
temporal punishments of the ungodly in this life, are the very beginnings of
eternal punishments to be suffered in another life. And thus far of
repentance.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of man's Free Will.
AFter the doctrine of Faith, Hope, and Repentance, the doctrine of Free Will
is to follow, because the Adversaries do attribute Faith, hope, repentance, or
as they call it, Penance, to the liberty of our will, as to the principal
agent or cause: but they assign to grace the second place in the work of
Faith, hope, and repentance: for they say after that Free Will is stirred up by
a preventing grace, man by the benefit of his free will, does of his own
strength believe, hope, and repent him of his sins. And as for grace, that is
only a fellow-worker, say they, and a helper of man's Free-well, which
principally works in faith, hope, and repentance. But to this we have
answered before in the doctrine of repentance, and we shall hereafter answer it
a little more plainly. Now having thus far showed the occasion, why after the
doctrine of Faith, hope and repentance, we speak of Free Will: let us come to
the point it self, and discourse of it. The will of man is a faculty The will
described.
of the reasonable soul, following next after the faculty of reason: for the
mind first understands, and the^ judges. The function and use thereof is in
willing, in nilling, in choosing, in refusing, and in doubting of those things
which were before concealed, and considered of in the understanding. The
objects thereof are things simply good, and evil, and things indifferent. I
call those things simply good, which are commanded by some express Things
simply good.
law of God. I call those things simply evil, which are forbidden by the some
express law of God. And those things I count indifferent, which are neither
expressly commanded, nor expressly forbidden in the law of God. And if they be
commanded or forbidden by any law of God, that is by accident, to wit, so
far forth as they further or hinder the edification of our neigbour. These
objects of the will I subdiuide again into their final causes or ends, and into
those means which tend and lead us to the ends.

And thus I apply the functions of the will to the ends, and to the means: We
be said as well to will, and nill, the means as the ends unto which they
serve: for to will and nill are things general; but we are said only to
accept, and to reject, and to doubt of the means: for these things are
special. And thus far of the will, according to our present purpose.

There is ascribed unto the will a certain property, which the Latins call
Liberty: the Greeks a Power, as Libertas. (...).
Romans 9. 20. where the Apostle speaks of the power the Potter has over the
clay. And 1. Cor. 7. 37. He that has power over his own will: As if he should
have said, he that has liberty or power of his will: in our vulgar tongue it
is called Soueraingtie. This liberty of the will is as it were a royal power,
and the Greek word is used to set forth the power of a king, or some supreme
Magistrate. Romans 13. 27. Let every soul be subject to the higher power. For
this cause the will in the soul of man is received as a Queen, and in that
respect is said to have as it were the jurisdiction in her own hand.

But to come to some description of Free Will: This freedom of will, is a
liberty, whenas a thing being offered to the will, as to a certain Queen,
whether it be good or evil, or indifferent, the will even then can by it own A
descripttion of free will.
proper right and power, either will it or nill it; reject or receive it; or
hold a man in suspense. For which cause commonly in schools it is defined to
be a power or faculty, to like or dislike things that are directly opposite,
that is, to incline to either part of the contradiction, to receive, or reject
the one or the other: and thus commonly they describe it. Yet I like best this
description, to wit, that liberty of will should be in respect of good and
evil things (for concerning them the controversy is) it is, I say, a power of
the will, or a certain right it has, whereby of it self, and of it own
inward and natural motion, without constraint, it wills only that is good, it
chooses the good, it wills not that is evil, it rejects that is evil: In
one word, liberty of will is a power unto good, not to evil.

I am induced to like best this definition of liberty, by the example of the
liberty of God himself, who by the confession and grant of all men, most
freely wills, and Gods free will
does all things: notwithstanding, the liberty of God is not so defined, that
it should be a certain power, whereby he does so will good, as though he might
nill it, or does not so will evil, as though he might will it; but the liberty
of God is this: of his own right, and without constraint, only to will that
which is good, and nill that is evil. Again, the same is plain by the
example of the blessed Angels, who have liberty to that is good only, and not
unto good, and evil: that is, they do not so will good, as if they might nill
it: for they are so governed and Freedom of Angels.
strengthened of God, that their will only is inclined to good, and does abhor
from evil. To conclude, the same is showed in the example of Adam, and of his
state before his fall; for then truly the liberty of his will was to will good
Adams freedom in his innocence.
only, and not both good and evil, that is, he did not so will good, as if he
might nil it, except you understand a remote power: whereas we by this word
Liberty (to speak properly) do understand a more near faculty of the soul.

I call that a remote faculty, which is incident to the matter, as is the
power or property of laughter in the body of a man, before it has either
form or life. I call that Remota potentia:
a near faculty which is incident to the form, as laughter Propinqua
potentia.
in a man that has life. So in the will of man there is a remote power, as
appertaining to the matter; and there is a near power, as pertaining or
consequent to the form: but we (as a little before we spoke) by liberty
understand not that remote power, which is incident to the matter, but that
near power which is consequent to the form: and by the form we understand
that sanctity which is according to the image of God, which is the soul as it
were of our soul, and without which our soul is as it The image of God.
were dead. For which cause the Apostle says Ephe. 2. 1. That without this
holiness, we are truly said to be dead in sins and trespasses. Whence I
conclude, that the liberty of will is properly a power or faculty, which is a
consequent of sanctity, as of the formal cause, and as it were, the very soul
of the will. Whereby it comes to pass, that the will in this state without
constraint, does incline only to good, and does decline from evil: for this
liberty of a man's will, is according to the similitude and image of the
liberty of God himself. Unto this liberty, constraint is opposite, proceeding
from some outward agent, and is contrary to the nature of the will: for it is
not a will, if it be constrained, neither is it said, that the will is
constrained, albeit man himself, in whom the will is, may be said to be
constrained. I say that constraint is opposite to liberty, and not necessity:
for those things which we will or nill freely, we will or nill those things of
necessity: first, because of the necessity of Gods decree: secondly, because of
the incident form of the will it self, as of holiness, of corruption, of
both. As when man was holy in his creation; so long, as that holiness
continued, of necessity he did will that which was good, and nill the evil.
So the blessed Angels of a certain necessity will that is good, and nill the
evil, and at length when man is glorified he shall incline to good, and
decline from evil: So The will of the unregenerate.
man being wholly corrupt, before his regeneration of a certain necessity, he
wills the evil, and nils that is good, and notwithstanding after his manner, he
does will freely, albeit this be not a true liberty, as we shall hereafter
see. To conclude, a man regenerate partly of necessity does will good, in
respect of his new birth; partly of necessity he does will evil, for that he
is as yet partly corrupt; yet in both respects he wills freely: for we must
distinguish betwixt necessity, and constraint; for necessity is more general
and large then constraint is: for that which is constrained, is necessary, but
on the contrary that which is necessary is not constrained. And thus much
concerning the liberty of the will in general.

There is then a four fould hate of man to diverse conditions 1. State.
or states of man to be considered. The first state of his innocence before his
fall: secondly, the state of his corruption after his fall: thirdly, the state
of regeneration: fourthly, the state of glorification. First then concerning
the first state, it is a question whether man in his innocence had liberty of
will? I answer, if you follow the former definition of liberry, which is a
faculty, or power respecting inclining to either, side, I grant that in
things* indifferent it had a liberty, but in things simply good and evil, man
had not in that state of innocence, that liberty of will, whereby when he did
will good he might nill it, and when he did nill evil, he might will it:
except you understand a remote power: for in respect of his near power, he was
inclined to good, only because of the form of sanctity and goodness in the will
which was in him, according Propinqua potentia.
to the image of God; but if you follow the latter definition of liberty, which
is, when the will of it self of an inward motion without coaction, or constraint
of any external agent, is carried to that which is good only: if I say you
follow this definition, I answer, that man in the state of innocence had a
liberty of will.

Concerning the second state of man, the question is, whether man in the state
of corruption now has liberty 2. State.
of will. I answer, if you follow the former definition of liberty, I do not
deny that in things indifferent he has his liberty: But in things simply good
and evil, he has not liberty. For man which is wholly corrupt, does not so
will evil as that he may or can nill it: neither does he so reject that is
good as that he may or can will it; except ye understand a power remote: for
in man unregenerate that near power of the will is only inclined to evil,
because of the form of corruption and of impurity which does wholly possess his
will. But if you follow the latter definition of liberty; then verily we cannot
ascribe that liberty of the will which is according to the image of the liberty
of God himself, and is a near power or faculty, and whereby without constraint
he is carried to that only which is good, we cannot, I say, truly attribute this
unto the unregenerate and his will. For a faculty to evil cannot truly be said
a liberty; but rather a certain servitude: And in verity the unregenerate man's
will is not free but bound: yet because the unregenerate does not will evil
by constraint, but of his own accord and mere motion, in some sort it may be
said that his will is free.

Here our adversaries dissent from us, ascribing liberty of will to the man
unregenerate, whereby also of his own mere power he may will good; where as
this liberty or Papists of free will.
self power, before preventing grace lies indeed a sleep: yet
notwithstanding (say they) it is in him like as a man though he be a sleep,
yet he is both a man and living. From whence it follows necessarily (as they
would have it) that there is some holiness and integritiy in the will of a man
unregenerate. For there is no self power of the will to good, unless there be
in it the form of sanctity and integrity, which is as it were the life of the
will, and quicknes of this self power in the will unto good.

The Papists therefore erhere two manner of ways: first, because they will have
some sanctity and integrity to remain in the will of man unregenerate now after
the fall: and secondly, because they will have this self power of the will (which
necessarily is a consqeuent of the formal cause thereof, which is holiness, as
is aforesaid) they will have this self power (I say) unto good to be in the
will. For as touching holiness and righteousness, it is certain that all the
image of God was lost in the fall of man, and what portion soever hereof we
shall have in this life, it is repaired and as it were created a new by Jesus
Christ: for which cause it is called a new creature. And if this in any respect
be old, wherefore is it called new? And if any sanctity (which is the soul of
our soul, remain in man after the fall) why is man said after the fall,
before regeneration, to be dead, and not half dead? We forbear to use
testimonies of scripture in this matter, which are infinite. And as concerning
the liberty or self power which they ascribe to the will of man, how many
evidences of scripture might be produced to refell ye same? Ioh. 6. 44. No man
can come Propiqua materia.
to me, except the father which sent me draw him. Romans 8. 5. The wisdom of the
flesh, it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. 1. Cor. 2.
14. The natural man perceives not the things which are of God: for they are
foolishness to him, neither can he discern them. These places of scripture
and other such like, are to be understood of that near power of the will unto
good, which therefore the scripture denies to man in his corruption, because
there is in him no holiness left since the fall of Adam. For as touching the
remote power of the will unto good, which is a consequent of the matter, not of
the form, we do not deny, that it is in the will of a man unregenerate. And that
this also becomes of a remtoe power a near power, so soon as any holiness is
wrought in the will of man by the spirit of Jesus Christ. Seeing then we leave
this remote power to the will of the unregenerate man, that is, a certain
power of the cause material: there is no cause why our adversaries should say,
that we make men very stocks and blocks, because we deny free will unto them.
For this power of the material cause unto good, which we ascribe unto the will
of man unregenerate, may not truly be ascribed to any dead stock, or trunk.

We must understand in this place, that whereas we deny this near power to the
unregenerate, that is, a liberty to good; we mean hereby that which is good,
as it is truly good: For even the unregenerate person may will that which is
good, in it self; as the conservation of his country, justice, equity, etc.
But that which in it self is good, becomes evil in some sort, in regard of
the man unregenerate; who does not will well, that which is good in it self,
that is to say, neither in that manner, nor to that end does he will it as he
ought to will it, because himself is not good, and clean; and to the
unclean, all things are vncleare, as to the clean all things are clean. Tit.
2. 15.

Again, be advertised that in this matter of free will, I hold that there is
one, and the same reason of good things of what kind soever they be, natural,
or civil; and humane or spiritual: for the unregenerate man has not this
liberty, or near power to any good thing, as it is good and acceptable to God,
and agreeable to his law: albeit by nature his will is most far estranged
from spiritual things, which the natural man perceives not, and which (as
the postle says, He cannot know, yea they are foolishnes unto him. By
spiritual good things I mean faith, hope, repentance, justification, eternal
life it self. There is no cause therefore why our adversaries should ascribe
faith, hope, repentance to the liberty of our will, that is to say, to the
strength of nature, as to the principal efficient cause of the same: as if we
by nature, and the strength thereof could believe, could hope and truly convert
our selves unto God.

But to the intent this thing may yet be more manifest, we must understand that
there be two kinds of good things, the one is of humane good things: the other
is of kinds of good things.
divine and spiritual good things. Humane good things are either moral, and
pertain to every private man, or Oeconomicall, and pertain to a man's family:
or they are Political, and pertain to the whole commonwealth, or to the
whole City. Spiritual good things are faith, hope, repentanceiu, stification,
sanctification, life eternal. To both these kinds of good things man's will is
not like affected, for unto humane things, or unto humane good things, it is
somewhat more inclined: as for example, nature does incline unto temperancy,
fortitude, liberality, justice, albeit it does neither will nor choose these
things, which in themselves are good, in that manner or to that end it ought.
Whereby it comes to pass, that those things which in themselves are good,
yet (in respect of him, who is unregenerate) become evil and very sins
before God. And concerning things spiritual, the nature of man is more
estranged from them: and when they offer themselves to the will, nature it
self does wholly abhor from them.

This thing may be yet more plain by example, and experience. There are two
certain good things, to wit, justice by works, and justice by faith, which is
called the justice Righteousness by works natural.
or rightcousnes of God: we all have experience that our will naturally is
inclined to that righteousness which is by works, and which is a certain
humane good thing. Hence it comes that even to this day, all the world
following nature seeks to be justified by good works. But the same will does
wholly abhor, and utterly dislike that righteousness whichis by faith: the
reason is, because it is a certain spiritual and unknown good thing. Hence it
comes to pass that so few seek to be justified by faith, and by the alone
mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

By this and other such like examples it appears, that man's will is more
inclined by nature to humane good things; and wholly to abhor spiritual good
things. Albeit in truth, to speak exactly, it is inclined to no good at all,
as it is truly good. It is not inclined at all, no not to those humane things,
as they be truly good and acceptable unto God: for it wills them neither in that
manner, neither to that end it ought. So far forth then, as it wills them,
even those things that are good in themselves are sins, and unpleasing to God.
Notwithstanding they differ from those evils and sins, which even in
themselves, and in their own nature are sins, as manslaughter, adultery,
theft, and in which I grant there be more degrees of sin; for in these things
men sin both in the substance of the things themselves, and in the manner of
doing, and in the end. And the will of man unregenerate is more inclinable unto
these things by it own nature, then unto those things, which are good in
themselves. For first, it is carried of it own accord to those which are evil
in themselves. Secondly, it has but some inclination to things humane, which
in their own kind are good. Lastly, it does wholly abhor spiritual good
things before regeneration. Again, I conclude, that humane good things, so
far forth as man unregenerate does will them, become in some sort evil; and
the man unregenerate does sin in the very desire of them: which thing also is
true in things indifferent, which are neither good nor evil in themselves. For
so far forth as man unregenerate does will them, so far forth they become
evil; and the unregenerate man does sin, when he does will and desire even
that, which of it own nature is indifferent, because he does will it, neither in
that manner, nor to that end he ought.

Now concerning the estate of regeneration, the question is, whether the
regenerate man has his free will: I answer, if you define free will to be a
liberty or power to choose, or will (they say) any of both sides: First, in
things indifferent, we say that he has this liberty. Secondly, we do not
deny unto him this liberty also in things good and evil: for seeing there is
double act and a double form in the will of the regnerat man, to wit, the form
of holiness, and the form of corruption; and because he has the first fruits of
the new man, and the remnant of the old, it cannot be, but that the near power
of his will be double also, one inclining unto good, the other declining unto
evil: So that this received definition of free will seems unto me to agree
best with the will of the regenerate person. But if you define liberty to
consist of a power not constrained, tending to good only, and not to evil;
then verily the man regenerate is not so free; but proceeds only to this
liberty, which shall at length be perfected in another life.

Finally, concerning the estate of glorification, the question is whether man
when he shall be glorified, shall have this liberty of will? I answer, if you
define free will a power to make choice of either part, even in good things,
and in evil; then I say, man in this state of glorification shall not have it.
For he shall have that near power to good only, because of that form of
holiness, or glory rather, wherewith then, his will shall be endued withal.
I deny not that there shall be in him also a remote power to evil in respect
of the necessary mutability of the creature; but this remote power shall never
be a near power, because God shall for ever strengthen him, and sustain him
in yt state of glory. But if you follow that latter definition of free will,
the glorified person shall at length be set free: for he shall will that only
which is good and acceptable to God, and that without constraint, and for ever.
Man had free will in the state of innocence, according to the image of that
divine liberty; but in the estate of glorification, wherein he shall come more
near unto the image of his God, and shall bear the image of that heavenly man
Jesus Christ, his will shall be much more free, and far more ready to that which
is good only. And thus have we spoken hitherto of the liberty of will, that is,
of that propriety, or natural quality of the will.

Now we be to speak of *free will. But there be which refer the word
Arbitrium to the mind: for that they deem it is nothing else but the judgment
of the mind, which goes before the free action of the will: but the word free,
they say, does pertain to the will: notwithstanding I think the word Arbitrium
does signify the decree of the will it self, that is, that by this word, we
understand the fu^ction of the will, whatsoever it be, whether it will, or nill,
whether it choose or reject. We ascribe liberty to this purpose or endeavor of
the will, and it is said to be free, even as the will it self is called
Free Will, for that ever the propriety of the cause does predicate (as the
Logitians speak) both of the effect, and of the action of the same cause.
Free Will then is nothing else in my judgment, but the decree or endeavor of the
will, which is without constraint, and which proceeds from some inward motion
of the will, and not from any external constraining power. A question may be
demanded whether the will when it does freely execute his function and office
in willing freely, or nilling any thing, whether I say, the mind and
understanding have not some working herein? I answer, that object, whatsoever
it be which the will, and ye free function thereof does respect, is first
discerned by the mind.

The judgment aiso of the mind is two fold: first, simple Judgment of the mind
twofold.
and intelligible; as when without any discourse and reasoning, it judges that
this is good, and that is evil; this is to be followed, and that to be avoided.
This judgment of the mind is of the end, or of some means serving to the end,
which is but only one. Next, the judgment of the mind is, when as by
discourse, and arguing, it judges any thing to be good or evil; to be
avoided, or to be followed. This judgment is where diverse means fall out, of
which, after discourse had in the mind, one is chosen, and the other is
rejected. Now the object which by the mind and understanding is in some sort
showed and discerned, the will does freely will, or nill; choose, or refuse:
howbeit since the fall of man, such is the confusion of these faculties, or
powers of the mind of man, that what the understanding judges to be evil, and
disalloweth, the very same does the will choose, and prosecute: The disorder and
confusion. which is by nature in the soul of man.
and on the contrary, that which the mind approves for good, and allows,
that very same the will rejects. Of the mind it may be demanded, whether it
can discern between good and evil; approve the one, improve the other. This
question must be answered by the consideration of that fourefold state of man.
But because the question chiefly is of the understanding of man in the state of
corruption, whether that can approve or accept the good, and reject the evil:
our answer shall be accordingly: We say therefore, that if you understand that
near power, which is a consequent of that corrupt essential form, the mind of
man, in this state can but only allow that which is evil: It may also allow
that which is good in it self, but not as it is truly good, because it cannot
allow it, neither in the manner, nor to the end it ought, as is aforesaid of
will. But to approve that good, which we call humane good, the mind of man in
the state of corruption is more inclinable: but far is from intertaining any
spiritual good at all, for as the Apostle Saint Paul says, 1. Cori. 1. 2. 4.
It judges every spiritual grace to be folly; for the things which are of the
Spirit of God are foolishness unto him. And thus far have we spoken
concerning the freedom of man's will, or of free will. It follows now that we
speak next of the grace of God, which is contrary to free will, or to nature,
and which is not only the principal efficient cause of Faith, Hope, and
repentance, but also the sole efficient cause of them: It follows then that
we treat next of the free grace of God.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Concerning the free grace of God.
THe grace of God is the undeserved favor of God, or it is that whereby God
favors his creature without any desert of his. The Apostle Grace described.
does intimate thus much Ephesians. 1. 9. in that he puts no difference
between these words Grace, and a good pleasure: for whereas he says in that
verse, that God (...)
had elected us according to his free grace, it seems to be spoken in the
same sense and meaning with that which he said before in the same chapter, ver.
7. In him we have redemption according to the riches of his grace: for the
grace and love of God are taken in differently one for another, To. 9. 13. I
have loved Jacob. This is that love or that free grace wherewith from all
eternity he loved Jacob. Ephesians. 3. 19. That (says he) You being rooted and
grounded in love. etc. And this is that grace whereby he loved us from all
eternity Tit. 3. verse. 4. The grace of God as it respects mankindis called
(...) or love towardds Man.

Again, this word Grace is taken more generally, then this word Mercy, for
whereas mercy does properly respect such as are in misery and sinners: grace
reaches unto al creatures of what kind or condition soever they be, as well to
the blessed Angels as to sinful me^, as may appear by the salutation which
Paul uses to Timot. in the first, and second epistle, where he wishes first
grace to Tymothy, as being a more general thing: then in the second place
mercy, as a more particular thing, restraining it to the Grace more general
then mercy.
person saluted. For although in those salutations Grace and Mercy are taken
metoymically for the blessings and benefits which are conferred, and conveyed
to men of Gods free grace and mercy: yet hereby may appear that the mercy of
God, which is the cause and fountain of these benefits has not so general an
acception as grace. For the meaning of the words is thus much, as if the
Apostle had said, the benefits which God does give us, are freely bestowed upon
us, without any desert of ours, and not only without desert, but to us which
deserve to be punished with all the miseries and calamities that can be.

That it may further appear that all the blessings and benefits of God, are
derived and conveyed unto us by means of his grace, and same favor of God,
we will search into and consider more deeply of the doctrine of grace. God
from and before all eternity, purposed to be glorified specially in his grace,
To. 11. 32. God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all. In which place we may see the justice of God, to attend on his mercy and
grace. So in like manner all the other essential properties of God, as his
power and wisdom, etc. all which be subordained to serve his grace and mercy.
Hence it is that first of all, God before all eternity past his decrees of
grace to the praise and glory of his grace. Ephe 1. 6. 12. The 1. decree of
Gods free grace.
The first decree of Gods free grace, was concerning the incarnation of his
Son, and the glorifying of him, at the appointed time, unto the praise of his
grace. Concerning the decree of his Son Christ, read Act. 2. 23. and 4. 28.
oncerning the love of the father to Christ, Colos. 1. 29. Because the Father
was well pleased in him: where you may see that the love of the Father is the
cause why the fullness of the deity does dwell corporally in Christ: for it was
of his admirable grace that God would have flesh, yt is, so base and vile a
creature to be united unto God, the glorious and incomparable creator. The
second decree proceeding 2. Decree of Gods free grace.
from grace, was concerning the first creation of man after his own image:
then after the fall, concerning his restoring by his Son Jesus, I trust, unto
the image of his Son: that is to say, by calling, justifying, and glorifying
of man to the glory of Christ, and to the praise of his own grace in his
appointed time. For the restoring and repayring of manking after the fall, is
summarily set down in these three chief points: read Ephesians. 1. 4. 5. To. 9. 11.
To. 11. 5. 6.

Hence follows the execution of these decrees by same grace of God, and the
first execution was of the decree of God concerning man; which by order of
Execution of Gods free grace.
nature had the second place, for that which was first in decree and
ordination, became the second in execution; and contrarily, that which was the
second in decree and ordination, became the first in execution. Therefore the
execution of the decree of God concerning man has the first place, and the
same was of the free grace of God, unto the glory and praise of the same grace.
Therefore the execution of the decree of God concerning man to speak some thing
thereof, was first the creation of man, of Gods free grace after the image of
his creator, and to the praise of that his grace. Then after the fall of man
followed the restitution of man, of Gods free grace in and by his Son Christ,
to the glory of Christ his Son, and to the praise of the grace of God the
Father. This repairing, which is one of the parts of the execution of the
decree of God concerning man consists of many parts all which proceed from
the mere grace of God, and first tend to the glory of Christ the head, and our
mediator between God and man: next, to the praise of ye grace of God the
father. 1. Co. 3. 22. 23. Al things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ
is Gods. And concerning this restoring of mankind, before we come to the parts
thereof ye must be advertised, that in time it partly went before the execution
of that decree, concerning Christ the Son of God; and partly did follow after
it: For before the fulness of time came, wherein Christ was manifested in the
flesh, God began to restore mankind, even from the very fall of the first man,
that is, men were called, justified, and glorified: and that partly by virtue
of that decree concerning Christ, which was from everlasting; and partly
because of the manifestation of the same Christ which was to come. But when
that fulness of time came, and when Christ was now manifested in the flesh, had
suffered and was glorified, this redemption of man was more fully and richly
accomplished. For Christ being now come works our restitution more effectually
by his Gospel, I mean his power is more effectually seen and known in our
vocation, justification, and glorification, then it was before his incarnation.
Therefore the execution of the decree concerning Christ the Son of God, which
was first, falls now as it were into ye midst of the repairing of mankind, or
of the execution of the decree concerning man's redemption. Wherefore we shall
also speak thereof in the middle place, that so from it we may proceed to
speak of the parts of the redemption of mankind.

The execution then of that decree touching the Son of The execution of the
decree concerning Christ.
God Jesus Christ consists in his incarnation, passion, and glorification,
and that of the free grace of God which respected partly the humanity of
Christ, and partly respected us, who be repaired and redeemed by that same very
flesh of Christ hypostatically united unto the Son of God. Therefore the
execution of the decree concerning the Son of God Jesus Christ, did proceed
from a double grace, and was to the praise of that grace of God.

Now I come to speak of the recovery or redemption The execution of the decree
concerning. man's redemption.
of mankind, or of the execution of the decree concerning the restitution of
man: the parts hereof briefly be these: vocation, justification,
glorificatio^. Our calling, to speak thereof in the first place, is by Gods
free grace, and that in a double: respect, for first in our effectual calling
the publishing of the covenant, and the preaching of the gospel, is of the only
free grace of God. Ephe. 1. 9. Having opened Our calling is by grace.
unto us (says he) the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure.
Next faith, whereby we receive the promise of the covenant, which is offered
unto us in Christ, is of the Faith.
mere grace of God. Philip. 1. 29. For unto you it is given for Christ, not
only to believe, but also to suffer for him. Hence it follows that faith is
the free gift of God. That former grace may be called the grace of our
vocation, this grace is common to all that are called elect and reprobate. But
the latter grace in our effectual calling, may be called the grace of faith,
appertaining only to the elect: for it is given only to those that are
predestined, to life everlasting, to believe. Under the grace of faith I
likewise comprehend the grace of hope, and of repentance, as being subalterne
graces, and comprehended under this argument of our effectual calling.

The grace of justification follows this double grace in our effectual
calling: For that very imputation which follweth faith, and that apprehension
of faith in our effectual calling proceed also of a certain new grace of God:
For it cannot be but of grace that the justice, and satisfaction of another
should be imputed or accounted unto us as ours, To. 3. 14. We are justified
freely, that is, by grace; as else where often. This grace the Apostle does
always oppose to works, and to merits, making it the companion of faith Merits.
in Christ: for the free grace of God does well agree, and stand with the
merits of Christ apprehended by faith; not only because that merit is not ours
but Christ's, that is, the merit of God himself, but much more rather, because
the satisfaction and merit of Christ is of Gods free grace and mere mercy: For
God spared not his Son, but gave him to die for us. To. 8. 32. Hence it is, that
the grace of God does more appear in this satisfaction and merit of his, then
if he had justified us without any merit at all, either of our own or of any
other.

Therefore the free grace of God does very well stand with that merit, which
God gave us of his own. And if that merit and price of our redemption had not
bin paid by God himself, then surely the grace of God had not so manifestly
appeared in our redemption. And as for man's merit, we say that the grace of God
cannot in any wise stand with it.

The grace of glorification, or regeneration, follows the grace of
justification; for as pronunciation, and giving of sentence is of grace; so the
execution thereof is likewise of grace: for regeneration or glorification is a
certain execution of the sentence of justification aforegoing. Of Regeneration
or glorification is as it were an execution of the sentence of justification.
this grace see. 1. Pe. 2. 3. Who of his great mercy has begotten us unto a
lively hope. Tit 3. 5. According to his mercy he saved us by the fountain of
regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost. Ephesians. 2. 5. 8. They are saved by
grace.

Here ye must observe that in this work of the restitution of mankind, and
that in all the parts thereof, there is but one only grace of God, which is the
beginning and first cause of all these proceedings: but we according to the
variety of the effects thereof do thus distinguish it, and consider of it
diversely: like as the spirit of God which is one 1. Cor. 12. 4. in respect of
the diversity of the gifts and effects thereof, is after a sort distinguished,
for that in some respect (but not indeed and verity) he seems not to be one
and the same (as it were) Romans 8. 15. For you have not received the spirit of
bondage to fear any more, but you have received the spirit of adoption.

By this that has been spoken, understand that there are as it were 4. graces
of God in the restoring of mankind, and in the parts thereof. For whereas there
is a double mercy of God in our effectual vocation, to wit: First, an offering
of Christ with all his benefits, in the covenant of grace, or the Gospel:
secondly, faith to receive Christ being offered (under faith I comprehend hope
and repentance, which follow faith) Therefore in our effctuall Parts of our
effectual calling.
calling two graces must be understood the grace of our vocation, or of
offering Christ unto us, and the grace of faith, or of receiving Christ by us.
In justification we have a third grace, which we may call the grace of
justification; and in glorification there is a fourth grace; which we may not
vnfittly call the grace; of glorification.

Hence we may see, that the first grace (which they call preventing grace,) is
that grace whereby God first calls us to himself by his Gospel; and the last
grace which is Preventing grace
the complement of grace, to be that grace whereby God does glorify us together
with his Son in his kingdom: for he begins the last grace in this life by
regeneration, but reserueth the full consu^mation thereof to another life by
glorification. Thus much of the parts of the restitutio^ of mankind, all which
proceed from the mere grace of God, and are directed unto the glory of his
grace.

We must observe this in general, that all the blessings of God as well those
that were from al eternity, as those that are in time, be founded upon the only
and mere grace of God. And that in respect of grace there is no difference
between those benefits of God, that were before all worlds, as his prescience,
and predestination, and these which are in time, as our vocation,
justification, glorificatio^.

This is the truth of God, and it will stand in despite of all the adversaries
and enemies of the grace and cross of Christ, which notwithstanding hold I
know not what freedom of will, and that our meritorious works do co^curre in
our votion, justification and glorification, with the grace of God. For as
touching our calling, although they confess this to be true, that preventing
grace (as they speak) does so prevent or preoccupy us, even then, when we
think nothing of the grace of God, or of preparing our selves to receive
grace, but being (as it were) a sleep in sin: yet they do ascribe to free will,
that affiance which we give unto faith, whereby we assent unto preventing grace,
and admit ye same: as though we had any actual free will, or self power, (as
they speak) to receive the grace of God. We do grant some power or freedom of
will, whereby it inclines after a sort unto that which is is good: I understand a
power of the matter: but we do utterly deny that men by nature have any actual
free will, or that we have a self power to do that which is good, as it is
good. That self or near power of will, or liberty of will to good, I define
to be that liberty in the will, which is by the essential form of Potentia
propinqua.
holiness, or by the image of God which is imprinted in the will, as may
appear in the Chap. of free will before handled. Therefore we hold, and teach
that in receiving the first grace, our will stands before God mere passiuely
and not actiuely, that is when the free grace of God preuenteth it, we say it
has a power unto good, but the same to be of the matter only (as schoolmen
speak) and passive, which they call a remote power. Again, we avouch that the
same power is made actual, by means of divine grace preventing us, yt is, by
the working of the holy spirit, who takes possession as it were of us by the
preaching of the Gospel, whereby the holy Ghost does renew our hearts,
inspiring that life of God into us, from which we were before altogether
strangers: as it is written Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. 19. creating in us again that
image of God which was lost, that image (I say) of holiness, and true
righteousness.

As touching our justification where our adversaries do affirm that it is two
fold, terming ye 1. habitual and the 2. Popish justification.
actual: they say, that we are prepared by our free will, to the 1.
justification, as by a principal agent, and by the grace working together with
the same. But as for the 2. justification, that they place in works proceeding
from free will and from our*first justification, which they call infused grace.
And here they ascribe life everlasting to the merit of this 2. justification,
which does consist in the works of our free will and of infused grace (as
they call it.)

Hence we may see, that they do not attribute to the only grace of God, any of
the former benefits, neither justification, nor vocation, nor glorificatio^,
nor any of those spiritual graces, which God in time gives to his children: But
they do part them between Gods grace, free will, and man's merit. Finally, if
any comparison be made between God, and us concerning the conferring of these
benefits, we shall Note.
find them to ascribe more to us, and our free will, and our works, then to the
grace of God. But we have written somewhat of this before in the chapters of
our effectual calling of repentance, and of free will. Therefore I refer the
reader to these places, and here I end this matter.

Thus far then have we spoken of this common place of our effectual calling,
which because it comprehends under it many other points of divinity, it may
be well reckoned amongst the most general heads of Theology.

OF THE MEANS WHEREby God from the beginning has revealed both his covenants
unto Mankind.
Question.

HOW many ways are there, whereby God from the beginning has revealed all his
will, that is, Kinds or forms of revelation.
the doctrine of both covenants, of works and grace, unto mankind?

A. They are two.

Q. Which be they.

A. The first is a lively voice: the second is the Scripture.

Q. What call thou a lively voice.

A. The first means of revelation, whereby God partly by his own mouth, and
partly by men, has manifested What is meant by a lively voice.
the whole doctrine of both covenants to his church, from time to time.

Q. What were the instruments of that lively voice from the beginning?

A. First, God himself spoke sometimes by his Son in Whose it was.
the form or likeness of man, appearing to the Fathers; sometimes by his spirit
inwardly in the heart. Secondly, the lively voice of Angels was heard: Thirdly,
the lively voice of men, first of the Fathers, then of Moses, and the Prophets;
after that, of John the Baptist until Christ. Then lowed Christ himself
manifested in the flesh. Last of all, the lively voice of the Apostles of
Christ.

Q. This kind of revelation which was by a lively voice of all The quality of it.
these whom you have named, was it by inspiration and altogether free from
error?

A. Concerning the lively voice of God himself, of Christ and of the Angels,
there is no question: and as concerning men, whose lively voice God has used
from the beginning of the world hitherto, in revealing his will to his Church,
they truly albeit they were sinful men, and in part only regenerate;
notwithstanding in the delivery of the doctrine of the truth of both covenants,
they were so extraordinarily governed and inspired with the Holy Spirit of God,
that they could by no means err.

Q. Do thou mean then, that all men, as many as have been from the
beginning of the world hitherto (by whose mouth God hath-spoken to his Church)
were men extraordinary, endued with extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, and
confirmed by miracles.

A. I mean even so: for prophecy in times past came not by the will of man,
but holy men spoke as they were moved by the spirit of God. 2. Pet. 1. 2.

Q. At what time began this lively voice in the Church? When it began.


A. It began even in the first creation of man.

Q. How long has the lively voice of God and men, who could not err in
delivering the doctrine of the truth continued Continuance of it.
in the Church of God?

A. It has been from the beginning of the world, even to the death of the
Apostles: all which time, there was almost no age, wherein at least some one
holy man of God, was not extraordinarily stirred up; who could not err in
delivering the doctrine of the truth.

Q. Why do you say almost: was there any intermission at all?

A. Truly there was: but I will name only some more notable intermissions,
which may be gathered out of the holy scriptures. First in the age of the
Patriarchs it is observed, that there was an intermission in Terachs time who
was the Father of Abraham: for albeit he retained some grounds of truth
received from his Fathers, notwithstanding he became an Apostata and an
Idolater, as is manifest by the history. Next, there was an intermission also,
when the people lived in Egypt: for from the death of the Sons of Jacob, even
to the departure out of Egypt, Ezechiel testifies Chapter 20. that all the
people were fallen from God to the Idols of the Egyptians. Lastly, there was an
intermission from Malachy the last of the Prophets until John Baptist, in all
which time no Prophet was raised up; notwithstanding the word of God was
continued, amongst the people of ye Jews by high Priests and the ordinary
ministry, but not without corruptions: so that at the coming of Christ for
the more part, the doctrine of truth was now corrupted.

Q. Ought not the lively voice of God, which is not subject to error, be
continued in the Church until the coming of Whether a lively voice not
subject to error continues til Christ.
Christ; because you said that this lively voice did continue in the Church
till the coming of the Apostles only?

A. The lively voice of Christ continues in the Church, I confess, but not the
lively voice either of God or of extraordinary men, such as were the Fathers,
Prophets, and Apostles: but only the lively voice of ordinary men, of pastors
and doctors, who both may err, and do err whenever they depart never so
little, from the prescript word of the Prophets and Apostles.

Q. But God has given a greater measure of his holy spirit, to his Church
which now is under Christ, then ever he gave to the old Church. Therefore if in
the old Church there was a lively voice which could not err, how much more
shall there be now in the Church of Christ a lively voice which cannot err.

A. It is true indeed, that together with this full revelation, which is
contained in the writings of the Apostles, a more full spirit was given to the
Church of Christ, which now is, then was given to the the old Church: But hence
it follows not, that either the Church, or the Pastors and doctors in the
Church, are so governed with that Spirit, that they cannot at all err in
delivering the truth: For this was the extraordinary gift of the holy Ghost,
which was given but for a time; but the gift of the Spirit which was given to
the Church of Christ since the times of the Apostles, is ordinary and
perpetual, to wit, the gift of sanctification, illumination, and regeneration.

Q. The Church then which now is, seems to be in a worse case, then the old
Church was, which had the lively voice of God, and of men which could not err?

A. That does not follow: for this Scripture of the Prophets and Apostles,
which now the Church has, does not err in doctrine, and contains also a
most full and most clear revelation of the truth.

Q. Albeit I should grant the condition of our Church to better then of that
old Church which was before Moses, and which had the tradition and use only of
the lively voice, and that very imperfect and obscure: notwithstanding I see
not how the Church was not in better case, which was after Moses, even to the
coming of Christ, as having not only the use of tradition, and of a lively
voice, but also of the Prophetical Scripture, as a light shining in a dark
place?

A. Truly that Church had both, that is, both the sound of a lively voice, and
of the Scripture and written word of God; but neither perfect, and absolute.
But this Scripture which our Church alone has, contains a most full and
plain revelation: for even one form or manner and kind of revelation, which is
perfect and full must be more excellent, then two which are both imperfect, or
which contain an imperfect revelation of the truth.

Q. But there is no man who would not say, it were better with this our Church,
if it had some lively voice which in speaking and answering to all
controversies, might not err?

A. They have Moses, the Ptophets and Apostles, that is, the writings of Moses,
of the Prophets, and of the Apostles, and those truly not only sufficient,
but most perfect: whence only if they cannot learn the truth by the^, and
decide and end all controversies, they will not be instructed with the lively
voice of any extraordinary man: howbeit, as I have said before, the lively
voice was to continue only so long in the Church, as some thing was wanting to
the full declaration of the mystery of Christ. So that if now there should be
any need of the lively voice either of God, or of some extraordinary man in
the Church of Christ; that truly should plainly argue, that the revelation of
the truth and mystery of Christ, is not perfect as yet, nor accomplished.

Q. You conclude then, that since the Apostles time there has been no lively
voice heard in the Church, which could not err.

A. Yea truly.

Q. Why did a lively voice not subject to error, continue in the Church all
that time, which was from Adam to the Apostles?

A. To speak nothing of the will of God, with the which alone we ought to rest
contented; first, the condition of the Church did require this continuance: and
then the measure of the revelation that then was.

Q. Why the condition of the Church?

A. Because the visible Church in all that time, which was from Adam to the
Apostles, was both in place more straight, as being shut up in one family, or
in one nation, and was by reason of age weaker, or not so well grown. For the
Church before Christ (if I may so speak) was either as a child, or as a young
man.

Q. What then?

A. The lively voice does more easily reach, or extend it self to a Church,
which is in place more straight, and to the Saints fewer in number: and the
church being as yet inexpert by reason of the age of it, and less grown, had
need of the lively voice of a teacher, none otherwise then children have need
of the lively voice of a master, who as it were stammereth with them: but
after the coming of Christ, when the Church was sufficiently instructed by the
lively voice of Christ, and of his Apostles, and now come to man's estate, there
was no more heard any lively voice either of God, or of men extraordinary.

Q. Why did the measure of Revelation require this?

A. Because all that time, which was from Adam to the Apostles, there remained
as yet some thing more clearly and more manifestly to be revealed; and the
revelation of the doctrine was in several ages, made more manifest still as
pertaining to the substance of it: and so long, as some thing remained to be
more clearly revealed, so long a lively voice was to continue; for every new
revelation ought first to begin with a lively voice.

Q. Seeing that the last and most full revelation was by the lively voice of
Christ and his Apostles: has there ever since been heard any lively voice,
either of God or of any extraordinary man?

A. None at all.

Q. Do you gather by these things which you have spoken, concerning the causes
of the continuance of a lively voice in the Church, what was the use of it
heretofore in the Church?

A. Yea truly: for the use of it was first in respect of the Church it self,
to give it instruction while it was yet so small for place, and so young in
knowledge: next, in respect of revelation, to deliver it from time to time more
clearly and evidently unto the people.

Q. By this use of a lively voice, which you have here mentioned, it seems
that this kind of ruelatio^, which was by a lively voice, was the more simple
and the more familiar, and the more imperfect, and therefore the more fit for
persons and things that were of like imperfection?

A. It is even so as you have said.

Q. Hitherto I have heard you speak concerning a lively voice: now I would
hear something of you concerning the subject of it, what say you then was
taught all that time by a lively voice?

A. In all that time, and in every age the self same, and the whole truth of
God was delivered by a lively voice. The subiector master of the lively voice.


Q. Wherefore then, said you, that the perfect manifestation of that mystery
of godliness was not accomplished till the Apostles time?

A. By that fullness and perfection I understood not the substance of the
doctrine it self, but the quality, that is, the clearenesse of one and the
same doctrine. For the mystery of Christ was in the Church, and was manifested
in some measure from Adam unto Christ, and the Apostles: but if the comparison
be made of times, it may be said to be shut and hidden in all ages before the
coming of Christ.

Q. Was the paritie of the heavenly doctrine sufficiently conserved and kept,
by a lively voice?

A. The history shows plainly that the doctrine delivered by lively voice,
was often corrupted and adulterated.

Q. How then was it restored?

It seemed good to God, afterward by new revelations to restore the purity of
his word decayed, to conserve and keep it, and to give a more full declaration
of it.

Q. Was the purity of doctrine sufficiently preserved and kept so?

A. Not so verily: and therefore it seemed good to God, at length to add
hereunto the written word.

Q. Are there no other causes of writing the holy Scriptures?

A. There are: for first the condition of the Church required, that the
Scripture should be added unto the lively voice: and next, the measure also of
revelation.

Q. Why the condition of the Church?

A. Because at length, in Moses time, the Church began to be both in place more
large, as being spread throughout a whole nation, and to grow greater and riper
in years: for the time from Moses unto Christ, was as it were, the time of the
midde age, or young years of the Church.

Q. What then?

A. The written word therefore was first in respect both of place, and
ripeness of age: for both a whole nation is more easily taught by writing then
by voice: and the age which is more ripe, is more capable of that doctrine
which is delivered by writing, that is, by that kind of revelation which is not
so familiar and simple: and by writing does more easily conceive any man's
meaning.

Q. Why does the measure of revelation require the written word?

A. Because whereas before Moses, the revelation of the mystery of godliness
was small and very obscure, it seemed not good to the Lord to cause it straight
ways to be written, to the intent it might be kept for posterity. But when in
Moses time the Revelation began to be much more clear then before, then it
seemed good unto God to commit it to writing, to the intent it might be
reserved, and remain for those which should come after. For that which is more
perfect and full, that we are to write, to this end, that it may remain both
for us and our posterity; but that which is more imperfect, that we do not
esteem worthy the writing, or to be reserved unto posterity.

Q. Before you go any further, I would have you declaare unto me the ages of
the Church, where of you have so often made mention?

A. I will so do.

Q. How many ages then, say you, are there of the Church?

A. Three: the first was from Adam unto Moses, which was the infancy and
childhood of the Church: the second from Moses unto Christ, which was the youth
or middle age of the Church: the third, from Christ and his Apostles, even unto
the end, which may be called the ripe age of the Church, if it be compared with
the ages past: for otherwise we are not men grown until we be gathered
together with Christ our head in heaven.

Q. Do you mean then, that God had respect always of these three ages, in his
proceedings with his Church?

A. I mean so indeed: for (that I may so speak) he has tempered these three
things proportionally to these three ages of the Church: to wit, first the
measure of revelation: secondly, his holy Spirit: thirdly, the manner of
revelation.

Q. Declare I pray you more particularly what you have said?

A. To the infancy and childhood of the Church, he gave the least measure of
revelation to wit, first, the first principles of religion only. Secondly, the
least measure of the holy Spirit, to wit, that which was proportionable to the
revelation. Thirdly, one only kind of revelation, which was by lively voice,
as being the most fit for the instruction of infants, and of such as were weak
in the faith.

Q. I understand what you say concerning the first age of the Church: now I
would have you speak concerning the middle age, which you call the youth of
it, and to apply these three things mentioned to it in like manner?

To the middle age of the Church he gave first a greater measure of revelation.
Secondly (so to speak) a greater portion of the holy Spirit. Thirdly, a double
kind of revelation, the lively voice, and the Scripture. The lively voice I
say, because as yet it was but weak: and the written word; because it was in
age better grown, and so more capable in some sort of the word written: for
God has tempered these two kinds of revelations together, and of both has
made a middle kind of revelation, according to the time and age which we call
the middle, and as it were the temperate age.

Q. You have spoken of the first and second age of the Church, now I pray you
speak of the third.

A. To the third age of the Church (which I call the manly or ripe age) he gave
first a full measure of revelation. Secondly, a most plentiful effusion of the
holy Ghost. Thirdly, both those kinds of revelation, and that now truly
containing a full and perfect revelation; he taught it by lively voice for a
certain time: and after this, he added the writings of the Apostles. And when
as the mystery of our salvation was fully revealed by that lively voice first,
and then that full revelation was written, ever since there has been no more
use of the lively voice of any extraordinary Prophet or Apostle. But the
Scriptures written first by the Prophets, and after by the Apostles, remained
only without any lively voice, which could not err.

Q. Where must we begin to count the third age of the Church?

A. Not so much from the coming of Christ, and the sending of his Apostles to
all nations, as from that time when the Apostles ceased to speak with lively
voice as well to the Jews as to the Gentiles: for even then the Church catholic
came to man's estate and full growth, and then the Church began to understand
and to learn the will of God by the written word, as being a more accurate and
perfect manner of revelation. The time then which was from the coming of
Christ until the death of the Apostles, was as it were a passage from the
middle age of the church, unto the full growth and ripenes of the same.

Q. I understand what you say concerning the causes of addition of the written
word to the lively voice, and of the several ages of the Church: now I would
have you speak some thing concerning the scripture, or of the writing of Gods
word.

A. I will do so.

Q. What then call you writing or Scripture?

A. I call scripture or writing the second kind of revelation, whereby God
either by himself, or by the means of men extraordinarily revealed those
things, which already had been delivered by lively voice before, to wit, in
that first kind of revelation.

Q. Who then were they, who ever since the beginning have written?

A. First, God himself, next, men Moses, the Prophets, and the Apostles.

Q. This kind of revelation which was by writing, was it not subject to error,
like as that kind which was by a lively voice?

A. No truly: for concerning that which God himself did write, there is no
question: and touching men, they were so extraordinarily inspired and governed
by the spirit of God, that in writing they could not err at all.

Q. When began it then to be written?

A. In Moses time.

Q. How long did the word written continue in the Church?

A. The scripture or the act of writing continued from Moses, even to the
Apostles: all which time there was almost no age wherein extraordinarily some
one was not stirred up, who in delivering the doctrine of truth by writing,
could not err.

Q. You think otherwise of the scripture it self, then of the act of writing?

A. I do so: for the scripture it self or that which is now written by Moses,
the Prophets, and Apostles yet continues in the Church, and shall continue unto
the second coming of Christ.

Q. Was there any intermission of writing the word from Moses unto the Apostles?

A. There was: for it appears in all that time, which was from Malachy to
John the Baptist none was stirred up, either Prophet, or writer inspired by
God: for the books of the Machabees be not given by inspiration, as we shall
show hereafter.

Q. You said that writing continued in the Church until the time of the
Apostles, ought it not then to continue even unto the end?

A. Like as since the Apostles time there is no lively voice heard in the
Church, which can be said to be so goned by the holy Ghost, that it can not
err at all: So since the Apostles, nothing is written in the church, which may
worthily be called or said to be given by inspiration.

Q. What then do you think of so many writings of godly and learned men, which
have been published since the times of the Apostles from time to time, to the
great good and profit of the Church?

A. Verily I think of the writings of Pastors and Doctors in the Church, as I
think of their preaching, to wit, that both be subject to error, and neither
is so governed by the holy Ghost, but that in delivering the truth of God they
may err.

Q. It seems then that the condition of the Church, which is since the time
of the Apostles, is not so good as having neither the lively voice (as is before
said) nor the writings, as now you speak, of those very me^ who in delivering
the truth cannot err?

A. It has the scriptures of the prophets and Apostles, which as pertaining to
the substance of revelation is full; and as touching the kind and form of
revelation, it is given by inspiration and not subject to error: out of the
which scripture, whosoever do not learn all things which are necessary to
faith and salvation, assuredly such would not receive from the mouth of God
himself, openly speaking in an audible and intelligible voice, the doctrine and
instructon of faith and salvation.

Q. Wherefore did the Lord so continue to record his will by The cause of the
continuance of* writing Gods word.
writing in the Church all that time, which was from Moses to the Apostles?

A. There are the same causes of the continuance thereof, as are of the
addition of the lively voice unto writing: For both the condition of the church
and the measure of revelation required the same.

Q. Why the condition of the Church?

A. Because the church continually increased and grew, as in number so in
knowledge.

Q. What then?

A. The greater number and riper knowledge do require this, that the word be
written.

Q. Why the measure of revelation?

A. Because the revelation of the doctrine of salvation, was from time to time
made more clear and manifest, even unto the times of Christ and of his
Apostles; at which time it was in the end complete and perfected. For it was
meet that every revelation manifested more clearly and fully, should be
recorded in writing, to this end, that it might be surely kept and delivered to
posterities.

Q. Can ye gather by these things the use of the continuance The use of writing.
of scripture in the Church of God.

A. Yea truly.

Q. What is then the use of it?

A. To pass by the conservation of the purity of doctrine, the first use was
in respect of the Church, for the instruction thereof, as being now in place
more ample and large, and in knowledge more perfect. Secondly, it was in
respect of the revelation of the doctrine it self, that it might comprehend
and keep it more fully and clearly.

Q. By this use of scripture or writing which you give, it seems that this
kind of revelation which is by writing, is somewhat more perfect and high, as
that which is best agreeing and fitting to persons and things that are more
perfect?

A. It is even so.

Q. Thus far then forwriting or scripture: now I would have you declare
something unto me concerning the subject of this writing, and of the matter it
self which is written?

A. As touching the substance the very same is written which was before
delivered by the lively voice.

Q. I pray you speak in order unto me of the subject or argument in scripture,
written first by God himself: secondly, by me^, by Moses, the Prophets and
Apostles?

A. I will do so.

Q. What then has God written?

A. The sum of the doctrine of the covenant of works, and of the law, even the
very same which he had delivered first by a lively voice to the Fathers, and to
Moses.

Q. What has Moses written?

A. All the celestial doctrine, which he had received partly of the fathers by
tradition, partly of God himself, Moses books
who spoke mouth to mouth with him; for so the scripture speaks: partly he
had learned of the holy Ghost by an inward inspiration; and to speak in a
word, whatsoever had happened to him, and to all the people in his life time,
for the space of 100. and 20. years, all these things he committed to writing
and gave to the people.

Q. Did Moses then write what soever true doctrine was delivered from the
beginning of the world to that time?

A. Moses omitted no point of true doctrine, which at any time had been
delivered concerning either faith or manners: for from the beginning until that
very time one and the same doctrine of truth, as touching the substance, was
taught full and whole, in all ages. The difference only was in the measure of
the revelation of it, that it is accidental and Moses delivered this doctrine
fully and wholly by lively voice more clearly and manifestly then ever before:
then after this, it was recorded in writing.

Q. What did the Prophets write, who followed Moses every one in their time,
and order?

A. The same and all, as touching the substance, which Moses had written
before; the difference only was herein: that every one by revelation did add a
more clear and manifest interpretation, as the bright morning star did
approach more near.

Q. What have the Apostles written after the Prophets.

A. All and the same, which from the beginning of the world in all ages before
them was both by lively and audible voice delivered and written; they first
also by a lively voice delivered the same, and after committed it to writing.

Q. Do you then make no difference betwixt the writings of the Prophets and of
the Apostles?

A. In the matter and substance none; in the clearenes and perspicuity thereof,
very great: for the scripture of the Apostles contains the same revelation of
the mystery which was declared from the beginning of the world, but most fully
and most clearly.

Q. I have heard you speak concerning both kinds of revelation, considered
without comparison: now I would have you to compare together the lively voice
and writing, that by comparison it may appear whether is of greater dignity
and authority.

A. I will compare them together, the lively voice and scripture are compared
either in respect of substance and matter is self, which is revealed by these
means, or in respect of the kinds of ye revelation of it. If comparison be
made in regard of the matter or substance, they must needs be both equal and
alike, seeing that the matter in either is one and the same: but if you compare
the kinds of reuclation together, it cannot truly be denied but that the first
and better place is due to the lively voice, seeing that the lively voice is
both in respect of time more ancient, and was before the organs or instruments
thereof (for the mouth is an instrument more worthy and to be preferred before
the hand) and is a kind of teaching more familiar and more fit for the capacity
of such, as are more rude and ignorant. Albeit also in some respects writing is
to be preferred before the lively voice: For it is a more perfect and accurate
kind of revelation, fit to instruct those that are more perfect, and to keep
the truth more firmly. In the mean while it cannot be denied, but yt in other
respects they are both alike, for they have both spoken, and written the same
thing, and in the same manner, to wit, as being guided and moved by the holy
Ghost and inspired of God, 2. Pet. 1. 21. 2. Tim. 3. 16. To conclude, seeing
that now the lively voice, by the will of God has ceased, and in the place of
it the scripture has succeeded; so that whole dignity of the lively voice
before mentioned, is and ought worthily to be ascribed and referred unto the
scripture, or written word of God.

Q Do you mean then that the Prophetical and Apostolical scripture ought to
be now in as great account with us, as the lively voice of God himself, and
of extraordinary men was in times past?

A. I mean so, and in his kind of revelation alone I willingly rest, as in
that which came by inspiratio^ from God, so long, until I shall hear at his
glorious coming that lively and most sweet voice of Christ my Savior; when
he shall say to them, who shall be at his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom, prepared for you from the beginning of the world.
To whom be all praise for ever Amen.

To God only wise be praise through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen.

