The Ceremonies, solemnities, and prayers, used at the opening of the holy
gates of four Churches, within the City of Rome, in the year of Iubile:

And also the great Iubile for this year of our Lord 1600. granted by Pope
Clement the eight, that now is;

Together with the Bull of the said Pope Clement, made touching the Iubile, for
all those that shall visit the great Churches of S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John de
Latran, and S. Marie mayor, in the City of Rome, this present year of our
Lord 1600. aforesaid.

IHS



Prin^^d at London for John Wolf. 1600.

The ceremonies, solemnities and prayers used at opening of the holy gates of
four Churches, within the City of Rome, in the year of Iubile.
And first, the opening of the gate of the Church of Saint Peter in Vatican.
Upon the 24. day of the month of December, being the vigill of the birth of
Christ (commonly called Christmas day) after dinner, about Evening, our holy
Father the Pope, apparelled in his Pontificalibus, accompanied with my Lords
the Cardinals, and Prelates, each man clothed according to their dignities and
degrees, the Officers appointed for the purpose, marching all in procession,
and the Cross borne before them, went to the Chapel of the Apostolical
palace, where our holy Father falling upon his knees before the holy Sacrament,
with the rest of the company, made their prayers; in the mean time, certain
candels were lighted, and given unto my Lords the Cardinals, Prelates, and
Officers, the Cardinals candels being white wax, and waying three pounds, the
Prelates and Officers candels of common wax, each, six ounces the piece. There,
our holy Father being still on his knees, powered incense upon the holy
Sacrament: which done, they began to sing, Veni creator spiritus: which Hymn
the Quiristers continuing, the procession began to march out of the Chapel,
to go to Saint Peter's Church, our holy Father being borne in his Chair to the
gate of the said Church, the said gate being walled up, and all the rest of the
gates shut; where being arrived, our holy Father descended out of his Chair,
with a wax candel burning in his hand, went up into an other higher seat then
the first, prepared for the purpose, hard by the said holy gate, in the which
Chair he sat down, and having rested for a time, he descended, and with a
hammer appointed for the purpose, he struck three blows upon the gate,
pronouncing these verses following three times; unto each of the said verses,
the Quiristers answering as follows:

V. Aperite mihi portas Iustitiae. Lord open unto me the gates of Justice.



R. Et ingressus in eas, consitebor Domino. And being entered therein, I will
praise the Lord.



V. Introibo in domum tuam, Domine. Lord, I will go into thy house.



R. Adorabo ad templum sanctum tuum in timore tuo And will worship in thy holy
Temple, with fear and trembling.



V. Aperite mihi portas, quoniam nobiscum Deus. Open the gates, for God is with
us.



R. Quiafecit virtutem in Israel. Because he has showed his glory in Israel.



Which done, our holy Father returning to his Chair, said, V. Domine exaudi
orationem meam. Lord, hear my Prayer.



R. Et clamor meus ad te veniet. And my cry shall ascend up unto thee.



And being in his Chair, the Masons and other workmen with their tools,
break down the wall of the said holy gate, and the Pope continuing his
prayers, said, V. Dominus vobiscum. The Lord be with you.



R. Et cum spiritu tuo. And with thy spirit.



Oremus. Let us pray.



Oration. ACtiones nostras quaesumus, Domine, aspirando praeueni, and adiuuando
prosequere, vt cuncta nostra oration and operatio a te semper incipiat, and per
te coepta finiatur, per Christum Dominum nostrum.


The prayer. LOrd, we pray thee, to inspire us in our actions, and assist us in
our ways, to the end that all our words and works may begin, continue, and
end in thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Which prayer being ended, the Quiristers sung the Psalm, Iubilate Deo omnis
terra etc. Let all the inhabitants of the earth rejoice in the Lord, etc. With
other Canticles of praise and thanks giving.

In the mean time the said workmen and all the people, moved with devotion,
took and bare away the stones and mortar of the said gate, with so great
diligence, and dexterity, that all whatsoever was found (great or little) were
voyded from thence, (as it may be said) in the twinkling of an eye; the
Penitentiaries apparrelled in their habites and ornaments, washing the posts of
the said holy gate, with holy water.

Which holy gate being opened, and the stones borne away, as before said, our
holy Father the Pope, before he entered, said the versicles following, whereunto
the Quiristers answered.

V. Haec est dies quam fecit Dominus. Behold the day which the Lord has made.



R. Exultemus and laetemur in ea. Let us be glad, and rejoice therein.



V. Beatus populus tuus, Domine. Lord, thy people are happy and blessed.



R. Qui scit Iubilationem? Who can declare their gladness?



V. Haec est porta Domini. Behold, the gate of the Lord.



R. Iusti intrabunt in eam. The Just shall enter therein.



V. Domine, exaudi orationem meam. Lord, hear my prayer.



R. Clamor meus ad te veniat. And my cry shall ascend unto thee.



V. Dominus vobiscum. The Lord be with you.



R. Et cum spiritu tuo. And with thy spirit.



Oremus. Let us pray.



Oration. DEus, qui per Moysem famulum tuum populo Israelitico annum Iobelei,
and remissionis instituisti, concede propitius nobis famulis tuis Iobelei annum
hunc tua auctoritate institutum, quo portam hanc populo tuo ad preces tuae
maiestati porrigendas ingrediente solenniter aperiri voluisti foeliciter
inchoare vt in eo venia atque indulgentia plenae remissionis omnium delictorum
obtenta, cum dies nostrae aduocationis aduenerit, ad coelestem gloriam
perfruendam tuae misericordiae munere perducamur, per Christum Dominum nostrum.
Amen.


The prayer. O Lord, who by thy servant Moses did ordain and appoint for
thy people of Israel, the year of Iubile, and remission of sins, grant us
thy grace, and to al thy servants, that we may happily begin this present
year of Iubile ordained by thee, and wherein thy pleasure is, that this gate
should with all solemnity be opened unto thy people, to enter, and present our
prayers unto thee, to the end, that in this year, having obtained full
remission and pardon of al our sins, that when the day, wherein it shall please
thee to take us out of this transitory world, shall come, we may by thy great
mercy, enter into thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


This prayer ended, the cross is given unto our holy father, who kneeling
before the holy gate, begins to say,

Te Deum laudamus etc. Lord, we praise thy holy name. And being entered by the
said gate into the church, the Queristers sang the rest of the said Hymn, unto
the end. Our holy father being entered, he ascended again unto his chair,
wherein he was borne by the officers (thereunto appointed) to the high altar of
the said church of S. Peter: and there descending out of his chair, he prayed
before the altar: which prayer being ended, he ascended into an other seat
higher, and more elevated, where for a time having rested himself, he stood
up, and began Evening prayer, rehearsing the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ,
as the manner is.

Upon the same day, and at the like hour, three of my Lords the Cardinals
went unto the other three holy gates, of the three churches, of S. Paul, S.
John de Latran, S. Mary mayor.

Which Cardinals, at every of the said churches, using the same ceremonies, and
like prayers aforesaid, opened the gates of the said three Churches.

All the said gates of S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John de Latran, and S. Mary mayor,
remain open, from the same day, until the end of the same year, and so
continue every year of Iubile, to the end that al faithful Christians may
therein continually obtain pardon and full remission of their sins, to the
praise, and glory of God and all his holy Church. Amen.

The Bull of our holy Father, (by the grace of God) Clement the eight, made
touching the Iubile, for all those that shall visit the great Churches of S.
Peter, S. Paul, S. John de Latran, and Saint Mary Mayor, in the City of Rome,
in the year of our Lord 1600.
CLement Bishop, and servant of the servants of God, to all faithful
Christians, to whom these letters shall come, greeting, and spiritual
Apostolical benediction.

Dearly beloved children in Jesus Christ, at this present (by the grace of
God) approaches the placable year of our Lord, the year of remission and
pardon; now comes the acceptable time, and the days of eternal salvation
begin to approach for the redemption of men's sinne^, and salvation of their
souls. Behold, not far hence, the year of Iubile, so much pleasing and
wished for by all Christians, which is the 1600. year, from the most blessed
childbearing of (the holy mother of God) Marie the Virgin, the which we mean
to celebrate, according to the ancient custom, with joy, and assembly of the
faithful, in this our noble City of Rome; and with so much the more joy,
because the said year formally, and with efficacy, represents the first
original of the same: for as it is well known by old traditions, and monuments
of our ancestors, agreeing and conformable to the most ancient institutions
of the Church of Rome, as the years and times pass and come to an end, that
is, that every hundredth year, from the birth of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, there were most large indulgences, pronounced unto all such as devoutly
shall visit the most holy and sacred Churches of the most blessed Apostles:
and certainly, this most ancient institution, of celebrating the 100. year
within the city of Rome, extracted (not from a vain superstition of the
Gentiles, but proceeding from a pure zeal and devotion, with a great
concurrence and assembly of the Christians) has been confirmed by Pope
Boniface the 8. of happy memory, by his Apostolical decree, not only for an
assurance to all those of our age, but also a perpetual memory in time to
come. And although other Popes our predecessors, such as succeeded him,
restrained the time of celebrating the Iubile to a shorter number of years,
because of the breuity of man's life: yet this custom of the celebration of the
100. year, is by good right, of more auctority in regard of the ancient
tradition and ordinance thereof: And in truth, it seems to be wrought by the
secret counsel of GOD, that in the last year of every age, (which commonly in
these days is accounted the longest time of man's life,) all Christians
ingenerall should (even in the very fortress, and house of Christian religion)
reiterate so great a benefit, which is, that Jesus Christ the brightness of
the justice of God, by whom all mankind has received salvation, was borne of a
virgin; and also, that all Christians should likewise repair unto the seat of
the holy Apostle S. Peter, and to the stone and foundation of the faith, as
children to their Parents, and sheep to their sovereign pastor: And further,
herein we may evidently behold the persit unity of a troup of sheep and their
pastor, and that the brightness of one universal faith does shine and give
light into all places, which faith has never changed, nor bin altered by any
end or alterations of times, but still by an inviolable confession, has
continued whole and entire among the faithful, without any corruption; and
also that the world might know, that the members are more straightly bound and
united unto their visible head, by the gluing and bands of faith and charity,
and that in the end, the same Spirit, by the which the only Catholic Church
and her body, is miraculously conjoined and united together, may be evidently
manifested, then when as in the said Church of Rome, the mother of unity is
celebrated (as if all the Christians were assembled) with all devotion and
solemn ceremonies, of a whole year upon certain days appointed, which by
good right is called the holy year.

Now this holy year, a year agreeable to the Lord, and such a year, as
appeaseth his wrath, a year wherein men may do penance, and be perfectly
converted from the bottom of their hearts, unto the Lord the father of mercy,
was first denounced unto the world by Jesus Christ the son of GOD, the true
author both of our lives and saluations, whom the Father has anointed with the
holy Ghost; and having powered upon him all fullness of grace, sent him to
preach unto the poor, to aid the humble, to ease the heavy hearted, to
preach indulgence, and remission unto those that were captive, deliverance unto
prisoners, and to open the way unto the blind. We likewise, who (although
abiects and unworthy) by divine disposition, do exercise the place of Vicars
to Jesus Christ upon earth, sitting in the highest sentinel of the
Apostolical watchtower, to announce, declare, and preach the same year of
Iubile, of true repentance, and spiritual comfort, unto all you that are
faithful Christians in Jesus Christ.

And for that the charity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for whom we
exercise the charge and embassage unto all Nations, does entice us, the zeal
of the salvation of men's souls touching our hearts, we exhort and desire every
man in general, by the virtue of the blood which Christ has shed, and by his
holy coming, as also by the name of the day, wherein he shall sit as a
terrible Judge, that every one of you, especially in this time of Iubile,
withdraw himself from his evil ways, and return unto the Lord, with a
pure and sincere heart, a good conscience, and an unfeigned heart, because our
GOD is gentle and merciful, full of compassion, and one that deferreth the
punishing of all those that are true repentants.

But in the mean time, that with great joy, according to our pastoral office,
we call and inuit our wel-beloued son in Jesus Christ, the Emperor, Kings,
and Catholic Princes, and all other faithful Christians throughout all the
world, and namely, such as inhabit the provinces and Regions furthest distant,
unto that most agreeable celebration of this Iubile: we are in a manner
pricked with an extreme dolor and grief, calling to mind how many great
Nations and numbers of people are most miserably cut off and disioyned from
the unity and communion of the Catholic and Apostolical Church, who in the
precedent hundredth years, marching with us in one Catholic and Apostolic
Church, with one will and consent, in this house of our Lord, have celebrated
with great joy and spiritual exaltation, the holy year of the said Iubile,
for whom we would most willingly lose our lives, and sheade our heart bloods
(if need were) to obtain the eternal salvation of their souls. In the mean
time, you our obedient children, and true Catholics, come, mount up into this
place which God has chosen, come to the Spiritual Sion, and the holy
Jerusalem, not by letter, but by Spirit, from whence, from the beginning and
Original of the Church, the law of God, and the truth of the Gospel has spread
it self throughout all the Nations and parts of the earth. This is the happy
City, the faith whereof, is commended to all the world, having been
commended by the mouth of the Apostle, wherein the most happy Apostles, Saint
Peter and Saint Paul, have both preached their doctrine, and shed their blood,
to the end that being made the head of all the world by the sacred seat of S.
Peter, it should be mother of all believers, and mistress of all other
Churches. Here is the stone of faith, here is the fountain of sacerdotall
unity, here is the doctrine of pure verity, here are the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, and the sovereign power to bind and unbind; and to conclude, here
is the treasure of the Church, full of sacred Indulgences, never able to be
diminished, whereof the Bishop of Rome is Guardian, and dispensator, who
distributeth them at all times, when he knows by the secret will of God, that
it is requisite, but specially, in the year of the holy Iubile he inlargeth,
and bestows them, with a most holy and liberal hand, then when the holy
gates of the most ancient, and most religious temples, and Churches of this
noble City, are opened by solemn ceremonies, and the faithful, purged of the
spots and fowlenesse of their sins, enter joyfully before the face of the
Lord, no more unto the end that according to the precepts of the old law,
(which only had the shadow of goodness to come,) nor according to the
custom of the Hebrews, to whom all things were set down by figure, or else
as bondslaues, tied under the yoke of humane servitude, in becoming free, or
as prisoners detayned in prisons, are released, or as such as are charged with
great dettes, are acquitted, whereby they may reenter into the lands and
possessions of their ancestors; for all these terrestrial things are
transitory and not permanent: but the fruits of the holy year of our Iubile
are most fruitful and abundant, that is, that men's souls, redeemed by the
blood of Jesus Christ, are delivered from the insupportable yoke of diabolical
tyranny, and from the obscure prison and chains of sin, by the divine virtue
of the Sacraments, and their sins and punishments being remitted, they are
adopted sons of God, and admitted to the heritage of the heavenly kingdom,
and possession of Paradise, receiving other infinite benefits of God.

We therefore, following the paths and footesteps of the sovereign Bishops,
our predecessors, and observing their devout, and most holy institution, with
the consent of our most reverend brethren the Cardinals of the holy Church of
Rome, and by the authority of the most puissant God, and of the most blessed
Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, as also by our own, with as much
spiritual rejoicing as possibly we may, to the glory of God, and exaltation
of the Catholic Church, do publish and signify unto all men, the celebration
of the Iubile, in this year, being the year of our Lord 1600. to begin at the
evening of the Vigill of the Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ, of the same
year of 1600. and to continue for the space of one whole year then next
ensuing: in the which year of Iubile, we in mercy and compassion in our Lord,
give and grant free indulgence, remission and pardon of all sins, to all the
faithful in Jesus Christ, without exception of person, who being truly
repentant and confessed, shall devoutly visit the chief Churches of the
blessed Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, as also those of Saint John de
Latran, and Saint Marie Mayor, within the city of Rome, once in a day, for the
space of thirty days following, or otherwise, if they be Romans or
inhabitants of the City, or for the space of fifteen days, if they be
pilgrims, or other strangers, upon condition that they shall make humble
prayers unto God, for the salvation of all the faithful and al Christian
people: and because it may fall out, that among such, as by reason of this
Iubile, shall have enterprised this journey, or that are arrived in this City
of Rome, some being let or hindered by the way, or otherwise within this City,
by sickness, or some other lawful impeachment, or being p^euented by death,
cannot effect these things, and visit the Churches and Temples aforesaid, not
having accomplished the days limited, or otherwise have not begun them; we,
as much as possible we may, beningly desiring to favor their deuoutnesse,
will, that such people being truly repentant and confessed, shall all be made
participants of this our indulgence and remission, as if they had effectually
visited the said Churches and Temples of Rome, upon the days by us prescribed.

And you our Reverend brethren, Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, and
Bishops, which partly at our request are summoned and called hereunto, you that
are guides, and Pastors of the people, the light of the world, and the salt of
the earth, take into your hands the tru^pets of silver, which you must use in
this year of Iubile, that is to say; preach the word of God continually,
annou^ce this joy unto the people, that they may be sanctified, and that by the
aid of Gods divine grace, they may be prepared to receive the celestial
benefits, which God, the giver of al good things, by our weak ministry has
prepared for all his dear and wel-beloued children; draw your brethren by
words, and the simple and unlearned by good examples, bringing them unto the
pappes of this their most dear mother, that has begotten them in Jesus
Christ: bring the children to their father, the sheep to their sovereign
pastor, the members to their head, the faithful to the stone and foundation of
the faith, wherein all the edificy and building of the Christian church is
erected: bring the people to the holy Church of Rome, and to the glorious
Princes of the earth, S. Peter and S. Paul, which taught the law of God
throughout all the world, as also the faith; whose dignity and authority is as
yet extant and in force in their unworthy successor. Call therefore the assembly
unto these sacred Indulgences, that they may receive the salutary fruits
thereof, in this City of Rome: assemble the people, sanctify the Church,
instruct the sheep committed to your charge, because we are but strangers and
pilgrims here in this life, having no permanent place, but seek for that which
is to come.

And because the days of this our troublesome and miserable pilgrimage are but
short, and for that we know not when the master of the family, and our espouse
Jesus Christ will come, warn them, that for this cause they will be watchful,
and bear in their hands burning lamps, filled with the oil of love and
charity, and that they make have to enter into this rest: for if ever they had
cause, it is now, that for the love of Jesus Christ, they should abandon and
leave off al wrath, riots, debates, contentions, and inueterated enmities: it
is now time that the servants ought to have pity upon their conseruators, to
the end that our most merciful God may freely forgive them all their sins;
it is at this time, that we must specially purge and cleanse our selves of all
the impurities of the flesh, to the end that the Temple of God may be pure and
clean, and that every man may have his earthly vessel laden with honor, and
sanctification, and so God may dwell within their bodies. To conclude, we must
wholly exterminate and abandon all theftes, robberies, homicides, adulteries,
and all other sins, to the end that the wrath of God may be appeased, and
that those that attribute unto themselves the name of Christians, may by him be
accounted and holden for true Christians, imitators of Jesus Christ, and
folowers of good works. Teach them then, how they ought, with a contrite
heart, and humble spirit, to prepare themselves by continual prayers,
fastings, and other works of mercy, to merit and obtain these salutary
indulgences, and that those that are endued with the riches of this world,
should open their hearts, and by that means relieuing the necessity of their
poor brethren, and that before all other things, they extend their merciful
charity unto such pilgrims, as shall travel to Rome, renewing with spiritual
joy, the holy hospitality agreeable and pleasing unto God, which by the most
ancient Christians in times past (even in the middle of all storms, tempests
and persecutions) has with great diligence been observed and kept: advertise
them also, that they pray for all kings, and Christian princes, that we may
live in peace and tranquillity, and that peace may perpetually be kept and
observed.

To conclude, teach them with what modesty, with what devotion, and with what
brotherly love, they are to make themselves known, when as they shall once
have enterprised the holy viage, to the end that, in all places they may yield
the sweet savor of Jesus Christ. Show your selves also, my reverend brethren,
and all the Clergy, to be the example of all good works, and the formality of
the troop, to the end that all others may be conserved, as it were, by the
salt of your virtues, and religion, and abhor all filthiness of sin, and
that in the end, all we with full consent and agreement, in one spirit of
Christian charity, with all holiness and righteousness may serve God.

We also exhort and desire, in the name of God, our most dear sons in Jesus
Christ, the Emperor, kings, and all Catholic Princes, that seeing they have
received diverse and most great benefits, of him, by whom all Kings do reign,
with so much the more ardency, as reason requires, they should be stirred up
with a great and good zeal, to procure the glory of God; and before al things,
that they comfort and aid the careful vigilance of our brethren, the Bishops,
and other superior Prelates, charging their Magistrates and Officers to
further and assist them, to the end that the unbridled liberty of the wicked
may be restrained, and the intentions of honest men by their royal aid and
favor relieved and sustained: and specially, that they use their benevolence
and charity toward pilgrims, giving order, that they may safely pass along
the way, and by no means be impeached by the wicked and perverse generation,
that being lovingly received into the public hospitals, and by that means
comforted, and relieved with all things necessary for their viages, they may
joyfully without interruption pursue, and end their journey taken in hand, and
so return into their own countries: for by these offerings, kings and Princes
shall please God, to the end they may live long and in all happiness upon the
earth, and that at the last they may be received into the eternal tabernacles,
by the same poor and miserable people, to whom they shall have exercised
their charities, which are those in whose bodies Jesus Christ is nourished and
fed.

And to the end that this our present Bull may with more ease fall into the
hands of all the faithful, wheresoever they be, our pleasure is, that to the
copies hereof being imprinted, signed with the hand of a public notary, and
sealed with the seal of some man of Ecclesiastical authority, the like
credit shall be given, as unto these, being the original. Let no man
therefore be so foolish-hardy to infringe or gainsay this our Bull of
Indiction, promulgation, confession, impartition, exhortation, prayer, and
will: and if any man be so bold to attempt it, let him know that he shall
incur the indignation of God, and of his most blessed Apostles S. Peter and
S. Paul. Given at Rome in the Church of Saint Peter, in the year of the
incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ 1599. the nineteenth of May, and in the
eight year of our Pontificate.

Signed B. Dat. Marcellus Vestrius Barbianus.
Registered by Marcellus the Secretary.

A. de Alexis.




