AN EXPOSITION UPON SOME SElect Psalms of David, containing great store of
most excellent and comfortable doctrine, and instruction for all those, that*
under the burden of sin) thirst for Comfort in Christ Jesus.

Written by that faithful servant of God* M. ROBERT ROLLOK, sometime Pastor
in the Church of Edinburgh: And translated out of Latin into English. by C. L.
Minister of the Gospel of Christ at Dudingstoun.

The number of the Psalms are set down in the Page following.

EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT Walde grave Printer to the Kings Majesty. 1600.
Cum Privilegio Regio.

A Table of the Psalms expounded in this Book.
Psalm
Third Fol. 1. Sixth Fol. 35. Sixteenth Fol. 80. Twenty three Fol. 113. Thirty
two Fol. 135. Thirty nine Fol. 202. Forty two Fol. 229. Forty nine Fol.
261. Fifty one Fol, 283. Sixty two Fol. 351. Sixty five Fol. 375. Eighty
four Fol. 387. Hundredth Sixeetnth Fol. 410. Hundredth Thirty Fol. 447 Hundredth
thirty seventh, 489.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GRAVE and Godly Matrone, LILIAS GILBERT, Spouse to M.
JOHN PRESTOVN, of Fentoun-Barnes; One of the Senators of the College of
justice, and Collectour general of Scotland. C. L. wishes grace mercy, and
everlasting peace, passing all knowledge, from God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ for ever. Amen.
HAVing long considdered and advised with my self (because I was never yet
accustomed to such matters) to whom I should dedicate this translation of the
Exposition, (of that worthy seruante of GOD, of blessed memory, M. ROBERT
ROLLOK, who now rests from his labor) vpponsome select Psalms; Ye, right
honorable, and dearly beloved in Christ, came first into my mind. The chief
thing that moved me thus to do, was the discharge of my promise, wherein I
was bound unto you, ever since the book came home (which was in Summer last)
At which time, I happening to read unto you a little of the Exposition upon
the 42. Psalm: Ye desired me very earnestly to translate the whole book;
which thing I granted-to, and promised to perform. Behold therefore, my
promise is now in the mercy and assistance of God fulfilled to you. And next, I
being ever desirous to testify my duetifull and thankful mind unto you (as
one to whom I was, and is much beholden to in many respects) I thought that
there could be no better mean, then the dedication of this present work,
which contains great store of most comfortable doctrines, as I trust ye
shall confess, when ye have well perused the same, so that the only reading
thereof, may justly commend it many ways, even to such as are of great
learning, godliness, and virtue. For if we respect the Author, it is God
himself, who used DAVID and others, the penners of the said Psalms, to be his
instruments, that his own in the day of their own particular trouble and
affliction should not lack store of Spiritual and heavenly comfort. And so it
is the word of Consolation, the lamp of light, to lead the heavy hearted, and
casten-downe Christian, by reason of the troubled conscience, by the burden of
sin, through the dark night and thick cloud of afflictions, to the throne
of Gods mercy and grace. More-over, there are very few heads of our
Christian faith and religion, (as Faith, Repentance, Justification,
Sanctification, the Resurrection of his flesh, Eternal life, the nature,
causes, and effects of Sin Original and Actual, comfort for the heavy and
sorrowful soul, and sundry such other points) But they are most pithily,
solidelie, and with great evidencie of the Spirit set down here. Again, if
we have an eye to the party, by whose ministry and labors, this Exposition
was written: He was a man, as I may be hold to testify (being conversant with
him, both in Sanct-Andrewes, and in this ciitie, near hand this twenty years
by gane) to whom the Church of GOD within this country, is as much beholden,
as to any one instrument that ever GOD thrust out into his harvest, in this
Church of Scotland, being a man indewed with excellent and manifold gifts of
GOD; most diligent, earnest, and painful in employing of the same; for
bringing up of the youth in godliness, information and instruction in the
Lord, beating down of the adversaries, winning of people unto God, edifying of
the flock of Christ, and showing good example to other in his upright
conversation. And we have all just cause to fear, that the taking away of
such a worthy light, is a forerunner of Gods severe judgment to come upon
this sinful Land, which I am afraid is nearer then we suppose. He was in
in his life time a notable learned Doctor, and a most pithie Preacher of
Christ crucified; Endued with as great humility, as ever I knew man of our
Nation; which is a rare gift in the more learned sort, (For knowledge puffs
up, says the Apostle) and one whom I may bless the Lord for his mercy
in Christ Jesus toward me, that ever I knew, as being the especial
instrument of GOD, that planted the knowledge of my Savior in my heart,
whom I may call vvorthelie my Father and instructor, in the Lord Jesus
Christ. And vvoulde to GOD, that we that are left behind him, in this
miserable valley of tears, could learn to have our delight as little set
upon this life, and things belonging thereto (where our city and place of
residence is not) as he had, whose only care was how to enlarge the
Kingdom of Christ, ever waiting for the City, which is not builded with
the hands, But is everlasting in the Heavens, as many a time, I have heard him
speak. I say no more of him, for his works already set out, and the
seminary which he has planted (I mean the College of Edinburgh) will
continue his happy remembrance to the posterity to come. As concerning the
translation of the work itself, I have dealt as simply and faithfully, in
turning it into English, as was possible, being content to express the authors
meaning, in most easy and simple terms, keeping his own phrase of speech,
so far as I could attain to. And so I humbly submit the judgment thereof, to
your favorable acceptance, the obteining thereof, shall greatly increase my
gladness, in that I have done any thing, whereby the Church of God, or any
particular member thereof, is, or may be any whit edified. Receive it therefore
with as charitable a mind, as I do willingly offer it, as a token of my
Christian duty toward you; Whom I recommende to the Lord, and his grace in
Jesus Christ, beseeching his holy and sacred majesty, to continue his favor
with you, your Husband (my Lor) dand your posterity, to your everlasting
comfort in Christ, Amen.

From Edinburgh the third day of December 1599.

By yours to be commanded in Jesus Christ, C. L. Minister of the Gospel of
Christ at Dudingstoun.

ANE EXPOSITION upon the third Psalm.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Psalm of Prayer. Now the maker thereof, and the occasion of the writing of
it, is evident out of the Inscription. A Psalm of David (says he) when be
fled through fear of his son Abschalom. Look the occasion in the 2. book
of Sam. 15. Chapter, to the twenty Chap. at length opened up. Then to return
to the matter, the Psalm is composed of three parts. The first is ane heavy
complaint, from the 2. verse to the 4. Then is a glorying of Faith, through a
feeling of the mercy and deliverance of God, which he appears to have felt
and tasted, while he made his complaint unto the 8. verse. Thirdly, there is a
two-sold petition, The first for him self: The other for the whole people,
unto the end of the Psalm.

THE III. PSALM.
1 A Psalm of DAVID when he fled through fear of his son Abschalom.

2 O Iehova, how many are mine adversaries, many they are that rise up against
me!

3 Many there are that say of my soul, there is no salvation for this man in
God! Selah.


The first part of the Psalm.
O Iehova, how many] The first part of the Psalm, is the complaint which
aryseth, as it appears clearly, from a heart, partly oppressed by the
grieuousnesse of afflictions; partly astonished through the multitude of
enemies. For he cannot sufficiently wonder at such a multitude so suddenly
seduced by his son Abschalom: And therefore wondering and astonished at once,
he repeateth this thrice, How many are they! The grievousnes of the affliction.
Now the heaviness of the affliction appears fully of the degrees of the
complaint: for he complains not only of many enemies, but of many enemies
rising up against him: And not that only, but of many enemies, both
blasphemous against God, and spiteful against himself; The common church
of whom they spoke, as of one forsaken of God. Of this third and highest
degree, this thing is to be perceived in David's example, that God, even after
such a manner uses to exercise his own, and those that are beloved of him, that
they appear to the world to be among the number of the reprobat, and of those
that are forsaken of God. And this is not done without a cause, for the
defections, yea, Cau^
of every one that is most good, are many, and sin appears many times to be
sweet unto the Elect. Therefore, God suffers them again to taste how bitter
the fruit of sin is: Yet notwithstanding in the mean time, he so mitigateth
this sense of the fruit of sin, that he suffers them not to feel at one
time, and together, the whole sharpnes thereof: And he changes so that part of
that sense and bitterness, which he gives to them to be tasted, that out of
bitterness, he makes sweetness to come; out of that which is, by the own nature
the fruit and punishment of sin, he makes a way as it were, of amendment of
life, yea, unto the very heavens themselves. This way to some man may appear
backward, that any by the Helles, should pass unto the heavens:
Notwithstanding God brings it to pass, which brought light out of darkness.
Then mark next in this complaint, and in this example of DAVID, that every one
of the godly uses in their afflictiones to turn them selves at length unto
God. And that is a plain proof, if there were no more only, that this
punishment which is otherwise inflicted upon sin, changes the own nature:
For at no time, the turning unto GOD follows the punishment, in so far as it
is the punishment of sin, whatsoever the Papists prattle of temporal
punishments and satisfactions (as they speak:) But after what manner now at
last does DAVID convert himself unto God? For the godly man afflicted many
ways uses to turn himself unto God; for either by confession of his sins,
or by seeking deliverance from the present affliction, or finally, by
complaining and quarrelling with God, he turns himself unto him. Now DAVID
in this Psalm turns himself unto God by complaining and lamenting, not
indeed that he acknowledges not his sin together with his deserving, to
wit, that he is justly through his own procurement afflicted after that
manner. For we read not that DAVID thus complains in any other place, that
he vndeservedly suffered any thing of his God. In some other place I grant he
complains, that he suffered many things of men and of his enemies, but in no
place he makes moan that he suffered any thing vndeservedly at Gods hands.
Moreover, it is manifest enough by his own words in this place, of what thing
he complayneth: For he complayneth not only of the multitude of his enemies but
also of the over grieuousnesse of the affliction: David^ complain what on it
is.
As if any child chastened of the father complaining that he is over
rigourously handled: Albeit in the mean time that is true, that GOD never
tempts his own above that they are able to sustain: For he will not suffer
you to be tempted above that you be able, but will even give the issue with
the temptation, that ye may be able to bear it. 1. Cor. 10. 13. I grant he
burdeneth the reprobat above, that they are able to bear: and therefore CAINE.
Genes. 4. 13. complayneth: That his punishment is greater, hen that he is of
strength to bear. But God tempts not his own so; albeit sometimes it
appears so unto them, because of the infirmity of our nature. I pray you,
what meneth that, The tentation of the godly.
that a man even in the midst of his tentations (I speak of the godly) while
he hes his recourse unto God, feels, that in some part he is eased of his
burden; and that he feels with sighs that cannot be expressed a joy
invtterable? What other thing I pray you, is meant by that matter, but that
while the godly hes their refuge unto God, their tentation is assuaged, and
that after a sort they slide and escape out of the midst of tentation (to
speak so with the Apostle.) The tentation of the wicked.
) The ungodly whiles they are punished of God, they feel not indeed that,
neither is there a way made open to them unto God: Therefore the burden of the
wrath is heavier then they are able to bear. Of which thing also, CAIN. Genes.
4. 14. complayneth, who beside that he was condemned to banishment, and casten
out of the Church, he was also casten out from the face of God. But this
complaynt of DAVID is yet a little more diligently to be examined of us, and
finally, it must be taken heed to, from what mind it proceeded. The beginning
of this complaint, clearly manifests the self of this familiar manner of
doing with God, which is easily perceived in DAVID'S complaint. For such a
familiar fashion of dealing with God, shows that this complaynte came not
from the Spirit of man. For the Spirit of man durst never yet compeir before
God and his judgment seat: For howsoever otherways it appear to be fearce,
notwithstanding, it trembles and shakes at the sight of God. Wherefore of
necessity, this so familiar a complaint must proceed from the Spirit of God
himself. They call this Spirit, the Spirit of adoption, which as PAVL^
speaks, Romans 5. 5. pouring out into our hearts that fatherly love of God.
testifieing therewithal, that we are the sons of God: and therefore it opens our
mouth that we cry Abba, father, and that in our affliction we complain unto
God. For this is it which the Apostle speaks. Romans 8. 26. The Spirit it
self makes request for us, with sighs that cannot be expressed. From this
Spirit therefore this so familiar a complaynt of afflicted DAVID comes: For
except this spirit, and some sense of the fatherly love of God be present; as
in the mean time I grant unto you that it may be, that some man will shout and
howl in afflictiones, and roar according to the custom of Lions and
wildbeastes, as DAVID speaks of himself, Psalm. 32. at which time in
troubles, he is not so tuitched with this feeling of the fatherly love of God:
Nevertheless, that a man may familiarly turn himself unto God, and complain
unto him as unto a father, of the grievousnesse of the affliction: no manner of
way can it come to pass, except this Spirit be present, and that there be some
sense of the fatherly love of God. Servile (...) so^^y (...)
A servant that only fears his master because of wrath, and therewith
loves him not also; neither yet on the other side feels that he is beloved
of his master, while he is beaten by his angry master, he turns not unto
him, he quarrelleth not with him familiarlie: but as his master handles him
inhumanelie; so he complayneth, not so much according to the manner of men; as
he roareth and howleth like unto wild beasts, without all sense of the love
of his master. But the son, who is touched with a sense of his fathers love,
in the midst of the chastening, he turns him unto his father, and quarrelleth
with him familiarly. So the afflicted child of God, quarrelleth with God his
father; of whom he feels himself much more loved yea, even then while he is
afflicted be Gods hand then any natural son whosoever can be beloved of his
father. He feels also God the father to suffer together with him, and to be
commoved by the self same afflictions of his, which otherwise he him self
sends upon him: even as a father is touched with a compassion in the very
mean time, while he is chastising his son; notwithstanding that of
necessity he is compelled to chastise his son; specially, to the end he
should not grow worse by liberty and impunitie. And so to this place we have
spoken of DAVID'S complaynt, which we ought to follow in our afflictiones: in
which certainly, we should endeavor, that there be ever present with us, a
sense of the love of God, in Christ Jesus. But so far as concerns the person
of DAVID'S enemies; you have in them, not only an example of blasphemy against
God, but of extreme malice against men, who spare not so much indeed the
soul, or the other life, in so far, as they endeavor altogether, to cut away
the hope of Gods help. In which thing also, yet see their wonderful
blindness, who think that the godly are altogether left by God in the mean
time when they are afflicted of him, yea, and also that they themselves are
stirred up by God to destroy and utterly to overthrowe them: like as that
blasphemous lowne Rabschake gloried against the people of God. 1. King. 18. 25.
Am I now come up without Iehova unto this place to destroy it? Iehova hes
said unto me, Go up against this land and destroy it. And thus much have we
spoken of the first part of this Psalm.

4 But thou Iehoua art a buckler about me, my glory, and he who lifts up
mine head.

5 I crying unto Iehova with my voice he answered me out of the mountain of
his holiness, Selah.

6 I Laid me down and slept, I awakened, because Iehoua sustained me.

7 I will not be affrayd for ten thousands of the people, which standing round
about me, have pitched their tents against me.


The other part of the Psalm.
But thou Iehova] The second part of the Psalm, in which, through the sense
of the presence and help of God, albeit he was not yet in effect delivered,
notwithstanding he glories, as if he were even now delivered; For he had
scarce complained unto God, when he felt some presence and protection of his
before hand. For surely no man will have his recourse unto God in Jesus Christ,
before he first in some measure feel his help: Come unto me (says he
Matthew. 11 28.) all ye who are weary and burdened, and I will make you to
rest. But what are these helps, to the end we may come to the particular,
which DAVID felt to come from God, in the time he had his refuge to him. DAVID
being disarmed, fled from his son Abschalom; now he felt God as a buckler
to cover and protect him wholly over. David misery (...) glory.
He was in shame, he felt God to be unto him Glory. He lay prostrate; he
felt God lifting up his head. And to speak it in a word; he felt God to
supply all that wanted in him. The matter is so then, surely thou shall want
nothing, which that only one God shall not furnish, if thou have thy refuge to
him: yea, thou shall also feel him only to be all unto thee. Desire thou
wisdom? he shall be wisdom vnthee: desire thou glory? He shall be glory
unto thee: Desire thou riches? he shall be riches unto thee. Finally, he
shall be unto thee al things that thou desire. Moreover, DAVID whiles he felt
the sethings, he holds them not within himself, but the things he feels,
he speaks out, and professes them first before GOD. This sense of the mercy
of God, The seeling of the mercy of God.
it cannot be altogether suppressed and restrained, but it will burst forth in
an open confession. For so both God himself is glorified, and he who hes that
sense, receives the greater consolation; especially, the sense of the mercy of
God, being enlarged by the confession. For how much the more we utter forth
that sense of Gods mercy in our hearts; so much more it grows and is enlarged.
But he who never at any time speaks a word, either with God, or men of the
mercy of God in Christ Jesus: this man by his silence declares plainly
enough, that he is not touched as yet with that sense of the mercy of God, with
which it became him to be touched. The acknowledging of the mercy gotion.
I crying out] He goes forward in his glorying; and as first he had
professed before God himself, that feeling of his mercy: so turning himself
unto men, he commends the same unto them, beginning first from the manner
and fashion, whereby he had apprehended the mercy of God. Then in following
out every particular part of the mercy. For so it comes to pass, that both
God is more glorified, and men are also more edified through that example of
the mercy of God toward him: for no notable mercy of God is bestowed upon any
for his own cause only, but also for the cause of others, that others also by
his example may be turned unto God, and may purchase mercy. Wherefore (says
PAVLE 1. Tim. 1. 16.) For this cause he received me to mercy, that Jesus
Christ should first show on me all long suffering, unto the example of them,
which shall in time to come believe in him, unto eternal life. Therefore the
Prophet begins from that reason, whereby he had apprehended mercy. Now it is
perceived in conversion unto God and prayer; to the end, that no man should
think that God gives grace to that man that seeks it not, or that he
opens the heavens to the man that knocks not, let be, to the contemner or
refuser of the grace offered: For God will have our faith exercised after that
fashion: albeit otherways he gives us not, yea, the least thing that can
be, because of our prayers, as for any deserving cause. He aunswered] To wit,
out of his heavenly sanctuary, yea, and out of the earthly also, unto which
his visible presence was then tied. This is subjoyned, that all may know that
they seek no sooner any thing from God, according to his will, but he will
surely therewith answer them in some measure: and so they may be encouraged
from the very success of the prayer, to conceive prayers thereafter. Also,
we shall see that it cannot be otherwise, but God shall presently answer to
our petition, if we consider from whence the same is: now it comes from Gods
own spirit it self; and so it is not possible but God will hear his own
Spirit. Wherefore PAVLE. Romans 8. 27. 28. after he had said that the Spirit
makes request for us, with sighs that cannot be expressed, presently he
subjoynes, that God knows the meaning of his own Spirit: As if he should
say, God must of necessity hear the intercession of his own Spirit, and
answer to the desire thereof. From whence I pray you is that, that with sighs
that cannot be uttered, of which the Apostle speaks, we feel therewith, that
invtterable joy, and so we come from God as if we were satisfied: yea even
then, when that self same thing is not as yet gotten, which hes been sought of
him: Surely, none otherwise, but from thence that God hes answered our
petition. For so God uses, stirring up in our hearts, a certain unspeakable
joy, to answer us when we call. And this sense is more then all those earthly
things, more then this present life, yea and al things belonging thereto:
Wherefore he has purchased more at Gods hands, who has felt this joy, then
he who has gotten this present life from God, and all things necessary to the
same. But now we have in the end of the next verse, what God answered to DAVID,
when he says. Iehova susteineth me] Therefore God answered not so much by
word as by deed, then when he vpheld David: Which thing he spoke before in more
words. [Thou art my buckler about me, my glory, and he that lifts up mine
head,] He comprehends the same thing in one word hereafter. The effect of
Gods mercy.
[He sustained me] says he, whereby he means that sense of Gods protection,
in the midst of persecution. I laid me downe] Now he commends the effect
which followed so gentle an answer of God, of the which he spoke immediately
before. And it is indeed, ane certain security of the mind, which he leaves
to be perceived be the effects. Now there are in it, that he lay down, that
he sleeped, and that he awakened out of sleep. For as when the mind of any
man is troubled through any present danger, either he goes not to bed, or if
he go to bed, he sleeps not quietly, neither yet wakeneth he softly, if
peradventure he sleep: So when the mind is quiet, then indeed a man goes to
bed, he sleeps securely, he awakeneth softly: Wherefore some deep security
of mind, is manifested by those effects, yea, and that a spiritual rest. The
thing therefore that makes a mind secure in troubles, you see it to be Gods
presence, and a feeling of his help. Therefore the Apostle has these words.
Romans 8. 31. If God be on our side, who shall be against us? For he felt that
quietness of mind through Gods presence, which made him thereafter, to provoke
whatsoever enemies of his salvation. Also that is worthy of consideration, in
what meaning the Apostle in that place understands God to be present with him.
After that he had fully rehearsed all Gods benefits, having begun at the
first to the last in these words. Romans 8. 29. 30. Those which he knew before
he also predestinate, whom he predestinate, them alsa he called, whom he
called, those he justified, whom he justified, those he gloryfied: then he
subjoyned, verse. 13. What shall we say to those things? To the which
interrogation, he answers, If God be on our side, who shall be against us? In
which words, surely he has brought in one sum, all the benefits before
spoken of; all which easily may be brought to this: How God is with us.
That God is with us. Therefore Gods presence is perceived by his powerfulnes
in calling, justifying, and glorifying of us: So that if any man would know
whether God be present with him or not, he must see, whether if he be called,
whether if he be justified, and by these, as by the means, he must ascend to
the Predestination, and foreknowledge of God, which were from everlasting.
Then least any should doubt of these benefits, by which he declares the Lord
himself to be present with us, he brings us to that gift of his son Christ,
of al gifts the chiefest, and by an argument taken from the thing that is more,
to that which is les, he concludes thus, He who spared not his only son,
but gave him for us to death, how shall he not with him give us all things
also? Therefore, you see that the Apostle reasons, from Christ given, to all
the rest of the gifts: to the end we should learn from thence, how often
soever we would know, whither God be present with us by his benefits, so often
we must have our recourse unto Christ, and we must see, whither if we be
participant of Christ of his death, of his resurrection, without the which,
surely we have no presence of God with us, no effectual power of God in us.
But to the end we may return hither, from whence we began: That is most
certain indeed, The effect of the gracious presence of God.
that the presence of God, and that indeed by the self alone, makes a man
secure: which thing is so true, as if thou take away his presence, man has
nothing in him but fear and horror, specially when any grievous affliction
seazeth upon him: Or if there be any sort of quietness of mind, that is none
other thing, but a fleshly security, which is a token of the sudden
destruction to come. PAVLL says. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. When they shall say peace
and safety: then shall come upon them sudden destruction, as the travel
upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. Therefore, to the end
there may be a deep sleep, and a soft wakening out of sleep, that is, that
there be a true security of mind, every man must take heed, that he feel
God present with him, present I say, when he goes to bed, when he awaketh in
the night: for our sleep should be no sooner interrupted in the night, but we
should have our recourse unto God: Albeit men commonly are chiefly distracted
in the night, with the cares of this world, yea, with lighter and vayner
tryfles. More-over, nothing has more strength, either to settle the mind in
the night time, or to call it back again to sleep, and to refresh the body
with rest, then that sweet meditation upon God. Finally, when the time of
awaking comes in the morning, every man must take head that he find God
present with him, when he goes forth of the house, when he comes in
again, while he eats, while he drinks, while he is doing any thing,
continually that presence of God is to be sought. Also we have God present at
all times, if with our voice we cry unto Iehova, as DAVID did, or if also, when
there is not place for the voice, we call upon him with our heart, which
thing yearly may be done, without hindering the most serious business we have
ado, to leave also that unspoken of, that this way specially, all the honest
adoes of this life, may be handled with a certain inutterable delight. Now the
ground of this presence is Christ, without whose croce and sacrifice, set
before our eyes, no entry is patent unto God. An other effect of Gods presence.
I will fear none euill] In this verse, he enlarges that security which he
felt through Gods presence, while he says, that he has no cause to fear
hereafter, no, not indeed ten thousands of his enemies. The amplifying
therefore is partly from the time to come, partly, from the multitude of the
enemies: As if he should say; Not only was I secure, but also hereafter I will
be so secure, David^ confidence exhorts us to invincible constanci^.
that if ten thousands of the people would pitch their tents about me,
notwithstanding I will not be shaken with fear. Of the which thing you learn,
that this is the force of the quietness of the mind in God, that there is
nothing which it is not able to overcome. From thence Paul, after he had
numbered out many things, which are contrary to us in this life, such as were
anguishes, oppression, and the rest; finally, he subjoyned. Romans 8. 36. 37.
Yea, in all those things we are more then conquerours through him who has
loved us: Behold, you may see the ground of this security and victory: To
wit, the love of God in Christ. For when there is that sense of the love of God
in Christ, and consequently, any taist of that life to come (for this last
follows always of that former) then in deed the child of God is so carried
above al those things inferior, that from on high he despises and contemns
them. The cause brought out of the Apostle.
Now the Apostle in the same place, brings in the cause why we are more then
conquerours through the love of God. For I am persuaded (says he) that neither
death nor life, etc. is able to separate us from the love of God. For if those
things, which are reckoned out in that Chapter, might separate us from the love
of GOD, then certainly, we should easily fall under the burden through
them. But seeing they are not able to bring that to pass that GOD in Christ
should not love us, and we also feel that love in Christ, and out of that
love, life: surely it will never come to pass, that those things fall utterly
oppress us: But on the other, it falls out directly to the contrary, that
we over come them all, DAVID therefore, to return to him again, was so
carried away through the sense of Gods presence and love, in the midst of
persecution; that he securely despised all the contrary power, as one, who
had persuaded himself of that, that it was not able to separate him from that
love of God in Christ, the sense whereof indeed he had at that time. For it
is not to be thought that this voice of DAVID, and his glorying, arose
chiefelie of that security, which he had then perhaps of the certainty of the
keeping of this life present: But much more of that security, which he had of
the certainty of that life to come, yea and that through the feeling of the
love which is in Christ Jesus: For that is the differance betuixt the godly and
others which stretch not their hope farther nor this life: Those are never at
ease, neither yet can they glory, except they be first sure of this life: yea,
but the godly being uncertain of this life, and certain of that that is to
come, through the feeling of the love of God in Christ, they are in quiet rest,
The difference be^uixt the godly and ungodly, concerning this life.
and do glory, Sadrach, Mesach, and Abeanego Dan. 3. 16. answered so to
Nebuchad-netzar threatening them with all extreme torments whatsoever, We are
not careful (say they) concerning this matter. And thus much have we spoken
concerning the second part of the Psalm. The glorying and commendation of
the benefits of GOD, The su^me of the second part
whereof the first was the sense of the help of God: the second, of the
security p^st and to come, proceeding from that sense of Gods help: Now
follows the third part of the Psalm.

8 Arise Iehova, save me, my God, who has stricken all mine enemies upon the
cheek bone, thou have broken the teeth of the wicked.

9 Salvation it self is to be ascribed to Iehova: let thy blessing be upon
thy people. Selali.

Arise Iehova] The last part of the Psalm, The third part of the Psalm.
as we have spoken, in which DAVID, turning himself again unto God; First
prays for himself, that he may be delivered from the present danger: Then
for the people. Now he prays for himself in these words. The combat of faith
Arise (says he) Iehova, save me] For so long as we feel not a full
deliverance, we remember God so, as if he were vn-mindfull of us, and did sir
idle in the heavens, casting away all care of his own upon the earth. Save me
(says he) my God] Embracing GOD as it were in his heart, he craveth that he
would save him: For when he says [my God] he embraces God, and by faith,
applies him to himself: now he does, and speaks this through the right of
the covenant, in which God promised to be a God to Abraham, Why David sure of
eternal life, appears to be careful of the present.
and to his seed. Genes. 17. 1. But if thou ask in this place, seeing now
before he had gloryed in God, and in his presence, which also he felt in his
mind, in the middeste of afflictions: He gloryed, I say, against all his
enemies, against life, against death: how comes it to pass, that now he is
so careful of this life, and craveth so earnestly at God, that he would
deliver him out of the present danger? I answer, that this great security of
the godly, and the contempt of this present life, fights not among
themselves. And the petitiones of this sort, whereby they crave also the
preservation of this life, always with that condition, if it please God so,
that he would grant the same to his own glory: for neither the godly, while
they have a fore-taist of that other life, and leaning thereto, they glory
against all things; cast not in the mean time utterly away the care of
this life, and rashly power out the same. For this present life, among the
rest of Gods gifts is not the basest. Thou have striken] He mooveth GOD to
his preservation in time to come, from the by gane experience, in destroying of
the enemies and wicked and therewith also filling them with shame; For it is
thought to be a shameful thing to be stricken upon the cheek bone, and to
suffer the breaking of the teethe, that is, strokes upon the face, and in the
mouth. Observe in this place tw^ linkes, as it were, of that fine Golden
Chain. which PAVLE linketh together, to wit, Experience and Hope. Experience
(says he, Romans cap. 5. 3.) brings out Hope. This petition of DAVID, from
bygane experience, leans to the Hope of the present and temporal deliverance
to be purchased. Albeit indeed I confess that this is not a sure hope, even
that, to wit, which makes not ashamed, unless it be that hope of that
everlasting promised deliverance: For that is properly that hope which follows
the experience of Gods deliverance, especially, if there be a feeling, with
that experience of deliverance of the love of God in Christ Jesus: Therefore
the Apostle subjoyned in that place: For the love of God is powered out in our
hearts by the holy Spirit: As if he should say, of necessity this hope makes
not ashamed, and it is sure, seeing that experience, from which hope
proceeds, is especially of the love of God in Christ Jesus. Salvation it
selfe] Thereafter he prays for the people, yea, for that part of the people
which followed after Abschalom, and was seduced of him. One would marvel, that
DAVID in such a great danger of his life, is so mindful in his prayer of the
people, and salvation of others: For this would appear to be of a man that is
set a part from all peril and danger, not only to respect himself, or his
own life, but also others, and the salvation of others. But it is to be known,
that this is the disposition of every member of that universal body of Christ,
that it is not only touched with a sense of the own misery, but also it is
commoved with a compassion of the rest of the members of the same body: And
look how much the more it is touched with a sense of the own misery, so much
the more it suffers with the rest, whom it seeeth to be miserable. For he who
never yet felt any misery, surely that man is unmeet to pity others, whom he
sees to be oppressed with misery. Also, the reason of this petition is taken
from the nature of God him self. To Iehova (says he) is salvation to be
ascribed] as if he should say: The reas^ of the last petition.
The nature of Iehova, is to save and to be merciful: So he declares unto
God what his nature is: For there is none other reason more effectual to move
God, then if you bring forth unto him his own nature, especially, that
whereby he is merciful: For God delights chiefly in mercy, and above all
things, in his own nature he is most merciful. God is love. Ioh. 4 ^. Now it
is not possible that this can be done of us, to wit, that we be able to bring
out this his nature before him, especially that he is merciful, unless we
travel diligently, first to see by the eyes of our soul, yea, and feel also
surely in our heart in some measure, that infinite Essence, Wisdom, Justice,
Power, and mercy of God, etc: Except we hold us content to prattle of an
unknown thing, which we have never yet, neither seen nor felt. Wherefore,
the knowledge of the nature of God, is chiefly most necessary to conceive
earnest prayer, and not only the knowledge, but the sense and feeling of the
same. And we must endeavor all our life long, so much as is possible we may
conceive in this finite that and narrow mind, that infinite majesty: To him
therefore be all honor and glory, Amen.

THE ARGUMENT. Of the VI. PSALM.
This is a Psalm of Prayer, and it is manifest out of the inscription, that it
was written by David. The parts thereof are two. The first is a petition, by
which David being sick, prays to God that he would remoove his anger and
scourge, he craveth earnestly his mercy, and seeks after salvation, from
the second verse, to the ninth. Then through a sure faith, feeling the things
that he sought, he gloryeth against his enemies, of Gods taking heed unto him,
and of his bountifulness unlooked for, from the ninth verse, to the end of the
Psalm.

THE VI. PSALMI.
1 A Psalm of DAVID (committed) to the Master of music upon the Violes (to
be song) to a grave tune.

2 O Iehova rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy burning
wrath.

3 Iehova, be gracious unto me, because I am become feeble, heal me, Iehova,
because my bones ar altogether troubled.

4 And my soul is greatly troubled, thou therefore, Iehova, how long!

5 Return, o Iehova, deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake.

6 For in death the self, there is no remembrance of thee, who shall praise
thee in the grave?

7 I faint in my mourning, I cause my bed to swim, all the night I make my
bed side to melt with my tears.

8 My eye through indignation, is consumed, it grows old, because of all my
foes.


The first part contains the petition, the cause whereof he adjoyneth.
O Iehova] The first part of the Psalm, as we have spoken. The petition:
first he prays that affliction may be remooved, Then he prays for
prosperity, as for deliverance and salvation. Also, with the petitiones, he
intermingleth the causes. First, therefore he prays, that the wrath of God
may be remooved. O Iehova (says he) rebuke me not in thine anger, etc.] DAVID,
as it appears by his own words, being holden down with a grievous sickness,
he conceived in his mind that God was angry against him, of the which it
came to pass, that being now sick, he is more troubled in mind, through the
feeling of Gods wrath, then in the body, through the feeling of the sickness.
For, that we speak somewhat of the wrath of God, it is intolerable, for it is
not possible that he can be satisfied, unless it be with the everlasting
punishment of that man who is out of Christ. It is not the sickness of one,
two, or mo years, not of a thousand years, that can satisfy the angry God,
if you be found out of Christ, but thou must be punished for evermore. The
common place of Gods anger.
And even as the wrath of God in the self is intolerable, so the sense of the
flesh, and of this corrupt nature conceives it to be unappeasable, and to be
mixed with no kind of mercy; of which thing Cain complayneth. Genesis 4. 13. My
punishment is more (says he) then that I am able to bear. But certainly,
profane Cain, lies against God, and against his nature. For where sin
abounds, grace abounds much more, If the mind could be brought on
earnestly to seek the same: How Spiritual David's fee^^ng was.
For then it shall feel the wrath of God in Christ pacified, which the flesh
and corrupt nature feels vn-appeaseable. DAVID therefote, to return unto
him, having once felt this wrath of God, was more troubled through the sense of
the wrath, then through the sense of the most grievous sickness: he craveth
then, that not so much the sickness be remooved from him, as the feeling of
the wrath; and he doubleth that petition, as one who was deeply touched, with
the sense of that wrath O Lord (says he) rebuke me not in thine anger, neither
chastiseme in thy burning wrath. For he apprehends not only the anger, What
doctrine the afflictions of the godly is.
but the burning wrath: Therefore, in the example and person of DAVID, this is
to be learned of us: The afflictions of the godly, are not indeed so many
satisfactiones for their sins, neither does God lay them on upon his own, to
that end, that he may satisfy his wrath and justice: For Christ has
satisfied once the wrath of his father, for the sins of all the believers,
yea, and that indeed most perfitely. For the Papists lie, The Papists (...)
concerning satisfaction.
in that they say, that the afflictiones of the godly, are so many temporal
punishments inflicted, because of their sins, which of necessity they must
suffer, either in this world, or in the other, That is, in Purgatory. For they
say, that Christhes only taken away by his death that everlasting punishment.
By which lie, who is he not that seeeth, how much is derogated from that only
one and perfect sacrifice of Christ. Therefore I affirm, that these are not
satisfactiones for sins, or the punishments of sins, but fatherly
chastisements, by which God of his mercy exercises his own in this life,
that they be not utterly casten up in a deep sleep of fleshly security, and
so perish with the rest of the world. Which thing, albeit it be true, yet
notwithstanding, afflictiones many times darkeneth so in our sight, that mercy
and love of God in Christ, that the very Godly are afraid also when they are
chastised, least together, and at one time, the whole wrath of God be poured
out upon them. Now this fear aryseth not so much of the renewed part of the
mind, as it does of the flesh and unregenerate part of the soul: For love
casts out fear. 1. Ioh. 4. 18. Therefore it proceeded of the flesh, that
DAVID feared so much the wrath of God, and his prayers some thing savoring of
the flesh, What the prayers of the godly are.
and of the corrupt nature mixed with them. For the prayers, yea, of the most
holy men, contract a certain spot on some one side or other, of the remanent
uncleanness of this nature. Nevertheless, in the meanetime, he turns
himself unto God, and prays that he would turn away his wrath from him:
which is again a sure evidence, that he, even at that time had apprehended
some certain portion of that grace of God in Christ Jesus: for vtherwaies
surely he durst not have been so bold to come unto God, or to common with him
so familiarly, unless he had been allured by some feeling of that mercy in
Christ. Then the godly, in the midde cloud of afflictiones, surely have some
sight (howsoever at some time it be somewhat obscure) of the mercy and grace
of God, by which they being allured, come unto God, and earnestly crave his
mercy. For they are not able, who are not at least touched with some sense of
his mercy, earnestly to crave that mercy. But we will make the matter manifest
by this similitude* When a mid cloud is cast in betuixt our sight and the Sun,
the cloud indeed in the matter it self, diminishes nothing of the bright
shining of the same, which by nature is in the Sun, albeit the Sun be not
seen of us, in the clear brightness thereof, be reason of the cloud that is
cast betuixte: Even so it is, of that cloud of affliction; that is casten in
betuixte our sight, and that sun of the countenance and mercy of God: The
exposition and applying of the similitude*
in effect surely it takes nothing away from the love of God (howsoever
indeed it appear unto us) whereby God loves us in Christ, which, as God
himself is unchangeable, so he remains the self same for evermore, and is
ever like to the self, yea, and remains even then when he chiefelie
afflicts us. For even then when he looveth us in that his Welbeloved,
how-so-ever it appear not so unto us, because of the affliction, which is cast
in betuixt us and his countenance. And again, as the cloud cast betuixt,
darkeneth not the Sun so unto us, that nothing of the sun utterly is seen,
and we think that the day is suddenly changed into the night; nevertheles
surely some portion of the light shines unto us, through the midst of that
dark thickness of the cloud: even so, neither does that cloud of af^liction
cast in, darken that Sun of the love of GOD in Christ, but some beams
thereof will clearly strike upon our minds and hearts. These things are
somewhat more largely spoken of me, that we suffer not our selves to be so
oppressed in the darkness of afflictiones, so that al beams of the favor of
God in Christ, be utterly taken away out of our sight* but so much continually
of that light which is in his face, should be seen of us, as may show us the
way earnestly to crave mercy and deliverance. Iehova, be gracious unto me]
Hitherto, once and again, he has prayed, that the wrath might be remooved.
Now he earnestly prays for the grace and mercy of God. Wrath by prayer
being removed, we should earnestly seek grace after the example of David.
Be gracious unto me, o Iehova, says he] He had seen the wrath of God, he
had seen also his grace, he had apprehended grace, and after he had commed by
it, he cried, be gracius unto me, ^ Iehova For bursting out into these words,
no doubt he had, with a sweet feeling, apprehended grace. For we should not
be moved to cry for the grace of GOD, for the fashion, and some light
affection, but with the cry that is in the mouth, there should be a deep
feeling thereof in the heart. For the godly, no sooner seek earnestly grace,
but they get it as soon, their hearts being spread over, yea, with a most
sweet feeling thereof. Because I am become feeble] He subjoyneth an argument
of grace, The ^auses of grace ^ough^*
earnestly fought for from his languishing and sickness, as if he should say,
O God, thou see how grieuouslie I am afflicted with sickness, therefore be
gracious unto me. Heal me o Iehova] Again, he earnestly craves mercy. This
his frequent prayer shows that he had mightily wrastled with the sense of
Gods wrath: for we would not nakedly, A passiona^^ repetition.
and for a fashion (so as men use to do) call for the grace and mercy of God,
if we were touched with ane earnest sense of Gods wrath, but with a loud and
doubled voice, calling upon God, we would diligently endeavor to escape out of
that feeling: For it cannot be, that any man being oppressed with the wrath of
God, can fly away, except God him self, as it were, stretching out his hand
from the heavens, ease us of that burden of his wrath. Because my bones are
altogether troubled] He repeateth the argument, taken from his languishing and
sickness, (...) parts of the argument taken from the languishing.
but being laid open in his own parts. Now the parts thereof are these; the
trouble of the body, and of the most firm and solid parts thereof: to wit,
of the bones: then a troubling of the soul, be reason of the wrath of God
seazing thereon: As if he should say, both is mine hole body troubled, and
likewise is my soul troubled. Finally, nothing is whole in me. Men indeed ar
then in a good case, when the body being sick, the soul is touched and
pricked with a conscience of sin. For this cause the body is outwardly
humbled by God, that the soul also may be inwardly humbled. For unless in
mind, we rose up against the heavens and God himself, what need were there
of the casting down of the body? Therefore DAVID'S body was humbled, that his
soul might be humbled: For these things agree very evil among themselves, a
proud heart, and an humble body. And that is thought to be the most grievous
judgment of God, when the body being humbled, The most grievous judgment of
God.
God boweth not therewith and moves by his Spirit the Soul unto repentance:
and the very sickness itself is most desperate, when in the most grievous
feeling of the body, the heart of any man remains insensible, without the
feling of wrath, without the feeling of sin, without the feeling of grace.
But if there be any sense of the wrath of God in any man, that is, the highway
to recover conversion and health; but when there is not a feeling of the anger,
neither a conscience of the sin, then the afflicted man roareth indeed like a
Lion, as DAVID testifies of himself. Psa. 32. 3. And he is no more able to
turn himself unto God, then a wild beast unto the man that strikes him. The
comfortes that commonly are ministered to the sick, tend almost al to this end;
that in sickness they be quiet, as concerning God, they be secure in respect
of sin, they be at ease in consideration of heaven and hell: Be of good
courage, The stupiditie of the wis^^.
say they, remember not upon death, but remember of the recovering of the
health of the body. Then they commend the patience and strength of the mind:
but commend they that strength which proceeds from confidence in Jesus
Christ? Noe ways at all, but patience is unto them a fearce mind, proud and
wrestling with that hand of God, which seazeth upon the sick. Also, if in the
mean time, any man make mention of God, and of his mercy in Christ, of sin,
of life and death to come, presently they receive this speech, as a most
heavy tale; and they call it a melancholic co^mouing which serves rather for
the increase of the sickness, then for the diminishing thereof. But men should
deal far better with any sick man, if ane humbled, contrite, and dejected
mind were recommended unto him. For the mind being once cast down, there is
some place for repentance, and for the earnest craving of the grace of God. Our
misery, the object of Gods mercy
Observe this again: DAVID in this place, to the end he might move God unto
mercy, he sets down as it were to be seen before his eyes, and amplifieth
his misery, so that in a manner it may be altogether seen of God. Mercy
presupponeth misery: Now to the end that God may be merciful, of necessity
we must be first miserable. Wherefore, if any man would earnestly crave the
mercy of God, of force he must profess before God that he is miserable. For
every man may truly speak that of himself, to wit, that he is miserable of
his own nature; and that confession is above al things most acceptable unto
God, in whose sight it becomes us not to compeare with an oftentation of our
(I cannot tell what) Free will: even as if it were in the power of our nature,
and it were but once to think of any thing that were pleasant and acceptable
unto God: The impi^^^ of the Pelagians.
for that were to detract from the grace of God in Christ Jesus, of which only
we have what-so-ever power we have to think well, will well, work well.
Neither yet again, should we come forth in Gods presence, with the opinion of
our merits and satisfactions: For they that seek righteousness in these things
they find it not. The example of the Pharisee
The Pharisee boasted of these things, but he returns home vnjustified. Luke
18. 10. We must come forth rather in Gods presence, with that miserable
Publicane, who having laid out his misery before God, and found mercy.
Notwithstanding, the Papists cannot see, nor will not see the misery of our
nature, to the end, that they might obtain the mercy of God. Therefore, out
of these things that have been spoken, it appears, that we should lay our
misery open before God. But how can it be, that any man can set before him
the mercy of God, The deuty of the god lie in obteining the mer^^ of God.
unless he himself first know that he is miserable? Now to know that he is
miserable, and that he may acknowledge his own misery; it is not for the
fashion, to profess that he is mortal, that he is a sinner, that he is
subject to many inconveniences, when in the mean time, he feels nothing of
these deeply in his mind, such are the confessiones of men commonly of
themselves: But to acknowledge our misery, is to feel at the very
heart-roote, how miserable thou art; it is to know in conscience thine own
sin, with a serious dolor of thy mind. They are two-folde miserable, that
see not their misery. The two fold misery of hipocrit^^
It is a miserable thing in the self, to be a sinner, as a manslayer, as an
adulterer, etc. But not to see what great evil is in sin, nor to be touched
with no remorse of manslaughter, and adultery, etc. that is, to be miserable
over again. For such is the nature of that fleshly security, with which, as
with a strong Apoplexy, men ar cast up into a dead sleep, so that they neither
see nor feel any thing, while at length they be so wakened up by some sudden
judgment, that they never from that time forth be at rest. Hitherto the
argument taken from his misery has been amplified. Thou therefore, I Ichova,
etc.!] The conclusion of the deprecation of the wrath.
Now he concludes the prayer, for avoiding of Gods wrath: But the conclusion
is turned into a co^playnt, for he co^playneth that the Lord has remained a
good space turned away from him, as it manifestly appears of the petition
following, in which he says: Return Ichova] So then through the effect of
the vehement sorrow, the whole sentence is cut off, and it is a certain
holding up of speech [Aposiopesis] But the complaynt is to be considered.
DAVID, as it appears, being destitute for a short space only, of the
presence of his GOD, notwithstanding, he complayneth so, as if he were
deprived for a long time and space of that sweet countenance of his GOD. The
quiek feeling of the godly.
How long] says he: Those with whom God uses to be present, they are
scarseable to suffer his absence, yea, but for a moment: to them one hour is a
year. In deed it appears so unto them, especially if in the mean time they
feel God to be angry against them. For of those secure men, I speak
nothing, who never willingly look unto God, or at any time meditate upon him.
For how many are there in every place, who if they get liberty to enjoy this
life, with a reasonable sufficient plenty of these things, which belong to
the sustentation of this life, surely they would never desire to see neither
another life, nor heaven, nor God. Oh how deceivable is this fleshly security?
for it persuades us that there is in this life some happiness, true
quietness and peace with God, without Christ. Hitherto he has concluded, the
deprecation of wrath. Return, Ichova] Now again he earnestly craveth for
grace. There newed, see king of grace.
Return (says he) O Ichova, deliver my soule] To wit, save me out of this
present death, not indeed for my desert, but for thine own mere mercy and
grace. Therefore he acknowledges the presence of God and his Favor, that it
proceeds not indeed from any merit of his, but of the mere grace of God.
And from thence it appears in that complaynt, in which he quarrelled with
God, concerning his long absence, that he complained not of any wrong, as
though GOD had dealt unrighteously with him, otherwise then he had deserved at
Gods hand. For if Gods presence proceed of grace, surely Gods absence is not
of any unrighteousness in God. And that is the difference, betuixt the
complaints of the faithful, and of the infidels. The complaints of the godly,
and what they are.
The faithful complain not that there is any wrong done unto them by God,
any otherways then they deserve at his hands: But whiles they complain, they
acknowledge that whatsoever thing is done unto them, according to the will of
God, is ever righteouslie done, and that they have justly deserved the same.
More-over, they complain and quarrel with God, of a certain sonne-slike
fear, and of an unutterable desire of his presence: The complaints of the
infidels.
But the unfaithful in co^playning, they burst forth inaccusationes and
blasphemies, they accuse of unrighteousness, in the mean God time they bring out
their own righteousness; also, their complaint is made through the hatred of
God, and detestation of his presence, at which they tremble, and from the
which, they altogether vttetly abhor. There fore it is to be considered
diligently it persuades us that there is in this life some happiness, true
quietness and peace with God, without Christ. Hitherto he has concluded, the
deprecation of wrath. Return, Iehova] Now again he earnestly craveth for
grace. Return (says he) O Iehova, deliver my soule] To wit, There newed* see
king of grace
save me out of this present death, not indeed for my desert, but for thine own
mere mercy and grace. Therefore he acknowledges the presence of God and his
favor, that it proceeds not indeed from any merit of his, but of the mere
grace of God. And from thence it appears in that complaynt, in which he
quarrelled with God, concerning his long absence, that he complained not of
any wrong, as though GOD had dealt unrighteously with him, otherwise then he
had deserved at Gods hand. For if Gods presence proceed of grace, surely Gods
absence is not of any unrighteousness in God. And that is the difference,
betuixt the complaints of the faithful, and of the infidels. The complaints of
the godly, and what they are.
The faithful complain not that there is any wrong done unto them by God,
any otherways then they deserve at his hands: But whiles they complain, they
acknowledge that whatsoever thing is done unto them, according to the will of
God, is ever righteouslie done, and that they have justly deserved the same.
More-over, they complain and quarrel with God, of a certain sonne-like
fear, and of an unutterable desire of his presence: The complaints o^ the
infidels.
But the unfaithful in co^playning, they burst forth inaccusationes and
blasphemies, they accuse of unrighteousness, in the mean God time they bring out
their own righteousness; also, their complaint is made through the hatred of
God, and detestation of his presence, at which they tremble, and from the
which, they altogether vtte^ly abhor. Therefore it is to be considered
diligently of us, that in the mean while, we make our complaint, we put a
bridle to our affections, least through their distemperature, they carry us so
far forward, that we sprinkle not that holy and inviolable majesty, with any,
and it were, yea, but with the least spot that can be. Which thing is the
rather more diligently to be done of us for that cause, because we are al
inclined thereto by nature, and it is a thing very hard to repress and bring
under commandment, our boiling affectiones, and filthy thoughts. Wherefore
we must labor continually, that we speak and think of our GOD, with passing
great reverence and holiness. For in death there is no remembrance of thee.]
This is the other reason of the petition, The other reason of the petition from
Gods glory.
from the glory of God himself: For as that former reason was from our own
misery, in the third and fourth verses, so this latter is from the glory of
God, which through this present estate of DAVID, appears to be called in
question. Lord (says he) in death there is no remembrance of thee] Therefore
keep me alive. The cause wherefore the godly live awhile upon the earth,
before they ^lit hence to the lord
For this cause, God will have us to live in the land of the living, and as it
were, to live as strangers absente from the Lord, that first through faith we
might worship him, in his son Jesus Christ, in this life, before we fully
enjoyed that his presence, in that other. Every one of the godly, knowing this,
they desire to be preserved for a time, yea, even in this life, for this end
in special, which the Lord himself has appointed, and as the Apostle
speaks of the creatures. Romans 8. 20. not so much after their will, as after
his own will, who will have them for a time to be pilgrims absent from their
Lord. Therefore so often as we see the Saints so earnestly to desire this life,
and the preservation thereof at Gods hands, we must not think that this is
done by them, for this cause that they even delight so much in this life, The
cause why the godly desire to remain in this life.
or that they abhor this bodily death, but rather that they earnestly desire to
glorify their God among the living, and to exalte his militant Church and
kingdom upon the earth, and they desire not to ^itte from thence, while they
have won some unto Christ, and as it were, by stretching out their hand,
they carry them up with themselves into the heavens. For this present life is
chiefly to be consecrat to God, and Gods affairs: Yea, and this is the cause
why Ezechias took death in so evil a part, denunced unto him. Esa. ^^. And
this also is the cause, wherefore Paul, when otherwise he choosed rather to
s^it out of the body, nevertheles, he choosed rather to remain in the body,
to the end, that he might propagat the Church of Christ, and might bring men
unto the ^aith. Phil. 1. 23. 24. Finally, this was the cause, wherefore so
earnestly DAVID sought in so many Psalms, the prolonging of his life. Psa. 30.
and 88. and 118. Notwithstanding David in this Psalm, appears not so much to
be oppressed with the sickness of his body, as with the sickness of his soul,
and sense of the wrath of God. And therefore he is not so afraid of this bodily
death, as of that spiritual casting off, yea, and that through the sense of
the flesh, and part not renewed. Wherefore we may consider with our selves, that
he spak of that eternal death, and of the burial of the hell, in which, no man
will praise God. Therefore you see that the godly also, abhor, and are
affrayd for the bell; and again, you see, that they desire life and salvation,
not so much for their own cause, as for Gods glories sake. For neither DAVID
in this place, so much respects his own life, and salvation, as the praise of
GOD, yea, and that specially troubled him, that being once cast out from the
face of God, he should not at any time there after be a Preacher of Gods
praises. And this is a most sure evident of the salvation of the godly, if
they feel in themselves a desire and careful endeavor of gloryfiing God. For
it is not possible, that that soul can be detained in Hell, which aspyreth to
God, and to his glory. I faint in my mourning] Hitherto have been declared,
The three reasons of the petition from a most grie^ous sen^e of misery.
the two reasones of the earnest seeking of mercy. The first, in the third and
fourth verses: The second, in the sixth verse. Now follows the third, in the
sevent and eight verses, from the dolor and feeling of a most grievous
misery. He expresses this sorrow diverse manner of ways: For first (he
says). I faint in my mourning] Then, I make my bed (says he) all the night
to swimme] Thirdly (says he) I make my bed side to melt with my teares] I
grant that these speeches are very excessive: For in truth, neither made DAVID
so much as his bed to swim, neither yet melted he his bedde-side with his
tears: notwithstanding, the inward dolor of his mind was no les, then are
those external things which are here spoken of. For out of all question, if
it could have been possible, that DAVID'S eyes had been capable of so many
tears, as had been sufficient to have made his bed to swim, or to melt his
bedside: surely there was such a great sorrow in DAVID'S heart, as had been
sufficient to lowse them, and to power them out: and certainly DAVID'S body in
very deed, was almost consumed, and as it were melted with that sorrow. For
to speak this once, of this grief of DAVID, this is first manifest, that it
was not so much contracted, by reason of the bodily sickness, with which,
notwithstanding, he was most heavily oppressed, as it was indeed, by reason
of the feeling of the wrath of God, and those terrors of hell, the which grief
indeed is the greatest that can (...) imagined, and none is to be compared unto
it. Then DAVID was such a one, who now before had often tasted how gracious the
Lord was, as PETER ^peaketh. Yea, and he himself at this same very time,
was not altogether void of all feeling of his mercy. And therefore it came to
pass, that he took this wrath of the angry GOD, in so evil a part. For it
is sure, that how much the more greater the experience of the mercy of God
be, so much the more does any man take in evil part, the wrath of God, and he
is the more in that respect troubled through the offense of so merciful a
Father. And for these causes, From whence proceeded the great fear of the
Saints, who other ways were endued with a singular courage of mind.
the aunciente holy men, otherwise indewed with excellent courage and strength
of mind, when they came before God, they utter a most effeminat softness and
dejection of mind. There was no man of greater courage of mind then David,
notwithstanding at this time, he was altogether powered out as it were in
tears, for that invincible strength of mind is not otherwise to be uttered,
when we have to do with God, and with his wrath, for what other thing else
would this be, then to harden our heart against the hand of God, humbling us?
And that we have not experience of this grief in our selves, which David, as he
has uttered in this Psalm, says was in himself, the cause is this
stupiditie of our heart, and this fleshly security, with the which we are also
cast up into dead sleep, that we feel nothing at all: But if we were
lightly touched with those terroures of everlasting death, then indeed we
should be earnestly grieved, and it would appear no marvel unto us, that such
a bold man vtherwaies of courage, was of so dejected a mind at this time.
Wherefore we must continually tak pains to cast off the deadly so pour, which
crepeth upon us day and night, persuading our selves, finally ever of that, if
we judge not our selves, we shall be punished of the Lord, and some one
judgment or other, being sent out upon us, we shall be wakened out of so
deadly a sleep. Mine eye through indignation.] He persisteth yet in the
amplifying of his grief. The amplifying of the grief.
Mine eye (says he) through indignation is consumed] That is, according to my
judgment, through the wrath, whereby he is co^moved against his enemies, as
the words following appear to make manifest. Mine eye (says he) waxes old,
because of all mine enemies] To wit, for all those that in the mind of an
enemy, observe me, they insult upon me, being cast down to the earth, and
triumph as it were over me: for the wicked use to rejoice at the calamities of
the godly, and to insult upon them, being thrown down, for that end
inspeciall, that if it be possible, they may drive them to desperation, while
they perceive that their hope is mocked at: For this is a most grievous sort of
persecution, when this is cast up in their teeth, that they have in vain hoped
in God, and that they have been, as it were, beguyled of God, to whom,
notwithstanding they have so much trusted. Out of all question, DAVID suffered
this kind of tentation at this time. DAVID'S siknes of his body was grievous,
the feeling of the wrath of God was heavier: but this mocking of his enemies in
his miseries, increased exceeding greatly, that grief which proceeded from
both. The wicked have no matter of rejoicing, specially in the afflictiones of
the godly*
The wicked therefore rejoice at the afflictiones of the godly, when in the
mean time, they have no cause to glory. But the godly indeed have matter to
rejoice in, when they see the wicked humbled; for with the casting down of the
wicked, the deliverie of the godly is conjoined: But contrariwise, there is no
solid and true deliverance of the ungodly, when the children of God are
afflicted. The wicked indeed appear in their own sight to be happy, and to
live more at liberty, when the godly are dejected: But to speak so, there
shall not be a final deliverance. Wherefore if we will speak truly, there is no
cause of rejoicing to the wicked out of the aflictions of the godly, neither
shall so many victories gotten over the professors of the Gospel, profit the
Papists one hair, which a^ daily brought to our ears by men's speeches, out of
those nations, whom the Lord, for the cause of religion, exercises this day.
For there shall remain a Church to God upon the earth, even until the second
coming of Christ, albeit all the Kings of the earth conspire against the same.
For it is by the mighty power of God, that that small flock, is wonderfully
preserved, in the midst of so many Wolves, cirkling them round about. But
suppose that the Church of God were altogether at one time taken out of the
earth (which the ungodly would wish with all their hearts) would the wicked be
for that cause the more happy? The ^^^^^eame great m^sery of the ungodly.
Does this world stand because of the wicked? is this interchanging of days
and nights, by reason of the ungodly? Does the earth bring forth her fruits
for the wickeds sake? No verily: for all those things come to pass, because of
the godly, An example.
and Church of God. But if there were an final accomplishment of the Elect,
there should not be a place found, for any of the wicked upon the whole
earth. What cause therefore have they of rejoicing and glorying at the
afflictiones of Gods children. The Land of Palestina, which was ever an enemy
to the people of the Jews, rejoiced sometime at the afflictions of the Jews:
but what says God unto them? Rejoice not, O thou whole Palestina, because his
rodd^ that stroke thee, is broken. Esai. 14. 21. that is, because the power of
the kingdom of the Jews is diminished and broken: As if the Lord should
say, Thou have no cause to rejoice, O Palestina, concerning that matter. Which
things, seeing they are so, surely so often as we daily see those men that are
glad at the afflictions of the Churches of France, and rejoice at the coming
of the Spaniardes into this I Will, to overthrow this purity of the Gospel which
we profess, and who laugh, as it were, in their sleeue at those things: While
we see, I say, those fine-ones, we have no great cause so much, neither to
envy their prosperity, nor theirs whom they favor, as we have cause to
pity their misery, and to be glad for the happiness, that shall one day
come unto the Church. Christ ^ayth, Ioh. 16. 20. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, ye shall lament and mourn, but the world shall rejoice: ye shall be
heavy, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Again, Matt. 5. 4, Blessed
are they that mourn, for they shall receive comfort. And again, Luke 6. 25:
Woe be unto you (says he) that laugh, because ye shall mourn and weep. Out
of which words we observe, that this is a necessare interchanging, that those
that now mourn with the Church of God, shall laugh with her for ever, after
this life: But those who now laugh in the miseries of the Church, shall mourn
and weep for ever after this life.

9 Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, for Iehova hears the voice
of my weeping.

10 Iehoua hears my deprecation: Iehova receives my prayer.

11 Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore troubled, let them turn back,
let them be suddenly ashamed.


The other part of the Psalm. the heaviness of the godly is turned into joy,
they casting down into confidence.

DEpart from me] Hitherto the first part of the Psalm hes bin consumed in
petitiones, now follows the other, in which DAVID in an instant, having fe^t
that grace and favorable good will of God, which he craved by a turned speech,
he gloryeth against his enemies. That thing is worthy of consideration, to see
how hastily the alteration is made from the sense of the feling of Gods anger,
into the feeling of his unspeakable mercy even when he was wrestling with the
wrath of God. But now he is lifted up, through the confidence of his mercy.
Any godly man being oppressed with Gods anger, and casten down as it were to
the low hells, sooner nor one can speak the word, is lifted up unto the
heavens? This is to be attributed to God, and to his mighty power, who with
one blenk of his eye, is able wounderfully to deliver his own. DAVID in an
other place. Psalm. 30. 6. has expressed this sudden change thus; When he hes
bin but a moment in his wrath, of his gracious good will, life is present: he
makes mourning to lodge in the ^vening, but in the morning comes singing.
Then it is worthy of the consideration, to see after what manner in that same
Psalm, he declares this sudden alteration, by his own experience. O Iehova*
through thine own gracious good will, thou haste placed strength upon my
Mountain, therefore, I sai^e in my rest, I shall not be moved for ever, but
when thou hid thy face, then I was troubled. Then he subjoyneth: O Iehova, I
cried unto thee, and therewith I prayed unto Iehova. And he adds a little
thereafter, Thou have changed my mourning into a dance, thou have lowsed my
sackcloath, and girded me with rejoicing. There is none of all the Godly
truly, who shall not suddenly, and besides their expectation, feel some
comfort, if they in their misery, earnestly seek for the mercy of God. For
God sends away with rejoicing, those that come unto him with confidence and
heavines, which whosoever has but once felt, they prefer it before all the
kingdoms of this world. Wherefore, whosoever complayneth that he is
destitute of true consolation, let him lay the wight upon himself, and not
upon God, because he comes not unto God with true faith, and let him seek
mercy, which if he had sought, surely he had felt it suddenly, and unlooked
for. But to return to DAVID again, he being strengthened beside his
expectation, he turns himself to his enemies, and he gloryeth after this
manner against them. Depart from me (says he) all ye workers of iniquitie] He
calls the hypocrites, as appears, the workers of iniquity, which when they
bear a deadly hatred within, notwithstanding, in outward show they pretend
friendship, whom DAVID, Psalm 41. 6. and thereafter at length described. So by
works of iniquity, he understands hypocrites: As if after this fashion he
had spoken unto them: ye come not to visit me with any wel-willing mind, but
with a deadly hating heart, that ye may take pleasure in mine afflictiones, and
may triumph over me, being cast down to the ground* but ye ar deluded in your
hope: Therefore depart from me. The gro^^ of holy glorying
Then he lays down the ground of this glorying confidence of grace sought
and obtained, and he utters out this thrice. Iehova (says he) has heard
the voice of my weeping] Then: Iehova has heard my deprecation] The third,
Iehova has received my prayer.] This-three fold repetition proceeds ou^ of
question, from that firm apprehension of grace, which he had spoken of: For in
the heart aryseth gladness of the feeling of the grace. And the heart being
now sprinkled over with joy, no man is able to restrain himself, but he will
burst forth into a commendation of the grace, which he is not able also to
commend overmuch. For we would not speak so rawlie and so coldly of grace, as
we use, if that grace of God which is in Jesus Christ, were firmly apprehended
of us. Also, this is worthy to be marked in this place: DAVID a little before,
while he wrastled with the wrath of God, he wrastled also with the tentationes
of his enemies, and he was not a little trobled therewith: but now being lifted
up through the confidence of grace, he is so far away from that that he is
troubled with the injury of his enemies, as that he also securely gloryeth
against them. A man being once placed out with the grace of God in Christ, and
being troubled by the wrath of God, he is therewith laid open to a thousand
tentations, he is crossed with all things, yea, the most mean, he invieth, he
freteth, he fears, yea, he is not far away at some time from that estate, to
be driven into desperation: But returning again into favor with God, and
getting confidence, he obtayneth therewith also, that security of mind,
whereby he gloryeth against all things. Wherefore, there is nothing more
blessed then that peace and reconciliation with God, which is by faith in
Christ Jesus, who only is the maker of all our happiness and peace, whose
sacrifice being once looked upon, the wrath of God against us is pacified, and
therewith also the consciences of the believers are quieted. Let them he
ashamed, and greatly troubled.] Hitherto the ground of the glorying hes ben
laid down, to wit, the confidence of Gods mercy in Christ; now he returns
to that begun glorying. Let mine enemies be ashamed (says he) and let them be
greatly troubled] The meaning is, The accomplishing of holy glorying
as if he should say: those men looked for my destruction, now they are
frustrate of their hope, therefore let the^ be ashamed: for shame and co^fusio^
of face, arises to speak so of a disapointed hope Hope makes not ashamed.
Romans 5. 5. Then being ashamed, says he, let them be greatly troubled: as if
he should say; being frustrate of their hope, and ashamed, let them feel so
much trouble in mind, of their disappoynted expectation, as they have received
rejoicing of my destruction, which they hoped for. For sorrow and vexation of
mind, follows upon shame, as shame followed upon disappointed hope. Then he
adjoyneth: The sudden rejoicing of the godly, and sorrow of the wicked.
Let them return ashamed suddenlie] As if I should say, they came for this
end unto me, that with an enemies mind, they might narrowly mark mine
afflictions, and that they might triumph over me: But now let them return,
let them return, I say ashamed, because of their frustra^ hope, yea, and that
suddenly: and as I indeed in a moment, beside expectation have felt grace and
deliverance, so let them likewise in a moment be ashamed. Mark therefore, as
the godly are suddenly, and beside expectation, lifted up through the feeling
of Gods grace and deliverance: so shame takes hold suddenly upon the ungodly,
and after shame sorrow, and of that chiefly consists shame and dolor, in
that they see the godly beside their expectation, lifted up and delivered: For
this will be the chief part of the confusion and sorrow of the reprobat, in
that day of the coming of the Lord, that these, whom they some-time sought to
destroy upon the earth, and had persuaded themselves, that they were utterly
destroyed out of the world, so that there-after, there should be no
remembrance of them, at any time upon the earth; That then, I say, they shall
find them in a momente, and suddenly glorified, beside their hope and
expectation, they themselves, and the whole world looking on. One objection
rests to be lowsed: what* is not this the part of foolish and ambitious men,
so to glory against their enemies? I answer; The godly glory, and the wicked
do glory, but after a diverse manner. The wicked glory, trusting to their own
strength, to their counselles, to their riches; finally, to the arm of men:
But the godly rejoice, leaning only to the presence and grace of GOD. And this
is none other thing then to glorify God, which, what other thing is it, then
to utter out that inward confidence in God, yea, and that in the face of the
enemies and mockers themselves, who most earnestly travel to this end, that
they may separate us from that love in Christ* that they may together at one
time, extinguish all that feeling of his grace, Of which PAVLE speaks, Romans
8. 38. Who shall separate us from the love of God in Christ? It is true indeed,
that the ungodly also uses to vaunte of the favor and grace of God. So the
Papists this day vaunt of Christ, when in the mean time they persecute christ
in his members: even as Paul spak, of the Jews Romans 2. 17. that they gloryed in
the law of God, yea, even when they ^a^sgressed the Law. So we read that
blasphemous Rabschake, vaunted also against Jerusalem, that he came none
otherways to destroy it, then leaning to the commandment of God himself. 2.
King. 18. 25. The ungodly dream that the grace and favor of God belongs
unto them, when notwithstanding, in the mean time, the wrath of God
continually persueth the^: but at length it shall appear, that this glorying of
these men was vain, howsoever for a time al things appear to prosper according
to their hart^ desire. At length also it shall appear, that the glorying of the
children of God was not in vain, how-so ever it appear unto the wicked in
this world to be vain. For our hope, (as PAVLE says,) shall never make us
ashamed, but at length it shall be crowned with glory and immortality, in
that glorious coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, To whom with the Father and
the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory, Amen.

THE ARGUMENT Of the XVI. PSALM.
A Psalm it is of a mixed kind, partly a Prayer, partly a Thanks giving. And
it appears by the inscription that it is David's. Now it is made first of a
Petition, unto the fourth verse. Then of a certain glorying in God, unto the
seventh verse. Thirdly, of a blessing of GOD, from thence to the end of the
Psalm.

THE XVI. PSALM.
1 An excellent song of DAVID, Preserve me, o strong God, because I have my
refuge unto thee.

2 O my soul, thou say unto Iehoua, Thou art my Lord, good comes not
from me unto thee.

3 To the holy ones which are upon the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is
all my delight.


The first part of the Psalm a petition of preserving
Preserve me] The first part of the Psalm is a petition: also he seeks his
own preservation, whereby indeed he would signify, that he was come into
some danger, and that he was laid open to some peril, either through
Idolatry, or through some other cause. For, for this cause he hes his recourse
unto God, being a suppliant, From his confidence leaning unto Christ.
and he craved that he would save him. Preserve me] The reason of the
petition is from his confidence in God, whereby surely he embraced God, in
this present danger in his heart, in Christ Jesus. DAVID therefore being about
to present himself before that judgment seat of God, and being about to seek
his salvation and preserving, he dare not be so bold as to come forth in Gods
sight, unless first he be cledde over with Christ, and with his
righteousness: For this is to believe in God, or that he had his recourse unto
God. For there was none other way at any time to compeare before God, no not to
the best Kings themselves, except by faith in Jesus Christ, without the which,
no entry was every yet made open unto GOD. By whom, says the Apostle, We
have entrance by faith in God. Romans 5. 2. O my soul thou sayest] By a
converted speech, he turns him to his own soul, and brings her in
testifying with him of that faith, which he himself before professed, and
seeking therewith his own preservation. Thou say to Iehova] says he; As if
he should say, Thou, O my soul and conscience, testifies with me, that I truly
and sincerely profess that, in that I say, I believe in God: For if the soul
bear not witness with us within, and say as it were, Thou art my GOD, our
mouth in vain professes outwardly faith in God; it says in vain I have my
recourse unto God: Except we believe with the heart to righteousness, the
confession of the mouth profits nothing to salvation: Therefore DAVID
brings in his soul believing, and testifying with him before God, that thing
which he before himself had confessed in mouth: but what says DAVID'S soul?
Thou art my God] He acknowledges the Lord Iehova: But he sees him not as it
were then a far off, but drawing near unto him, he sweetly embraces him:
which thing is proper unto faith, and to that particular applying, which we say
to be in faith. He embraces him, I say, when he says. Thou art my Lord]
And from thence follows that, that DAVID himself now before had sought.
Preserve me] For the soul of DAVID sought the same thing, which he himself
had sought before it. But this petition of DAVID'S soul, is not expressed in
this place. Good commeth] Ane preventing of an objection of that understood
and suppressed petition of DAVID'S soul; for God might have objected; The
preventing of an objection and the gra^ting of the godly soul humbly looking
upon the majesty of God.
To what end should I preserve thee? What good thing can come unto me from
thee? DAVID'S soul answers first by a granting, Good comes not from me
unto thee] As if he should say: I grant that, that my life can no ways be
profitable unto thee. For it is necessary, that our faith, to the end it may
quiet the self, in the alone mercy of God through Christ, very humbly and
soberlie esteem of the self: and it behooveth every faithful man so to lean
to the alone grace of God, and merit of Christ, that in the mean time, he be
utterly estranged from all opinion of his deserving, and that he acknowledge,
after that he hes done all things that he is able to do, to the glory of God,
that he is no other thing, but an unprofitable servant. But the truth of this
sentence is to be weighed of us, least there be any who would think that DAVID
hes not spoken earnestly, and from his heart, A more d^ligent consideration of
David's confession.
but for the fashion and dissembledly. God therefore (according to the
perfection and exceeding great felicity which he is in himself) is not helped
nether on the one side or other by our well-doing: neither yet is he hurt any
way by our evil doing: man himself, is either helped by his own well-doing, or
his hurt, by his evil doing. For in that consists our felicity, that we
glorify God. Again, in that we are miserable, when we give not unto God his
own glory, yea, or then when we dishonor him, so far as lies in us: which
thing, this rejoicing which we feel through the conscience of obedience; and
again that grief, which we feel through the conscience of disobedience and
rebellion, Rom 7. (...) The correction of the granting.
is able enough to testify. O miserable man that I am (says PAVLE) Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! To the holy ones.] The other part of
the answer by way of correction: as if he should say; albeit no good thing
can come unto me from thee: Nevertheles, O God, preserve me with the Saints
that are upon the Earth, that is, in favor of the Church fighting in the
world, that I may at least be profitable unto her: Therefore, albeit nothing
can come unto God by our doing well, notwithstanding, we must not think that
our good works are unprofitable: For a man may be profitable to a man, and the
most contemptible may serve for some use to any the most honorable; as in man's
body the foot may be profitable unto the head. More-over, among men, Kings
may be most profitable to others, of which sort DAVID was, in respect they are
armed by God with power and authority: they are bound also by their office to
be profitable unto others; but especially, unto the Church of God: of which
thing we read, that Nebuchadne^zar, Dan. 2. 30.
(otherwise an Heathen King) was admonished by Daniell: that christian Princes
might understand, that this is so much the more to be required of them. To the
excellent] Those whom he called holy ones before, now he calls excellent:
Consider therefore how greatly DAVID esteemed of this Church of God, that is
now so much lightlied and contemned, not only by the Princes, but by the
basest sort of men. Not-with-standing the holy ones, whatsoever the world
think of them, remain excellent glorious. Dan. 7. (...)
Daniel, in the same signification, calls it the Church of the high Saints,
that is, of those that are Predestinate and ordained, to all most excellent
high things, and to life everlasting. In whom] This is the fountain of that
good thing, whereby he is to indue the Saints, to wit, the delighting in
them, as love and favor. For we profit in vain, either the Church, or any
member thereof, except we love. 1 Cor. (...)
If I should spend al my goods (say^ PAVL) in feeding of the poor, and had not
love, I were nothing. We may be indeed steidable unto others, but without
love we cannot be steidable to our selves, neither do we any thing that is
acceptable unto God, in respect it comes not from a sincere and sanctified
heart. Why the godly desire to abide in this life.
Moreover, mark here also the cause wherefore godly men desire to abide for a
while upon this earth: and verily it is the pleasure that they tak in the
fellowship of the holy ones; for whose cause they would live somewhat longer,
that they might promooue them to the knowledge of their salvation, and might
preserve some of them, before they depart out of this world. For they shall
have a far more greater delight in their God, in that other life. It is good
for me (says Paul) if I depart hence, Phil. 1. 23. (...).
but it is not so for you. If therefore chiefelie the love of this world, or of
those things which we see therein, tyeth us al-to-gether, so much to this
world, surely we are more then miserable, yea, in the greatest abundance of
all things of this world.

4 They multiply their sorrows, which give in dowry to ane stranger: I will
not offer their drink offerings of blood, neither yet will I take up their
names in my lips.

5 Iehova is the portion of my steeding and of my property, thou mayntaynest
my l^tte.

6 The lines are fallen out to me in pleasant places, yea my possession is
fair for me.


The other part of the Psalm an holy glorying.
THey multiply their sorrows] The other part of the Psalm: The glorying;
having received some comfort of the preceding rejoicing. For never man yet at
any time came in vain to God in Christ. And having as it were compared that
his happy estaite, with the estaite of Idolaters, he pronounces and
exclaymeth, that in respect of him, they are as it were but miserable caitifes.
They multiply their sorrows (says he) who give in dowry to a stranger]
That is, who give in dowry any thing to a strange God and Idol, that is, who
join them selves in marriage with it, having complcitlie paid a great dowry.
The fruits of idolaters.
For it can scarcely be uttered, how many things Idolaters rashly lavish out
upon their Idols: And what commodity get they thereby? Surely, no solid and
true joye, such as David felt of that his marriage with the true God, but sorrow
only, and all kind of misery. For superstition is ever conjoined with a
trembling of the soul. For what thing is able to establish the soul of man,
but God only? The Papists promise peace and security to others, which
notwithstanding they themselves enjoy it not. Observe then in this place, how
soon soever any man has felt that joy, which proceeds from the true God,
then all those appear miserable unto him, who having le^t the true God, have
their refuge to idols; For then he perceives well enough, what the misery of
Idolaters is, after that the eye is enlightened with that light, which
proceeds from the face of God. And surely that is he, who may only judge
aright of the misery of man. The Idolaters themselves are blind in their own
misery. There are also other men, who otherwise profes God in their mouth,
nevertheless, they feel not in their heart that solid joye, which proceeds
from Jesus Christ, whose judgment many times concerning Idolaters, is
corrupted. Of these I speak, whom you may see every where, to admit into
their company, without any kind of difference, whatsoever sort of men,
whether they be true Professoures, or the enemies of the Croce of Christ,
such as are the Papists this day: Then to speak it once in a word; there is no
man a right judge of the misery of Idolaters, but he who has himself felt in
times bygane, that happiness which is in the true and only God. The drink
offerings of idolaters.
I will not offer them drink offrings] As he had before pronounced Idolaters
to be miserable, through the sense of that joye which he had felt of the true
God, so now he professes, that he will have no society, either with the
Idolaters themselves, or with their Idols: and he shows that from the heart
he abhors that sort of false worship and religion. I will not] That is, I
will not sacrifice with them, (...).
after the custom of the profane Gentiles, which sacrificed, even with the
blood of man not only against the law of God, yea, but against humanity it
self. I will not tak up their names] This is somewhat more, then that which he
said even now: as if he should say, I will not indeed so much as name their
Idols, and strange gods. Concerning this there is a for bidding commandment
extant. Remember not upon the name of strange gods, neither let it be heard in
thy mouth, Exodus (...).
whether it be in ane oath, or in familiar commoning. Of this you have an
example, in this place, and a promise in the Prophet Ose. 2. 17. Therefore there
is an utter detestation that DAVID professes, yea, against their very nams.
But if any man will most entirely considder, that miserable estate of
idolaters, and then will be touched therewith, with some sense of the true God
in Jesus Christ, surely that man will al-to-gether, abhor with DAVID
Idolaters, and Idolatry, yea, and their very names will be abominable in his
^ares: 2. Co. (...)
For what fellowship is there betuixt light and darkness? Nor yet surely,
would there be so many found amongst us, who would receive so willingly these
Pestes and messengers, sent out by the Antichrist, which are sent over to
this country, to overthrow that purity of the Gospel, which we profes. Iehova
is the portion] After that he hes declared the misery of Idolaters, The
happiness of the godly opposed to the misery of idolaters.
and had therewith professed, how far disagreeing he was from them: Now he
shows his own happiness, which he obscurely sets against the misery of
Idolaters. There is matter enough furnished unto us, of glorying of our
happiness, who worship the true GOD, according to his Law, when-so-ever we
look upon those miserable men, who follow a strange worship: and surely
this would have the own use this day, if any man would carefully, look upon
that misery; but very few there are which do this thing: whereby it comes to
pass, that they are neither moved with their own misery, nor with their
own happiness. God the heritage of the godly.
But let us consider more diligently the words. Iehova (says he) is the
portion of my steeding] First, he gloryeth of his heritage: and he calls
Iehova himself his heritage. For it is necessary, that we be first
participant of God himself, according to the promise in the covenant, I will
be thy GOD: Then that all his benefits in Christ Jesus may be communicated
unto us, as ar remission of sins, righteousness and life everlasting. Then
secondly he gloryeth in the assurance of that his heritage, yea and that by a
turned speech unto God. By which thing indeed we are warned, that when we
glory, we should turn our eyes often to GOD, that the confidence which
proceeds from the sight and presence of God alone, might be the more.
Thirdly, he gloryeth in the pleasantness of his heritage. The lines (says
he) are fallen out to me in pleasant places] That is, the heritage, which is
divided and assigned unto me, as it were by lines, he fallen unto me in
pleasant places. Concerning lines, look Moses. Fourthlie and last, (...)
he gloryeth, in the fairnes agreeable with his heretage, and (that I should so
speak) proportionable thereto. My possession (says he) is fair for me] That
is, the fairness thereof, answers to me in proportion: Then to speak of
this matter su^marily: DAVID glories in his inheritance, and in the thing
conjoined with his inheritance. The use of the doctrine and of the spiritual
joy.
All these words of DAVID, are great and weighty, and they manifest a very
great feeling of God in Christ, and of that everlasting life, which being
covered under these words, was in DAVID'S soul, yea, surely they manifest a
greater sense, then ar contained in the words themselves. For that joye of
faith, as Peter thinks, ^ Pet. 1. 18
is unutterable and glorious: Then their greater was the feeling, then the
words, but the matter it self, and the substance of the rejoicing, is greater
then all sense, whereof we al are not capable. Wherefore, those so weighty words
of David they manifestly declare that joye which we shall feel in the life to
come, and which indeed shall be wounderfull. Therefore we must travel
diligently, that when we read those things, which are uttered forth here by
DAVID in this Psalm, that we therewith feel some like sense of joye in our
selves, and let us reason with our selves, out of those same words, that that
joy shall be incomprehensible, which we one day shall fully attain unto, when
our Lord Jesus. Christ shall be made manifest unto us in that his second
coming, and when we shall see him, how glorious he is in himself.

7 I will bless Iehova, who counsels me, yea, my reins instructing me in
the ^ightes.

8 I set Iehova continually before me, because he is at my right hand, I shall
not be moved out of my place.

9 Wherefore my mind rejoices, and my glory is very glad, yea, my flesh^
shall dwell securely.

10 Because thou will not leave my soul in the grave, neither yet will thou
suffer him to whom thou art gracious, to see corruption.

11 Thou will cause me to find in experience the path of life, the sacietie of
joys before thy face, the pleasantness at thy right hand for evermore.


The last part of the psalm.
I Will bless Iehova] The third part of the Psalm, The blessing. Having now
felt that his happiness in Iehova, DAVID bursteth forth into a blessing, that
exceeding great joy, to wit, which proceeded from God, redounding to God
again, the author thereof: For the praise and blessing of Gods name, presently
follows that felt joy, proceeding from God: and of what measure the joy is,
in the same measure is the blessing. If there be no joy, there is no blessing,
if there be some joye, whether it be more or less, there is also some
blessing, whether it be more or less, to wit, according to the measure and
quantity of the joye. But in the heavens, where there shall be a perfect
rejoicing, the blessing shall be perfect and continual, both day and night,
and without intermission, Apoc. 4^
we shall say, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty. Who counselleth] Here
follow the arguments of the blessing, from the benefits of God toward him.
For after that once the rejoicing of the heart, has lowsed the tongue to
praise God, then there shall lack no matter of praise. The benefits of God
are of two sorts, partly, they belong to this present life, as the counsel
of God, in seeking the weill of his own, and a certain immovable
stedfastnes, in this verse, and in the verse following: partly, they belong to
the life to come, as the resurrection, as everlasling life, from the ninthverse
to the end of the Psalm. Then this is the first argument of blessing, in that
he has God to be his counselor. Who councelleth me (says he) that is, which
thing he has not once spoken in the 2^. Psalm nor elsewhere. Who teaches me
his ways.] Now he taught DAVID his ways, whilst he enlightened his mind to
this purpose; that he might see those things, which were acceptable and
pleasant unto God. He taught him also his ways, when he directed his heart
to follow out those things, which were acceptable to God. For such is the
blindness of our mind, as concerning good things and that are pleasant in Gods
sight; also, such is the frowardness of our heart, that unless the Lord put
to his own hand to enlighten, reform, and make us new over again, we cannot
so much truly as think one good thing. Wherefore, whosoever will do any thing
aright, and with commendation, of necessity he must have God to be his
counselor: Moreover, Kings ar warned to do this chiefly, by the example of
King DAVID who used not to come out into the counsel, with the nobility of the
kingdom except he had first consulted with his GOD. In the nights] He
shows the time inspeciall, when God gave him his counsel: as if he should
say, Not only in the day, but also in the night he gave me his advise: That
is, there is no time in which he does not counsel me. Of the which, it
appears that David, being a man otherwise distracted in the nights, with
diverse cares and tentations (as he was indeed that man who was a type of
Christ; and his afflictions and tentations were figurs in special of the
afflictions and tentations of Christ that were to come) it appears, I say,
that he being so distracted, was accustomed in the night by prayer, to have
his recourse unto God, and to use him as it were in his hard affairs, to be
his counselor, whereby also it came to pass, that as he testifyeth of
himself in an other place, when being overwhelmed altogether in anxietie and
trouble often, he went to bed in the evening tide, yet in the morning he arose
out of bed joyful, and as it were altogether sprinkled over with gladness.
Now this was not done for any other cause, then that he had God to be his
counselor, even in the night. It is a grievous and heavy thing indeed, if any
man be deprived in the night, of this bodielie ease, and bodily senses, which
are wearied now the whole day long, by hearing much, seeing much, and handling
much, etc. But that is far more grievous, if any be not only deprived of
that rest of the body, but also in the mean time be distracted with diverse
cares and thoughts of the mind. This is for the most part the cause of those
fasheries in the night, that so few in their troubles, have their refuge unto
God, and lay them not down as it were in his bosom; but they had far rather
without God, fight and wrestle with their fasheries and cares, where by it
comes to pass, that they are more and more disturbed with the self same
cares. Yea my reins instructing me] He shows the manner whereby God gave him
counsel: and it is by the holy spirit, which he understands by the name of
reins. Also, the reins are put metonymicallie for the thoughts, whose seat
the scripture makes the reins. Then David shows the way, Psalm. 7. 1^*
not any extraordinary wayc, such as was that, which was, by vision, by
dreams; but the ordinary, which was by the word of God, upon the which, David
out of all question often meditated, Psalm. 1. ^
and that through the holy spirit, working by the word. Then the cause wherefore
we wait not for God to be present with us extraordinarily; and that he
speaks not with us face to face, either by day or night, let us not think
therefore, that it cannot be possible, that we use him as our counselor,
because this ordinary way of dealing with God by the word, and by his holy
Spirit, is the over-farre best, as for examples sake, if any man being
oppressed night and day, with trouble of mind, will meditate upon that saying
of the Apostle. Phil. 4. 6.
Be not careful in any thing, but in all things let your requests be showed
unto God, in prayer and supplication, with giving of thanks. If any, I say,
will meditate upon this, surely that man shall no less familiarlie deal with
God, neither shall be receive smaller comfort, then if he spoke with him face
to face. I set Iehova always before me] The second argument of Gods blessing,
The second argument of Gods blissing.
from that benefit, whereby he stands immovable and firm, yea even in
this present life. I shall not be mooved] (says he) For David felt himself to
be firm and stable in God, yea, in the midst of those commotions and
troubles, whereby then he was shaken. The self same thing feel the other
godly, when they have their recours unto God. So says Paul. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? For he felt himself to be grounded and
rooted in that love of God, Romans 8. (...)
as he speaks of himself in another place. Ephesians. ^. 18.
Notwithstanding, the same Apostle in other places, felt himself grievously
exercised, even according to the outward man, as he speaks. But what
speaks he in the mean time of the inward man? We are afflicted on every
side, yet are we not in distress, in poverty, but not overcome in poverty: ^
Cor. (...). 9.
We are persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but we perish not. But the
wicked when they are oppressed with adversity, as they have not their refuge
unto God, so they feel no stabilitie for themselves in God. I grant indeed, at
some time, that they appear to themselves to be placed without the danger of
al trouble, yet are they shaken altogether, yea, with the least motion of
affliction, how sone soever these helps fail, to the which they trusted. But
let us considder the grounds of this stabilitie. The first is this of which he
speaks, Iehova is at my right hand] As if he should say, Iehova susteineth
me, as he speaks in another Psalm. But of this stabilitie, there is an
higher foundation. I set Iehova (says he) always before me] This is that
continual confidence in GOD, Psalm. 3. 9.
which makes him to be present with us at all times. Wherefore whosoever will
stand firmly in afflictions specially, let him seek for Gods presence, and he
who would have the presence of God, let him apprehend him by says: neither
suffer him, so far as is possible, ever to depart out of his eyes. The third
argument of Gods blissing.
Wherefore my mind reioyceth] Here follows other arguments of blessing,
taken from the benefits belonging to that other life, the resurrection from
the dead, and everlasting life. For it is not sufficient, if we look only
upon the blessing of this present life, except also we direct the sight of our
eyes to the consideration of that other life, and as it were, behold a far off
those benefits most excellent, which shall be bestowed upon us in that other
life. But of the whole graces of God in Jesus Christ, were tied only to this
life, surely all those things would be nothing, which be fall unto us in this
life. If our faith and hope we^ bounded in Christ, only for this life, we were
miserable. If only in this life, (says the Apostle) we had hope in Christ,
1. Cor. (...). 19.
of al mortal creatures, we were the most miserable. But if the form of spech
is not to be pretermitted, which he uses in propounding unto us those two
benefits of the life to come. For he makes his preface in the ninthe verse,
that he is glad and feels an exceeding great joye to arise from the^. He
expounded not unto us after that manner, those former benefits of this life,
neither used he such a preface being about to speak of them so that thereof it
manifestly appears that there was a greater joy of the soul, Two benefits
of the blissed life to come hope of the glory of God and of our own
resurrection.
yea, of the hope of the benefits, which shall be bestowed upon us in that
other life, then of the present enjoying of the benefits, which be fall us in
this life present. We glory (says PAVLE, writing the Epistle to the Romans,
and fifth Chapter, verse second,) under the hope of the glory of GOD. Behold,
the gloryiing under the hope, of the benefits of that everlasting life to
come. The Apostle also warns us, that there is ane exceeding great comfort,
yea, of the speeches which are uttered in conference, concerning that glorious
resurrection that is to come. These. 4. 18*
But we must a little more diligently mark this example of DAVID: He saw not
but a far off, and after many years* the resurrection of his body to be. For
how many years ar now passed bye, since he spoke those things, and since he
departed this life? And yet notwithstanding, he has not risen again, neither
yet also shall he arise before that second coming of Christ, and yet
nevertheles, through the very hope of the resurrection, which was to come to
pass a long time thereafter; he rejoices exceeding greatly! What is
therefore to be done of us, who are fallen in into the point of time, of the
coming of Christ, and to whom being once departed this present life, there
shall be so short a burial of our bodies? But we must considder more
diligently the Prophets words, he attributes to the heart, joy, and exceeding
gladness to glory, that is, to the tongue, which is the instrument of holy
glorying in the Lord. Finally, he attributes a secure habitation unto his
flesh, that is, to his own grosser part, which we call the body. For of
necessity, this part of man, after his own manner, takes death chiefly most
grievously, in respect it is to be laid upon the grave, when in the mean time
the soul, the other part of man, flitteth away into the heavens.
Notwithstanding this self same flesh is secure, Genesis 49. 6.
under the hope of rising again, Psalm. 30. 31
and rejoices after the own manner. Behold, here joy spread abroad through-out
the whole man, and all his parts; and that indeed through the hope of the
resurrection to come, and of life eternal: Which thing surely, seeing it is so
great under hope and faith, how great shall it be under sight? Of this
rejoicing under hope, (which is as it were the earnest penny, which also is
said to be enutterable) we may easily guess that that joye shall be
incomprehensible, which shall be after this life, through the present sight of
God in Christ Jesus, 1. Pet. 1. 7. ^.
Peter reasons this way; for after he had spoken of joy, glory and honor,
which shall be when Christ shall be made manifest, then he lays down the
argument of that so great a glory from our faith and love toward Christ
absent, and from that joy unspeakable and glorious, which we now feel, yea,
and it were no more but through faith in him absent. Because thou will not
leaue] Peter in the second Chap. of the Acts 25. verse, The resurrection of the
head of the Church is the cause of the resurrection of the members.
etc. interprets this place, from the 8. verse forth, to the end of the
Psalm, to be spoken properly of christ: which David in this place spak as a
Prophet, yea, and that not only as a Prophet, but also as a figure of Christ
Jesus, who was to come. For David in him self also felt all those things in
experience in some measure, which he fore-telleth, were to come unto Christ.
Then those things which are here spoken of, are chiefly to be understood,
concerning the resurrection of Christ, and of his glorious life: which thing,
Peter prooveth manifestly in the same place, verse 29. And thereafter, yea,
even out of these words, in which it was said, That the holy one of the Lord
should not see cor- Corruption, I mean the rotting of the buried flesh, and
resolution into dust: For out of these words, Peter assumeth, that David saw
corruption, He dyed (says he) and was buried, and his sepulcher is with us
unto this day. Wherefore, says Peter, those things cannot be properly spoken
of David but of Christ his seed, whom David saw to come in the promi^e made to
himself. Notwithstanding, David in the mean while saw, in that rising again
of his seed Christ, his own resurrection also, which was to be accomplished
through the power of Christ's rising again who was made the first fruits of
them that sleep. ^* Cor. 13. ^0.
And so we al likewise when we look upon Christ, we may see the fullness of
that grace which is in him, to redound unto us as it were again. But namely,
if now drawing near to death, and to the grave, if then we look upon him, we
shall feel in him, and his glorious resurrection, our own rising again: For
the Lord shall bring those who sleep in Jesus Christ together with him. 1.
Ths. 4. 14.
Finally, that is to be marked which he says: That God will not suffer him to
whom he is gracious, to see corruption.] By this defyning and description of
himself, he shows the ground both of the glorious resurrection of Christ, and
also of all the godly in him: To, wit, that fatherly love of God, whereby both
he loves Christ, and likewise all the godly, howbeit it be after a great
difference, For he loves us, in that his beloved. Ephesians. 1. 6.
The difference betuixt the rising again of the godly and of the wicked, which
shall be, is no ways obscure out of this ground of our resurrection. The love
of God in Christ shall sweetly raise up the godly out of the grave. But the
warth and justice of God being judge, shall raise the wicked, yea, against
their will, drawing them out of their graves at that last day to everlasting and
just punishment. Thou will cause me] This is the other benefit, which he is to
attain unto after this life, to wit, that everlasting life, unto the which,
after the resurrection, he shall straight go. As if he should say; after that I
am awakened up again, and raised out of the grave, he will make me to know that
pathway, which leads to eternal life: And having known it, I shall walk
therein: By these words therefore he understands, that the way to life, and
to the heavens, is to be clearly showed unto him, after that he sal be raised
out of the grave. Now in the words following, he signifies the life it self,
which after he has walked through in that way, to an end, which leads to
life and to the heavens, he shall attain unto. The sacietie of joys.] He
expresses that life first by joy, and by the saciety of joy, then by
pleasantness. He makes the beginning and fountain of the joy, the
countenance of God. Gods right hand, he makes the cause of the pleasantness,
and he boundeth both the joy and the pleasantness, with eternity of time. Our
Lord Jesus Christ, bring us to this life: To whom with the Father, and with the
holy Spirit, be all honor and glory, Amen.

THE ARGUMENT Of the XXIII. PSALM.
A Psalm it is of doctrine, in which David glorying, opens up his confidence
and security. Also this security which is to continue for all time to come,
proceeds from the confidence and present fruition of the mercy of God toward
him, and of his Pastoral care over him. Two things therefore ar proposed in this
Psalm. This first, a confidence and apprehension of the present favor of God.
The other, is a security in time to come, arysing of the confidence, that God
will with the same gracious favor in all posterities to come, follow him. Both
these things are shortly see down in the first verse. Then they are opened up
in the verses following: Confidence specially unto the sixth verse, and Security
in the sixth verse.

THE XXIII. PSALM.
1 A Psalm of DAVID. Iehova i^ my shepherd, I cannot lack.

2 He makes me to rest in foldes replenished with grass, he leads me by
the soft running waters.

3 He makes my soul to be quiet, he leads me in the ways of
righteousness, for his own names sake.

4 Although I walked through the valley of the deadly shadow, I would not
fear evil, because thou art with me, thy rod and shepheardes crook, they
comfort me.

5 Thou furnishest a table before me, over against mine enemies, thou
plentifully anoyntes mine head with ointment: my cup is very full.

6 Surely, goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I
shall be at rest in the house of Iehova, so long as times shall endure.


IEhova is my sheapheard] This is the proposition of a glorying, The
proposition of the first part.
first of confidence, and as it were, the Pastoral care of God toward him:
Then of security in time to come. In the first part of the proposition, he
expresses Gods care, borrowing the words from a sheapheard and a flock;
comparing God with a Sheapheard, and himself unto a sheep. Iehova (says he)
is my Sheepheard] That is, The other part of the prepositio^*
as the shepherd feeds his sheep, so Iehova feeds me. I cannot lacke]
The other part of the proposition, in which is set down the security in time
to come: Also, this security in time to come, is gathered and brought in from
the present confidence and apprehension of the care of GOD toward him, as if he
should say, GOD feeds me for the time present, and by all means takes care
of me: Therefore I shall never want his help in time to come; neither shall it
ever come to pass, that I in any time coming, shall lack any thing. The like
glor^ing we have of Paul: Romans 8. 10.
God is on our side, who is against us? So much hitherto then we have spoken
of the proposition, set down by way of glorying, whereby we see confidence in
God present (for confidence is the apprehension of a thing present) to bring
out security, whereby any godly man promises unto himself, that God will be
present with him for all time to come. There is no other thing unless we will
except God, which by the own presence thereof, can make us so secure: I speak
of that true and spiritual security. For I grant that the tra^sitory things
of this world engender in men's minds a certain security, which we call
carnal, such as was that of that rich man, which after that his barnes were
enlarged and replenished said to his soul. Luke 12. 19.
Soul, thou have much goods, laid up for many years: live at ease, drink and
take thy pastime. But what heard he from God? O fool (says he) they will
take thy soul from thee this same very night. And Paul shows, what
follows upon this fleshly security. 1 These. 5. 3.
When they shall say peace, and all things quiet, then shall come upon them
suddaint destruction, as the sorrow of a woman like to travel, and they shall
not escape. Therefore this carnal security is deceavable, but that spiritual
quietness shall never deceive us, neither yet can we glory sufficiently of
spiritual security, neither yet can we at any time to come, promise things
great enough to our selves, of God, and of his mercy to all posterities, of
that spiritual quietness. He makes me] He opens up the first part of the
proposition, first by allegorical speeches, unto the fifth verse, then in
proper speeches, in the fifth verse. Then to the end he might declare that
Iehova is his shepherd, he makes an induction, first of the parts of a good
Pastor. Now there are five parts of the office of a shepherd reackoned out;
Five parts of a pas^^^rll duty.
whereof the first two pertain to the body of the sheep; the third to the
soul, the fourth and fifth to the ways in which it walks. Then the first
part of the duty of a good shepherd is contained in these words. In foldes
replenished with grasse] In which two things are comprehended: The first is, 1
Nurishme^t
the office that he makes the sheep to be satisfied in foldes abunding with
grass: The other is, that the sheep now being filled, he makes them to lie
down and rest, that is, he makes to enjoye an exceeding soft quietness. For
in this latter, that former is to be understood; for the sheep uses not to lie
down and rest while it be filled first. DAVID applies this part of the duty
of the Pastor to him self; as if he should say: None otherways then the
shepherd makes the sheep, to fill the self in the foldes abounding with
grass, and then to lie down and rest, so none other ways, say I, does GOD
refresh my body, with meat and most sweet rest. 2 Refreshment.
He leads by the soft running waters] The second part of the duty of a
shepherd, belonging also to the body of the sheep. Now it is seen in that,
that the Pastor cares to quench the thirst of the sheep, by giving unto it
the commodity of drink and refreshment. Even so, says DAVID, Iehova
quenches my thirst, and refreshes my body. Then this much hitherto DAVID
has commended the care of God, as of a sheephearde toward his body. Learn
therefore what the care of GOD is toward our body: None there is of all the
godly whom he satisfies not with meat and drink: also this satisfaction is
not so much to be defined by a full belly, as by a full heart, or contented
with things in modesty. 1. Tim. (...)
Godliness is great gain, with a heart content of the own lot. By which
saying, the Apostle would signify, that those two things are conjoined
together; Godliness, and a contented heart within the self, or a mind content
of the own portion. Whosoever then is godly, is content of mean things, he
is often content with one hungry belly, I have learned (says the Apostle) In
what soever estate I am, therewith to be content. And I can be abased, and I
can abound: every where in all things, Phil. 4. (...).
I am instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, and to abound and to have
want I am able to do all things through the help of Christ, which
strengthens me. Then he in whom Christ dwells by faith, has all
sufficiency within himself, and a soul which is content not only of small
things, but of such as are al-to-gether no things. But he who has not Christ,
he has not sufficiency within himself, yea, or a mind content with the
greatest things. For the more that the ungodly man possesses, so much the
more he does seek after. We must not in this place pas by in silence, with
what mind DAVID recommendeth this liberality of God, in nurishing of his body.
For there is no godly man able to hold his peace concerning the bountifulnes of
God; for he esteems more of any mean and common fair received at Gods
hands, then the ungodly man does of the most dainty dishes: For it comes to
pass (I cannot tell how) that while the godly man eats or drinks, he does
it al to the glory of his God and while he hungreth and thirsts for those
earthly things, in the mean time that he is eating and drinking, he tastes
therewith those heavenly and spiritual things: It comes to pass, I say,
that whilst his mind is eating and drinking in that grace, which uses to
season with a wounderfull sweetness, yea, the very bodelie and common meat,
so that any common meat savoreth better in the mouth of the godly man, then the
most dainty meat, The third part of a pastor^^ duty.
otherways savoreth in the mouth of the wicked man. He makes my soule] This
is the third part of the office of a shephearde, which concerns the life or
soul of the sheep. For that beast is of nature fearful, and uses to be
troubled and disturbed in spirit, with the most light thing that can be.
Therefore it is the duty of a good Pastor, not only to have a consideration
of the body, but also of the soul or life of his sheep, that he make it to
be at rest and quietness: Even so says DAVID, God does, that I may be of a
quiet and settled mind. For to what purpose shall man have his body to be well
taken care of, whilst in the mean time, the soul is neglected, which is the
preciouser part of man, and which is not in a good case? What the true life and
peace of the soul (...).
surely, it cannot be well then with the body. For what delight can the body
take of meat, drink, and the rest of that sort, when the soul is in some
exceeding grievous fear, especially when it is tormented with those horroures
of hell. Therefore DAVID says, that GOD takes thought of his soul, and that
it is quieted of him. Every godly man also feels the same care of God, and
feels that quietness and peace of the mind, which surpasses all
understanding. I speak of the peace of God, not of the peace of the world: For
this peace and fleshly security of the world, which creeps upon men, is not
to be accounted among the benefits of God, but directly contrary, it is to
be reckoned among Gods curses. I speak then of that peace of God, which
aryseth from a good conscience, that is, a conscience persuaded of the
forgiveness of sins. For look how soon God does justify us, our souls
then begin to be at rest, and to be strengthened with the peace of GOD, as by a
certain fortress. For so speaks the Apostle of this peace, Phil. 4^.
And the peace of God (says he) which surepasseth al understanding, shall be a
preservation unto your hearts. But consider, how much DAVID makes of this
peace, and how he commends the same. For it is not possible, that any godly
man can contain this peace of mind, within his soul, but he will prease the
same to the glory of God in Christ: Also the wicked man, commends his own
peace, (...). 5. 3.
Peace (says he) and all things at quiet. But in the mean time never one
word speaks he of God, But every godly man while he is glorying, he
ascribes that whole peace and tranquillity unto GOD, which thing, when the
wicked man hears, he conceives it not to be of that peace, which rejoices
in the Lord. For that it is a peace, which over-commeth the whole understanding
of the natural and carnal mind. He leads me in the waies] The fourth part of
the duty of a good shepherd which belongs unto the ways in which the sheep
walks. The fourth pastoral duty.
For the sheep is a beast, by nature wandering (such is the simplicity of it)
subjecte to many by-waies, therefore it is the duty of a good Pastor, to take
heed least it wander away from the place and straight way: even so, says
DAVID Iehova leads me by the path^ of righteousness, that is, by right
ways. The fifth qastorall duty.
Although I walked] This is the fifth part of the duty of a good sheipheard.
But if it fall out, that the sheep wander from the way, and lay the self open
to danger, let him have a rod in readiness, whereby he may call back, and a
sheepe-crooke, whereby he may draw it back again. So DAVID confesses, that
he was called and drawn back, with the rod and sheep-crook of Gods holy
Spirit, by his God as by a faithful Pastor, after the same manner, does God
take heed to every way whatsoever, of every godly man that loves him, not only
by a general providence, whereby all men without difference, live by him, are
and move: But much more, by that particular providence of his, whereby he
rules them by his holy Spirit, whereby, as by a hand they are guided in all
their ways, and if it fall out so, that they goeastray from the way, they are
brought again into the way by that self same Spirit. You see how much DAVID
commends the providence and presence of God: the same thing do all the
godly, while they feel they do nothing without God, and while they feel also
after what manner they attain unto the Butt, that they themselves ar taken
hold on by God, and that they are led on unto that self same Butt: while they
feel also GOD to be present with them in all their ways most dangerous
whatsoever, whereby they must of necessity pass unto the heavens. For there
is no solid joy in doing of any thing, unless we feel the holy Spirit of
God to be the directer and the moover. Moreover, it is to be marked in this
place, that no dangers, no afflictiones, no, not death it self can separate
us from God. The sure confidence of the godly.
For he says: Although I walk through the valley of the deadly shadow, I
would not fear, because thou art with me] Commonly it is thought, that God is
absent from that man, who is brought to some extreme danger, who has his
abiding in the midst of death. For they perceive not how those things can
stand with the providence of God: even as though God were not able to hold us
up, unless he vpheld this body and this present life. Also, this is the most
sure sign of Gods presence in perils, that the godly are void of all fear,
and that they are of a bold and courageous spirit. For, for this he says. I
would not fear, because thou art with mee] Thou see then, to speak it in
one sum, how particular the care of GOD is toward his own: For seeing in
man, three things are to be considered; the body, the soul, the actiones; God
leaves none of those destitute of his presence; to the body he furnishes
nurishment and government, he makes the soul to be at rest, he directs
the actions of the body: Neither yet only has he this particular care of his
own: But (which thing I have ever reckoned amongste the chiefest of Gods
benefits) he perpetually causes them to feel some sense of his providence
and care toward them, so that they are able to declare particularly the
sorts of Gods providence, and to attribute fully to God, the whole glory of
the same. Thou furnishest] He opens up in proper words, the former
allegory, borrowed from the custom of a good shepherd, and he
comprehends that whole care of God toward him, in those three parts, as it
were. The first is: That he furnishes a table before him] The second, That he
annoynteth his head with oil. The third, 2. Sam. 12* 20.
That he makes his cup very full] The first and the third part, Mat. 6. 17.
belong to the necessary nurishment: 2. Sam. 13. 12.
The second, to the decorement; for the auncientes for the most part, were
anointed with oils and ointments for braverie and seemelinesse cause, and not
for any necessity. Wherefore those who were in the mourning estate, absteyned
from annoyntings. That which he says in the first part is to be marked. Thou
furnishest a table before me, over against mine enemies] Whereby he signifies,
that in despite of his enemies, he was fed and nurished of God, by the which
great honor redounded unto him, and the greater was the confusion of his
enemies, while in the mean time that they are looking on, he is so honored of
GOD. Then we are to note in the third part, that which he says, That God
makes his cup to abound] For he understands the abundance and increase of
things necessary to this life, as of drink. Considder therefore of the care
of God toward his own, and how liberally he deals with them: he bestows
upon them, not only those things which belong unto necessity, but those things
which are for decorement: again, he furnishes not the things niggardlye,
which belong unto necessity, but abundantly and liberally. And all those
things surely he does for their cause, their enemies in the mean time,
looking on, and sore against their wills, whereby the greater glory may
redound unto them, and that the confusion of their enemies may be the greater,
while they see those to be honored of God, whom they earnestly desired to be
destroyed. So God honors every way those, who honor him. Surely goodness
and mercy] An exposition of the second part of the proposition, that is, of
the security for the time to come: For he gloryeth of the security, and he
promises unto himself, both all good things in this life, and also the
everlasting kingdom in the life to come. Concerning this security, we have
observed some thing upon the first verse before; now this one thing I add to
this only, And I seek the cause from whence it comes to pass, that any man
gloryeth so securely, of the feeling of the present favor of God, and
promises so surely to himself, that he shall never be destitute of that favor
in time to come? The cause is, not any thing in us, nor that love whereby we
love God: for there is nothing in us that can make us to be at rest, such is
our inconsta^cy by very natural disposition: but the cause is that free favor
of God, who loves him, whom he has begun to love forever, in that his
welbeloved son Jesus Christ. PAVLE gloryeth securely, not indeed of the
sense of that love, whereby he himself loved God, but of the Feeling of that
love, whereby God in Christ had embraced him. Romans ^.
Who shall separate us (says he) from the love of God? For this is that
ground of all glorying and security, the love of God toward us, from the which,
by no kind of force, we are able to be pulled away. The glory therefore of
al security, be unto God in Christ for ever. Amen.

THE ARGUMENT. Of the XXXII, PSALM.
It is manifest out of the inscription, that it is a Psalm of Doctrine, and
that it was written by David. In it is handled the blessed nesse of man, and it
contains the doctrine of happiness First therefore is set down the general
doctrine, unto the 8 verse. Then the applying of the general doctrine, unto
the last verse, and finally, a conclusion of exhortation in the last verse it
self.

The XXXII. Psalm.
1 DAVID'S Psalm of doctrine. Blessed is he which is eased of defection, whose
sin is covered.

2 Blessed is the man unto whom Iehova imputes not iniquity, and in whose
Spirit there is no guise.

3 When I keept silence, my bones waxed old, in my roaring all the day.

4 For thine hand was heavy upon me, day and night my most excellent iuioice,
was turned into summer droughts. Selah.

5 I will make my sin known unto thee, neither will I hide mine iniquity, I
said, I will confess my defectiones unto Iehova, and thou took away the
punishment of my sin, Selah.

6 For this thing shall every one to whom thou art gracious pray unto thee,
what time it shall fall out (in the overflowing of many waters, they shall not
so much as touch him) Saying,

7 Thou art a lurking place to me, preserve me from trouble, compasseme about
with songs of deliverance. Selah.


The first proposition
BLessed is he which is eased] The proposition of the blessedness of man in the
general doctrine, comes first in hand: Then a confirmation of the
proposition, from experience: last the effect of that experience of the mercy
of God toward DAVID, in others of the faithful. Then to the end we may speak
of the proposition: DAVID first is tormented with the conscience of sin, and
because of sin, with the feeling of Gods wrath. Then his mind is quieted by a
confidence of the forgiveness of his sins: Therefore he appears to himself to
be blessed, after that torment and horrors of death, through the conscience of
the remission of his sins, his mind being now settled in ease: he shows
pl^inely, once and over again, what great good is in the forgiveness of
sins, in this Psalm of doctrine, and there through he becomes an
excellent learned Teacher, of the blessedness of man. For every man is bound,
after that first he has felt his own misery, then his free deliverance in
Christ, according to his calling, to deliver over unto others, as it were, the
doctrine of the misery and blessedness of man. DAVLD now then becomes such
a one, and he teaches that true and solid felicity, consists not in the
riches of this world, not in honor and glory, not in pleasures, not in the
works and merits of men: but in the grace of God alone, and in the free
remission of sins. Also, those whom he takes in hand to teach, are miserable
men, miserable, I say and it were no more but by reason of the conscience and
of death, yea, or rather, because of that fleshly security, whereby many are
casten up so in a deep sleep, that neither are they touched with a sense of
sin, nor of misery: which estate, surely is of all estates far most
perilous. Then those ar they whom he teaches this true happiness, and to
whom, by viue voice he poynteth out, as it were, with the finger, that only
cause, which pacifieth and blesses the consciences of miserable men, to wit,
the free remission of sin in Christ. Moreover there are three sorts of
speeches concerning remission of sins, in the two first verses, which
notwithstanding all fall into one. The first is, The first.
Blessed is he which is eased] (says he:) DAVID feeling himself as it were
first oppressed with the burden of sin: Then that he was eased of that but
then, through the mercy of God, and his conscience now being pacified to him,
drawing his breath, as it were, he cries out and declares, that that man is
blessed, whosoever he be, that is disburthened of the heavy burden of his
defectio^. Now the cause wherefore we feel not in our selves such a
blessedness, neither are able to praise the same with DAVID; is this
security, whereby it comes to pass, that either sin is not felt at all, or
if it be felt, it is esteemed as a thing of little weight: But if the deadly
sopour, were shaken off from us, and if there were any feeling of sin,
together with a sense of the wrath of God, drawing out sin to the light, and
making the burden of sin to appear intolerable, as that way it appears
unto DAVID, when he says and complayneth, that the burden of his iniquities
are heavy, Psalm. (...). ^.
and that they are heavier, then he is able of strength to bear: For he felt
conjoined with his iniquities, the wrath of God, from which proceeds that so
great a weight of sin. If therefore we feel that burden of sin, with the
anger of God lying on us, then surely we would in good earnest acknowledge that
that man were blessed, who were disburdened of his defection. Whose sin is
covered] The second form of speech follows, whereby he publishes the
remission of sins. Blessed is he (says he) whose sin is hid.] DAVID, when
he had felt this sin, and all this deformity of nature to be laid open
before the eyes of that wrathful God: Then also, he had felt that his sin
was covered with the obedience and righteousness of Christ, his mind being
now quieted and settled, he pronounces that man to be blessed, whose sin
was covered. Now the cause wherefore we feel not this blessedness in our
selves by experience, is, that he is blessed, whose sin is covered, is the
selfsame stupiditie of our nature, and fleshly security, wherewith we are
so blinded, that we neither see our sin, neither the angry face of God,
looking upon us from the heaven: For the which blindness sake again, we do often
come to that shamelessness, that not being content in secreet, to offend those
eyes of God, we also do openly come out, and in Gods sight, before the Sun and
the Moon, yea, and as it were the whole world looking on; sometimes we commit
manslaughter, otherwhiles adulteries. now thieftes and riefes, and then other
sorts of most filthy sins; and provoke, as Esaias says. 3. ^. the eyes of
the glory of God: Like as we read of that Zimri, Number 9^ 25.
a most impudent man, who came forth and brought out his filthiness, with
that his exceeding filthy whore the Midianitish woman, in the sight of God,
in the sight of Moses, in the presence of all the people, yea, in the public
sorrow of all the congregation: Wherefore Phinees, being vehemently stirred up,
with the zeal of God, taking a spear in his hand, strikes them both
through. But if surely there were any Magistrates among us, indewed with such a
zeal, those most wicked men, should not escape unpunished, for so many
man-slaughters, so many adulteries: Finally, for so many sorts of most heinous
sins. Nevertheles, this thing in the mean time should comfort us, that the
self same God yet remains, and that ever like to himself, who because of
his righteousness, is not able to suffer for ever, that these most wickedman
shall escape vn-punished, for those sins. This is then the blindness which
proceeds from our security and again, a wounderful shamelessness,
proceeding from that blindness. But surely, if once at length we were wakened
up, out of this deadly sopour, and saw our sins viuely, together with the
angry countenance of God, beholding us from the heaven, and burning up our
souls as it were, with his hot wrath (for the angry countenance of God does
none otherways burn the unclean souls of men, then the fire any matter meet
for burning, as timber stuble or hey, according to that saying of the Prophet:
Thou shall appoint them, For to be burnt, as a furnace of fire in the time of
thine angry countenance: and then declaring that more clearly, he subjoyneth,
Iehova shall sup them up in his wrath, (as if the fire had consumed them) But
if, I say, there were any feeling of those things, then surely we would with
DAVID commend much that man to be blessed, whose sin were so covered, that it
should not be seen of an angry God. Blessed is the man to whom Iehova
imputes none iniquitie] The third form of speech, The third form of speech.
whereby he expresses unto us the remission of sins. He felt out of all
question, first a judgment seat, set up, as it were, in his own soul, and
an accusing conscience, that his sin was imputed unto him, by God the judge.
Then this whole judgment being remooved out of his soul by Christ, that his
sin was not laid to his charge. Of this it comes to pass, that being
refreshed; he cried out, and commends him to be greatly blessed, to whom God
imputes not sin. But if we, after the same manner, raising up a judgment
seat in our hearts, would first see and feel our conscience accusing us, God
sitting in judgment, and sin to be laid to our charge by GOD the judge,
surely, we would call that man blessed with DAVID, to whom God imputes not
sin. But such is our great sluggishnesse, that albeit, we be other wile
sinners, notwithstanding, except it be very hardly, ar we touched with any
sense of sin, yea, even then when the wrath of GOD exercises us, we are not
drawn on to the acknowledging of our sin, but very hardly. Out of this
last form of speech, whereby DAVID published the forgiveness of sins, we
learn also from DAVID'S example himself, we learn I say, first, what is the
estate of the soul of a sinner, which is touched deeply with a conscience of
his own sin, and thereby is prepared unto grace. He feels, that there is a
judgment seat set up in his soul, and that God himself the judge, sits
therein: Then the conscience of sin accuses, and God the judge lays sin
to the charge, and looks upon the filthiness thereof, as with a terrible
eye, From thence follows a deep sense of sin, and a burden that is not
able to be borne, of sin, I say, which appeared a little before, to be of no
weight and moment: Of this also aryses horrors and terrors of hell, which if
they continued any longer, they would drive a man unto desperation. We have
again also in the example of DAVID, the constitution of the soul of the
sinner, after that sins are forgiven: He feels within himself, that all
that judgment cease, that his conscience as a witness accuses him no more
of sin, and that sin is not laid unto his charge by God the judge: he
feels also, that what-so-ever remanent of sin, is in the corrupt nature,
that it is wholly covered so, with the righteousness and perfect obedience of
Jesus Christ, that the angry face of GOD, is no more directed against the
same: finally, he feels now, that his sin is not imputed unto him, and so,
as I said, it being covered, he feels it to be a burden unto him no more.
And in deed, when any is disburdened of the burden of sin, sin appears
unto him to be a light thing, not by reason of that fleshly security, but
for the mercy of God in Christ his sake it is made light and of little weight
Upon these follow an in^credible peace and quietness of conscience, which is
none other thing then that blessedness, which DAVID commends. For when he had
once entirely felt it in his soul, he reteineth it not within his own mind:
But he is compelled to common thereof with others, that, if it be possible,
other miserable men also (such as we are all by nature) may be touched with
some sense and sweetness thereof, in some measure, that so they may become
blessed. More-ouer, we have also to learn out of DAVID'S words, that which
PAVLE also gathered out of the recommendation of this blessedness of DAVID,
Romans 4. 6.
to wit, that that man is blessed, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness
without works, that is, that a man is made righteous, not by any inherent
righteousness, which proceeds from his works, but by righteousness imputed
only. For if justification and blessedness, be by forgiveness of sins, of
necessity it must follow, that justification is by righteousness, not surely
inherent, but imputed. For forgiveness is also of sin inherent: Now sin
being inherence, that righteousness is not inhere^t but imputed. This
necessary consecution of imputed righteousness, from the forgiveness of sins,
caused PAVLE to interpret that place that DAVID spak expressly of the
remission of sins, even as if he had spoken of imputed righteousness. But this
matter, shall become more evident by some example, taken from judgment seats,
and from the common customs among men. For the matter is none otherwise to be
considered of, in this head of justification, then if any King of free grace
would forgive the sin to any guylty man. As for example, to a manslayer,
even now condemned for his sin: Now this man, his sin being forgiven, is
said to be justified. But by what righteousness, I pray you? not by that
which is inherent: For in him self in very deed, he is a manslayer. By what
righteousness then? surely by none other, then by that, which was freely
imputed by the King, to wit, by that whereby he thinks him righteous, who is
not righteous in himself. The same in all respects, is the manner of our
justification, before the judgment seat of God the judge. We are not indeed
just through our own works, but unjust, Neither yet does God pronounce us to
be righteous for our works. But the justification of GOD, that is, the
publishing of the just, is that whereby he utters that man is unjust, to be
just, of his only mercy in Christ. Now to the end that the whole matter may the
more clearly appear; The thr^fold manner of iustit fiing
we must know, that a man may be said to be justified before GOD, three ways
summa^lie: ^ By the worker of the law.
First, by the works of the law; secondly, by the punishment of the law broken;
Thirdly, by remission of sins, or by not imputing of sins, for those things
ar one. Moreover, as concerning the first manner of justifying, which is by the
works of the Law, after the fall of ADAM and of us al in ADAM never was there
any yet, that was justified by the works of the Law, except one man Christ.
For seeing the law requires two things, the one, either that we fulfill, or
that we die, all fulfilling of that which the law commands, is utterly
lost in ADAM. (...) By punishments for transgression.
Now, as concerning that second manner of justifying; Christ is justified only
that way, yea, and that for our cause, for that cure denunced in the law,
perteined unto us, and we behoved to satisfy the righteousness of God, by our
everlasting death, but Christ came as a mid man betuixt, through his own, and
his fathers mercy, and transferred our sin, together with the punishment due
to our sin upon himself. The third manner of justifying, which is by the
free remission of sins, (...) By the remission of (...).
rests alone for us, whosoever we be, that will be justified and saved
before God, to wit, whereby we freely receive remission of all our sins,
believing that Christ has satisfied the law for us, and for our cause has
suffered that curse of the law, and having recived that forgiveness, we are
counted just in that righteousness and satisfaction of Christ, apprehended by
faith. Of these three sorts of justification, The difference of these maner^.
the two former differ from this third, that seeing in the two former the cause
of the sentence of justification, is in him that is justified, in this third
sort, the cause of the sentence of justifying is without him that is
justified, to make it clearer, in that first manner of justificatio^, the cause
of justifying is in the works of the man justified. So ADAM had bin justified,
if he had stood in the obedience of God, so Christ was justified for our
cause, by his own righteous works, and by the perfect love upon all sides of
GOD, and of his Neighbor. In the second sort of justification which is by
punishment, the pain it self, which is suffered by the justified man, is the
subject and the cause, why he is justified of GOD. So Christ alone is justified
for our cause, and he is made for us the curse of the law; also, he hes fully
satisfied the law by his death. Last, in the third manner of justification,
the cause is, that self same satisfaction, which is in Christ him self,
without us, as in ane subject, but after some sort made aires, to wit, by
faith. So then by this third manner, all the faithful are justified, by the
cause of justificatio^, that is, Christ's satisfaction, which is with out us.
DAVID therefore, that we may return to him again, speaks not of the first
justification, nor of the second, but of the third; and he attributes the
justificatio^ and blessedness of man, not to the works of man himself, nor to
the punishment taken according to the threatening of the law upon man himself,
but only to the free remission of sins. Which sort of justification, is
accomplished after this order. First, the sinful man being called of God,
believes in Jesus Christ, to whose sacrifice, the wrath of God pursuing him,
he is compelled after some sort, one or other to fly, as unto a certain
Girth. Then taking hold upon that sacrifice, the wrath of God is now
pacified: The wrath being assuaged, there is place for grace and mercy, and
therefore of grace, he forgiveth him his sin, and therewith imputes to the
sinner, that righteousness and satisfaction of Christ, which by faith before
he had apprehended. And so in these two things, is situat that sentence of
justificatio^, the cause whereof, we see to be Christ's satisfaction, without
man himself, except in this respect you say it to be in man, in so far as it is
apprehended by faith. And this fashion of justification, is no less effectual,
yea, it is much more forcible and full, then if God had justified us for any
cause, which can be in us. For the peace and quietness of conscience is no
less, neither yet is that rejoicing, which is through justification by faith
in Christ, and by his satisfaction any whitles, then if we ourselves were by
our works justified. Being justified (says the Apostle) through faith, Romans
^. ^.
we have peace toward God. Then a little thereafter, We glory (says he)
under hope. The Apostle also himself, Romans ^. ^.
in this justification of God by faith, gloryeth securely against that man,
whosoever he be that would lay a crime to his charge a ye, experience it self
has ever teached since the beginning, that this way of justification is more
sure, then that which is by works, and by a cause inherent in us. For seeing
that inherent righteousness, both of Angels and also of men is lost, this
righteousness of Christ, apprehended by true faith, shall never be lost. In which
alone surely (to the end we may make one conclusion of this discourse) whosoever he be, that quieteth not himself, there shall no part be left him in
that blessedness, which DAVID says is placed in the forgiveness of sins.
In whose Spirit, there is no guyle] Hitherto has DAVID published, man to be
blessed, through the forgiveness of sins; now he shows him to be blessed
through sanctification also, especially, for simplicity and sincerity of the
heart, which is the effect of the remission of sins: AS if he should say: I
publish him to be blessed to whom sins ar forgive^, yet not with standing, so
that I separat not sanctification, from the forgiveness of sins, and
justification. So Paul, after he had showed, Romans ^. ^.
that there is no condemnation for him that is in Christ Jesus, presently he
subjoyneth, who walks not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. DAVID
therefore, conjoyneth with the remission of sins, sanctification: for the
blessedness or happiness of man, is no other thing then his blessed estate in
Christ Jesus and it is the effect, of all the spiritual blessings in Christ
Jesus, of those, to wit; which are reckoned out, Romans ^. 29.
and there after, and ar brought in, Ephesians. 1. ^
and thereafter. Moreover, they are the fore knowledge of Gods Predestination
unto life, calling, justifying, gloryfiing. Then there is no cause why any
should gather out of this place, that a man is also justified through holiness
of life, and good works, because the prophet says, blessed is he in whose heart
there is no guyle: seeing that by the word of blessedness is meant justification;
but the common effect of all the rest of the blessings, of which hesbene even
now spoken, and among the which, sanctification is reckoned out as one. Then we
may define the blessed man, from his own causes going before, that it is he,
who is called, justified and glorified, of the foreknowledge and
Predestination of GOD. Out of those things you perceive, that sanctification,
synceritie and cleanesse of the heart, are required to blessedness, which in
this life, is no other thing, but a begun glorifying, and that blessedness
is the common effect of all. Neither yet also shall it appear, if the sentence
of the Apostle be taken good head to in that place, and if his words be
considdered, that the blessed and the just man, or justified man, as they
think commonly, is taken for one thing. For, blessed, also with the Apostle is
none other thing, then the blessed estate of the justified man, and the effect
of justification, or of imputed righteousness without works. From whence
also it is, that our Prophet in an other place, in plain words, publishes a
man to be blessed, through the works of sanctification. For I would not expound
the word blessed in that place, Psalm. ^. ^
justified: as if the Prophet, of the consequent effects, described the
justified man: But I would understand by the name of, blessed, a man constitute
in that estate of life, which is the estect of justification, sanctification,
and finally, of all spiritual blessings in Christ. See those things which we
have observed upon that place concerning blessedness. When I held my peace]
Hitherto was set down the proposition of the blessedness of man: Here
follows the confirmation thereof, from his own experience. Also, that
experience is two fold: The first is of the misery, at what time, to wit, he
held his tongue and confessed not his sin. The second is, of deliverance and
forgiveness of sin, that is, to wit, at that time when he confessed his sin.
Then he says first: When I held my tongue, my bones waxed old] That is, when
I contained my sin within me, when I dissembled the same, and confessed not,
My bones waxed olde] That is, mine whole body was consumed, and there was
nothing so firm in me, no not indeed so much as my bones, which was not worn
away with the hand of God. Mark the Prophets words: for he speaks not so,
because I have sinned, my bones consumed away. But he says thus; When I held
my peace] Or when I confessed not my sin, Why the godly are afflicted of God.
My bones wore away] Of the which we learn, that the godly are not for that
cause afflicted of God, that they are punished because of their sins, which
are all forgiven, in that alone satisfaction of Christ, but to the end they
may be raised up out of that sluggishnesse, and extreme deadly security,
and may be brought to repentance. I observe this, because of the enemies, who
defend that afflictions, yea, even of the godly, are so many temporal
punishments, and satisfactiones for sin, when there is but one satisfaction
of Christ, yea, and that all sufficient, and punishmente, which he suffered
for all our sins, so that, whosoever would conjoyne any other satisfaction
whatsoever, with this satisfaction of Christ, of force he must take away some
thing, from that most perfect satisfying. Much rather therefore we must hold
and learn out of this experience of DAVID, that whatsoever afflictiones of the
godly, are not ay by reason of their sins, to wit, that any punishment should
be taken of them, albeit otherwise, the original and efficient cause of them
be sin, For the wages of sin is death (the same judgment is to be taken of
al temporal afflictiones whatsoever.) But GOD who out of light, brings forth
darkness, he so changes these afflictiones, which are of the own nature the
fruits and effects of sin, that now they become certain exercises of the
godly for their weill. Then, as I have said, afflictions come not for sin, as
the end that it may be punished, but that repentance, mortification, and
conversion may be wrought. Secondly, mark in this place, how deep the deadly
sopour, yea, of the godly is at some time, that those, who now and then, sleep
so in sin, that they cannot be wakened, unless it be with most grievous
afflictiones, and as DAVID speaks, yea, except their bones be consumed, and
that also (which is a wounderfull thing) falls out, after that they have now
often had experience of the mercy of GOD in Christ, and are touched with that
sense of the passing sweet love of GOD, which surely ought to have easily,
without any trouble, alured their mind unto God. For he who once has felt how
gracious the Lord is, he must of necessity, continually seek the presence of
God. Notwithstanding, they are so obdured whiles, and cast up into a deep
sleep, that they would never turn themselves unto God, unless it were, they
were drawn with the violence of afflictiones. This security is wounderful,
this sleep is marveylous, which now and then even creepeth-on upon the godly,
and shakes off so from them, the taist of that love of God in Christ for a
time, in which otherways it became them to be allured continually to seek
God, that except they were judged of GOD they should perish miserably with the
rest of the world. Moreover, we have here to mark out of the word, Of keeping
silence] whereby indeed somewhat obscurely is meant some conscience of sin,
and that oppressed with silence, and unrighteously with holden, as the Apostle
speaks. For there is no man so void of conscience, which is not some time,
as it were, rounded with into the ear, and admonished of his sin. And from
thence it proceeds, that men being warned by their conscience, of sin
(whereof, in the mean time they delight very greatly, and they endeavor to
nourish the same in their bosom as it were) they travel by all means, to
dissemble and cover their sin, so that if it were possible, it should not be
marked with Gods eyes, to that end especially, that they might enjoy sin,
without the broad of conscience, and disquietting of the mind, which thing
indeed, they cannot attain unto, if they know that their sin is before the
sight and eyes of God. Of which it comes to pass, that some pretend one
excuse, some another; yea, some pretending religion, and external worship for
their sins. But al those things are done in vain: For it is not possible, that
sins can be covered (as it was said before) unless they be hid with the
only obedience of Christ. In my roaring] As if he should say, I in the mean
time, not acknowledging my sin, was touched indeed with a present sense of my
afflictions, all the day, I roared like a Lion, I uttered very beastly noyses.
Of the which we learn, yea, that the very Hecte and godly, at what time being
delivered over into their own hand, they begun to wax beastly, and to
sleep in sin, while by afflictions, they be awakened out of that sleep, they
use to utter voices, as of beasts, rather then of men; yea, many times they
murmr and fret against God. For if you will considder common nature, there is
no difference betuixte the Elect and the Reprobat, the godly and the ungodly.
Which surely, if there be any, it is from God alone, who only puts the
difference betuixt us, who at last allureth the godly unto himself, by some
sense of his love, yea, and by his holy Spirit, boweth their hearts: But he
leaves the ungodly for ever; and being left, it is so far a way, that they are
softened by afflictions and calamities, that contrariwise they are judged and
become worse and worse. For day and] Hitherto has the most grievous affliction
bin set down; here follows the cause thereof, as if he should say, no man
has cause to wou^der, that my bones are worn away, and that I in the mean
time, have roared like a Lion; For the hand of God, day and night oppressed me.
Thy hand was heavy upon me (says he) day and night] That is, continually and
without intermission, and from thence it comes to pas, that, My most
excellent juice, was turned into the summers droughts] That is, that juice,
whereby the body was fresh, did dry-vp, yea, and the whole body was dried up,
and became withered. For it is the amplifying of so grievous an oppression,
from the own effect, because the hand of God oppressing him, it wrong out all
the sap of the body. Mark here the principal cause of DAVID'S afflictions,
not only did the afflictiones so much move him, as God afflicting, whom in
the mean while, he felt to be his judge. Thine hand (says he) was heavy upon
me] Wherefore chiefly he respects the person of the afflicter: ^or the
afflictions themselves move men not so much, as the conscience of God the
judge. For if there be some feeling of the love of God, in the midst of
afflictiones, they appear now to be lighter, because then we feel, that those
afflictions are not inflicted by God, as a just judge now, but as by a most
gracious father. But if in afflictions, there be no feeling of the mercy of
GOD, otherwise, the most light now appear to be the most grievous unto us, not
so much, because of the afflictions themselves, as in respect of the
conscience of the Judge. For it is a terrible thing to fall in to the hands of
the living God: And of ^l enemies the terriblest, is the wrathful God
chiefly. Many there are, I confess, who being many ways miserably
afflicted, notwithstanding, in the mean time, are either nothing, or at least
very little commoved: For no other cause then that they see not that their
afflictions are of God; and from thence it is, that no regard being had of
GOD, they turn themselves unto the second causes, and they power out their
wrath upon them, thinking with themselves, that then at length they shall be
blessed, if they can be rigorous against them. But if they understood, that
GOD were the author of all those things which shall upon them, and in the
mean time, will not be touched with any sense of his love and mercy in christ
surely they would be more viuilie touched with those calamities, and they
would meditat with themselves one time or other, concerning the asswaging of
the wrath and justice of God, and they would not be altogether violently, with
their whole force, carried away against the second causes, as they call them.
Surely such blindness and be nummednes of men is miserable, The he^uinesse of
gods (...).
whom when God exercises with his own hand, never theles, they neither see nor
feel the same. Then we have to mark that which he says, that that hand of
^od was grievous upon him continually. First, there is the heavines of the
hand and wrath of God, Thereafter, there is a heavines without i^termissio^ when
the sinner remains obstinat against faith and repentance, then as it were,
God is hardened in his wrath. Also, afflictions and calamities make manifest
very often unto the world, that perpetual anger, which God so continues, that
as one wave follows upon an other, so one affliction comes upon the neck
of another, and the greater continually, follows upon the smaller. So the
Apostle speaking of the obstinate Jews, The wrath of God (says he) is come
upon them to the full. The Jews an ^xample.
If at any time we see the wicked to swim out of afflictiones, 1. These. 2.
16.
we should not think for this cause, that this deliverance shall be
perpetual, All the wicked.
but that they are thus prepared, for some more grievous trouble. I grant, God
gives unto them a breathing time, and some well long distance of time, between
afflictions which he lays on (such is his long suffering) but these, as the
Apostle says, According to their hardness, and heart that cannot repent, make
that those distances of time, Romans 2. 5.
which are otherwise granted unto them for repentance, to be no other thing,
but so many preparations, to the more grievous wrath. But to speak of the
godly, this they by experience feel in themselves, that while their faith in
Christ languisheth, and they some times turn themselves away from God;
incontinent surely they feel in experience, some signs of the wrathful God.
And if they also persever in their backsliding, they feel that God continues
in his anger, to the end, to wit, that it may appear to be most manifest unto
them, that there is nothing without Christ but wrath. And if there were no
other evident of this matter extante, then those horrors, which otherways the
faithful feel in themselves, while they either neglecte Christ or his blood,
or apprehend it not firmly enough in their soul; surely, by that and it were
no more, it is sufficiently declared, that men are not in safety without
Christ: that there is no true peace and quietness of mind, without Christ,
seeing that in him alone, the wrath of God himself does quiet the self. I will
make my sinne] Hitherto has been declared DAVID'S first experience, to wit of
his misery: now follows the second, that is, of his deliverance. The sum
is, When I confessed my sin, thou forgavest me, both the sin, and the
punishment of the sin: But we must take heed to the words. I said] that is, I
purposed and deliberat in my mind to confess my sin: Now he utters this,
three manner of ways. First, (says he) I will make my sin known unto
thee] Then, I will not cover mine iniquitie] Last, I will confess my
defections unto Iehova] These three speeches fall all into one. And this
threefold repetition of one thing* either shows how earnestly he had
confessed his sin, or surely manifests that in the advisement taking,
there was some wrestling or combat with the flesh, drawing the man back from
afree and good confession He wrastleth out therefore, and he multiplieth the
confession of his sin. And thou took away] That is, thou forgavest me my
sin. For then is the forgiveness of sin, when the guiltiness I say, and
whole pain, and not some part only of the pain, whether the same be more or
less, Is taken away. For Christ's satisfaction for sin is perfect, from the
which verelie, so much is taken away, 1. (...).
as we give unto our satisfactiones: But concerning this matter, look before.
Observe here first, that DAVID confesses not first his sin, before the same
be forgiven, neither took he sooner a purpose to confess his sin, but the
punishment of sin, was as soon taken away, which certainly is ane
evidente token, that sin is not so much the cause of the guyltines and
punishment, as hardness, and (as the Apostle speaks) the heart that cannot
repent. I grant indeed, that sin procures the wrath of God, but obstinacy in
sin continues and hoordeth up that wrath. For if any man would confess his
sin, he should have GOD no more angry against him. But by reason of his
hardness, he confesses not sin, therefore the wrath remains and not only it
remains, but it increases. Therefore PAVLE speaks, But thou o man, Romans 2.
5.
after thine hardness and heart that cannot repent, heapest unto thy self,
wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment
of God. For what shall we think to be the cause, why that anger that is to
come in that day, shall be so grievous? The cause of so great a wrath, surely
shall not be so much sin it self, as an obdured heart in sin, and the
contempt of grace. For that which is said by the Apostle, is not to be thought
light, to neglect such a great salvation, Heb. 2. 3.
is utterly to refuse the Son of God, in whom whosoever believes not, as is
spoken in JOHN 3. 18. Is already condemned, because he believes not in the
only begotten son of God. Mark next, 2. lesson
that bold liberty, which the sinner, being now turned unto God, uses in this
confession of DAVID. I will confess my sin unto thee] (says DAVID) And
this liberty, manifests the feeling of Gods love toward him, and the
confidence of grace and of remission of sins in Christ: For it is not
possible, that a sinner turn him self unto GOD, confess his sin, and
earnestly crave for the forgiveness of his sin, unless there be already first
after some sort, some sense of grace and pardon purchased. The conscience threw
out a confession out of IVDAS, but he durst not be so bold as to confess his
sin before GOD, neither yet to deal with God after this manner that DAVID
does in this place. I will make my sin known (says he) unto thee] But
going aside, and turning his back as it were unto God (says he) I have
sinned, having betrayed the Innocente blood. Wherefore, to speak it summarly,
the confession of sin before God, and the craving of pardon, that is, this
liberty whereby any man dares be bold to appear before him, and to present
himself before his judgment seat sufficiently does manifest some feeling of
grace, and that self same remission of sins, which we seek, being
purchased already in some sort. For this cause shall every one] He commends
this his experience, (...).
which was of Gods mercy immediately preceding, from the own effect, in every
one of the faithful, that were to come thereafter. For this cause] (says he)
That is, for this experience of thy mercy toward me. Shall he pray unto thee]
That is, he shall confess his sins, or he shall crave pardon. He to whom
thou art fauorable] That is, not by putting any kind of difference, but he
only whom God loves. Of this love and favor, there must of necessity be
some sense, as we have already even now spoken before any man be so bold,
either to confess his sin to God, or earnestly to crave pardon for sin.
But at what time shall he, whom God favoreth pray? at times, (says) When it
shall happen] To wit, In the over flowing of many waters] That is, in the
storms and waves of extreme vehement afflictions (as before Psalm. 18. 17. and
every where in the Psalm. 69.) They shall not so much as touch him] that is,
they shall not so much as touch him lightly, so firm shall be the love of God
in Jesus Christ. Romans 8. ^
And if they happen to touch him, they shall be so far away, from being of
ability to hurt the man, as contrariwise they shall be for his profit. Romans
8. (...)
For all things work together for the best, to them that love God. Wherefore
the Apostle, when he felt himself so grounded in that love, he securely
gloryed against the adversary, creatures of whatsoever sort, as oppression,
nakedness, hunger, the sword, death, life, powers and dominions. And this
surely he did, not indeed, for that end that he thought, that it was not
possible that this life present, might be taken out of the world by those
things (for he himself thereafter felt the contrary in experience) but for
this cause, that he looked for, and certainly hoped for that other life of God,
^ Lesson.
which should never die with this life. This is not to be pretermitted, that
DAVID confirms this man, that is, to pray, whosoever finally he be, with a
promise of that thing which he shall crave, and so encourages him to pray. For
by this example we learn, whosoever will pray with confidence, of necessity
he must have while he is praying, continvally before his eyes, the promises of
God in Christ, yea, and he must remember of them, so far as it is possible.
For if there be no meditation upon the promises of GOD, what confidence, what
zeal I pray you can there be in praying? seeing that without Gods own word,
there cannot be faith, and in vain shall any man promise to himself any good
thing, or grace from GOD, whereof he has not some assurance, out of Gods own
word and promise. Faith is by hearing, Romans 10. (...)
and hearing by the word of God. Indeed, that is true, that there is no man to
be found, which is not at some time touched with some feling of this want, and
so is provoked, and it were no more, very necessity it self compelling him to
conceive prayers. But if there be no promise of God before the eyes, no word
of GOD concerning that thing which they seek with what face; or of what mind
dare they be so bold to come unto God? I mark this the more carefully for
that cause, that all may know how necessary it were to search and learn out
of the word of GOD himself and Scriptures, all the promises of GOD, whither
they be of things temporal, or of things everlasting. In which verily,
whosoever at passing-well versed, those men do pray very well. When we speak
of promises, Christ is not to be passed by in silence, in whom all the
promises of God are, yea, and Amen, that is, they both have their own ground,
and also their accomplishment, without whom, in vain surely thou look upon
the promises, either temporal, or eternal. Wherefore, whosoever beholds the
promises of God, if he will look upon them with profit, it is requisite that
first of al, he look upon their beginning and end, Jesus Christ, and never
suffer him to depart out of his eyes. Thou art a lurking place unto me]
Hitherto by the way, the promise was inserted; Now follows the form of
prayer, which that man, which is beloved of GOD shall use, whosoever he be,
yea, and that leaning to DAVID'S example and experience. In this little prayer,
not so much at the words to be numbered, as they are to be weighed; Before the
promise, he makes his preface, that God is his lurking place, and he
professes his assurance in God alone, which in deed is principally the solid
ground of the petition, and a vehementargume^t to purchase to himself the grace
of GOD: For seeing thou make a semblance and professest that thy confidence
in prayer, is placed not in men, nor in our merits, in which the Papists
trust; neither yet in any other thing, but in God alone, through Jesus Christ;
surely now thou bring with thee somewhat, then which no thing is more
pleasant and acceptable to God. Also the petition is in those words, Keep me
from trouble] Then next, according to the same meaning: compass me about with
songs of deliverance] as if he should say: deliver me, that I may have matter to
sing thy praises. He seeks then a deliverance, for the glory of God, whereof
out of all question, he had a great respect thereof himself. For we ought al
principally to have before our eyes in our prayers, The (...) of prayers is the
glory of God in Christ.
the glory of GOD in Christ. And when that which we have sought, is already
gotten, we are bound so to use that benefit, that it may redound to the glory
of GOD, that is, in using thereof, we should continually look unto God: For
otherways, it cannot be a true feeling and enjoying of the benefits received.
1. (...) 10.
PAVLE says, Romans 14. ^.
Whether ye eat, whether ye drink, whatsoever thing ye do, do all to the
glory of God. For there is no true enjoying, no not so much in deed, as of the
meat that we eat, no true pleasure thereof, unless we eat unto the Lord,
that is, unless we eat it to the glory of God. For it may be, that we
devour meat, which thing sundry men do, with a certain beastly sense and
pleasure; but to the end that we may enjoy it with that pleasure and true
sweetness, it cannot be done, unless we considder in the use thereof, God and
his glory. We shall observe one thing here of this effect of DAVID'S experience,
(...)
before we proceed to the rest; he says indeed that some will follow his
example. But who? even those, to wit, that like as he had confessed his sin,
so shall they confess their sin; and like as he himself had prayed to God,
so shall they also pray unto God. So PAVLE says, that other men shall follow
his example. 1. Tim. ^. 1^
But what are they? even those, to wit, that shall believe, as he had
believed: That I might be (says he) an exemple to them that shall believe
unto eternal life: Learn therefore, how many so ever examples there have
bin of the mercy of God, yea, since the world was created, that they are so
many co^solations and docume^ts, to the posterity of the mercy of God toward
them; but finally, under this condition, that they enter in into that way of
mercy, which other godly men before them have entered into, who have walked on
before them, that is, if they believe in Jesus Christ, if they repent, if they
be converted unto God, if they pray: We thought this meet to be marked for this
cause, by reason we see that not a few abuse the examples of godly men,
thinking that if they have them only in their mouth, it shall come to pass
presently, they be entertained after the same manner with them, and also, that
they shall likewise attain unto mercy, when in the mean time, they endeavor
not to tred into the footsteps of godly men, seeing they are without faith,
without Christ, without God in the world: But they are far deceived, for to
grant that unto the^, that they have in sure register, all the examples that
ever were extant of the mercy of God; nevertheless we aff^^m, except they set
before themselves the selfsame purpose of life, which those godly men before
them have followed (whose examples they vaunt of) they belong nothing unto them.

8 I will instruct thee and teach thee the way that thou shall walk in, I will
give counsel, mine eye taking attendance upon thee.

9 Be ye not like an horse, like an mule, wanting understanding, whose mouth is
to be bound vpwith bridle and bit, least they come near thee.

10 Great sorrows are for the wicked, But he which has his confidence in
Iehova, mercy compasses him.


The second part of the psalm.
HItherto has been opened up the first part of the Psalm, concerning the
happiness of man, made clear by the experience of the Prophet himself. Now
follows the second part, in which, by a turned speech, he turns himself
to every one of the godly whosoever, he applies that former doctrine in
particular unto him, and instructs him in that true way of happiness, and
therewith also rayseth him out of that miserable security of the flesh: Before
the application there is a preface, The preface.
in which offering true instruction and learning, he stirs up that man whom
he purposes to teach to attendance; for the secure man, and he that sleeps
in sin, has need of most sharp arguments of taking heed, whereby he may be
pricked and awakened out of sleep. The preface is thus. I will instruct thee
and teach thee the way thou shall wa^kin, I will give counsel, mine eye taking
attendance upon thee] That is, with most diligent care and travel, I will
watch over thee. Some things are to be marked of us in this place. First,
DAVID had said before, that that man whom God favored, would pray unto God by
his exemple, especially, to that end, that he might attain to the like
mercy. But now; not being content of that, that of their own accord, others
should pray unto God, by his example, he turns himself about to every one of
the faithful, and teaches him by his own voice. Although the example of Gods
mercy toward thee be excellent of the self, The duty of the sincere godly man.
yea, that others without thee, be their teacher, are able to see and follow
the same, notwithstanding, thou shall not be said to have done thy part,
except thou turning thy self unto thy brethren, thou thy self declare openly
the mercy of God toward thee, and fulfill the part of a teacher among them.
For who is able with more dexterity, and with greater profit, to preach of
the grace and mercy of God, then he who has found it in experience him self?
For he who has not any time tasted how gracious the Lord is, cannot be a
sufficient Preacher of his mercy. Wherefore it is necessary, that he, in whom
has bin kythed the example of mercy, co^municat his experience with others.
For no man gets the grace of God only to himself, but unto others, that
others may become ter by that grace. So Christ says unto PETER, When thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. (...). ^2. 32
And this is the nature of faith, that it stretches out the hand to ill men,
for this end, that if it be possible, al may be saved. Paul when he pleaded
his cause before King Agrippa, after that he had rehearsed the story of his
life, having forgotten himself, vn-mindful of his bands, and turning unto King
Agrippa, he was altogether occupied in this, that he might bring the man unto
the faith: Beleeuest thou not the Prophets (says he) King Agrippa? I know
(says he) that thou beleeuest. Then Agrippa answered, almost thou perswadest
me to become a Christian. PAVLE replyeth again, I would to God, that not only
thou, but also all that hear me to day, were both almost, and altogether,
such as I am, except those bands. What then? Thought also PAVLE himself to be
blessed, far beyond that King? Surely those who has once tasted the sweetness
of the grace of God which is in Jesus Christ, those also esteem the Kings of
this world, whom they see to be out of christ, to be unhappy, in respect of
themselves although they themselves appear to be most miserable, not only to
kings, but also to the whole world. When therefore PAVLE desired Agrippa to be
like unto himself; who, seeing he was without Christ, out of all doubt he
thought so great a King, in regard of himself, to be unhappy and miserable,
which thing, whiles he thought upon, pitying him, stretching out his hand
as it were, would have led the man unto Christ, he wills that, I say,
pitying him. For the faithful and godly alone, who them selves have felt in
experience, the mercy of God, are unfeignedly merciful. For Agrippa pyttied
not so PAVLE, whom notwithstanding he judged at that time to be miserable,
whom he saw bound and laid open to all the injuries of his enemies. Therefore
to speak at once, that is seen to be true, yea, and it were no more, but
this one example, that every one of the godly, seeks nothing so much, as the
salvation and conversion of miserable men. For what? Thou which stands in
grace think thou not but that it may be, that some of thy grace may be
diminished, if thou communicate not the same liberally with others? Feel we
not that in experience, that this communicating serves chiefly for this, to
increase faith and grace? Whereof it came to pass, Romans 1. (...)
that PAVLE desired to visit the Romans, That he might be comforted
together with them, through their mutual faith, both theirs and his. Secondly,
that DAVID turns not himself to many, but to some one man. I will instruct
thee, and teach the] (says he) By this thing he recommendeth to every man the
doctrine of blessedness, and he wills that every man a part apply it to him
self. For doctrine proposed and conceived in general, it is less forcible,
but being applied to every man in particular, it pearceth more into the
heart, and without particular applying the promises of God in the scriptures,
will never kindle up faith nor hope nor being kindled up, will not feed them on
still: and therefore the Apostle applies the scripture, brought out for the
purpose, unto the Romans, with this admonition, What soever things are
written, Romans 1^. ^.
are written for our instruction, that through patience and consolation of the
Scriptures, we might have hope. By the which words, indeed he signifies,
that we have not true comfort and hope, without application. Wherefore it is to
be taken heed, how we either read or hear the Scriptures, which otherwise
are set before all men in general, and travel must diligently by taken, that
every one draw in particular to him self the things that are spoken in
general. Let this be for examples sake, when this sentence is proposed, 1.
(...). 16.
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. We should every one of us,
even as the Apostle PAVLE does in the same place, restrain the same to
ourselves, making as it were the sub-sumption: But so it is that I am a sinner,
and a conclusion: Therefore christ came into the world to save me, which
particular conclusion indeed, as soon as the soul apprehends, it quieteth
the self therein, and as it were feeds and nourishes thereon, with a very
strong consolation. Thirdly observe, DAVID while he promises unto him, ^eb. 6.
^.
whom he will instruct doctrine and learning, he prepares him therewith to
hear and greedelie to receive that which he is to say. He who prepares
himself to instruct in others, next under Gods glory, he should have set
before him not his own profit, not vain glory, or any such thing, but the
commodity of him whom he receives to instruct, yea, and he should she we
the same in outward behavior in word and in his whole life. For so it shall
come to pass, that he whom lie instructs, while he sees that his teacher
next after GOD, he sets his salvation before them, with the greater courage
of mind, he will take heed unto the things which are spoken. For one of the
two is necessary, that either the doctrine should be effectual to the life,
or unto the death of the sinner, which proceeds from him who comes out to
teach with this simplicity and sincerity of mind, Paul the Apostle after that
he had said, That he was unto God, the sweet savor of Christ, in the^ th^^ ar
saved, and in the^ which perish, to the one we are the savor of death unto
death, 2. Co^. ^. 1^. 16.
and to the other, the savor of life unto life, then he subjoyneth, we are not
as many which make merchandice of the word of GOD: but as of sincerity, but
as of God in the sight of God speak we in Christ. Therefore sincerity in
teaching, shall either effectuat life or death. Then to speak it in one word,
that uprightness and simplicity of heart, which has principally the glory
of God set before it, is required before all things in the Teacher and
Minister: I save, principally the glory of God, yea, because it must be
preferred before the salvation of man, which is to be sought in deed, as the
proper end of the doctrine and ministry. For the Minister should not first
and properly respect that his Preaching be not the savor of death unto death:
Notwithstanding, if the glory of God cannot be obtained no other manner of
way, unless it be with the hardening of some men, the glory of GOD is to be
sought, yea, and it were with the overthrow of all mortal creatures. Romans 4. 4.
Let God be true, ^an. (...).
and every man a liar. Shame of face, and contempt belong unto us, but with the
Lord our God, are compassiones. Be not like ane horse] Hitherto has the
preface for attention continued; now we shall absolve the doctrine in few
words. Be not (says he) as the horse, as the Mule] He speaks especially to
those that are benumbed, and wax brutish under the afflictions and
chastisements of the Lord. For he speaks by experience; for he himself
had sometime by-paste waxed brutish; And therefore he speaks unto such, in
these words, as he was in time past himself, as if he should say. O
miserable men, be not like beasts under Gods chastisements; as the horse, the
mule, and other beasts that are void of reason and understanding. Whose
mouth] Here follows now a grievous threatening, to the end that they may be
awakned as it were out of so deep a sleep, as if he should say, as the horse
or mule can no otherways be dantoned, but by casting the bridle into their
mouth; Even so God, except at length ye awaken out of this deadly so pour, he
will cast in into your mouth, the bridle of his power, to dantone this
wildenesse. Great sorrows are for the wicked] Then by clear and proper
words, expressing the matter which before he had set down, with improper
words, and by an figurative speech, and weighing in his own mind, as well the
miserable estate of the obstinate, as the happinsse of the faithful, he cries
out after this manner. Great sorrows are for the wicked] That is, to the
obstinate man in his wickedness. But contrariwise, they that put their
confidence in Iehova, mercy compasses him] That is, defends and
strengthens him upon all side, that he may be sure on every side, from the
assaults and tentationes of the enemy. So then he terrifieth the senseless^,
by denunciation of misery, and he confirms the faithful by the preaching of
happiness. He sets then before the minds of the senseles men, the estate both
of the faithful and of the unfaithful: yea, and with such a weight of words,
that if it be possible he may once shake off from them that senslesnes. Mark
here first, DAVID himself being delivered from this be nummednes, and fleshly
security, he presently beholds those which sleep soundly as it were in sin,
having looked upon them, he esteems them miserable, yea, he thinks no
more of them nor of horses and mules. The godly fra once they have awakened
out of sin, and their eyes are opened, then looking upon them, whom you may
see everie-where to be cast up in a deep sleep, yea, that they are not able to
be awakened by any afflictions out of that deep sleep of security, they
esteem no more of them, then of vn-dantoned beasts, being void of al reason
and understanding. And surely in very deed except they repent, they are in
worse case, then the beasts themselves, whosoever finally they be. Men that
are Princes, think themselves to be blessed, when they leap on upon their
horses and Mules, and they drive the^ hither and thither, but if they do that
not taking care of God, and of his mercy, in Jesus christ, then verelie they are
more miserable, then their horses and mules. It may be indeed, that they may
oppress and overthrow all for a short time, according to their pleasure. But,
except in time they be awakened out of so deadly sopor, it will come to pass,
that God will cast a bridle into their mouth, and while they say Peace, and all
things are at rest, a sudden destruction shall come upon them, ^. These. 5.
3.
as the pains upon a traveling woman. It was not said in vain by Christ,
Watch and pray, Math. 26. 40.
For there is no surer token of a most greevous judgment to come, then carnal
security: Observe also: DAVID having felt in experience the misery of
senseless men, and the happiness of the godly; he weighs them both
earnestlye in his own mind, and of them both he speaks passing gravely. For
those who once felt in experience, and tasted both of misery and felicity,
these surely are they who ar both able to speak most weightlie of the misery
and happiness of men; and also who best may ponder in their mind, the misery of
man, and his felicity. I say, they are ablest to speak, from the soul and
feeling of the heart, of hell, of heaven, of the pains of hell, and of the joy
of heaven. For it is not to be thought, that every man indifferently can
speak of those things as it becomes, or that every man without difference,
can be capable of them, when he hears any godly man, and experienced in
them, to talk thereof. Wherefore I propose to every secure man, and to him
that is oppressed with that deadly sopour, but this one sentence to be weighed
all his life long, to wit, this which is to be had in this place: Great
sorrows are for the wicked man, But he which has his confidence in the Lord,
mercy shall compass him] For this cause I observe these things the more
carefully, that we endevoure our selves to those things, that we feel our
souls as it were burdened and oppressed first with the weight and burden of
misery, then with the weight of that excellently excellent weight of happiness
and glory, to speak so with the Apostle. For so it shall come to pass, that we
shall be able most gravely, yea, and with some weight, to preach of that misery
and happiness of man, and once to touch, if it be possible, this benumbed world
with some sense of those things, which verily if it be not in time commoved in
some sort with the weight of those things, it will surely come to pas, that it
salbe oppressed in hell, with that intolerable burden of the wrath of ^od*

11 Be glad ye righteous and rejoice in Iehoua, and sing all ye that be
upright in mind.


The conclusion of the psalm
BE glad) Hitherto has bin expounded the second part of the psalm, to wit,
the application; here follows now the last part, the conclusion, in which he
exhorts them, whom immediately before he had declared to be blessed and
acceptable to Iehova to gladness, and to some certain signs of joy, such as ar
songs. Be glad (says he) ye righteous, and rejoice in Iehova] Be glad (says
he) not in your selves, but in Iehova, from whence alone, is all that
blessedness of yours in Jesus Christ: For so speaks the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.
50
Ye are of him in Christ Jesus, whereby he signifies, that all that
excellency and blessedness of ours, is from GOD in Christ Jesus, that is,
through that our most strait conjunction with Christ, which is made unto us
wisdom, justification, sanctification, and redemptions Then he subjoyneth the
end thereafter in the 31. verse, why we are of God in Christ, that (says he)
as it is written, He that gloryeth, let him glory in the Lord, to wit, fra
time he be in Christ. In which place appears the wounderful wisdom of God,
whereby he provideth and is careful for his own glory, which otherwise men,
ambitious by nature and blasphemous, ascribe to themselves. He has not chosen
indeed many wise men, not many mighty, not many noble; but he has chosen the
foolish, weak, and ignoble things, which he will indew in Christ, with the gifts
of his grace, for that end especially, that flesh should not glory in the
self, but should acknowledge what so ever thing it has, is received of the
Lord, and therefore should rejoice in him through Christ Jesus: But who are
those whom he exhorts unto gladness? Be glad (says he) ye righteous and
rejoice, ye that are upright in heart] By these names of justice and
vprightnes, from whence is that blessedness* (For it was said before, yea, even
of holiness and sincerity of the heart is blessedness) by these names, I
say, he shows them to be holy, and those whom in the verse immediately
before he said was compassed with Gods mercy. In which place, first note, that
none rejoice at any time, the solid and true joy, but the blessed, and those
(as he calls them) who are righteous and upright in heart. For I would not
call this gladness of the world, which is of unrighteous and miserable men,
Esaias, 48. 22. and. ^7. 21.
by the name of joye. For there is no peace to the wicked (says the Lord)
Mark again, that the joy once conceived in mind, cannot contain the self,
but it will burst out, either in singing or in some glorying. And therefore
DAVID bids the righteous man sing: and this glorying is not only then, when
things are prosperous and in happy case, yea, but even then when they are
troublesome. For they that are spredde over with that true joy, and enjoy that
peace which over comes all understanding, Phil. 4. 7.
as PAVLE says, They glory in afflictiones, Romans 5. ^.
under the hope of the glory of God To whom be all glory for ever, Amen.

THE ARGUMENT OF the XXXIX. Psalm.
It is a Psalm, calling the Prophet to remembrance of his advise, that he
had once taken before this time, concerning his own government. Out of the
inscription, it seems to be David's. And it appears out of the thr^ede of
the text and purpose thereof, to be written at that time when he was cast in
extreme great straites, by the conspiracy of Abschelom. The argument and
sum of the Psalm is this. David acknowledges first, that, he went a stray
from his purposed silence and patience, and correcting himself thereafter, he
prays unto God. First then in this Psalm, there is a Narration unto the 8.
verse, then there is a prayer unto the end of the Psalm.

Psalm. XXXIX.
1 A Psalm of DAVID, committed to be song, to the Master of Music, of
Ieduthun.

2 I had said, I will take heed to my ways, least I sin with my tongue, I
will keep a bridle in my mouth, so long as the wicked man shall be in my sight.

3 I had been dumme, speaking nothing, yea, I had kept silence from good,
when my sorrow be-gouthe to wax fresh again.

4 And my mind growing hoate within me, the fire burning up in my
meditation, I spoke with my tongue, saying.

5 Cause me, o Iehova, to prove in experience mine end: for what is the
measure of my days? I will assaie how durable I am.

6 Behold, thou haste appointed my days as hand breadths, and my time is as
nothing before thee: surely all men is every way vanity, although he be
never so well established. Selah.

7 Doubtless man passes away by a shadow, surely in vain they make a noise:
some man gathers together, but he knows not who shall receive those things.


I Had said] Of the narration, Three parts of the narration.
there are three parts: For first he sets down the advice that he had
taken to drive over his life in suffering, in the 2. verse. Then he subjoyneth,
that as he had taken purpose, so he begouth to live at the beginning, in the
3. verse. Thirdly he adds, that he fell away from his begun advise, from
the latter part of the third verse to the 8. Then to return; First de
declares, The first part.
that he took purpose to drive over his life patiently. And in this meaning, he
speaks first ingeneral. I will take heed to my waies] That is, to my whole
life: Then in special. Least I sin with my tongue] whereby he signifies, he
will take diligent heed, least he go astray in tongue or spech; for in ruling
of the tongue and speech, a good part of our life is seen: Now to the end he
may the better govern his tongue (he says:) He will keep in his mouth a
bridle] To wit, to bridle his tongue; the borrowed speech being taken from
vn-rulie Horses. Then he notes the time of his silence, and dantoning of his
tongue. So long (says he) as the wicked man shall be in my sight] That is,
how often soever it shall please God to exercise me, The second part.
Through wicked men's doing. I had been dome, speaking nothing] The second part
of the narration, whereby he opens up the begun execution by himself of his
counsel taken. I had been dome] (says he) Then follows the amplification,
from the thing that is more: As if he should say; yea, I remembered not so
much indeed before them of mine honest and just defense, but I leftall, and I
patiently suffered. Of this, see the example in DAVID'S history of Simei. 2.
Sa^. 1^. 5.
He met DAVID slying from Abschalom, and not only he invaded him by words, but
by stones. But DAVID, with a wounderfull patience, sustained the man's opprobrie
and wrong. When my sorrow] In the third room, The third part.
DAVID declares and shows, that he had gone astray from his purpose; And the
sum of the going astraie, is set down in the words that follow in the
fourth verse. I spak with my) That is, I murmured against God. Also the three
causes of going astray go before. The first is in this place, as if he should
say, When there was none end of afflictiones, my sorrow as a wound waxed
green: The second is in the beginning of the next verse. My mind growing
hoate within mee] The third is the second part of the verse following, as if
he should say, With often meditation and thought, mine affection was kindled
up, and was as it were, altogether so vehemently in flamed. DAVID
manyfesteth this extreme great perturbation of mind, When TZIBA approaching,
he accused his master MAPHIBOSHETH, as one aspyring to the kingdom falselie.
2. Samuel. 16. 1. Mark, of all these things, First, DAVID took purpose to
be patiente, and he begouth to put in practice his purposed advise, but he
went back from execution. It proceeds of the grace, that we take purpose
to do the thing that is good: It comes from the grace of GOD, that we
begin to follow out, the good thing that we have decreed: But scarce have
we begun, but if we be left of GOD (such is the weakness of our nature) we
presently fall away. Where fore we have need of the continual grace of GOD
all our lifelong and in all the actiones of our life, otherwise, it is not
possible that we can persever to the end. Secondly, that is to be marked,
that DAVID entered not in rashly into thie this way of silence and patience,
but he did this advisedly, that is, having first taken counsel there anent. Whosoever therefore will patiently drive over this life, and live well every way,
he ought to oblish himself as it were to do this thing, by a sure
determination of his mind, and haueing had deliberation thereof before. For
this thing serves especially against those sudden motions of the mind: For
you may see, many carried violently hither and thither in an instant with their
own affectiones. The cause is, that they never yet decreed with themselves, to
drive over their life patiently: From whence it came to pass, that if they be
moved, yea, with the least trifling thing, presently their tongue is lowsed to
reproaches, and their hand is enarmed to commit sum heinous wicked fact. Men
commonly think that it is not the part of a courageous mind, to suffer
wrong, neither yet think they, that they are men of Spirit, unless they be
transformed into beasts. Surely I judge, that none of those men were stronger
in Spirit then DAVID, or greater in heart, which notwithstanding decreed with
his own mind to suffer all kind of injuries. This is the very beastly
fearcenes of our country men, and not any courage of mind. Thirdly, it is to be
observed, that David's affection at last boyled-vp, and that he himself spoke
at length: For such is the force of our affectiones, that violently they draw
the regenerate hither and thither. Of which it is that you yet perceive, some
remane^ts of sin still to remain in every one of the best men: and that this
perfect regeneration of the Papists, is but a dream. Surely I believe, that
these men never yet sufficiently went down into themselves, and have never seen
that vile corruption, that lies far ben in the heart. I know (says the
Apostle) being now regenerate, that in me, (...). 7. 18.
that is in my flesh, no good dwells He indeed felt that bitterness of sin
cleaving fast to the ribs, and that law, which he calls, The law of the
members, rebelling against the law of the Spirit: which indeed those men have
never yet felt nor would not feel. Fourthly, it is to be noted, that DAVID
gave not place incontine^t unto his affection: for you see here that he bursted
forth into these voices, by certain degrees. For afflictions coming upon us
daily, first of all, sorrow like a wound waxes green, then the heart grows
hoate: thirdly, the fire kindles up, and then indeed the tongue is lowsed.
Learn therefore, that the affectiones of the renewed man burst not forth,
without some wrestling, whereby indeed the regenerat man differs from the
unrenewed, which easily, yea with any light motion, is brought on to commit
any thing, and from hence proceeds also another difference betuixt the
renewed man, and the unregenerate. The regenerate man indeed suffers
greatly, and for a long time, wrongs and afflictiones: JOB took in patience
the los of his goods, he suffers also patiently, the tinsell of his children,
but when it came to boyles in his own body, he suffered not those with so
patient a mind. Notwithstanding, that man's wounderfull patience, is recommended
to the whole posterity, But he which is not renewed, suffers nothing with a
willing mind, if he be not able to revenge wrongs when he would,
notwithstanding he reteineth with in himself an intention of vengeance.
Fifthly, it is to be marked, DAVID kindled up first, then he spoke: Iame. 3. ^.
James in his Epistle, He calls the tongue a fire: also the same chap. 3. 6.
Apostle calls it a fire inflamed of Hell. Behold in this place that hell
which is no other thing then the fire of malice, burning up in the heart as it
were, and blown up and fed by Satan. Se therefore, unless there be first a
flamme in the heart, there is no flamme in the tongue: That thing which defyleth
the man (says the Lord) comes out from within the man: Then as often as thou
hear those blasphemies, reproaches, and rotten filthy speeches, impute not
those so much to the wickedness of the tongue, as to the uncleanness of the
heart: For of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh] We detest the men's
tongues, but if we were able once to see those foul and filthy hearts of
men, which God alone beholds, how greatly I pray you, would we altogether
abhor them? For there is nothing more detestable to the godly man, then is
the soul and heart of a man, not regenerate by the holy Spirit: Hitherto
has been declared, the first part of the Psalm, Cause me, o Iehova to prove
in] He makes mention of the prayer which he used in the falling back. whereof
again there are two parts: First, he earnestly craveth death: then he
desires a deliverance from sin, two parts of the petition.
and from the punishment of sin. To the end this doctrine may be the easier;
these two things are to be distinguished in the first petition: First, the
petition it self, in the first part of the fifth verse: The first part.
The second, the reason of the petition in the next part of the same verse.
The third is, an amplification, in the last part of the same verse, and in
the beginning of the next verse: The fourth is an^ certain acclamation, in the
second part of the sixth verse, and the whole 7. verse through out. Now as
concerning the petition. Cause me to prove in experience (says he) mine
end:] He might have comprehended this in one word; make me to die, but he used
a circumlocution, because of his passionat affection, to show the loathsomnes
he had of life; as if he should say: I have long sinsine sought the end of
life, make me to feel it in experience at last: Then the reason is adjoined,
from the shortness of this life. What is the measure of my days (says he?] As
if he should say, it is nothing. Then continuing in the purpose, and willing as
it were to define more exactlie the time of his life: First, he makes a
preface, that he will diligently endeavor, that he may see and know how durable
he is: There after he prescribes the time of his life, then clearelie he
shows, as it were to God the author thereof, the measure of his life. Behold
(says he) thou haste appointed my days as handebreadths] that is, no longer
then is the measure of an hand-breadth. Then he proceeds, in the extenuating
of his days. My time (says he) is nothing before thee] This much concerning
the enlarging of the Argument. Last follows, the publishing of a grave and
weighty sentence or acclamation. Surly al men (says he) is every way
vanity, although he be never so well established] That is, firm and fixed in
this life: like as DAVID appeared to be in a noble and pussant kingdom, the
enemies upon all sides, being overcome, when this conspiracy arose: Now he
repeateth this part of the acclamation: For in the same meaning he says:
Doubtless man passes away by a shaddow] That is, by a certain vanishing
fashion, 1. Cor. (...) 31.
as PAVLL speaks, by a fashion or figure, by which words it signifies: not
any substantial thing, but a certain vanishing fashion of a thing. The same
is the judgment of the Prophet, of every wicked man, Psalm. 7^. 60.
although he appear to be never so well established, The same also is the
Apostles judgment, concerning this whole present whorlde. The fashion of this
world (says he) goes away. 1. Cor. (...) 31.
And this much indeed has been spoken of both the parts of the acclamation.
Surely in vain they make a noyse] He shows the self same vanity to be of
men's careful indevours, which is of the men themselves: as if he should say:
They labor, run and sweat in vain, which thing he himself had before
found in experience, who after he had purchased with so great travel, the
kingdom, and so great riches, he saw Abschalom his son to rage, and he
believes that Mephibosheth would interprise some thing against the kingdom,
and therefore he was uncertain, whether he should have his son to be his
successor, or any other whosoever. Mark first: DAVID, his tongue being now
lowsed, he inveighed not presently against Abschalom, nor against Mephibosheth,
nor against any man whosoever: But turning unto God, he murmureth against him.
For we are al of that disposition, and that is the nature of our affectiones,
that as soon as they are lowsed, then they begin first to be carried head long
against God: which thing, these Tragedies, written by the Gentiles,
sufficiently declare, where ye perceive so many blasphemies of miserable men;
so many passionat out cryings and exclamations, not so much against man as
those gods, whom they feigned to themselves. There surely it is a certain vive
representation of the corrupt nature of all men; in the mean time, they suffer
all sorts of extreamities: For we all by nature, impute the afflictions which
befall us, and our miseries to God, and not to our selves, or to our sins.
Notwithstanding, this murmuring of DAVID, neither that impatience of JOB, is
altogether desperate, such as uses to be of profane men, and whom God leaves
altogether by his Spirit. Mark next, The argument of the petition, from the
shortness of the life, he gathers that we must die. It is profitable indeed,
continually to think of the shortness of this life, and not to harden our
heart against afflictiones, whereby we are exercised in this life, according
to the will of God. So JACOB complayneth before PHARAOH, through the sense of
the nuserie of this life, Genesis 47* 9.
That his days were short and evil: But we must not always gather of this,
that we must die, neither yet through impatience, is death to be thirsted
after: which thing DAVID did at some times, through the weakness of the flesh.
But PAVLE shows a far diverse use of oppression. Affliction brings not out
impatience, Romans 5. 4. ^.
but patience, patience experience, experience hope. Thou see therefore, that
impatience and desperation follow not upon the the sense of afflictiones, but
patience and hope. Of the which again, you gather, after what manner the
corrupt nature of man, abuses good arguments, for evil conclusiones and
petitiones. Also, there is some measure of impatience here: to wit, the holy
Spirit of God drawing back the man again For surely, even a very Cato being set
in that estate which DAVID then was in, had gone further on, and not only
would he have earnestly desired death at Gods hand, but he himself had put
hand in himself: yet God leaves not his own altogether. Thirdly note, that
the corrupt nature of man, abuses the best sentences what soever, such as is
this, That al men is every way vanitie] For we cannot sufficiently weigh our
own mind, how vain we are by nature, whereof we have an example, yea, in David
a renewed man; We abuse this sentence to a very bad conclusion, to impatience,
to desperatio^, and to murmuring against God. The same David, or whosoever he
was that writ the 73. Psalm gathers a far better conclusion of such a like
sentence, of the vanity of ungodly men: Psalm. ^2. (...)
This to wit, I shall be always with thee (says he) Fourthly, David being
afflicted, he feels in experience his own vanity and misery, according to
his own misery and confession: As if he should again, he measures the
common misery of men. Of which thing learn, what is the use of afflictiones,
from afflictions proceeds not only the knowledge of our own selves, but
commonly of the misery of all men, which is so necessary always, that
without it, there is no feeling of deliverance and happiness. For except
misery be known, there is no desire of happiness and felicity: And if there
shall be no desire at any time, in the life of this deliverance, surely no
deliverance shall ever be. For the gate is not opened, but to those that
knock, neither yet is any thing given, but to those that seek. ^his estate
of men is most dangerous who are continually dronken, with the prosperous
success of all things, neither yet have they experience at any time, of those
imperfectiones, and miseries, which follow our nature.

8 But now, o Lord, what wait I for? mine hope is in thee.

9 Deliver me from all my back-slyding, lay me not out for a reproach to the
foolish.

10 I am dumme, I open not my mouth because thou have done it.

11 Remove thy plague from me, I fail at the stroke of thine hand.

12 If thou with rebukes for iniquity would chastise any man, thou would
dissolve the thing that is to be desired in him, as a moth, surely all men is
vanity. Selah.

13 Hear my prayer, O Iehova, and my cry, turn thine ear unto my tears,
play not the part of a deaf man: because I am a stranger before thee, a
soiourner as all mine auncesters.

14 Cease off from me, that I may refersh my self, when I go not, as yet
away, so that I be present no more.


But now] The second part of the Psalm, in which he draws courage to
himself, and corrects that wandering a straye, which was in himself some time
before, as if he should say. Hither to I have have spoken these things of my
going astray. But now o Lord, what wait ^ for? that is, what is mine hope?
Then he answers himself: Mine hope is in thee] Having laid down his hope,
he conceives new prayers far diverse from those, which he made mention of
that, he used before. He is very zealous in prayers, for he repeateth one thing
thrice. Now there ar three arguments of the petition, thrice repeated over: Then
is subjoyned the conclusion. The arguments of the petition.
He craveth first in these words. Deliver me from all my defectiones, lay me
not out for a reproach to the foolish] That is, to those that abuse reason to
foolishnes and infamy; which thing al men do: while they be called back by the
holy Spirit of God. I wax dumme] The argument of the first petition, from
his own repentance say; I acknowledge that thou art the righteous author of
this my chastisement, and I quiet my self in thy judgementes. Remove thy
plague from mee] He repeareth this petition, The repetition and expo^ng of the
petition
especially the latter part thereof. For that reproach whereof he spoke, he
interprets and calls it a plague. At the stroke] The other argument of the
repeated petion, from his own wickedness. If thou with rebukes] The amplifying
of the argument, from the common estate of all men, of whom, none have that
strength, whereby he is able to bear out, if he compare himself, with the
weightinesse of Gods judgment: But contrariwise, he is extreme weak. Now
concerning this argument, look many things, in the book of JOB. For
iniquity would chastise] That is, if thou would chastise any man
according to his deserving, thou would dissolve him into Ashes, as a moth,
which is destroyed with the touching only. Then considdering this common
estate and weakness of men, whereby they are not able indeed to suffer so
much as the least of Gods judgments, he cries out as before, in the sixth
verse, Surely all men is vanitie] Here my prayer] Thirdly, he rehearses the
same petition, with a great vehemency of mind, And first he recommendeth
unto God, the prayers themselves: Then the crying out in pouring out of the
prayers. Thirdly, the tears co^joyned with the crying: For such circumstances
are not adjoined unto prayers in vain, as crying and tears. Yea, they are
cared for by God, who puts up into his bottle, every tear of his own, and
hes them all in his register as it were, as DAVID speaks in another place.
Because I am a stranger] The third reason of the petition repeated in the
third place, from the shortness of this life: as if he should say: Because I
am not able to continue long in this present life, and be a stranger from the
Lord; such is the common estate of all mortal men, therefore there is an
occasion offered unto thee, to excuse thy mercy toward me, a miserable
Pilgrim. So do the faithful speak in other places. Cease off from me] This
is the conclusion, as if he should say: Therefore leave off from afflicting
me longer and more grieuouslie, that I may refreshe my self before I die, not
being to return again unto this life. So does JOB dispute, 10. 21. etc. and
as a humble suppliant is turned to God. When I go not away] These words
declare the shortness of this present life, as if he should say, so long as
the short light continues, or, so long as I enjoy this short light. And this
is the selfsame argument in effect with that, which was in the end of the
verse preceding. Out of those things which we have spoken, mark first in DAVID
a certain memorable change and prayers, greatly disagreeing among themselves.
Before indeed he had prayed with a troubled mind, but now he prays with a
more quiet and settled heart. For sometimes the flesh has more the rule in the
prayers of the faithful, then the Spirit oft-times. And some times again, the
rule of the Spirit, is more then of the flesh. Thou have also in this change,
an instruction of the final victory of the holy Spirit. For although in this
present life, the victory appears to be often upon the fleshes side;
nevertheles by that same thing, that after the motion of the flesh, the holy
Spirit raises up in us that operation, which suppeth up, as it were the motion
of the Spirit; we are put in mind that once the victory, shall be perfect and
full upon the Spirits sides. More over considder, how diverse* yea, how
contrary to the self, the effect of afflictions is in DAVID. For seeing
before, when affliction drove him forward to mourning, now the feeling of the
same, provokes him to the acknowledging of sin, and to the deprecation of the
punishment thereof. For what is all our nature, if at any time we be oppressed
with adversity, then we are wearied of this present life, and we cry for
death. But we are admonished rather, to seek the forgiveness of sins, and
reconciliation with GOD, through Jesus Christ, then death, seeing that indeed
the affliction is not to be ended with death; but it shall be increased many
ways, if through Jesus Christ there be not reconciliation. Finally observe,
how diverselie he does conclude from the same argument, taken from the
shortness of this life. For before, because the life is short, he earnestly
sought for death. Now, because the life is short, he prays that the plague
may be remooved. He uses the argument of the Spirit aright, which the flesh
abuses; and he draws out holy petitiones and conclusiones out of the same
principles, out of the which, the flesh draws out venime. The regenerate men
foeleth in themselves this contrary manner of reasoning and concluding out of
the same principles. Yea, and they are happy in that respect, that thereafter
they have concluded out of good principles, evil things; out of the same
again they have gathered good things, the Spirit, to wit, overcomming the
flesh: when the ungodly and unrenewed, continually, if at any time it happen
them to see good grounds, draw out of them false and ungodly conclusions: For
it is said, That the ungodly knowing God, notwithstanding they glorified him
not as GOD, but they became vain in their thoughts. Romans 1. 21
To GOD, in Christ Jesus be all glory, Amen.

THE ARGUMENT Of the XLII. PSALM.
A Psalm it is of doctrine, as it is evident out of the ^nscription. And it
contains David's complaynt, that he was banished from the visible presence of
GOD, which was in Jerusalem. Of the Psalm, there are four parts. 1 The first
a complaynt unto the 6. verse. The second, is a comfort in the 6. verse, to
the latter part of the 7. verse. The third, is a certain glorying against all
the inconvenients of his banishment, and finally, against all afflictions, unto
the last verse. In the fourth and last part of the Psalm, he returns to
the comforting of his casten down soul.

Psalm XLII.
1 A Psalm of doctrine, committed to the master of the Music, among the
posterity of KORACH, to be song.

2 AS the heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so my soul brayeth unto thee,
^ God.

3 My soul is thirsty for God* for the strong living God, saying, When shall
I come near, that I may appear in the sight of God.

4 My tears are meat unto me day and night, while it is said unto me daily;
where is thy God?

5 Remembering these things, I power out my soul upon my self: that I was
woonte to pass by in the multitude, that I walked with them unto the house of
God, with the voice of singing and praise, The congregation, in the mean time,
keeping a feast.


The first part of the psalm.
As the hart] In this first part of the Psalm, and his complaint, DAVID
utters out two most grievous passiones: The first indeed, a vehement desire
of the visible presence of God, which at that time was in Jerusalem. The other,
an exceeding great sorrow of heart, conjoined with an earnest desire. The
desire is first set down by way of comparison, the similitude being made with
an heart braying. The heart (says he) brayeth no more for the channels of
waters, then I bray unto thee, o God) The heart is then said to fly at al times
unto the waters, The nature of the heart.
when painefully he draws breath, which is chiefly, when the harvest quarter
begins, at what time, in respect of the burning heat, he is most impatient
of thirst: So are we all by nature thirsty and dry, and when there is a
feeling of that thirste and drough, then with no less desire are we carried
forward unto Christ, in whom only we have our refreshment, then the heart
brayeth, that is, crying out, he runs unto the waters, whereby he quenches
his thirst, Then is set down a simple propounding of that desire: My soul is
thirsty for God] (says he) By nature al men as we have said, are dry and
withered, burnt up, to wit, with that fire of sin, and of the wrath of GOD.
But few feel their drough, where by it comes to pass, yea, that few are
moved with the thirst of grace, for no man is thoroughly touched with the
thirste of the grace of God, except God first by his Spirit has provoked him,
especially by the preaching of the law. But now, when once it is provoked,
except newgrace follow on, whereby the thirsty are continually led forward, to
that pure fountain of the water of life, Jesus Christ, presently they will seek
unto themselves foul puddles; and for clean and living water, they will drink
in filthy and stinking waters: for the only merit of Jesus Christ and his
blood, they will drink up the merits of men: and such poisons, which the
Papists this day, offer to miserable men. Wherefore Christ in JOHN, at what
time he remained upon the earth with the Jews, with a loud voice and cry,
he called all that were thirsty unto himself. And this whole Preaching of the
Gospel this day, it belongs to no other end, then that, as with the finger,
that only fountain of life Jesus Christ, be pointed clearlye out. Now after
that men are brought unto Christ, they drink, yea, they drink for evermore,
they drink in that grace which is in him, and they all receive of his fullness:
for that fountain of life, is never drawn dry, neither yet does ever the
blood of Christ dry up: But not without some difference, drink we in this
life, and in the life to come: For in this life (that I spoke so) we taist but
a little, but in the other life, we shall drink that water of life
abundantly. We shall drink then for evermore, and we shall drink without
loathsomeness, and prease of vomiting: For like as that water, can never at any
time be drawn dry, such is the plenty and abundance thereof; so it is of
that dulcenesse and sweetness, that it allureth and provokes the drinkers to
drink continually. There is no pleasure in this life, which by continual use
thereof, breeds not a loathsomenesse of the self. We loath at sometimes, I
grant, those exercises of godliness; as the preaching and hearing of the word,
prayers, and such other of like sort. But this is not to be imputed to this
water, but to our corruption: For there lurketh as yet in every one of our
hearts, some gall of bitterness, whereby our mind is so infected, and the taste
in the mouth is so corrupt, that those things which are by nature most sweet,
at sometime they seem to be bitter: Which thing is manifest, yea, out of
that, that in that other life, when we shall have laid down, this corruption
of nature, there shall be no loathing at all. Beside this difference, whereof
we have spoken, there is another, whereby we drink in this life, and shall drink
in that other to come. In that other life we shall drink immediately, that is,
no midde instrument coming between, either of the preached word, or of the
sacraments administered, we shall see God even as he is. But in this life, surely
we have need of means, as it were of spowts, whereby may be convoyed out of
Christ unto us, that water of grace. And this is it which the Apostle speaks:
1. Cor. (...) 12.
Now we see through a glass darkly, but then shall we see face to face. And
of this it comes to pass, that as long as we live here; like as there is a
desire of the water of life it self, so there is a desire of the means
whereby we draw that water: I say, there is a desire of this outward
ministry: And this was that longing of DAVID, which he opens up in this
Psalm: But thou will spear; Had not DAVID God present with him, in whatsoever
place it happened him to be, without that external ministry, had he him not
with him, I say? I answer, that he had in every place God, in some measure
present: but he felt not so abounding an fruition of his presence, when he was
far away from the Temple of ^od, which he was wont to feel in the visible
Church of God, and in that Temple which at that time had especially a promise
of Gods presence: The self same thing also, all the Godly feel in
themselves, that they feel not so plentiful an enjoying of God, whether by
the word Preached, or by the Sacraments administered, which they are accustomed
to feel otherwise with those means. For those ordinary means are not
appointed by GOD in vain. For the strong God] These are the grounds and
causes of such a great desire. DAVID had felt of that visible presence of GOD,
his mighty power through Christ, he had felt also by experience in him,
through the same Christ, everlasting life. From this arose, that desire of
enjoying of him. From God present and in some sure manner, visible in his
Church: of feeling, I say, that accustomed power, goodness: finally, the life
of God in Christ Jesus. For he that has once tasted those things which are
in God, and (that I should speak so with PETER) Hes tasted, 1. Pet. (...)
how gracious the Lord is, he desires him continually to be present with
him, and earnestly, he craves that sincere milk of the word, which thing
also PETER himself has left manifest by his own example, who long before that
answered to the Lord, that he would not depart from his side. Lord to whom
shall we go (says he) Thou have the words of eternal life. Saying when]
Here DAVID'S soul declares his own thirste. And it is brought in the self
speaking, by taking on the person of one that speaks, and talks unto God,
for while we complain and lamente, not only the mouth of the body is to be
brought out, but the soul is to be brought out into Gods presence. The
meaning is, as if he should say, will this never come to pass, that I shall
come to GOD, and appear in his sight? Those who ar destitut of Gods wou^ted
presence, and of that life which proceeds from his presence, and then feel
nothing but the terrors of death, they appear to themselves indeed, that
they shall never swim out of that death. This is the feeling, I say, that
nature furnishes. And those, which otherwise are godly, when they seem to
themselves to be destitute of God, at some times they are governed by the
instinct of nature. Look the Psalm. 13. verse. 2. Will thou forget me
forever? My tears are] Hitherto has been the passion of his desire, now he
publishes the vehement passion of his grief. For twice he brings it out,
once in this verse, again in that that follows. In this verse then, (he
says) My tears are] That thing which we chiefelie take pleasure in, John. 6.
^5.
the scriptures calls meat, from whence it comes to pass, that Christ
says, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me] this is the thing
which chiefly I delight in: So the tears are said to be meat in this place,
because he who is in the estate of heaviness, delights in tears, and
drinks them in greedelie, as any most sweet liquor. For there is some
natural pleasure in every affection, when the affection is left to the self.
Yea, in the passion of sorrow, there is a delight, although there be not in it
a solid joye. But if the Spirit of God stir up those sighs, and those tears,
now there is another joy, yea, and that solid indeed, conjoined with the
tears themselves, and together with inutterable sighs, of which the Apostle
PAVLI speaks. Romans 8. It is that gladness which PETER calls in his first
Epistle, unspeakable and glorious, and together with those tears the water of
grace and life is drunken-in. Neither yet in this life, to speak the thing
which I think, is there any solid joye of the Christian man, unless it be
then* while he rejoices, he powers out tears, sighs, and is heavy. But in
that other life, All tears shall be ^iped ^waie from the eyes, (...). 4.
as JOHN speaks While it is saide] He adjoyneth the cause of his sorrow,
that bitter mocking of the enemies, which daily in steed of a reproach they
cast up in his teeth. Where is thy God?] There was indeed sufficient matter
of displeasure in that, that he was destitute of that visible presense of God
in his Church, but for this cause sorrow was heaped upon sorrow, in respect,
it was objected by his enemies, by way of mockage, that he himself was left of
GOD. This is no new thing with the persecutors of the Church, thrown down
and humbled, yea, this way to vp-brayde any particular member thereof. Look
Psalm. 137. In which it is said of the Church: When we sat weeping at the
rivers of Rabell. But what did the Babylonians then in that mourning: They
required of us, say they, in skorne, joyful songs: such as we had sunge in
Jerusalem. This same thing also shall we feel in experience, if ever it come
to pass, through the righteous judgment of God, that we be spoiled of this
presence of God in his Gospel; the meditation of which evil, now appears to
be somewhat light: But after that it comes to pass, through the righteous
judgment of God, then in very deed, we shall find in experience, how
grievous it is: I speak of those especially, who sometime delights in the
presence of God in his word. Remembering these things] Again he sets down
his grief, and he conjoyneth therewith a new argument of sorrow. I power out
my soul upon my selfe] As if he should say, Not only I power out tears,
but I power out the very soul, which with displeasure melts within me. The
inward lousing of the soul, and of the affection thereof, is the cause that
the body and the eyes, are resolved into tears: And many times, yea, our
eyes are not indeed sufficiently of power to furnish tears to our heaviness,
after that till all the tears are powered out, and the body as it were dried
up. Then the passion of sorrow uses to be vehement, when it is left to the
own liberty. He adjoyneth the cause of so great a sorrow. Remembering these
things] (says he) to wit, which follow. That I was wont (says he) to
pass by in the multitude] As the remembrance of the former misery, after a
deliverance, is conjoined with gladness (for that man never rejoiced solidely
at any time, which was not first before displeased in earnest) so the
remembrance of the bypaste felicity, after that any happy man is made
miserable, is conjoined with a great dolor of mind. Thus, seeing it is
customable in any other thing what soever, it has chiefelie place in matters
Spiritual and heavenly. For to him it seems to be intolerable, who at some
times had GOD present with him in Christ; if he be at any time left destitute
of his presence, epecially, if any external affliction for the present lie
over his head: but if in the mean time, with the remembrance of the former
presence, together with the dolor, there be a desire of that presence, surely
there is some gladness conjoined with that sorrow: Blessed are they who hunger
and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be filled, and Gods ancient
mercy shall come upon them, whereof they remember an argument of the
assurance of Gods presence to be restored in time to come. Moreover, it is to
be marked in this place, that fra once the presence of GOD is withdrawn, all
sorrow and adverse things meet us in the way, as are the skornings of the
enemies, and the remembrance of felicity past.

6 Why castest thou down thy self, o my soul? and make a noise within me?
Hope in God, for I will yet praise him, and the salvation of his face, that is
of all sorts.

7 My God, my soul casts down the self in me.


The other part of the Psalm.
WHy castest thou down] In this second part of the Psalm, he waltereth as it
were suddenly, out of the midst of sorrow, and draws courage to
himself: And first by a turned speech he speaks to his own soul: Then next
to God, the fountain of al comfort. Also, he calls back as it were again,
his soul out of the helles: For it was very greatly cast down, as the words
themselves show. For this is the custom of the godly, that after for a time
they have given liberty unto displeasure, and have said to their soul as it
were: Receive not comfort, but drink in sorrow as water (for in dolor and
heaviness for a time, is the rejoicing of the godly) After they have
sufficiently and abundantly given place to sorrow, and are now altogether
cast down, and astonished, presently they rise up, and encourage themselves,
by the grace of God, and some certain motion of the holy Spirit, which leaves
them not utterly for ever. Moreover, they do it after this ordour: First, they
rebuke and correct their own soul and affection, which thing, David does
here, no otherways then a mother does her child, which has not yet the use
of reason, at which time, it is wholly powered out into tears: Then after
rebuke, they comfort their soul, and exhorts it to hope in God, altogether
after the same fashion, whereby mothers, after they have sharply rebuked their
children comfort them. It is to be marked, that David lifts up his soul unto
hope: For to hope in God, it is the only remedy against desperation. For hope
is contrary to desperation, and whosoever they be, that are of a cast-downe
mind, if in the mean time they be not lifted up by hope, they will fall
into desperation, and will perish at length. From whence proceeded that
desperate sorrow of the Gentiles, which was without faith, without hope, without
Christ: And the same day also, how many soever they be, that are in the estate
of death, without Christ, of necessity they must dye in desperation. For I
will yet] He makes some place to hope in his soul from thence, that he shall
not be disappoynted of the thing hoped for, but even as he has hoped, so shall
it fall out unto him. I will praise him (says he) and the salvation of his
face, that is of all sortes] That is, his face, in which is the s^cietie of
joys, or that manifold salvation, which is in his face and presence; and so to
praise, is to publish. David therefore promises, that he will praise both God
himself, and also, that so great a benefit of his life received from him: or
finally, to praise the salvation of his face, is to praise and publish the
salvation which shall be before him, from whence, in the last verse (he
says) that he will praise the salvation of his face, that is, the salvation
which shall be seen before him. My God] As he had first turned himself unto
his soul, now he turns himself unto his God, and he lifts up his eyes,
and sigheth, (as it were) unto him, opening up unto him the sorrow of his
soul, and he powers out his carfulness and solicitude upon his bosom.
Whosoever is endued with Gods holy Spirit; This man sigheth unto God in his
affliction and sorrow: But he who is endued with man's spirit only, that man
will never sigh unto God: for he supposes God to be angry with him, especially
then, when there lies any affliction upon him: For he thinks that that his
whole misery proceeds from the wrath of God. But he who has the Spirit of
God, that spirit (I say) of adoption, by whom we cry, Abba, Father: This man
comes without fear unto God, because indeed that Spirit is alwaie with some
feeling of Gods mercy and fatherly love. Wherefore, as a son, who has his
Father well-willing unto him, in his sorrow, he takes his way straight to his
father: Even so the child of GOD, he passes in his sorrow and misery to God
his father, and makes his complaint unto him.

7 Therefore I remember of thee, out of the Land of Jorden, and of the
Chermonites, out of the little hill.

8 Howsoever a deep calls upon a deep, at the sound of those that are sent
out by thee, let all the breaking-in surges, and thy valleys pass by me.

9 In the day time, Iehova will send away his loving kindness, and in the night
his song unto me: I will continue in my prayer unto the strong God of my life.

10 Saying unto the strong God of my rock, why forgettest thou me? Wherefore
go I in mourning apparel, because of the oppression of the enemies?

11 They assail my bones with a short sword, my enemies reproching me, while
they say unto me daily, where is thy God?


THerefore] He glories thereafter very suddenly, first against the places of
his banishment whatsoever, then against every one of his most grievous
afflictions. This particle, [Therefore] appears not to give a reason of any
sentence going before in the text. Then he begouth this sentence (as it
seems to me) from some cutted off and sudden feeling of joye, and of the
presence of God: as if he had said, because of that joy, and that rejoicing of
the soul, which I conceive of my God, I remember of thee, etc. Of which thou
learnest this, how soon a man uses to be changed, that turns himself unto
God: for the presence of GOD is forcible to give life unto the creature; that
his face shines no sooner, but the creature begins to reviue again,
although it be never so dead. When the Psalm speaks of these gross and
brutish creatures. Psalm. 104. 29. 30. When thou hidest thy face, they are
troubled if thou take away their breath, they return to their dust. Again, if
thou send forth thy Spirit, they are refreshed, finally, thou renewest the
face of the earth. How much more the reasonable creatures, as we call them,
and not only the reasonable, but the spiritual, that is, the creatures that
are renewed by the Spirit of GOD, which have once felt how merciful the Lord
is, those creatures, I say, depend upon their God; for it is necessary, yea
much more, that their life and death depend from his face, present and absent;
Psalm. 4, 7. 8
Lift up (says David) Jehovah the light of thy countenance upon us, and put
more joy in mine heart, then at the time, in which their corns and wines were
increased. Of these therefore chiefly do I speak, which are already
accustomed with the countenance of God, and that use to take some pleasure of
his face. For to speak of others, they are not able earnestly to seek that
countenance of GOD in Christ Jesus. For there is no desire of that thing we
know not. Also, these have not yet tasted, how sweet that sight of God is in
Jesus Christ. I remember of thee] as if he should say, In every place where it
happens me to be banished, from all the bordours and coasts of Israel. From
the East, where is the river of Jorden: from the North, where it is bounded by
the mountain of Chermon and Libanus, and from the South, where the hilly
country bou^deth Iudaea. He calls these hilly countries, by the name of a
little Hill, because they being compared with the Mountain of Libanus, and
with Chermon, which are situate upon the North, they are reckoned out only
among little Hills. Of this place thou perceivest, that there is no place
either of banishment or of imprisonment, so unpleasant and ougly of the self,
which is able to separat the children of God, from the countenance of their
God? yea, they glory in that presence of GOD: which they possess against any
place whatsoever: For this, in which we drive over our life, what ever it be,
it is nothing indeed, But Gods presence is all things. The word Of
remembrance] which he uses, is to be marked. For surely that remembrance, was
rather of Gods presence, then the presence of God it self, which was then
without the City o^ Jerusalem, in which at that time, was that visible
presence of God. The matter is so then, when we are banished from this outward
ministry of God in his Church; yea, in which we chiefelie have our God
present: Then surely we that are the faithful, are not said indeed so much to
have our GOD present; as to remember upon his presence, which was some-time
with us. Also, this remembrance I grant is joyful, sweet and acceptable,
notwithstanding, it lacks not some certain displeasure and heavines of the
own, yea, and in it, there is a certain matter of sorrow, as we saw before in
the fifth verse. Remembering these things (says he) I power out my soul upon
my selfe] I will say somewhat more: This presence of GOD also, which is in
the ministry of his word, it has the own dolor conjoined therewith,
because it is under hope. Hope I grant, is with joy and glorying, from whence
the Apostle remembers of the glorying of hope. And in another place. We glory
under the hope of the glory of God. Heb. 3. 6.
Notwithstanding that hope is conjoined with sorrow and sighs, We sigh (says
he) waiting for our adoption, that is the redemption of our body. Rom, 5, 2,
Howsoever a deepe] As before he had gloried against every one of the places of
his banishmente whatsoever, Romans 8. 13
so he glories now against afflictions, although they be most grievous.
[Howsoeuer a deep calls upon a, etc.] That is, how grievous soever the
afflictions be, as they were waters breaking in violently upon me:
notwithstanding [Iehoua will send away his loving kindness in the day time,
etc.] You see there is no affliction although it be never so grievous, which
is able to separate the the faithful from the presence of their God, or from a
feling of his mercy: yea contrariwise, they glory in the most heavy
calamities whatsoever. Romans 8. 35
Who shall separate us (says Paul) from the love of God, shall oppression
shall anguish? It is next to be noted, that he says those floodes and waves
violently breaking in: also those things that are sent out to be Gods; as if
all these things were from God. Therefore he acknowledges that all his
afflictiones proceeded, from God as the author: But from whence promises he
that comfort shall come unto him in his afflictiones? says he not in the 9.
verse [Iehoua will send away his loving kindness.] Therefore affliction and
comfort in affliction proceeds both together from God, 1. Cor. 10. 23.
together with the trouble he sends comfort, with the tentation, he sends
deliverie out of tentation. Nevertheless, there is some difference in the
order, for first in deed he afflicts ere he comfort: First is the sense
of trouble, then the feeling of comfort, to what purpose is that? To wit,
because we are so dull of nature, and senseless in this life, that we cannot
esteem of the grace of God in Christ, how great it is, neither yet can we
judge how sweet it is, unless we feel first, how miserable we ourselves
are by nature, and sigh under the burden of sin. Now in misery the feeling
of grace and of that presence of God in Christ is sweet. But after this life
the joy of the Godly shall be solid wanting altogether al feling of sorrow; to
wit, when all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes: for then we shall be
able to comprehend that pure and sincere joy, which we cannot compass in this
life. [I will continue in my prayer] This is the effect of the things
preceding: For in respect that God will send away his loving kindness in the
day, and his song in the night unto DAVID: Therefore he will continue in his
prayers to GOD. For there is no man that is able to conceive prayers, unless God
furnish the matter of them, and indue us with a feeling of his mercy. Lord
(says he) in the 51. Psalm 17. verse [Thou shall open my lips, and my
mouth shall show forth thy praise] He calls God the Fountain of his life]
by which name, he shows manifestly, that he has apprehended that power of
God which is in Christ, which serves unto life. But let us consider the form
of the prayer it self. I say unto the strong, of my rocke] that is of my
refuge, etc. This prayer of DAVID is a lamentation, and a certain complainte.
Observe then what sort of songs God uses to furnish in afflictiones, to wit, a
complaining kind and sorrowful. And surely of necessity it must be thus.
For to what purpose serve joyful songs in miseries? look Psalm. 137. In
which the Church of God abhors those joyful songs, such as she song
sometime in Jerusalem, being now in her banishment. Notwithstanding the
heaviness and lamentation is always tempered with a certain sweetness, and joy
in God, and the louder the sighs are, the deeper uses the rejoicing to be.
But let us consider the words. Why forgettest thou me?] (says he) First he
complains that God forgets him: Then he complains of his misery This
latter indeed is the effect of the former. For when God forgets us, then at
that time we are miserable, we walk as in mourning apparel, and we quarrel
with God. Also in the mean time that DAVID complains that the Lord had
forgotten him, he calls him, The strong GOD of his rocke] Whereby is
signified, that yet he cleaves unto God very grippingly. The faithful so in
love embrace their God, that although he seem some-time to be forgetful of
them, nevertheles they leave not off to stick unto him: Howbeit (says JOB)
thou would slay me, should I not hope in thee? Which thing surely is an
evident, that God in very deed forgets them not, although for a time he
appear so unto them. For if God once forget us, and should leave us
altogether, Example in Job* Chap. 13. 15.
surely we also should forsake him. For if he first took not hold upon us,
verily, we were not able with our hand, as it were, to take hold of him.
Notwithstanding, it appears so unto us, while we are afflicted, that we are
left of him, and that he takes no further thought of us. Wherefore go I in
mourning] He complayneth of his misery, which he signifies by the adjunct
clothing of his body: Because of the oppression] He shows the cause of his
misery, and of that dooleful habit of clothing: To wit, the oppression of
the enemy. They invade my bones] In these words, he expresses more
particularly this oppression. They assail my bones] Then opening up that
figurative speech: Mine enemies reproching mee] (says he:) The reason
wherefore then next he renders, from their contumelious and blasphemous
words, While they say (says he) unto me daily, Where is thy God?] This
indeed was a blasphemy against God, which was a contumely and a reproach
against David. For blasphemy against God, is the reproach of the neighbor, and
they are no otherways commoved therewith, then if they were stricken through
with a sword: for such is the mutual conjunction of God, and of his own;
such is the compassion, and mutual feeling, that if they see God to be touched
with any ignominy, and his name to be blasphemed, the godly are no otherways
commooved, then if they were wounded with some deadly wound: Even so on the
other side, God is so moved with the persecution of his own, that he
esteems the same, as if it were done to himself, Saul, Saul, Act. 9. 4.
(says he) why persecutest thou me?

12 Why castest thou down thy self my soul? and why make thou a noise
within me? Hope in GOD, for I will yet praise the salvation of al sorts of my
face, and my God.


WHy castest] Last of all, turns to that verse, which we opened up before,
as it were, the overword of the Psalm, concerning which, look before in the 6.
verse; Therefore, as touching it, only we make mention of this: how often soever
the godly for a time give place unto their sorrow; so often many times they
return to themselves, and comfort themselves, correcting their passion, and
exhorting their souls unto hope, which is contrary to desperation, unto which,
their affection other ways caryeth them headlong.

And thus much have we spoken upon the 42. Psalm.
The Argument of the XLIX. Psalm.
Nothing do I reason concerning the maker of this Psalm. The parts of the
Psalm are four: The first, a grave preface, in which he labors to purchase
all men's attention unto the 6. verse. The second, is a proposition of
confidence into God, in the 6. verse. The third, is the argument of the
confidence propounded, from that benefit of the Resurrection, and of eternal
life, unto the 17 verse. The fourth, is a conclusion of exhortation to all the
godly, from thence to the end of the Psalm.

The XLIX. Psalm.
1 A Psalm (committed) to the master of music (to be song) among the
posterity of Korach.

2 Hear this all people, all in dwellers of the World, understand with the
cares.

3 Both borne of the base man, and likewise borne of the Noble man, both the
rich and the needy.

4 My mouth shall speak wisdom of diverse sorts, and the meditation of my
mind manifold prudence.

5 Inclyning mine ear to a parable, I will utter upon the Harp, mine hard
matter.


The first part of the psalm.
Hear this] The first part of the Psalm, the Preface, in which he craveth
the attention: First in general of all people, of all the in-dwellers of the
world. Then in particular, making as it were a certain distribution, he
seeks for attendance. 1. Of ignoblemen. 2. Of Nobles. 3. Of rich. 4. Of
poor: all whom he mooveth to take heed; from the weightines of the matter, he
is to speak of wisdom of all sorts, and manifold prudence: This in the 5.
verse, thereafter in one word, he calls it a Parable, because, to wit, he
sets it down in his own example. He calls it also a hard matter, that is,
a notable figurative sentence: For the Hebrews call the allegory, that is
either clear or obscure, a dark matter. Again, to the end he may the more
move them to attendance, he declares, that he will beearnestly occupied in
entreating of this matter. My mouth, (says he) shall speak, and my mind
shall meditate, my ear shall inclyne the self, and my harp shall be played
upon.] See here, first, he requires attendance upon the part of other men,
in the mean time, he declares that he diligently and earnestly entreates of
the matter. First, then observe when there is any grave matter propounded to be
handled, both he that hears, and he that speaks, should be very earnestly
occupied therein. Note again, the argument of the Psalm is of wisdom, as
we have in the Preface it self. Now that is that Wisdom, the doctrine of
confidence, as it follows there-after. Then being about to speak of
confidence, he exhorts that all men take diligent heed, and give attendance
to the same. The doctrine of Confidence; when-soever it is propounded, it
should not be laid out to the deaf, but it rerequireth the taking heed of
all Noble, ignoble, rich, and poor: Of the great men (I say) and rich, least
they should put their confidence in their nobility and riches: and of the
ignoble and poor, least being destitute of those things, they cast away their
courage, yea, or commend them overmuch in others. For such is the inclination
of our nature. The poor commonly place happiness in riches, Ignoble and base
men, in honors, whereof they themselves are destiture. Thirdly, he
professes, that he will be all ways occupied in handling of this matter. For
what is it chiefly, that stirs up attention in men, that are of contrary
opinions? Even the serious diligence of the teacher. And when is the hearer
chiefly edified? Even then, to wit, when he diligently marketh thee
speaker, And profits also by him, that he speaks nothing but that
whereupon he has meditated before, and inclyneth his ear as it were to his
own voice: For although, he pronunceth not other things with his mouth, the^
those which he has before thought upon in his mind: Notwithstanding, the self
same things being first uttered in the mouth, and then understood by the
ear, and finally, returning unto the mind from whom they proceeded, they
confirm the faith and knowledge of the speaker himself. And thus much have we
spoken, concerning the Preface.

6 Wherefore should I be affrayde in the times of afflictione, that the
iniquity of my foot steps should compass me about?


WHerefore should] Follows, the proposition is, in the 6. v. The sum of the
proposition is, confidence in GOD against all evils, as well of this life, as of
that, that is to come: He propounds not this simply, but having wrastled as
it were a little, with the infirmity of his flesh, he utters it out with an
interrogation: Why should I fear (says he) in the times of evil, that the
iniquity, etc] That is, that through the infirmity of this my life, in which
I walk as it were with my feet, I be circumveened with calamities, and so I be
in an evil case. This speech appears to be of a man, reasoning with another,
and rebuking, and so it comes to pass indeed in the very matter it self. For
David speaks these things out, not without a certain reasoning and
wrestling with the weakness of the flesh: For we get not liberty, through
the flesh, without a certain wrestling, to put our confidence in God. And our
confidence in God is perpetually hindered by the infirmities of the flesh.
Whosoever therefore will put his confidence in God, of necessity, he must
prepare himself for a combat.

7 Of those men that trust in their riches, and glory in the multitude of
their goods.

8 None is able any ways to redeem his brother, to give his ransom to God.

9 (For the redemption of their life is dear, yea. it cease for ever)

10 That he may live yet for ever, that he have not experience of corruption.

11 Although he see wise men die, the foolish and the brutish perish together,
and leave their wealth to others.

12 Their mind is, to call after their own names, through the earth, their
houses for ever, and their habitiones for every generation.

13 Neither shall the man who is in honor continue still, he is like to
beasts that die.

14 Seeing this is the way of those men, they have an expectation, and their
posteriritie approves their speech, Selah.

15 Like sheep, fra once they be placed in order in the grave, death shall
eat them down, while the righteous rule over them in that morning, and shall
consume their beauty, received out of the habitation there of.

16 Verily, God shall redeem my soul from the grave: for he will receive me.
Selah.


The third part of the psalm.
OF those men] Here follows the argument of confidence, from the rising
again of the flesh, and life everlasting. For, (says he) he will redeem my
soul foom the graue] He thinks it not sufficient to lay this argument
nakedly down, but he premitteth the amplifying thereof, from the contrary,
which, to wit, falls out to them, who place their confidence in riches, and
honors. For there is none of them who is able to redeem his soul from
death. This amplification and declaration, to the end we may the more
clearly understand it, shall be deduced into those parts. First, in the
seventh verse, and thereafter unto the eleventh verse, he shows, that he
that puts his confidence in riches, is not able to deliver a soul from
death. Then next he shows, that he which puts his trust in honor, cannot
redeem a soul from death, from the 11. verse, to the 14. verse. Thirdly, while
he considers these things earnestly, he aggregeth the foolishnes of those
men, as also he rebukes the foolishnes of the posterity, in the 14. and 15.
verses: I return to the first part. Of these (says he) who trust in their
wealth. etc.] None there is, who is able to deliver with all his riches, not so
much indeed as his brothers life, let be his own life: (for a man will
redeem his own life with a greater price, then his brothers) So that he may
live for ever, and not find in experience corruption] And in the ninth verse,
the reason is inserte: For (says he) the redemption of their life is deare]
Yea, certainly the price of life can at no time be paid by them to GOD. And
this is the thing which he subjoyneth, Yea, it cease for ever] The sum of
all tends to this: as if he should say, he who places his confidence in
riches, he cannot indeed by his wealth so much as redeem the life of his
brother, let be his own life. Mark: David speaks not after this manner: He
who puts his trust in his wealth, knows not what the inconsta^cy of the
world is, how long he is to enjoy that wealth; but giving that he had
sufficient portion of riches in this whole life, notwithstanding he affirms
that he is not able beyond that moment appointed for death to protract this
life, or to give immortality to any mortal man. DAVID then for this cause
estemeth very little of riches, because they cannot make a man immortal, he
regards immorality so much. It cannot be said, how far the judgment of the
men of this world differs from this sentence of David, These men know
indeed, that neither riches nor honors are able to give immortality:
Notwithstanding, taking no thought of immortality, they place their whole
trust in those things. And some are so profane, that they are not ashamed to
say, If they be in a good estate in this life, they little regard that life to
come. But others, if they dare not be so bold to cast out so profane a speech,
nevertheless they sufficiently show in their life and manners, that they
think the same thing in their hearts. Man in the first creation was made for
immortality, 2. Cor. 3. 5.
yea, and there is in him by nature it self some feeling and desire of
immortality. Then I reckon this among the extreme greateste curses, that any
man shall become so brutish, that all his life long he shall think nothing of
immortality. Notwithstanding you shall see every where many such, not so much
men, as wild beasts, having nothing of man's nature in the^ except the outward
show, yea, who are worse then the very wild beasts. For the wild beasts
retain their own nature, but those degende from their own natural. But,
what will you say, ar riches so great enemies and contrary to that life to
come? Are not rather all those temporal goods, as many earnest pennies of that
life and felicity to come? I answer. I say that riches scattered abroad,
rather then gathered together by hook and crook are more profitable to eternal
life. For where a man's treasure is gathered together, there is his heart. But
the riches scattered abroad, are that true The saurie which shall be
profitable to eternal life. Call thou that a treasure (would any man say)
which is scattered abroad? Yea, 1. Tim. 6. 10. 19.
surely, the Apostle calls dispersed riches, a treasure: For if (says he)
we be ready to give, we shall lay up for our selves a good foundation for the
time to come, that we may take hold of eternal life. You see, therefore that
we lay up that, which notwithstanding we give out and gather that, which
nevertheles we disperse. Although he see] The second part of the amplification,
whereby he shows him, who puts his trust in honor, is notable with glory
and honor to redeem his own life. Then he teaches, what they get of that to
themselves; they are notable to redeem their souls although (says he) they
see the wisemen of this world, none otherwise to perish, then the vn-wise,
foolish and brutish: And that they leave all their riches and magnificence to
others, yea, perhaps to men unknown and strangers: Notwithstanding, their
mind is to seek glory to themselves, yea, and that of works builded up
here, and there gloriously. Which it pleases them to call after their own
names] Then he subioyneth in the thirteenth verse, which befalls those
ambitious men: The man who is in honor, he shall receive no further profit of
his honors, then the rich-men of their riches] Yea surely, all the honors
shall not be able to give him the delay of one night: he becomes at last,
like unto beasts that perish. For even as in his life, he was like unto these
very beasts, to wit, understanding nothing, as it is set down in the last
verse, so also in his death he shall be like unto them. Eccles. 1^. 18. 19.
For it is good reason, that he which lives like a beast, shall also die lik
a beast. Mark here he says, first that he who puts his confidence in
honor, that is, the ambitious man sees and understands: Then next he
says, that nevertheles, his mind is to seek glory. It profits nothing
atall, to see the thing that is good, and to be followed, and the thing that is
evil, and to be eschewed; unless God therewith open the heart to this end,
that the thing which we see and understand, we feel it entirely in our heart.
You will see every where wicked, ambitious, covetuous, yea, and cruel men,
when they have a thousand such most doleful experiences before their eyes,
notwithstanding, they are not commoved with any of those things, neither yet
change they their mind and purpose into better. And what is the cause? Those
men see well-ynough with their mind, and do understand, but they feel
nothing in their heart. Therefore, God is earnestly to be prayed unto, that as
there wants not examples as well good as evil of all sorts; so he would grant
unto us, that we may feel entirely in our heart, and that there may be with
the knowledge of the mind a conscience, and a feeling of the heart. Seeing
this is] The third part of the amplification, in the which indeed, while he
considers more diligently this issue (for none of them, neither the rich man,
nor the ambitious man, is able to redeem his soul) He aggregeth the foolish
assurance and confidence of those men; yea, and not only of those, but of the
posterity. Seeing (says he) this is their way] And seeing none of them is
able to redeem his own soul, neither this man by his honor, nor that man by
his wealth: notwithstanding they wax so beastly, that they put their assurance
in those things: and not only do those go mad, but their posterity also
approues them as wise men, and have the^ in admiration, and follow their
example. Thou see therefore the wicked, that not only they hurt other men
while they are alive, but also they are an offense unto them when they are
departed this life. These vayne-glorious and ambitious men, crave this thing
most earnestly, that the deeds achieved by them, be liade up in remembrance.
But considder with me, how much they profit by this thing: what other thing I
pray you do they, then increase their own righteous condemnation? how many mo
in that respect, follow their wicked example, so much the more grievous surely
shall be their judgment. Therefore we must endeavor so to live, that not only
we be not an offense to others while we are alive, but also that we leave not
to our posterity after our death, an example of an evil led-life. This is
specially to be done of them, which are in any account or place, and whose
deeds done, are laid up in memory to the posterity. Like sheepe] The
conclusion of the amplification, whereby he shows the misery of those men:
That are not able to redeem their soul, either by wealth or by honor: But
even like sheep, fra once they be laid down into the grave, death shall
eat them up. And how long? To wit, while the righteous rule over them,
that is, in Christ Jesus, of whose kingdom the righteous shall be participant.
At what time shall they rule? in that morning (says he) in which, to wit, the
godly shall rise again, as it were out of the night, and darkness of the grave,
when the Sun of righteousness, that is, Christ Jesus shall arise in that his
second coming. And Hell consume their beautie] Again, What he is.
he prescribes that time, in which death shall eat them up, to wit, while
their beauty, that is, this earthly and visible substance received, a new
united body wholly with their own soul, Hell consume them. The Scriptur
understands by the name of Hell generally, whatsoever estate of the dead, and
therefore this word, according to the circumstance of the place, it is whiles
to be applied to the Grave, whiles to the, Hell putting a part for the Hell, or
contrariwise, some time to both together. Bot we in this place, take this word
so, as we judge it best to agree, with the purpose and ordour of the
judgeme^ts of God; and the opposition following, to wit, for that place, in
which the reprobate ar to be tormented with punishments, and with the
righteous judgment of God. Observe a continual progress, as it were, from
misery to misery. Of the which, the last is ever more grievous then the
first, and the last of all is most grievous. For first the reprobate, when
once they have departed this life, they are laid up in the grave, which indeed
is accu^sed unto them: being laid in the grave, death eats them down unto the
latter day; and unto that morning, as he calls it, in which the elect and
righteous shall rule over them. Which dominion surely shall be unto them as it
were a heavy yoke, and some part of that everlasting punishment.
Not-with-standing the most heavy punishment whereby they shall be tormented
evermore, as well in body as in soul, is resting yet. Then let them consider
and beware, (who put their confidence more in the riches, and honors of this
world, more then in the Lord) what end abides that sort of men. And thus have
we spoken of the amplification. Now follows the sixteenth verse. The
argument of his confidence which he set down in the sixth verse. Which is
indeed subioyned unto the preceding amplification by a dissimilitude: As if
he should say: They are not able neither with their riches nor honor to
redeem their soul. But God will redeem my soul from the grave, that is, he
will give unto me the resurrection of the flesh, and eternal life in Christ
Jesus, who is my deliverer from the corruption of the grave, and damnation of
hell. You see here then a clear difference of the^ who put their trust in the
transitory things of this world, and of those, that put their confidence in
the living God. All the things of this world, surely, is not able to
preserve the servants thereof in this life. But GOD is of power to call back
again them that are already dead, and that believe in him, and at his own
time also will call them back again. Then there is a very great choice, what
thing or whom we have for God, this world, to wit, or the things of this
world: Or rather, the God of heaven and earth, the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

17 Be not thou affrayde, when any man becomes rich, when the glory of his
house is increased.

18 (For he shall take nothing up thereof in his death, his glory shall not go
down after him.)

19 Seeing he has blessed his soul in his life, and they will praise thee if
thou do well to thy self.

20 That he may come unto the age of his fathers, yet they shall not enjoy the
light for ever.

21 The man which is in acount, neither is one that understands, he is like
unto beast, which perish.


The fourth and last part, of the Psalm.
BE not thou afraid] The last part of the Psalm, in which he concludes
exhorting all the godly that they be not commoved, either by the example or
speech of such like men by their speech, I say, whereby they either flatter
themselves, or flatter the godly also. He brings in two reasons of the
exhortation, the one indeed from the mutabilitie of riches and honors. When it
commrth to pass that he must go to the grave (says he) those things over
throw their own worshippers.] But he brings out the other reason, from the
instability and last destruction of the men themselves. Although (says he) it
falls out to them to come unto the age of their fathers, nevertheless, they
shall not enjoy that light of eternal life: But they shall abide in the
thickness and black darkness of the second death] Mark; There uses to come
upon the rich and ambitious men of this world an extreme great perril, for
they will have all men to be involved and folden in the self same damnation
with them: But it is to be remembered, that those men in their temptationes,
shall at length have an end with their riches and honors, yea, they shall
remain without end, in the darkness of the second death, except they repent. I
recommend for this cause the more carefully, the remembrance and meditation of
this thing, because I see every where, very many bewitched with these
vanitses, before they judge them to be vain things. For the understanding of
this flesh is so gross, that it cannot but be wise only in gross things.
For the Spirit of man is not able at any time to comprehend those celestial
and spiritual things. Therefore God must be prayed unto, that he would be
present with us, (who are in the midst as it were, of those things with
which the world is bewitched,) by his Spirit, and that he would lift us up
above this world, to behold, not those things which are seen, but those things
which are not seen: For the things which are seen, are all transitorious;
but the things which are not seen, are immortal, and are able to make us
immortal, by Jesus Christ our Lord: To him be al glory and honor, Amen.

THE ARGUMENT, Of the LI. Psalm.
David having renewed battle against the Hummanites, sitting idle at home,
seeing the fair wife of Vriah washing herself, he sends for her, and
having had to do with her, he sends her away again. Hearing thereafter, that
she had conceived by him, he calls her husband out of the host, that the
birth might be thought to be his. Which thing, because it took no effect,
having sent Vriah back again to the camp with letters, he commands Ioab to
put him out to be slain by the enemies: Which being done, he marieth his
Widow. Thereafter, upon this occasion, Nathan is sent by God, who having
proposed a Parable, and sought out narrowly what was the Law, He brings him
to a conscience of his fact, and denunceth parden to him, repenting of the
sin. Look 2. Sam. 11. and 12. Chapters. Thi^ is then the Psalm, in which
David repenting earnestly, craveth the remission of sins. And it is composed
of two sorts of petitiones. First, of a particular kind of petition, in which
he craveth the pardon of his sins, from the third verse to the twenty verse,
Then, of a general, whereby he craveth the weal of the whole Church, in the
twenty and twenty one verses. The first sort of petition is mixed with the
own causes: For he prays first, and he adjoyneth the cause to the prayer,
from a simple and plain confession, Secondly, he prays, and to the prayer he
subjoyneth, the second cause, from the edifying of others At last, thirdly, he
prays, and to the prayer, he subjoyneth the third cause, from Gods own
glory. But let us considder the thread of the Text.

The LI. Psalm.
1 A Psalm of David (committed) to the master of the Music (to be song.)

2 When the Prophet NATHAN came unto him, after that he had had to do with
BATHSCHEBA.

3 Have mercy, upon me, o God, according to thy loving kindness, according to
the largeness of thy compassiones, blot out my defections.

4 Wash me much from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

5 For I acknowledge my defections, and my sin is continually laid open
before mine eyes.

6 Against thee, against thee alone, have I sinned, and the thing which is
thought evil in thy sight have I done, I acknowledge that thou may be
justified in thy speeches, that thou may be pure when thou iudgest.

7 Behold in iniquity was I formed, and my mother nurished me in sin.

8 Behold, in the reins thou delightest in the truth, and in the hid place
have thou made wisdom known unto me.

9 Purge me with Hyssope, that I may be clean, wash me that I may wax whiter
then the snow.

10 Make me to hear joy and gladness, let the bones which thou have bruised
rejoice.

11 Hide thine angry face away from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

12 Create in me a clean mind, o God, and renew a firm Spirit within me.

13 Cast me not away from thy face, and receive not thine holy Spirit from me.

14 Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and vp-holde me with the Spirit
of freedom.

15 I shall teach back-slyders thy ways, that sinners may be converted unto
thee.

16 Deliver me from blood, o God, the God of my salvation, let my tongue sing
thy reghteousnes.

17 Thou will open my lips, o Lord, that my mouth may show forth thy praise.

18 For thou delightest not in sacrifice that I may give, thou will not have a
burnt offering.

19 The sacrifices of God are ane broken spirit, Thou despisest not, o God, a
broken and contri^e soul.


Have mercy] Having heard Nathans rebuke. there is presently set up in David's
soul, the judgment seat of God, as it were, the judge, and the conscience
which before was cast up in a dead sleep, being now awakened, intends the
accusation, before that tribunal. First, it objecteth that most filthy crime
of adultery. Then, a most cruel manslaughter; from hence arise horrors and
terrors in the heart of the miserable man, wherewith being troubled in deed, he
pretends not this or that excuse to his sin, as some use to do, and hides
his sin, but giving place to his conscience, and confessing the crime, he
turns himself an humble suppliant unto God: Have mercy upon me (says he) o
God] Surely there is no other sorrow so grievous, as this sorrow of ane evil
conscience, which thing, while the wicked feel, first, they diligently travel
to beware, least the conscience, once being cast up into a dead sleep, be
awakened again. They very carefully fly all admonitiones, rebukes and
threatenings out of the word of God. Then next, if perhaps, yea against their
will, the conscience be at last wakened up, then indeed they prepare not
themselves presently to remoove the sin, as the matter of the troubled
conscience: But by all means they assay, to mitigate that dolor of the
conscience, and to deceive their own conscience as it were, by playing,
boording, and finally, giving liberty to all sort of pleasure. Indeed it may
be, that for a time they assuage their displeasure, by using these deceitful
remedies, and blunte the edge of their conscience: But that peace is
deceivable, and the wound bound up so, will at the length wax green, and
unless sin be taken away in this present life, which they above all
things desire to be covered, it will come to pass at last, that the con^erence
shaking, off that deadly sopour, shall awaken, so that in time to come, it shall
never enjoy again any kind of rest. There is but only this one way of quieting
and asswaging that dolor of an evil conscience: To wit, if thou confess thy
sin, if thou fly to that throne of grace and mercy of God in Christ Jesus.
Psalm. 32. 1. ^.
And this is it which we learn by David's example in this Psalm: For upon
this shall follow a certain unspeakable peace in the mind, yea, passing all
understanding, which being felt through the remissiof sins: David in another
place publishes him to be blessed, whose sins are forgiven. According to thy
loving kindnesse] This is the cause, why David although a sinner,
notwithstanding dare be so bold to come unto GOD, that is, to his judge, to
wit, the loving favor and mercy of GOD in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 12.
leaning to which, he has liberty and entry, With confidence unto God, as
the Apostle speaks, and craveth grace at him. What time, the conscience
intends against us any crime, at the same time, God as a just judge, passes
up upon his judgment seat, and with majesty sits thereupon, and with such
an awfulnes, that every sinner is easily affrayd to come before his face; for
the ungodly are not able to sustain that angry countenance of GOD, who have
not as yet felt that mercy of GOD in Christ Neither yet are they able from
the heart, to call him Father; yea, they would rather go out of the world,
that they might fly away from that his so fearful presence. Wherefore a
sinner, except he feel together with the sense of sin God also to be
merciful, he dare not be so bold as to compeire before him. But now having
felt his mercy, and that love by the holy Spirit powered forth into our hearts,
he is no ways skarred away, neither by the weightines of sin, nor yet by the
majesty of the judge, but that with confidence he will draw near unto him. For
the feeling of the mercy of GOD in Christ, has so great a force of alluring:
If thou would slay me (says JOB) should I not trust in thee? Blot out my
defectiones] The same petition is repeated from the exceeding great desire of
deliverance. Blot out (says he) my defectiones] That is, forgive me my sins,
whereby it is come to pass, that filthily I have made defection from thee: It
can scarsely be spoken, how grievously David had sinned; First having committed
adultery, then manslaughter; Thirdly, having contracted marriage, with the
woman defiled in adultery: Fourthly, the people of God being laid out to an
open danger, and with all these finally was conjoined obstinacy in sin. For
he had sleeped securely many months, as it were in the sin. DAVID
therefore being guilty of so many sins, surely he durst not have been so
bold, unless he had leaned to the infinite mercy of GOD, to have commed into
his sight: And from hence proceeds that thing which he cried out, Blot out
my defectiones] That is, so many and so great, and that, O God, according to
thy superabundant mercy; Every sin whatsoever is the offending of that infinite
Majesty. Of this it comes to pass, that the burden of sin-after some sort
is infinite: if the sinner himself be not disburdened thereof, in Jesus
Christ. Wherefore there is need, yea, of an infinite mercy, that any sin
whatsoever may be forgiven: how much more is it necessary, that infinite mercy
and superabundant be had, to the end, that many and grievous sins may be
forgiven? For seeing sin abounds, of necessity grace must superabound.
Which thing, experience it self teaches: For any man oppressed with some more
heinous sin, he finds not first rest to his soul, before he conceive in
his mind, the mercy of God, which as soon as he has felt and taken hold
of, there is no sin of never so great momente, Ephe. 3. 8^
of the pardon whereof, he may not now perswad him self: therefore we should
travel al our life according to the saying of the Apostl, We may be able to
comprehend what is the breadth and length, and depth and height: and to know
that love of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 18. 19.
which passes all knowledge: For out of all question, the mercy of GOD in
Jesus Christ is infinite: But we (such is our stupidity) are not able to
comprehend scarce the thousand part thereof. Of which, it comes to pass,
that in our own default, we are spoiled of a sufficient comfort. For there is
no place for comfort in the soul without faith, which, what other thing is it,
then a feeling of the mercy of God in Christ? Wash me much] Thirdly, he
repeateth the same thing, as if he should say, Cease not to wash, before thou
have fully purged me from my sin. For it is an allusion, to the clensings of
the Law. But it is to be marked, that not being content with a light and
common washing, he says, Wash me much] He felt, to wit, that sin had set
the roots thereof deeply in him, and that more toughlie it had cleaved to
him; and therefore he craveth of God that he would multiply the washings,
which, unless it be done, he thinks that it cannot come to pass, that he
can be cleansed from the filthiness of sin. Note then, that sin is not a
superficial thing, but that it occupyes wholly all the deapths of the heart.
But who knows this? Surely not these secure men and Libertines, who either
feel not sin at all, or if they feel it, they feel it lightly; and no
otherways, then in the utter part of the skin. Who then feels it? Verily they
who repent earnestly, and from the heart. Those men very well know within
themselves, how filthy a thing sin is, and how deep parts of the soul it
occupyeth, and from hence it is, that in this life, they think they cannot be
sufficiently purged from their sins, and that those panse upon this, that
there is nothing whereby they may be cle^ged except that alone blood of Christ
to who^ only, the holy Spirit leads the^ when there is an earnest feeling of
sin, and a desire of washing: For that is not the Spirit of Christ, which
carries a way else where the soul of a sinner from Christ: and to other
washings and satisfactions whatsoever, which the Papists dream to themselves.
Of al these things which have been spoken, mark this: David utters the
exceeding great dolor of his heart, in these his petitions; and the cause of
the dolours may be sufficiently known out of the petitions themselves. Also,
the sin is, whereby he himself had grieuonsly offended his God: For he
says, Blot out my defections etc.] From whence is manifestly seen, the
difference betuixt the sorrow of the godly; and of the wicked: These last
indeed, are sorrowful, not so much for the sin, Genesis 4. 1^.
and the offending of God, The examples of Judas and Cain.
as for the punishment of sin, and the torment. So Cain sorrowed. Mine
iniquity, is more (says he) then that I am able to bear. So also Judas, the
betraier of Christ sorrowed. But the godly, although indeed they abhor the
pain; notwithstanding, for this cause they are chiefly displeased, that they
have offended their gracious God: and they detest sin, not so much because of
the punishment, as for the evil it self, which is in sin: and such was David's
sorrow at this time. For I acknowledge my defections] Hitherto he has sought
one thing thrice, now he adjoyneth the cause of the petition from a simple and
plain confession of sin, as if he should say, O God, I confess that I have
made defectio^ from thee al those ways, which thou have manifested to me by
Nathan thy Prophet: I confess, (I say) before thy Prophet: Finally, before thy
whole Church, not only that which is present, but which shall be in times
coming, to the end of the World: That is, by writing of this Psalm, and
declared to the whole posterity and ages to come. Upon this follows the
Petition. Therefore, be merciful unto me, O GOD] Of this appears, that
there is no place for grace and mercy, except a simple and plain confession go
before, proceeding from the earnest repentance of the mind. Which is the same
thing which David testifies, Psalm. 32. 3. and thereafter, that which he also
learned by his own experience: When I held my tongue (says he) and
confessed not my sin, my bones consumed, etc. And then he adds, Psalm. (...).
I will make my sin known unto thee, I will not hide my back-slydings, I will
confess mine iniquity to Iehova. This indeed is the confession: But what
follows upon it: Thou have taken away (says he) the punishment of my
sin, that is, sin, and the punishment. The sum of those things tend to
this, where there is not a confession, there no grace is, where confession is,
there is grace. And my sinne] This is the efficient cause of the repentance and
confession, an evil conscience, without the conscience of sin, as if he
should say; The conscience of my sin urges me day and night, and continually
lays murder, adultery, and other heinous sins, conjoined with these,
before mine eyes. We are prepared therefore, to faith and repentance, by a
conscience accusing us, and striking a terror into our hearts. From thence it
is that we have our recourse unto the grace of Christ, and embraces the same
by faith; from faith again, and the feling of grace, the dolor aryseth, which
is according to God, that is, because God is offended, of that dolor, again
proceeds that change of the mind, which we call the turning of the mind,
or repentance. For as the Apostle witnesses: 2. Co. ^.
The sorrow which is after God, causes repentance unto salvation.] Finally,
from repentance and changing of the mind, a ryseth the confessiof the mouth.
This thing is clearelie seen of the preparation to grace, that no man
attayneth to that grace, which is in christ Jesus, by sluggishnes and sleeping.
But by horrors of the conscience, they pass to that heavenly joy. For
although life in Christ be freely given unto us, notwithstanding, we must suffer
some notable alteration, and we must be cast down, yer we be lifted up, before
life be gotten. Moreover, we learn that thing of this example of David, how
graciously they are handled, who have a conscience somewhat more watchful: for
first they are bridled, that they commit not many heinous sins, which
otherways they would commit: Then the self same conscience if there be any evil
thing done by the^, they are admonished thereof; and thereafter, they are thrust
forward to repentance. But contrariwise, their estate is most miserable, whose
consciencelyeth in a dead sleep: For of necessity, they must rush forward,
nothing hindering them into all kind of sin. And then, after any grievous sin
is committed of necessity they must securely sleep therein, nothing calling
them back to repentance: wherefore the estate of that man is happy, which is
touched with a conscience of his deeds, and although it seem very often
unpleasant unto us, that the conscience either holds us back from the
committing of sin, or that we are called back to a confession of sin committed.
Against thee, against] He aggregeth his sin, from that, first that it is
against God, then that it is against God only. As concerning the first. Against
thee only (says he) I have sinned. Then for the greater surety of the matter,
Against thee against thee, I have sinned] the same word being doubled, David
seeks not any starting-hole, neither denies he that he has offended against
God, which thing we here, the reprobat shall do at the latter day, who being
acused of sin yea, even committed against God himself, Math. 2^. 44.
shall answer: when saw we thee a stranger, naked, or an hungered, thirsty,
cast in prison, etc. But Christ shall then answer them presently in their
own words, and shall take this excuse away from them, saying: Verily,
verily, I say unto you, in so far as ye have not done it to one of those little
ones, ye have not done it to me. David. (I say) goes not about this way to
excuse the matter, by lessening of his sin, as if it were not committed
against God: For he cannot more expressly speak, that that sin was
committed against God himself: Against thee, against thee] (says he) I have
sinned: Then he aggregeth his sin, when he says, That he has sinned
against God alone] If we will speak properly, whatsoever sort of sin,
which is committed against God, and respects him, either immediately, as when
men sin against the first Table of the lawe^ or immediately, as when they
sin against the second Table. For sin is the transgression of the law of
GOD, and the person offended is God properly. For except Gods commandment
interveened not first, either forbidding or commanding any thing, surely there
should be no offense against any creature, except God had said, thou shall not
commit adulttrie, there should be none offense, neither of VRIAH, neither of
any other in committing Adultery, Except God had said, Thou shall not slay:
There should be no offense in slaying, neither against VRIAH, nor against any
other: Wherefore, if we will speak properly, all sin is committed against
God alone. Of this, two things do follow, the privilege of forgiving of sin,
or remission of sin, pertains to GOD alone, for God alone, if we will speak
properly, forgiveth our sins. The other, the revenging of sin, belongs to
God alone. Vengeance is mine (says the Lord) and I will repay: Romans 12* 19.
Wherefore, when any wrong is done to any man, the injury is not so much to be
thought to be done against man, as it is done against GOD, and to him it should
be left freely. God, if we will speak properly, is the person hurt, and
offended, for so much as his commandment is broken, which verily, if it were
not broken, the creature should have no cause to complain of the injury:
wherefore vengeance first is to be committed unto GOD, then next, to that
person to whom he has committed his place upon the earth. Notwithstanding,
men so handle their own cause, so they revenge the wrongs done unto them, as if
sin were committed against them selves alone, and that the wrong, nothing
perteined unto God. Of which, it comes to pass diverse times, that while they
will revenge the wrong done against themselves, God revengeth himself upon them,
and makes the^ to incur the second s^aith, to speak so: and this much
concerning sin, in so far as it belongs to this place For David lesseneth not
so his sin, as if in a part only it touched God, but he aggregeth the same, as
if it were committed against God alone, as if he should say, I have nothing to
do (to speak truly) with Vriah, or with any mortal man, But with thee, O God,
I have to do, although all without difficulty, should forgive me the offense
committed against the^: Notwithstanding, by that thing I could not be
satisfied, my God; Because, against thee, against thee alone have I sinned, and
except thou, according to thy goodness, for give me my sin, I account
nothing, of all the remission, of all the men in the world, or the pardon of
sin purchased of all men. We are warned therefore, by David's example, that
while our conscience accuses us, it accuses us not indeed so much of any man
that is offended, as of that infinite majesty of God, which is offended.
David's conscience accuses him, not so much of any fact committed against
Vriah, as against God himself, and from hence aryseth, that earnest feeling of
sin. From hence also arise those horrors of hell, while men see that they
have to do, not so much with men, as with GOD himself. For of all enemies,
God is the most terrible enemy, from whose wrath, there is but this only
refuge to us, that we fly unto himself, and with him be reconciled in
Christ: Wherefore we will get this commodity, out of the example of David,
that after we have now sinned, we should not fly else where, but to God
himself. For David's mind is not at rest, before that first he enter in favor
again with his God. And the thing that is thought] As if he should say, A
clear confession of sin.
I thought that I had done it secretly, whatsoever thing I did, when,
notwithstanding, the whole matter was done as it were before thine eyes, and as
it were, thou looking on, whether it be Adultery or manslaughter, or
unrighteous and unlawful marriage, contracted with the adulteress, either
finally, there be a perseverance in all those sins. David therefore now at
last says, that he has done al those evils in Gods own eyes, and openly.
Men indeed think, that whatsoever evil thing they do, they do it unwitting
of GOD, but in the own time they shall see, that God has been as it were, an
eie-witnes of all those things. It were best indeed, that they saw this in
time, while there is some place for grace, least if it be done laiter out of
time, there be no place left for grace. I acknowledge that thou may be
iustified] He subjoyneth the principal end of the confession, the glory of
God: As if he should say, I confess this, O God, not so much for mine own
cause, to the end that thou should have mercy upon me, as for thy glories
sake. That thou may be justified in thy speeches] That is, That thou may be
seen to be faithful. Rmo. 3. 4.
For Paul attributes to the truth of God, and (to speak so) his
faithfulness, this justifying. Therefore be (says he) to the end thou may
semee to be faithful, in this thy threatening denunced by the Prophet Nathan,
and that thou may be seen to be pure, that is, righteous when thou judge,
that is, when thou put thy judgment in execution, which now before thou
had threatened. Thou see then, by David's example, that confession of sins,
especially serves for the glory of God. For sin committed, does no more
redound to the dishonor of God, then the sincere and free confession of sin,
redoundeth to his glory. And contrariwise, they who cannot repent, with their
hardness and obstinacy of mind, they dishonor God more, yea, then having
committed the most grievous sin, they had dishonored him before. For to
harden the heart against grace and calling, against the threatenings of God,
what other thing, I pray you is it, then to accuse GOD of a lie, in the mean
time, that he is calling us unto himself, and denuncing his judgments against
us? surely there can be no sin grievoser nor this, which I would to God this
world would at last acknowledge, which cannot repent, in respect of the
hardness thereof. Behold, I was formed in iniquitie] Hitherto has been the
proposition of the confession; now follows the amplification thereof, or,
which is the same thing, the aggravating of the sin: and he aggravateth the sin
by three arguments: The first is, from Orginall sin: The second, from the
nature of God: The third, from his own knowledge wherewith GOD had endued him.
First then he says. Behold I was formed in iniquitie] thy is the first
argument, from that original corruption, in which he was conceived and nurished
in his mothers belly, while he became a perfect and ripe birth, as if he
should say: What need I to tarry long in demonstrating unto thee this actual
sin, as they call it: Behold the fountain manifest before thee, most corrupt and
filthy, the whole nature, how much soever it be, is made up of sin, for the
poynteth out as it were with the finger unto GOD, the corruption of his nature,
which was in him, even from the very birth. I was formed in iniquitie] that
is, I was conceived in original sin in which, after that I was conceived, in
the belly of my mother, I am alone in the same, ever unto such time, as I
became a perfect birth. He damneth not indeed, the natural action of
conceiving and nurishing of the birth in the womb, as a thing unlawful, either
forbidden by the law of God, seeing the action it self of the own nature is
not sinful. But he signifies, that he had contracted original sin, so
long as those natural actions, and lawful in themselves were accomplished, and
that now even from the belly, he was defiled with that common infection of
nature, not indeed through natures default, such as it was then first created
of God, but through the sin of nature, which degenered into corruption.
Original sin, that I may touch it in few words; it is partly seen in the
guiltiness of that first sin, partly, in the fault or corruption of nature.
It is seen indeed in the guiltiness, because we are guilty of that first sin
of Adam. For in Adam, we have al sinned, because we were all then in his loins:
and the sin of Adam is not so much to be accounted his, as of us all. Also,
in the corruption, original sin is seen, for our whole nature, and all the
faculties of our soul, are corrupted and made wicked, by that defection of
Adam, the mind is blinded, the judgment perverted, the will and the
affections altogether deformed. Now in this place, we understand that
corruption of nature, from whence arise those actual sins, as they are called.
In this place, David, while with himself he weighs his own actual sin;
from thence he is led forward, to the knowledge of the fountain it self, of
original sin, as they call it. For all our particular defections, they should
put us in mind, of this corrupted and defiled nature of ours, that that being
once looked upon, and the filthiness thereof considdered, we may very
diligently travel, that that may be purged, and renewed, according to the image
of God. For we ought not to be content with external actions, although they
be very excellent in outward show, unless in the mean time we are doing
them, we feel our mind continually reformed within, and that from our inward
obedience, al our actions proceed. Then David, from thence takes an occasion
to aggravate his sin before God. But those Libertines by this thing, yea,
they excuse themselves, and diminish their sin, because they are co^ceived in
original sin, and are nurished in their mothers belly: we have sinned (say
they) but we are flesh, what could we do? It is man's nature to fall. In the
mean time, they meditate nothing of repentance. But by David's example, we
learn, that in this respect every actual sin whatsoever, is the more grievous
and filthy, that it proceeds from so filthy and bitter a root. Hitherto
has been the argument from original sin: Here follows next, from the holy,
pure, and sincere nature of God himself. For he shows the same be the own
effect. For God delights in inward truth and sincerity, because he himself
is true and sincere. Behold thou delightest in truth in the reines] As if he
should say, My GOD, thou art holy and pure, and thou delightest in holiness
and pureness of the reins, that is, in the inward cleanness. Nevertheless,
I have defiled my self, and I am become unclean: As it was done in bringing
in of the former argument: so is it done in this likewise. For this partickle
[Behold] craveth attendance, and poynteth out with the finger, as it were, unto
God, that his most clean and sincere nature, to the end that God looking upon,
and considering his own nature, so contrary to David's sin, it may appear most
grievous and filthy: for he will not have any one part of his sin to be hid
before God, thinking this to be the only way to take away sin, if the whole sin,
how much so ever it be, be set down together, and at one time in the sight of
God. For so he is assured, that it shall come to pass, that God, by that
merit and righteousness of Christ, shall cover his sin. For we our selves
ought not to cover our sin, But we should in a sincere confession, set it
down before the eyes of GOD, that GOD thereafter may cover the same. For that
at length sin is truly covered, when it is hid over by Christ from Gods
sight. Moreover observe, that he aggravateth his sin from Gods nature: That
the knowledge of GOD, leads us to the knowledge of our own selves, and to
the knowledge of that infinite majesty, infinite power, and infinite wisdom
of God, shows unto us, how we our selves are nothing: Finally, it teaches us
the knowledge of his most holy will, how far we go astray from the right way.
When we look upon our selves only, we appear to be somewhat to our
selves. But when we lift up our eyes to that majesty, presently we are
filthy and wax vile, yea, in our own eyes. When we are ignorant of his will,
we think that we have willed and done all things passing well: But having
looked upon the law of God, we see how far we have fallen away from truth
and uprightness. Paul appeared to himself, when he was ignorant of the law,
that then he lives in very deed, Romans 7. 9.
But ^y the coming of the commandment (says he) sin reviued: but I am
dead: Again, we see that David here aggravateth his sin, out of the reveiled
will of God by his Prophet. Some there are, who endeavor to lessen their
sin, from that everlasting and necessary decree of God, that is, from Gods
vnreveiled will: Romans 9. 19
Wherefore then say they, is he yet angry? For who has resisted his will?
Notwithstanding, that vnreveiled will of God, excuses no man. For with what
conscience can any man do that, that God shows manifestly by his reveiled
will is not to be done? Also, by this place of David's, we learn to live
according to the will, which God has manifested to us, neither ye^ ought we
curiously to inquire of that vnreveiled will. Finally, the decreete of God is
not to be brought as an excuse to our wicked deeds. Here follows the third
argument, whereby he inlargeth his sin from that knowledge of God, and of
his will, wherewith David was endued. Thou made wisdom known unto me
(says he) in the secret place] That is, thou instructed me familiarly, as
one of thy servantes, in the knowledge of thee, and of thy will. Nevertheless,
I have thus so filthilie made defection from thee, even as I had bin ignorant
of thee, and of thy Laws. It is profitable indeed to know the will of God,
but the knowledge of God, and of his will, aggravateth the sin, and the
damnation, if against that knowledge, thou become disobedient to his will. Yea,
if thou persevere unto the end, in sin, which is conjoined with the
knowledge of God, surely it were better for thee, if thou had never heard nor
known any thing concerning GOD or of his will. For that knowledge of thine,
what shall it be unto thee in that day, but a testimony against thee? And
this knowledge of the Gospel, so full and plentiful, what other thing in
that day shall it do to those men, which in their deeds deny Christ, but
increase their righteous condemnation: For the condemnation of every Hypocrite,
and of him which is but in name only a Christian, shall be most grievous, yea,
and it were no more but for this same name of a Christian, which they so
impudentlie do dissemble, and falselie ascribe to themselves. Purge me with]
Hitherto has been insert the first argument of the petition, from a true and
simple confession; now he returns to that begun petition. And first, as he
did before, earnestly he craveth remission of sins, and then next
regeneraton, which of necessity, is conjoined with the former benefit. Then
as concerning the first benefit, he says, Purge me with Hyssope that I may be
cleane] that is, sprinkle me with the blood of that everlasting sacrifice
Christ, to the end that I may be pure from sin. He alludeth to that
sprinkling of the law, which was performed by a bunch of Hyssope, in the blood
of beasts, and which signified, the sprinkling of the blood of Christ. Leuit.
14, 7
Therefore he seeks clenging by the blood of Christ, Number. 19. 18.
never the less, he does not despise the Sacrament, and type appointed by God:
but he also seeks that same very temporal sacrament it self, the more to
confirm his faith. For seeing that grace of God in Christ, neither can be
seen to the eye, ^neither touched by the hand, GOD willing to help our
weakness, which believe not sufficiently the thing that is spoken, except we
also feel the same, yea, with our bodelie senses, in the seals and
sacraments, even from the beginning he has reached forth, as it were, his
grace in Jesus Christ, to be seen with the eyes, and to be handled with the
hands. Wash me] Again, he craveth remission of sins, wash me (says he)
to wit, with that selfsame blood. That I may wax whiter then the snow] But
he speaks this out by way of comparison, yea, and that indeed making the
comparison, with the thing which in the own nature is most white. Also, the
comparison is made from things that are less, to the end he might declare,
that there is nothing in nature so white, pure and clean, as is man, to whom
sins are once forgiven, and who is once washen by that blood of Christ.
Consider here first, David, while he craveth forgiveness of sins, and peace
of conscience, he seeks it under the symbolls and figures of these washings
of the law, whereby sometimes was shaddowed-out that washing through the blood
of Christ. We see therefore that David soght the forgiveness of his sins, in
the only blood of Jesus Christ. There hes never been, nor never shall be in time
to come, remission of sins, and consequently quietness of the conscience,
except by the blood alone of Jesus Christ, which is certain, that the ancient
Church and fathers, have apprehended in the sacrifices and shadows. It may be
indeed, that the Papists, so long as they feel not the weightines of their
sin, and of the wrath of God for sin (for the conscience of those men, so far
indeed as my judgment can reach, is cast up in a deep sleep by that doctrine,
which daily is taught among them) I say indeed, it may be, that for a time,
being thus afflicted, they vaunt in their merits, indulgences, Purgatory, and
I cannot tell what satisfactiones: By all which, it is certain, somewhat is
pulled away from the grace of Christ. But if it come to pass, that they be
oppressed in earneste, with the burden of sin, and with the sense of the
wrath of GOD, they shall feel surely, and publicly profess, that all those
things are vain, and none other things but dreams and trisles, which now they
so much commend: for then they shall feel in experience, that there is no
remission of sins, or peace of conscience, without that blood and alone
sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Which would to God, at length those miserable men
saw and learned, that both Gods wrath is pacified, and the consciences of
miserable men quieted, by that blood alone, which in themselves are not
disquieted and troubled by any other thing, then by that sense of the wrath of
God. O blessed is that peace and quietness, which is by that blood of Christ
only! Mark again in this place, he promises cleannes and whitenes, whiter then
the very snow. If he but once get that, to be washen with the blood of
christ. And indeed he does this thing, not to the end that he thinks it shall
not come to pass, that sins once being forgiven, in time to come, there
shall be no remnant left of sin and uncleanness in his nature. But to that
end, because he thinks and persuades himself, that all the guiltiness of
sin shall be taken away by the blood of Christ, and by his perfect
satisfaction once imputed, and that he shall be in that estate, as if he had
never sinned in his life. For we have a two-folde purging and washing in
Christ, the one which is by blood, the other, which is by the Spirit of
Christ. That washing which is by the blood of Christ is most perfect and
quieteth our consciences. But this washing which is by the Spirit, it is
begun only in this life, and quieteth not the conscience properly and of the
own self. To speak it in a word, the forgiveness of sins, which is by
Christ's blood, is perfect and absolute in all the parts thereof. But the
regeneration, which is by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, is but begun only in
this life. Make me to heare] He does yet continue in the self same petition:
The meaning is, as if he should say, witness unto me through thy holy Spirit
inwardelie, that my sins are forgiven me. And so it shall come to pass, that
thou shall furnish unto me ane exceeding great matter of joy and gladness.
This is it, which in other words he speaks els-where. Lift up the light of
thy face upon us, Psalm. 4. ^.
Iehoua, and put greater gladness in my mind, then at that time, when their
corns and their wines are increased. For the sixtenth Psalm speaks: There
is sacietie of joys before the face of GOD. Then he adds in the text, let
the bones which thou have bruised reioyse] As if he should say, forgive me my
sins, and then I whom thou hadest humbled before, shall rejoice with an
unspeakable gladness. For the joy of the man cast down and humbled, is
invtterable: after that now he is lift up, with that sense of mercy, and
confidence of remission of sins. But we are to considder the words more
diligently. Make me (says he) to hear joy. But by what Preacher and
Messenger? was it not already before preached by the Prophet Nathan, that
David's sins were forgiven him? It is true: But the outward testimony of all
men is nothing, except that inward also of the holy Spirit be conjoined.
Wherefore David in this place requires that inward testimony of the Spirit.
For the remission of sins, is an action entirely hid in the mind of God. And
as no man knows the things of man, but the Spirit of man: So these things
of God, no man knows but the Spirit of God which (as Paul says) searches
the deapthes of God himself. ^ Cor. 2. 10
Wherefore, except the holy Spirit of God testify in our hearts, that our
sins are forgiven us, surely no testimony, either of the creature, or of
man, is able to assure us of that thing. But after what manner at length, does
the holy Spirit testify, that our sins are forgiven us? The holy Spirit of
God works in our hearts, a wounderfull sense of the love of God, as the
Apostle speaks, powers out love into our hearts, whereby God loves us in
christ. But what a love is this? surely not any common love, but a special and
natural, to speak so, that affection, which they call the natural affection such
as is the natural affection of the Father, toward his only begotten Son. For
the Spirit of God testifies, that fatherly* and most tender affection toward
us: Of the which also it follows, that the same Spirit bears witness,
that we are the Sons of God. For if it witness a certain fatherly love; It
follows, by the force of things equal, that we are the sons of God. From
whence also he is every where called the Spirit of Adoption, to wit, in
respect he witnesses, Romans ^. 1^ 19.
that we are the sons of God through adoption. But if he testify, that we are
the sons of God, he witnesses therewith also, that our sins are forgiven
us, and that that heavenly inheritance pertains unto us. Romans 8. 17
For if we be sons, we are also heirs. The heirs of God; and the heirs
annexed with Christ. And all these things are done in Christ. For without
Christ, there is no feeling of the love of God toward us: yea, without Christ,
there is but a feeling of wrath only. For by nature, we are all the sons of
wrath. Wherefore, if we would have that testimony of the Spirit: First of
all, we must believe in Christ, every one of the godly feels this in
experience in their tentations, at what time the conscience accuses them of
sin, if then Christ be not present, there is no peace or quietness of mind in
them: But if Christ be present, contrariwise, they feel in experience, that
their conference is pacified. The Apostle while he considdereth this so
necessary a presence of Christ, I had not purposed (says he) to know any, 1.
Cor. 2.
thing among you, but Christ, yea, and him crucified. Gal. 3. ^.
And to the Galathians he writes, that Christ was crucified, to wit, by the
viue preaching of the Gospel before their eyes. Moreover, mark here also, he
says, make me to hear joy and gladnesse] There aryseth a great trouble of
the mind, and ane extreme great dolor of sin not forgiven, and thereafter
an evil conscience. For if after the sense of sin there is no entry made
open to grace, but contrariwise, there is a feeling of Gods anger, there
aryseth in the mind intolerable horrors. For of all enemies, the wrath full
God is the most terrible, and it is a fearful thing to fall in the hands of
the living God. These are the speeches of wanton and secure men, they had
rather enter in count with GOD, then with the most vile men otherwise. But if
the angry God shall at sometime enter in reckoning with them, surely they shall
feel, how terrible a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God.
Therefore I say, that intolerable horrors follow of the earnest feeling of
sin not forgiven, and that fear, with which, as Moses threatens, the
wicked being commoued, Levit. 26. 16.
as with the shaking of a leaf, are altogether driven hither and thither. This
was the fear of Cain, who being now cast out from before the face of God, and
feeling him self spoiled of Gods grace, he complayneth, that whosoever shall
first meet him, shall put their hand violently into him. These men are
afraid of every creature of God, and they seem to themselves to be sure in no
place. But contrariwise, there follows ane certain exceeding great joye of
sin forgiven and of a good conscience, and a peace which overco^meth all
understanding. For sin being once forgiven, we feel that there is a way made
open to us unto the grace of God; neither yet can it be said, with how great a
joye the mind boyleth. And this is that rejoicing of David, which who never
have yet felt in their life, surely they feel no more gladness, the^ dogs or
horses. This indeed were to be borne with, that men do only seek the joys
and pleasures of this life present, if there were no more hope to men, then
there is unto bruish beasts, of another life and immortality. But how can
that be suffered, 2. Cor. 5. ^
that men created for eternity (as the Apostle speaks) notwithstanding, in
the mean time in this life, they taste at no time, not so much as with the
utmost part of their lips, the joies of that life to come; but as beasts
content themselves with the commodities and pleasures of this life. Hide thine
angry face away] The third time, he seeks the same thing, that is, the
forgiveness of sins: for he who lightly and for the fashion, craveth that his
sins may be forgiven him; this man has not yet learned how horrible the
offe^ding of God is: neither yet how sweet that feling is of his love and
mercy. For the sense of the mercy of god, causes a godly sorrow, that is, that
sorrow which is for the offending of so gracious a father: from this sorrow
again, aryseth a turning unto God, hatred of sin, and love of righteousness,
with a confession of sin, and an often calling upon God; which tendes to that
end, that the self abolisheth sin. But to return to the purpose again:
Hide thine angry face away from my sins (says he) and blot out al mine
iniquities] That is, have not mine iniquities before thine eyes, but blot them
out of thy books of record: For he speaks of them, as if they were written
in books of record, and were continually in the sight of God, which thing
indeed, seems intolerable to the wicked sinner. For we were not able to
abide the sight of the angry God if we walked naked before Gods eyes, that is,
not cled with Christ and his righteousness. But as concerning the wrath of
God, in few words, this much speak we of it. The wrath of God, by reason of
his inviolable holiness, and also because of the greatness of sin, is so
horrible, that in no case it can be borne of the creature. For seeing sin is
a certain violating as it were, of that most holy majesty, is it any wounder
that the wrath which is a mainteiner and revenger of such a majesty now
violated, is so horrible? From whence ^he same David, calls it a consuming
fire, and in another place he says: If thou shall straightly mark our
iniquities, o Iehova, who shall be able to bear? Suppose with thy self, Psalm.
130. 3.
that all the creatures, all the Empyres of the world conspyre together, to
sustain and bear as it were in their hands, that man with whom God is angry.
Notwithstanding that man, were not able to sustain that wrath. For like as if
God with his own hand, would uphold any, and comfort him inwardly by his
Spirit, this man would not be oppressed with any kind of violence; We are
afflicted on every side (says Paul) yet we are not in distress, in poverty,
but not overcome of poverty. We are persecuted but not forsaken, cast down,
but we perish not. Every where we bear about in our body, the dying of the
Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus, might also be made manifest in our
bodies: So if God would show himself angry against any man: This man by no
force could be sustained, he should be afraid, yea, with the shaking of a
leaf, let be any great commotion. Which wrath indeed, when David felt, he was
not able to bear it any longer, and he prayed that it might be remooved from
him in these words, Hide away, thine angry face from my sinnes] Thou seeste
therefore, by the example of DAVID, that even those whom GOD dearly loves,
because of their sins at some time, are not without some grievous sense of
the wrath of God, which indeed is done for this cause, that they themselves
may come unto the knowledge of Gods nature, And may know first, how good
he is who will not have his own to lie sluggishing in their sins. Then
next, because he is holy and just, in respect he begins his judgment at
his own house, yea, and will not wink indeed at the sins of his own. For
that I may affirm boldly, that the godly for the most part are chastised of
GOD in this life: And that GOD is exceeding long suffering toward the
ungodly. But the Godly on the otherside, are touched with a sense of Gods
love in this life. From thence arise that interchaunge of sorrow and joye in
this life. But the ungodly abusing the long suffering of God in this life, they
shall feel at last the unappeasable wrath of God. Hitherto has bin repeated,
the petition of remission of sins. Now he seeks that other benefit of
Regeneration, which is conjoined of necessity, with the forgiveness of sins.
Creat in me a clear mind] Then, by way of clearing of the matter, be presently
subjoyneth. Renew a firm spirit within me] as if he should say: This work of
New Birth begun in me by thy Spirit, but upon my part interrupted. O God,
renew and repair in me, that thy Spirit in time to come may be firm and
constant, and I through the benefit thereof, may persevere in thine obedience.
There are two benefits necessary in reconciling us to ^od, which self same
things, God promises to us in the free covenant, to wit, forgiveness of
sins and regeneration; Ier. 31. 33.
and both are obtained in Christ; For by the blood of Christ, our sins are
forgiven, and by the powerful holy Spirit of Christ, we are borne of new
again. For the alone and selfsame Christ, as the Priest died for our sins,
and as King, he is powerful to regenerate us by his holy Spirit and word.
David therefore, after he has sought forgiveness of sins in Christ, he
earnestly craveth the New Birth, and renewing of that interrupted work of Gods
holy Spirit in himself. Considder here first, that the holy Spirit is made
so joyful, by Gods works, and a good conscience, that he courageovsly makes
progres in the work of our Regeneration. But contrariwise, Ephesians. ^. 30.
the Spirit of God is so touched with grief, by evil works, as the Apostle
testifies, that he cease as it were from that work, and leaves off in the
midst that begun work of New Birth. The Spirit now leaving his own work
in the midst, presently there aryseth darkness in the mind, which makes
that bright light of the countenance of GOD to pass out of sight, and to
vanish away from our eyes, and incontinent our heart waxes hard, as a
certain skarre of a wound, and becomes benumbed and without sense, so that
the holy Spirit of God is very hardly raised up again, being oppressed with
the darkness of mind, and hardness of heart. And from thence arise those
mournings and sighs of the godly, fighting with the darkness of their heart.
And from thence arose that speech of PAVLE, O miserable man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7. 24
Considder here again, DAVID craveth not Regeneration by the Spirit of
Christ, before he first have sought the forgiveness of sins, through the
blood of Christ. This order of the petitiones, evidentlie declares, that of
necessity we must be first justified by Christ, before we be sanctified in
our selves: which thing also, the righteousness of GOD requires, which
suffers not the Image of GOD to be repaired in us, which is according to
righteousness and holiness, before first God be satisfied for all our
^innes. For it is not possible, that GOD can renounce his own justice. Now
after that thou art justified, then there is place to Regeneration, and the
Petition thereof, not indeed that having attained to it, thou quiet thy self
chiefelie in the same: But thou must specially, and alwaie thereafter, quiet
thy self in that most perfect righteousness of Christ, without the which,
not all this holiness which is in us, dare be so bold to come forth once
into the sight of GOD. For our Regeneration and holiness, is but begun
only in this life, and neither by the self, pacifyeth the wrath of GOD,
neither (...) our consciences. And (...) the Papists are more (...) leaving
this most perfi^e righteousness of Christ, will quiet themselves in their
own, and in that which they call inherente; And again, for this cause they
are more miserable, that understand not what this inherente righteousness is,
which is none other thing in very deed, but that the Regeneration of our
nature, is only but begun in this life: wherefore we ought to pray to GOD,
that he would not suffer us to be involved in this darkness and that he would
not suffer us to be seduced, by men which this day are blinded in so clear a
light. Cast me not away] He continues in this second petition of the holy
Spirit, and of Regeneration. Cast me not away (says he) from thy face] then
expressing the same thing clearly, Take not thine holy Spirit from me (says
he) Nothing can befall a man more grievous in this life, then if he be left of
GOD. For seeing that God is the fountain of all good things, GOD leaving man,
all good things also therewith leave him. All good things leaving him, he is
therewith laid open to all evil things. If God be on our side, Romans ^. 31.
who shall be against us? No, not these things indeed, which seem to be
most displeasant and contrary. For all things work together for the best, to
them that love God. Contrariwise, all work together, for the worse to them
that love not GOD, yea, even those things, which otherwise appear to make for
us. Now, although there be so great an evil in the desertion of God.
Notwithstanding, the elect also are at some time destitute of the Spirit of
GOD, which is the thing that DAVID teached us in this place by his own
example. Verily I say not this for this cause that I think, the Spirit once
given to the elect, thereafter is allutterly taken from them: For the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance. But that for a certain space the
efficacy of the holy Spirit is not seen in governing of the elect yea, and
that especially for this end, that they may be humbled, and that they may
learn, that it is not possible for them to stand, yea, but for one momente,
unless they be sustained, by Gods grace and his holy Spirit. Whereby it comes
to pass that the elect after they have found in experience, how infirm and
fragill they are by nature without the Spirit of God, now being destitute
thereof for a time, they more carefully, and with more fervent desires
earnestly crave his presence and help. This is the second thing which he
offers here to us to be learned by his own example. Also the third, that we
in this place learn by his example, that that desertion is exceeding doleful,
whereby he, who is once left of God, yea, and that by his most just judg^ment,
God, to wit, leaving him, because of his sin, and being now forsaken and
left, he remains in the pains, which by his own sin he has deserved: Yet
notwithstanding, in the mean time, neither is his mind enlightened by Gods
Spirit, nor his heart reformed: But the more he leans thereto, the more is he
blinded and hardened. For to such a man, extreme destruction is appointed,
unless at last he repent. Of this sort of men, that threatening of John
Baptist, is to be understood: The axe is laid to the root of the trees. Math.
3. 10
Also, that saying of PAVLE, When they shall say peace, 1 These. 5, 5
and all things quiet, then sudden destruction shall come upon them.
Moreover, it appears out of this example of DAVID, that GOD leaves not his
own by so sorrowful a desertion: For David repented very soon at the
threatening of Nathan: For God when he afflicts his own, he therewith
illuminateth and changes them also, by his holy Spirit, that repenting they
may obtain remission of sins, and may be restored to life. Restore to me the
ioy] Yet he persisteth in the petition of the holy Spirit, or of the presence
of God by his Spirit: as if he should say, surely I have felt, O my GOD, an
exceeding great joy of thy salvation, that is, since the time thou becammest my
salvation, protector, and defender: But now through mine own default, that
whole joy is broken off in the midst: Therefore, O God, restore to me, that
wonted joy proceeding from thy presence. The only comfort and solid joye of
man, as well in life as in death, is, that he is not in his own power, and
left to himself, but that he is the Lords, and that he has him to be as it
were his protector and defender. David when he felt in experience, Psalm. 2^.
^.
that God was no otherways his keeper, then the shepherd was to his sheep,
it cannot be spoken, how great a joy he conceived thereof, which also bursted
forth in these words: Thy rode and thy sheepcrooke, they have comforted me:
This spiritual rejoicing, which comes of the presence of God, whosoever has
once tasted it, this man will not be content with the whole joy of this world,
unless surely he be therewith participant in some measure of that heavenly
joy also. David verily, had refused the whole comfort of this world, and would
have nothing esteemed, that his kingdom and royal dignity, if that old and
wonted joy had not been restored unto him, which arose from the presence of
God, by his own holy Spirit. But if we would not provoke to wrath God
present with us, neither yet would grieve his holy Spirit, surely we should
have that joy of the Spirit, more solid and constant. For from whence comes
that interruption thereof, because we make defection from God. David had God
present with him, he had the Spirit the comforter: But after he had forsaken
God, by committing adultery and murder together, he spoiled himself, both of
that presence of God, and likewise of that solid comfort of his presence. Men
commonly with all the strength they have, provoke that holy Majesty of God to
anger: But it comes to pass, I cannot tell how, that in the mean time,
they appear to themselves to live at rest, and with sufficient pleasure, and
delight themselves with a vain dream. For as the Lord says, there is no
peace for the wicked, I speak of the true peace, for I would not call this
stupidity a peace, whereby it comes to pass, that neither they feel their
own sin, nor yet the wrath of GOD, which thing they in woeful experience shall
learn some day when suddenly being awakned out of this dead drowsy sleep,
they shall be forced to behold that angry face, and terrible countenance. And
uphold me] The self-same, is the meaning of these words, and of the words
preceding: for so at last we feel God present, his salvation, gladness,
arising thereof, if we be vp-holden by his Spirit. David is afraid, of the
affections of his mind, least he be overwhelmed with them, as by a certain
deluge. He craveth therefore, that GOD would sustain him by his Spirit. For as,
if a great bosse be cast into the water, presently the water running in into
it, it is drowned: but if, first it be blown up with wind, the air being
enclosed, before it be cast into the water, it swimmeth in the superfice of the
water: So our mind, if it remain void of the Spirit of God, it is drowned
incontinent in the midst of the waves of our affections: But if it be
replenished with the Spirit of God, it is not possible that it can be
overcommed of the affectiones. Let every man take heed what mind he has,
whither it be void and tume, or rather full and replenished with the Spirit.
He calls the Spirit, the Spirit of freedom^, or of liberty. To the end we
may understand the reason of the word. it is to be learned out of the 8.
chap. to the Romans, that there is a two fold spirit, or rather, that there is
a twofold effect, of that one and self same spirit of GOD. The Apostle calls
the former, the Spirit of bondage to fear, that is, which at the preaching of
the law, touches us with a sense of our sin and misery: for unless the Spirit
of God were effectual in our hearts, with the preaching of the law, surely by
the preching of the law alone, we should never be touched with an earnest
sense of sin, and of our own misery: this spirit there fore makes us to know
our sin and misery, and holds us under fear of the wrath of God, death, and
condemnation: and therefore, it redacteth us as it were utterly to a servile
estate. For this was of old proper unto servantes, continually to fear
punishment and vengeance at their masters hands. The Apostle calls that
other spirit, the Spirit of adoption: It is he, who while the Gospel is
preached, makes us to know our deliverance from sin and misery. For we
should never be so touched with the preaching of the Gospel, unless in the
mean time, the Spirit of God were powerful in us, which makes us to know
our deliverance from sin and misery, and that we feel in our heart, that
fatherly affection of God toward us, and consequently leaves a testimony
within us, that we are the sons of God. And if we be sons, that we are
also delivered from sin, wrath and damnaton. From thence it is called, the
Spirit of freedom or liberty, because it witnesses that in Christ we are
delivered from sin and death. There is also another cause, why it is called
so, to wit, because, renewing our mind according to the image of GOD, it
makes us in the mean time freely to serve God, and that we walk in the
liberty of the Spirit. For by nature, there is no freewill, But where the
Spirit of God is, there is liberty, 2. Cor. 3. 17.
(says PAVLE.) And this is that blessed Christian liberty, whereby we are so
delivered, that we may serve God, and not that we should live according to our
own will, such as liberty, as these Libertines and Fpicures do feign,
neither yet must we think that we are forced to do our duty by this Spirit,
but that willingly we are led. For God loves those that are willing, as David
speaks in an other place. Nevertheless, in this life, this liberty is but
begun only, which at last shall be perfited in that life to come. But we must
yet a little more diligently, mark the word of freedom, for it signifies,
not any common liberty, but a special and noble freedom, such as is the
liberty of a Noble man, or kings son. Neither yet without cause, this word is
applied to the present purpose: For we are the sons of a king, that is
indeed Noble; the King of kings, and the most hie God. For whosoever is
regenerated by his Spirit; he is his son in Christ, although otherwise (if
we considder these prerogatives among men) he be base borne, notwithstanding
hei* noble, and more noble then any King, who has only the first nature, and
is not regenerated by the holy Spirit. For the regenerate man (to speak this
with Peter) is made participant of the most noble divine nature. 2. Pet. 1.
John esteemed much of this noblenes, when he said, whosoever received the
Word, that they have gotten this dignity, John, 1, 12
to be made the sons of GOD. Behold, he calls dignity that estate, to the
which, the Sons of GOD were lifted up, which if men would somewhat more
diligently take heed to, they would not trouble themselves, with those
things, which the Apostle calls, Carnal, as are kindred, 2, Cor, 5.
^iches, honors* but would seek rather the new Creature in Christ, for old
things are paste away, and all things are made new^. And hitherto the
petition has been two fold. The first, of remission of si^^es: The other, of
Regeneration. Now follows the common argument of the craving of both, from
the edifying of our neighbors. I shall teach back slyders thy waies] (says
he:) As if he should say; if I shall obtain at thy hands, the thing that I
crave, O God, I shall be a Preacher of thy infinite and incomprehensible mercy
to others. Thy waies] (he says) not my ways, such as were man slaughter,
adultery, etc. For those then were DAVID'S ways; which ways indeed, men are
skillful enough commonly to pretend to their evil deeds, who seek none other
thing, then liberty to sin, yea, and that under some certain cloak, when
notwithstanding this example of life, is not set before them by David, that
they should follow it, yea, but much rather the ways of God a^ set before
them, that is, his unspeakable mercies toward sinners: which also appears of
that, that where sin abounded, grace superabounded. The ways of God by
nature ar unknown to man, and specially that way of infinite mercy in his own
Christ, of the which nature, indeed was not able ever at any time to suspect.
But after, beside nature, and against nature, it was reveiled; notwithstanding,
the conscience trembling, through the feeling of sin, and of the wrath of God,
so that a mid cloud as it were, is cast in betuixt the sight thereof, and the
grace of God, that it cannot but see very hardly. For then such an huge heap
of sin aryseth, that it takes away by force, the whole sight of the grace of
GOD, almost from it. In the mean time, infidelity, which proceeds of nature
persuades us to despair, of the mercy of God. Finally, a thousand impediments
ingire themselves, which al makes it to come to pass, that we are blind at
the light of that grace of God, so that we find in experience, how hard a
thing it is, especially to a man who is touched with an earnest feeling of his
sin, to have before his eyes, that mercy of God in Christ: For I speak of
him who is touched with a sense of his sin. For others, who while they sin,
yea, and sin grievously indeed, notwithstanding, they feel not that their
sin, in speech, surely they promise to themselves the mercy of God in Christ,
nevertheles, in very deed they feel it not. For it is easy to any secure man,
and that sleeps in his sin, in a dream to promise all things to himself.
God therefore willing the weill of sinners, in this so great a difficulty of
feeling of grace, he would have left unto us an example of that this mercy,
whereby most grievous sins are pardoned, such as was this example of Gods
mercy in DAVID, the more notable in this respect, the more grievous that his
sins were, as manslaughter, adultery, etc. Also, they were the heavier, in
that selfsame respect, that he was a King, PAVLE the Apostle. 1. Timoth. 1.
Professes indeed himself to be the chiefest of all sinners, to wit, a
Blasphemer, a persecutor, a man that did wrong. Notwithstanding (says he)
God for this cause had mercy upon me, that he might show first on me all
long suffering, unto the example of them, which shall in time to come, believe
in him to everlasting life: This way of bringing men unto grace, which is by
experience, and by his own example, God will have without al dout, every one
whosoever have felt at any time in experience his mercy, to follow and to
communicate to others willingly that taste of grace, which they themselves
before have felt: which thing, David promises to do in this place. I will teach
back-sliders (says he) thy waies] In this place thou shall mark, that the
godly, when God as it were, taking hold of their hand, lift up themselves,
they stretch out their other hand, as it were to lift up others, whereby they
also may be participant of the same grace. When Christ calls upon them, they
also at the same time, call others, that they may come together unto him,
according to that commandment of Christ unto Peter, When thou art converted
strengthen thy brethren. For true faith, not only is careful for the self, but
chiefly, this is the end of the purpose thereof, through a certain zeal of
the glory of God, to promoove the salvation of others, to wit, that other
sinners may be turned unto God and repent. For David respects this end, in
teaching others, that is, the mercy of GOD toward sinners* that they also
might repent, being moved to wit, with that sense of the mercy of God toward
the^. Of the which, that thing appears, that some taste of the mercy of GOD,
preceedeth turning unto God, and that faith is the cause of Repentance. For it
cannot be, that men can be turned unto God, unless they be allured with some
^eeling of his fatherly love. Deliver me from blood] Now the third time he
repeateth that petition, of the forgiveness of sins, for the conscience of
his heinous fact continually pricketh the man, and this infidelity of nature
labors to extinguish faith and the Spirit, whereby the sinner persuades
him self of the remission of his sins, therefore by crying, and by crying
again, he wrastleth with his infidelity of nature. There is none of all, which
is to seek forgiveness of our sins at God, without some wrestling: I speak
of that man, which is to seek by faith, and by a serious feeling. For it is
easy to the secure man, and that thinks nothing of sin and misery, to
crave for the fashion, the remission of his sins, yea, and that not over
again, but only once, O God, (says he, very rawly and coldly) be merciful
unto me. David therefore now the third time, craveth pardon and forgiveness of
his sin; and he poynteth out his sin in particular. For when the conscience
of sin urges men, they are not ashamed to profess and name it in
particular, yea, and that publicly. Also, the cause wherefore men are
ashamed, by name to point out their sins, and to confess them, it aryseth of
this, that there is not an earnest feeling and conscience of sin. But let us
see, which was David's sin in particular. Deliver me, o God (says he) from
bloud] For it appears, that the conscience of manslaughter, moved the man
chiefly. For this tormented him, that he had shamefully slain that man,
whose wife he had defiled in adultery, and that he had heaped sin upon sin:
Therefore he craveth that he might be delivered from blood, no otherwise then
if he had bin wholly defiled with the blood of any innocent man, which so
fastly had cleaved unto him, that, unless it were wiped away with Gods own
hand, it could not be at all possible to be wiped away and cleansed. For
manslaughter, being once committed, and the slaughter or the murder of an
innocent man executed, the whole blood is powered out and runs back as it
were, upon the manslayer, and dies him no otherways, then the purple dye
does the Wool. If your sins (says the Lord) were as skarlet, Esaias. 1. 1^
yet I will make them as white as the snow: As if he should say; Although ye
were dyed as with skarlet dye, that abundant blood being shed out upon you
(for he had said before, that their hands were bloody) not withstanding, I will
make you as white as snow. Also, being this way dyed and spotted with the blood
of the innocent man: The manslayer continually appears in the sight of God.
And God out of his judgment sent, looks upon him with an horrible
countenance, by reason he spoiled his own Image, and likewise the common
nature of al men. The manslayer, in whatsoever part of the world he be in, is
notable to fly from this face of God. But this is the stupiditie of our
murderers, that no way they feel this. David also for a time, sleeped in his
sin, neither yet saw he that he was defiled wholly with the blood of the
innocent man, neither yet did he see that angry face of God, but being at
length awakened up at the threatening of the Prophet, be was no longer able to
suffer himself so to be defiled with that blood, neither yet was he able to
abide, being thus defiled with blood, to be cast before, and laid open to the
sight of that angry eye: but very often he cried, and earnestly sought; that God
would pardon him his sin, that he would wash him, that he would deliver him
from blood: which would to ^od, those murderers, who are not touched, either
with a conscience of their sin, or of the wrath of God, neither yet make any
end of murders and oppressions, they would see at last, their own bloody
hands, they would see also that God saw them, which surely he sees, and shall
at length see some day, when he shall tak a vengeance upon them, except in time
they repent. David appears to cry out, through some feling of the wrath of
GOD, that he might be delivered from blood. For the sense of innocent blood,
and the feeling of wrath, are continually joined together. Notwithstanding, he
cries unto God, the God of his salvation. Of the which, so familiar an
incalling: in this appears sufficiently, that David felt therewith the mercy
of his God. For the faithful together, and at one time, use to be touched,
both with some sense of the wrath, and with a sense of the mercy of God: by
which thing indeed, the faithful differ from the Infidels: For the faithful
feel both, that is, both the wrath and the mercy of their God in some certain
measure, and at the same time in which they are afraid of wrath and of the
angry God, at the same time, they cleave fast unto him; neither yet do they
suffer themselves to be pulled away from his word and promises: Upon the which
they depend, as it were upon a certain rock, in the exceeding great tossing
too and fro of the waves. But the infidels, and such as the Lord has casten
off, at what time they feel his wrath, in the mean time there is no sense of
grace; and while they see the helles opened: Wherewith they are even now
presently to be swallowed up, they have nothing in the mean time, to which
they may cleave, or which, as it were, stretching out the hand, they may take
hold on, neither God, nor yet the promises of God in Christ, from which aryses
unspeakable horrors, with which no comfort is conjoined. Then indeed they are
compelled to esteem those to be blessed, who have learned in this life, to
draw near unto God by faith, and to take a grip of Christ, and of the promises
made in him. Let my tongue sing] Here follows the last argument of the
petition, from the glory of God himself, as if he should say, O Lord, this the
whole work of thy glory, is to redound to thine own glory again: Wherefore
deliver me. The words of the text are, My tongue shall sing thy
righteousnesse] That is, thy mercy, which for this cause, here he calls
righteousness, because it is done according to Gods promise; for that which
God does according to his promise, that thing he does righteous^ie. Open my
lips o Lord] That is, furnish unto me matter of thy praise, from the
remission of sins and deliverance, and then, My mouth shall show forth thy
prayse] Mark what he does, being now delivered from sin and damnation:
DAVID being condemned, could not praise God, Who (says he) shall praise thee
in hell? Also, David knew very well that God was of that nature and
disposition, that he would have al his works to redounde to his glory again,
and the fruits of his benefits to return unto himself; and from thence it
is, that he communicates not his benefits indifferently, and without
discretion, to every sort of men whatsoever: I speak chiefly of spiritual
blessings. For he gives those temporal and bodily things, yea, even to the
reprobat. But he gives Christ and his benefits, to none but to the
faithful; for in these only he attayneth to the end of his benefits, and
those alone who receive them in faith, glorify that God the giver. What,
say thou, that there comes any thing to the increase of the glory of God,
by the praises that cum from us? I answer, God indeed in himself is most
perfect, and all sufficient, and that his glory consists perfect within
himself, without the help of any of the creatures, without the which, The
Father glorifyeth the Son; The Son the Father; The Father and the Son the
holy Spirit; The holy Spirit the Father and the Son. But for this cause,
God craveth his glory from the creature, in respect he is righteous. Now his
righteousness requires, that the creature, acknowledge the own Creator, and
glorify him, the fountain of al good things in his benefits. Also, that good
thing, which is in the praising of GOD, belongs to the creature, whose
happiness consists in this, that by all duties, it serve God the own
Creator and redemer. Yea, and this same thing, every one of the godly find in
experience in themselves. For if at any time they feel not their heart to be
loused into the praises of GOD, then surely there is no comfort, there is no
gladness. But contrariwise, if at any time they feel their heart to be
touched to praise their own Creator, to seek all whatsoever they have need of
at him, to give him praise for benefits received, then surely they appear to
them to be blessed. For thou delightest not] David said that he would publish
the praises of God, that he would sing with his tongue, the righteousness of
God: which service indeed, is only spiritual and inward. Wherefore it might
be asked concerning the sacrifices and external ceremonies, whether if he
should not by them praise God also? He preventeth this demand; and answers
to it in these words. Thou delightest not in sacrifices] as if he should say,
God takes not so much pleasure in the outward worship, as he does in the
inward, which is seen in spirit and truth. He delights not so much in the
sacrifice and killing of beasts, as he does in the internal obedience of the
heart, and inward holiness: whereby it comes to pass, that men present
themselves a sacrifice unto God, holy, living, and acceptable unto God. Romans 12.
Notwithstanding, it may be objected yet, seeing that sacrifices are of his
own ordinance and commandment, seeing that David lived none otherways, but
under the iudiments of the law, Christ not being yet manifested in the flesh:
how is it that either David himself refuses those external exercises of
Religion, or pronounces that GOD takes no pleasure in them? I answer: the
words are not simply to be understood, neither yet absolutely are they
spoken: but by way of comparison of that outward worship, with the inward, in
respect of which, indeed the outward worship is not greatly to be accounted
of: So GOD himself professes that he regards not so much, in the respect of
the sacrifices, if in the mean time, praises be offered and sacrificed unto
him. Psalm. ^0, 4,
Samuel sharply rebukes Saul, because he had thought, that God takes more
pleasure in burnt offerings, then in obedience: takes Iehoua pleasure (says
he) so much in burnt offerings, as when he is obeyed? 1 Samuel, 15, 22.
Behold, to obey, is better then sacrifice, and to take heed, is better then
the fat of Rams. There is also another answer of others, which indeed I
refuse not, to wit, that David here speaks of the abuse of the sacrifices.
The law taught, that sins were purged by sacrifices, that siners distrusting
their own deservings and works, they might put their confidence in Christ's
sacrifice alone, where of all those Leviticall sacrifices were types: And that
their faith in time coming, might be strengthened by that sacrifice of
Christ. This surely was the proper use of those ancient sacrifices. But men
neglecting the sacrifice of Christ, neglecting faith and repentance, neglecting
finally the inward worship, they put their confidence in their sacrifices
offered, and outward ceremonies, ^s in merits: He says therefore that God
takes no pleasure in this abuse of sacrifices, which also God says he
abhorred. Esaias. 1.
Those external exercises of Religion, in hearing of the word, in
administrating, and participating of the sacraments, was indeed prescribed by
God, but if there be not therewith the internal worship of the soul, faith,
repentance, good works, all these external things are nothing, God takes no
pleasure in them, yea, contrariwise, he abhors them. Concerning sacrifices,
I mark this only in this place, that those which specially were called
propitiatory, were so many types and figures of that only one sacrifice of
Christ, upon whom were to be transferred the sins of the world, and the
curse of God. Of the which it appears, how great the excellency of this
sacrifice is, unto which, so many sacrifices offered, since the beginning of
the world, did serve, as so many shadows thereof. There was never at any
time a thing, concerning which, there are so many prophecies, so many
significations among the Jews: Yea not one day hes past by, in which morning
and evening, it was not the self viuely represented, to wit, in this
continual daily sacrifice. And surely, this plainly prooveth, that this
sacrifice was passing excellent, and most necessary, which we should not at
any time suffer to depart out of our eyes, which also* it was of necessity
requisite to be represented to our fathers in certain shadows, from the fall
of Adam, to that time, in which Christ was exhibited; for they considered
another thing in their sacrifices then the blood of beasts, to wit, the blood
of the son of God, which also they placed in the midst, betuixt them and
the angry GOD: But we, to whom it has happened to be borne after Christ, and
his coming, and who have fallen in those times, in that respect we are
happier then that ancient people, because we behold, not now in a shadow, as
they sometime did that sacrifice: but we have Christ crucified before our
eyes, in his Gospel, which thing those ancient fathers, Abraham, Isaac,
Iaakob, and all the Prophets, most earnestly desired; and yet notwithstanding,
they obtained it not. The Fathers and the Prophets (says Christ) desired to
see the things that ye see, but they have not attained to that. And this
blindness of ours is miserable, and cannot be y^uough ^amented, who see not
surely, as it becomes us this son of righteousness which is risen.
Therefore, we are to pray unto God, that as he has set this sacrifice before
our eyes to be seen, so he would open our eyes that we may at length clearly
see the same. Let us consider the worship now which pleases God, and let us
weigh the words of this text. The sacrifices of God (says he) are ane
broken Spirite] He calls them sacrifices in the plural number, because that
only one sacrifice of a contrite soul is insteede of many, yea, and of all
whatsoever have been at anie-time. He calls them, The sacrifices of GOD,
that is, acceptable to GOD. I understand by the broken Spirit, as it were,
bruised into little pieces, and abjecte through the conscience of the own
weakness and unworthiness. Then turning unto GOD, he says, O God, thou
despisest not a broken and contrite soule] It is a speech uttering less, but
meaning more, whereby he signifies, that the broken and the contrite soul is
most acceptable to GOD. But let us considder somewhat more diligently, what
he calls a broken heart. After that any man is awakned up, out of his
sin, and his eyes are opened, that he may see his own filthiness, having
compared it, to wit, with that nature of GOD, which is set down to us to
be righteous and holy in the Law, he has seen also the punishmente of his
filthiness, the wrath and curse of GOD, (for no man at any time can
sufficiently wounder at the blindness of corrupted nature, those who are
blind in body, have notwithstanding some sight, for they see and know that
they are blind: But those that are blinded in soul, they are in this respect
more miserable, that they do not know indeed that they are blind: yea, they
think that they see very clearly, when in the mean time, miserable men, they
are blinder then any Mowle: while at length by God, their eyes be opened unto
them. After then, I say, any has looked upon the filthiness and uncleanness
of his nature, and Gods anger therewith, then in heart he is cast down, and he
who appeared to be some thing to himself before, now he is most abject in his
own eyes, and seems nothing to himself; and this is the one cause of
casting down and contrition. There is also another, to wit, the mercy of God
in Christ, being tasted surely in some certain measure, which as soon as any
man has tasted, he is not so much sorrowful, because of the pain, as because
he has offended GOD, so merciful a father. And this is that sorrow, 2. Cor^.
10.
which the Apostle Paul calls godly sorrow, which causes repentance, that
is, the changing of the mind, the mortifying of the old man, and the quickening
of the new man. This sorrow which aryseth from God offended, has conjoined
therewith an unspeakable joy, proceeding from the sense of Gods love. For it is
not possible, that that sincere feling of that fatherly love, should lack all
sense of gladness. For, which thing may appear wounderfull to any, the more
the feeling of the love of God in Christ be, so much more is the sorrow, yea,
the gladness is so much the more. For no man rejoices in earnest, who has
not been in earnest sorrowful. And this the estate of a repenting sinner; this
is the most sorrowful, yea, and also the most joyful estate of mortal men.
Now then God having looked upon the heart of man thus broken and contrite, he
wonderfully delights therein, and therein quietly satisfies himself. From
whence God himself denies, Psay. 66.
that he dwells in Temples made with hands, yea, he denies also, that he
dwells either in heaven or earth, but he professes that his dwelling place
and house of rest, is a poor and a contrite heart. But if thou say, seeing our
mind is not fully regenerated in this life, no not the heart of any man, who
most seriously repents: how comes it to pass, that God takes so much
pleasure therein, so that also he dwells and quieteth himself therein? I
answer: He who has a contrite heart; this man therewith is endued with faith:
For contrition proceeds of faith, and of the persuasion of the mercy and love
of GOD in Christ. And the heart, although it be not altogether regenerated, by
faith pleases God, to wit, by faith in that alone sacrifice, whereby both the
wrath of God against sin is pacified, and the conscience of the sinner is
quieted: Therefore God takes pleasure in the contrite heart, because the same
is faithful also, and has Christ dwelling therein by faith. To the end
therefore that we may please God, we should never suffer that sacrifice of
Christ to slip out of our eyes.

20 Do well according to thy good will to Tzijon, build the walls of Jerusalem.

21 Then shall thou delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, in the burnt
offering, and that that shall be altogether consumed away, then shall they offer
bullocks upon thine altar.


The other part of the psalm,
DO wel] Hither to has been the first sort of petition for himself; here
follows the other for the whole people and the commonwealth, whereof he was
then thought to have had no respect, when he provoked GOD to wrath by his
sin, (for the sin of the Prince, casts the whole people in danger) when
he laid them out to the sword of the enemy. Now this damage, whereby he
damnified the people, is compared allegorically, with the fall of the walls,
because the faithful are living stones in the house of God. Then he says,
(that we may come to his own words) Do well according to thy good will to
Tzijon] according to thy will (says he) that is, 1. Pet. 2.
according to thy free mercy. For he pretends no innocence of the people,
when he has to do with GOD: although otherwise he abused the innocent people.
Neither yet does he thus pray: Do well to Tzijon, because it is innocent; but
thus, Do well to Tzijon, according to thy good will, that is, according to thy
mercy. Build the walles] That is, O God, repair and a mend that breach which I
have made in thine house, who of thy own power alone art able to do it. It was
an easy thing for me, surely to destroy this people by my sin: But it is
not so easy to repair the ruin again, and to make it of new whole. Of the
which you see, that David when he craveth of GOD that he would do well to his
people, he acknowledges therewith, that in his default the people were
destroyed. The conscience therefore of that evil where by he hurt the people,
urges him now to pray to God for them. If Princes fail in any thing, commonly
it is in their office, to wit, that they govern not the commonwealth aright.
Such was the fault of David, when he laid out the people of God to the sword
of the enemy: and therefore of necessity it is, that their fault redoundeth to
the whole people, And from thence it comes to pass, that the sin of the
Prince is more grievous, then any private man's fault, in respect it spreads
further abroad, and by the danger thereof involveth more. And from thence it
proceeds, that when God deliberateth, either to chastife or oppress any
people, he gives to that nation foolish Princes and counselors, that stir
up always pernicious or not necessary wars. But contrariwise, when he will
prefer any people, he gives to them good Princes and counselors. When God
would have the Jews to be exercised and afflicted with the Philistims, he
gave wicked Princes to the people, Saul, Ioram, Achaz. When again he would
have the Jews to be in a prosperous estate and flourish, he gave them good
Princes; David, Ezechias, Josias. The common sort of men, while they look
upon these things, and mark this interchaunge, they impute all, either to the
cowardice and foolishness, or to the courage and wisdom of the Princes
themselves: Or finally, to Fortune and chance: But they cry miserably, for all
those things proceed from GOD, by reason of the thankfulness, or ingratitude
of the people: Wherefore, while we see these things to be done by princes, let
us lift up our eyes, not so much to the Princes, as to God and our selves.
Again see, David in this place, when by his own sin, he had hurt the whole
people, being touched with the conscience of the matter, he earnestly prayed to
god, for the repairing of his skaith whereby he da^nified the people of god.
Moreover observe, David himself being reconciled to God, presently he
interceedeth for the people: he who him self is first reconciled to God, and
now is quiet in his own conscience, he is bold also to interceed for others
at Gods hands. But he who is not yet reconciled to God, and is therefore yet
guiltlie in conscience, he dare not indeed be so bold as to plead his own
cause before God. How much therefore is it profitable for a people, to have sum
certain good man, and familiar with god that has his conscience well pacified,
and that by faith in Jesus Christ. Surely one such like man, by his prayers, is
able to be profitable to many others before God. God grant that the Lord may
give to every one of us this faith in Christ Jesus, which is the ground of all
these things, with the which we can neither do, or be bold to do any thing.
Last of al, in the last verse, he mooveth God to do well to his people from his
own thankfulness, which he, together with the people, will be bound to
perform to God, to wit, in offering the lawful sacrifices and acceptable to
God, according as it was the custom of those times, when men were under the
rudiments of the world, and discipline of the Law: The words are, Then shall
thou take pleasure in the sacrifices of righteousnesse] That is, lawful
sacrifices shall be offered unto thee, according to the prescript of thy law,
and therefore they shall be sacrifices of righteousness. For it is not permitted
unto us to worship God according to our pleasure; but it is necessary, that we
serve him according to his own ordinance. The meaning therefore is, as if he
should say: The sacrifices appointed by thy self, shall be offered unto thee,
and thou shall take pleasure in them. Thou shall also delight in burnte
offerings, yea, which shall be altogether consumed to ashes: They shall also
offer, according to the custom, Bullockes upon thine altar. God seeks his
own glory, yea, and David also acknowledges the same in deed; nevertheless,
except he himself furnish matter to his glory, that is, unless he provoke men
to glorify himslfe by his benefits, they will not glorify him: For none
there is in hell, that can worship God. Again, al men indeed are not thankful
to the Lord for the benefits bestowed upon the^, but these only, who have
tasted how gracious the Lord is, that is, who have some feeling of his favor
in Christ Jesus. Of the mercy of God, there are many evidents indeed; for look
how many his benefits are, so many documents are there: But sundry of them are
of a common and vulgar mercy only, such as is, to wit, of the Creator, toward
his creature: But Christ alone is a sure evident to us, of singular mercy and
love; such as is the favor of the father toward the Son. For God will not
have that mercy and that love of his, whereby he has loved the World, to
be made manifest by any other thing, then by his Son given for the world.
Wherefore, only those, who are in Christ, and embrace him by faith, those
alone I say, feel how sweet the Lord is, because into their hearts only,
that love of God is powered out. Wherefore also, they alone are these, who can
be thankful unto God for his benefits received. We conclude therefore that,
which has now often been beaten in our ears, that we must chiefly endeavor to
believe in Jesus Christ; without whom, no good thing can we get; without who^,
we do no part of our duty, either to God or men; without whom finally, there
is no salvation. Therefore God is to be prayed unto continually, that as of his
infinite mercy, he has given unto us his only begotten son: so he would open
the eyes of our mind, to the end that we might see himself: Also that he would
open our hearts, that we might entirely feel him, without whom there is no
feeling of gladness in the hearts of sinners: And this is to be prayed for by
us, for and by the same Jesus Christ, the son of God, and our Lord: To whom
with the father and the holy Spirit, be al honor and glory, for ever and
ever: Amen.

The Argument of the LXII. Psalm.
The author of this Psalm is David: And it was written at that time in which
Saul persecuted David by his spies ^ent out. The whole Psalme^, concerning his
confidence in God. For partly he showed his confidence unto the 9. verse:
partly, he recommendeth to all the godly this confidence, from thence unto the
end of the Psalm.

The LXII. Psalm.
1 A Psalm of DAVID, committed to be sung, to the master of Music in
Ieduthun.

2 My soul only is at rest in God, from him is my salvation.

3 He is only my rock, and my salvation, my strong hold, I shall not be moved
out of my place, with a great motion.

4 How long will ye be devising troubles against a man? ye shall be all
slain: how long will ye be like a bulgeing wall, a wall of dry stones thrust
down?

5 They only devise counselles to thruste him down from his dignity: they
take pleasure in a lie: they bless with their mouth, but within themselves
they curse, Selah.

6 O my soul, be at rest in God only, for of him is mine expectation.

7 He is only my rock and my salvation, my strong hold, I shall not be moved
out of my place.

8 In God is my salvation, and my glory, my strong rock, my refuge is in God.


The first, part of the psalm.
MY soul onely] As concerning his confidence; first he gloryeth of his
assurance in God: Then he gloryeth against his enemies: Thirdly, he returns
to that former glorying. As concerning the glorying in his assurance. David
after he had been afflicted and troubled in mind, at length he quieteth
himself in God. Having then felt so great a joy of that rest, he gloryeth
thereof in this speech. My seule only i^ at rest in God] The Hebrew word it
self signifies to be silent, which our interpreter turns to be at rest:
Then David's soul made a noise within him, as he says in another place. Why
art thou cast down my soul, why make thou a noise within me? But it may be
demanded, does now his soul keep silence; when notwithstanding we see, that
he utters out these speeches? I answer, that then any man's soul keeps
silence, when it makes not a noise, and is not troubled, although in the mean
time it glory never so greatly. Then there are three arguments, wherefore his
soul takes rest in God. The first is, because God is the author of his
salvation: Then drawing near to God himself, and not content with this his
benefit alone, except he possess God him self, and sit upon him as it were a
rock or mountain: He is only my rock, (says he) etc.] The third argument,
is the effect of the second. I shall not be moved out of my place (says he)
by any great motion indeed] whereby it shall come to pass, that I shall
altogether fall. Mark first, David surely would have patiently suffered
affliction, Psalm. 39.
(as he speaks of himself in another place) to wit, because he had
decreed to take heed to al his ways, least he should sin with his tongue. But
the affliction bursteth out, and his soul makes a stir, notwithstanding, at
last he quieteth himself in God. Every one of the godly, would indeed humble
them selves with silence under Gods hand, but troubles waxing greater and
greater, the affection cannot contain the self, which after that it is
loused, it rests not, and takes breath to the self first, before it feel
GOD present with it. I will speak this once, there is no solid quietness
indeed to our soul, except to GOD alone. It is not in riches, not in
honors, it is not in the arm of man. Finally, it is not in Idolles and
feigned Gods, of whom DAVID speaks. They multiply (says he) their
sorrows, Psalm. (...).
that give in dowry to a strange God. For with what other thing I pray you,
do Idols fill men's minds, but with fearful superstition? The same DAVID in
the fourth Psalm, manifestly declares, that his soul takes not rest in
riches, Lift up (says he) the light of thy countenance upon us, o Iehoua,
and thou shall put more gladness in our souls, then at that time, when the
corns and vvines are increased. In which place, you see, that he prefers
his security and gladness in God, to that whole gladness of those men, which
take their rest in such like things. My soul therefore does rest in God only]
and therefore, because the wicked cannot rest in GOD, there is no peace to
them. (says the Lord) Observe again, that DAVID means not here any
commoun security of mind. but a singular and notable; whereby it comes to
pass, that one may gather, that such a notable quietness of mind, went before
some certain notable perturbation. For surely, look how much the more the
rest of the mind is, so much the more was the commotion of the mind before.
Mark in the third room, David seeks not out the causes of his security in
himself, but without himself in God, in whom, to wit, his soul does quiet
the self, while he calls him his rock and his rower. Nothing therefore
which is in our selves, can properly be the cause of the tranquillity of our
mind; no, albeit thou should speak indeed of faith it self, or of hope;
if by the name of faith thou understand only the instrument of the
apprehending of christ. For whatsoever things in us, yea, even the regenerate,
they are imperfite, all faith, hope, love, and works flowing from these, as
from their beginning. In God alone therefore is the cause of our peace and
quietness in the strength of God alone, in the love of GOD alone through Christ.
Paul, when he published the security of mind; he says not indeed, who shall
separate us from that love, whereby we love God? But in that place he says,
Who shall separate us from that love of Christ, that is, from the love whereby
God loves us in Christ? let the papists take heed to this, who seek ease to
themselves, and their souls, in their own works, whereby it is, that I
cannot be persuaded to believe, that those men can enjoy love, peace, and
quietness of mind, with a conceit of their own works. Note fourthly, that he
says, he shall not be remooved out of his place with any, at the least, a
great commotion. He denies not altogether a commoving, but he denies that it
shall not be any great or notable commoving. For in this life we must not hope
that we shall be free always from all commotions. For David reasons not so,
because no ways shall I be commoved, therefore my soul rests in God: For
if thou haste not decreed with thy self, to quiet thy self in GOD, unless it
be under that condition, that thou shall nowaies be commoved all thy life long;
truly it will never come to pass, that thou shall rest thy self in him,
either in this life, or in that other life. Let it be sufficient to thee, if
thou be not oppressed with afflictions: For the godly have a promise, not
indeed that they shall be altogether free from all kind of affliction, but
that they shall not be utterly oppressed with troubles. For it is said, 1. Cor
7. 10. 1^.
That God will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able to bear.
Look also concerning the same matter, Paul's example. Cor 4. ^. 9
How long will] Now he turns himself to the enemies, and being set as it
were in a castle, he gloryeth against them all. Two things there are which he
dema^deth; of the which, the latter, opens up and declares, that which is
the former. For the meaning is, as if he should say, as a bulgeing wall and
full of riftes, falls down through the own weight thereof, or is thrown
down by no great travel, so ye shall be consumed, by your own envy and
wickedness. They only deuise] He poynteth out clearly that their devising.
They enter in counsel to thrust me down from my dignity. Concerning this
dignity, look 1. Sam, 18. David being appointed captain of Saul's guard, he so
bare himself, that his government was approuen of all men, yea, and was
preferred by the damsels that sang, to the government of Saull himself. Saull
has slain his thousand, but DAVID has slain his ten thousand. Then he
showed under what pretense they did this thing: They have pretended a lie to
their counsels, (says he) which again he declares by these words, With
their month they bless, but within them salues they curse. As if he he should
say, they profes indeed friendship, but in very truth they are enemies. Mark
first, the things which moved David before, now the same things move him
nothing, while his soul quieteth the self in God, he esteems nothing of
all his enemies. For that joy which arises in the mean time that any rests
himself in God, it devoured up all fear and sorrow altogether, yea, it
makes confidence to arise, whereby we glory against all contrary
afflictions. But contrariwise, when the soul quieteth not the self in God, it
is moved, yea with the most trifling things, it is affrayde with the name of
persecution. For the cause wherefore this first seems to be terrible to many,
is this, because they see not that life and glory which is with Christ hidd up
in God. Observe nixt, let the wicked alone to themselves a little space, and you
shall see them fall down with their own weight, none other ways then a wall
full of riftes, or a wall bowing for-ward, which falls of the own weight,
Nevertheless, few there are that see this thing, and from this it arises, that
the outward happiness of the wicked moves many so much. These only see that
thing, whose soul quieteth the self in God, and these who look a far off
upon those men as it were out of a watch tower. Also, the regenerate
themselves, at sometime they see not this thing, as David, or whosoever he was
that wrote that 73, Psalm, he saw it not, while he had entered into the
sanctuary, and then in deed he perceived their end, he saw that they stood
in very slipperie places, he saw that in an momente they went to
destruction. Observe thirdly. The enemies labored to cast down David who was
exalted from his dignity. He whom God lifts up, the wicked indevoure to
cast that man down out of his place, yea even at that time, when they see God
himself to travel to the direct contrary side. Jonathan did otherways, who
when he saw David appointed for the kingdom, he made a covenant with him: so
it becomes all the godly to do, look the fourth Psalm. Sons of men,
(says he) how long shall my glory be an ignominy unto you, rather know,
that God when I shall pray unto him, will hear me. Let men therefore be
affrayde of the prayers of those men with whom God is at ^ne aggrement. [O my
soule] He returns to that first glorying, concerning his co^fide^ce in God,
and having altered a little the manner of speech, he speaks to his own
soul: Also he brings out the same reason which he did before. The second,
drawing nearer to God as before, he is not content of Gods benefit, except he
possess God himself and sit upon him; as upon a rock. The third is the same
which was before. In the eight verse he repeateth the second reason, the manner
of speech being somewhat changed. Of al which arguments indeed mark this,
that David satisfies not himself in multiplying of words, whereby he
amplifieth God and his benefits: Also he alters the form of speech, he
calls him his salvation, his rock, strong hold, his glory. He says that
his salvation was received of him, and he publishes that he himself is
salvation and a rock: finally he pronunceth that his salvation is in him. Of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and that feeling of rest in
God, cannot be sufficiently expressed by words. For the things which the
holy Spirit works in the hearts, these things cannot be sufficiently
declared by the tongues of men, from whence arise these sighs, which are
furnished by the holy spirit, that the Apostle PAVLE says are unspeakable.
Romans ^. 2^
And PETER calls that joy of faith unspeakable and glorious. 1, Pet. 1. ^8.
Of these things you see first, that that soul which quieteth the self in
God, returns now and then to glorying in God. Then consider and learn out
of this repetition, that the soul is not so quieted and settled in this life,
but truly in the mean time it is troubled in some measure. The sea while it
is not tossed too and fro with storms, notwith-stan-ding it is commoued with
some soft air. The affection if it be not presently inflamed,
notwithstanding it is puffed up in some certain measure. Wherefore our
souls has need now and then of a new exhortation to this rest in God.
Considder thirdly. The first argument of glorying is, from waiting on or from
hope, to this aggreth that which the Apostle PAVLE speaks, We glory under
the hope of the glory of GOD. Romans 5. 2,
But if this hope and expectation of salvation, cause so great a glorying and
rejoicing of mind, I pray you how great a rejoicing shall the matter it self
make, when we shall be placed into the present possession of all those things,
which we now see but a far of?

9 Trust in him all time, o people, power out your mind before him: God is a
refuge unto us, Selah.

10 These that are borne of the baseman ar only vanity, these that are borne
of the noble man are a lie, those being laid together upon the balance, they
should go up above vanity.

11 Trust not to oppression, and vanish not away by robbery, if wealth
increase, set not your mind there^n.

12 God has once spoken. I heard the same thing twice, that strength is Gods.

13 And that mercy, o Lord is thine, that thou recompensest every man
according to his work.


The other part of the Psalm.
TRust in him] The second part of the psalm,^ne admonition, and that twofolde,
for partly he admonishes the godly, partly the wicked. The admonition
belonging to the godly, is again twofold: For partly he warns them to trust
in God, partly, that they should not trust in men. Trust in God says he,
Then, power out (says he) your mind before him, etc.] this latter is the
effect of the former. For they who trust in God, they power out all the cares
and anguishes of their troubled mind before him. The argument is subjoyned, for
he is, says he, a refuge unto us. Then he warns them that they should not
put their confidence in men, for although this be not expressly set down,
notwithstanding it is to be understood. The argument of this admonition is
from the vanity of men, of whatsoever estate and condition to conclude, they
be of. They that are base borne how many soever they be, they are vain; How
many soever they be that are noble, they are liers and deceitful: And to the
end he may show their greater vanity, he calls them lies and vanity it
self. Also he amplifieth the vanity of men, making a comparison of them with
vanity it self. Understand not this place to be excessive or hyperbolick,
for it is so indeed it self as he speaks. I grant indeed that man before
the fell was some what, but after the fall, he is redacted to nothing. For there
remained not in him, yea not so much as one remanent crome of uprightness and
holiness. And if there be any thing in him, it is wholly evil, and if man be
any thing, he is wholly evil, how much so ever it be, or very wickedness
it self. And to be this way somewhat, it is worse then to be nothing at
all. Let the Papists take heed to this, that make so much of the nature of
man, yea to wit, so exellent make they it. David reckoned it amongst the most
vainest things but they will have it to be somewhat also in themselves, and
they take away something from gods grace, that some uprightness may be given
to man. Of these things mark first, a great difference betwixt them that put
their confidence in God, and them who trust to other things. They who put
their assurance in God, they very willingly communicate this benefit with
others, and will have all men with them to put their trust in God. But those
who put their confidence in other things, as in riches, in honors, in the
arm of man, they do not willingly admit any others whosoever into their
fellowship, and participation of these things. For they would together and at
one time devour them up themselves. God is a good thing, which is
sufficient for all men, neither yet if many at once be participant of him, any
one man shall be in a worse case who is participant together with the rest,
neither yet for this does he receive the less, but he rather is in a better
case, and receives more, the mo fellows he has of the self same benefit.
Mark secondly, he admonishes us to put our trust in God, and that we power
out our minds before him. These two are so coupled among themselves, that he
who trusts in God, of necessity he powers out into his bosom as it were
all the secrets of his mind. But con^^ariwise he who trusts not, this man
albeit he seem at some time to pray and to open up his mind unto GOD,
notwithstanding he never deals earnestly and freely with GOD, but the thing
that he does, he does it coldly and for the fashion only. For it is not
possible, that any man who believes no^ in GOD, will communicate his secrets
and cares of his mind familiarlie with God. Romans (...)* 14.
How shall they call upon him says S. PAVL^, in whom they have not believed?
Note thirdly, David while he quieteth himself, in that tower as it were,
watching and beholding all men appear not only to be vain in his sight, but
to be vanity it self. Those surely who sirmelie by faith-cleane unto God,
these I say only are they, who look upon the vanity of men, yea and rather
the misery and vanity of this world. For it is not granteed to every man,
presently to considder and discern it. But those only are they, who see no
solid thing but in God alone, and these are only they who rightly can give
their judgment concerning the blessedness and misery of the creature, in
respect they only have experience of that true blessedness that is in God.
Trust not to oppression] The second admonition directed to the wicked servants
of Saul, and pertening of necessity to every one of them whatsoever. Now he
warns them, that they should not trust to oppression, and that by reafe they
should not vanish away. But we must take heed to this word of vanishing
away, for this cause we trust to every thing that by them we may firmly
stand, and neither fall down nor vanish away. These verelie stand firmly
alone who put their confidence in GOD alone: But they who put their trust in
any other things whatsoever, they are so far away from that, that by them
they are able to stand, that contrary ways they vanish and fall away, none
other ways then water powered on upon sand. If riches abound set not your
minde] This warning generally pertains to all men whatsoever. [God has once
spoken] This is a common argument to both the parts of the admonition, and it
is taken from Gods judgment himself. The strong, mighty and merciful God,
will recompense all men according to their works, let every man therefore
take heed, whether he trusts in GOD or in other things. The antesident is
prouen by the testimony of Gods own word, yea and that twice repeated over.
God has spoken to me (says he) etc.] As if he should say. The same God has
very often confirmed it unto me. Observe first, David envieth not this excellent
good thing in them, which is GOD him self, notwithstanding they envied, yea
this very transitory life of his. For to this purpose belongs this
admonition: By David's example therefore thou have set down the nature of the
Church, together with the disposition of the enemies thereof. These do envy
the very transitory life of the members of the Church, but the Church envieth
not them, yea she wishes unto them earnestly life everlasting. Christ prayed
for them that cursed him, Steven prayed that the sins of those that stoned him
should not be laid to their charge. Mark hear, secondly, how great the
madness of man is, for it is a very great sin to put confidence in things,
which otherways are indifferent, as in riches, in honors, or in the arm of
man, which things you may use well also. How great then is the madness, and
how grievous is their sin, which put their hope in reafe and oppression, and
in other things that are of their own nature evil, which things you can at
no time use well. Notwithstanding some cause of this so great a madness may
be learned, yea by this Example of SAVLES courtiers, to wit, that they
committed all these things without any punishment. Now men presently think
that this is permitted to them to do, which is permitted to be done without
any inflicting of punishment. This confidence therefore in wicked things, is
not so much to be imputed to the wicked doers themselves, as it is to be laid
to their charge, whom it became to have punished them, as to Saull and to the
other magistrates, who use to wink at the wicked deeds of courtiers, and of
their flatterers, howsoever perverslie and preposterouslie magistrates and
earthly judges give liberty to wicked men and malefactors. We learn in this
place, that that heavenly judge shall make it to come to pass, that the
wicked at length shall vanish away in their reafe and oppression. Finally, this
is not to be pretermitted, that David says, that he was once and again
admonished concerning that righteous judgeme^t of God. whereby he will
recompense every man according to his work: Which thing indeed is an evident,
that David thought now and then of that last and terrible judgment: Of the
which surely it becomes us all, yea the best men whosoever often to meditate
thereon. For this is the nature, yea of the best men, that looking upon that
terror of the Lord, they have need to be brought under correction. For Paul
speaks thus of himself knowing, says he, that terror of the Lord, we bring
men to the faith. We are to be allured I grant by the sight of Gods mercy in
Christ, to do our duty. Notwithstanding such is our nature, unless on the on
part as we are allured by Gods benefits, so on the other part we be
terrified be Gods judgments, surely we cannot be contained in our duty. To
God therefore who provideth al manner of ways for the salvation of his own in
Christ Jesus his son, be all honor and glory, Amen.

The Argument of the LXV. Psalm.
It is a psalm of thanksgiving. David bursteth forth first in giving of
thanks and praising of God in the ^ and ^. verses. Then follow the ^rgumentes
of the proposed thanksgiving, to the end of the psalm. All those arguments
are taken from Gods blessings and benefits. The benefits are partly
spiritual and eternal, which belong only to the affairs of the Church, unto
the 7, verse. And partly bodielie and temporal, which again are of two
sorts in this psalm For partly they a^ common, and belonging to all things
created unto the 10, verse and partly they are proper and peculiar, bestowed
upon the Church of God unto the end of the psalm.

The LXV. Psalm.
1 A Psalm, the song of DAVID, committed to be sung, to the master of Music.

2 O God who art in Tzijon, settled hope and praise is due unto the, and to
thee the vow is to be rendered.

3 O thou who bear the prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.


O GOD] The first part of the psalm, in which David, first through a sense of
his misery and sin, then through a feeling of Gods mercy, as it appears
out of the fourth verse; thirdly by a faith quieting the self in GOD, he
bursteth out into Gods praise, and ascribes only unto him first the
confidence of his soul; Then, the praise of his mouth; Thirdly, whatsoever
duty we have bound our selves by a vow to pay unto our God, and this thing
DAVID does in the second verse. Then next in the third verse, he promises
that it shall certainly come to pass, that every man through faith shall
come unto GOD. The reason is contained under the title which he gives unto
GOD, while he calls him the God who hears the prayer. In the third verse,
he promises that faith of men in God, which he says was peculiarly due
unto him in the second verse: As if he should say. Men indeed O God, ought
to give their faith unto thee, and they shall give it thee, and shall believe
in thee. Learn out of this place, what it is properly to praise or glorify
God, it is indeed to ascribe unto him, the things which are due unto him: also
the things which are due to him are those, first confidence of the heart;
then praise of the mouth; thirdly, are these duties which we are bound to
accomplish, either by a vow or by any other whatsoever obligation. Then next
we learn hear, that it is not in the power of any man to burst forth into
the glorifying of God by these grounds; from which out of question the
praising of David proceeds, neither yet is any man able indifferently to
pronounce those words which David then at that time spoke [Setled hope and
praise is due unto thee,] But that man is only able to do this thing, who
puts his trust in God, through a feeling of Gods mercy, and quieteth
himself in him. For no man glorifieth God, unless it be of faith, also he
that believes in him, he both confesses and professes faith, and that all
other offices are due unto God in Christ.

4 Thou clensest the wicked things and our defections, which have prevailed
over us.

5 Blessed is he whom thou choosest and admonishest, who may dwell in thy
courts, we are satisfied with the good thing of thy house, with the holy
things of thy temple.

6 Thou speak out unto us in righteousness things that are to be
reverenced, o God of our salvation, the confidence of all the uttermost parts
of the earth and sea, that are farthest off.


THou clengest] Here follow the arguments of the praise set down, from the
benefits of God himself; and first the benefits spiritual toward the
Church. Of the spiritual the first is the forgiveness of sins, by which he
concludes that proposed praise, to wit, that confidence is due unto God, etc.
Of this argument that appears to be true, which we have spoken, that DAVID
bursteth forth into this praise, from a sense of Gods mercy, and of the
remission of his sins. The words themselves, whereby this benefit is
expressed, clearelie do signify that DAVID had first wrastled with his sin,
then that sin prevailed over him in this combat. Thirdly, that God had purged
this sin, from thence he gives the glory of the forgiveness of his sins, or
of his deliverance from sin, to God alone. Thou (says he) clengest] for it
cannot be, that any man can ascrive to God the praise of the remission of his
sins, unless he have first foughten with sin, and have felt himself
weaker then sin in that combat: Then that God is stronger then sin, to the
which he himself was inferior, from whence I pray you proceeds that voice
of PAVLE, I thank God by Christ? We read in the same chapter, that David had
foughten with sin: Then, that he was carried captive away under the law of
sin: of which arises that complaint, o miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? After this complaint, we easily
perceive, that a godly man has his refuge unto Christ, and in that in him he
had obtained deliverance from his sins, whereof proceeds that holy giving
of thanks, I thank my God through Jesus Christ? Wherefore we come not to the
sense of the feeling of Gods mercy without a fighting, to the glorifying of God
himself. And there is always a glorious issue of our combat, for it ends in
the glorifiing of God, with an unspeakable and glorious joy Then next, the
word of clensing is to be marked, whereby is signified a purging by some
sacrifice propiciatorie, whereof he speaks. Psalm. 51. 9. purge me o lord
with byssope, that is, by the holy blood of Christ, shaddowed out by that
figure. This word therefore signifies that which is set down in Heb, 9.
Without blood there is no forgiveness of sins. For the fathers did not under
the law implore at any time mercy and pardon for their sins without blood
and sacrifice to pacify the wrath of God Neither we our selves this day feel
in our hearts the forgiveness of our sins, but by that sacrifice of Christ,
apprehended first by faith, neither yet dare we seek the forgiveness of our
sins, except in Christ and and in his sacrifice. Blessed is he whome] The
second argument of praise, from the benefit of ca^ling, which by the ordour of
nature, preceedeth the remission of sins. Then he arises a little higher in
reckoning out of the spiritual benefits of God to forgiveness, the
preceding cause. Now he comprehends Calling within those parts as it were.
The first is whereby God chooses any man, that is, calls him out from the
number of lost men, upon this part does that follow, whereby he brings us
nearer, and makes us to approach hard to himself. For unless he himself took
hold of us, and drew us, as it were to himself, surely, being called out, we
should not be moved out of our place. Upon this finally does that part
follow, which makes us to dwell in his courts. Our calling therefore
begins from that choice which God makes, and it passes fordward by that
drawing near unto God, and at last it ends in that dwelling which is with
GOD in his Church. But the phrase of speech which he uses in uttering out of
this benefit of calling, is not to be pretermitted in silence. For he
speaks not this coldlie and barelie, thou choosest us, but with ane outcrye
and a certain woundering of the greatness of this benefit; Blessed is he
(says he) whom thou choosest. So we are taught not so much to pronounce as
to wonder at all the benefits of God in Christ such is that in comprehensible
and unspeakable greatness of them all. But surely some certain apprehension
is specially required to this matter, of the benefits of God in our own
hearts. For of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and he who
feels nothing in his heart, verelie speaks ather little or nothing in his
mouth [We are filled.] He commends this benefit of calling from the effects
following The first is in Gods action toward them that are already called be
him. The second is in the word of God. As concerning the action, he fills
us (says he) with good things and holy, as concerning the words thou
speak out unto us things to be in thy righteousness reverenced. He who
receives any man in ludgeing, and sets him at table, there are two things
summarilie that he is able to do in entreating of his guhest humanelie and
daintelie: First in setting before him the most delicate meat which he may
feed upon, the other is in delighting his ears, and making his heart glad
with most pleasant and glade speeches of all sorts: GOD does both these
things to us, whom he has once called, and invited, having thought us
worthy of his table. But the words are somewhat more diligently to be
considered. Of these things wherewith we are filled in the house of God there
are two properties, first they are good and healthsome unto us: Then they are
holy; By these good and holy things are all the spiritual blessings in
Christ meante. Of, the words also which he speaks, there are likewise two
properties, the first is, that they are reverent, and therefore do require
reverence at the hearers hands. The second is, that they are in righteousness
that is, just, upright and sincere, without falsehood, without lying. Also in
these words the promises of God concerning good and holy things are to be
understood, greater they are then we are able to comprehend in this life, but
we shall be capable of them in that other life. You see then, with how great
gladness, with how great a rejoicing of heart, we have our abode in the
house of God, and do sit as it were at his table who not only are joyful by
faith of the good things present, that is, by the present apprehension of
them, but also by the hope of the benefits to come, which will be far
greater then those present. Of these effects we see that, that David not
without cause published that man to be blessed, whom God did choose. For what
is it to be blessed, if this be not, with so great a joy and gladness of
soul, to be filled with things so good, so holy, and in the mean time to
hear the promises of things to come, exceeding great, so reverent, so
righteous, so true. O God of our saluation] There is two titles of God hear,
the one which respects the Church: for salvation belongs to the Church. The
other which respects all things created, for confidence is of al things
created. Consider hear first then, as the goodness of God not only extends
the self to the Church, albeit chiefly to the Church, but also to al things
created, and to these also which are without the Church for he suffers not
yea even the wicked to be destitute of his testimony, Doing good unto the^
giving unto them raynes from the heavens and fruitful seasons, filling their
hearts with food and gladness. Even so the Godly look upon God, and not only
upon his benefits toward the Church, but also in his benefits toward All
things created. Considder nixt that there is some confidence also in God of
the du^me and brutish creatures, For in their own fashion they thirste for the
grace of God, and haueing gotten the same, in their own manner, they repose
themselves quietly in their God, finally they wait with certain sighs, the
Revelation of the sons of God, with whom they also shall be set at freedom
Of this matter look Romans 8. In which place the hope of that glory to come, is
not given to man, but to those who have the first fruits of the spirit, but in
the same place, some hope notwithstanding of the glory to come is attributed
to the creatures, that you may see that the things create brutish and dumme
are in a better case, then men, if they be not regenerated by the spirit of
GOD. [Stablishing the mountains.] Now follow the corporal benefits of God,
belonging in common to all things created. Thou visitest] Here follow the
benefits bodielie, belonging to his own Church, unto the end of the Psalm.
All which things seeing they need no exposition, but are easy to be
understood, it shall be sufficient to have poynted out the prophets mind,
especially in respect they may be known easily out of the longer writings
of others.

The Argument of the LXXXIIII. Psalm
It is a Psalm of prayer, of David's, as it is likely, being banished through
the tyranny of Saull. It is first made of a heavy complaint unto the 9
verse. Then of a petition unto the 13. verse. Finally of ane acclamatorie
conclusion in the 13, verse.

The LXXXIIII. Psalm.
1 A Psalm (committed) to the Master of the Music, among the posterity of
Korach, (to be song) upon the instruments Gittith

2 O Iehoua of hosts, how amiable are thy tabernacles!

3 My soul is touched with a desire, yea it faynteth to come to the courts
of Iehoua, my heart and my flesh, cry out to come unto the strong living God.

4 To thine altars, Iehoua of hosts, my king, and my God, yea the sparrowe
finds an house, and the swallowe a nest for themselves, in the which they may
lay there young ones.

5 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will praise thee always.

6 Blessed is the man, who in thee has liberty of thy paths, which the
godly have in their mind.

7 Blessed are they who passing through the valley of the Mulberrie, appoint
that fountain, whom also the rain of thy blessings do cover.

8 They go from battle array, to battle array, let every man compeir before
God in Tzijon.


O Iehoua] The first part of the psalm the complaint, in which the diverse
passions of David's mind being banished, utter themselves. And first indeed the
affection of that love whereby he embraces Gods presence in his Church, is
brought out in this verse. For David when he had felt that sweetness of the
presence of GOD, which then was tied unto the Church of the Jews, he was taken
with a wonderful love thereof. Also he opens up that most tender love in
this word, [How amiable,] For this word is the speech of a lover. By the name
of Tabernacles he understands that visible Ministry, which then was bound
to the temple of Jerusalem only, and in which God exhibited himself to his
people to be seen in some sort. My soul is touched] In this the passion of
desire utters the self: For when the holy man was banished, from that
presence of GOD which he so greatly loved, he was not touched with a mean
desire thereof. For desire properly arises, of the absence of these things
which we love. Considder therefore what it is to have once taisted how gracious
the Lord is, for of the taist comes the love, of the love arises the desire
of the thing absent, which thing the fell surely is never destitute of some
sort of enjoying and presence. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for
righteousness, because they shall be satisfied. But they, who at no time have
taisted how gracious the Lord is, they surely are not taken with his love,
and they who love not, they desire not him that is absent. For what is the
cause that you see many destitute of this visible presence of God which is in
his Ministry, and not-with-stan-ding are not so much, as by the least
feeling, touched with the sense thereof. These never tasted, how sweet this
presence of GOD was in his ministry. From thence there is no love of God,
again from thence, there is no desire of him. But what would you think of
those, which not only do suffer themselves willingly to be deprived of this
presence of God, but also persecute the same all the ways they can? I pray you
of what mind ar those men toward God, and how wickedly are they disposed. [Yea
my soul fainteth] He aggravateth that his desire to come unto God, and first
indeed from that, that through the desire, his mind fails him: Then from
that, that he is wholly occupied with that desire, both in his heart, in his
flesh, in his mind, in his body: Thirdly from that, that through the desire
he cries out. Mark therefore in this place, how vehement the passion uses to
be in the godly, not only of desire, but of love, sorrow and rejoysing etc.
For that spirit of GOD, which stirs up this affection in the godly is in
co^prehensible. From thence his operation is marvelous in the heart, not such
natural commotiones indeed as use to be in the mind, as the natural desire,
the natural love, the natural sorrow, etc. From thence the sighs of the
godly are said to be unspeakable. Romans 8, and the joye unutterable and
glorious. 1. Pet. 1 Nevertheless there is something in the affection of the
godly, which you may vvounder at, and which you cannot find in the natural
passion: Their desire is vehement, it is not without some presence and enjoying
of that thing which they desire, from thence arises that pleasure while they
desire. For their sighs cannot be expressed, surely they are not without some
joy, if the unspeakable joy be not conjoined with inutterable sighs. [To
the strong God.] Under these titles of God there is some cause of so great a
desire, for he felt that his whole power and his life was from God, who is both
strong and living, that is, who is not only strong in himself, but
furnishes strength unto his creatures, not only lives himself, but powers
in life into the things created: they then which feel themselves to live by
God, that they move and are, surely they suffer not themselves to want the
presence of God: But they who feel not that thing, they take that absence of
God in a good enough part. I grant, all live indeed, and are by him, but all
understand not that: only they understand and feel that, who have begun to
live that life of God, and have the first fruits of the Spirit. They indeed
ascribe to God alone as his gift, not only that spiritual life, but even
the sensual life, [Yea the sparrow.] The third affection. Indignation, for he
is angry, yea that a sparrow or a swallow* shall have some entry to the
altars of God: when not-with-standing the altares of GOD, belong nothing to
those little birds: But he himself which is a member of the Church, all entry
unto the Church of God is utterly stopped up. You see therefore that the
Godly, being destitute of Gods presence, envy that the little birds should
have the same, and they think themselves miserable in respect of the birds.
You see also, that God by the birds, does after some sort provoke men to
aemulation. The ungodly in this life do suffer easily the things created and
dum, to draw nearer unto god the^ themselves, and yet for all this, think not
themselves in this respect, either more blessed or more miserable the^
themselves. But when they shall come to that latter judgment or to that air,
and to those clouds, wherewith the Lord shall be environed, and upon which he
shall set miserable men, they shall think the birds happy in respect of
themselves. [My King and my God.] Those names of God, sufficiently declare
that there was also some presence of God present at that time, when he so
grieuouslie complains of his absence. For these words proceed from faith,
that is, from some present apprehension. You will see then the godly complain
of the absence of GOD, when notwithstanding they feel him present in some
sort. They complayn also of his absence, because they cannot get that presence
and communion of God, which they would have. For we live here by faith, and not
by sight, that is, we look a far off only upon the Lord, and that self
same sight, which is from a far off, is hindered many ways; yea, many times
also all presence of God, is rest away from our eyes. From thence arises that
desire of flitting out of this body, and going to dwell with the Lord. From
thence come these complaints, concerning the Lords absence. Blessed are those
who dwel] This is the fourth affection, woundring. He cannot sufficiently
wounder at the blessedness of these men, who have some entry patent unto God,
that is, to that visible ministry, in which God exhibited himself to be seen
in some sort. For whosoever at any time have God present with themselves, those
define that blessedness, that felicity of man, by that same presence and
communion, which is with God: Neither ar they able at any time, who have not
seen God in Christ, either to think aright or speak truly of that happiness.
From thence proceed these shameful errors of profane Philosophers, of which
number, some have been so mad, that they have placed the misery of man, in
place of his happiness. Also, those whom in the first place he published to be
blessed; those appear to be the Levites and the Priests. For those are they
who dwelt in the house of God, and according to their office, perpetually
praised him. The Ministers therefore of the Church, obtain the first place of
happiness, and no marvel indeed, if thou will measure happiness by Gods
presence, and the glorifying of his name. For the Ministry are sanctified and
separated above others, to communicate with GOD; upon whom this thing lies as
a part of their office, that they point out as it were, with the finger, God
whom they first have seen in Christ, and paynte out Christ before the eyes, to
others in the preaching of the Gospel, and crucify him as it were to others:
there fore the faithful Ministers and stewards of the mystery of Christ, ar
chiefly blessed; but if they be not faithful, they are of all men the most
miserable, Blessed is the man] Secondly, he esteems them to be blessed, who
have an easy entry into the Church of God: For this is that which he says:
Who in thee have liberty of thy pathes] For here also is the matter of
happiness, that there is an easy passage made unto us, to the assemblies of the
Church, in which the word of God is heard and preached, and the Sacraments are
ministered: But we very often, fulfill that which is commonly spoken; The nearer
that we draw to the Temple of God in our body; we are the farther in our
soul from God; and we abuse that liberty and power, in which there is any
matter of blessedness: For we have taken a loathing of the word of God, and of
the Ecclesiastical assemblies long since. Blessed are they] Thirdly, he
counts these among the blessed, who, howbeit they had a hard way and a
droughthie place to pass through as was the valley of the mulberie, are
compelled to journey, and likewise travel in a raynie weather:
Notwithstanding, they are able to come unto the Church of God: Appoint that
fountaine] That is, they refresh themselves with a consideration of that
fountain of GOD, unto the which, they strive through those droughthie places,
The rain of thy blessing.] That is, which for the most part, is sent to
communicate the blessing of God with the earth, and makes it fertile. Thou
see then that those are blessed, to whom otherwise there is an hard entry
into the Church of GOD, if in the mean time they come unto him: For the
difficulty of coming unto God, takes not away our happiness, if sobeit at
length we take hold on him. But these surely are the meet judges of this
happiness, who have once tasted, how gracious the Lord is, and what great
sweetness is in his presence. They go from battle array] The reason of their
blessedness, who have an uneasy way unto the Church of God, from the event.
They go (says he] from battle array, to battle aray] That is, after they are
commed into the Church, that difficil way being accomplished, they pass from
one holy assembly to another daily, to exercise publicly, the whole worship
of GOD. It is a borrowed speech from warfare. Let every man compeare] This is
done according to the Law. He shows evidently then their happiness, who
have an hard journey unto the Church, from the notable issue; for we must
measure blessedness from the issue, and not from the means, whereby we
attain unto the issue. And therefore our Savior in the fifth of Matthew
says, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, whereby he
signifies, that blessedness is not so much in the mourning, as it is in the
consolation: Not-with-standing, he shows that mourning is a necessary midds
for comfort, so that if we mourn not in this life, there shall be no comfort
for us in that that is to come, unless we pass as it were in some sort through
the Helles, we shall not come unto the Heavens.

9 O Iehova, God of hosts, hear my prayer, conceive with thine ears, o God
of Iahakob. Selah.

10 O our shield, behold, o God, and look upon the face of thy Christ.

11 For one day in thy courts is better then a thousand. I choose to haunt
the thresholde in the house of my God, then to dwell in the pauillion of
iniquity.

12 For God Iehova is the sun and the shield, Iehova gives grace and glory,
he withholds not good, from them that walk in vprightnes.


The second part of the Psalm, the prayer.
O Iehova] Now he prays unto GOD, that of his mercy he would bring him home
from banishment into his Church: The petition is contained in two verses: The
reason thereof is unto the 13. verse. The ground of the petition, upon the
which it is built, is easily perceived from the titles and names, whereby he
incalleth God. Also, the ground of the petition first, is indeed in taking
hold on GOD in his everlasting essence, from whence he is called Iehova: Then
next, in that his infinite power, from whence he is called, the GOD of hosts,
and that he has under his dominion, al hosts and armies; as well the heavenly,
as the earthly. Thirdly, in his mercy, which he has made manifest in that
covenant, made with Abraham, Isaac, and Iakob, from whence he is called, the
God of Iahakob. For we cannot pray unto God, except we take hold on him in
our heart, not only in that his everlasting essence, whereby he is
distinguished, from all things created, but also in his proprieties, but
chiefly in two; power, whereby he is able to save us, and mercy, whereby he is
willing to save us. Also, we utter this apprehension of heart, in the titles
and names of God, while we call him Iehova, sometime the God of armies, at
other times, the God of Iahakob; and finally, when we are praying, we call
upon him by other titles. It is to be marked in the petition, that he
repeateth the self same petition. This repetition shows evidently, the
earnest desire of the thing sought for, without the which, we should not call
upon God, for the desire of the heart, is a certain necessary foundation of
prayers. From thence arise those vehement and repeated petitions, the which
selfsame askings again, of necessity, God must hear. But if there be not a
desire of the heart, the askings are but cold and dry, and therefore again
they get nothing but a cold and a dry answer from God, and procure rather
some judgment, then any benefit. For we should not deal for the fashion sake
with God. O our shield] How of the craveth, so often he calls upon God most
reverently, which thing, is an evidente, that every one of these words proceed
from particular apprehensions of the heart. Men commonly when they speak to
superior powers, they use often and honorable styles; but for the most part
feigned styles. But the godly, when they speak reverently unto God, they speak
from the entire sincerity, reverence, faith and love of the heart. For we must
deal with GOD, the searcher of the hearts, with vprightnes of heart, and not
make our word so much as our soul approoved unto him, and this cannot be done
without his own spirit: For no man calls Jesus Christ, but by the holy
Spirit [Behold] As he first sought the ear, so now he desires the eye of
GOD: For the godly are not at rest within themselves, before they first
feel, that all the senses of their God, as it were, are exercised upon them;
for even as they, who favor not but of those earthly things, some not to
themselves able to live, unless they have the ear of the Princes of this world
open unto them, and have their eye fixed upon them: so they who seek that
everlasting life, they depend altogether upon the eye and ear of God, who is
the alone author of life, and in whose face there is sacietie of joys.

For one day is] This is the argument of the petition, from that joye which is
in the Church of God. Of this joy he entreats by way of comparison, and he
aggregeth it by a comparison taken from a thing that is less, of that joy
which is in the pavillions of wickedness, that is, which is without the Church,
without the which, there is nothing but wickedness: as if he should say, The
joye of one day in the Church, is more then the joy of a thousand days
without the Church; from thence he concludes: Therefore I had rather hant the
threshold in the house of God, etc. He prefers then the joye of one day in
the Church, to the joy of many days without the Church. The reason is, because
the weight and quantity of that spiritual joye which is in the Church,
recompenseth the shortness of the time: For one crumme, if it were no more of
that spiritual joy, is of greater weight and estimation, then is the whole joy
of this world. Mark, if so little a time of spiritual gladness, begun but
only in this fighting Church upon earth, surpasses by so many degrees, that
whole time of the joy, which is of this world; I pray you, how much shall we
say the eternity of that spiritual joy to be, which at length is to be
perfited in the triumphant Church, to be more excellent, I say, then all the
joye of this world, which lasts but for a moment as it were? For the whole
time of this joy, if it be compared with eternity, what other thing is it,
then a certain moment, and that gladness of the world, if it be compared with
that heavenly joy, how vain and light is it? Compare therefore, that
everlasting weight, of that excellently excellent glory, so to speak with the
Apostle, with this momentanean lightness of worldly joy. 2. Cor. 4
The Prophet said not great joy, which is in the Church, when he brought in
the cause, wherefore he desired to be brought home again into the Church, but
by way of comparison he said, that this joy was greater, then that joy of
the whole world is; yea, he preferred one day of this joy: to a thousand days
of worldly joy, and not only preferred he this joy, which is in the Church,
to that joy which is in the world, but having utterly abandoned this worldly
joy, he choose that spiritual joy. Here then I mark, that is not sufficient,
if we say there is a great joy in the Church of God, unless we prefer the
same also unto the whole joy of this world. Again, it is not enough, if in
word we prefer the same, except also we make some choice thereof also in this
life. Moses choose rather to be afflicted with the people of God, then to
enjoy the commodities of iniquity. If therefore Moses choose the affliction
and misery of the Church, having contemned altogether the royal pleasures; how
much more ought we to choose that gladness, which is in the Church of God,
having despised in the mean time, all the pleasures of this world. Which joy,
surely if we choose not in this life in some certain measure, certainly we
shall never enjoy that perfect pleasure which is in the other life.

For God is the Sun] The reason, wherefore he choose rather to haunt the
thresholde in Gods house, taken from God himself, and from his presence in the
Church, as of a certain Sun and Shield. God is a certain Sun, because the
beam of his grace shines in our hearts, 2. Cor. (...)
as the Apostle speaks. And he is a shield, because he protecteth and
rescueth his Church, and defends it from evil: For without the Church, there
is no protection, no salvation, as there is no light, no grace. But the
borrowed figurative speeches following, expound these words, by which it is
said first, Iehova gives grace and glory: For, for this cause he is called a
Sun. Then is subjoyned: He restrayneth not good from them which walk in
vprightnes] That is, who are truly and really of the Church. But understand
therewith, he holds off and restrayneth evil from the Church, and the
members of the Church. For, for this he is called a shield. Mark, who finally
ar they, who chose to dwell in the house of God, or in the church, to wit,
those only ar they who behold that Sun shining in the Church, and that
buckler, which protecteth the Church. But others, upon whom that Sun has not
shined, and whom that shield defends not, they are so far from that, that
they would dwell in the Church of GOD, that contrariwise, with all their heart
they abhor the society of the Church, and of the Saints. It is therefore
greatly to the purpose, once to have looked upon that presence of god in his
church.

13 O Iehoua of hosts, blessed is the man that has his confidence in thee.


O Iehova, blessed is the man] The conclusion of the prayer, containing an
excellent acclamatorie sentence, in which David having considdered that
presence of GOD in his Church, he publishes him to be blessed, who puts
his trust in God, that is, who is in the Church, and enjoys that presence of
God in his Church. He therefore that beholds God present in his Church, not
only he chooses to dwell in the Church, but he judges him to be blessed,
whosoever he be that by faith and love in God, joyneth himself unto the
Church, and that man alone indeed is the judge of the true felicity and
misery of man, who sees the presence of GOD in his Church for this man
judges, yea, and he judges indeed aright, from that presence of God, either
of the happiness or misery of man. To God therefore in his Church, be all
glory, through Jesus Christ, for evermore, Amen.

The Argument of the CXVI. Psalm.
Of this Psalm, there are five parts. The first, he professes his love
toward God, and he adjoyneth and amplifieth the cause of this love, unto the 7.
verse. Secondly, by says he gloryeth with his own soul Thirdly, he gloryeth
with God, unto the 10. verse. Fourthly, he confesses his own weakness,
which was sometime in him, and that by a comparison of the faith which the^ he
had, unto the 12. verse. Fifthly, he takes purpose to render thanks unto God.

The CXVI. Psalm.
1 I love Iehova, for he hears my voice, my deprecationes.

2 For he has bowed the ear unto me, when I called upon him in my days.

3 And when the dolours of death compassed me about, and the griefs of the
grave met me, finding anguish and sorrow,

4 I called upon the name of Iehova, saying, I besseech thee, O Iehova deliver
my soul:

5 Gracious Iehova and righteous: Our God, I say, merciful,

6 Iehova preserving the simple when I am brought to nothing, he besieweth
salvation upon me.


I Love Iehova] The first part of the Psalm as we have spoken, in which he
professes that love, whereby he loved God. Also, love is ane certain
affection in the heart, whereby any man carnestlie desires the communion and
conjunction of that thing which he loves: whatsoever thing surely it be. But
if the love of any man toward another be very fervente, then verily he who
loves, desires himself to be made one, and as it were one man, with him whom
he loves. Paul expresses the force of this love, when he said, O
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 6. 11. 12.
my mouth is opened toward you, mine heart is made large. Ye are not kept
straight in us, but ye are kept straight in your own bowels. By which words
indeed, he shows by the affection of his love toward the Corinthians, that
his heart was so enlarged, that he received them, as it were, within himself,
and into the bosom of his heart, and that he became, as it were, one man with
them. The love of God is, whereby we desire the communion and conjunction with
God. ^ Cor. 5, 6, 8.
Paul says, We are hold though we know that whiles we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord. Nevertheless we are bold, and love
rather to remove out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord. From whence
proceeds this Paul's approbation? surely from that love of his Lord, who as
he says in the same Chapter, verse 14. The love of Christ constrained him,
and continually carried him forward unto the Lord. And this is the cause
wherefore we sighing, wait for the coming of Christ: For the love whereby we
embrace Christ, earnestly thirsts for that conjunction with Christ. There is
also another thing that is required in this love, that is, that for the love of
Christ, we would be willing to loose the most dear things whatsoever we have
in this life. So Christ speaks in Luke: Luke 14. 20.
If any man come unto me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Desciple. By which words, Christ signifies, that his love is to be bought,
yea, with the hatred of those things which are most dear, if it can no
otherwise be obtained. And this indeed was David's love, which he professes
in this place. Such should al our love be, who profess the same God with him.
And in this respect we are chiefly most happy, because we have that God of
Abraham, Isaac, Iahakob, and David, whom we may love, whom we may worship.
For he heareth] This is an argument of love from the benefit of his
deliverance, from whence arose a certain earnest feling of the mercy of God
toward him. Mark then, that the knowledge of the goodness of God, and the sense
of his mercy and love toward us, continually goes before our love toward him.
He loves us (says JOHN) not because we have loved him first. 1. John. 4. 19.
For it is impossible that any man can love God, unless that now first that
love of God in Christ Jesus, be powered out in his heart by the holy Spirit.
David in every place professes his love toward God, Romans 5, 5.
he gives an account thereof continually from the mercy of God toward him. I
will love thee (says he) from my very most inward bowels, And what is the
reason? Psalm. 18. 2.
Iehova is my strength, Iehova is my rock and my strong tower, etc. By which
words indeed, he declares the cause wherefore he so much loved GOD, that it
was the mercy of God toward him. But if verily we will love God (for except we
love him, we are miserable) and if we will set our affection upon God, we have
need of nothing so much then of diligent marking of all his benefits, which
he continually heapeth upon us. For these ar so many testimonies of gods love
toward us. Now we have said, that the love of God toward us, is the cause of
our love toward him. Wherefore, to the end that we may love God from our
soul, every particular benefit of God, so far as it is possible, is to be
marked by us. For surely the cause wherefore our hearts burn not in that love,
where in they ought to burn toward God, proceeds from this, that we
considder so slightlie his benefits toward us, especially that greatest
benefit of all, the benefit of our Redemption in Jesus Christ; for while his
benefits are nor weighed, there is no sense of his love toward us. And when
there is not a feeling of his love toward us, how can it come to pass, that
we can love him? He hears my deprecation] Therefore the prayers went before
the benefits of God, and the sense of his mercy. For by those degrees, we come
as it were unto the love of God. First we seek at Gods hands any benefit,
whether it be Temporal or Spiritual. Then after we have gotten the benefit,
we feel his mercy and love toward us, as the fountain from which that benefit
flowed. Finally, from that sense of the love of God toward us, that our love
again towrad him aryseth. Wherefore, to the end, that any man may earnestly
love the Lord, his prayers ought to be continual; for of continual prayers
and supplications, continual benefits of God come unto us, which are so many
testimonies of that his love toward us in Christ. For he has bowed] He
opens up at greater length, the reason immediately preceding of his love, and
he abides in amplifying thereof, unto the 7. verse. In my dayes] He
understands the days of affliction and anguish, as the verse following
makes manifest. In this meaning, the word of [daye] is taken. Psalm. 137,
Remember against the Edomites of the day of Jerusalem, that is, of the
affliction, whereby the Edomites afflicted the Church. So Jeremy in the
Lamentation 1. 21. For times, metonymically in every language, use to be taken
for misery in times and days. We see therefore in this place, that affliction
thrusted David forward to prayers. For the feeling of misery, stirs up the
petition of mercy. Neither does any man earnestly pray unto God, but he whom
his own misery mooveth. Considder therefore, first the fountain of that love
which he set down, to wit, the sense of misery, from thence proceed prayers;
from prayers again aryseth the benefit of deliverance; from the benefit of
deliverance, comes the feeling of the love and mercy of God; from the sense
of the love and mercy of God, proceeds again our love toward God. This
therefore is the first degree of our blessedness, that we our selves feel
how miserable we are, and it is good to be afflicted. It is good for me (says
David) that thou have humbled me. Look the effects of afflictions. Affliction
causes patience, and patience, experience, and experience hope also hope
makes not ashamed For although the root seems to be bitter, notwithstanding
it brings forth at length sweet fruits. And when the dolours of death
compassed] He declares again more plainly, Heb, 12. 11
the thing that immediately before he had spoken, And first, he sets before
our eyes, that present danger, in the which he was placed. Then he sets
down his sorrow, proceeding from that danger and peril. Thirdly, the
deliverance after the dolor: And we have these things unto the 7. verse.
First, therefore he paynteth out unto us his dangers, in these words: And when
the dolours, etc. By which words, he mean thane most dangerous and most
imminent perril, Look 2. Sam. 22. 5. and Psalm. 18. 5, David being constitute
in this perrill and anguish, almost he was driven to a certain desperation;
for, as we shall see hereafter, in the 11. verse. he bursteth forth into
words of infidelity, and accuses Samuel of a lie, as if he had promised him
the Kingdom of Israel, not of the Spirit of God, but of a fleshly mind. From
whence we learn, how great the force of afflictions and sorrow is, yea, in the
very godly. Neither ought we rashly to judge of the dolor and impatience of
men, when they are grievous^^e afflicted and exercised under the hand of God.
David complayneth in another place: Psalm. 32* ^.
When I held my tongue (says he) my bones wore away, in my roaring all the
day. Where he professes, that for a time in his afflictions, he rather roared
like a Lion, then uttered the voice of a man. Anguish, etc.] In these words, he
opens up his sorrow which arose from the present danger. I called upon the
name] Here we have the deliverance out of the danger, after the sorrow. First
he declares, that he calls upon the name of Iehova, and this was the first
grace, and a certain preparation to the deliverance following. For surely, if
we will compare this gift of praying, with temporal deliverances whatsoever,
the gift of prayer is a certain greater gift, then are all these temporal
deliverances, and he who has gotten but only the Spirit of prayer in
afflictions and dangers, has gotten more at Gods hand, then if he had gotten
this present life, and al temporal deliverances; and it is certain, that he
to whom God has given that his ^pirite, whereby he may pray, that he shall
not pray in vain, but shall get a deliverance, either temporal or
everlasting: from whence Paul prooveth the certainty of the glory to come by
that reason, Romans 8.
because the Spirit makes intercession for us, with sighs that cannot be
expressed. We have the sum of David's petition comprehended here. I beseech
thee Iehoua (says he) deliver my soule] Then he craveth deliverance. Mark
then, When affliction oppressed David outwardly, and sorrow within, that is,
his affairs were no ways in an good estate, neither was the disposition of
his mind quiet, then God would not take David out of this life, being thus
disposed and afflicted. For if death had seized upon him, being thus
afflicted, surely not only the present life, but the life to come had been
brought into danger. But, having first sent his spirit, he reformed David's mind
within, and bowed it to prayers. Then he delivered him out of danger. Mark
then, that the godly are often brought to an extreme danger, yea, not only
externally, but also they are in an evil case within, and are at some times
driven into a certain despair, in the which, they being now placed, if God
would bereave them of this life, or would suffer them to be oppressed, they
should be in danger to loose that other life. But God uses thus to deal with
his own, that he takes them not out of this life, except they be well
disposed in some measure in their soul, and well furnished with his Spirit:
When contrariwise, he suffers the wicked, being in an evil case, and driven
into desperatio^ to perish, their souls not being turned unto him, before their
last breath go out. Observe secondly: We see that David's last refuge is here
unto God. Good and evil men are alike subject unto the afflictions of this
life, before they come unto the last danger, the wicked appear ever to be in
the better estate, for all things that belong unto this worldly life, are for
the most part ready at their hand, yea, they have very many deliverances:
But when they come to the last danger, and when all the helps of this world
fail, then the godly are in ane over far better case, and whosoever they be
that put their trust in GOD; for God is a refuge unto them: But the ungodly ar
driven into despair. Gracious Iehova] Here follows the effect of David's
petition, deliverance out of the present perrill. When (says he) I was
utterly brought down, God bestowed salvation upon me. He speaks not this
rawlie and coldly, but he describes his God accordingly to the purpose; first
from his grace, justice and mercy; then from a general effect of these causes.
Gracious] God is called gracious, because of his mere grace, without the
deserving of men, he bestows upon us, all his benefits. He is called [lust]
because he is true and faithful in his promises. For Justice, if at any time
it be conjoined with deliverance (as when it is said, that God is just,
because he delivers us) then faithfulness is to be seen in the promises: As
Psalm. 31. 2. In thy righteousness deliver me. And Psalm. 51. Deliver me from
blood, o God, the God of my salvation, and my tongue shall sing thy
righteousness. Finally, he is [merciful] because he regards the misery of the
afflicted. For mercy has a respect unto misery. Iehova preserving the simple]
That is, that general effect, proceeding from the properties of GOD above
rehearsed. The simple in this place are they who are destitute of man's help
and counsel, and who in a single mind, recommend themselves unto God. This
description of God, is applied to the following effect of David's deliverance.
For those godly men, if at any time they have made mention of any work of GOD,
they described God the worker thereof, according as it aggreed with the work,
and they called him, either just or powerful, or wise or merciful. Paul going
about to speak of quickening, Ephesa. 4.
as well of the Jews, as of the Gentiles: first he described God, from the
cause of quickening, to wit, from his mercy. God (says he) who is rich in
mercy, because of his great love, whereby he has loved us, he has quickened
us together with Christ. That is, he had considdered diligently the benefit
of quickening, and felt it entirely in his soul. From thence he ascends, to
the cause it self, to wit, to the mercy of God. For they who meditate
earnestly, concerning the effects of God, those same men also, do not les
seriously panse of the causes and of the effects which are in God, and they
glorify God in them; and every man surely, as he weighs the effects and
benefits of God; so has he an apprehension, either more light, or more
weighty of God; so that we may gather, yea, of the very naming of God, how
much men are moved with the works of GOD, if at any time they speak of them.
For if in the mean time, that they speak of the works of God, they name not
God with that reverence which is due, surely that is an evident, that there is
but a light apprehension only of Gods works.

7 Return unto thy rest, o my soul, seeing Iehoua is beneficial toward thee:

8 Because thou have delivered my self from death, mine eyes from tears, my
feet from falling.

9 I will walk continually before Iehova, in the countries of the living.


Return vnto] The second part of the Psalm; The glorying of faith, both in
his own soul, and likewise before God; And first he gloryeth in his own
soul. Return (says he) o my soul unto thy rest] He opposes this rest
or peace, to anguish and sorrow, of the which he had spoken before in the
third verse: As if he should say; Disquiet not thy self any more, neither be
in any sorrowing, but now at last quiet thy self: The cause is adjoined. For
God is bountiful unto thee] The reason then is taken, from the present
benefit of God. It may be asked in this place, whether if the benefit of GOD,
sets the soul of the disquieted man at rest? Which if it be so, what is the
efficacy of faith or hope, which is of a thing that is absent? I answer,
seeing faith, under which hope is contained, and the present enjoying of the
thing, are two diverse things: Faith indeed has great strength to quiet and
pacify the troubled mind: Notwithstanding, the prefence of the thing it self
has greater strength to bring that matter to pass. Faith indeed, which
respects that lise to come, and as it were, exhibiteth it present to us; I
grant, i^urnisheth a peace, that is above all knowledge: But how great shall
this peace be, when we shall enjoy that life to come, fully and perfitly? That
is not to be in silence pretermitted, that he names Iehova to be the author
of this benefit and deliverance: Iehoua (says he) is bountifnll unto me]
He said not ^awlie and nakedly to his soul, because thou have delivered me
from present danger, but he names God to be the author of the deliverance,
from thence aryseth that rest. For God himself, the author of all benefits,
is a thing somewhat more excellent, and the conscience of God the chief
worker, has greater strength to quiet the mind, then all the benefits of GOD
have, for (if we shall speak properly) not so much the gift it self, as the
well willing heart of the giver, quieteth our mind. That peace which proceeds
only from benefits temporal and worldly is deceivable, such as was the peace
of that rich man, which after that his barnes were enlarged and filled full,
promised to his soul in time to come, all peace and happiness. But what heard
he then: O fool (says he) they shall take away thy soul from thee this same
very night. Luke 12. 20
Because] Now he gloryeth before God, as if he should say, I shall not perish
now, but I shall live among the living; for this is it which he says, I shall
walk always in the land of the living] and not only, says he that, but he
says, I will live before Iehova, that is, I will live justly and uprightly; so
that by mylife, God shall be glorified; and this is not without a cause
adjoined. For unless we walk before God in this life, while we live we are dead,
as the apostle speaks of that widow, ^ Tim, 5. 6
which lives in pleasure, While she is living, says he, she is dead. Also,
he takes the reason of his glorying, from the gift of God it self, which by
three degrees is amplified. Thou have delivered my self (says he) from
death] Yea, and not only that, but thou have delivered me from al sorrow] Yea,
and not only that have thou done, but thou have delivered me from all
impediment, which could be able any way to procure sorrow unto me Learn out of
this place first, that there is no matter of glorying, but in the grace of God
alone, Romans 3. (...)
and in god alone, when is the glorying (says Paul?) it is excluded by what
law? by the law of works? No ways yea, by the law of faith. Whereby he
signifies, that there ought to be no glorying in our own works, no, not so
much, in deed, as in the works of regeneration. For Abraham himself, being
regenerate, had not matter to glory in works before God. For the works of
regeneration, were even now al done; wherefore, he that desires to glory, let
him glory in Christ alone, and his merits. Secondly mark; David speaks here
of his own deliverance, as if it were full and perfect. But surely thereafter
he was laid out to many and great dangers, and he was in displeasure:
Wherefore of necessity, here he has a respect to another deliverance, and to
another life, then to this that is present. For it is not likely to be true,
that so godly a man gloryed so much of this temporal life, in which none of
the godly at any time, ever contented themselves. But to the end I may speak of
those Fathers, who lived before Christ, they indeed respected continually under
figures, as it were, and shadows of temporal things, things everlasting: and
in their temporal deliverances and benefits whatsoever, they looked within
that everlasting redemption, and all spiritual and heavenly things: And almost
all those temporal things, and earthly was given them, as shadows of the
Spiritual blessings in Jesus Christ. Also, al those Temporal benefits should
be so many earnest-pennies unto us, of that Spiritual and heavenly life, and
perfect redemption, which then we shall attain unto, when Christ the second
time shall come.

10 I believed when I spoke those things, I had spoken above measure.

11 I had said, making have: Every man is a liar.


I Beleeued] The fourth part of the Psalm, in which he confesses his
weakness, yea, and his former infidelity also; and he clears the same by a
comparison of this present faith. The meaning is, when I partly thus gloryed in
my own soul; partly before GOD, faith triumphed in my soul. Paul applied to
himself these words of the Prophet, and after this manner he recited them: I
believed (says he) and for that cause I speak] unto you O Corinthians, 1.
Cor. ^. 1^.
of that spiritual and eternal life, leaning to this faith or confidence, that
I myself at sometime hereafter, should arise from death. For the things which
any man speaks unto others of God, of Christ, of his benefits; first of
all, they must be believed of him, that is, they are to be applied, to the
soul of the speaker: For so it shall come to pass, that as the Apostle
speaks, we shall (...) a greater liberty and evidence in speaking. When he
said in that place, let us have such an hope, that is, confidence of so
glorious a ministry, we use great freedom in speaking. I had spoken] This
much concerning his faith for the present, here follows the infidelity and
weakness, which was sometime in him, and which he illustrateth by his present
faith. First in these words, is contained a proposition of th^se speeches,
which proceeded from infirmity, they went beyond measure, I had said] The
exposition of the proposition: As if he should say; being rent away through a
sudden perturbation of the flesh, I had said: So he spak. Psalm. 31. I had
said in my have [every man] These are the words which proceeded from a
troubled mind: As if he should say; Now I see that no faith is to be given
unto men, no not to very Prophets indeed. For Samuel shows unto me, that I
should come unto the Kingdom of Israel. But now in very deed, I find in
experience, that he spoke not prophetically by the Spirit of God, but that he
has spoken of his own fleshly mind and lyinglie: so David, through
infirmity, accused not GOD openly, but Samuel of a lie, as if he had not
sufficiently tried out the will of GOD, but had transgressed the bounds of his
calling. So Psalm. 31. 23. through a troubled mind, he bu^sted forth into
this speech, I am cut off from the sight of thine eyes. Ye see therefore, in
what estate the affairs of the faithful are, so long as they live here. Now
indeed through weakness, they are thruste down even to the helles: Then
again, they are lifted up by faith, unto the heavens; but at length, the
victory is faiths. David after that through weakness, he had almost blasphemed.
Then next, through faith again he triumphed. It may come to pass indeed,
that the flesh in the first combat have the maistery as it were, as the Apostle
speaks. Romans 7. The law of the members, makes the man captive to the law of
sin, which is in the members: Notwithstanding the faithful perpetually feel
this in themselves, that the last victory is of the holy Spirit, which surely
is an evident, that the flesh at length shall be utterly vanquished, and that
the full and perfect victory shall belong unto the Spirit. This is not in the
mean time to be passed by here, that David in glorying, utters a notable
confidence; to wit, because there was before a great weakness: For in the
combat of the flesh and the Spirit, the more that any man is cast down
through a feeling of his infirmity, in that respect he is the more lifted up
through faith: The greater the sorrow be in the wrestling, in that respect the
joy and gladness through the holy Spirit, is greater after the fight. Finally,
this is to be considdered, that he says, that hastening those things which
were spoken by him, that is, he was moved through a certain sudden motion
of the flesh. Of the which, mark the difference, betuixt that infidelity, into
the which the godly at sometime fall, and the infidelity of the wicked and
rebellious. The godly at sometime distrust through a certain sudden motion of
the ^lesh and weakness. So Peter through infirmity, denied the Lord: and in the
very misbeleefe it self, they feel some dolor, and they distrust not so
securly, but burst forth sometimes into those speeches: O miserable man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! Contrariwise, the ungodly,
they misbeleeue God, not of any sudden motion of the flesh, but of an
obstinate malice, as those did, who ascribed the works of Christ, unto the
devil; and all Heretics, who after they are convict, by the testimonies of
the Scripture; notwithstanding, they maliciously resist the truth. And from
this it proceeds, that the ungodly, who distrust through malice, seldom
attain they to mercy: the godly, who misbeleeue through the weakness of the
flesh, they repent and find mercy. Heretics are seldom converted. Peter
was converted, David obtained mercy, as in this Psalm, and Psalm. 31.

12 What shall I recompense Iehova with? al his benefits overcome me:

13 I will give openly, the received cup of all salvation, and I will praise
the name of Iehova.

14 Rendering my vows unto Iehova, even now before all his people, saying,

15 The threatened death is precious, in the eyes of Iehova, to them whom he
himself bears at good will.

16 I beseech thee, O Iehova, seeing I am thy servant, let me be thy servant,
the son of thine hand maid, seeing thou have lowsed my bands, let my life be
precious.

17 I will sacrifice unto thee, the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and I will
praise the Name of Iehova.

18 I will pay my vows unto Iehova, presently before his whole people.

19 In the courts of Iehova his house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.
Halelu Iah.


WHat shall I] The first part of the Psalm, in which he takes advise
concerning rendering of thanks unto God. In consulting, he signifies and
professes, that he is not able to recompense so many his great and manifold
benefits; as if he should say: It lies not in my power to recompense Iehova,
his benefits are greater, then that they are able to be recompensed by me.
He proposes therefore first, that he is not able to recompense Iehova; that
is, to recompense his benefits toward him. Then he renders a reason, from the
greatness of the benefits of God. For the unequal or surpassing greatness of
the benefits of God. For the unequal or surpassing greatness of the
benefits of God, being considdered upon the one part, and his vnhability and
weakness being considered upon the other part, being overcome by the
incomparable greatness of the benefits of God, not knowing what to do, he
asks, and in a manner he cries out, What shall I recompense Iehova with?] As
if he should say; It lies not in my power, to recompense so many and so great
benefits of God. Then the argument is taken, not only from the greatness of
the benefits of GOD, but also from his own inhabilitie, weakness, and
littleness (to speak so*) In one word, the matter is thus, the reason is from
thence, that there is no correspondence and proportion, betuixt him and his
strength, and the benefits of God. For the duties whatsoever of man toward
GOD, are so far away from that, that they can desire any thing at Gods hand,
that they are unequal and unable to recompense those benefits received of
God. What madness is that then of those men, who think, that by their works,
not only they recompense GOD, that is, recompense that benefits bestowed
upon them, but that they also deserve other new benefits, especially those
great benefits, and life eternal? We learn again here, that such is the
liberty of God toward us, which tarieth not upon a mutual and equal
recompensation to be done by us, yea surely, which indeed it could not do.
For this would declare that GOD had need of our good, but GOD in himself is
most perfect, to whose blessedness nothing can be added, and from whose
blessedness, nothing can be taken away. For that his own glory and happiness
was with him before the foundations of the world were laid. Glorify me,
Father, says the Son of GOD, with that glory which I had with thee, before
the foundationes of the World were laid. John. 17* (...).
And the same Son of GOD again speaks in another place, I seek not glory
from man. John. 5. 14
The happiness or misery of the creature, is placed in this, that it either
gloryfieth, or not glorifyeth the own Creator and Redeemer. Also, this
liberality of God, is set down before us to follow, that we should give
mutually, looking from thence for nothing again. In the mean time, that is
not to be pretermitted by us, that such is the greatness and dignity of the
sacrifice of Christ, which for our sake and cause, not only recompensed all
the benefits of God, but also deserves at Gods hands, not only these common
benefits, but also those which are passing great, righteousness and
everlasting life. If it be asked in this place; was not this pride of mind,
yea, once to endeavor to recompense God alike for alike? I answer, David
endeavored, not so much to recompense GOD in those words, as by an humble mind
he professed, what little or no strength he had, how unable he was to
recompense. I will giue] Hitherto there has been a douting and interrogation:
Now follows the answer, and as it were, a resolution of the doubt; whereby
he concludes, after consultation and douting, with his own mind, to render
thanks again unto God: for this is the thing that he is only able to do, yea,
indeed he is not able to do that without the grace of God. First therefore
he declares, that he will give thanks unto God: Then he brings out the
form of the Thanksgiving, that is, the form of the prayer, which he is to
use before God. Last he repeateth and concludes, the proposition of
Thanksgiving. The proposition is contained in these words, I will give openly,
etc.] To the end we may understand this proposition, it is necessary, that
we repeat somewhat out of the story, which is set down, 1. Chronicles 15.
chap. Where after that, the Arc was brought in into the city of Jerusalem by
David: we read that he did two things: To wit, the first, that he offered
burnt offering and sacrifices of thanksgiving unto God. The other, that he
made an holy feast unto the people, in a remembrance of the benefits of God
received. In this place therefore he says, that he will do both these things.
For that speech belongs to a feast, I will (says he) give openly the
received cup of all salvation] That is, I will make an holy feast unto the
people, in memory of all my deliverances, and I will propone the cup to be
drunken to all men, in a perpetual remembrance of my deliverances. Then next,
as concerning the burnt offerings and the sacrifices of thanksgiving, he says,
that he will offer them in these words, when he says, I will praise the
name of Iehoua, I will pay my vows unto Iehova, etc.] As concerning the vows,
this only we are put in mind concerning them, that they serve our weakness.
First, in perrilles they confirm the faith of our deliverances; For, fra once
we have turned our self by a vow unto GOD, then we conceive a surer hope of
deliverance. Then they stir us up more to Thanks giving, after that now
we are delivered, for being bound by a vow, we feel that there is a
necessity laid upon us, to render Thanks unto GOD. In vows we must
chiefly beware, that they be not of things unlawful, and not permitted by
the word of GOD, such as are at this day; Those of the Papists and Monks,
where-by they serve not GOD, but tempt GOD; they ease not their own weakness;
but lay a greater and weightier burden upon it: Such a vow amongst the
rest, was that concerning singleness of life. The thing that occurreth in
this place to be marked first, is that, that ^ee first acknowledges, how
that his duty toward GOD is nothing, in regard of the greatness of the
benefits of GOD, then he descends to give Thanks; by which method, we are
put in mind of the acknowledging of our weakness, whereby we are not
sufficient to recompense the benefits of God, that there preceedeth an earnest
giving of thanks. For that man shall never seriously, and from his heart, give
thanks to any man for the benefit received, which is led with an opinion of
his own strength, whereby in very deed he may recompense the benefit. When any
puissant man has received any benefit from a man less mighty and poor, he
thinks not the man worthy of any thanksgiving: For he thinks that he is
not only able to recompense the like, but also far more, when it pleases him:
Contrariwise, any poor man having received a benefit from a man more
mighty, he is guilty within himself of his own poverty, that he has no
power to recompense him again, the thing that he only is able to do, he
does, it in giving thanks by word. That Pharisee, who together with the
Publican, went up into the Temple, that he might pray unto the Lord; he prayed
indeed, according to these words: I give thee thanks, that thou have not made
me like other unrighteous men, robbers, adulter^rs, nor yet also like this
Publican: (for he poynted out the man with his finger, standing far off from
him) then he adjoyneth; I fast twice in the week, I pay my tenthes. Not only
would he give thanks for the benefits received from God, but he would also
enter in count and reckoning with God, what he had given him, and received
from him: Even indeed, as if he had recompensed those benefits that he had
mentioned, he had gotten from God, with his duties again toward God. But what
did he bring to pass by such a thanksgiving? what profited he thereby? Christ
says, he returned home not justified, which was the earand wherefore he came:
That all men learn, that in the mean time, they are giving thanks unto God,
not to put their confidence in any of their own deservings, neither yet to
vaunt of their own righteousness before God; as if they not only by their
righteousness had recompensed the benefits of God toward them, but also had
deserved somewhat at Gods hand. We are again taught here, that the
acknowledging of our own weakness and poverty, proceeds from diligent
examining and weighing of the benefits of God. Also, from a consideration of
our gifts whether they are able to answer to so many and so great benefits of
god: wherefore so at last, we shall feel how unable, yea, that wear nothing, if
we will weigh the benefits of God toward us, and our strength and gifts
together, having compared them among themselves. For it will so come to pass
at length, that having diligently considered, that great inequality of the
benefits of God, and of our strength, we shall acknowledge how many and how great
in lacks there are in us, and how unable we are to repay the Lord again: Will thou therefore from thine heart give thanks unto God, and ascriue solidly and
altogether, all the glory of his benefits to himself? acknowledge how poor thou
art in thy self, and how thou have nothing to recompense the Lord withal: now
will thou know this thing? examine diligently and compare the benefits of God,
and thy gifts and strength among themselves. And if we should proceed after
this order in giving God thanks, surely we would give all the glory to God of
his benefits, more earnestly from the heart, and more effectually, then we use
to do. Again, mark here in David, the token of a thankful mind: he voweth
unto God, and he repayeth his vow. This thankfulness in promising, and the
accomplishment of the promise, is not to be reckoned among the least of Gods
benefits. For it proceeds from the special favor of God, that we are
thankful to GOD for the benefit received. For we are almost all more prone
after some measure, earnestly to crave Gods help, and to live unto him, when
we are pressed with any grievous perrill, then we are to give thanks, and to
pay our vows unto God; after that already, the benefits of God are bestowed
upon us. Notwithstanding, the Prophet warns, that those two are to be
joined together, with an inseparable knot. Ps. ^0. 14. Sacrifice praise unto
God, and pay thy vows to the most High, and call upon me in the time of
anguish, I will deliver thee, that thou may honor me. Surely I think that
that man has not sought any thing at God earnestly, and with that heart with
which it became him, who after that he now has obtained the same, is
unmindful of the benefit and of Thanksgiving. For that self same spirit,
which teaches us to pray as is requisite, and makes intercession for us,
with sighs that cannot be expressed, teaches us to give thanks unto God for
the benefits received, and that with ane certain unspeakable joy and
gladness of heart. Last, it is marked here, that this was the highest degree
of thanksgiving, that David promises here unto his God. For an exceeding great
benefit, requires exceeding great thanksgiving. Also, passing great thanks
are not these which are given to God secretly, but those that are given
publicly. The whole Church of God looking on and hearing David, if at any time
he promises or offers a chief duty unto God, he professes that he is not
able to offer or to promise a greater duty nor this, then that he will praise
God in the public congregation of his Church. For the public giving of Thanks
is more then the private. For while thou give thanks publicly unto God, the
whole people says, Amen; And so they glorify God together with thee. From
thence it is, that God would have his people togather together in one, and to
give him thanks together in the Church, to the end, that the greater praise,
honor and glory may redounde unto him. Precious in the, etc.] This is that
form of thanksgiving, which he sets before him to be followed. First, he
recommendeth the Providence of God toward his own, as well in their life, as in
their death. Then he confirms this providence of God, from his own
experience. First therefore, says he, the death is precious] Men do commonly
think, while they see the godly afflicted and exercised with sundry
calamities; they think, I say, that God at that time takes no thought of
them, whether they live or die. And from thence it is, that the persecutors
themselves thinking, that God takes a like little care of their life and death;
they wax the more fearce against the^, as against as many vile and abject
slaves. David therefore opposes, to the perverse opinion of men, in this
place, this excellent passage, precious in the ei^s of Iehoua] etc. Whereby he
signifies, first, that God many times, permits not his own to die, but
delivers them very often out of exceeding great dangers, and rescueth them as
it were, out of the very jaws of death. Then next, by this passage he
signifies, that if God at any time suffers his own to die, that comes not
pass, by Chance or Fortune, but by the sure purpose of God. Pilate after this
manner spoke unto Christ, even as if God had taken no resolute advise
concerning his life or death. Know thou not (says he) that I have power to
crucify thee, yea, also power to lowse thee? Christ answers him: Thou
should have no power at all over me, unless it were given thee from above.
Thus much speaks Christ. Thirdly, by this passage is signified, that the
croce and death of the godly it self, howsoever it be vile in the sight of men,
notwithstanding it is precious in the eyes of GOD. Last, this sentence
admonishes, that after the godly are already dead and taken out of this life,
by the permission of God, and violence of the ungodly together; GOD suffers
not their death, to slip out of his remembrance at any time: For seeing that is
most true, that he has all the tears of his own, put up in a bottle, as it
were, and in register, how many they are; how much more will he have the
whole blood of the godly, yea, and every particular drop also of their blood
kept close with him? Yea surely, before so much as any one drop of the blood of
the godly should perish, he will command the earth it self, which opening her
own mouth, the time it was shed, received it and drank it in, he will command*
I say, the very earth it self to keep it in her womb as it were, unto that day
of the Lords visitation, wherein he will take a vengeance upon all them,
whosoever have persecuted the godly in this life. After these four diverse
fashions therefore, to speak it it summarlie, the death of the godly is
precious in the sight of God: first, that he suffers not his own often to
perish, but delivers them out of exceeding great dangers. Then, if he
permits them to die, that is, not done rashly, and without a most weighty
cause. Thirdly, that the very death of the godly it self, howsoever it seem
vile in the sight of the world; notwithstanding, in Gods sight it is precious.
Fourthly, that continually the memory of the death of the godly is always
fresh and recent. Of these four manners, that first is chiefly to be
understood in this place: To wit, that for this cause the death of Gods own is
precious in the eyes of God, he suffers, in respect them, not many times to
die, but delivers the^ out of extreme great dangers. But whose death is
precious in the eyes of Iehova? Even the death of those, says he, who^ he
bears at good will. Therefore, the love and favor of God is the cause,
wherefore the death of his own is precious; and those whom he loves, he
keeps them alive, neither does he at any time suffer them to die rashly. Any
would suddenly wounder at the first show, why God has not only permitted, but
also has commanded often, that so many Nations should be destroyed, no choice
being had of men, women, and infants; which thing we read in the book of
Joshua come to pass, upon the people which were in the Land of Canaan. When I
was occupied in seeking out somewhat more profoundly, the cause of this so
great a severitie; this first came in my mind, because God favored not those
Nations, but contrariwise he hated them; whereby it came to pass, that their
death was not precious in the eyes of God. If their precious death, or not
precious death. depends upon the love or hatred of God; how blessed are
those, whom the Lord loves, as well in life as in death? I beseech thee
Iehoua] He confirms Gods providence toward his own, by his own experience:
as if he should say, have thou not, I beseech thee o Iehova lowsed my bondes]
For he speaks of himself, as if he were drawn bound hand and foot to
execution. For he means, that he was brought to an extreme danger of
losing his life, when by Iehova he was delivered. He subjoyneth the cause of
his deliverance, to wit, that he was the servant of Iehova, and for this cause
a servant, because he was the son of a hand maid: for the sons of the
handmaid, are therewithal, according to the law, servants; When he says that
he is the son of an hand maid, he signifies, that he is not a stranger and
a servant coming from far, but a household servant among the rest of Gods
domestickes. He means then, that he is not a man that is a stranger and a
sojorning servant in the house of god, but that he himself has some right and
title in the house of god, either from his parents, which before him were
comprised within the covenant of God: for that is no common benefit of that we
are borne as it were, of the domesticques and confederates of God. And surely
the affection of David's mind, utters the self clearly in this gradation of
words as it were: For the words show, that the affection of the mind,
approached unto God more and more: For first he says, I am thy servant: This
is the first degree or step of the words, and the first approaching of the
soul unto God: Then he repeapeth the felfe same thing, and he says, I am thy
servant] This is the second step of the words, and the second approaching of
his soul unto God: Then he says in the third place, I am the son of thine
handmaid.] This is the third step of the words, and chief sign of his
exceeding great and third drawing near unto God. For while he speaks this
last, he coupleth himself altogether with GOD, and he cleaves straightly unto
him; and so for this cause he becomes blessed: For our happiness consists
in that communion and fellowship with God. Thou feast therefore, that thing in
this place; first, from whence it proceeds, that he publicly reco^mendeth,
with so great a confidence of mind, that providence of God toward his own:
Surely it comes from that his own experience, and of the particular
providence of God toward him self. For no man can praise generally, the
providence and mercy of God toward his own Church, except he has in
particular, felt the same in experience himself: Certainly that saying would
have bin but coldly spoken by Paul, To wit, that Christ came into the World
to save sinners, unless that he himself had first felt in experience, both
the misery of sin, and the mercy of God; and for this cause he subjoyneth
these words, Of whom (to wit of sinners) I am the chiefest, to the end he
might conclude in his own conscience, that he himself was saved by Christ.
Therefore, that general faith of the Papists is unmeet to recommend the
providence and grace of God toward his own Church. For never did I ever yet
esteem at any time, any Papist to be a meet Preacher; or publisher of the
benefits of God toward his Church; who is not able to bring out any thing from
his own feeling or experience; who is not able to say that, of the which before
we have spoken in this Psalm, I believed, and therefore did I speak. Mark
secondly: There are men whom this or that kind of death does greatly vex and
torment, as violent death, as filthy, sudden, exquisite, and cruel deaths;
concerning which sorts of death indeed, they do no sooner meditate upon, but
presently they are stricken with a horrible fear: but this care and thought
which is concerning the manner of death is preposterous: Why should not that,
much rather be taken thought of by us, that we may feel our selves beloved of
God: for if we be grounded and rooted in that love of God, our death of
whatsoever sort it be, shall be precious in the eyes of God, and we shall be more
then conquerors in very death it self: observe thirdly, David out of all
question, Romans 8. ^7
attained to that hid love of God, which was in the heart of God; and he
obtained some sense from the effect of some special and notable deliverance; he
learned also that he was beloved of Iehova, from that, because his death was
precious in the eyes of Iehova. This is that our only comfort in life and
death, that we are not our own, but our most faithful Lords, Jesus Christ's,
and that we are the Lords, and that he takes a care of us* From thence also
those godly ancient men chiefly learned the same thing, because they felt God
present with them in very deed in whatsoever perrilles. Amongst the rest,
David is to be nu^bred, who as he was laid open to many dangers, so he felt
exceeding many delivera^ces, and he persuaded himself, that god had a special
care of him, and in the self same place, in which he said that the death
intended against the godly, was Precious in the eyes of Iehova, he without all
doubt, means that this was a document of the favor and care of God toward
us, in respect that our death is precious in his sight. Last mark: At what
time does David finally glory in that, that he is the son of the handemaid of
GOD; that is, borne of that mother, which was in the covenante with GOD, surely
even then, when therewith, he acknowledges that he is the servant of God. It
is profitable in deed to be borne of the Saints, and of those Parents who are
in Gods covenant, so long as thou co^tinuest in that covenant with God, and art
Gods servant; for so that promise of GOD, of long and durable mercy, which is
made in the second command, belongs unto thee; I will have mercy (says
he) upon the thousand generation of those that love me, and keep my
commandments. But if thou make thy self unworthy, both of thy parents, and
likewise of that covenant of God, that shall nothing profit thee, that thou
art borne of the Saints and of parents, that are confederat with God. It
profits thee nothing that thou art able to set down thy pedigree, in a
certain continual race, even unto Abraham himself, with whom the first
covenante of God was made. I will sacrifice to thee] He repeateth that promise
of thanksgiving, which was set down before in the 13. verse. Of the which,
because we have spoken sufficiently enough there, we shall be the shorter;
therefore in opening of the same: Only we shall add this much to the things
that we have spoken, that fra once that stupiditie of our mind is shaken off,
and fra once we begin to praise God, and to give him thanks, we are so
carried away, by that Spirit of GOD, that we can scarce make an end of the
praising of God. We are in deed, but very slowly stirred up to praise God;
but being once stirred up, we take such delight in prayer for a time, and
through that joye, our heart does boil, so that in a manner it is altogether
powered out into the praises of our God. Wherefore to the end that we may praise
God, this deadly sopour of our mind is perpetually to be shaken off, and we
must endeavor that at no time, so far as it is possible, this our heart be
altogether void of feeling, either of our misery, or of the mercy of God in
Jesus Christ: for of this two-folde feeling, there aryseth a twofold affection
of the heart, that is, both of sorrow and of joye: From sorrow specially arise
petitions, and from joy, arise giving of thanks, which are done in Christ Jesus:
To whom with the Father and holy Spirit, be all glory, Amen.

The Argument of the CXXX. Psalm.
It is a song of Doctrine, written by some one of the Prophets. It is composed
of three parts: First there is set down a memorial of prayers, which he had
at sometime conceived, when he was in an extreme great danger, unto the 5.
verse. Then making a tran^ision, he professes that he has yet his hope in the
word of Iehova, and that he depends upon him* unto the 7. verse. Thirdly, he
recommendeth the same hope to Israel, that is, to the whole Church, unto the
end of the Psalm.

The CXXX. Psalm.
1 A most excellent song. Out of the deapthes I cried unto thee, o Iehova,
saying:

2 O lord, harken to my voice, let thine ears be attent to the voice of my
deprecations.

3 If then shall straightly mark iniquities, o Iah, Lord, Who could be able to
stand?

4 But with thee is forgiveness, that thou may be reverently worshipped.


OVt of the deapthes] The first part of the Psalm: The depths in this place
are most deep and terrible dangers, for so are they called. The metaphore, or
borrowed speech, is taken from waters, in which men are almost drowned. Look
the Psalm. 69. 2. 3. etc. This is out of all doubt, that while any man sticks
in most deep perrilles, then he powers out from a most hollow and deep
heart, fervente prayers, yea, he cries upon the Lord mightelie: For so the
Prophet speaks of himself here: Out of the deapthes, I cried unto thee, o
Iehova. Thou see then, at what time the godly are exceeding grievouslie
afflicted, and oppressed with the hand of God, at that same time, they use
earnestly to deal with their God, and to have their refuge chiefly unto him,
with prayers and supplications. For (that the truth of this proposition may be
manifest) afflictiones work in our hearts, first some feeling of our sin
and misery. For unless God exercised his own, after such ways as he knows
most meet, surely they would never come to a sense of this common misery of
their nature: then next, when once the heart is prepared with some feeling of
the own misery; Then the spirit of God, which they call the Spirit of
adoption touches the same, with some sense of the mercy of God: And to speak
with the Apostle, Rom* 5,
The love of God is powered out into our hearts, by the holy Spirit which is
given unto us, yea, and that by Jesus Christ, and by his death. For surely the
holy Spirit touches not our heart, with any sense of the mercy of God in
Christ Jesus, unless first they be prepared with some feeling of misery. And
then, after that the holy Spirit has powered out that love of God into our
hearts, then we conceive in our minds that confidence, whereby we draw near
and incalles upon him: For this is the Spirit which the Apostle calls, The
Spirit of adoption, by whom, we cry, Abba, Father. We cry, says he,
because the Spirit of adoption, through the feeling of the love, works that
confidence in the heart, that the heart being first enlarged; then next the
mouth, we may call God Father, with a free and shrill voice. Therefore, fra
once the Spirit has indewed our souls with a feiling of the love of God, we
go freely unto God, and pray unto him; For except there be first some
feeling of the love of God, certainly there can be no calling upon his name.
Then thou see that that is true, which we spoke at the beginning: to wit, the
more grievouslie the godly ar afflicted, in that respect the more fervent are
their prayers. We because we are not drowned yet in those deapths, and therefore
are not much touched with that sense, with which we ought long ago to have
been touched, either of our misery, or of the mercy of God, and pray not so
earnestly as it becomes us: It were much better indeed to be afflicted with
prayers, the^ to be in prosperity without prayers. Saying o Lord] Hitherto he
has declared, that in danger he calls upon GOD; now he sets down
that form of prayer, which he then used in calling upon God. Hear (says
he) O Lord my voice.] Then he doubleth the same petition. Let thine ears
be attent to the, etc.] This doubling and iterating of the same petition,
proceeds from a vehement, and two-folde affection, as it were of the mind,
and grace of the holy Spirit: For except, by the grace of the Spirit, the
affection be enlarged, surely the mouth cannot be enlarged. For it is the
Spirit by whom we cry, as it were, with a mouth stretched out wide. For
how often we double our cry, so often the feeling of the Spirit is doubted in
our heart: The first cry, proceeds from the first feeling of the Spirit.
The second, from the next. The third from the third and so forth. For no man
calls Jesus the Lord, but by the holy Spirit. 1. Cor. 12. And we know not
what to pray as it becomes us, because it is the Spirit which makes
intercession for us with sighs that cannot be expressed. Romans 8. For this
cause, I speak those things, that the natural man may know, that it lies not
in his power, to pronounce one good word, except first of a natural man, he be
come a spiritual man. But what is that that moves him to cal^ so ernestly upon
God, to this end, that he would len his ear unto his prayers? Thought the that
God was deaf? These which are oppressed with Gods hand, they think that God
is so estranged from them, that he nether sees, nor hears them, neither that
he remembers them at all. From whence arise those so lamentable voices,
Hear, o Lord, See o Lord, Remember o Lord, which occur every where in the
Psalms: But are they which call upon God from their heart, and earnestly desire
his presence; are those, I say, in the mean time altogether destitute of the
presence of God? Would they, I pray you, be able to seek the presence of
God, unless surely they had some presence of GOD, through his own holy Spirit.
Are we able without God, to thirst after God. What require we therefore, which
we now have? For this cause we do this, that we may the more enjoy and
possess God. For prayers bring that to pass, that God draws near unto us,
and they are the increase of mercy and grace, for it is not possible, that
those sighs which are not so much ours, as the holy Spirits in our heart, and
the cries of that same Spirit in our mouth can pass away in vain. For GOD
knows what the meaning of his Spirit is, And blessed are those that hunger
and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. And we find that in
experience in our selves, that we no sooner sigh unto GOD, but our souls are
watered over with a certain unspeakable joy: so that we truly feel that
thing, to wit, that the presence of God, through the Spirit of heavines and
invtterable sighs, causes the presence of God through the Spirit of joy and
vnspeaktble gladness. If thou shalt] The preventing of an objection: For this
might have been objected either by God, or by his own conscience. Thou art a
sinner, Then how shall I hear thee? Why do I not rather consume thee in my
wrath? He answers, first by a concession, If thou shall straightly mark
iniquities, O God, surely I grant that no mortal man can stand in thy sight,
but of necessity, he must be consumed be thy wrath. Then next he answers by
an correction: But with the is forgiveness;] As if he should say; Thou
markest not our iniquities according to thy justice, but of thine infinite
mercy, thou forgavest them al, in thy Son Jesus christ. For the Fathers
indeed, and those ancient Prophets, felt not at any time, their sins to be
forgiven them, through the mercy of GOD, but by that mercy in Christ, who
has promised unto them, whom they saw as it were a far off, and in whom
alone the wrath of God was pacified, even since the beginning of the world, to
the end, that some place might be left for his mercy. For unless, first his
justice be satisfied, surely there is no place for the mercy of God. Also, our
estate, in that respect is the more blessed, then that estate of the Fathers,
because that sacrifice of Christ, is present and before our eyes, which they
behold a far off, and in plain words may say, God in christ is merciful, and
has forgiven al our sins, which they no way ar able to say. We learn also in
this place this, by the example of the Prophet, that the conscience of sin,
which we call the trouble or evil of the conscience, is an impediment that we
pray not friely unto God: Yea, we find also the same in experience, that an
evil conscience, unless it be cleansed, utterly stops up to us, al entry unto
God. For that is the thing which the Apostle says, Let us draw near with our
hearts, purged from an evil conscience. Wherefore no entry is patent unto God,
except the hearts be first purged, from an evil conscience. Also, that thing
which we spoke concerning the conscience of sin, we affirm the same of sin
the self, which if it be not altogether remooved out of the sight of GOD;
surely God shall not so much indeed, as count us worthy of his sight: And this
is that which is spoken in this place, If thou shall straightly mark
iniquities, o Iah, Lord, who can be able to stand] Then, to comprehe^d in one
word the things we have spoken. The conscience of sin, which forbids us to
look upon our God: And that is sin, which hinders God to look and behold us
that are miserable. And we learn the remedy of this evil, out of the second
part of the answer: But with thee is forgiuenesse] Wherefore this is the
only remedy, that we have our refuge unto the mercy of God, yea, and that by
a simple and clear confession of our sin. For no man ever yet compeared
before God, but as a certain guilty person, craving the mercy of God
earnestly, with a confession of his sins: But in this the whole difficulty
consists, how we may come to that throne of grace. For seeing we cannot
pearse, but as it were, through the midst of justice, as it were, through a
certain fire, and slamming wall unto the mercy of God, and to that throne of
grace, surely it is requisite, that he that would draw near to that throne of
grace, be enarmed and prepared against that wrath and righteousness of GOD,
which suffers nothing, which has, yea, and it were never so little
uncleanness in it, to approach near to that inviolable majesty. Now we
cannot be armed against the heat of that fire, with any other thing, then with
the alone righteousness and satisfaction of Jesus Christ. Wherefore, whosoever
would draw near to the throne of grace, and break through the midst of that
justice and wrath of God, of necessity that man must be found to be in Jesus
Christ, and that he be purged by that blood offered by his everlasting spirit,
from his dead works. Heb. 9. Then, after he is co^med to the throne of grace,
by the faith of Christ, then is that passing sweet voice of forgivenes and
justification heard. That thou mayest] This is the end of the mercy and
forgiveness of GOD, his worship and reverence. For no man ever at any time
reverently worshipped God; but he, to whom his sins were forgiven through the
mercy of God, that is, but to him who felt that benefit of the forgiveness of
his sins. For no man gloryfieth God, unless he himself first be glorified
of God; also, no man is glorified, but he who is already justified. Wherefore
the first effect of forgiveness, or pardoning of sins, is sanctification,
or our glorifying. And we, when we are already glorified, we glorify our GOD,
not that he has need of any of our glorifying, which comes from us, seeing
his glory is perfect in the self: But because our duty requires the same,
yea, and that for our own weill. For in this our happiness consists, not
that we our selves should be gloryfied, but that we should rather glorify for
ever our God. For to this end, as we are created and redeemed.

5 I have waited on Iehova, my soul has waited: yea, I have an expectation in
his word.

6 My soul is more diligent toward the Lord, then of the watches toward the
morning, watching even to the morning time.


I Have waited] The second part of the Psalm, in which, by a comparison made
of his own deed, and of his bypast expectation, he proposes, and professes
that he himself yet had his expectation in the word of God, because, to
wit, from a patient awaiting, he had experience of the mercy and
deliverance of God. For patience causes experience, experience causes hope of
a greater deliverance and mercy, then we have ever found at any time in
experience before. For the experience of the Temporal deliverance, causes a
hope of the everlasting deliverance; and that hope shall never at any time make
us ashamed. For we shall obtain fargreater things in that other life, then we
could have hoped for in this present life, look concerning these things, the
5. chap. of the Epist. to the Romans But let us weigh the words somewhat more
diligently, I have waited on Iehova] (says he) Then he subjoyneth, My soul
has waited] As if he should say, Not only with the eye, but with the mind
most entirely, I have waited for Iehova. For it is the earnest desire of the
mind which makes God present unto us. Also, concerning the expectation of
the godly, look Paul in the 8. chap. to the Romans We (says he) that have
the first fruits of the Spirit sigh, looking for our adoption. Thou see that
the awaiting for the godly, is with sighs which proceed from the heart: for
thereafter, in the same chap. he declares how much we profit in Gods sight by
these inutterable sighs: For God (says he) knows what is the meaning of
the Spirit, That is, those sighs which proceed from our heart, they presently
touch the mind of God with a feeling, because it is the Spirit of God
himself, which stirs up those sighs in our heart. We may be touched
indeed with a desire of any man which is absent, when in the mean time he is
no ways touched with that desire of ours neither yet do our sighs come into
his mind; for we sigh not by his spirit, but by our own spirit. But we no
sooner indeed sigh unto God, but he is moved with our sighs. For all these
sighs proceed from his spirit. Now this unspeakable joye, puts us in
mind, that he commoved with these sighs of ours, which is felt at once, with
those inutterable sighs; for this unspeakable joy can proceed from no thing
else, then from some presence of God. Yea, I haue] He says that he has an
expectation in the word of God, because, so long as we walk by faith, and not
by sight, we depend upon the word of God, and we behold God as it were in
the mirror of the Word, and not face to face and presently. My soul, etc.]
He makes his expectation clear, by a lesser comparison, of those who watch
and that indeed are occupied in continual watchings; to whom, no man coms in
their room, but they must watch the whole night long. Learn here, with how
great a care, they wait upon the Lord, and depend upon him; who have once
tasted how gracious the Lord is: For they are not so much forced by any
necessity to that, as they are allured by I know not what sweetness. Mark in
this place, what the estate of the godly in this life is, they are continually
occupied in watching, looking for the coming of the Lord. For this present
world, is a perpetual long lasting night unto them, if it be compared with
that world to come, in the second coming of Christ, and with that morning
which is so called. Psalm. 49. 15. in which, to wit, that Sun of
righteousness, Jesus Christ, shall arise. Mal. 3. 20. Also, I grant indeed,
that this world is a bright day, if it be compared with that, which
preceeded the first coming of Christ. From whence it is said, The night
(says he) is gone To. 15. ^1. 1. These 5. 5.
and the day approaches and, We are all said to be the children of the light,
and the children of God: but this present world being compared with the world
to come, and with that incomprehensible light, which then shall be seen;
surely not without cause, it shall rather have the name of a Night, then of a
Day. Also, a watchman is not so much bound to watch, and be occupied
continually, unto the morning time, then every one of us is bound to drive over
this whole night in watching. Of this arises that saying of Christ to his
Disciples, Watch, for ye know not the hour in which the Lord will come. Math.
24. 42.
And even as those who watch in the night, and are thus occupied are wearied
and fashed; And therefore they long for nothing so much, as for the Morning
time, at which time, they may refreshe themselves with sleep. So we that
watch unto that mourning time, in which Christ shall come: We are wearied and
oppressed with the burden of our sin and misery, so that many a time we are
tired of this life, and from thence aryseth, that vehemente desire of that
morning time, in which Christ will come: Who as soon as he comes, then
indeed we shall enjoy that everlasting rest. And as the Psalm. 23. 61.
speaks, We shall be at rest in the house of Iehova, so long as the time
shall be of length and continue. I speak of those who have watched in this
life. For they who have done nothing but sleeped in this life, these shall be
tormenetd with everlasting watching and pains.

7 Let Israel have an expectation in Iehova: for with Iehova is loving
kindness, and exceeding much redemption is with him.

4 And he himself will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.


LEt Israell] The third part of the Psalm, in which he recommedeth to
Israel, that is, to the whole Church, that self same awaiting that he has.
For he, who by awayting, has once felt in experience that mercy of God, not
only he himself waits for God in time to come; but he will have all men
together with him, to wait for Iehova, that all together may feel in
experience, the self same mercy. For he wills that all men, if it be
possible to be done, feel that loving kindness of the Lord which he has
felt. Also, this chiefly is meet for Israel to be done, that is, for the
Church of God. But that, which the Prophet respects as the last end, is the
glory of God himself. For every faithful man wills that many obtain mercy,
to this end, that many may glorify GOD, and is careful of man's salvation,
that the glory of Gods mercy may redounde to himself. For God, the moo puts
their trust in him, in that respect he is the more glorified. For with Iehova]
He puts Israel in mind to wait upon Iehova, from his gracious nature.
He demonstrateth not to Israel, a God, either mighty, righteous, or wise;
but a merciful and a gracious GOD. Wherefore does he so? do not the
remanent properties in GOD, as almightinesse, righteousness, wisdom, truth,
etc. Do not these, I say, purchase unto him the minds and faith of men? I
grant all these things, that in their own place indeed, they purchase the
faith of men; but seeing miserable men and sinners, have chiefelie need of the
mercy: Surely it is the mercy of God, which men chiefly require, and it is
the first object of faith. Also, when once faith hes apprehended the mercy of
God in Christ: then the other things which are in God, allure the same faith to
themselves: But without the feeling of the mercy of God, all other things, are
rather a terror unto us, then a consolation. First therefore, and properly,
faith is carried toward God as the object, in so far as he is merciful, and
the more we seek out in GOD that his infinite mercy, so much the more, do
we believe him, For what other thing, I pray you, is the growth of faith, but
an increase of the knowledge of the mercy of God: wherefore to the end that
faith may grow, it is continually requisite, that we search out the mercy of
God in Christ, which surely we shall do without any danger of curiosity, seeing
the other properties which are in God, they are not able to bear a curious
searching out. Paul amongst other things, wishes this to the Ephesians, that
being rooted in love, they may be able to comprehend with all Saints, Ephesians 3.
^7. 18. 19.
what is the breadeth and length, and depth and height: and to know the love of
Christ, which passes all knowledge: But in no place we read, that he wished,
that any man by knowledge should attain to that infinite power, wisdom, etc.
of God, to wit, because, it permits not so much to us to know those
things, then to know how greatly god loves us in Christ his son. Therefore
he is said in the 5. chap. to the Romans, to power out love in our hearts: But
we read not of the Spirit, that he powers out power, wisdom, etc. (which
are together in God) into our hearts, that is, that he touches not our minds
with so abundant a feling of them. Wherefore, to the end we may believe in
God, and may have our hope in him, his loving kindness and mercy in Christ,
is chiefly to be known of us; whereof the Prophet was not ignorant of in this
place, seeing he makes mention specially of his loving kindness, to the end
he might move Israel to hope in God. And exceeding] In words he amplifyeth,
the self same loving kindness of God: For no man, together and at one time,
could be able at any time, by any words whatsoever, to comprehend the whole
mercy of God: For there is ever something resting beside that which has been
spoken, that may be uttered thereof, such is the incomprehensible greatness of
the same; and those who have once felt in their mind, any mean portion
thereof, they indeed are not at any time able sufficiently to express in
words that portion, how little soever it be. For this spiritual feeling in
the hearts, whether it be of joy or of sorrow, is unspeakable, from thence
they are called, sighs that cannot be expressed, and ane inutterable^ joy.
Romans ^.
How much more therefore, 1. Pet. 1^
shall that whole mercy of God, not together, and at one time be expressed by
words: seeing that words are not able sufficiently to express, yea, and it
were no more but that little apprehension thereof, which is in our hearts. For
these words are not excessive and hyperbolicque, whereby godly men have
endeavored to express that mercy of GOD, even as thought, the words were
greater then the matters themselves, which thing, whosoever think, surely they
appear to me indeed, never to have comprehended in their mind, the mercy of
God in Christ. And he himselfe] This is the other argument, whereby, promising
assuredly, redemption to the Church, from her sins; he applies that loving
kindness of God, and manifold redemption, which he has published, more
near unto them. For it is not sufficient enough for faith, that any man in
general shall preach and recommend only the mercy of God, unless it promise,
that is apply assuredly the same to miserable men: for the promises are so many
applyings, of the mercy of God. And from thence it proceeds, that the
Scriptures are full of promises, without the which, that full persuasion of
faith, and spiritual confidence cannot be. For this general doctrine,
concerning the mercy of God, does this to us, that not so much indeed, we in
effect believe, as that our hearts, may be prepared unto faith. This is to be
observed, that he says, that God will redeem Israel, not from persecutions,
not from outward troubles whatsoever; but from al her sins. For the redemption
of the Church, is not seen in that, that she is delivered from the troubles of
this world, as in that, that she shall be delivered from her sins. For sin is
the most deadly enemy of al, and is the cause of all the rest of the enemies
of the church: because, al afflictions, are both from sin, and likewise tend
to the mortifying of sin. For it is certain, if there were not any sin in the
Church, there should be no persecution of the church: and every one of the
godly, sighs more under the burden of sin, then under any other weight of
afflictions whatsoever. Christ himself also dyed, to redeem us, not so much
from al afflictions, as from sin and that everlasting death. Finally, when at
that day, we shall be set free, into the liberty of the sons of God, being
fully redeemed, we shall glory, not so much, that we are redeemed from all other
afflictions, then that we are fully delivered from sin, as it appears out of
that saying of Paul, O death, where is thy victory? O grave, where is thy
broad? And the broad of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15. 33.
but the law is the power of sin. Behold, we shall glory in that day, that
we are delivered from the broad of death, and that by Christ Jesus our Lord:
To whom be all glory, Amen.

The Argument of the CXXXVII. Psalm.
A Psalm it is of a mixed kind, Of doctrine and of prayer, It is not manifest
by whom it was written* Yet it is likely that it was written by some Prophet,
and that in name of the whole Church of the Jews, being now in captivity. It
appears also, to be written at that time, when the people were carried away
into Babylonia, yea, even then when they were in the very journey, as it may be
gathered out of the first verse. Now it is composed of two parts. The first
is, an heavy complaint of the Church, unto the 7. verse. The other, is an
heavy imprecation, and a prophetical denunciation, against the enemies of the
Church, unto the end of the Psalm.

The CXXXVII. Psalm.
1 By the rivers of Babylonia, we sitting there, we wept very much, when we
remembered of Tzijon.

2 In it we hanged up our harpes upon the willowes:

3 Although in that place these who had led us away captives and had buried us
together, required of us joyful songs, saying: sing to us of the songs of
Tzijon.

4 How could we have soong the, song of Iehoua in the land of strangers?

5 If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget the self.

6 Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I remember thee not, if I
call not back unto Ieruschalaim the head of my joy.


BY the rivers] The first part of the Psalm; The complainte, in which there
is first, the proposition of the complaint, when he says, we weept very
much] That is, we were extreme sorrowful: For the Spirit makes intercession
for the church, with sighs that cannot be expressed To. 8. so to speak with
the Apostle: And it cannot be sufficiently spoken, with how great heaviness,
the Church is accustomed to be moved, when she is humbled under the hand of
God. This murning and sorrow of the Church, is circumscrived by the own
subject, when he says, By the ryvers of Babylonia] That is, of the
Babylonical monarchy: For the Jews were not only carried away into Babylonia,
so properly called, but they were dispersed throughout the Babylonicall
jurisdictions; as it may be most clearly gathered out of Ezekiel, Daniell, and
Ezra. Then the place is the Babylonicall monarchy in general, but in
particular the brinkes of the rivers: For he says, By the rivers of Babylonia:
We sitting there, that is, sitting upon the brinks of the rivers, unto such
time, as all were ferried over. This place of the Babylonical monarchy,
contains in the self, a certain cause of this weeping, which he sets
down. For the place manifestly shows, the banishment, and carrying away
into captivity, from their native soil to an strange land. Then the people
being in their journey, far from home, and banished, bewayleth their sins,
which ought to have bin bewailed at home. Not-with-standing, those who will not
murne at home, they are compelled to murne far from their home. For sins of
necessity, are once to be bewailed, and we must be sorrowful, either sooner
or later, because we have offended GOD. And if we be not sorrowful at home,
surely we shall murne far from home. And if we murne not in this life, surely
we shall be sorrowful in that other life, or rather death, where there shall
nothing be heard, but wayling and gnashing of teeth. Blessed are they also who
later, yea, and that in exile, yea, at any time whatsoever ar earnestly
sorrowful for their sins, if so be, they defer not their mourning to an
other World, blessed are they. For even those, who do later, yea, or at
whatsoever time, murne and repent in this life; in that other life, all tears
shall be wiped away from their eyes: But those who laugh in this life, and
refuse to murne in that other life, there shall be none end or measure of
their sorrow. When we remembred] This is the other cause of the mourning, but
somewhat more clear, to wit, the remembrance of Tzijon, that is, of
Jerusalem, where the visible and outward presence of God to be looked upon
was. For these who are banished from God, they do surely feel, what great
profit, yea, and it were no more but this which is in the presence of GOD, and
which is in this his visible ministry, and what great discommoditie is in that
his absence: we while we have God present in his ministry, and behold him
after some sort in that mirror of his Gospel, we acknowledge not how happy
we be, and it were no more, but for that self same cause. But if it shall
come to pass at any time, through the righteous judgment of GOD, that this
mirror of the Gospel, and this outward ministry be taken away from our
eyes, then indeed we shall feel in effect, what great misery it is to be
destitute thereof. I speak specially concerning those, who are accustomed at
any time to feel some pleasure, of this sincere preaching of the word, and
administration of the Sacraments. David being in exile, Remembering those things
(says he) I pour out my soul upon my self, when I remember that I was wont
to pass by in the congregation* to walk with them unto the house of God, etc.
Behold David, being banished from the visible Church of God, he was exceeding
greatly sorrowful: But what is the cause? Even, because he was wont to
walk together with the Church unto the house of GOD, with the voice of
singing and praise: That is, because he was to feel no little pleasure of that
external and visible ministry. And therefore being now a banished man, the
remembrance of that Spiritual pleasure and joy, moved him to no small
displeasure. Here we are to be admonished, that this dolor proceeding from the
remembrance of that heavenly joy, is not the sorrow of this world; But it is,
that dolor, which is called the godly sorrow, which surely, has greater joy
mixed therewith, then is the whole joy of this world, yea, albeit it be void
of all sense of sorrow. For every one of the godly, while they mourn, they
feel in the mean time, ane unspeakable joy, conjoined with sighs that cannot
be expressed. In it we hanged up our Harpes upon the Willowes] A certain
amplification, of the murning and sorrow set down. The Church murned, and cast
away al instruments and matter of consolation: For these who are sorrowful
earnestly, and from their heart, they think that all joy, and matter of
joy, is a displeasure unto them, and contrariwise, they think all heaviness
to be unto them as a pleasure: My tears are unto me (says DAVID) in steed
of meat. But what manner of songs were these? Psalm. 42. 4^
They were holy songs, and the songs of the Lord; those who earnestly and
sanctifiedly do weep, use not so much indeed, as to sing holy songs, For at
such time, as the Lord casts us down and humbles us; at that time, it
becomes us to mourn, rather then to singe, Iam 5. 13.
to be in displeasure, then to be joyful? Ezekiel. 3. 1.
If any man be afflicted among you? Let him pray: Is any man merry, let him
sing. All things have the own time, There is a time of weeping, and there is
a time of singing. Although in that place] The amplifying of the deed
immediately preceding, to wit, of the casting away of the instruments, and of
al matter of joy, from the contrary authority and commandment of the
Babylonians, who, when they had carried the people of God away captive, they
required of them, thus carried away, Joyful songs; but the Church indeed was
not moved and brought on to sing, for all their authority and command. For the
soul that is humbled by Gods hand, cannot be lifted up by any authority of
men, neither can be be merry. It is God alone, who as he induced either by
prayer or reward to hu^bleth, so may he lift up the dejected mind. Psalm. 40. 4.
He put a new song into my mouth. Mark next, that he adds, Those who carried
us away captives [as if he should say: Those self same men, who were the
cause of sorrow unto us, they required us that we should minister joy unto
them. Now the Prophet signifies here, that they would have had the people to
do some absurd and unreasonable thing; for the enemies of God and of the
Church, are not to be stirred up to joy; for so they should flatter and please
themselves, in their own malice. Thou see again here, that the Babylonians,
are not so much indeed as touched with any sense of the present sorrow of the
Church. The ungodly know not, what the displeasure, or what the joy of the
godly is. They vanish away in their own imaginations, neither yet do they
feel inwardly in their heart, either true and solid dolor and joy: For their
heart is not established by grace. Heb. 13. ^.
How could we] The church brings in the causes, wherefore she was not
moved, no, not so much, as by the authority of the Babylonians to sing, to the
end that you may know it is not sufficient, if we resist the superior powers,
of any obstinate affection, and obdured mind (for the power of the Babylonians
over the people, was according to the will and ordinance of GOD) except we
have also most just and grave causes to disobey. Also, the first reason is
taken, from the profaning of the holy songs, which is to be understood in
these words: The songs of Iehova: Then, in the Land of strangers: That is, in
a profane land, among profane men. For to sing the songs of Iehova, that is,
the songs that are holy unto God, at the pleasure of profane men; what other
thing is it, then to profane the holy things of God? for to lay out whatsoever
holy things, either the word of God, or the Sacraments, or any other thing of
that sort, unto the pleasure of men, that are defiled and unclean, which do
not seek so much as their own edifying in them, or the glory of God, but
their own unclean delight, what other thing is it, I pray you, then to cast
pearls before swine? If I forget] the other reason, from the forgetting of
Ieruschalaim, and of the church of God: it is made after this manner: If I shall
now sing (says the holy congregation) this were to forget Jerusalem and the
Church of God: But I will not forget Jerusalem: Therefore I will not sing: Mark
then, what it is to sing or rejoice in the mean time, that the Church of God
is any way afflicted. Surely, it is no other thing, then to forget the church:
But contrariwise, to murne with the murning Church, what other thing is it then
to remember the Church? For we testify, that we have a regard of the Church of
God, and that we take care thereof, from this common affection, and this mutual
compassion; whereby it comes to pass, that we rejoice with the rejoicing
Church, and murne with her, when she mourns. The assumptio^ of this reason,
is not set down nakedly, but with an execration, whereby he wishes a vengeance
to fall upon him self; that is, the impotencie of his own right hand, if he shall
strik the harp therewith, and the vnmoveablenes of his tongue if he should sing
with the same: for this cause he does this thing, because he waited assuredly,
for sum trouble and no table judgment of God, to light upon himself, if it
should come to pass, that he should forget God and his church: for thee
execrations and obtestations, ar an evide^t, that there abides the^, who forget
the Church of God, and who th^^ do laugh, when the Church weepeth, there
abides them, I say, an heavy judgment of God. If I call not] This is the
amplification of the words preceding, as if he should say: Not only will I
remember, but I will prefer and make more of the Church of GOD, above the head
of my joy, that is, I will esteem more of, then of my joy, although it were
never so great: For it is not enough to remember the church, but we must of
necessity prefer it to all things whatsoever.

7 Remember, O Iehova, against the Edomits, the day of Ieruschalaim, who said,
uncover, uncover so long as the foundation thereof shall be in it.

8 O Nation of Babylonia, that is to be destroyed, let him be blessed, who
shall recompense thee the wicked deed, whereby thou have troubled us!

9 Blessed shall he be who shall tak hold, and break in pieces thy young ones,
dashing them against a stone.


REmember] The other part of the Psalm, or an imprecation against the
Edomites, and a prophetical denunciation against the Babylonians. First then
after that the Church has bewailed her captivity, in the mids of the sorrow
she turns her self unto God, and she prays for an utter vengeance upon
her neighbors the Edomites. Then she turns her self against the
Babylonians, and she denunceth assuredly the judgment of God to come upon
them. We learn by the example of this Church, from what affection, any
imprecations and threatenings whatsoever, should proceed against Gods enemies;
That is, from an heavines and sorrow of the heart, and not from any light
motion of the mind. For when they come from sorrow and heavines, then indeed
they are heavy, and in their own time, they bring on a sure judgment;
otherwise, they are but light, and they provoke God more to wrath against our
selves, then against our enemies. Mark, as concerning the Edomites; we read
not that they, together with the Babylonians, overthrew the city of God, only
they did show^ in allowing the Babylonians in the mean time, while they were
destroying Ieruschalaim, O Babylonians (said they) uncover, vncover] And
therefore they were involved in the same judgment with the Babylonians. They
who assent to the wicked, and persecutors of the Church, either in word or in
heart; they are reckoned also in the number of the persecutors, and shall be
together judged with them* Then, as concerning the Babylonians, not only they
denunce the judgment against them, but blessedness is pronounced also, and
promised unto the instruments and executors of that judgment to come Darius
Medus, and Cyrus, to the end that we might know, that those are blessed who
execute the work of GOD diligently, as contrariwise, they are cursed, who do
the work of God negligently: Blessing is pronunced upon them also, who,
notwithstanding had not so much God before their eyes in that work, as the
enlarging of their own Empire. How much more shall they be blessed, who while
they are doing the work of the lord diligently, for the Lords sake himself they
do it, that all the glory of the work, may solidely and for ever, redound unto
him, Amen.

Proverb 10 verse. 7. The memorial of the just shall be blessed: But the name
of the wicked shall rotte. Isaiah 57 verse 1. The righteous perishes, and no
man considdereth it in heart: and merciful men are taken away, and no man
understands that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. Revel.
11. 14. verse. 13. Then I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the dead, which hereafter die in Lord, Even so says the Spirit,
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.
FINIS.

