MEDITATIONS OF INSTRVCTION, OF EXHORTATION, OF REPROFE:

INDEAVOVRING THE edification and reparation of the house of God.

1. PET. 4. 10. As every man has received the gift, so minister the same one
to another, as good disposers of the manifold grace of God. LONDON, Printed by
I. L. for George Gibbs and Francis Constable. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, THE SONS of the most High, his blessed Brethren by the
best, that is, the second Birth.
TRuly Honorable, whose Father is God, and whose Inheritance a Kingdom; the
diverse sparks of holy fire, which have issued from the Spirit that baptizeth
with fire, I have gathered together; by their united heat, to kindle a flame
where is none, or to increase it, where it is already kindled. This blessing
must come from God, and therefore of God have I desired it. And surely the
best, as ye well know, have turns of winter, even upon their hottest zeal,
and then woe to him that is alone, for how should he have heat? Therefore if in
the time of cooling, some spiritual work be joined to the heart, it may be
warmth will grow between them. So have I often from Elisha applied, even some
Prophet of God, received life; and I wish, that some quickening may proceed
also from this work; which in all writings is more or less, as the Spirit
therein more or less speaks.

These Meditations are indeed diverse in their matter, being diversely borne,
both in regard of time and occasion; yet tend they to one end, and this profit
often comes from variety, that some one thing among many, fitteth every one,
and gives an answer to the particular question of his heart. The glory of God
by your benefit, is that which I seek, desiring also to be helped by you,
both in prayer and exhortation. As for an idle name, made up still, of
perishing, and often of corrupt breaths, I leave it to them for an end, to whom
God is not an end sufficient. But let our chief joy and glory be to glorify
God, and by being written in heaven, to be admitted unto the beholding of his
glory. To that mark, my beloved, let us steadily aim, and sending our hearts
before unto Christ, let us go on lustily to overtake them. Let us draw hard up
the hill toward heaven: and though the flesh press down, the world and Satan
draw back; yet strengthened by the Spirit, encouraged by the word, and
fortified with the mutual and united force of mighty love, let us carry the
Ark of God, even the soul (wherein Gods Image dwells, and his will is
written) from the Country of the Philistims, to the Land of promise. And
though here our fleshly brethren, Ismael and his heirs, mock and despise us,
though Esau with his four hundred men look big upon us: yet are we sure that
their time is short, and but for life; whereas we have an inheritance
eternally glorious. Thither the sons of the flesh, though with long
pedegrees, and large treasures, can never enter; but sitting without, where is
weeping and gnashing of teeth, they shallsee despised holiness, triumph upon
magnificent and powerful wickedness. God our strength, whose cloud and pillar
guided Israel to Canaan, guide us to the heavenly Jerusalem, by the grace of
his Spirit. This I humbly desire through Christ his first borne, the purchaser
of our inheritance and door of all the mercy that issues from God unto man.

One of your least worthy brethren, but a great lover of you, and your peace.
F. R.

1
THe maine Faultiness of these Times, is a Disproportion, between Knowledge
and Action; or rather a mere resting in knowledge short of Action. So are we
come from no knowledge, to knowledge alone, which will not lessen, but increase
our judgment; and from the ouerualuing of works, to the Neglect of them.
Surely the error of works without knowledge, is less dangerous then the
error of knowledge without works: But this is the best of it, it is the
doctrine of our Nature, not of our Divinity. For while it is taught, that
works deserve not, some are content to think they are vselesse; others being
truly persuaded of their use, yet slothful to goodness, lie down in
knowledge, and will not go on to the labor of action. But as hereafter the
pain will follow the fault, so now let the shame: for certainly it is a great
shame, that so much knowledge should be idle, and that skilful men should
sleep in this Midday light; for the light was made for walking and working,
not for idleness. The Father shows his will, because he will have it done;
we are called to be sons, because we should do the will of our Father: and
Nebuchadnezzar gives the greatest title, when he calls the three children the
servants of the most high God. In the Spirit wherein is Life, is also
Actiuenesse: If we nourish not the actiuitie of it, we decay the Life, and so
kill our selves with eternal Death. Christ has no dead or unprofitable
Limbs, they all bear fruit, or are not his; and Faith which our sloth would
magnify, by resting in her, thrusts us on for her life to action; for she
lives only when she is active. If then faith not working, be dead, and dead
faith quickens not; the inactive believer may speedily with a Heathen see
himself without life. As these things may drive us, so the value of works may
draw us: for by Christ who works them in us, they are accepted of God, and
have a valuation stamped upon them, by his Grace for Grace. And first, though
works justify not us, they justify our Faith, and in the day of justice they
shall go so far toward justifying us, that they shall declare us just. In
the mean time, they please and glorify God, the giver of such gifts unto men,
and then even the least of them shall have a reward of glory, which they shall
set as a crown on their heads that wrought them. Let us not therefore be
wanting to this glory belonging to God from us, and issuing from God to us.
Besides, if we will consider what works are in themselves, we shall find that
they are streams of the Deity, their fountain, and sparks of that heavenly
and eternal fire. Accordingly they present and express something that is
Divine, and supernaturally excellent; whence it was that a Reverend Ancient well
said: The deeds and conversation of the Primitive Christians, had in them a
perfume and sweetness, wherewith they exceedingly delighted those with whom
they conuersed. And how can it otherwise be, for when he that is blessedness,
and excellence, powers virtue from himself into these works; they must needs
have a resemblance and partaking of their original. And surely there are two
things in them, which as they are the most pleasant of all other, so they most
resemble, and approach to the Creator. One of these is Light, and the other is
Love; both which put life and soul into every good work. God is Light, and
God is Love* and it is a pleasant thing to behold the Light; and Love is as the
precious ointment which was powered on the head of Aaron. Wherefore good works
being a Divine and heavenly offspring, let them be highly respected and
carefully cherished by us. Again, works are to us strong evidences of the
Spirit of Life, and therefore as sure as we would be of our salvation, so
careful let us be of good works: shameful it were for them who are so
scrupulous and eagre for security concerning temporal things, not to be more
eagre for the ensuing of their Election. Lastly, they are excellent in regard
of the benefit they do to mankind, which also is manifold. They do good by
the work wrought, and so they are as the dew of Heaven, which refreshes and
nourishes the dry and thirsty land. Surely to a good Christian there is
nothing more pleasant then to do good. For as he especially delights therein,
to please his Maker, so he exceedingly rejoices, thereby to profit his
neighbor. They do good also by example, for they come before men as
patterns; their sound goes forth and tells mankind what should be done, what
may be done; and so they palpably persuade men to be followers of them, that
are followers of Christ. Again, works do good unto men, while they are
moved by them, to lift up their hearts and eyes unto the heavenly Father, to
glorify him that gives such gifts to earthen and corrupted vessels. And
whenever God is glorified by man, man that glorifies him shall be blessed of
God; whenever glory is given to God on high, peace and good will shall be
bestowed on Men below. If these things will not yet move us, at least, let us
prevent the taking away of our candlestick and the remoouing of it, to a
nation that will bring forth more fruit. Let us prevent the scandal and
shame, which we purchase to our selves from the enemies of our Religion. Let us
prevent the vpbrayding of Chorazin and Bethsaida, Finally let us prevent that
fearful sentence: I know ye not, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.
This shall we do, if we become right Christians in whom faith works by
love: For the soul that is rooted in Christ, has from this root, the life of
Love, Divine, and Humane, which expresses it self outwardly in the fruit of
good actions.

2
It is a great unhappiness to many, that they mistake good nature for grace:
For so doing they set up their rest in it, thinking they are gone far enough
toward God, because they wish all well, and no hurt to any. But it must be
known that good nature at the best is not grace, yea it is full of enmities
that fight against Grace. For though it be somewhat apt and appliable to the
second Table, yet it is ever far short of the first, not having in it that true
knowledge and love of God, nor that inward pureness which therein is required.
So the observing of the second Table, is faulty, for want of the first; for if
a man do never so many seeming good works, if they proceed not from a heart
truly sanctified by God, they are glittering sins issuing from a corrupt
fountain, and tending to the sea of death. For nature is exceedingly blind
toward God, neither beholding, nor worshipping him as god, yea it is perverted
from God, and against God, and chooses many things to it self in stead of God.
Now that which is blind cannot lead us the right way, and that which straieth,
leads us a false way, even a way from life. Therefore let-vs employ our
judgments upon our own estates, that we may know whether there be in us
something more then Nature, and by which Nature it self may be rectified and
directed to the true scope and mark, which is God. If there be in us this
godly and immortal seed, let us water it, let us cherish it, as the life of
our life; if it be not in us, let us violently knock at the door of heaven
with groans, with panting desires, with vehement supplications, until there be
an opening to our knocking, a giving to our asking; and until they that thirst
may drink freely of the waters of life. Otherwise if in a lazy contentedness,
we lie along upon the stream of Nature, suffering it to carry us whither it
lists; certainly it slideth along to death, and all the benefit we can pick
out of it is this, that we go thither pleasantly.

3
The goodness of any worldly thing which so much pleases and moves us, is but
a spark of infinite goodness, which dwells in God, the author of it. If then
we love these small and transitory things with so great an affection,
proportionably should we raise our affection (if it were possible) toward God,
as much above it, as God is above his creature. At least, let the creature when
it gives us any comfort, be a remembrancer unto us of God, pointing to him as
the Author of every good thing, and our sovereign Good.

4
Having undertaken the profession of Christians, and considering in our own
thoughts, the persecutions and tentations that may befall us, or co^ferring of
them with others, let us not promise to our selves or others overmuch strength
or constancy; let us not promise over confidently what we will do, lest with
Peter, we perform nothing of that which we promise. For the strength which
must do this work of resisting and ouercomming temptation is not our own but
Gods: and how can thou promise that which is another? That which is ours, is
only the strength of flesh and blood; now flesh and blood, be it never so
lusty, is no match for temptations and persecutions. Indeed the spirits of men
in prosperity are prompt and forward, their imaginatio^s of themselves are
high, and they dare boast of great things. But let us know that the devil
overcame man at the best, and what may we not doubt of our selves, the weak
issue of man fallen to the worst? Let us therefore rather mistrust our own
strength, confessing it to be weakness; and in humility and confession of our
weakness, run to God, and call him our Rock and our strength. Let us say:
By my God I can break through an host, and by him I can leap over a wall of
temptations. And that we may obtain God to be our strength, let us instantly
beg of him that Spirit of Fire, which makes men strongly to endure the fiery
trial. Let us pray to him that he will continue to do in us, what he has bin
accustomed to do in others, even in infirmity to make his strength plain and
evident. And that we may be fully capable of the grace we pray for, let us
present our selves, as vessels empty, and altogether void, that of fullness we
may receive fullness. In sum, let us so speak, let us so think of our
selves as holy Paul: In us, that is in our flesh, there is no goodness, but
we hope and desire to do all things through Christ that strengthens us, even
to be more then Conquerours, through Christ that loves us.

5
All sorts of men propose to themselves a happiness and having proposed it,
they seek it with all their might, neglecting all things in coparison of it.
The happiness of the Gentiles is this world; and therefore they strive toward
it with all their strength, neglecting the kingdom of heaven in regard of the
world. But the happiness of a Christian is the kingdom of God, and setting
his heart thereon, he despises the world in comparison of it, and endeauours
wholly for faith and regeneration, the means to attain it. Now the Christians
have great advantages of the Heathen: For besides that our happiness is
eternal, theirs transitory; ours increases a man, theirs adds nothing to
man: we have even their happiness for an advantage, though not for an
happiness. For this world was made for the next, and whosoever have a right to
the next, they only have a right to this, and a promise that so much of this
world shall be added to them, as is necessary for them, in their way to the
next. He that sets us in a Journey, will give us food in the Journey as he
did Manna to the Israelites travailing to Canaan, and bread and drink to
Elias, when he was to go the great journey to the Mount of God. Surely if the
Creator give himself to us, how shall he not give his creatures with himself?
Therefore as we avoid the love of the Gentiles, so let us avoid their fear:
as we love not the world, as our chief good, so let us not fear the loss of
the world, as a chief evil; especially since we have a sure, steadfast, and
immovable word, God will not fail us, nor forsake us. Surely they that know
thy name will trust in thee O Lord; for they have seen and felt that thou have
not failed them that seek thee.

6
The Sun of the soul is God: while she is here therefore without God, she
has but her own light, which is but as the light of the eye without the
Sun, and is little more then blindness. Let us therefore still aspire to
that high and perfect light, where the soul looking out with open sight, shall
behold a Sun infinitely more passing this Sun, then the soul does the eye.
In the mean time let us be far from setting our content on this dungeon,
where the soul dwells in darkness; but in a godly disco^tent let us strive
here, to get some ray of that purest light, which may guide us through this
darkness, and from it, unto that glorious city, wherein God is the Sun.

7
The nature of man being subject to passions, is very apt to amend one vice
with another, and to run from one extremity, just as far as another. The
civil and spiritual powers are two, that may and would well live together, in
mutual comfort and unity. But in the first times after Christ, the civil
power mightily destroyed, and diminished the spiritual, hunting the possessors
thereof as partriches on the mountains. After this the clergy having gotten
power enough at least to right themselves, advanced toward the limits of the
temporalty, and at length invaded the very sword and scepter thereof. This
being the disease of the clergy, it was mightily purged, and now it concerns
the Laity, whose turn is next to be faulty, to look to it self, that it
continue not these circular evils. Likewise the Papists dug down the
foundation, to build up the walls, they took from Christ to magnify works.
Now let us take heed that we make not all foundation, and so indeed make no
foundation; for Christ is not a foundation to them that build not upon him. The
Popish Clergy covered their people with blindness, and then gave them a
line, which they willingly followed; ours desires to guide and fill us with
light: now far be it from us, so to hate blindness, that we do nothing but
stare on the light. Light on earth is a guide to light in heaven, but it is no
guide to them that do not follow it; yea to such in the day of darkness it
shall become an accuser. But though darkness should bring forth more works then
light, yet Hagar may not boast against Sara, nor ignorance against knowledge.
For first, these works of ignorance are the children of the bondwoman, even of
our natural corruption; and therefore shall not inherit with the children of
grace, the freewoman, neither shall they obtain any reward. Secondly, nature
spreads over all mankind, but true sanctifying grace comes into few. Now
superstition is rooted in nature, and so is general with nature; and therefore
it is no wonder if that which is general, bring forth more general, and common
fruits: neither if grace which dwells but in the few that enter in at the narrow
gate, makes the less muster, and outward appearance.

8
A Christian man has as much need of Christ's Spirit to be a Christian, and to
live eternally, as a natural man has of a Spirit to be a man, and to live
temporally. For as the soul and the body are a man, so Christ's Spirit and man
are a Christian, which is a holy, eternal and happy thing.

9
When a Christian has committed some notable sin, there presently open
before him two dangerous gulfs ready to swallow him; one of them is Despair,
the other, Presumption. He is tempted to believe, that he cannot be forgiven,
or that he is very easily forgiven; and so Gods mercy is too much assumed or
refused. But against presumption, should be set as a counterpoyse, the
Majesty and Justice of the great God that is offended, the foulness and
deformity of sin in the sight of that God, the breach of the Covenant made
with God, both at the outward, and inward Baptism; the grieuing of the Spirit,
with which we are sealed unto redemption: and finally, the temporal
punishments, wherewith God chastises his transgressing servants, especially,
not judging, humbling, or chastising themselves. Surely God is infinite in
Majesty, the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, the Angels cannot fully
behold him, the Sun and Stars are not pure in comparison of him. The same
God, is a just and jealous God, visiting sin and iniquity: for sin is more
loathsome in his sight, then the most abhorred filthiness, or foulest soars,
are in the eyes of me^. As for thy Covenant, thou have mightily broken it: thou
gave thy self to God in general, and now thou take thy self from him in
particulars: thou made an agreement with him to be his servant, if he would
be thy God; he is become thy God, and thou failest in thy promised service.
Besides, thou grieuest the Spirit, that co^forts thee: thou art a great
vexatio^ to him, who is thy chief consolation: thou frettest that which is thy
life eternal, and go about to quench him, who would quicken thee unto
glory everlasting. Lastly, that the punishments of sin may come within thy
consideration, remember David, for whose adultery and murder, his child of
adultery died; his wives were polluted with incest, and himself by his own
bowels, was driven from his palace into the fields of the wilderness. Remember
Hezekiah, for the lifting up of whose heart, the Treasures must be carried into
Babylon. Remember the Corinthians, of whom many were sick and many slept,
because they had sinned, and slept in their sins. Wherefore make have, run to
God right early, acknowledge thy sin against thy self, and humble thy self
under the mighty hand of God, that in due time he may exalt thee. That is the
only right exaltation which is done by God, and humiliation of thy self is
the only way to it: but an exaltation of thy self without God, will turn to
an humiliation by God, if not a confusion. But if thou washest away the
pleasure of sin, by the sorrow of repentance, if thou washest away the
pollution and deformity of sin, by cleanness of heart, and rightnesse of
Spirit, then may thou lay hold on the satisfaction of Christ to wash away the
guilt of thy sin, and so thou art wholly made clean. As God will not have his
mercy to be made an encouragement to sin, so he will not have his justice
to be a discouragement to them that turn from their sins: but justice
belongs to the presumptuous to humble them, and mercy to the humble and broken
hearted to refresh them. Come therefore thou that art heavy laden, which
feel thy sins as a burden intolerable, take the refreshing which belongs
to thee; and look not on the terror of justice any longer, which belongs to
the presumptuous, and not to thee. God will not that the reed bruised by the
Law, should be utterly broken, but that it be healed by the Gospel. Gods aim
in thy humbling is not despair, but Faith, Hope and Love; his end is thy
amendment, and not thy torment. But if thou doubtest that so great a sin has
cut thee off from Christ, and therefore thou dare not to make use of his
merits, know this, that by thy faith, which made a general surrender of thee
unto Christ, thou wast ingrafted into Christ; Christ was thine, and thou were
his. Now this Union is indissoluble, nothing can put asunder what God has thus
put together. Besides, Christ in his Union with thee, did not wholly take away
thy wild nature, but pouring in a godly nature, left also some remainder of
thy former wildnes. If then this wild nature bring forth the fruit of the
wild olive, it is no wonder; for it is so left, that sometimes when God hides
his face, it may lead us away captive unto the execution of sin. Yet the
Spirit of Christ even the^ lives in us, though in bondage, for the time; and
grace is then not put to death, but only made prisoner. The seed of Christ
remains immortal, he is still in thee, though sometimes thou bear thy own
fruit and not his. A general dominion of sin, excludes a general dominion
of Christ: but a particular sin may yet leave a general dominion to Christ.
Thou mislikest thy self because thou art not holy in all things: thou do
well to love and desire perfection; yet though thou offendest in some thing,
do not despair, for God has not given any man in this life so much grace, as
may give him a general rest from sin; he leaves this world as a place of
battle and combat, and refers perfect rest unto the world to come. Now
the same God, though in justice he requires a full obedience, yet in mercy he
accepts according to that we have; and he knows we have nothing, but what
we have received, and we have received only so much grace, as may exclude the
dominion of sin, but not abolish the being of it. Let us therefore not so much
busy our selves in superfluous and unprofitable vexation of our own souls, as
in the study of purging our selves from our sins, that we may bring forth more
fruit. This is it which God especially looks for after sin, and so doing we
shall undeniably prove to our selves, that we are still the lively branches of
Christ. A man's servant does sometimes his own work, yet if he presently
return to the work of his Master, and makes that his chief and maine
employment, he cease not to be his servant, since most he serves him. So
and much more is it between Christ and us; We are his, though sometimes serving
our selves especially being held by him, out of whose hand nothing can take us.
Therefore thou distressed soul, go thy ways, and endeavor to sin no more,
and then thy faith shall make thee whole.

10
The devil has put the world out of frame, and that in two ouerspreading
confusions; One is sin, the other misery. Now Christ came to unloose the
works of the devil, and performs it both in himself and in his members. His
own part he has fully perfected in himself, and now it remains that we
join with him to perform that part, which is to be done by Christ in us.
Therefore against sin, wherein the world blindly walks, let us oppose
sanctification, seeking to place it in the stead thereof, both in our selves and
others. Against misery let us employ the inward and outward consolations which
God has given us, releeuing refreshing, and encouraging all distressed
patients. This must we do, yet we may not expect that the work shall be
perfected until the great day come. Then only shall be a pure separation of
things now confounded. Then only shall the sin and misery which now cleave
to the Saints, fully be wiped away; and then shall a kingdom come, wherein
holiness, and happiness, lifted up far above sin and misery, shall
eternally dwell together. In the mean time we must patiently behold many
crooked things which no man can make straight, and yet we must strive to
reform the crookedness that may be made straight. Blessed are we if when our
Lord comes he shall find us so doing; we shall have our part in the
sentence of blessing, and our works of mercy and righteousness shall praise
us in the gates of heaven. And the same Christ who has here wrought mightily
in us unto the perfecting and advancing of his kingdom, shall there work
maruellously for us unto the advancing of us in his kingdom.

11
There is great reason, though it breed but little practice, that we should put
the love of the creature far below the love of the Creator, the love of things
perishing below the love of things enduring for ever, the love of things made
for us, below the love of him that made us, and for whom we were made. With
this reason, there is joined great reward, for at last things transitory will
part from us, and the love placed on them; but God continues for ever, even
after the other have forsaken us, and then rewards the love built on him with
an everlasting love: and on this love attend Joys unspeakable, and a crown of
glory Immarcessible.

12
Our knowledge in this world* is little and imperfect, but they that have
Christ by union with him, have a perfect wisdom, and are in him perfectly
wise. Let us therefore esteem our selves, and others more or less wise, as we
are more or less partakers of that high and infinite wisdom; and therein
especially let us strive for Supereminence. If in this little and narrow
knowledge of man we only excel others, it may be a just ground of contempt
against our selves, rather then a reason of that pride which is commonly
assumed, and employed in despising others. For those whom this humane wisdom
despises, may have an assured Right in the Divine wisdom; which in the
foolishness thereof is wiser then the wisest of men: and which being wise,
approoues her children for the most wise, for justifying of her; and which
finally shall raise up her meanest children in so true an image of God, that in
regard of their new understanding, the Schoole-taught knowledge even of old
Doctors, shall be ashamed of the name of knowledge, and shall appear to be
but as the rudiments of children. Let Christ therefore be the wisdom, by
which mankind should be especially measured, and valued; so shall the judging
of them be according to truth, not outward appearance, we shall judge the
judgment of God and not of man.

13
If any man have done some excellent work, by wit, learning or valor, we
ascend presently from the excellency of the work, to the excellency of the
worker, imagining him to be a fountain whereof his work is but a stream, and
we earnestly desire to see the more excellent cause, of so excellent an
effect. This is the ordinary course of natural Men; yet is there a most
notable and incomprehensible work, the work that contains all humane
works, yea man himself, and this work is daily seen; but few ascend from
the work to consider the worker, and much fewer desire to see him, and fewest
of all wonder that they do not desire. Surely to a rectified soul, it is a
great wonder, that for Atchieuements small in comparison of this great one, we
should look up with love and admiration to their cause; but for this huge
work, we should not lift up our eyes and desires, to the cause thereof, which
indeed comprehends, and causes all other causes. But again the same soul
cease to wonder when it looks on the fall of man; for therein it sees man's
chiefest corruption was in that fleshly wisdom which has blinded us to the
Creator, and makes us broad-sighted to the creature; which has put the head of
a beast into the heart of a man, and makes him look downward with the beasts,
from the maker to things made. But it is our part to vnhood our selves as much
as we may from this vizard of wisdom, and to judge of things according to
clear truth, not blind opinion. Let us pursue truth as long as it lasts,
not so long only as our muffled understanding does naturally and easily follow
and apprehend it. In this course of outgoing nature, yet let us set our first
foot in her own pathe: So on her ground we fasten this, that the Author is
more excellent then the work, the cause then the effect, and therefore if it
be pleasant or glorious to see and know the work and effect, it is far more
pleasant and glorious, to see the cause and author himself. But whereas
grouelling nature applies this rule only to these lower things, we knowing that
the truth thereof proceeds further, yea reaches especially to the cause of
causes: let us outstrip nature, and follow this truth, until it lead us into
an amazing wonder, a fervent love, a longing desire, to see that great producer
of all excellent works; that infinite being, from whom all this mass of
Creation has his Being, and who as far exceeds in wisdom, power, and
glory, the created wisdom, power, and glory, as an infinite and
indeterminable cause, may effects finite and determined.

14
If God have revealed a truth to us, which has bin long concealed, let us not
seek to have our selves proclaimed as the fountains of that truth, nor draw
followers to our selves, but to it, and by it to God. For God is the Author and
fountain of all truth, and of the revelation of truth; and so the truth found
is Gods, and the finding of the truth, appertains to the grace of God.
Therefore let us desire to get glory to him, to whom the glory indeed belongs.
And humbly thanking God, that among many of his excellent servants, he has
vouchsafed to use us in the revealing of it; let us steal away our own names
if we may from the honor thereof, leaving the whole glory to the name of God,
whose work it is. If thus we draw men to the truth, and by the truth unto God;
not to Paul or Cephas, but unto Christ; this seeking of gods glory with the
loss of our own, will God reward with infinite glory: whereas the setting up
of our selves in Gods stead, the jealous God will punish with extreme
torments, as most odious idolatry. Yet even in this life to such humble seers
does honor belong, though not the honor of fountains, yet the honor of
cesternes, even the honor due to such as God honors, by committing to them
his oracles and secrets. And even to their humility belongs honor, for
humility is Gods way to preferment; which though it takes away the value of our
selves to our selves, yet as an excellent grace it ought to increase the same
value, in the sight of others as it does in the sight of God.

15
When there comes any pleasure to be lost, or pain to be suffered for Gods
sake, let us set up a balance in our hearts: in one scale, let us set the
temporal pleasure we lose, and in the other, the eternal pleasure we gain by
this loss; and we shall see the weight of this latter to be infinitely
exceeding. So likewise for pain, let us set the temporal pain in one
balance, and the eternal in the other; and we shall see there also the weight
of eternal pain far to exceed that of the temporal. Now if we use but our
ordinary judgment, of good things to choose the greatest, and of evils to
choose the least, we shall presently consent with the loss of temporal
pleasure, to procure eternal joy, and with the enduring of temporal pain, to
avoid pain eternal; especially, since with the avoiding of that eternal
torment, the exceeding weight of joy, is jointly procured.

16
There is a great craft of Satan, which passes too much unmarked, or
unresisted, and this it is; That he seeks by all means to keep his own
kingdom whole and undivided, and to divide by schisms and contentions, the
kingdom and body of Christ; that by the malice of such contentions, the flock
of Christ may bite one another, and consequently devour one another, and so
do Satan's business for him. But it behooves Christians to note this his
cunning, and with detestation to beware, that they be not Satan's in struments,
nor become those mad members which fight and strike one at another, and seek to
tear that asunder, which God has unseparably joined together. And lamentable
indeed is this madness and folly: for the main business of Christ, effected by
a bloody death, and bitter passion, is, to set in unity and peace, the things
in heaven and earth. Besides, he has left as a legacy to his Church, the
preservation and continuance of the unity which himself began; As I have
loved you, so love ye one another. Again, Christ has prayed to his Father,
that we may be one, as he and his Father is one. Now cursed is he that goes
about to break this threefold cord, and endeavors to frustrate the death of
Christ, the commandment of Christ, and the prayer of Christ. But thou will
say, I divide my self from him, and oppose my self against him, because he
opposes himself against Christ in some incurable error. But take thou heed
that this error separate him from Christ, and remove the foundation, else thou
can not hate him. For when men agree in the saving foundation, they become
one body and one building, united upon that foundation, and unto it. Now when
men acknowledge Christ, in whom is the Trinity united to man, to be
happiness, and the only means of happiness, even the Door, the Way, and
the Life; and to this Christ wholly resign and surrender themselves, to be
justified, to be sanctified by him; these have received into themselves, the
root of Life; they are one with Christ, and one among themselves. But that
these united members, because one received this faith of Paul, another of
Peter; because one believes something more, another something less in matters
not absolutely necessary to salvation, nor directly overthrowing the
foundation; should mutually hate and revile one another, should shun mutual
conversation, should prosecute and persecute one another with enuenomed
tongues, is most unreasonable and lamentable. Is not the solid union between
them a more cause of love, then the slight difference a cause of hate? Nay,
will Christ allow, that there is any cause sufficient, to make his members hate
one another, whom he has tied in the bond of peace, by such mighty knots?
Especially right loathsome is it to him, to have his name used for a pretense of
such hatred, which above all names, is the name of love and peace. Surely
Christ knows, that when men in this kind pretend to serve Christ, they indeed
serve Satan. He knows that unity is the preservation of his kingdom, and
division, the destruction of all kingdoms. Therefore if thou will please
Christ, preserve his Kingdom by preserving unity; it pleases not the head, to
have his member, bruised, bitten, or hurt. He allows not the member of greater
knowledge, to be proud over a member of less knowledge, much less to make
their difference of knowledge, a ground of hatred. He himself forgiues this
ignorance and error, for which thou hate thy brother, and offers up his
blood to the Father that he may be forgiven. Yea he loves this brother
notwithstanding his error, and what art thou then to hate one whom Christ
loves? Even thy self also (though perchance thou think it not) art by
Christ, borne with, and forgiven for greater errors and ignorances; for of
thee and us still, Christ knows this to be true, that yet we know but in part.
Therefore thou that pretendest to please thy Head, be truly conformable to
him, and thou shall indeed please him. Love where he loves, and bear with him
with whom he bears. Obey that new commandment of his, That ye love one
another. Express this love in instructing thy brother, if he be ignorant; and
hate him not, though he be so weak, that he cannot receive thy instruction.
He is yet grounded on Christ, he is yet a living member of Christ, he is still
a soldier for Christ; therefore still join with him, and comfort him in the
battles of the Lord. Take heed thou quench not that which smoketh, nor beat
down the weak hands, which should be lifted up against Satan, and that thou
diminish not one of Christ's Band. But assemble rather, encourage, and unite the
army of God, persuading them to grow strong by growing on; that so being
mutually strengthened by union, we may be more victorious in our fighting for
God; and ouercomming, may be admitted to eat of the Manna which is hid, and to
reign with Christ for evermore. Let us be glad of company in this our
pilgrimage to heaven, and far be it from us to lessen it by division. But
let us rejoice when any says, though in some infirmity, Let us go up to the
house of the Lord, to the City of the living God.

17
God is one and immutable, so may we as certainly know what he will be
hereafter, as what he has been already. Heretofore if men feared him, they
might be without all other fear, for he was their Father, Defender and
Maintainer. This having been tried, we say it is certain, and with as much
certainty may we pronounce of the time to come, that if we fear him, he will
also to us be a merciful God. Let us not therefore doubt any change in him, but
in our selves; and striving by all holy contention, prayer, fasting and
watching, to keep our selves steadfast toward him, let us assure our selves,
that he is the Rock immovable, whom we shall ever find in one and the same
place.

18
If God commands us to do a thing, and all worldly profits and pleasures
mustering themselves together, like the kingdoms of the world before Christ,
persuade the contrary, we must then wink with the eye of flesh, and so not
see, or at least, not regard any of them. But then looking wide open with the
eye of faith, let us steadfastly behold God and his glory, remembering our duty
to him, our covenant with him, our happiness in him. If thus we can guide the
eye of our soul, that it look on the things eternal which are not seen, and
not upon the things temporal, which may be seen, we shall be allured forward
toward that Kingdom of rest, where our hope is fixed, and we shall pass along
as pilgrims, through this world of lusts, unhurt and vnhindred by them.

19
Christ as he took flesh of the Virgin, so was he the son of Adam, which he
was, to be subject to the Law laid on Adam; that by subjection to it, he
might fulfill and satisfy it. But Christ as he was begotten of God, and one
with the second person, so was he an Adam himself, even a father of mankind,
by a new kind of generation; and the first Adam from whom Christ came, must by
Christ be begotten if he will live in the new world, even the new heavens, and
the new earth. Thus we see two roots of generation, one carnal another
spiritual, one ingendring to bondage and death, another to life and
happiness. We must pray to the great Husbandman, that he will cut us off
from the first root, and ingraffe us into the second; for he that comes
after, is preferred before, for he was before. Then are we translated from
death to life, then are we Citizens of the new Jerusalem, we are passed from
the old things which must be blotted out, and are come into the new world,
which abides for ever. Where be now these pedegrees from Adam, and the sons
of Adam with their swelling glory? They often come forth to amate Gods children
of low degree, yet are these the pedegrees of death, they prove their owners
to be the glorious sons of sin and mortality. But, O the infinite
happiness, and privilege of the sons of God, borne of the best Father, in the
best image, to the best inheritance! God their Father begets them to his own
image, and becomes their inheritance, in whom is the fullness of glory, beyond
whom is nothing, and therefore nothing to be sought beyond him. Let us in
comparison of this new birth and life, despise the glory of earthly birth, and
earthly life, not as if we had neither eminence of birth, nor pleasures of
life, (which perchance was a reason to Philosophers, but must not be to
Christians and to many it needs not) but because they are gross, miserable,
and base in respect of the other. For this cause let us especially dote on our
heavenly pedigree, and celestial happiness, growing still stronger in love
with heaven, as we grow nearer unto it. Let us refuse to be called the sons
of Pharaohs daughter, in respect of being the sons of Pharaohs Creator. And
though this descent and inheritance be invisible, yet therefore are they the
better; for that which may be seen, shall vanish away, but that which may not
be seen endures for ever; that which may be seen, is gross, but that which
may not be seen is pure and glorious, and only discernable by a glorified
sight.

20
Gods time and our time are often different; but surely he that is wisest,
appoints the fittest times. Accordingly, God who is wisdom, gives both
meat and all things in due season. Let us therefore with patience surre^der our
selves up to him in all our necessities, suffering willingly his time, to be
ours. For he will come though he seem to tarry, and that in the fittest time,
( Luke 18.) his coming being quick enough in his judgment, when sometimes it
seems slow to ours.

21
The children of Anak and Achitophel, out of the acknowledgement of their own
strength, and cunning, think that if God would have any servants, he would
choose such able men as themselves, and not the meaner sort whom they despise
with the Pharisees, saying; Does any of the Pharisees believe in him, but this
base people which is accursed? Again, they are persuaded, that if God would
not find out them, they could find out God, sooner then the simple swain,
that believes, as they think, only out of a low spirited fear. But let them
know, that the more earthen the vessel is, the more is the glory of him, that
does great works in it. For the baseness of the vessel puts away all the
glory from it self, unto God. Therefore according to Gods speech of Gideons
army; They are too many for me, to overcome Midian by them, we may say of
these jolly men: They are too good for God to work his glory by them: yet
humility acknowledging all sufficiency to be from God, and to be nothing
without him, might take them down, and so make them fit for God. But as for
the finding of God in Christ without his own light, surely they may as well
find the Sun in the night, and the secrets of the spirit of man, when the
man himself is silent. God must shine, if he will be seen; he must both
tell his secrets, and give an understanding to conceive them, if man shall
receive them. As no man can see God and live, so no natural man can see Christ
who is God, as long as he lives a mere natural man. He must die; and
especially to his own wisdom; and his very sight, which he magnifies, for
clearnes, must be acknowledged for blindness, and be brought to be cured by
the lightsome Spirit of Christ, which then will show him from whom it self
proceeded.

22
We are gods, and not our own; so are our children, by creation, if not by
sealing. Why should we doubt that God will not provide for his own, and in
this doubt seek to piece out his providence, with a distrustful providence of
our own, which indeed at the best, is but a shrid of his. Surely our selves
and our children, being more his then ours, and his love to his own, being
purer, and wiser then ours, we might rest well contented with that portion
which is granted by him, to our lawful endeauours. For the heavenly Father,
gives good, yea the best gifts though the earthly fathers would feign
sometimes give greater ones. But the greatness which the earthly desire, is
earthly, but the good (which also is great) that the heavenly gives, is
heavenly; And this God knows to be a substantial blessing, for it is
blessedness it self, stretching beyond time, and reaching in place above moth
and rust. Be we then thankesgiuers, and not murmurers, when we or our
children, have store of grace, though with little wealth; for we are then very
rich in the true treasure, though not in the vanishing; and our Father has
provided for us many cities, and a large inheritance ( Luke 19. 17.) in the
land of the living.

23
The Scripture has authority, and selfe-vpholding in it self, because it is
the word of God; and this it has, and is, whether men receive it or not. Truth
is as much truth when it is not acknowledged, as when it is. But the true
manner of receiving it is this. At first the Church enlightened by Gods Spirit,
saw and beheld in it the truth of God, received it, and commended it to all to
be believed. Now the learners of Christianity, receive it first on this
commendation of the Church, before by it they receive the Spirit to discern
it; As children believe rules given by their Masters upon trust, before that by
the rules, they come to the knowledge that they are right rules. But after
having been enlightened by the Spirit, they receive it then, upon their own
knowledge, as the first Church did. And thus proceeding they come at last to
judge the Church it self, by that word, which before they received from the
Church. So while I am a natural man, I receive the word of men; but when I
become a spiritual man, which discerns all things, I then discern it to be
the word by the Spirit. And the belief which comes from this spiritual
discerning, is truly and only faith, the former is only credence and trust;
the one has the very word for the object thereof, the other, the persons of
men. Now miserable is the estate of that Church that hedgeth in men within that
trust, and never does suffer them, or at least encourage them to proceed to
faith. Where it is taught that it is sufficient to believe the Church, there
man's mind is persuaded to rest in that belief, and cares not to believe the
word for it self. Such a persuasion fastneth the eye on men, and turns it
from the word of light which gives light to the simple, and might, and would
be seen it self. Indeed it is an excellent cover for a bad Religion, for it
keeps men within the pale of security since they must ask their teachers
only whether their teachers be deceived. By the same rule may the Alcoran also
be established, or any the most pestilent Herisie, if men must be bounded by
their teachers, and not look beyond their teaching. But far more blessed are
they, if they be also blessed with thankfulness, who may look Divine truth in
the face, and love it for the beauty which themselves behold in it. And as men
have happiness hereby, so has God his glory, who scorneth that his word
should have men to give their word for it. It is a word that stands by it
self, it approoueth it self. And lest men should say, that the former trust
helps the weakness of men, and not of the word; they should know, that God
has taken course himself, that man should not still continue in such a
weakness, that still might need such help. For as he gives the word to shine
from without, so he gives his Spirit to shine within, that the light of the
Spirit might apprehend the light of the word. Let us not therefore forsake this
invincible rock of Christian religion, even a self-approuing, and
selfe-establishing authority of the word. For as hreby it is strong in it own
strength, and so bears it self immovable, against all exception, so herein
it excels all errors and heresies, since none of them can stand in their own
power. Be this then the privilege of the word, never to be lost.

24
There are in man naturally, three knowledges of good and evil: one of reason,
which is true, as far as reason guides it. Another of instinct, imprinted
into the nature of man at his creation; such a knowledge thinks it good to love
our children, to relieve the distressed, and thinks the contrary evil. Hereto
is joined that natural affection, which Paul commends, Romans 1. but in this
sometimes is excess, sometimes defect; and therefore it must be advanced or
lessened, as the measure of reason requires. A third is of lust, and sometimes
called by us humor, which esteems things good or evil, out of some blind
affection, not for any reason or just cause. So some love killing, and hate
mercy, some love trouble, and hate quietness, some love nothing but wealth, some
utterly neglect it, some think fame to be good, and honesty foolishness.
This came with the fall, and hereof we must take heed in all our actions: for
this is that darkness, which brings forth the works of darkness, and leads
to eternal darkness.

25
The things of the next world, are as certain as these here: for the same
word that said, Let these be, and they were; says also, There are such
incomprehensible things prepared for them that love God. They are as certainly
known by faith, as these by sight; as truly, though not so largely. For Moses
saw them certainly; else perchance for them would he not have forsaken the
certain pleasures of sin. And the Word says, that his faith truly saw God;
and no one true thing, is more true, then another. Again, the things
invisible, are certainly better then the visible: for holy men have ever
despised the present for those to come. The heart can conceive temporal things,
but not eternal; and that which is of God, is infinitely inferior to God
himself. But what is the reason then that we choose them not, being certainly
known, and far better? The reason is, because our station is natural,
elementarie and gross, and likeness makes love only to like. Therefore also
the things above being supernatural and pure, must have a mind of like temper
to love them. There must be a new station, a second work, even stinting and
crossing nature. Yea, we must have a mind lifted above nature, to love things
above nature, we must be raised above flesh into an heavenly knowledge, to
see heavenly truth, not sinking with beasts into the low region of seeing,
touching, and tasting. Thus lifted up and made spiritual, we shall discern and
approve spiritual things, as the natural man does the objects of nature.
Therefore let us importune God, the Father of this better nature, that he will
distill into us some drops of that heavenly dew, which may give us heavenly
minds, and make us to love the things of heaven, as much as flesh and blood
does things of earth. Surely until then, the wise Naturalist, thinks
happiness folly; and then the spiritual man demonstrably sees and proves
all present things to be vain vanity. Until then we are but great children,
or brute beasts concluded under the senses; and we then only are men, when we
get the image of God our Father, which both knows him, and is known of him.
Such were they whom God made at first, and such are they whom God now makes
again.

26
If every thing be desirable according to the benefit thereof, then either
prosperity or adversity may be loved, and neither determinately hated or
condemned. For either is very profitable to a man, and most commonly,
adversity. Let us therefore cease to despise it in others, or impatiently to
bear it in our selves, since adversity has whipped many to heaven, when
prosperity has coached more to hell. Let us leave off, with children only to
desire pleasant things, and grown into men in Christ, let us desire wholesome
things. It is better in good sadness to be saved, then in good fellowship to
be damned.

27
The Church truly and rightly calls God her salvation. By God is not one
person only meant, but the whole three persons. For God the Father, through his
Son, by the holy Ghost, saves us. God the Father, principally out of a
fundamental love elected us, appointed and gave the means, by which this
election might produce salvation. God the Son principally did put himself
into the very work of our salvation, and became the maine matter, means and
treasury thereof. God the holy Ghost principally distributeth and imparteth by
particular gift and application, the salvation, which was foreordained by the
Father, and is treasured up in the Son. So the whole Trinity joins
together in this our happiness, it being absolutely necessary toward our
salvation, that there should be an election and appointment of the means, an
actual exhibition of the means appointed, and an actual application of the
means exhibited. Therefore when we say, we are saved by Christ, we mean not,
that we are saved by the second person only, and the humane nature united to
him: but with Saint Paul we mean, that whole God was in Christ, and reconciled
the world to himself. Accordingly in our due thanksgiuings, when we praise God
for his gifts toward the new life, we ascribe glory to him for our Election,
for our Justification, for our Regeneration, which are the maine works of our
salvation, and are the ioynt-workes of the undivided Trinity. But yet we can
follow this truth no farther, then it goes before us. Therefore when we come to
regeneration, there must we stop and look no further for salvation, for
therein is our salvation accomplished, and all the parts thereof perfected. If
after we will go on to works as to further causes of our salvation, we go
beyond the truth, being past the Godhead, and come unto man. For though it may
be said, that God works these works in man, yet man joins therein with
God. Now the salvation of man is derived into man from God alone, and is then
absolute and full in parts, when Election, Justification, and Regeneration, the
absolute and only works of the Trinity, have wrought upon him. For
regeneration having put into man, the seed of God which is the seed of life;
Man is then translated from death to life; and having begotten him the Son of
God, he is then the heir of promised glory and eternity. Indeed works
coming after the state and right of life and glory, their goodness, as it
comes from God, so it shall be rewarded by God, increasing the degrees of that
glory, wherein before we had an undeniable property, and title. Therefore works
add not a new part of salvation but only increase the issues, and fruit of a
part formerly possessed. Accordingly does the Divine song of that ravished
soul, orderly declare Gods saving of us from our enemies to go before our
serving of God, in holiness all the days of our life: So works themselves
are placed, as fruits of our salvation, and therefore the glory given to
works, is but as the fruit of the fruit of salvation. But why then shall it
be said; Come ye blessed, for ye fed me; and blessed are they that keep the
commandments, that their right may be in the tree of Life; So that good works
seem to justify and save in the day of judgment. Herein comparisons may
inlighten, though not prove. If a man have a wife of a suspected life, whose
many children when the dying husband calls before him, he says to those
that lively represent him; Come to me the true sons of Me your Father, you
truly resemble me, therefore to you shall be given the inheritance of your
Father. Here for their countenance and proportion is the inheritance adjudged
to them, yet is it not for that indeed given them, but because thereby they are
judged to be sons, for which Sonship, the inheritance is verily given them.
So does God in his great judgment, he will judge men to be his sons by
their good works, it being impossible that good works can come from any cause
but Regeneration, and for the regenerate sons, was the kingdom of glory
long agone prepared even by that election which was before the world. So the
word, For, does not still imply the cause it self, but sometimes an
inseparable sign annexed to the cause, as if it should be said: My sons are
heirs of my kingdom, and those which are my sons, and they only bring forth
the works of love; these works have I seen in you, therefore do I acknowledge
you to be my sons, enter into your Fathers joy.

28
There are two things without in the word, which witness it to be excellent
above nature; A supernatural truth, and a supernatural holiness; There are
also two supernatural things within a Christian, which join their inward
witnessing to the outward; A supernatural inlightning, to acknowledge, and
believe this truth; and a supernatural virtue changing the will into a
conformity with this holiness. So in the mouth of many witnesses stands
firm the truth of divine truth.

29
Man and the earth are grown wild by the fall of Adam, both bring forth
weeds of their own nature. But as the earth is cured by husbandry and good
seed, so by the regeneration of Christ the chief husbandman, and the seed of
the word, man is brought into a fruitful nature, and has a remedy for the
first Adam by the last. Blessed be the word which is God, and reverenced and
desired be the word of that Word which is of God, for of them is our life and
health.

30
As a man in his first conversion yielded himself into a general submission
unto the spirit, so must he do in every particular action; and then most
resolutely when sin tempts most strongly our selves. We made our covenant at
first for the whole, and continually we must perform the parts of the promised
whole. When we gave our selves to the spirit, of dead branches to be made
lively branches, withal inclusiuely, we gave our selves to bring forth the
continual fruit of living branches; which is done by a continual sucking of
life from the spirit which quickneth us. Now if we rest contented only with
our first ingrafting, though the Almightinesse of him whose seed is immortal,
and who will not fail of his end, may preserve us alive, yet do we what we may
to kill our selves, and to falsify our covenant with him: who therefore being
offended will chastise us with temporal judgments, and desertions, and will
show that when he is angry he is a consuming fire. But let the true sons
keep near to their father, let them keep close to his spirit, moving at
every motion of it, and filling the wants in their Lamps with the continual
oil thereof; for this spirit is our very life and the witness thereof; By our
general resignation this life entered, and by particular resignation this life
increases; so the more we sow to this spirit, the more we shall reap of life
eternal. Again, as a man in his great and main conversion from a sinner and
guilty, to a sanctified and justified man, goes over himself in general with
yt judgment of the Law, whereby finding himself a man of death, he flies
unto Christ, who baptizeth him from his guilt, and sinfulness by his Blood and
Spirit; giving both his actual righteousness; and the spirits habitual
righteousness; so after the committing of every particular sin, we should go
over it with a particular judgment of ye Law, whereby acknowledging it to be a
work of death, we should fly to a particular application of the great
Baptism: that so putting away the particular guilt of that sin by the
washing of Christ's blood, and the particular uncleanness of that sin by the
washing of Christ's Spirit, we which before were generally cleansed and
justified, may also have a particular and continual clensing and justification.
For our inward and outward Baptism though at once performed, is of continual
use, and daily we must have a recourse thereto (to wit by the outward
remembering and passing to the inward) that the stock of justification, and
sanctification at first imparted may be daily applied, and distributed to our
particular necessities. And though being in Christ we have in him justification
and sanctification, yet God expects we shall not let either of them shift
for it self, and to work on us, not working therewith. But he looks that
daily sinning against him, we should daily offer up to him the justification of
Christ to purge away the guilt of sin; and daily request of him the Spirit of
sanctification, and the increase thereof to purge away the defiling of sin.
Thus doing we keep our selves in continual pureness, and to be pure we must
do thus; And because the latter is most painful but absolutely necessary, we
must give great heed thereto. For all sin leaving on us guilt, and a stain,
the guilt is not ordinarily forgiven except the stain be taken away;
therefore as often as we would be forgiven of the guilt by Christ's blood, let us
ask Christ's Spirit to wash away the spot contracted by sin. When David will
hopefully pray to be delivered from bloud-guiltinesse, he must pray also,
Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit in me. Thus must the
sons and daughters of God put away every uncleanness from among them, being
perfect in their purposes and endeauours, as their heavenly Father is perfect.
And when they entreat this Spirit to cleanse the blemish of their soul, they
must do it with a submission to the spirit, to be wholly guided and changed
thereby, and particularly to have that very sin slain, which before defiled
them; that the spirit may be as it were revenged on the sin which grieved it,
and that it may be restored to the true place and power thereof, even of
reigning and dominion over us and our sinful lusts; from which it was degraded
by that rebellious sinner, which therefore must now be subjected and cast
down under it.

31
Death in respect of this life seems to be a great evil, because it is an
end of life, and of all the pleasures thereof. But the same death is rather a
most excellent benefit which puts us out of this life subject to evil, and
whose natural happiness is in the creature, into an eternal life beyond the
reach of evil, whose happiness is the enjoying of the infinite fulness of the
Creator, in whom the goodness of the creature is also included. Therefore
death is a gate, whose near side, though it seem covered with blackness, yet
the inner side is covered with shining gold, and the purest light has her
dwelling there. Let us therefore with the holy men of God by faith, look to
the farther side of this partition, let us pierce beyond darkness unto light,
beyond the shade unto glory, not sticking altogether with the blind multitude
on the darkness, which is on this side, as bounded therewith. Then with Paul
shall we cry to be dissolved to be with Christ, we shall so admire the
inside, that we shall despise the outside; we shall with the holy Martyrs and
Saints push at this gate, saying, Open the everlasting doors, that we may
enter in unto the King of glory. Besides, if we will look from our selves to
other creatures, worms, birds and cattle die for the profit of men, yea for
their pleasure; yet man created them not, neither can claim any right to this
power of their lives, but by gift. But God by creation has a right to man, and
for his glory has appointed man to die, which owes infinitely more to God,
then the creatures to man: yet man is loath to do that for God, which without
feeling he will have the beasts do for him. But, O man, yield to thy Maker, be
thou for him, who has made the beasts for thee, and therefore himself. Break
not this appointed order: thou have this addition of comfort, thou go to
happiness when thou die, and so God does not kill thee, but call for thee.
He takes thee not from being, but alters thy being, and makes it better; follow
him gladly therefore, removing thee to bliss: and the Law which thou willingly
allowest on the creature to his extinguishment, allow also upon thy self for
thy advantage. But if thou will not yet away, thou must, thou may lose the
benefit which might be made of it, but escape thou can not; the decree of
heaven must stand in despite of thee; and to conform our selves to it, is our
chief wisdom and ease.

32
Many things are troublesome and full of work; one thing is easy, ready and
mannageable. Many things can tend no farther then this world, which tends but
to vanity and corruption; one thing tends to eternity, and to happiness in
eternity. Again, these many things leading to vanity, hinder much that one
thing which leads to eternal felicity. Let men therefore choose that one
which is easy, and rewards with happiness, rather then the many which comber
us, only for vanity. But especially let them beware, that with those many
things of vanity they comber and hinder not that one thing of felicity. Let
them beware, that with temporal trouble, they purchase not trouble eternal;
and so take pains never to be out of trouble. Many there are, who have a
smoking flax of religion in them, and ambition or covetousness allureth them
to put into their hearts, the many things which are combersome, thinking still
to retain room for that one thing which is necessary. But by little and
little the many things so possess the heart, that the one thing is thronged
out, and the smoke which might have been a fire, is no longer a smoke. Thus do
they kill the spiritual life which began in them, and with many cares buy
death eternal. But pity your selves, O ye sons of Adam; know your strength,
and take heed you sell not your souls for the whole world. Some indeed have a
greater force and dispatch to turn over many worldly businesses, but take heed
thou ouerlay it not. Some are weak, and a little overthrows them. Let not a
horse undertake the burden of a Camel, and let neither go beyond his
strength: the surest way is, to be faulty (if on any side) on the best, and
surest side; therefore be sure thou allow enough to that one thing which is
necessary, though thou abridge and lessen those many things, which are
troublesome and transitory. But if thou fillest and ladest thy self with
care, thou becommest indeed a Camel, even a beast of burden, thou can not
go through the eye of the needle, thou have too much about thee, to go in at
the straight gate of the Kingdom of heaven.

33
Mankind has rooted in it a faculty, or rather an impotencie of desiring,
which cleaves fast to him through his whole life. Whatsoever outward changes
befall, or whatsoever prosperity without change, there is a root of lust and
desire in man, which still will bud forth; and if it fasten on nothing to be
desired, it is in pain, and desires earnestly to desire something. The reason
of this, is the saying of Christ, That which is born of flesh is flesh: to wit,
that which is borne of fleshly lust, is lustful flesh, the effect is like the
cause. Hence are those endless desires, which are ever reaching, though
without need, with out use. Hence it is, that the man who is ignorant of his
own nature, so often deceives himself, while as often he tells himself,
that such a thing had, he will leave desiring. For even after that had, he
desires afresh, and on that very thing ofttimes whereby he thought to bound
the old, he raises a new desire: the whiles he perceives not, that himself
is still the cause of his desires, and not the objects; so that whiles he is
himself, he shall still desire: Indeed when a thing desired is enjoyed, the
desire seems to cease, and then man thinks he will desire no more. But that
is but one single desire, which cease by the obtaining of that his object,
the power of desiring still remains unslain, and is no more taken away, then
a root by the breaking of a single branch; therefore it still newly buddeth
out, and makes endless work, upon the end of one desire, sending forth a
new. But what remedy is there to this evil? Surely we must not run so much to
objects thereby to satisfy and quiet desires, which is endless; as to our
selves, to kill them all in the root. But this evil cleaves so fast to man,
that except man can be untwined from himself (which is also very hard) it
seems impossible to be cleared. And this very thing that is impossible to
man, is possible to God, and done by God. He by regeneration puts a new man
into us, which eats out the old man corrupt through these deceivable lusts.
This new man teaches and moves us to deny the lusts which fight against the
soul. It changes us and our nature, and makes us dead unto lusts, and alive
unto truth and reason. Therefore if we will be at rest in our selves, and
keep a perpetual Sabbath in our souls, let us pray for this godly nature
unto God the father of it, which may free us from this slavery of lust, (that
like the Egiptian bondage still sends us about to seek work for our selves)
and may put into us holy, reasonable, and measured desires. Let us give our
selves wholly to be led by the light and motion thereof, taking no care to
fulfill the unlimited lusts of the flesh; And surely this world of vanity is
not worth a long or large desire, neither is the lustful desire of any thing,
more then a sickness and labor of the mind, and no help to the thing desired.

34
As a man Regenerate has two natures in him, so have te^porall evils which
fall on him, two natures and effects instilled into them from the former two.
For first by the old man they have a taste wholly bitter put upon them; they
are to it proposed and beheld as punishments, even the strokes of God hating
and afflicting. This made many holy men cry out in their agonies that God hated
them, that he did set them as Marks, that they were borne unto sorrow and
darkness. But the godly nature which we have from Christ, touching these
afflictions when they touch us, turns them as the waters of Marah into
wholesome sustenance, yea into medicines; For Christ is active even upon his
passions, both in himself and his members. And as all such troubles are
sanctified by the touch thereof, so does the same nature inwardly teach us that
these chastiseme^ts are the strokes of a loving Father: and withal it so
comfort and asswageth our souls with the oils thereof, that we rejoice amid
tribulatio^s: and among the complaints of the old man, there often break forth
pangs of joy sent from this holy and blessed nature, as we find in the
writings of the Prophets. Let us therefore in our sufferings not so much look
to the outward show of temporal evils, but go inwardly into that temple of
ours where the holy Spirit dwells, and there let us ask advice of it, and
inquire what they are; This Spirit will answer us with comfort, that they are
blessings, that they are blessed to us, that they cure us, being heavenly
exercises imposed to suppress our corruption, to keep our new man active and
able, and to make him bring forth the fruit of patience, and righteousness.
And if we hearken with belief and rest to the spirit thus informing us, we
shall see the promised effects, even increase of sanctification and
glorification.

35
Most rightly does the wisdom and grace of God inform us against lust, which
is the maine root of sin, a mistress of folly, and an inuenter of torments.
It is still begetting of sin, for still it sets us either against God, or
holds us from him, by committing evil, and omitting good; it wrappeth us in
continual folly, for it self is blindness and possessing the understanding
neither sees it self, neither suffers it to see. Accordingly it imployes man
in many endless, unprofitable yea impossible proiects, which condemn the man
that labors in them of a dark and deceived judgment, and withal punishes
him for it; It fills our life with torments, for whereas enjoying, is the
comfort and chief portion out of this life, lusts never suffer men to enjoy,
or at least not long, but sets him still on new work, and spurs him unto new
travails. It tells the mind that which thou have is nothing, except thou have
some other addition and increase: that which thou art is nothing, except thou
some way increase it thy self. So is the soul still driven from her rest, and
made a Lackey to trudge on the businesses of lust; Amidst which travails she
meets with many crosses, fears, griefs, which like thieves and wild beasts
stand ready for them which go that dangerous way; how much better were it for
the soul to cut it self off by divine circumcision from this accursed lust,
and to join it self to grace, the contrary and remedy thereof? For grace
will draw us nearer to God our happiness, it will make us to rest in God, and
by conforming us to him will both please him and bless us: it will be a light
to our souls, even a day star in our hearts, showing us ways right
profitable and possible; it will ease us from many harsh and laborious
services, teaching us to believe, that it is far better to walk in the sight
of the eye, then in the lusts of the flesh.

36
There are many considerations which would allay the swelling of Ambition, if
they were as duly applied to it by reason as glorious objects are to it by
corrupted nature. Now since with natural men, natural thoughts fit best, let
us talk with them in their own language. It is a confessed thing by all that
understand this life, that enjoying is the height and utmost of life, and the
more solid and hearty inioying, the higher is that height. This being
chiefest, to that should the mind chiefly aspire; for if it go to that which
seems higher, but is not, it sells substance for shadow, and being, for
seeming. Now if we inquire in what estate this enjoying is greatest, we shall
find in that wherein natural, and as we term them, kindly affections, and
desires, have most satisfaction. For indeed what comparison is their between
the imagination of being pointed at for greatness, and the solid sweetness
of being loved of a wise and honest friend? What comparison between the
officious and hartles complements of seruice-offring-flatterers, and the
obsequious love of a chaste wife, and dutiful children? what equality between
the delicate inuitations of a dainty feast unto a cloyed stomach, and the
sweetness of plain fare to a natural appetite, which desires it not* being
desired of it. If these be the better comforts of life, and that life is better
which has most of them, then in a mean degree and not still in the greater is
the best portion of life. Therefore it is not amiss for men sometimes to
aspire downwards even to the conditions of an estate beneath them selves. This
I set forth not as persuading an universal priuatenesse (which as man's
ouer-spreading ambition will ever make impossible, so it needs not) but only
in a public fortune to carry a private mind not swilling in too general and
large desires, but bounded within natural, and becoming affections. And this,
not to make a heaven of it on earth, as the Philosopher in vain assayed, in a
world so thoroughly tempered and seasoned with misery; but to draw men upon
profitable and aduantageable terms into the most quiet and orderly compass of
life; that the order and quietness thereof might allow room for the practice
of some course profitable to the Commonwealth, and especially to the
contemplation of a better life. For these are too much put out of mind by
swollen Ambition; that often so takes up the whole heart, that it thrusts this
present life, the country wherein life was received, and that country where
only true life and happiness shall be, beyond all care and remembrance.

37
The pleasures of this world after they are past, (and after they begin they
are going to be past) are as much nothing as if they had not been. Therefore
when sinful pleasures tempt us, let us think, that if we by Religion put them
not from being, they will even by being put themselves from being. Wherefore
let us much rather choose, that grace should make them to be nothing, and to
perform an acceptable work to God, which shall have his reward, then give them
leave by their own nature to bring themselves to the same nothing, and yet to
leave guilt behind, and obligation to punishment. But if the mind will needs
dote on dying pleasantness, let the same mind at that same time know and
believe the pleasure of seeing Gods face, infinitely to exceed this both in
quantity and in quality, and that it shall as certainly appear to us
hereafter, as these do now, if we refuse these for it. There is no ods that
may dissuade us, but presentnes of the one, and futurenesse of the other; which
being again vnmeasurablely ouerwaied by advantage of excellency and
eternity, should so mainely carry us, that we should despise the presentnesse
of all sinful pleasures, much more then Jacob his next present seven years
liberty for Rachel; or one that proves masteries his present ease and
pleasure for a corruptible crown.

38
The affections of man are useful and commendable, meeting with fit occasions,
and limited by due measure. But they are commonly inordinate among us, and lay
hold on wrong objects, or on true in wrong measure. Joy is good, yea
necessary, when Gods love is beheld and considered. And joy is good, when Gods
blessings are powered upon us, for even that joy is the gift of God: but joy often
transgresses; for it rejoices more in the blessings, then in God; and it is
too lively in temporal things, and too dull in eternal. Yea, it rejoices
sometimes in sin, our own or others, which is a joy in the place of sorrow.
For sorrow, though hated, is also very profitable, and excellently meet for
the sinful and miserable estate of man. Sin, when it has myred the soul,
by repentant sorrow has the filth, (though not guilt) washed away, and indeed
the guilt is not washed away by Christ, until the filth be washed away by
spiritual sorrow. For as long as the dregs of sin lie on the soul
vnbathed in repentance: so long the blood of Christ, as it were, lotheth to
come near it. Again, sorrow fitteth excellently the, estate of vanity and
misery, that our look being sad, our heart may be made better; and that grief
may stir us up to apply our hearts to wisdom, whereby we may escape
through vanity and misery, into immortality and happiness. But sorrow is
often faulty, when it sorrows more for losses, then for sins; which in effect
is more for losses of this life, then of life eternal. It is faulty also, when
it is stubborn against spiritual joy, and will not let the heart rejoice in
the mercy of God, though he bid it rejoice continually; yea hatred it self is
good, yet in one only cause, when it is against men that hate God; for then may
we hate both their wickedness, and them as our utter enemies. Yet we must
beware we hate not men for some single sin, who otherwise strive to live
uprightly; for in many things we offend al, and have need our selves in such
cases often to be spared. To such belongs the Spirit of meekenes to restore
them; and if David say, I have sinned against God, the Prophet must say, Thy
sin is also forgiven thee. But the habitual and greedy sinner, that puts
God far from him, and in defiance says, Who is the Lord; this man is odious,
and Iehosaphat shall be bitterly chidden if he love them; yet the bond of
charity may still hold on, which must watch that our hatred be for Gods sake
only, and not our own (for man ought not to hate man in his own behalf.)
Beside this, charity must pray for the amendment of him; for charity to man
desires the preservation, not the destruction of man, as far as it may,
without* offending the charity of God. But summarily to bring all affections
into their true use and proportion, let us find out both their use and measure
in the word of light, kindling or quenching them, lengthening or shortning
them, according to the direction and line thereof.

39
The best knowledge has been anciently thought to be man's knowledge of
himself: but the best knowledge indeed being the knowledge of the best, which
is God, the knowledge of man comes next in worth, who is the next best in this
lower world, and whom God known, teaches and commands to know himself, and
who by knowing himself shall the better know God. Now the immediate use of
this knowledge being to better the knower, he that will make most use thereof,
must learn to know himself most in those parts and faculties, which are of
most use and excellence. Therefore on the soul, let the soul of man
especially fasten her eyes, that knowing herself with a right and true
knowledge, she may find what is right in her, to continue and confirm it; and
which is crooked and corrupted, to avoid and amend it. But to do this
clearly, she has need of some light above her own; for it is hard for the
blind soul to see her own blindness. Therefore begging for that eye-salue of
the greatest Light, and so having obtained it, let her go on to a true search
and inquiry of her self. In this inquiry, let her generally compare the
resolutions of her understanding, and the inclinations of her will, with the
laws of her Maker. For seeing the soul did, and should bear the Image of God,
which Image, the laws of God truly and unchangeably express: it is a certain
truth, that wherein the soul differs and boweth from these laws, in
understanding or will; therein, and in so much, the soul differs from God,
and has abated and altered his Image. And this is indeed a chief and most
worthy employment of man's time on earth, when the soul looks into Gods love,
as into a glass, and thereby trimmeth and fitteth her self for her Maker,
against the day of her appearance before his glorious Self, who cannot abide
to see any thing near him that is unlike him. Now there are some parcels and
remnants of this Law, yet remaining of the first writing in the nature of man:
but if we will read profitably therein, we must take heed we follow it not too
far, but still compare it with the Law written, because there are but small
broken and corrupted pieces thereof. While we are in this search, as
generality and custom are great binders of the soul unto error and
corruption, so a suspicion that a general estimation of things may proceed
from the understanding deceived, or the will corrupted, may be a great help to
bring the soul into her place and true estate. For to suspect deceit, is a
first and excellent degree toward being vndeceiued; and unto this suspicion of
men's wisest and most esteemed opinions, the word of truth gives us a good
foundation, while it says, that many things which are highly esteemed among
men, are abominable in the sight of God. And of this again, there is an
infallible reason, even the corruptnesse of the soul by the fall of man. For
this deprauation mightily possessing the understanding, makes it in the best
judgment thereof, to think deceitfully of things, and withal to think these
deceived thoughts wise, because it knows nothing beyond them. But let the
soul that prepares her self for God, untie her self from her self, as from
a thing corrupted, and from the world, as from a multitude of such things as
her self is; equally blinded, and walking in the same darkness, though among
themselves they be agreed to call it light. Thus putting off her own corruption
and that of the world, she is fit and ready to be new stamped with the image
of her Creator, and to be enlightened with truth in her understanding, and to
put on rightnesse in her will, which let her learn from the law, and desire to
have engraven in her by grace. In this course there will be many Rubbs, the
glorious folly of the world will mock thy particular and desolate wisdom, it
will dissuade thee from singularity and desire, or provoke thee to err with
company; it will ask thee whether the rulers do believe as thou do; yea
thine own corruption will sometime strike thee into astonishment, and make thee
muse and wonder whether thou art in a right mind and purpose. But go on
unchanged, knowing that thou seek not what is usual, but what is right, and
the pattern to which thou art fitting thy self is not man but God; even a
pattern of perfection beyond all exception. This is also their duty if they
considered it. Therefore let them that would turn thee, return to thee,
Return not thou to them. When thou shall present thy self before God, the
more holy and unblameable thou art, the more acceptable shall thou be to him,
who will not ask what company came with thee, but will know and acknowledge his
sons by their likeness to him, and accordingly reward them as that is more
or less; and then shall it be no sorrow of heart to thee, that thou have gone
out of thy self, and the world, to pass through somewhat more vnsociably into
happiness.

40
God is the judge of the world, and judges it generally by two kinds of
judgment. The first is by Deputies, and so by Kings, Magistrates and Judges, he
judges mankind. It is the judgment of God which is committed to them, and
they are his mouth to the people* How wicked and false are they then, that out
of the mouth of God give not the judgment of God, but of their own
corruption! that seek not what God judges of the case, but what themselves
may judge, corruptly, if covertly. These are in the rank of the old false
Prophets, which said the Lord says, when he speaks not by them. Thou
stand o corrupt man, in the place of God, to represent him, but thou actest
this part ill fauouredly, and insteede of representing the pure, and
by-bribes-vnflexible Lord of the world, thou plaiest the part of a base and
rotten-harted slave; so do thou express thy own vice not his justice, and
we receive that judgment of money, not of God. Yet is that indeed thy God,
and tells thee what sentence thou shall give; and all this is wisdom if
concealed from the eyes of men. But even for that point also know this, that
though thou art only in that place deputed to judge, yet many others,
particulars being heard, ca^ and do judge as well as thy self: these see and
feel when the bias of covetousness, and corruptions, carry thee from the
straight line of justice; they feel when the judge is some way allied to the
cause, and has some feeling of it, because he or his have felt some thing for
it; yea generally they talk of it, though out of hearing; for corruptnesse
though it have no other goodness, has yet some modesty, and is ashamed to
hear it self spoken of, for it knows it self to be a vice: yet this is
one more vice of that vice, to rage more against others that reveal it, then
against the owner of it, that did such a thing which might justly shame the
Author of it, if revealed. Let such a one be rather angry with himself for
doing ill, then with another, for speaking truth. But because through this net
of humane justice and deputatiue judgment, many guilty, if profitable
offenders break out and escape, God has another greater net which he casts
without these, wherein he takes both the escapers, and the giuers of leave to
escape; This is the great and general judgment, wherein God in person will
sit as judge, and will examine the judges themselves and the judged. Then the
righteous Judge of the world, shall justify the judges that have judged
righteously in this world; But there they, that now are wrongfully justified
shall justly be condemned, and the mooueable Judges that missed their part,
and changing judgment, spoke from themselves, when they should have spoken
from God, shall have their faults repeated unto them, if vnrepeated; and by the
just mouth of God himself, shall with their faults be delivered to Satan the
iayler, who shall carry them to the dungeon, where the worm dies not, nor the
fire goes out. But because such men do fortify their consciences, against
the terrors of the Lord, and his fearefully-great judgment, and put the evil
day either wholly or far from them; that they be not utterly without fear
in this world, God does many times by particular judgments strike, either
them, their issue, or those whom they have justified in offenses; by which
particular strokes on some among many, he puts them in mind that he which
now judges some, shall hereafter judge all sin, being equally odious in all,
and equally liable to judgment. He strikes not all, yet, because general
justice is reserved for the general judgment; But he strikes some, that their
judgment might to al be an earnest of a general judgment, and might in the
mean time terrify men from wickedness by present plagues, who fear not the
future.

41
Moreover; it is a great motive from sin, the shortness of the time between
sin and punishment: there is nothing but life between them; and howsoever we
lengthen it in our imagination to keep us from fear of punishment, yet if we
consider it by the most earnest and most trusted judgment, which is that of
the worldly wise, it is thereby valued but at seven years or thereabout; yet
if it be (as it is but with some) a continuance of thirty or forty years,
after thou come to thy full age of wickedness, ask the worldling what he
thinks of himself when he has such a term in a living. He will by no
means think himself a settled man, he will not much build upon it, for he
holds it but a short time, and is continually troubled that it wears so fast
and is so near an end. Surely the devil has a great advantage upon us by
this deceit of our flesh, that it can tell us truths in many things when their
use and end is earthly, but tells us falsehoods in the same things when their use
is heavenly; it makes us wise for matters of this generation, but not for those
of the Regeneration. But let us, where there is such a truth so found, take the
line from the worldly things, and lay it on the spiritual, then shall we find
that grossly to appear, which before was not perceived, and so may we deceive
the Devil himself, his advantage being made ours. Accordingly let us take
that life, wherewith the wisdom of the world does measure life for worldly
purposes, and lay it on the same life for our spiritual use: then shall we
find that the sinful pleasures of life, are but pleasures for a season, and
that a short one, and that there is but the same short season between pleasant
sin and eternal punishments.

42
He that will find a good friend let him seek a good Christian. For a
Christian is more then a man, and has the strength of God added to the
strength of man: Christ the Rock is his foundation, and he will stand the
billows, and beat back the tempests, for he is founded on a Rock. But the
Moralist, and the Roman of these times, are but flesh and blood, sand and
dust; therefore floods and tempests wash him, and blow him away. Wonder not
therefore my soul with the world, neither take up the usual complaints of the
deceivable uncertainty of friends. Those that were once true friends are
still so, those that are not, never were. If they had been of us, they would
have continued with us. If they had been truly Christian, love would have grown
in them, not decayed* For it is a special business of a Christian in this
life to grow up unto Christ in love: but their not continuing with us, shows
they were not of us: so they do us not wrong, but right by departing from us;
for they rid us of il company, and tell our judgment the truth, which before
was deceived in them. Yet that we deceive our selves no more, let us fasten on
such no expectation: let us try the spirits, and if by true experience we find
a spirit begotten of God, let us take him for that friend, which is better then
a mere brother. Thy heart and his are one, and they will agree in spite of
the devil; though he come against them accompanied with the flesh and the
world; yea if such two should be stirred as Barnabas and Paul even unto
parting, being parted, they would meet in love, and do the offices of
friendship each to other, upon any occasion. The heavenly loadestone, even
Christ's Spirit of love has touched them, therefore though stirred, they return
to their point, and still rest in love.

43
When Adam was created, there was no corrupt lust: when there was no such lust,
there was no shame; generation was clean, and merely pure: and when
generation was pure, then the nearest kindred could not defile themselves with
it, for pure things defile not. Therefore rightly God, who had abundance of
Spirit, made but one male and female, who could have made many more: for though
there were enforced thereby an intermarriage between brethren and sisters, yet
thereby was enforced no incest; for when marriage and generation were pure and
without shame, then the brother discovered not the shame of his sister, which
is the wickedness and unlawfulness of incest. And thus might the state of
generation have continued in all posterities, if the state of the creation had
continued: But man by his fall brought in lust, and thereby shame, and by both
a necessity of incest, which was not before. For God made only a necessity,
that brethren and sisters should purely and holily marry together: but man
turned this necessitated marriage into incest. For a brother and a sister being
one flesh, it is a ground of nature, that the same flesh should cover the shame
of the same flesh; which he that does not, goes so far toward incest, as he
goes from this covering. Now the children of Adam, being brought by Adam into
this necessity, were suffered by the patience of the God of long suffering,
who might still require his first course well instituted, that now by manis
corrupted. After that some of the Fathers may be thought to have done the like
by a spiritual necessity, that they might marry within the Church, and not
with the daughters of men; or by divine indulgence and dispensation, God being
the Lord of nature, and so able to change the laws of it, to give what laws
he list unto it, much more to require the law in which first he created man.
But for us who neither are forced by a natural necessity, the world being
filled with multitude; nor with a spiritual, the multitude having in them,
though fewest, seven thousand that bow not to Baal; nor any dispensation from
God for it, but a law of God against it: this near intermarriage is a
loathsome abomination in the eyes of God. It is a sin against nature, and so
abominable even to man's first and natural apprehension.

44
The course of the children of God through this world unto heaven, is the very
course of the Israelites from Egypt to Canaan. Israel is born in Egypt under
the service of Pharaoh, and brought from under him by a mighty and
outstretched Arm, escaping the death of Egypt by the blood of the Lamb. Gods
children are begotten in the Kingdom of Satan, and drawn from his subjection
by his mighty power, who can only bind the strong man, and take away his
goods. By the blood of the Lamb, Christ Jesus, they also escape that death
which is due to them, by being borne in the kingdom of Satan. The Israelites
by the red Sea were cleared from the prosecution and danger of Egypt, and
through it found a path toward the land of promise. The true Israelites by
spiritual and inward baptism are dead unto sin and the kingdom of Satan,
and by that death escape from them; having also a way painted out by the
sanctification thereof to the Kingdom of blessedness. Forty years long after
their manhood did the Israelites wander in the wilderness, until they came
into Canaan: and forty years are the usual time appointed to the children of
God to travel in this world, before they come to rest. And in this forty
years, the only ordinary food of Israel that gave them life and comfort was
Manna from heaven: and the chief food of the regenerate is the Spirit of
Christ, which dwells in them, and is their life and comfort. Slender and
light did that Manna seem to the Israelites, yet sufficed to bring them to the
land of Promise: and small does the life and comfort appear of this Spirit to
fleshly reason, even of the regenerate; but it will serve to bring them to
heaven, and to comfort and strengthen them by the way. Manna showed, that man
lives not by bread only, but by every word which proceeds from the mouth
of God; to teach us, that by this Spirit which proceeds from the breath of
God, we have as certain a life, as we have by bread. But as at first there
was an host to fetch Israel back into bondage, and at last there were hosts,
giants, and gates of brass to keep the^ from the possession of the Land of
Promise. Accordingly when Christians are escaped from the kingdom of Satan by
regeneration, and walking to Jerusalem which is above, Legions and armies of
wicked spirits, the gates of hell, yea Og the King of Basan, the huge Prince of
hell, and the Principalities of darkness fight against them, and seek to turn
back, and stop their progress unto rest. But unto Israel their enemies were
as bread, even a prey and a triumph; and to us the God of peace will tread
Satan under our feet, the gates of hell shall not prevail against us, but
their temptations shall be our aduancements, and their resistance shall give
us the title of conquerours. And that we may make full benefit of this example,
let us especially be careful to walk like those Israelites, which continued
and perfected their course from Egypt to Canaan; the chief resemblances among
the Israelites of the true Christians among us. Let us avoid the sins of
them, who fell by the way: let us make great reckoning of the Manna of the
Spirit, feeding, comforting, and contenting our selves in all estates
therewith; in all estates, trials, and changes. For this small dram of our new
birth, though it seem to melt sometimes before the heat of tentation, and the
bread thereof tastes not so strong as the onions and flesh pots of natural lust
and pleasures: yet it is of the womb of the morning, it comes from the
dayspring on high, it has life eternal in it; and this little seed shall
raise us up in the glorious image of the incorruptible and everliving sons of
God. For the weak things of God are ever strong enough to accomplish their
appointed end, they are backed with omnipotence, and if they wanted any thing in
themselves, yet from that shall they draw perfect sufficiency.

45
The sanctified soul in this world is a widow; Christ is her husband, and he
is absent from her; The senses have their pleasant objects to delight them, the
flesh has gross matter enough to satisfy the lusts thereof. But the soul
beholds not an object for her pure joy, for he whom the soul loves and
should only love, is gone to a far country; yet is her heart toward him,
she thinks still upon him though a pilgrim in a strange land; she breaks
out into longing passions and inquireth of the sheepheards for him: she looks
by a chinke, with the eye of spiritual light into heaven, and so has a glimse
of him for whom she is sick of love; for he stands behind a wall, this earth
of ours is a partition betwixt us and him, and he looks through it but by a
little grate; yet still is she his only, as he is hers, she rejoices in him,
and remembers his love more then wine; she entreates him to draw her that she
may run after him; to set her as a seal on his heart, and as a signet on his
arm, for her Love is as strong as death. She fitteth her self for him by
being all glorious within, and chastely reserues her self unto him as a garden
enclosed, and a spring shut up. She is decked with fruitfulness, even with
fullness of all sweet fruits, trees of incense and al sweet spices. Thus
loving, thus glorious, thus chaste, thus holy, thus fruitful in goodness,
she waits for his return until the eternal day break, and the earthly
shadows fly away. This is a sanctified soul, go thou and do the like.

46
Herein is that in expressible height of Gods mercy to his elect much
expressed, that the most wise and laborious men in moral goodness, yet not
having grace, pass under the Law, and their very goodness is condemned to be
sin. For such indeed it is, not coming from him who is the only Author of
goodness, nor returning to him who is the true end of all things. Yet weak
and sinful souls, though laden with great infirmities, by the mercy of God
are taken from the Law into grace, and so their many sins are forgiven them;
that weak and frail men, if striving against sin, though often falling into
it, might yet comfort themselves in that high mercy, which laid hold on them,
and singled them out for its own sake, and not for theirs; and that no flesh
might rejoice in it self; for the glory of flesh without the mercy of God, is
but shame to it self, and matter for justice. As therefore we have an infinite
benefit freely bestowed, let us thankfully glorify the giver, who gave it us
chiefly for his own glory: and withal let us take heed that though there
be so great mercy with God, yet we make not work for mercy, lest mercy
tempted, turn into judgment.

47
The obedience of insensible, and brute creatures unto the will of God, is a
great check and reproof unto the disobedience of man; Man is the chiefest of
creatures, and they the lowest, yet do they as far exceed him in obedience,
as he does them in natural eminence. The will of God is a straight and fixed
line, to which all things created by the same will, should so fit and fashion
themselves, that they should not bow from it in any degree; This do the baser
things, steadfastly following the imprinted light and law of their first
Creation. So the storke and swallow know their appointed times, the ox knows
his owner, and the Ass his masters crib; the sea moves in settled and
vnmoouing course; the stars fit their many changes to a steadie rule,
answerable to the will of him that never changes. But man that had a burning
Lamp, even a fountain of light in his soul (whereas brute beasts have but a
light determined and certain; and liuelesse things have no light of reason,
but an orderly influence and moving power fixed into the^) this reasonable man
is wholly gone astray from his rule, and not only runs from it but against
it. Thus is he far worse then things worse then himself, and openly shows,
that he has fallen and not they. What now remains, but that as this abased
Lord of creatures, has been checked and reproved by the creatures his
vassals, so he should also be instructed by them? Therefore o thou man go
willingly hereafter to the Ox and Ass to learn thy duty. There is in them,
as in the Ass of Balaam, that which may instruct thee. Be ashamed of thy
corruption and fall, but be not ashamed by any thing not fallen, to bring thy
self back to the place from whence thou fellest: when thou see creatures
obedient to thee, thence know that obedience is also due to God from thee, who
is infinitely more above thee, then thou above them. When thou see mutual
love between creatures of one kind, learn thence Charity to thy own kind:
In sum, when thou see any creature continuing the steady and appointed course
of his kind, call thereby to mind, that there is a certain and appointed
course to thee also, wherein thou should as certainly satisfy the will of
thy Creator, who requires a conformity of all things in their place and
order, and the chiefest of the chiefest.

48
It has been an often policy of Satan, when he could not pull down good
things with evil, to pull them down by setting them together by the ears
between themselves. Not to mention the too-much opposition between the
reformed Christians, I can example it in the quarrels which have been between
faith and works, prayer and preaching, and the commendation of the learned
works of some, in a comparatiue despite of as profitable works of others. But
this is an unkindly debate, and issues by no means out of the nature of the
things themselves, but from man's contentiousnes, want of judgment, or
ouer-prising our own apprehensions. Each virtue has her several place, and
in that place she excels and has commendation, and thrusts out no other
virtue either from place or worth. The place of faith is first in the
understanding, but working downward on the will and affections, it ioynes us to
Christ; so is it the hand of the ingraffer, it sets the eye of the soul ever
on God in Christ: it is excellent for union, and for all the benefits and
fruits coming from that vnio^, whereof works are a part. The place of works
is chiefly in the will and affections, yet grounded in the understanding, and
springing forth at the members: They express the virtue of the union, they
praise and glorify him that bestowed this union; they are excellent as fruits,
but they have both being and excellence from him whom faith apprehends.
Preaching delivers words of knowledge, of reproach, of comfort, of exhortation,
to our ignorance, to our sinnefulnesse, to our despair, to our deadness of
heart: yea it teaches us how to pray, it persuades us to pray; prayer
fetches down grace from the Author of grace, by which, preaching it self is
made profitable, and life is put into the dead letter; it prouides us for
hearing, and makes us able to do what we hear. In sum, it procures help in
all things from him, without whom we can do nothing. Thus it seems both faith
and works, prayer and preaching, be of kin, mutual embracers, and far
from that contention which is fastened to them: each desire that their fellows
may have appointed time and place, because in their prosperity themselves do
Horish. Now for the last kind of debate, which has been set between excellent
writers, discretion and charity might serve for a full remedy. If any one be
in any thing good and profitable, charity and wisdom will rather comme^d
that worth of his, then obscure it by comparisons: if another be more learned,
it may be the less learned does more edify; and sure it, is that such
contention does not edify at all. The Schoolmen are excellent in subtilties,
they search how things are, they dig for the root; and in sum, if sifted from
errors, and clearly conceived, they may give great light to the understanding.
Another Divine goes more plainly to work, he sets forth the matter without
curious search of the manner, herather shows that it is, then how it is; yet
he shows enough for salvation, he shows enough for the most general
capacity, and withal he mooues the will, and stirs up the affections to
receive life, and refuse death. The first make a few men excellent, but find
not often a fit great audience; they are good teachers of teachers. The later
does generally profit, he goes into the will and affections, and vnlockes the
heart for God, the seat where he delights to dwell. Of this kind has this age
most need of, of which prophecies foretold, that the love of many should now
wax cold, that men should love their pleasures more then God: and of which
experience tells us, that knowledge has far outrun obedience, which should
follow close at the heels of it; and therefore of the two, lacks most
nourishment, and encouragement. Generally, let them that build the house of
God, if they hold a sword in one hand, yet hold it against the enemy, not one
against another: much less let the bystanders take their swords out of their
hands, and fight for them, when they will not themselves. The building is not
promoted by this means, but hindered, yea, pulled down.

49
The evils of this life are great and many, whereof some are immediately from
the hand of God, others from the wickedness of men, others from the malice of
Satan; and of these also God has the command. These evils are by men diversely
received, some entertain them only with passion, and these cure one vexation
with another, and add sorrow to sorrow. Some by reasons moral or natural,
seek to preserve their own quietness, and these obtain not often what they
seek; and if they do, they have but a fading and transitory rest, which
being past, is all one with sorrow past; for then they are both like vanity
and nothing. But a third sort of receivers are they, that receive them with
faith, even a believing soul, whose object is God in Christ, and which looking
up to God, both sees him, and in him sees what he sees in these evils: this is
the going into the Sanctuary, where the evils of this life are only truly
discerned, and so thereby conquered. For looking up to God, we see him our
merciful Father, unchangeable Savior, and our steadfast happiness: we see
that the evils which he sends, or directs to us, are rods of love, and their
stripes are healers; they punish the flesh, and that but temporally, that the
spirit may live eternally. And for the wicked, who are sometimes gods
executioners, he tells us, that he beholds their wicked actions, that they stand
in the slipperie place of a transitory and dying life, and that they and their
works shall come to judgment; and then their wrongs shall turn into eternal
torments to the^, and to us into eternal glory. And evils thus received are
comfortable evils, for by faith, we see affliction to be a treasure
everlasting, far better then treasures of Egypt; they are edifying evils, for
they build us up; being beaten down in the body of sin, we are built up in
grace and truth. So these believers only make benefit of evils, and in stead
of being vexed by them, or receiving no advantage of them, they turn them into
spiritual nourishment; therefore let us go still armed with this faith, which
only overcomes the world, and makes it serviceable. It is the only strength
and support of a Christian in this vale of miseries, and that which keeps him
from being oppressed of them, and that helps him to suppress and use them. As
much faith as we have, so much strength we have; and if we lack strength, we
lack faith. If then evils pursue thee, and thou faintest under them, know that
thou want faith, as surely as Peter did, when he began to sink. For how can
the believing soul be overcome, which beholds the Almighty on her side,
even when ten thousand hemme her in? yea, which then beholds these evils
short and transitory, yet by transitory lightness working eternal glory.
Beleeuest thou these things, and yet art thou afraid? it cannot be that thou
should be afraid of happiness, though entered into through affliction; but
that thou do not verily behold and apprehend it. Therefore henceforth in thy
troubles go out of thy flesh, and consider not therewith; for flesh and blood
will add weight unto them: but go into the Spirit, where the Comforter dwells
by his anointing, working faith in thy soul; there shall thou find wherewith to
conquer, there shall thou find wherewith to comfort, yea to better thy self
by evils.

50
If it be asked who is the greatest fool, it may be answered, The worldly
wisest man. For true wisdom is that only which finds out true happiness, and
agrees with the highest wisdom the begotten of God; proportionably, that is
the greatest folly which is most laborious, curious, and effectual in seeking
vanity instead of happiness: and the whilst goes astray with all the might
thereof from him, who only is the sovereign good. Therefore when thou see a
man by wicked craft gathering about him thick clay, and settling his hope and
heart thereon, know him to be the great spiritual fool, and his good
success therein, to be but prosperity in folly. For his deceived heart feeds
on dust and vanity; he has forsaken the fountain of living waters, and has
has made cesternes for waters that fail: this the end will make evident; for
then it will appear even to the fool himself, that the foundation can no
longer stand, then the thing on which it was founded. But in the end the earth
shall melt away, and the elements shall consume with heat; and therefore the
hopes built on earth, and earthly things must needs fall down, and wholly be
ruined. But that infinite and eternal happiness, whose name is, I am, he is
for ever. The hopes built on him cannot be shaken, the heart fixed on him,
cannot be overthrown; that foundation remains sure, and the building thereon
is Mount Sion, which cannot be moved; he will be left after all things, to
receive and crown thee. Be wise therefore, O ye Princes, yea be wise, O ye
wise men of the earth. Kiss the Son, even that eternal wisdom, be ye
instructed by him, and then ye shall be truly wise; his Spirit will teach you
that truest wisdom to lay your out money, and that for food of eternal life;
to forsake these dry cesternes which contain those fading and dying
pleasures, and to seek the fountain of living waters, even the God of Gods,
in whose presence only is the fullness of joy, and with whom only are the
pleasures for evermore.

51
A great burden of this Island is blasphemy, and the profanation of the name
of God: a heavy, yet unprofitable sin it is, by which God is dishonored, and
man damned at a very low rate. So does this people sell himself for nothing, and
as seekers of death, rather then they will not die, they will anger God of set
purpose, and without profit procure their own destruction. Surely, as it has
bin well observed, this sin has a more pure corruption and venom in it, then
most of his fellows; for other sins have commonly some sensible profit or
pleasure to Midwife them into the world: but this in it self is neither
pleasing nor profitable, but issues out of the mere profaneness of heart,
even of a carelessness and contempt of God. For how can it be, but God is
exceedingly despised and neglected, when his name is used to make up idle
places of a hollow or vnfilled sentence, or to vent or utter with some grace
and force the choler and malice of a displeased man: But be it known to thee,
O man, of what sort or degree soever thou be, that God made thee to serve him,
and in part of service to fear and sanctify his name; and indeed thou art not
of thy self worthy to serve, or to name him: How then dare thou to make him
and his name to serve thee, thy profane discourse, and thy rash and untempered
anger? It was written anciently, Holiness to the Lord; and surely where God is,
holiness is about him; where God will bring any to him, he puts holiness upon
them; and where his very name is, he will have holiness applied and
appropriated to it. Therefore his name must be brought forth only in holy
uses, and an extremely unfit match it is, to join the holiest name with the
vnpurest and prophanest passions and speeches. If thou wearest but the vizard
of a Christian, and a man should ask whether thou can say the Lords Prayer,
and the ten Commandments, thou will extremely scorn the question. But assure
thy self, that God infinitely more scorneth, that in that prayer, one should
offer up a petition to him, that Gods name should be hallowed, who cares not
whether he have his petition granted or not, yea many times takes pains to
make it void. And much he scorns that any should say his commandments, that
care not to do them; and that the same tongue which says, Thou shall not take
the name of God in vain, should presently take the same name in vain, and so
be contrary to it self, give the lie to it self, and dishonor the name
which it falsely pretended to reverence. But if thou will needs love this sin
more then God, the same God who now endures thy blasphemies with a limited
patience, will one day when that patience is come to the full bounds thereof,
ransom his name from thy unhallowed throat; and he who is a consuming fire
shall make every touch of his name to burn in thy bowels. Then it shall be
felt, though not now believed, that God is still active, and either sanctifies
or consumes wheresoever he is; and if he have been in thee much but not
sanctifying, he shall be in thee much also, but consuming. He is too strong
for us, and so cannot suffer of us; and though he seem to do it by being
taken at will into our licentious mouths, yet it is but as the taking of a
coal or hook, which burn, and bite, and take the takers: so thy own wicked
words shall fret into thee and become thy snare and consumption. But that every
one may know his part and interest in this sin, and the judgment of it, the
different degrees thereof do readily appear. There is one sort of prophaners
that keep open house of blasphemies, and the name of that God which dwells not
in their hearts, yet issues still at their mouths: these are in the depth of
Satan, and be the eldest sons of hell. And it is to be wondered if they believe
not that there is a God, how they speak so often of him; and if they believe God
to be, how they fear not to dishonor him: who if he be, must needs be just
to himself, and take his own part against those that thus abuse his name.
Another sort there is of them that leaving the name of God, yet use other names
and words in stead thereof, and so by an evil idolatry, translate the honor
of God to creatures or imaginations of their own. A third sort is of such as
in every idle exclamation or admiration, at any unusual or odd matter, take
up the name of God, altogether unprofitably and unseasonably: who is not to be
named but with reverence, and for the bettring of our selves or others. For as
often as we are not the better for naming him, we are the worse. These will
sometimes say, if thou admonish them, that they mean no ill; but they must
neither mean ill, nor do ill; and because by carelessness and vnwatchfulnesse
of speech this often happens, let those that fear God, watch their mouth,
that they offend not with their tongue. And generally let al those whom God
has moved to glorify him, and to speak good of his name, teach the same to
their children, that we may leave a godly seed behind us in our room; it
being a complaint of this time, that children too much learn to speak English
and oaths together, and so to blaspheme God almost as soon as he has made
them.

52
Custom of evil has sundry great evils belonging to it; one that it self is
a long succession of wickedness, and offense against God: Another, that
growing into familiarity with men, at length it comes to the reputation of no
vice, if not of a virtue. A third, that it takes root and establishment by
continuance, and grows so stiff and immovable, that it is like the laws of
the Medes and Persians which may not be altered. This course and sway it has
both in the lives of particular men, and great Churches, and that to so great a
conquest of men's judgments, as well as their actions, that they have enacted a
law, that an evil well settled ought not to be removed. This the Church of
Rome practices; but as we see in the thing it self, that it is a wisdom
which ascends from below, and is devilish and sensual: so by the
consequence of it we see it is temporally dangerous to them that hold it; For
this position brought that Church to this present weakness. Ambitious and
commodious errors had crept into that Church, to which, time had given such
strength and estimation, that it was a very especial wisdom to hold them
untouched and unmoved. But they that deny just things, often provoke to the
taking away of them and more; as tyranny often has driven away kingdoms. And
somewhat accordingly, while they would keep their errors, they have provoked
men to take from them that which once was held lawful, though as things now
stand, they may seem to have lost edification. So with their supremacy, they
have lost Patriarchy, and the ten tribes are rent from that Rehoboam which would
not ease the burden of his fathers. This may serve for an example even to our
Churches, whereby they may learn, not to establish themselves by establishing
any sinful corruption, if any such shall appear: for that very corruption by
which men shall think to strengthen themselves, is likely to prove their
canker and destruction. This was the justice of God of old against the Calves
of Jeroboam, and of late against the whoredom of Rome. Therefore according to
wise Solomon, be not wise in your own eyes, but fear the Lord, and depart
from evil; Let all your wise policies be grounded, or at least subordinate to
true piety. Do not by defending a known sin, give a handle to a rough
amender, who taking a Church by the blemishes thereof, may perchance pull out
them and the sound flesh which hangs to them. The Ancients knew the
corruptnesse of mankind, that it still brought forth tares among wheat; and
therefore appointed general and particular Synods for the rooting up of them;
our age is latter, and therefore worser: if we grow in diseases, let us not
abate in the remedies. If we cannot have general Councels, let us make true
use of our national sinods by serious examining in them, not so much what
evil customs it might seem policy to maintain, as what customarie dross
it were true and spiritual wisdom to refine. In like sort, a remedy of evil
customs is needful to every member of the Church; If thou have done evil,
amend that which is past by future goodness, and add not to thy vomits,
returning. But let all especially shun and kill the beginnings of such wicked
customs; for the more they continue in them, the stronger they make a chain
for themselves: so that at last they are mightily enthralled thereby, and are
still further from escaping.

53
The root of all obedience and fulfilling the law, is the love of God: if we
love God truly, we keep the first Table, and we will do what we can to keep
the second. For how loves any man God whom he has not seen, who loves not
his brother whom he has seen? And who loves God yt will not please him and
keep his commandments? That this work of love which of it self is pleasant,
and whose yoke is light, may by us pleasantly and easily to be performed, let
us consider partly, (for we cannot fully) wherefore God is be loved. God is to
be loved first for himself. For he only is the fullness of happiness, and
all sufficiency, since in him only is Being, Light, Life, Wisdom, Glory,
Power, Goodness. Other things which carry these things names, have them not
indeed; for nothing created has any of these of their own, but in him and his
they have all that they have, and they be that which they be. So God is, and
there is nothing beside him. Secondly, God is to be loved for the love which
he has expressed to us; for love deserves love, and chiefly a great love
deserves a little love; but most chiefly that greatest love of the Creator,
deserves the greatest love (which at greatest is but little in comparison of
the other) of the creature. Now if I should go about to show the love of God to
man, I should labor to bring infiniteness within measure, and to bound within
the knowledge of man a law incomprehensible. This in sum may be conceived:
That God loved us when he had but foreknown and foreappointed our being, when
we were not at al, but only in his purpose: Then he loved us with a love that
marked and sealed us to eternal happiness. This love produced our Creation in
an excellent image, and this love to man fallen from that created image, gave
him the greatest gift that is or may be, even his own Son to clear him from
the guilt of his fall by a bitter satisfaction; and to imprint a begotten image
steadfast and permanent, instead of the created image mooueable and decayed, by
a precious regeneration. Thus from God the Father with the gift of the Son,
have we also the holy Ghost: so is the whole Trinity imparted to us, and what
more can he do for his beloved? Yet his love cease not, but proceeds to
guide, to purge, to increase, to defend, to cherish, as a father nurtureth his
son, and as an Eagle stirs over her young. Much is our weakness, and much
he strengthens us; many are our falls, and he forgiueth us much: many are our
dangers, and troubles, and the Lord delivers us out of all. Let us therefore
love the Lord our strength, let us love him much who forgiueth us much: Let us
love the Lord because he receives our Prayers, and delivers us in the time of
trouble. Let us love him first for that which he is, for he only is worthy of
love; his courts only are truly delectable, and his presence amiable: There
only dwells the fullness of joy, and the pleasures of eternity. Next, let us
love God for his love to us, and be glad that so great a love will be
contented with a love so narrow and scant. Let our love be raised to the
highest, and let us fit it to him as much as we may, that the narrowness may
be caused rather by the lowness of our condition and being, then the
straitness of our will: so let it be with all the soul, and all the strength.
Again, since our love is chiefly expressed in pleasing him, and he is
chiefly pleased in keeping his commandments: Let us as much as we love him so
much desire to please him, in a proportionable observation of his
commandments. If this we do, we shall have comfortable assurance of enjoying
him whom we love, and then are we happy above our fellows: the oil of
gladness is powered upon us, and according to Saint Paul, we may rejoice
continually. For if we be assured to see and enjoy God our perfect hapines,
what sorrow can ouer-way this joy, what loss can counteruaile this gain?
Surely we may be contented with whatsoever we have, for godliness has
brought us, the chiefest and most incomparable gain. If we shall have the
greatest happiness, how can any temporal thing make us miserable? If then we
grieve much, we esteem not this happiness as we should, or we turn our eyes
from the assurance thereof. But thereon our eyes being fixed, and not on any
thing between us and it, let us go on courageously, loving God, pleasing God,
and rejoicing in God; in whom we may continually and constantly through all
changes behold as ours, perfect joy and absolute felicity.

54
In a Christian when he becomes a son of God, the form and character of a
Christian and of a son is created in him. This character is the root of him,
from whence flows whatsoever fruit of good-works issues from him. Being
thus animated, the Spirit which has animated us, does not then leave us, but
seconds this his first work, with a continual supply of strength and increase
of grace, until we appear before God in Sion. For this root is rooted in
Christ, from whose Spirit it sucketh still new strength. So we are not as Adam,
left to our selves; for then we should prove accidents without a substance,
and perish into nothing. But being grounded in Christ, the Rock and the Life,
we cannot perish, or be annihilated; and herein is our excellency above Adam.
Indeed sometimes Christ draws in his Spirit, and does not water us with fresh
grace; and then the soul dry and withering, cries as forsaken, Cast me not
away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. In all this is
matter for humility against presumption, and for comfort against desperation.
Thy goodness is altogether of God, he first powered it into thee, when he new
begat thee Again, the continuance and continual increase thereof is from God.
So what have thou of thine own, or what have thou, that thou have not received
of God? Therefore be humble, as a thing which in it self has no goodness; and
if thou will not, know farther, that God will take this goodness from thee for a
time, in which thou gloriest as thine own: and by the lamentable experience of
that time, will plainly show thee thy own weakness and corruption. For when
he takes his from thee, thine is only left, and that will lothsomely appear
to thee to be nothing but dregs of sin and corruption. Then shall thou be
humbled by misery, which would not by bounty; and thy own deadness, which
before thou would not see, now thou shall feel. Yet is here also matter for
consolation; for being rooted in Christ, though he draw in his breath, and
leave us so far, that we feel not the power thereof, yet our union still
remains with him, and we are not parted from Christ, though his virtue
somewhat depart from us; we are grounded on the Rock, and hell gates cannot
prevail against us; we are one with life, and life cannot wholly forsake us.
Yea after desertions, when God has drawn us to give him the glory, which is
his own, and so instructed and bettered us by his chastisements (for punish us
merely he will not because we are his sons) he adds to this benefit
another, even an increase of grace beyond the old bounds. So that though out of
our selves, he gives us humiliation; yet from our union with him, he gives us
exaltation, that he which glories, may glory in the Lord; and that he which
wants, may seek him only, who only fills the hungry with goodness.

55
Death, at ye devils first bringing in of it, was a fearful punishment,
cutting off man from all joy and comfort: But when God in his mercy annexed
infinite and everlasting ioies unto death, death became then advantage, and
that an especial one, as being the gate of eternal happiness. But the
natural man seeing only with natural eyes, beholds therefore only the
sensible and visible comforts of this life, not knowing the second joys;
wherefore his desire being bounded with his knowledge, rests only in them,
and accordingly he accounts death a chiefly miserable and fearful thing, by
which he must be deprived of such joys. But the spiritual man by the
spiritual eye of faith (which the other has not) discerning spiritual
things, beholds evidently the infinite and endless joys which are in the
glorious presence of the highest happiness, even God the Creator: and valuing
them according to the ods of their worth, he longs after them, he thirsts
to enjoy them, he accounts death that which it is, even a great advantage;
as that which does not take away life altogether from a Christian man, but most
happily changes it, turning a life frail, miserable and sinful, into a life
mortal, secure, holy and happy. And as that which does not take away joy, but
changes it, turning the impure narrow and the interrupted joys, which here we
take in the creatures, into a pure, unbounded, and incessant ioies in God the
Creator. Now herein is the great difference between a natural man and a
Christian. The natural man is in bondage while he lives for fear of death;
he goes on, casting an eye still on this vizard, as a thing of terror and
affrightme^t; he is troubled with the darkness of not being, the fearful
shadow of death. But the true Christian is bold as a Lion, he treads upon
death, as having lost the sting, by which it may kill unto a second death: he
gladly makes use of it, willingly giving himself to it as to a messe^ger of
God, which comes to fetch him from earth to heaven, from misery to felicity,
from the works of the six days which could not bless their days, to that
blessed rest of the Maker of those works, which rest blessed the seventh day;
it being indeed blessedness it self, and there being no other blessedness
but it self. Be it therefore the high privilege of the Christian, to enjoy
death, to rejoice in it, and to account it the door of felicity. And that
every Christian may make use of this privilege, this must also be the practice
of a Christian; even often with the eye of faith cleared by prayer and
meditation, to behold the joys which are at the right hand of God, even the
glory of the new Jerusalem, whereof God is the Sun. For as much as we se it,
so much shall we see it to surmount all worldly joy; and as much as we see it
to surmount, so much shall our desire to it, surmount our desire to the world,
and finally so much greater shall be our love of death, as our desire to that
joy is greater. Wherefore if thou love death but a little, thy sight of that
joy is but little; but see it more, and thy affection to death shall be more. If
nature run to the eye and ear, to draw thee to life, run thou to the word and
spirit to draw thee to heaven. These will show thee more reason why to desire
God, the^ flesh can why to love this life. But thou likest, as thou say, the
bargain well, and do account it gainful exchange: but thou likest not the
means; death is painful, and thou art not contented to be happy by pain.
Surely sickness is pain, but death absolutely in it self seems not to be
pain. For the setting of a joint is many times more pain, then death by a
consumption. The conuulsions which appear, are commonly from the strife of
nature with diseases; but death follows usually after nature is overcome, and
then life goes out gently like a consumed taper. But if it must be confessed,
that there is pain in the sickness of death, or in death it self, get thou
again into the spirit, and yet shall thou see, that death is advantage. All the
sufferings of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed. For
the weight of yt joy is an exceeding weight, and ouerweyes far all temporal
and momentany affliction. Therefore if by lesser weight of temporal grief,
thou purchase ye exceeding weight of eternal joy, thou art yet a great gainer,
thou have made a most profitable exchange, thou may yet rejoice, and go
gladly through pain unto a surpassing happiness. Go thou therefore, and follow
the pattern of our faith Christ Jesus, who for the joy set before him, endured
the cross, and despised the shame. Follow the servants of Christ, who rejoiced
in tribulations, and went joyfully through all persecutions, scourgings,
stonings, burnings, and death it self, unto that glory which is above. Yea,
let us say with the servants of God, If God commanded us yet a greathing,
should we not do it? for the end shall abundantly recompense the way; the end
which is happiness, the way which is grief, and the way passes away, but ye
end is endless, and endures for ever. Let us go on therefore hopefully and
chearefully, through al sorrows and bitternesses, limited and transitory, unto
happiness large without end or bound; solid without lightness, and continuing
without cessation: let ye sight of this felicity counterpoise, yea ouerwey with
comfort, the trouble imparted by the feeling of grief.

56
A main cause of much of the grief and folly of men is this; That men resolve
to make something of this world. They raise great plots upon it, and intend to
bring it into a Method; and out of things so ordered to draw some great
happiness and contentment. But God has resolved the contrary; to make nothing
of the world, but to turn it into vanity of vanities: he has set it forth as
a thing to be shaken, to be removed, to resolve with the lost fire, and only
to be a schole and nurcery for the next world. Therefore does he suffer things
in this world of vanity to run without difference, yea often without present
justice, and often to perish, to be overthrown and to undergo great
desolations. Now man's mind being prepared to receive comfort from the world
fitted unto it self, and Gods mind being to let the world run into many
changes, destructions, and finally unto vanity it self; it must needs be that
men oftentimes have their purposes crossed by the purpose of God, and their
courses overthrown by the ouerruling destiny of God. One has gotten him a
good wife, a good house, and a good demeanes, and is, as they call it, well
settled to live; he takes comfort in the course which he is entering into, and
he has bespoken his heart to be merry and rejoice. But behold, suddenly the
disease of the world lays hold on his estate, on him or his wife; and then the
plot is mard, the joy is lost, for the foundation thereof is overthrown. The^
what weeping, what wayling, what sorrow and breaking of hearts? hope is turned
into grief, and the more the hope was, the more is the grief. But the only
way to prevent this, is, that the purpose of man agree to the purpose of God,
and accordingly that man expect no more from the world then God allows the
world to give. Therefore let him persuade himself, that whatsoever part of this
world he has gotten into his use, that part is subject to the law of the
whole, which is bound under change, perishing, and vanity. And consequently let
him expect no other certainty from it, then such as may be from a state of
uncertainty. If he have a house well fitted, a wife well conditioned, a large
demeanes, beautiful and towardly children; let him know his house may burn,
his wife may die, his land may be taken from him, by public, or private
enemies; his children may by sickness put on ashes for beauty, and become the
children of death, yea of Belial. Let him therefore build his hopes on these
things, as men use to build scaffolds for spectacles, eue^ with a certain
expectation of taking down when the spectacle is ended. Let him use the world
as if he used it not, or as ready not to use it; because the form of the
world passes away. When Gods providence calls, we must look for their
departure; and if thus expected to depart, they fall from us ripe, and are not
pulled from us as green; but if not expected, they depart as things glewde to
the heart, which tears away some of the heart at parting. Thus not using this
world as a place of certainty and rest (which it is not) yet let us use it as a
Nurcery and School for heaven, which it is. Let us learn here of the Spirit,
of the word, of the sacraments, of affliction, and even of the general
condition of the world it self; For since the world is so full of misery,
incertainty, and vanity, it teaches us to set our affections on another world,
even that continuing City which is above, heavenly Jerusalem, where is
stability, perpetuity, and glory incoprehensible. Let us pray, let us strive in
this world to be fitted, to be trimmed, for that world, as abride for the
wedding-chamber, though through a thousand changes, a thousand crosses; for if
we become inwardly fair, the King of heaven will have pleasure in our beauty;
we shall be crowned with a crown of joy immarcessible, we shall be filled with
the glory of God, and the blessedness of his presence, which is perfect
happiness.

57
Consisting of eight parts.
I. Part.
There is one (otherwise wise enough for a son of the old Adam) takes upon
him to measure the Ocean of Gods wisdom flowing in the mystery of man's
salvation, with the cockelshell of his own wit, and accordingly with his
judgment he walks over the length and breadth thereof, laying his high and
mighty censure upon it. The honesty of Divines he debaseth, and prefers
that of the Philosopher: the religion of Palestine he condemns, but commends
the Christian religion as a thing well contrived. Yet his commendations seem
not to be hearty, since under them there pass from him certain undermining
sentences, which strike at the maine Pillars of that which he commends. The
odious comparison of the Christistian and Mahumetane religions, because the
Mahumetane succeeds the Christian, in the pretense of a greater perfection,
as the Christian does the Judicial, may pass the more unresisted because it
is apt of it self to fall. For it easily appears that therein the devil was
less then Christ's Ape, mentioning only and not performing an imitation. For
Christ has really out-gone the Law: First, he has justly abolished the types
and shadows thereof, by bringing in the substance and things themselves.
Secondly he has taken away the ignorance under the Law, by giving such a
knowledge, that the least in his kingdom is greater then the greatest under
the Law: and thirdly, he has amended the weakness of the Law, by giving
strength to his servants to perform what the Law before could only teach. But
in which of these points has Mahomet made any probable progress beyond
Christ? Types and shadows of future things he cannot take away; for there are
none in the Christian Religion. Ignorance, he is so far from amending, that
he is the very man that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge; we hear
of fables and unlikely visions, but in sum, he forbids knowledge, hates
the light, and al examination of his religion. Lastly, instead of strengthening
men in the accomplishing of the Law, he weakeneth them, by giving them the
satisfaction of lust in polygamie; and impossible it is he can go beyond
Christ in any precept of holiness, who commands us to love and serve God with all our soul and all our strength, and more then all can no man give. So does
Mahomet only speak of perfection, but performs it not.

2. Part.
But with two points especially he seems to wound the Christian Religion,
though like a Parthian looking another way: One is while he judges it a
loathsome thing that God should be satisfied and appeased with blood: which
though it seem mainly to be bent against common sacrifices, yet being spoken
without exception (as it is there) it strikes at the very sacrifice of Christ
performed in blood; and that there was such a meaning this also adds
probability, because in his directions of Piety while he speaks of
sacrifices, he advises not his pious or godly man to make himself acceptable
to his Creator, by the commemoration of any such bloody sacrifice, but being
altogether silent in that point, he says, the most absolute sacrifice is a
pure, true and humble heart. A second is while he judges it a strange thing
that the Spirit of God should be in frail, weak, and imperfect men. Yea he
seems to exclude him from all men: for he says, where the spirit is, it
would produce some strange effects, as the remoouing of mountains; it would
appear in the whole course of man, and nothing in the world could shake us.

3. Part.
To answer these things first in the root: The very root of this kind of
sayings and misbeleefes, is the natural wisdom of man, which is indeed
folly. For it self thinking wisely of it self, and making it self the
measure of all things, yea of the Divinity it self, it contracteth or
disposes, that, and all other things according to its own measure and
judgment. But herein are two faults; The one is: Because the wisdom of man,
at the best is narrow and shallow, in regard of the wisdom of God, and cannot
pierce unto the depth, or comprehend the breadth of that which is deeper and
larger then it self: yea in familiar and daily things, our wisdom lies
down, being dazzled and amazed. So that if God please to set forth any deep
judgment or wisdom of his, it is beyond and without our judgments;
therefore can they see nothing therein, but rather are offended with it. Then
the truly wise man cries out with Saint Paul: O the depth of the judgments of
God! and so leaves with admiration; and then the foolish wise man says, That
which he comprehends not, is not, but that the very wisdom of God is
foolishness: Another fault is, because our wisdom besides the shallowness
and narrowness thereof, is corrupted and perverted: The flesh lies on the
soul, as a finger upon the strings of a Lute, and makes it to sound, speak
and to be wise, according to the nature of that which stops it. Now the
flesh has this corruption in it, that it is auerted from God our true
sovereign good, and turns to the creature, setting her happiness thereon:
This it sounds still unto the understanding on which it lies; this way it
turns stiffely the will, so that the wisdom of God, which teaches the
contrary is loathsome to it, it is hated and condemned of it. And overcome with
these two infirmities, it seems this man has by them examined these great
mysteries of God: Whereas by strong mortification of this fleshly wisdom, and
the help of the Spirit obtained by earnest Prayer, hunger and thirst, the
flesh being made quiet and vnmoouing, and the Spirit opening the blind eyes of
his, and our souls, he and we might perceive a high wisdom in these matters
of God, yea and we shall perceive the reason why we could not before perceive
them.

4. Part.
But particularly to answer the branches: For the first, there is no reason why
God should be imagined without justice, and why justice should be considered
without a will of punishing faults, and why the punishment of faults committed
against God the chiefest essence, should not be a chief punishment even of
blood and death, which is allowed for offenses against men. And proportionably
believing mercy to be in the same God, we may reasonably believe that mercy
may take the punishment of one for another, this other being united to that
one, and so consequently, the punishment being one the same, they both being
made one. Again if there may be such a sacrifice of one for another, why
should not the blood of beasts, serve to teach men that sacrifice unto their
eternal preservation, as well as be daily shed for their temporal
nourishment, man being their end, and God their Creator, who therefore may
appoint this use of them, unto man as well as the other? Now for the second
branch, that the Spirit of God would show wonderful effects: First who has
tied God to give such a measure of his Spirit as this man lists? But it is
still in the hands of God to dispose his gifts in his own measure. If it please
him he may separate the gift of sanctification from the gift of miracles,
giving one and not the other: yea in very sanctification he may kindle us
sometimes as flax that does but smoke: and shall I say then, that except I
see the flame I will not believe that there is any fire? Yet his graces in many
are so strong, that they are plainly apparent, and cry out loudly, the power of
God, and not of man. For is it not a power evidently supernatural, that men
truly possessed of their wits, seeing and willing, fight, subdue and forsake
their own dearest affections, and sweetest pleasures, which they see and
feel; yea, leave the world, and life it self, to please God whom they see
not, to serve him, to obtain him: where as the general world, yea, and the
wisest of them does clean contrary? Does not this show they are moved with a
spirit different from the spirit of the world, yea, and contrary to it, which
is a divine Spirit? For nothing but God can turn man's heart unto God, being
naturally fixed and nailed to the world.

Part. 5.
But true it is, that God has so disposed of this grace, that he leaves in us
infirmity still to combat with it, and sometimes to quail it for a time. The
reasons hereof are diverse: first, he will get glory by our weakness; for we
being in a fight with our nearest flesh, and the next world, and the devil,
the Prince of this world; strong, mighty and ouermatching enemies; the glory
must needs be his, if we that are too weak for them, overcome them. And
again, the less power he performs the victory withal, the more is his
glory; for thereby it appears, that the weakness of God is stronger then the
strength of Satan. Again, this world is a place appointed by him to be blotted
out, and accordingly it is to man a place of unrest, of fighting, of striving;
his rest is above, his victory is above. Therefore God sets us not here in a
steady, victorious, and glorious grace, lest with Peter we should desire to
build Tabernacles here, where the foundations must be removed: but he
keeps rest, triumph, and glory for us in the world to come, wherein is the
perfect rest, even the pure Sabbath of God. Then shall it apparently be his
glory, that he has made so small a seed of grace, to bring forth such a
harvest of glory; and that with Manna, which to carnal men seems a light
bread, he brings men to Canaan, even the land of rest and happiness.

6. Part.
Now to return him some traffic for his observations, three notes and marks
I will here set upon carnal wise men, each of them being an imperfection,
which spoils their discoursing of Divinity, and Christ the chief part
thereof; even the ignorance of three things, which few of them have the
knowledge to see, consider, and confess, yet are they certainly true, and
truly showed in the doctrine of Christ, and therefore commends this doctrine
above all other. One is the story of man's fall, a true and immovable ground
of Christian Religion, and whereon Christ necessarily is to be brought in to
satisfy for the faults, and to rectify the crookedness thereof. Now this is
manifest to us, only by the word of life, yet it is necessarily enforced on any
clear understanding. For it may be easily seen and believed, that a creature
so wicked, so blind, so subject to every passion and vice, was never let out,
as he now is, from the hands of a most wise, and powerful essence; and that to
govern a great world, whereof he is not worthy, as he is, to be a party, he
being so extremely vicious and corrupt, and most creatures being more orderly
then himself.

7. Part.
Again, another folly and blindness of theirs is, that they see not the
resurrection: it is impossible, that the end of man's body should be this
present life. For then might we say with these Author, that there might be some
pleasure taken above in the torments here below. For what generally do we see
here but miseries, pains, oppression, diverse tortures, diverse deaths, diverse
heart-breakings, care within, and labor without: a few only living in some
ease, of which again but a few escape a great taste of misery. Indeed, were
there no life but this, we might verily think that man was appointed to be
borne, to live and die in a Iayle, wherein he is tied and bound up to misery;
and that this world was set forth for a spectacle of torments and massacres:
wherein we should infinitely wrong the infinite wisdom and goodness of the
great cause of al things. But as we have learnd of God our own fall and present
misery, so withal we have learned a remedy for our fall, and a way out of
this misery into felicity. We know and believe, that the body dying,
returns into that which it was, and that is dust; and if being dust at first,
it was then quickened; we know he that quickened dust at first, can quicken
dust at last, he being the same for ever; yea, we know that small portion of
his Spirit which is in us, is abundantly able to perform it. We doubt not,
but a little power included in an Acorne, is able to raise out of it a mighty
Oak, because we see it; and we may as easily believe, that this Spirit which
now shows a far greater power in our sanctification, may also raise out of
our dust, a heavenly and glorious body. To him that has done so great works
daily seen, there wants no power to do as great things yet unseen. For God
has not bounded his power by his works, but if his will be to work more, his
power is still sufficient to proceed in working. Now that it is his will, his
word does plainly show: blessed be he, who has both willed it, and showed
it; and God, the Author of these and all other good gifts, stablish us which
belong to him, in the knowledge and embracement of this his saving truth, that
living and dying therein, we may pass from this life, which is worse then
death, unto a true life of bliss and happiness.

Part. 8.
Another thing which flesh and blood has not fully discovered, and which has
been the author both of our fall and misery, and implies a necessity of a
preserver and redeemer; is a State, body politic, and kingdom of evil
spirits, which effectual in craft, mighty in power, diligent in
watchfulness: and having all these their powers employed and moved by an
endless and great malice toward mankind, go still about seeking the mischief
and ruin of weak and silly man, unable of himself to stand against this
Leuiathan; and therefore necessarily wanting the help of a preserver and
redeemer. Without a preserver we cannot prevent the evils to come; for against
so mighty enemies, we must be hedged about with a providence mightier then the
force of our enemies; else can we not be safe from our enemies, but should be
continually devoured by them. And we need a redeemer, for ye evils already by
these enemies brought upon us: for these evils we our selves can by no means
take from our selves, nor free our selves from the tyranny which Satan has
already brought upon us. Therefore this strong man must be bound by some
stronger then himself, and so we which were before his possession, may be made
free from that bondage. Now the highest power only is master of this power of
darkness; and therefore he only must perform this work. Some short and small
viewes of some outward, bodily and dissembled workings of these Principalities,
the Heathen have observed in their stories of witchcrafts, oracles, and
apparitions; which witness against themselves; that there are such a people,
and that at times they are very mischievous and malicious; but the craft of
this kingdom is so great, and the ignorance of man so gross, that sometimes
under the show of doing good, as cures and the like, and sometimes by
foretelling future events (so hiding still their principal malice, which was
to the soul and eternal life of man) they have won silly men to take them for
gods, who are their sworn and most fierce enemies: so far are men from
knowing, they are a kingdom combined against mankind. But Christ by his
doctrine, and the doctrine of his servants the Apostles, has described them by
name, has showed their nature, has set forth their malice and rage against
man, which begun with the first man, and continuing from thence increase now
toward the last of men. He has also set forth a remedy against all his
hurt and power, and that is even in this flesh which in the first man the
Devil conquered. For God will show to his own glory, and the utter confusion
of this proud and malicious Prince, that by that very weak creature, which no
way heretofore was not able to match with him, God is able to break his head,
if he do but unite and join himself therewith. And that of these men which
thus were in the first man foiled and overcome, he is able to set up a
kingdom mighty and durable, which shall stand invincible in this world against
the powerful kingdom of Satan, and the vnpreuailing gates of hell, and shall
at last (ouercomming these mighty enemies) pass victorious unto glory and
life everlasting. Even this perform in us O Lord thy weak servants: weak in
our selves, but strong in thee. Let thy power in us, overcome that power, which
without thee, would overcome us. And let us being strengthened by thee, march
valiantly against our enemies, being assured of conquest, through that mighty
one who loves and supporteth us.

58
The end seems to us to be caused by the means, and so at last it is; but
the end is indeed first, and most chiefly the cause of the means: for God
proposing his end, this end caleth out such means, as shall accomplish it
self, so that it causes that to be, which causes it self. So in the
Scripture, when diverse things happened, it is said, that they happened, that it
might be fulfilled, which God had before purposed: so that Gods purpose was
the cause of the being of those actions which fulfilled his purpose. Therefore
if we go to the root of the matter, we may perceive that foolishly we
reason, when we are discontented with the means, saying, If this means had
not been, this action had not come to pass; whereas we should reason this, If
this action had not been appointed to come to pass, these effectual means
had not fallen out. Then run we to see the true cause of things, even to Gods
providence and purpose, which to the godly is a sure rest and refuge, since
thereby al events must turn to the best to Gods children, though effected by
the malice and wickedness of men. For this purpose of God is rooted in Love,
and love purposes all for the good of that which it loves: so through
whatsoever kind of actions it passes, it still remains one and
unchangeable, bringing forth steadfastly fruit proportionable to the root of
love. Gods purpose cannot be hindered or altered by men, but passes along
conquering and prevailing, unchanged it self and changing all things, to it
self, and it own goodness: So Shimei his cursing might produce a blessing to
David, and Judas treason did procure the salvation of mankind.

59
Consisting of Parts.
1. Part.
It is a strange thing that in this broad day light, any man should stumble at
the Popes supremacy in spiritual, much less in temporal matters. If with the
Apostles we will but testify what we see, we on whom the truth clearly
shines cannot choose but see that this supremacy is a thing much younger then
the Christian Religion; which prospered before it was, and that much better
then since Religion was put out to nurse unto it. If we will begin with Christ,
Christ equally endoweth his Apostles with power of binding and loosing; and
equally appoints al nations unto them. If Christ should have said, That on
Peter he would build his Church (which he speaks of him only who only is the
Rock, 1. Cor. 10.) yet Peter answering for all, should receive this in the
behalf of all, for whom he answered. For since it was forbidden to all of
the^ to tell who Christ was, it seems all joined with Peter in the knowledge
and confession of Christ, and so all had interest in the benefit of that
knowledge and confession. Again, if at that time it should only have been
spoken only to Peter, we have another Scripture which equalleth the other
Apostles with him, even in the building of the Church; while it says, the
Church is built upon the foundation of the Apostles: so that the Apostles are
joined together promiscuously, not differently, toward the making up of the
foundation. Besides, Paul plainly answers that he is not a whit inferior to
the chiefest of the Apostles; that he had of Peter the right hand of
fellowship, not of inferiority: and which most cuts off the Pope from claiming
us who are Gentiles by Peter, and turns him over to fetch his especial claim
by Paul, Paul says that the Apostleship of the circumcision or Jews was
committed to Peter, and of the Gentiles especially to him: To this Eusebius
gives his testimony, saying, that Peter though coming among the Gentiles, yet
preached only to the Jews, and withal brings forth his first Epistle, as that
which was directed particularly to his own charge the Jews. And this indeed
best fitteth with the History, which reports, that Peter and Paul exercised
their Apostleships together at Rome, which might most orderly be performed, if
the one taught there the Circumcision; the other the Gentiles. Therefore let
the Pope take heed how he robs Paul, to give unto Peter; for he robbes his
best title, to give to his worse; but hereafter let him find some new
exposition of building the Church so upon Peter; that Paul also may have a
great part in the foundation whereon the Church is built. Now if we descend from
the Apostles (between whom if there be any odds in right to us, it appears
to be on Paul's side) to examine whether any such supremacy descended from
among them, to the succeeding ages, we shall find none in diverse hundred
years. The church of Rome indeed was a famous Church, founded by the Apostles,
flourishing with godly Bishops and Martyrs, and full of Saints; and therefore
by many holy men, great and large titles were given to her, and her Bishops, in
letters and writings. So might she for the eminency thereof, be called the
first Church or the chiefest Church, and the Bishops, the Bishops of the
chiefest Church; but a mean understanding knows there is great odds, between
being first in order, and a head in government. And this the practice of those
times plainly declared; for though they had given never so many good words to
the Bishops and Church of Rome, yet as soon as the Bishop of Rome intermedled
with their government, they presently rose up against him: so did Cyprian; yea
a council of African Bishops, and among them Saint Austin, walled up their
country from the command of the Roman Bishops. Even in the very matter of
excommunication, wherein is the pretented emine^ce of their power, Irenaeus a
Bishop of France and the Popes neighbor, reproved Victor, a Bishop of Rome
for exco^municating the Churches of Asia upon the observation of Easter. And
when Constantinus unjustly checked Liberius the Bishop of Rome for maintaining
the cause of Athanasius with these words, How great a part of the world art
thou, that thou alone should justify a wicked man, and trouble the peace of
the world? neither Constantinus acknowledged any supremacy in Liberius: neither
did Liberius in his answer (though he had occasion given to tell how great and
Catholic a head he was) thereby justify his doings. To conclude, (for
particulars are infinite, and this matter is commonly handled;) at length by a
council, Christendom was committed to five Patriarchs; of Rome,
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem: of which Rome was the
first, but had no more authority over the rest, then the second had over the
third; the authority of no one being subalterne, or subject to other. And the
proportionable practice of diverse of these Patriarchs yet standing, gives
hereunto confirmation. But the same corruption of man's nature, which in a
clown stirs up an ambitious desire to be a gentleman, of a gentleman to
become a nobleman, and of a nobleman to become a king; being in a Pope as much
as in other men, has wrought the same effect in him, that it has in others.
And so from being a Patriarch he has labored to be the head of the
Patriarchs, that is, an universal Patriarch; and from being and universal
Patriarch, to be an universal Emperor. So Ambition still ascends, making one
degree of honor, but a stayre whereon to mount it self up to another; and by
this means at length he is come to that all-comprehending top wherein he
meets just with the title prepared for him by Saint Paul: As God, in the
temple of God, above all that is called God. But he must remember that thereunto
are annexed these two other titles, the man of sin, and the son of perdition.

2. Part.
These things being so evident, most lamentable it is that there should be
plotted and devised an ignorance so gross that it sees them not; that there
should be miracles by the devil wrought or forged to stand between the eyes
of men, and this revealed Antichrist: that there should be distinctions coined
subtle enough for less subtle souls, to distinguish to the manifest
Antichrist from it self. Yet all these things are provided by the servants of
this son of perdition, and so powerful, that it is Gods election only which
mainely preserues those that stand and withstands this Mystery of Satan. And
indeed how can that ignorance, which is enjoined to the disciples of Rome, be
broken through by them, which are bound thereunto by a solemn vow, and under
fearful penalties? They must know but what deceives them, until they be so
thoroughly deceived, that it is almost impossible to be vndeceiued again. But
this let them take with it, that the same ignorance will serve to breed up a
man in any religion, be it never so gross; and at this day it equally serves
the devils turn to nurse two of his goodliest children, the erroneous
doctrines of Mahomet and the Pope. Yet lest ignorance should fail, and
perchance a glimse of light might shine in upon the seeled eyes, there are
miracles daily provided to set before the sight of men. These draw them to say,
that Simon Magus is the great power of God: but we are taught to go from
these signs to the Law, to the Testimony, to the Word; and this Word tells
us, that miracles in the latter times, shall be fixed and inseperable
companions of the man of sin. So in stead of converting us, they are
acknowledged by us, to be the badge of Satan, fastened on Antichrists sleeue,
and they tell us to whom he belongs. We need no miracles now, but to reveal
Antichrist; for we believe the doctrine of Christ once fully confirmed by his
own miracles. Lastly, if yet some greater light dazzle the eyes, which neither
ignorance can keep out, nor miracles employ in drawing the eyes wholly to
themselves; then are there provided subtle, nice, and sublimated distinctions
and reasons, whose office is to confound and entangle the understanding rather
then to enlighten it. Falsehoods are purified and refined, and made as like
truths, as possibly they may, that the vndistinguishing mind may equally accept
them, and so led by a little mistaking unto a gross error. And hereof at this
time is there a stedy forge in the Church of Rome, which does but expect what
the Pope and his Privy Council say, and instantly they are ready with their
excellent inventions, to prove it the voice of God, and not of man. Surely the
wit of man is a powerful thing in regard of man; but in regard of the Spirit
which made it, alas weak it is, and the effect cannot strive with his cause,
which is mightier then he. Therefore this Babel of man's wit built up against
the Lord, must needs be destroyed by the Spirit of his mouth. In the mean time
until this victory of Christ upon Antichrist be fully performed, let us pray
unto God, that he will add easily unto the Church, those who belong unto him;
and that they may plainly see, that he who seeks earthly things more then
heavenly, is of the earth, earthly, and far from being the Deputy of the
Lord of heaven.

60
The second resurrection needs not to seem very strange, if we consider the
first, already done in us; for whereas there is naturally in us but a carnal
wisdom, that sees and allows only present and visible things for
happiness, we have in our regeneration, a wisdom placed in us, which
blotting out the former wisdom, and the happiness thereof, beholds God
which is invisible, as our only true happiness. We have also in stead of our
fleshly will, which only sauoureth fleshly objects, a will directly contrary
thereunto planted in stead of it, which hates the former will, and the sinful
pleasures wherein that will chiefly delighted; and loves even the persecutions
of Christ, which the natural will especially hated. Thus by the new birth,
light being created in darkness out of no former creature, and a rightnesse of
will being framed, where was nothing but crookedness, and such a light and
will, that they alter the affections, actions, and whole course of man; why may
not the same new birth have also another power with it, even to change the
mortality of the body into immortality, as it has to change the corruption of
the soul and body into purity and incorruption? it being alike easy to go to
give life unto death, as light unto darkness, and good to evil.

61
Because we see not God, or at lest we do not see how he sees us, we rather
think that he sees us not, or are careless of his seeing: So our blindness
toward God, casts the likeness of it self, on God toward us, and imagines
him to be unto us, as we are to him. Herein men are to God, as some birds are
to men, who hiding their heads from seeing men, think that men the whilst do
not see them. But since the knowledge of God is the cause of men, the being of
men can reach no farther, then the knowledge of God. So whosoever takes the
knowledge of God from him, takes from himself his own being; for where the
knowledge of God cease to know him, there he cease to be; otherwise should
man, who is but the effect of Gods knowledge go farther then his cause, which
cannot be. But surely God that made man by his knowledge, knows the man that
he has made; he has not placed him out of his own reach; but as at first
after he made his creatures, he saw even through them, that they were thoroughly
good; so for ever, he veweth and pierces them, searching all things by that
very wisdom which made the^. Since then we are manifest and naked, before our
glorious God, who both sees, and hates all uncleanness, but beholds with
pleasure, holiness and pureness; let us take heed to our hearts, yea, our
whole selves, that no filthiness appear to him, lest we be shut out from the
City into which no unclean thing may enter: But that God seeing us to be pure
in heart, even in soul and body, may at length be called up to see God, who is
the fullness and perfection of all felicity.

62
The very being as well as the discoursing of our natural reason may well
prove, that man was not made only for this world. For if first it be granted,
that a great and excellent wisdom created this Universe which the curious
subtlety of the parts and frame thereof will enforce upon us; it must also be
believed, that wisdom does all things wisely, both in regard of order, and
end, every thing bringing forth his like: now the beasts having a more easy
and uninterrupted enjoying of the world, as not tilling, or reaping, neither
building Barnes nor filling the^; not foreapprehending griefs, nor long
retaining them? what does this reasonable soul in man (I speak of the
general) if his bound be this world, but teach him how to labor, how to vex
himself, and how to grieve, and consequently how to be more miserable then
the beasts themselves? But a soul more excellent then the beasts cannot be
imagined to be given for this use by so perfect a wisdom, it being extremely
contrary unto wisdom, that the beasts should serve a creature more base and
miserable then themselves; that man should be both above them, and below them:
and that man should have reason, thereby to be worse then he should be without
it. Therefore it strongly follows, that this advantage of reason was given by
wisdom to man, for some advantage of man. And if beasts enjoy the world as
much as man, and yet man has a soul more excellent then they; that this soul
has some happiness above the world, which is the especial end and mark
thereof. To this happiness therefore, let our soul lift it self up that it
may verily tend toward the end thereof, that it be not a mere drudge unto
labor and misery, sinking down below the beasts, but that reaching beyond
them, it lay hold on that blessed refreshing which is to come, and comfort it
self amid all the base employments, labors and toils of the six days, in
the view of the happy Sabbath and rest of God, the true aim of her desires,
and the chief solace that swallows and sweetens all her temporal vexations.

63
The devil usually raises temptations out of the state which is present, and
therefore though we be past one danger, into a calm and quietness, yet even
then look that out of that calm, also some tentation will arise. He is more
cunningly and industriously mischievous, the^ his scholar the Papist: One
Treason being past we may not think it the last, but one among the rest, and
so look for his fellows; if we have escaped, we must pray, hope, and endeavor
to escape again. Our life is a warfare, which is not a single battle, but a
continuance of many. If the devil have lost, he is the more angry for
loosing, and surely in this last time of the world as he is more choleric
and fierce then ever, so is he more cunning. He has man at his fingers ends,
and this his increased knowledge, he sets on work by an increased malice,
desiring because his time is short, to get in breadth what he cannot in length.
It concerns us therefore proportionably to increase our resistance; and if we
mean to overcome, by prayer, watchfulness, and industry, so to advance our
selves in the power of Christ, that we may ouermatch the power of Satan; that
the house of David growing stronger, and the house of Saul weaker, the kingdom
of Christ the Son of David may be thoroughly and firmly established in us,
and we in it.

64
A dissembler and hypocrite, is a thing most odious to God, and so should he be
to men, especially to himself, who next to God knows best how wicked himself
is. First, he is a perpetual liar, and his outward profession, is nothing but
a continual publisher, and perswader of untruth. It tells every one the man is
honest that shows it, and lies all the while. This lying in deeds, is at least
as wicked as lying in words, and accordingly should be hated. Again the
dissembler is an idolater, for he sets man in the place of God, and God in the
place of man. His best side he shows to man, and that is his outside; and the
worst side, he turns to God, and that is his heart: Accursed man that seek
to please him who is but thy fellow, and neglectest him who made both thee and
him, even the Almighty, Lord of all things. That God who is ielous and will
not give his honor to another, cannot but be highly offended with thee, for
preferring man before him; and to him shall thou give an account for this
corruption and withdrawing of thy heart, Gods chiefest part. Thirdly, the
dissembler is an idol, for he being nothing in the world sta^ds up to be
worshipped. By his outward show he calls in the country to reverence him for
the goodness which is not in him, he sets himself up on horseback as Haman
would have done, his hollow profession crying before him; This is the man, whom
God will honor. But this man, the whiles is the very man whom God especially
hates, and whom with Dagon he will cast down on the threshold of hell gates,
breaking him in pieces, when none shall deliver him. And this fits well with
him, for now he is not a whole man; but pieces of two men tied together, the
outward piece is a piece of an honest man; the other and that the greater
piece, is a piece of a Reprobate, or rather of a devil. Lastly, he is a very
fool, for of that which is good he chooses only to have the appearance, and
of that which is naught to have, a full and whole possession. Thou fool, if
the show of goodness be so good, is not the thing it self much more good? and
if the show of wickedness be odious, is not the wickedness it self much more
odious? But thou unwisely art contented to be rotten, corrupt, and filthy, so
the world see nothing in thee, but an outward painting of purity, and
cleanness; so thou may be to them a perfume, thou will be to thy self a
kennel. But rather turn from thy wickedness, and live; get the real
possession of that, whereof the very appearance is so beautiful and pleasant;
let the show make thee in love with the thing, and get a root to thy branches.
Otherwise thy vizard shall be pulled from thee, and thou shall be stripped of
thy shows, and be condemned for that which thou art. Thou shall be far away
from these whom thou representest, and shall be placed among such as thou art
indeed: there shall be taken from thee, that which it seems thou have, and
thou shall be cast into utter darkness. Surely if to men the looking asquint
of the eyes, be ill favored and unpleasant, much more ougly unto God is this
squinting of the soul while it casts the eye on goodness, but the sight on
wickedness: Therefore reconcile thy self to thy self, become one man and
differ not in thy self: for if thou agree with thy self, bringing thy inside
to be one with thy outside, then will God agree with thee, and this saying shall
concern thee as well as others: Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall
see God. But if thou plough on with thy ox and ass together, thou go on in
that, which is an abomination to the Lord, thou heapest up wrath against the
day of wrath; thou have no portion in ye blessednesses which belong to the
right eous, but in ye many woes denounced against ye Scribes and Pharisees
Hypocrites.

65
That image and Character wc every man bears in this life, the same also shall
he bear in the resurrection. He that in this life bears the image of God,
shall in ye resurrection appear in that image; and he yt bears only the image
of darkness and corruption, even the likeness of the old Adam, in the same
loathsome and deformed shape shall he appear before God sitting in judgment.
For God does regenerate and new create man only in this world. They that be
not changed here, and made like unto Christ, do let pass the time of
Regeneration, and so they have the stamp of sin in their foreheads
vnremooueable for ever. Now in that great and terrible day, what difference
shall there be in the twofold appearance of these different sorts? The son of
God new made by his Spirit, shall appear in the image and likeness of God his
Father, with light in his understanding, righteousness in his will, and
holiness in his affections: To him it shall be said, Blessed is the pure in
heart, he shall see God; for God delights to see him, even his own likeness
in him. But the son of flesh shall appear, foul and blemished in his
understanding, corrupt and froward in his will and affections; and in stead of
representing he shall be contrary and cross unto God, and ougly in his
co^trarietie. And then is his very presence lothsom to the Judge of purest
eyes, he is a toad or serpent made and taken to be destroyed. His ouglinesse
kindles the wrath of God against him, which burns and drives into the
bottom of hell; Lord, when thou raisest us up, thou shall make their Image
despised. Therefore while it is to day, while it is the accepted time, let the
son of man make have to become the son of God; Let him put off the goat
which he is, and put on the sheep that he should be; let him get a clean
heart, and a right spirit within him. And because this only comes of God, let
us seek only to him; and because God has told us by his Son that he will
be overcome by importunity, let us seek importunately still begging,
following, and undeniably soliciting him, until he give the holy Ghost to
them that ask him. Then shall we with Symeon, be full of peace at our
departure, being assured to see salvation; there shall we with Paul, be
always bold even at our remoouing, being certain of a better tabernacle in
heaven; then shall we comfortably approach to the Throne of God, who we know
will acknowledge us for sons by his mark in our foreheads, and will call us
in unto the Supper of the Lamb. But then they yt appear in the shape of dogs,
their place shall be without from the presence of God and the Lamb for
evermore, where their worm dies not, and their fire quenches not. They that
are the kindreds of the earth, and not of heaven, shall wail before God, and
theirs shall be eternal weeping and gnashing of teeth. The goats shall be
set on the left hand, God will behold them scornefully, and afar off; they
shall be called cursed, and they shall be driven from God into everlasting
fire, there to accompany the devil and his Angels, whom in this life they have
associated and resembled.

66
The hard things, are often most excellent, for our business in this world is
to strive against flesh and blood, which is not a matter of ease. Among diverse
combats therewith, they have not the least, who are in the stead of a father
and mother. The hardness hereof is, that such standing in the place of natural
parents, should do that right to the child in cold reason, which the other
would do in the heat of affection. Now men sail with affection, but row hard
with reason, yet the worth and reward counteruaile the labor. It must needs be
a matter of excellent worth: for God is the God of the fatherles, and he
joins with God that helps them; he is Gods instrument, and has a
deputiship under God; as for the reward, mercy procures mercy, temporal,
eternal. Thou may well hope, that God who is pleased with thy goodness to
the children of others, will raise up the goodness of others to help thy
children; and himself will become a father unto thee and thine. But if thou
liftest up thy hand against those, whom God has taken into his protection,
fear thou the Judgment without mercy, for showing no mercy; and that while
thou art a very father in law to others, God will be a father in law to thee
and thine, which makes men of al others the most miserable Orphans.

67
Marriage of all natural actions is of most consequence, yet is it the worst
done of any other. For men do not commonly make marriages, but bargains, and
the bargain being made, the marriage comes in upon the bargain. But it was
not so from the beginning. In the first marriage, the woman was the principal
part proposed to the man, and in her chiefly the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof. So it should be still, the great matters of the Law
should be preferred before Cummin and Mints, yet these need not altogether to
be neglected: howsoever, that which is absolutely and only necessary, must
be held whatsoever become of that which is but convenient. Examples of holy
Scripture show us plentifully, the miserable issues of marriages made not in
the Lord, which might be so many instructions to future times. In the first
world, wicked wives, even the daughters of flesh and blood, corrupting the
sons of God, brought in the Flood. Afterward, the most wise of only men,
Solomon, by idolatrous wives, was bowed aside to the worship of Idols, from the
service of the true God, who appeared to him twice: wherefore God did rent his
kingdom from him, and gave it to his servant. But a spectacle of long misery,
and as long wickedness, was that unhappy marriage between the son of
Iehosaphat, and the daughter of Ahab; thereby was Iehosaphat himself drawn
into danger and loss, and into the cause of them, worse then themselves, even
to the love of them which hated God. Thereby the son of Iehosaphat, yea his
sons son became wicked and unhappy generations, this sentence waiting on
their sins; for the one had the daughter of Ahab to wife, and the other was
counseled by his mother to do wickedly. Let men therefore be afraid to infect
themselves and their posterity, by becoming one flesh with wickedness; to
marry unto a leprosy of the soul is worse then into that of the body. A woman
is a needle to pierce into the heart and affections of man, and if she be
wicked, the devil is the thread which follows after. This knows the tempter
right well, therefore by Eve he got within Adam; by Dalilah he overcame
Samson; by the daughters of Moab, he got power on the children of Israel, to
inspire into them idolatry, one of his chiefest poisons. Therefore let no man
for money take unto him a factor for the devil, lest thereby the devil
attended with the curse of God, (which ever follows him) enter in upon him and
his posterity. The remainder of flesh in the best regenerate, though but a
part of him, is already too great a friend to our greatest enemy; let us not
add to this fleshly part a whole body of flesh to increase the grief and
incombrance of the Spirit of God in us, and to increase the force of Satan, and
of his temptations against us. But let them that do so, know, that they seek
the ruin of their houses by the same means, by which they seek to raise
them. For though Satan be a strong man able to keep a house in peace, yet
there is a stronger then he, who often binds this strong man, and takes his
house from him; or if he leave it to him still to be maintained (as indeed
he is allowed to be a kind of a Prince in this world) yet miserable is that
standing, and worse then falling, which stands by Satan; for there comes a day
wherein his principality it self shall fall and be overthrown, and all that
it does sustain. And in the mean time, what a bettering of an house is this,
to increase the living, and to corrupt the livers? to grow outwardly in wealth,
and to decay inwardly in grace and virtue? to lose in our selves, and our
posterity, yt we may add to the estate of our selves, and our posterity? The
true pattern of marriages was the first, made by God himself; and therefore to
be imitated by the children of God: therein God gave man a helper fit for him;
fit she was to help him in spiritual things, even the service of God, and fit
to help him in temporal things, eue^ those of this life. Such is ye wife
described by Solomon, fit to do her husband good all the days of her life: good
to his soul, good to his body; for she fears the Lord, and therefore is
praised. This pattern being followed, we may certainly believe, that he which
allowed, and blessed the first, will also allow and bless all those which are
like it. He will behold such a marriage with pleasure, while it is making; he
will be present at it, for his good will was principally sought in it; and he
will prosper it, that men shall have cause to say; Lo, thus shall the man be
blessed, that fears the Lord. But because goodness in any sex is over rare;
and it may seem a hard matter to get one, that may fully equal the pattern;
first, remember whose gift a good wife is, and seek to him, from whom comes
every good gift. Surely it is to be feared, that many have bestowed themselves
ill, because they sought not to him, who only could have bestowed them well,
or because they sought him more for outward advantages, then for inward graces.
Secondly, if thou have done this, and yet thou find not that one among a
thousand; and need so requires, that thou must proceed in thy purpose: when
thou can not get a burning lamp, get thee a smoking flax, if not one that is
expert, and by long custom exercised and used to strong meat, yet one that
desires the sincere milk of the Word to grow thereby. Take one that is likely
to become a Temple for the holy Ghost, and this likelihood find not in thine
own presumption, but in her disposition. That this may be really performed, let
us first discern a mind teachable, and willing to learn. It is a first and
chief step toward God, to hearken after God. Therefore wisdom ever begins
her speech with this; Hear ye children, and incline your ears to wisdom,
and, He that hears is wise, and will increase in learning. Next, let her be
humble and meek; for such a spirit is a fit receptacle for God, it is before
God a thing much set by, and to such, God will reveal his secret mysteries.
Now because man is weak, and his affections rob him of his judgment, making
him to think that party excellent, to whom he has an excessive affection:
Let God be instantly sought to establish weak and deceivable man; let him be
entreated, that he will not be wanting to that, which much concerns his glory
and service, and the good of his servants. And these things thus ordered,
strong hope may be conceived, that he who heard Abraham's servant, when he
entreated a wife for his Masters son, will give such a wife as she was to
the sons of Abraham: and he who gave unto Ruth a mighty man of wealth, and
one blessed of the Lord, because she resolved, that the God of Israel should be
her God; will also give the like blessing unto the followers of Ruth. But while
I sing the Songs of Sion in a strange land, the Chaldea^s or wizards of this
world understand not the language; the natural man perceives not the things
of God, neither can Scripture by any means make him leave a good bargain.
Therefore will he still in spite of heaven, marry his land to his neighbors
great portion: I mean his Son, that would perchance be better then himself,
to his neighbors daughter, which perchance will make him, if she can, worse
then the father. These exchangers of money by bargains consummated in the
Temple, since the Word (which forbids the house of God to be made a den
of thieves) cannot drive them thence, it may he a whip of cords will. And
surely in every days experience, such a one is laid soundly on many of their
backs. And therein a twofold cord, that breaks both bones and hearts is
especially remarkable. One is the often dislike between such unhallowed, or at
least, unequal parties. Religion is the truest and strongest bond of love;
where that fails, nature is next, which is most corrupt. Nature delights in
new lusts, and so runs after that which it has not, neglecting what it has.
Hence has that cursed speech issued from one of her followers: That he could
love his wife above any other, if she were not his wife; making that a reason
of hatred, which a Christian makes chiefly a reason of love. And when this
loathing of the party possessed, has brought forth the desire of another, and
that desire, obtaining; what heart is then great enough to bear the vexing and
tormenting thoughts that swell therein by this forsaking? if it be the wives
part, as most often it is, she still beholds with indignation, the lothing
of her self, the loss of her right in him for whom she forsook all others,
and his giving of himself away to a stranger. These meditations eat up her
heart, and then she curses the time of her marriage, and all them that made
it. When this news comes home to the churl her father, he doubts at last
his daughter is cast away; which he might probably have doubted before, and
much more profitably, for then he could have helped it. And now when she
sits as a Nun forsaken of the world, breaking her own heart, and somewhat
her fathers; misery beats into them, that instruction could not teach them;
that marriages made without God, are words, not actions; since such a woman
has had much money bestowed on her to be called a wife, and yet she has no
husband. Another cord wherewith this kind of folly whippeth it self is, when
the party which was taken into this match for the greatness of estate, by
vices wastes the estate which only made the match. This to the covetous
father, is the worst divorce; for he married his daughter to the wealth, not
to the man, and that wealth is separated from her. After this, the man is
found, apprehended and condemned to be wicked, which he was indeed before, but
his wealth gave his wickedness such a golden luster, that covetousness could,
or would not see what it saw: but now neglected wickedness begetting poverty
makes him odious, whom wickedness could not, and the robbed child is
returnable to the parents wanting another portion for maintenance. In this case
also, religion would have been a remedy, which takes men, though not
distrustful and unbelieving, yet provident for their family. These be the
stripes of graceless marriages, which afflict both the married parties and
their parents, and would, if observed, teach wisdom good cheap to others, as
they dearly and deeply have imprinted it into these. But this is the pity,
that money is so pleasant and glorious a thing, that it casts Sunbeames on
every person that has it, be he never so base; and the young woman's father has
his thoughts so cheared therewith, that he must needs hope the best of his
son in law, though nothing but money give him such advice; wherefore it is
yet to be feared, that many gazing and gaping on wealth, will follow it so
close, that they shall stumble into the same ditches, wherein they have seen
many of their neighbors wallowing. This makes sport for the devil, and thus is
man most truly fayry-led, even led aside by the spirits of darkness into the
wandering ways of Balaam the son of Beor, who made Israel to sin. But this
makes bitter lamentation, even the mourning for sons and daughters in the
Church of God; for hereby has the Church lost many, both sons and daughters,
some being turned from a good profession, others being altogether bred in
Paganism, having no difference from heathen, but only in the saying of a
Pater noster, a Creed, and it may be, the ten Commandments. Therefore the
Church takes up her complaint, and in sorrow of heart cries out: The Nation is
increased, but her joy is diminished, there are children borne but not to her;
therefore as Rachel she prays, Give me children or else I die, or else with
Rahel she weepeth and will not be comforted, because her children are not.

68
If a man thinks he has some understanding he must thus employ it, else he
has not what he thinks he has. First he must understand and know the great
ignorance which is in man, and particularly of things Divine, above us; yea of
natural things before us; God and the happiness in him is far from our
Reach, and even in natural and created things we are suddenly stinted, our
knowledge quickly stopping and resting in a confession of hidden and secret
faculties. Therefore ignorance confessed is a great wisdom in us. Secondly he
must know and acknowledge the great and general misery of mankind, which
through sickness, oppression, misery, and folly reigns in the world; and he
must know into what kind of world, he is borne and brought, that so he may
learn on what conditions he does live. Thirdly he must see the impotence and
weakness of man, to lift himself above himself, and to add one cubite yea
one finger to the height of his Being.: so that of himself he can get very
little above the ignorance, or the misery under which his condition is to live.
But this knowledge is not that we should sit down therein without use; for
then it were but a Lamp unto misery. But that justly valuing our selves, we
should be both humble and patient, as low and miserable creatures; but withal
should lift our eyes (since our selves we cannot) above this misery unto him,
who is true wisdom, Almighty power, and perfect happiness: praying him by an
addition of a new creation to the old, to raise us above our selves increasing
our knowledge, strengthening us, to ascend unto him, who is very Felicity;
protecting and comforting us in this path of misery which leads unto him. And
now having God, by the Spirit of his Son, from thenceforth in him we are
wise, strong and happy, who to us is wisdom, protection, happiness, yea al
things; and so we which before could not, may now rejoice; but in the Lord.

69
To perceive and find the truth of Christ, we must not look into our selves,
but into Christ and the doctrine wherein he is delivered, and which he
delivers. For if we look into our selves, we can see nothing in our selves,
that may prove the gift of Christ unto us. We may verily see, that we need
those effects, which by Christ are performed, even redemption, and
regeneration; but that the Son of God should take upon him the nature of man
to effect this, in our selves we cannot find. For first, man was created
without any need, or help of this incarnation; and therefore there was no
instinct of such a mystery planted in him at his creation, as there was of the
Deity. Again, man being fallen, he could not see any perfect way out of his
misery, as appears at this day among the Heathen that know not Christ.
Thirdly, were man never so intelligent, yet being but a creature, which cannot
comprehend his Creator, how could man comprehend this mystery, which was a
secret purpose flowing out of the unsearchable will of God, whose Spirit none
knows but his own spirit? so that what issues therefrom, is such as the eye
has not seen, the ear has not heard, nor the heart of man conceived; and
among these principal is this mystery of our salvation by Christ. Wherefore
going out of our selves, and not seeking Christ in our own wisdom, which
comprehends him not, let us go to him and to his doctrine; and therein we
shall find admirable wisdom, excellent justice, deep mercy, infinite power,
perfect holiness, and in sum a mystery becoming God as the Author of it,
and fitting above all other the misery of decayed and wretched man. If we
look into this mystery, we shall see him restoring man, by whom man was made,
and who better then he? we shall see man die for the sin of man, and how
could Gods justice be otherwise satisfied, there having been a vow that man
should die when he did eat? We shall see the Spirit of purity which first
made man to Gods image, renewing and sanctifying him above the first strength.
We shall see a Law of perfect holiness taught and prescribed by Christ, fit
for God to require, and for man to perform to his God. And finally Christ
brings us to the presence of God our Sovereign good, defending us in the way
from our ouer-mightie adversaries the devils and their servants, whom also at
last he wholly suppresseth. These things are in the doctrine of Christ: Things
necessary to be done for the salvation of man, but not done at all, if not
done by Christ; for in no other we find them performed. And if we look into
some circumstances of this doctrine, we shall find that Christ was prophesied
of inparadise by God: in Egypt by Jacob, in Judea by the Prophets, the Jews
the enemies of Christ confirming it. Besides, the story of the fall we find
fitly to agree with our present condition, and that is delivered only in that
story wherein also Christ, the Remedy of the fall is promised. Wherefore one
issuing from God, the other also has the authority of the same reporter. And
though Christ have no need of the devils acknowledgement, yet their testimony
may serve against themselves; and it was from below if not from above, that the
Sibyl cited by Virgil foretold of Christ: Christ being on earth, was confessed
by the devils; and wicked spirits at this day trading with witches, seek to
draw them from Christ to themselves. Lastly, the prophecies of Christ himself
concerning Jerusalem, concerning the succession of his own doctrine, of his
disciples and believers, became true in the event, and as it was prophesied, to
this religion and doctrine the devil opposed himself above all other by
persecution; wherefore it was above all other, the chief doctrine that opposed
him; in the opposition, overthrow, and vndodoing of whom and his works
stands a maine part of our redemption and salvation.

70
The devils preaching is clean contrary to Gods. God begins with the Law,
and ends with the Gospel: but the devil begins with the Gospel, and ends in
the Law. God says, When ye eat ye shall die* yet to man being dead gives
Christ to restore him. The devil says, ye shall not die at all; yet when man
(by his temptation being become mortal) should be restored by Christ, he goes
about to kill that Christ which was to be the life of them, whom he had
promised that they should not die at all. So continually before we sin he
says to every one of us, God is merciful, and Christ is a reconciliation for
all our sins; but after we have sinned, he says, whosoever sins is not
borne of God; The soul that sins shall die. And to them that sin after
grace received; There remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful
looking for of judgment. But we must cure our selves by contraries. Therefore
let us still use Gods kind of preaching to ourselves; which is contrary to
Satan's. Before we sin let us set the whole Law, even the terror of God before
us, to affright us from sin, and having sinned, let us carry the yoke of the
Law until we be truly humbled for our sins: But after due humiliation, let
us take hold on the Gospel; which to all penitent Christians, is the true and
rightful successor of the Law.

71
There are two sorts that read books, to make themselves better by them: One,
that gathers from them whatsoever adds to their knowledge or virtue. The
other would make it self better also, but it is in reputation, and glory; for
by seeking of faults and errors, they desire to raise themselves above the
writer. But I must borrow leave here to use the words of Christ, I tell you the
Publican returns home justified rather then the Pharisie: The humble learner
is more substantially increased, the^ the proud Scribe, and the ambitious
disputer. The first gets into him an essential growth, the other raises
himself only upon stiltes. The one, acquireth more solid matter, the other a
greater swelling; the one increases in the inner man, the other in the old
Adam. Surely the latter with Mary has made the better choice, there being no
comparison between the increase of life eternal, and the puffing up of
vanishing and vain glory. Wherefore let us covet the best gifts, and though
we need not put out our eyes, not to discern faults when we meet them* yet it
is both needless, foolish, and sinful to use our eyes to that purpose only
or chiefly. But the whole and chief aim of man in all things, being the
kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, let him in reading keep that
still fixed before him, as his especial mark, fitting and leuelling thereunto
every thing that will serve to this end. If thou meetest with errors in
doctrine, thou may warn thy self and others of them; but if only with
slips of infirmity, cover them to thy self and others, considering that thou
also art a man subject to the same if not greater frailty. And so shall thou
best advance the benefit of that work to thy self and others. For that which
is read by an understanding sweetened and seasoned with humility and charity,
discouers to such a reader the whole beauty, treasure and goodness it has,
and bestows all on him. But to the proud inquisitor, it hides much of
itself, being veiled and covered with an appearance of evil cast upon it by
the evil mind that read it. Besides, when good things be found, and among
them some faults though excusable, if the mind out of weakness or
censoriousnesse dwell upon those faults, it is a great odds but upon so kind
entertainment, they will make bold to persuade, that the good shall do no
good, but that which is faulty shall give a distaste to that which is
profitable. But as in the church so of the Church, let all things be done to
Edification.

72
A settled and resolved purpose to be rich, is the fountain of infinite evils.
For this resolution once being fixed, presently the eyes, and the ears are
turned into mere intelligencers and suruaiors. They are wholly employed to
seek and search whatsoever lies fit, and whatsoever is profitable; And
withal the heart greedily stands gaping to devour whatsoever of this fit and
profitable comes within reach. The difference of things (as lawfulness and
unlawfulness) is taken away; for the strength and eagerness of the desire
digests all alike into nourishment, as a mighty Appetite does meats both raw
and roasted. It is a heartbreaking, not to add somewhat continually; and if
Nabothes Vineyard come not, being called for, it is death to look upon it.
What though the getting of it cost the death of the owner, yet the covetous man
must save the life of his lust; and indeed his own life, which he says,
profits him not, except he satisfy his lust. Hence it is so many widows
groan toward heaven for the help which they cannot have on earth, so many
fatherless children are ready to die in the streets for want of bread; and so
many undermined, sacked, and ransacked families, being driven from their own
homes wander up and down to seek a covering for their heads from rain and
tempest. Justly therefore that holy Apostle and out of divine inspiratio^
pronounced this as an infallible and never failing positio^: They that will be
rich, fall into temptation and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts
which drown men in perdition and destruction. And how can it be otherwise? The
end and mark being fixed, the eye is still aiming, and the hands are still
working toward that end: And this end being riches, and not God (for a man
cannot serve two masters) thither tend the whole endeauours of the hungry and
covetous soul. If an unjust profit be offered, or rather vnoffered may be
hooked; the eye looks on riches, and not on God: and accordingly God and his
will being neglected, riches are taken howsoever displeasing unto God. God must
bear with him; for he must be rich. That plot must go forward, the
resolution is fixed; God must give place, he does not see it, or will perchance
forgive it. But whiles thou not seeing, or at least not regarding God, think
God therefore seeeth not thee; he sees thee verily, and will bring forth thy
works of darkness into light even stark naked, and they shall be thy
perdition and destruction. But rather break in pieces this thy resolution, O
man of earth, whosoever thou art. Fasten not thy soul to riches which are not
worthy of thy soul; neither make them thy mark and end, which were made for
thee: know thou that God alone is thy end, and thou art made to serve him only,
that God is thy happiness, and it is thy only felicity to enjoy him: that God
is thy chiefest treasure, therefore fix thy heart resoluedly on him, remoouing
it from riches. Change thy covetous, and be strongly covetous after God, and by
godliness, even faith and a good conscience draw him more and more into thee:
and so godliness shall be to thee the greatest gain, for it shall get thee the
best treasure. As for riches, make no covenant with them, fasten not thy heart
on them, lest withal thou fasten thy heart to many noisome lusts, to many
cares, and finally, to perdition it self. The holy and most quiet way is to
put contentedness in the place of covetousness, and then godliness will
appear that which it is, even the greatest gain. This thou shall the better
do, if thou consider the end of thy creation, that man was created not to be
rich, neither is that the business appointed him by his Creator: But the Creator
himself is the end of man; neither has the Creator made any necessity, that
a man should be rich: for food and raiment, and satisfaction of natural
necessities, is his chiefest drift and purpose of worldly things. Therefore in
the last judgment when it shall be demanded of thee, how thou have spent thy
time in the world, and what thou have done there; shall thou not be ashamed
then to say, I have there done all that I could do to be rich? For then shall
that plainly appear, which now is true, though not appearing: The man has
mistaken his business, that only studieth riches; for then it shall be said to
the covetous, That man was not made to be a gatherer of metal, nor a filler
of bags, nor a ioyner of hedge to hedge; much less to be a prowling vermin, a
ravening wolf, or a roaring Lion to devour the weak, the distressed and the
helpelesse. The employment of our natural abilities, as understanding, or
strength, in lawful actions to procure maintenance for our selves and our
families, shall then be allowed. For this maintenance is the supportation of
Gods Church in this vale of necessities, and so tends to God. But a desire of
riches for themselves, or for the outward glory of them, and that settled
purpose to be rich, shall be condemned in the great and terrible day of the
Lord; and then chiefest in condemnation, and of any of their rank next the
devil in torment shall they be, that have made a prey of misery; and whereas
misery is to goodness a ground of mercy and relief, these have made it a
ground of oppression, so adding sorrow to affliction, making misery because it
was somewhat wretched, perfectly miserable. To these shall also the perfection
of misery be appointed for a portion, even pure and clear judgment, without
the mixture of any mercy; and so their own measure for quality being returned
to them, (but in a far greater quantity) they shall then taste how bitter
the cup is, which they have given others to drink; and they shall by
experience, but helpelesse and remediless, know the grieuousnes of their own
works. And because this day is by such put far from them, and they comfort
themselves in the delay of it, let them know also, that some sins are partly
judged aforehand, even in this world: And among them, very commonly, the sin
of oppression. For often is it seen, that the fathers oppression, has been
powered out on his own son; and riches gotten wrongfully for posterity, have
been wrongfully taken from them, for whom they were wrongfully gotten.
Wherefore eue^ for fear of present judgment, and in mere good husbandry,
leave not the goods of wrong and robbery to your children. For vengeance and
they are inseparably tied together; they will hardly be quiet till they be
gone again, and the beam will cry to thereafter, the hedge to the field, This
is not our place, let us every one return to our own home.

73
Consisting of 8. parts.
Part. 1.
The Church of God, and the Church of Satan, according to the first law of
enmity enacted in Paradise, and followed with the continual practice of
succeeding times, have endless wars and combats. The weapons of the whole
Church are steadfast and the same, as the Word, Faith, Prayer, Patience,
Christian wisdom, and the like. But the weapons of Satan are diverse, as of a
cunning enginer, that still inuenteth new instruments, according to present
occasions. Among diverse other changes, he changes his persecutions, a
principal part of his battering ordinance. When God lets him loose, then he
shows the whole malice of his nature, he appears in the very shape of a
Lion, and teareth, frieth, burns men, made up in the likeness of torches.
But when God muzles and binds him, that he cannot bite, nor tear with his
teeth, and his claws, then he putting off the Lion, uses the craft and tongue
of the Serpent; even malicious cunning, to fret into the Church of God, and
undermine it by little and little. Accordingly at this time of outward peace,
he sets his malignant soldiers among us newly on work, especially in three
things, which though they are become somewhat fashionable, yet be they very
mischievous to the Church of God. A first is to put contempt on the Ministry,
which are Gods Colony on earth to keep his subjects in obedience, and to beat
off the enemies; the Salt that keeps men sauourie and untainted of Satan; the
shepherds which keep the sheep from the wolf: Surely if these may be
contemned, discouraged, or taken away, how must not the Church of God become a
prey? How near is Satan then to a full principality on earth? Yet these are
diversely afflicted, debased and trodden down. I pass by their own mutual
harms, which as grief wishes might never have bin, that they might never have
bin spoken of; so now it desires to cover with silence. But the lay servants of
Satan despite them diverse ways. And first they let fly at the very calling
it self, by turning the Ministry into an ignominy and reproach. If a man be a
Minister, he has deserved at the next quarrel picked at him, to be called pild
Priest. And when this is done, it is to be thought he has been called worse
then rescall, even as Paul says, the very scumme of the earth. But where live
we the whilst* and among what people? It is thought among Christians. But are
they Christians that thus tread down those messengers of Christ, which
outwardly by Baptism make them such Christians, as they are, and inwardly by
the word, make better Christians then they are yet? Are they Christians that
being begotten by spiritual fathers, will rail on their fathers that begat
them? surely it shows they were never truly begotten. A Christian honors
Christ, by whom he bears ye name of Christian. He honoreth him so, that
whosoever brings Christ to him, and him to Christ, he honors them also.
Christ himself was a Preacher, and the founder of the Ministry: if thou then
despisest the Ministry, thou despisest the very function of Christ, and the
institution of Christ; yea, thou despisest Christ himself, and then without
question thou despisest thy own salvation. Take heed therefore thou run not
against this sacred Priesthood of the Gospel, for it is rocky; and whosoever
runs against it, breaks himself in pieces. It is rockie, for Christ the
rock is the foundation of it; and what is built on it, is rocky, as Peter from
Petra. But some will say, They despise not the Ministers for their office, but
their lives; and consequently not the good but the bad. Surely as this on the
one side, preferres a petition to the reverend Fathers, to admit, or continue
none of scandalous life, so otherwise it gives us this answer; that these are
ye more mannerly kind of men that so say; for there is a number, which if they
see but a man in black, in their bravery come off presently, There goes a
Priest; whereof the meaning is, There goes a man of contempt, per excellentiam.
But if thou which excusest, despisest only the men, why castest thou a reflex
of thy malice on the calling, by reuiling him with the name of a Priest, as
with a reproach? What is the chafe to the wheat? Is he evil? He can never
defile that excellent calling, though he may scandal it; the evil is from
himself, not from his Ministry: yea, the Ministry is good, though tied to
an ill person; therefore is not the Ministry of a good man any way within
reproach for the faults of a bad one. Let his person bear his faults, and not
the Ministry which is not the cause of them; Let him bear it him self, and
not other righteous men with him, which hate his conditions honestly, as much
as thou do him maliciously.

2. Part.
Another notable sign of the contempt of the Ministry is, that gentlemen
scorn to bestow their sons in that calling. If a man have a means, he is too
good for God, and he is counted mad or base if he will turn Minister. But
know, thou puff of flesh and blood whosoever thou art, that the service of God
is the end of man, and there is no man good enough to deserve employment in his
service much less to surmount it. Thy means are given thee for helps, and
aduancements in his service, not for discouragements; and he that made both
them and thee, looks for glory to himself of both and that with all thy might,
not ease and idleness only to thy self. If thou have gifts for such a
service, and imployest them not therein, thou that would not serve his
mercy, shall serve his justice, and the tree that would not bear fruit in his
field, shall bear the fire in the place of torment. Why cumbreth it the
ground? Hew it down and cast it into the lake that burns for ever. It is a
due, and necessary course for parents concerning their sons, and sons when
they come to judgment concerning themselves, to weigh and consider wherein and
in what way such sons are most fit and able to serve and glorify their
Maker. In that way let the^ be placed, for it is a way of safety, protection
and blessedness. Any way besides that, is a way of dragons, it is the
broadway, and leads to destruction. If this were observed, God should have
the due use of his own creatures. Many Alehouses, play houses, yea many Gibbets
would be empty that now are filled; mechanical souls should not so often
become Ministers, and excellent and able souls would not so often turn Lawyers,
merchants, yea earth worms, and Priests of Mammo^. Yet blessed be God, yt has
not given al times and places over to this high Treason and Infidelity; for
eue^ nobles who now too much behold this profession a far of, have ennobled
themselves by serving a greater King the^ any they here serve; yea crouch and
creep to serve Gentlemen of great possessions, whereof yet France is not
without example, have honored God with their substance, and employed it in the
Embassage of the most High. And no marvel, for if we plainly knew and saw,
what a glorious King our god is; what a precious thing a soul is, what the
truth, not the name of Christian were, we should account it a high dignity, to
be employed by God in his business; a great gain to turn one soul to
righteousness; and a right ready, and natural duty of a true Christian to
resign himself over wholly to Christ to be bestowed by him in any function,
since he is his, by covenant, rede^ptio^ and mark, and not his own any longer.
Be it therefore a law for ever to the upright of heart, that a good Minister is
an honorable man, being an Ambassador of Christ, a successor of Christ, a
factor for the King of heaven, to return souls the most precious Jewels into
his kingdom of glory; and howsoever, they are here covered with co^temt, they
shall break out in the days of glory shining like the Sun, as having turned
many souls to righteousness. But that honor may continue safe to the
Ministry, God persuade them to bestow that labor in the word and doctrine,
which deserves double honor; to live as those that adorn the Gospel of
Christ; and themselves to be humble, rather receiving honor, then snatching
at it. For honor is best deserved, when it is least intended; to seek our
own glory is no glory; and to honor our selves, is no true honor.

3. Part.
Another new engine of Satan is the impouerishing of the Ministry. The devil
knows that the Minister has a body, which must be maintained by bodily
sustenance, and where this sustenance is not, there cannot the Minister
continue. Heretofore when divinity was inspired, not studied: an Apostle
though his spiritual work were worthy of his wages, might bestow his work
without any wages, and get wages by the work of his hands; But now the study of
divinity challenges the whole time of a man, so that a Divine can hardly
mingle any other calling with it, without injury unto it. Therefore having that
only function, by that and for that he must be sufficiently sustained; so is
there absolutely no hope of a continual Ministry, where there is not a
continued maintenance. Then how many ways have these last times helped the
devil to break off and discontinue the Ministry? It is too well known that
the bellies of ye friars 1. began to rob both the back and the belly of the
Ministry. And that when these thieves were arraigned and convicted, the goods
were not restored to the former owners though known; so hereby many miles
together have bin turned into a spiritual wilderness, spoiled of the ordinary
means of saving souls; lamentable and even a hart-breaking consideration it
is, to them that have any fellow-feeling of the misery of those, who lie in the
bondage of Satan, when they see many Churches, like lamps without lights, the
oil of maintenance being taken from the^. How ca^ a man there preach, where
there is scarce bread to maintain the strength of the voice? nor clothes to
keep off the cold that would choke yt voice? nor means to buy a very few
books, to put matter and soul into the voices. And on the other side, how can
the Eunuch understand, except there be some to expound? How can they believe
without preaching? alas, the lives of such places too much testify, that a
natural man is like a dog, and will hardly bite at a whole loaf; Yea that a
man is so tastelesse of spiritual things, that except he be taught to open his
mouth, except his stomach be stirred up by continual prouocations, he has no
appetite to the food of life; That a sinner is so heavily asleep in his
sins, that unless he be pulled and startled, and his sin taken up before
him, and the particular odiousness and ugliness thereof lively presented to
his dull and unwilling eyes, he had rather die in his sleep, then awake unto
life eternal.

Part 4.
But this disease being showed, what remedy is there for it? Surely the Lord
of the harvest being first entreated in heaven, there seem two remedies on
earth; one is Law, another, Conscience. But how shall there be any hope in Law,
since it is Law that has done the hurt? Surely as a Law begotten in the times
of ignorance* has hurt the Church, so a Law borne in the times of knowledge
may heal it. Let us show our faith by our works, and shame the works which
have been done without faith by exceeding them; if we have the light of the
Gospel, let us make statutes of light, and not continue the laws of
darkness. If we feel any comfort of light in our selves, let us with our
blessed Savior pity them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death.
I separate law from conscience; for though conscience be the truest fountain
of laws, yet politic consideration is very often the cause of them. Now it
is not the worst policy, but indeed the best, to lay a sure foundation of
religion in the hearts of the people. For from true religion, grows the
strongest branch of obedience: true religion has wherewithal to confute
treason, though masked in a vizard of religion. It will allow the Pope few
subjects in another man's Realm: It will keep them for the right owner. In
sum, the end of kingdoms, being the Church, and the end of the Church, the
glory of God by faith and holiness; how does that kingdom pierce it self
through with many darts, that suffers this faith and holiness, the life and
soul thereof, to be slain by wickedness and unbelief? Surely there is a
fullness of sins, which is the greatest rebellion in the world, for it
overthrows kingdoms, and lets out Vineyards to new husbandmen. This do
Jeroboam and Ahab now declare and bewail; Jeroboam cursing the baseness of
his new devised Priesthood, and Ahab defying the Statutes of men, it being a
policy to destruction, to be politic against God. But if it be demanded
whence such maintenance should be raised? Surely for worldly and temporal ends,
the raising of huge sums by Parliament, are well impoposed, and contentedly
received; and is there no way to raise one sum for the God of heaven? When
Moses provided for the Tabernacle, there was offering even to abundance. When
David provided for the Temple, there were many thousand Talents offered
willingly, and with a perfect heart. Why should not we much more willingly
contribute toward the building, not of Temples made of hands, but of the living
Temple and Church of the everliving God? If a town be destroyed with fire,
all men take pity on the ruin thereof, and from that pity issureth relief.
When whole Towns and Parishes are besieged with hell fire, how do we not pity
and succor such spiritual desolations? Then let that place which made the law
of substraction, redeem it by making a law of retribution, and by some divine
subsidy granted to the King of heaven, regaine part, or all of the ancient
inheritance of the Church, or procure some new sustentation in the stead
thereof. But if men's hearts shall herein be generally hardened against God,
against the souls of their brethren, yea, against their own salvation, and
deny this just and necessary help: Let those that are merciful, and therefore
shall obtain mercy, express this excellent virtue of him that dwells in them;
let them bind up the wounds which the Leuits passed by, let them imitate him,
who beheld even them in their blood and pollution, and said unto them, Live.
Let conscience remedy what law does not, the work of God being done without,
by the working of God alone in men's hearts within. Accordingly should it be a
sweet smelling Sacrifice, acceptablie ascending before the presence of God; if
those who are both spirituallie and temporally rich, should out of their
spiritual treasury, send forth that most precious charity, which might
convert some of their temporal and transitory treasure to this soule-sauing
end. Herunto God through me does beseech them, as inwardly no doubt he motions
the same unto them by his spirit. Obedience to God and his spirit is the most
excellent offering, and a soul turned to God, is the joy of heaven; but
proportionably quenching the spirit by disobedience, is a heavy sin; and too
quiet suffering of the death of souls, where means would give hope of life, is
the gall of bitterness, and the stone of the heart. Our Ancestors did set up
both Churches, and Churchliuings, a great and a large work was performed by
them; we are but to keep in reparatio^, that they have built. Indeed this over
boystrous tempest has overthrown a great piece of this building, yet but a
piece, not by many degrees so great, as that work which they raised. If they
have done all, it is a shame we should not do something; we should rather
be glad (though not of the cause, yet of this effect) that there is matter
left for our charity to express it self in this kind; and to let blind
devotion know, that, if our ancestors had not founded such spiritual
maintenance, it might and should yet have bin done by us. There are many godly
and devout persons, who have in these days of light, made and increase
dwellings and portions for the bodies of the poor and needy. Excellent indeed
is this work, it is a blessed thing to give, and blessed are they that feed
the hungry, and clothe the naked. But yet of all Alms houses, the spiritual
Almes-house is the best, and Paul that wills you to desire the best gifts,
would have you use your gifts to the best advantage. Wherefore I show you a
more excellent way. As the soul is infinitely better then the body, and life
eternal, then life present, so the food of the soul is far better then that
of the body, and the saving of the spiritual life better then the preservation
of the temporal life. If thou give to the body, thou do well, but thou
give to that which shall die: but if thou give to the soul, thou do
better, for thou give to that, which by thy gift may live for ever in
happiness, and make the body live for ever in the same bliss with it. If thou
give natural bread, thou do well; but thou give that which perishes with
the using: but thou most resemblest Christ thy head, and give the best Alms,
when thou give the bread of heaven. What a comfortable and joyful thing to
thy soul and heart will it be to see a whole Congregation fed on Gods holy day
with thy Alms? to see many souls receiving salvation as it were from thy
hand, to hear many bless and glorify God for his gifts to thee, and thine to
them? yea to bless thee therefore in the name of the Lord? Surely such joy is
infinitely better, sounder, and fuller of weight, then the joy of money, corn,
and oil; but the joy that God shall give thee in the great marriage day, in
the day of the gladness of thy heart, in that day will again infinitely exceed
this. The^ shall Christ say unto thee, come thou blessed of my Father; for when
I was hungry, naked and cold in the very soul of my little ones, thou did
buy Manna, long white robes and fire of the Altar, to feed, cloth and warm
me; thou gave the best gifts, and which most nearely and inwardly cherish me,
therefore shall thou have the best reward; come and sit nearest unto me. But if
some backward and withdrawing hearts in whom God has no delight, put this
grace and glory from themselves, by a persuasion, that this business concerns
them not, but that every horse should bear his own burden, and each
congregation maintain a Preacher for themselves: Let them know, that natural
men not used to instruction, for want of it, have no desire to it: Things not
known are unsought, much less will a natural man part from things known for
things unknown. It is the property of teaching to make men desire to be
taught: expect not then this desire from them, which have not the means to
attain it; the sweetness of the word must be first sounded in their ears,
before they will love the sound thereof: it must teach them the worth of it
self, before they will part from any of their worth for it. He must be partly
or wholly a spiritual man, that hungers for spiritual food unto the loss of
his temporal substance: and how shall many such be expected where the word, by
which the spirit enters, has not bin fitly opened unto them? Therefore if
thou will have them do for themselves, do thou something first, though but a
little for them whereby they may hear the word: And then it is likely the word
heard will make way for it self, and persuade for increase of maintenance; for
it persuades the truly sanctified to a far greater degree, even to fell all,
to give life and all, for the Treasure of happiness Christ Jesus; whom lying
more closely in the Cabinet of the word, preaching delivers unto us opened and
displaied in full glory and Luster. Yea it may be by the word so communicated
by thee, there will be some provoked, to do that for others which thou have
done for them; and so a generation of goodness may be continued of which thou
have been the father; and a chain of good works may be lengthned, of which
the first link framed by thee, is both the beginning and cause. Hereunto may
be added this other reason of foreign help; That such places bear already as
great a burden without the benefit of preaching as others do that have it.
Wherefore that Saint Paul's rule of equity may be observed, which will not have
some eased, to have others doubly grieved; and that rule of Charity, Bear ye
one another burden: it is fit that the burden of such places should be
divided among many, so to take away the grief of surcharging by an equality,
and to ease the weight of the burden by dividing it with others.

5. Part.
As these great blows of Satan have afflicted the Ministry in these latter
times, so do daily buffets, and lesser pinchings of the servants of Satan,
follow and persecute continually the same Ministry. His plot and his hatred
still are one, though the limitation of his power, by Gods ouerruling, suffer
him not at all times to bring forth like effects: He is, God be praised, tied
up somewhat from appropriating of spiritual livings, yet what he cannot get in
a rent, he strives to obtain in a fine. The Patron that cannot have the
yearly profit, must have a gross sum in consideration of it, and a scholar
having spent much of his portion, spirits, and time in study to make himself
worthy of a place in the Church, yet after must he study for sureties, or
ready money to throw into the mouth of Cerberus, even of these porters of hell,
that they stop not his way into the deserved Benefice. And this also is a
virtue, if they will bestow it, in this kind of bestowing on a man able and
sufficient; for if such a one be not very near as finable, as a mere dumb
and unlearned fellow: sufficiency shall be bought out, and profitable
ignorance shall be preferred before edifying knowledge. The great God Mammon
must choose the Priest that fitteth him best, and the greatest and truest God
whose Priest is thought the^ to be choosing, has least to do in yt choice. But
o thou Merchant of hell and Factor for Satan, know yt cursed is thy money with
thee, thy money is the price of Souls even of spiritual blood, the life of
spirits. Thou have for that sum given over so many souls to Satan, thou have
given their throats to the Butcher, and thou have done worse then slain them;
for thou killest them with death eternal. Christ has said, what shall a man
give for his soul, yea to give a whole world and to lose his soul is a bad
bargain: but what a beggarly and bloody bargain have thou made which for
little pieces and shrids of the world have sold many souls? But to what end is
it to speak to a man of clay, that has no sense nor feeling of heaven? To
what end is it to speak to a mule that has no understanding? Such men are
more dead, then the Altar which heard the word of the Lord. They are stony at
the very heart, and nothing but money makes any sound by striking such a heart.
Otherwise even to common reason it would grossly appear, that a lantern without
a candle can give no light, that a man without sight cannot be a guide to the
blind; and that men led by such guides, must needs fall with their guides
into the pit of eternal destruction. But if it happen that a man of some
sufficiency has like the Centurion by a great sum obtained the freedom of
this Benefice: then is the Patron ready to go into the Temple with the
Pharisie, to give thanks that he is not like other men: There is a fit man in
the place, and he has taken no money for the Benefice but for the Aduowson,
which a man may honestly do. But know thou Circumuenter of thy own soul:
That if it were lawful to sell an Aduowson, thou should sell it at the
price of an Aduowson. To find out this, consider what either thou payest for
the patronage, and so make some proportion by that, or what a layman would
give for it, that would make no use of it, but the bestowing. For whatsoever is
given beyond that which a man would give to have the mere naming of the
Minister, is the price of the benefice, and not of the Aduowson; it paies for
the profit of the living, and not for the particular appointment of the man.
Mingle things as cunningly, and confusedly as thou can, the judgment of God
shall single the^ as perfectly, and the evil shall be taken out and showed thee
by it self in the great and terrible day of the Lords displeasure. Yet neither
do I commend ye selling of Aduousons though at the easier rate; for a Patronage
is an excellent privilege, a patron has the power of a great and high work,
even in the chiefest business of God. Why will thou for a little money let
another do God acceptable service, when thou may do it thy self? Or why
perchance do thou suffer another to do Gods service negligently and
corruptly, when thou may do it faithfully? Take heed hereunto; for if by
thy sale, the sheep be unfed, for whom Christ died, thou may go among the
cursed to whom it shall be said, When I was an hungry thou had food in thy
hand, and yet thou fedst me not.

Part. 6.
But after all this, is not the Minister fully escaped; having paid the Patron
for his passage, he falls after into the hands of his Parish: then is he like
a man rid of a Lion, and fallen among Wolves; every one (almost, if not wholly)
rubs up his wit, and makes it a principal conquest, to deceive the Parson.
Howsoever the Usurer have his ten of the hundred, the Lawyer his grossefee, and
the workman his wages; the Minister, who lays out his stock for their
salvation, shall not have his ten of the hundred, nay, but a lean fee for
the most precious counsel; nor his full wages for his most excellent work. It
is a special part of thrift, if we cannot conceal and defraud some tithes,
yet to make a good bargain with the Minister, and to get somewhat by him; and
if he will not be so wrought on, he must go for a covetous and hard man. But
O thou ouerthriftie Tither, what think thou, while thou dealest thus? have
thou a soul or not? If thou have none, at least, if thou think so, words
will be vseles, until thou feel one day by the torments of thy soul that thou
have one; and then they will also be vselesse. But if thou have one, it is
better then thy body, which is also better then thy goods. Thou gladly give
to the Physician to maintain the health of thy body, and to the Lawyers to
preserve thy goods: how does not thy hand willingly and chiefly stretch forth
it self to him which saves thy soul, which is infinitely better then these?
It shows too evidently, that thou valuest things backwards, since thou
esteemest not thy soul, as thou do thy goods and body, nor the eternal
salvation thereof* as thy present preservation. But they that have had a glimse
of heavenly glory, despise earthly things in comparison thereof, and in
disdain say, Is it a great matter to give carnal things for spiritual? such
men know, they cannot give so good things to them, as they receive from them.
Therefore they would even take out of their own bowels to do good to their
teachers, at least they would thrust their right upon them, though ignorant of
it; they would by all means desire, that they might live plentifully in this
world, whose life is employed to make them live everlastingly in the next.
Far be it then from us to vex and discourage by robbery and impouerishing
those, who are the guides unto heaven. Let divine love justify them in taking
their right, yea, help them to it, and bring after them, what they have left of
it. Let us entertain them as ambassadors of Christ with bountiful allowance,
and not show our small regard of the Lord that sent them, by our ill rewarding
of his messengers. Their estate is but for life, and natural affection toward
their family, is commendable in them as in us; therefore a provident care, if
without wrong, is not to be censured, but allowed in them; and a willing and a
plentiful contribution is requisite in us. And herein I deserve speedier
assent, because I am none of those I speak for.

Part. 7.
A third cunning of Satan is to make sanctification an odious thing, and to
fasten on it some vile reproach, that men may be ashamed to serve God, and to
be saved. And that this may work the more effectually, he suffers many to go
so far in religion as they may, without losing them, that is, in a moral and
civil profession thereof; but that degree, beyond which indeed is only the
very life and power of sanctification, is very offensive to them, and appears
to such to be but hypocrisy and scrupulositie. Hence it is, that among most
of these ciuilians, regeneration and sanctification, which they attain not, is
Puritanisme, and a true Saint is called a Puritan; which in their English,
means a dissembling or scrupulous fellow. And this being the verdit of those,
who account themselves for honest men, and their neighbors think the same (to
whom these civil men are almost Puritans) like a kennel of dogs, they run
away with the cry, and bark out this term against every honest man they
meet. But a lamentable persecution of tongues is this the whiles, especially
among Christians, that a man should be reviled for being a Christian; and that
regeneration, the work of the holy Ghost, should be reproched. Cursed is he
that despiteth the Spirit of grace, eue^ that Spirit which gave his tongue that
power, by which he is able to speak against the Spirit. Cursed is he that
reuileth the holy Ghost, and raileth on the power of the living God. Know that
the time shall come, when thy words shall return upon thee, as so many Lions;
yea, the devil, who now sets thee on work, shall come to work upon thee with
torments: but especially that blessed Spirit, whom thou have reviled, shall
come against thee, and tear thee in pieces, and there shall be none to deliver
thee. Thou see in the whole course of such a man's life, a maine current of
honesty and goodness; and who would think that any should be so shameless
to rail on goodness, and to oppose against it? For the very opposing against
goodness, gives thee the title of wickedness, which alone is the enemy
thereof. It shows thou art a soldier of the Dragon, who goes out to make
war with that blessed seed, that keeps the commandment of God. But I do
know thy usual defenses: thou will say, that there are none worse, then such
as make such a show of pureness, and withal thou art furnished with some
merry tales, that show many mad tricks of these over holy brethren. Here a
little discretion and judgment in stead of salt, would be of very good use to
amend the savor both of thy heart and tongue. For an upright judgment, as it
finds many truths, so toward the true discovery of this business, it
finds these. First, that whosoever is indeed good, shall and must also seem
good; for his works will praise him, whether he will or no; his fruits will show
what tree he is, they must shine before men, that men seeing them, may glorify
God their heavenly Father. Hence first we conclude, that every one that seems
good, is not an hypocrite, but contrarily he may be one of Gods chiefest
servants. Therefore thou can not presently fall to thy nickname only for the
show of goodness. Secondly, that there is indeed a dissembled holiness,
worn for a cloak to wickedness, that the shape of an Angel of light some
times couers a foul devil, yea, the foulest devils are they that most use,
and need this cover. Now for this fellow, if thou find him, purita^ is too
good a name for him; for the Scripture has sharper names, as, generation of
Vipers, Wolves in Sheep clothing, and painted Sepulchers full of rotten
bones. These be they, whereon the devil sets the one foot, when he kickes at
true Christians with the other, justifying by these, his railings on those who
especially hate these, as the devils chiefest servants. But now there needs
some discretion to know these from the other, that thou call not good evil,
nor evil good; nor a Christian Hypocrite, nor an Hypocrite, Christian. Toward
this thou must look to the fruits of both, and that not a few particulars,
but to the general. For a Godly man is subject to infirmity, and has some
falls; and an Hypocrite knows that to cover his wickedness he must show some
goodness. But look to the continual course of both, and thou shall find, one
good generally, though sometimes frail; and the other often grossly
transgressing, though much covering his rotten heart. The things wherein
especially thou shall try the difference, may be these. First a love to Christ:
secondly, a love of Christ's voice: thirdly, a love of the members of Christ,
and a rejoicing in them who excel in virtue. Now these things will again
appear if for the love of Christ, the love of his word, and the love of his
members, a man be ordinarily contented to lose sinful profits or pleasures,
and with the steward to write 50. for an 100. This is the touchstone of a
Christian, even the taking up of the Cross, forsaking all, and following
Christ. But this the hypocrite cannot abide, he serves Christ, that Christ may
serve him, to get pleasure and profit by him, not to lose by him.

Part. 8.
But now here come in the many stories, which condemn these purer men to be
guilty against these duties, and so to be hypocrites. Yet run not away too
fast with this neither, but even in the point of hearing reports, take also
some discretion with you. For against good men very commonly, are bold and
confident slanders raised, which by their stoutnesse might seem to be truth
it self. But let not the wise believe them before examination. For most
commonly in the very telling of them, will appear a venom and malice, the true
issue of the old Serpent: and upon farther trial, falsehood and lying, the
natural brother of the former, and a truly begotten son of the Accuser of
the Brethren. He began the rule in Paradise, and will continue even to the new
Jerusalem; lie boldly, for some of it will stick fast for ever. And how can it
be otherwise, since the lasinesse of men is such, that they will believe a
report at the first telling, rather then trouble themselves to examine and
find out the truth, which only should be believed; and withal their
maliciousness is so great, that they are willing and ready to receive evil
reports, yea, they delight in them. But the servants of Christ know, that the
last judgment shall be by words, and that a rash and a bitter judge shall,
though not rashly, yet severely be judged. Therefore according to the Psalmist,
The good man is merciful, and guides his words with discretion. He inclines
naturally to believe good rather then evil; yet avoiding to condemn the just,
he also shunnes to justify the wicked. Therefore that his judgment may be
righteous, he searches both the matter how probable it is in it self; and
next he examineth the re-reporters, whether they be those, in whom the truth
dwells, and who themselves have a good report of the truth; not being like
Pilate, ignorant, and yet to learn what is truth. For it is a kind of murder
of our neighbor in his name and reputation (which is almost as his life) both
to bear false witness, and to receive false witness against him. Lastly, a
good man, if he may conveniently, will inquire of the party himself, or of
some of his acquaintance, whether such things have been done by him; and if
done, in what manner, and upon what occasion: for many times the manner of
things wholly alters the matter, and the matter may be good, in the manner in
which it was done, yet evil in the manner bestowed on it by the reporter.
Again, the thing being true, yet the occasion and cause may, though not
justify, yet excuse the fact; for many evil deeds are done by infirmity,
which yet prove not the men evil that did them. It were pity that men
should go to work this way with David, and only judge of him by his murder and
adultery: but it rather becomvs, to see whether his course of life being
different from his fact, do not manifestly prove, that these sins were of
infirmity; of sin cleaving to him, not reigning in sin. And in this point
should every man be the milder; for as it is said commonly in other matters, it
is every man's cause; this man's to day, and thine to morrow. And though thou
swear with Peter, that if all the world deny Christ, thou will not deny him,
yet I will never believe thee no more then Christ did Peter; for in many things
we sin all, and as the Apostles said, We are also men, subject to the same
infirmities.

Part 9.
But if these cautions will not yet moderate the savages of this world, as
indeed a fool, though braied in a mortar, will not grow wise: Yet, O thou man
of God, whosoever thou art, that suffer for Christ's sake, bind this rebuke
to thine head for a crown, and rejoice that thou art such a one as the devil
and his followers hate; for he cannot be but good, whom the devil hates.
Rejoice when men speak all evil of thee falsely, and know thou art now a
brother of Christ and his Saints in tribulation, and in the kingdom; for if
thou suffer with him, thou shall also be glorified with him. The spirit, whose
shame now thou bear, shall hereafter cause thee to bear his glory; and the
more shame for his sake, the more glory. So shall these Balaams, whose hearts
are so ready to curse the people of God, be the very means to procure a
blessing unto them. For so many curses, so many blessings; therefore if there
were no offense to God, nor hurt nor pity to themselves, we might well suffer
them to curse apace, for they curse us as fast to glory.

Part. 10.
From Christ's time, place is approved by truth, not truth by place. He that
freed true worship from being tied to Jerusalem, and tied it to the service in
spirit which may be in all places, gave true religion a large scope, even as
large as the world it self. Therefore Jerusalem being broken up, and true
worship being set free into the whole world, let not Rome seek to captive her
again, and tie her to the chain thereof: for they that worship in spirit and
truth, have God pleased with them, though such worship be in places, that know
not Rome to be on earth.

74
The Word of God is an undefiled Word, rightnes it self; and therefore the
most perfect rule. Let therefore sinful men frame their lives to it, not
seek, as many do, to frame it to their lives, and so to sin by the
authority of righteousness. And let frail and falling man, though many of them
think they be the Church, not try this Word by themselves, whether it be
right or not, but by the Word try whether they be right, even the right and
true Church; which is known by this, that they hear Christ's voice, and walk
according to this rule of Christ: Galathians 6. 16.

75
Silly and foolish is the pride, that any man takes in his service toward God.
For first, the whole man being from God, we can give him out of man nothing
but his own. Again, the whole man being due to God, there can return no good
thing from man to God, but what is his due. Thirdly, it is Gods free choice,
that vouchsafes to use thy service, who refuses the imploiment of many men,
excellent in natural abilities. Certainly, we have seen many such of great
hope turned into earth, before any, or small use of the^. God All-sufficient,
who can raise up servants of stones, thus often shows, that men have need of
God and his choice, to do him any good service; but he needs not them.
Therefore let us rather thank God, then boast before him, if he employ us in
his service. Let us with humility readily perform it, as to that great Lord,
who has refused infinite better, to be served by us; and whom therefore to
serve is a happiness and privilege of ours from him, not a benefit of ours to
him

76
Many several women were made for many several men; if many had bin allotted
to one, there would have bin fewer of the masculine sex; for even among
heardsmen, this rule is observed. But now there is a kind of equality in
number, that every one might have his mate diuidedly, without dividing with
another. And this which was indeed best was first; for then there being but one
woman to one man, the sin which is now unlawful, was then impossible. What
bare necessity was to man by creation, let necessary obedience unto God be
to the children of regeneration; whose special virtue, is to avoid the ill
which may be done. Surely as running after lust beyond this one, is endless in
regard of satisfaction, so has it a bad end in regard of retribution, even
tormented old age, that it can sin no more, and eternal death for having so
much sinned.

77
When a man is possessed by any lust, be it of covetousness, concupiscence or
the like, there is set up an image in him, though not a graven one, which is to
him a God. This image wholly fills his mind, to it he commits idolatry,
for he offers his whole heart in sacrifice to it; and if he can obtain the
thing therein represented, he accounts himself happy, as in the obtaining of
God. Such an image was there in Ahab of Naboths vineyard, and such a one of
Bathsheba in David. But let us take heed of this worship of images, for it is
but a vain shadow which steppeth into to the place of God; It tells us of
happiness, but it self obtained goes into nothing, and robs us of true
happiness. Let us rub out therefore the print thereof with prayer and holy
meditations, filling up our hearts with profitable and eternal truths, to
keep out these dying and killing vanities, let nothing posses our hearts but
God himself, who will one day glorify the place wherein he dwells, and make it
look like a temple of God: And surely nothing but God is worthy of a man.

78
God is the cause of all vnder-causes and of all effects; in him is the
fullness of all things, the spring of all beings. This world is a determinate
measure of his effects. The natural life at the best is but a certain number
of these effects, during a certain piece and limit of time. But the spiritual
life caused by our union with God, is an everlasting and infinite enjoying of
the infinite cause of all things. Hereby shall we find the Christian to be
most perfectly happy, who possesses all things in their cause, and beyond al
things that are, shall enjoy the cause it self. Infinite is the difference
between wisdom the cause, and wisdom the effect; light the cause, and
light the effect; love the cause, love the effect. Therefore is earthly
Paradise wiped out, and the Sun shall be taken away, and worldly pleasure
eaten up by death. And from hence have we infinite comfort, for besides the
blessed end which comfort all labors, we have other comforts in our way
thither. For if some temporal effects of God be now wanting, yet in God they
are ready for us, and far more excellent things, when it shall be best for
us: for God having communicated himself to us, we may certainly believe, he
cannot deny things small in comparison of him, when they shall be for our
good. Therefore when he withholds them, he does it as not being good for us:
yea we may rejoice in grief, knowing that a loving God and our God is the very
cause of it, and that to our good. So while our flesh by nature is sad at the
effect, our heart by grace may rejoice confidently in the cause. For God
unchangeable, through all our changes aymeth unchangeably to this end, our
good. Let all seek God with their whole heart; since himself is our exceeding
great reward; since all things attend upon him ready to cast themselves upon
them whom they see favored by him: And since all things of what time soever
that are cast on us, are turned into good by him who dwells in us.

79
If a good name be better then a small parcel of goods, then he that sits as
judge of a man's good name ought to proceed to sentence upon as firm evidence,
as the judge of a man's goods. If this were observed, men would hear sufficient
witnesses before they fall to their censures: Surely it is a great fault of
these times, that men are sooner condemned to be wholly naught, then a
publicly accused-man, is to have stolen a sheep. The reason hereof is; There
is a drop of the great Serpents venom powered into our hearts, which breeds in
us a willingness to hear evil of our neighbors. But let us thirst for the
medicinable drops of grace, and suck the^ into our hearts, which will fill us
with that love which rejoices not in evil. It is a pitiful thing that
creatures of one form, of one condition, should delight in the blemishes and
miseries of each other. But when the devil brought us to fall out with God, he
also brought us to fall out among our selves, that love the fulfilling of the
Law might be perfectly broken. Yet they that are new made by Christ, must
learn Christ's new commandment, which is love, and be slowly and unwillingly
led to believe evil of their neighbor.

80
It is a good degree of happiness to have a nature inclining, yea in different
to those ways to which the spirit bends it self, and would bend it. Thence it
seems a great advantage when a man has in his nature a coldness to Ambition,
to the glory of this world, to the pleasures of the world, and when it draws,
and contracteth it self into a narrower content, being satisfied even with
things necessary. For if we have not this naturally in us, we must strive to
make it natural by custom, because there is an absolute necessity that we be
such, or still strive to be such. For God must reign in us if we will reign
with him; and how does he reign in us, but by moderating and guiding the mind
within the compass of reason, curbing and restraining wild and inordinate
affections? And this it seems is much the end of afflictions on the men whom
God loves, that there by taming, swaging, and cooling their nature, and as it
were washing and taking away by a privation, the headstrong affections which
it bears to the world; the spirit may unresisted enter in, and quietly work
his nature into the afflicted. And as for these natural virtues, though they
be not Christian, nor in themselves acceptable to God, while they are merely
moved by nature, to a natural man's ends; yet when nature is moved to do them
by the spirit, from a right cause which is the love of God, unto the right end
which is the glory of God; then the actions so done by the service of nature,
are good and acceptable to God. As for those whose crooked, and more
vnmannagable nature, stands stiff against the discipline of the spirit and
their own desires; let them not therefore despair, because their evil ground
brings forth less fruit, and more briars then the others. It pleases God
indeed to make thee one of those to whom he appoints more labor, for the
promised penny; yet be not weary of well doing, for if thou faint not, thou
shall in due time receive thy wages. If thou strive heartily against thy evil
and hate it, God is pleased with thy will and affection, as much as the others
action. Therefore strive hopefully, according to the might which thou have,
praying for more; and his grace is sufficient for thee.

81
The wisdom of man and the wisdom of God are exceeding different, and no
marvel: one being infinitely pure, and purely infinite; the other narrow, but
great in corruption. As in all things therefore we should forsake our own
wisdom, and lean unto Gods; so not with the least care in the matter of
revenge; when thou have suffered some evil, thine own wisdom bids thee
return evil to the doer, but the wisdom of God bids thee to return him
good notwithstanding this evil. Hereat thou wondrest, and thy flesh finds no
wisdom in this to return good for evil, to help him who hurts thee: yet is
the counsel of thy wisdom, indeed folly, and this of Gods, excellently wise.
For 1. in revenging thy self, thou do foolishly; for God having taken to him
self alone, the name and power of being judge of the world, thou steppest into
this place and wilt be thy own judge. And God having delegated part of this
power for a time unto Magistrates, thou intrudest into their place, and so art
Rebellious both against God and man. And indeed, as thou have made thy self a
judge, so thou make thy self an executioner, and art the hangman to execute
the sentence of thy own malice: surely if a man had robbed thee though with
some blows, and were apprehended and condemned by the Magistrate, thou
would take it a great disgrace to be appointed for a hangman, or executioner
of him, who thus offends thee; yet here is nothing but justice: but when
thine own wrath usurping the place of Judgment, condemns a man for a blow or
a word to die, then it is a part of honor, to be the executioner of thy own
unjust and unlawful sentence. Be not deceived, this latter is the worse hangman
of the two. But to examine thy folly nearer, how art thou indeed avenged by
this, which thou think and call revenge? By intruding into Gods office,
thou have taken the matter out of Gods hands into thine own: but so where
before a God, and an offended God was thy enemies Judge, who in his wrath could
cast both soul and body into hell fire; now a man has undertaken him, who
has only power on the body, if yet he have so much: so instead of a
revenger, thou have done the part of a redeemer, and go about to help him,
whom thou thoughtest to hurt. Again, where God was before angry with him
alone, now he is angry with thee also, and so have thou lost thy advantage,
which thou had upon him. Thou had the best friend in the world for thee,
and against him: and now thou have by thy revenge, lost him equally with the
other. And lastly, him whom thou censurest to have done evil, thou go about
to imitate, and to make thy self as bad as he. And now that Gods counsel to
recompense good for evil, is excellently wise, it appears hereby: certain it
is, and to the godly certainly known, that the eyes of God behold al things
done on earth; and he which beholds all things certainly, shall as certainly
judge all men, for all things done in their flesh. Therefore if a man wrong
thee, know that this wrong is seen, that it is recorded, that it shall be
judged. And if thou could now but see, or rightly imagine that terrible
judgment, which shall be inflicted on those which touch Gods anointed, thou
would pity them, whom now thy vengeance would punish. Surely fire and
brimstone, cries and torments, darkness and devils are their portion; though
it be not present, yet it shall be present, and the weight of the pain shall
recompense the stay. Again, the moore good thou art, the more God will pity
thee, the more God will plague him that wrongeth thee. For the more good, the
dearer to God, and the more odious are those that offend thee. Therefore if
thou will be revenged on thy enemy, be still doing of good as to all, so to
him among all; and thy goodness shall bring God the auenger upon him, and
shall heap coals of fire upon his head, in the day of the highest vengeance.
Possess thy soul in goodness, in patience, and be not moved from thy place
to do evil; then shall thou dwell assuredly in happiness, and shall see thy
desire upon thy enemies; whatsoever the wicked do, thou know thy part;
though he does the works of a wicked man, thou still art to bring forth the
fruits of a good man; he does what belongs to a servant of his master: do thou
what belongs to the service of thine, and at last thou shall see his Lord and
himself made the foot stool of thy Lord, and cast down into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Then shall this thy
Lord, who casts him into hell, exalt thee into heaven: and as your ways in
this life were diverse, so shall they be in the next; and then shall it be no
grief of mind to thee, when thou art in that glorious kingdom, that thy hand
has not shed blood, nor wickedly avenged thy wrongs.

82
The nature of man by the corruption thereof makes a God of whatsoever it
lists. Therefore rightly is Idolatry by the Apostle, reckoned among the
works of the flesh, it being a work to which the flesh is prone. This has the
wicked custom of mankind grossly declared, while some make their wealth a
god; some have taken men for gods, as the Barbarians did Paul and Barnabas: and
some have made gods for all occasions, as did the Romans. But among the rest,
this corruption of the flesh, has a special lust and desire of some glorious
and fair image, to make to it self a God. And this it does not, by believing
the outward substance, as gold or wood, to be a God of it self, but that some
divine spirit inhabiteth and possesses it, and so makes it divine by dwelling
in it. This inclination and readiness of man to idolatry is expressed often
in Scripture Jeremy 10. Ezechiel 16. Judges 2. Yea, it has so far
prevailed, that men have been inflamed with Idols, under every green tree,
burning in lust toward them; yea they have adored and worshipped the very
images of their friends which they kept as remembrances of them, Wisd. 13. 10.
and more particularly, the image of the serpent which healed them, 2. King. 18.
If this was the inclination of man's nature in former times, how can we but
still look for the same fruits of the same root? The same corrupt nature,
yea worse in these last times still dwells in us; it is as near kin to Idols
as ever it was, and the devil rages more then ever he did, knowing his time
to be short. Therefore if an image was a stumbling block, and a teacher of
lies, how do they teach the truth, that teach images? Where they are publicly
proposed unto corrupt and frail mankind, yea where they are proposed to be
worshipped with the honor due to the pattern, yea where they do or are said
to do great and divine wonders, what can be looked for, but that the same
mankind which worshipped images in old time, and by that worship were
idolaters, will worship images with the same worship now, and now also become
idolaters? The same man, the same image, and the same idolatry. But now they
are taught not to worship them with divine worship. And then they were taught
by the second commandment, not to worship them at all. Thy proposing of them
does draw men more to them, then thy teaching does deter from them. Say what
thou will, if thou put an image before a man of flesh. Flesh and the image will
together commit idolatry. Will thou take thy fair wife, and leave her with a
lustful man, and tell him he shall only pass the time with her in civil
conference. The Lord of hosts, is as ielous of his spouse, as thou of thy wife;
he will not have temptations set before her, and therefore forbids altogether
the making of images for any worship. Besides the ignorant man understands not
the difference between Dulia and Latria, but falls heartily to his business,
and thinks he cannot do it amiss if he do it with all his heart. And if he
did understand it, yet when it does miracles, how can they not worship it?
since even for that Israel worshipped the serpent, which their story told them
to have been made of Brass. Therefore let men cease to lay stu^bling blocks
before the blind, though they hang up lanternes by their sides. Let them not
join with the devil to make temptations: yea let them avoid even images of
remembrances in the place of worship, since such have drawn worship aside from
God unto them: And cursed is he that makes the blind to go out of the way.
Deuteronomy. 27.

83
The estates and functions in this world, considered alone, and not in order
and respect to the next, meet altogether at the end of life in the same point
of vanity, howsoever by the way different in the appearance of outward glory.
And in this way, those that are gotten above necessity and misery, have so
confused, unknown, and mixed a goodness, that they still turn our thoughts
forcibly from themselves, and send them beyond themselves unto another kind of
being, to find fullness and satisfaction. The higher estate, which is that of
power and action, pleases it self in the pre-eminence thereof, and beholding
it self a cause and moouer of effects. But the end of a thing being the
excellency and crown thereof, and the natural end of action, and motion being
rest, it seems that the lower estates enjoying this most, enjoy most the
chiefest, and have the advantage of the fruit, while the other has the
commendation of being an excellent root. Yet the greatest are most contented
to be so, and the lesser might be contented, but they will not; and so is there
a confusion herein: that imagination makes some contented with labor, while
more substantial rest, will not satisfy others. Besides this vexation of
mind, there is another: That to be far above misery, is a misery: and
desires prevented, partake much of the trouble of desires unsatisfied. For man
being made of lust, it is a torment to him, not to lust; and so while men hunt
after an excess of fullness, they hunt after their own torment: yet is there
a great path beaten by these runners after extremities, who know not the sweet
bound and point of enough, beyond which, their striving is labor for loss.
Again, the supposed excellency, and highest perfection of mankind, being
commonly imagined to be at the state and ripeness of manhood, yet in that
indeed is man most miserable, as being then lanched forth like a full built
ship into the world, a sea of cares and sorrows; Then also knowledge
increased, increases sorrow, giving man a more full taste of his own misery.
But youth is free from care, and has strong enioyings of small and easy
things; for youth couers all things with its own pleasantness, whereas age is
sad in spite of objects, coloring them also with it own deadnes: Yet youth
desires manhood, and is tormented for lack of it, and after is punished with
having it. If then the ripeness of man, even man's best, is a station of care;
if he grow from pleasure as he grows into manhood, and yet tends unto
manhood as unto his perfection; it seems the very being and perfection of man
is a being of care and trouble, and that man is verily borne to labor as the
sparks fly upward. Now what is there left to be thought of man? but that he
was not made only for vanity and misery, and that this misery has a farther
and a better end, even happiness it self. We are here brought into a state of
trouble, and straitness, but it is, that serving God first in labor, we
should after come to his rest; and that the consideration of this rest should
be our comfort in the time of our labor. Let us therefore work on strongly in
the work of God imposed upon us, knowing that after the six days labor,
comes rest of the seventh. And let our eyes be continually on the joys
which follow, and not on the pain which is present: the joys beheld must
needs encourage us, for their sight is comfortable, and especially because we
are sure they are ours. The pain neglected and unregarded, cannot be very
disco^fortable; the thought not being grieved with that which is not beheld by
it. Thus did Christ look steadfastly on glory, and so despised the shame, and
endured the cross; and so does God himself, in the sufferings of his
servants. The world indeed wonders who sees but half of the matter, when it
beholds the sufferings of just and holy men. They wonder that God takes no more
pity on them, but suffers the fire, the axe, and the tormenter to have power
over them. But then God who beholds at once the whole estate of a Christian,
sees both the torments present, and the glory following; and he judges the
short and finite torments to be the gain and advantage of his servants, since
they cause a great access of infinite glory. Therefore let us be so minded as
God and his Christ are, and walk on valiantly in sanctified misery unto true
felicity.

84
Most men in part, or in whole are Gadarens, or Capernaites. The Gadaren, if
he lose any thing by Christ, desires him to depart out of his coasts, and will
lose Christ, rather then his swine. The Capernaite follows Christ, but it is
to be filled; so he seeks Christ for his belly, and makes his belly the end
of Christ. These things are too usual among us, we are ready to shrink from
Christ, as soon as our profits or pleasures shrink from us; because of
Christ, we will not be saved our selves, except we may have every thing else
safe as well as our selves: we will be both Dives and Lazarus, we will have
happiness both here and hereafter, which may not be: for this is to knit
together, what God has parted asunder. Equally wicked is their purpose, that
intend* to make an occupation of Christ to get favor, riches, or preferment by
him; that turn Christ from his, of being a Savior, and use him as
Merchandise: who take the ladder of Jacob, by which we should ascend into
heaven, and perverting the use of it, thereby clime downward to the things of
this earth. But miserable and foolish man, thou both robbest and destroiest thy
self with this thy policy. Christ would have done far greater things for
thee, and thou will only have him help thee to the less: he would have given
thee an everlasting Kingdom, a Treasure that is far above thieves and rust;
but thou had rather receive less and worse things from him, transitory
honor, and rustie treasure. Thou art a child in understanding; thou take an
apple, and refusest a jewel: But he that is verily Christ's Disciple, auoids
these corruptions. He knows Christ to be such an inestimable Pearl and
happiness, that if he have Christ, though with the loss of father or mother,
wife or children, life or land, yea, with persecutions; yet the possession of
him yields a hundred fold more comfort in this life, and in the life to come
eternal felicity. He is still a gainer amid all his losses, yea he gains by
his losses; for losses for Christ gain great comfort and assurance in this
world, that the losers are accounted worthy to lose any thing for Christ; and
hereafter in the next world, shall they gain an exceeding reward of glory.
The same Disciple also out of the same estimation of Christ, highly disdaineth
to make any other end of Christ, but Christ himself. Yea he so highly
prefers Christ above all things, that he accounts all things dung, so he may
win Christ; Christ is the mark of his desires, he sees nothing beyond him,
but all things far short of him: He knows Christ to be infinitely better
then all things, and therefore uses the worse as helps to the better; but
far it is from him, to propose the better only as a means unto the worse. So
he passes through all other things as a Pilgrim, but takes up his rest in
Christ alone. He walks along treading on earth, and earthly things, with his
eyes and heart fixed on his Savior in heaven: To conclude, he is so far from
selling Christ, to get any thing, yt he will sell al things to obtain Christ:
Now true love, the fruit of a true faith, makes this yoke easy, and this
commandment light.

85
The natural man has in him an inclination to be proud in the enjoying of
such things as have any excellence, though himself be not the Author of that
excellence, and sometimes though he have thereby no addition of worth to his
own person. So in the first kind he is proud of a good wit, and in the
second, is he proud of a proud horse, of a rich jewel, of an imbrodered
garment. And accordingly he attributes more glory to himself, for possessing
them, then to the Author and giver, for creating and giving them: yea commonly
all the glory to himself, the standing poole, and none to the spring. But the
true Christian, even the newborn son of God, rips up this swelling deceit,
and strives to free his soul from it, and to bring her to a true and just
discerning of things. To this end bending her eye to the contemplation of
truth, she finds that chief and only glory belongs to the giver, not to
the receiver; to the Creator, not to the thing made. She sees no reason that
she should boast of another work, nor that she should be proud of what she
has received; but rather she sees great reason, that the creature should
give all glory to the Creator, and the receiver to the giver. For the borrower
is a servant to the lender, his receiving is an implied subjection, and he
owes to him the thing lent, much more the glory of the thing. Accordingly* the
sanctified cry out: Sing ye loud to the Lord all the earth; for the Lord is
God, he has made us, and not we our selves: And, Thou art worthy o Lord to
receive glory, honor, and power, for thou have created all things. This if
puffed up man would rightly consider, he would remember by the benefits of God,
to glorify God his Benefactor, not himself, the almesman of God. And though
knowledge by man's corruption is made an instrument of puffing up, yet knowledge
pursued to this point by sanctification, would humble and abase. For it would
show us that we must glory in our own, not in our debts. Rather thereby as
borrowers and owners we should become humble acknowledgers of our own
subjection and obligation to him who lendes and bestows. But miserable and
distracted man, how far do thou wander from this duty? thou art proud of a
chain borrowed of thy neighbor, howmuch more will thou be of a greater thing
given thee of thy God? Rather break off thy sins by repentance, humble thy
false swelling, and abate the wisdom of thy foolish flesh; yea let all glory
which other give thee, reflect from thee to thy maker, who only is the true
rest of glory. Then if thou glorify him, thou shall be glorified by him, wc is
the glory thou especially should seek for unto thy self; so may thou
aspire by humility which is the only honor: yea most ready way of aspiring.
But if thou do it not, know that pride is the especial bar of Gods mercies;
Pride keeps out God, and many might have been far more sanctified, if they
had been far less proud. For God enters not into the soul that
acknowledges not him nor his benefits; those that are far from beholding
him, he beholds afar off. But into the humble soul, that gives him
abundance of glory; he enters with abundance of grace, sowing there, and there
only plenty of grace, where he is assured to reap plenty of glory. Now let us
beware that what God sows for himself we reap not to our selves, lest we
be found robbers of God: but being as laborers in that harvest only for him,
let us be content with our wages of laboring, which will be sufficient yea an
exceeding great reward to us; for great glory shall be given to those in the
next world, to whom God gives grace to be humble in this world.

86
It is pity we have so wholly taken up our minds with the controversies,
between us and the Pope, that we have much neglected the more immediate
controversy between us and the devil. It is good that thou lay thy hand on
this, and forget not the other. The chief superedification on Faith is Love,
and this love tends to the fulfilling of the commandments. Herein are the
children of God known, and the children of Satan. He that loves is borne of
God, and he that loves not, has not seen God, but the wrath of God abides
on him. But as love must be had, so must it be had to some purpose, it must
be useful, and bring forth the natural and kindly fruit thereof, which is
keeping the commandments. But the blackness of darkness is so thick on the
soul of man by his fall, that he cannot see the good which he would do; and
hence it is, that often love brings the children of good works to the birth,
but there is no strength of knowledge to deliver them. Many there are who have
consciences great with charity, yet in many things for want of knowledge, they
either abstain from doing at all, because they know not what is right to be
done, or sometimes mistake evil for good, and so offend God instead of pleasing
him. Now lamentable it is to see zeal and devotion misspent, to see a good
mind bring forth evil fruits, and the holy but divine soul to go clean
contrary to yt way it purposes. And this though neglected, very much abateth ye
glory and prosperity of the light, and enlarges the power and limits of the
kingdom of darkness. And as much darkness as is left, so much room is
there left for Satan, so much territory is there allowed to him; which as we
should strive wholly to gain from him, so especially in those which belong not
to him, but have given themselves to the God of light, to walk as children of
the light. Be it therefore the precious and worthy labor of some Bezaleel or
Aholiab, some one whose heart God has touched and enlightened, to lighten and
kindle many of the yet-dim-shining lamps which are in the house of God. Let
them be eyes to the blind, and let them join with the spirit of God, saying
in the voice thereof, This is the way, walk in it. Let them break abroad the
commandments of God into their several branches of things forbidden, and
commanded, that he which runs may read, and he which reads, may run
aright. Then shall many a work of darkness be prevented, and the works of
light shall spring in far greater abundance. Then shall the Prince of
darkness be chased much farther from us, and the God of light shall dwell more
powerfully and fully in us. Then shall thou, whosouer thou art, that turnest a
soul from sinning, shine as the stars in heaven; the blessing of him that
has received instruction from thee, shall be upon thee, and thou shall have
an especial part in that welcome of Christ, in the day of Christ: Come thou
blessed of my Father; for when I was hungry and imprisoned in my members,
pining for want of knowledge, and fettered with ignorance, thou did enlarge
me, thou did feed and increase me. But if the spiritual lawyers shall not
be so diligent to search, and set forth Cases of Conscience, as the secular
Lawyers are to publish Cases of transitory and temporal right, let them
expect to have a chief part in that curse of Christ: Woe be to you Lawyers,
for ye withhold the key of knowledge, ye either enter not your selves, or you
do not help those that would, to enter.

87
The man who intends deservedly to get the name of a Christian, has undertaken
a work called mortification, a denying of ungodly lusts, even a dying to sin,
that he may live in the spirit of Christ. He that purposes the end, must
likewise intend the means, else his purpose is not effectual, and is not indeed
a purpose of the end. Now if he seriously intend to use the means, a special
part of that means will be a true search and notice of the lusts which he
must deny, and chiefly of the chiefest; which excel in force, or in height of
corruption. For this must he look into the nature of man in general, into the
nature of the men of that country or place where he dwelles, and into the
custom (which is also a nature) of men at that time when he lives, and
especially into the man, which is himself. This being done, let him take the
rule of the law, and lay it on man thus distinctly considered; and he shall find
both wherein lust has bowed mankind in general from that rule, and wherein
eminently and especially men of that country men of that time, and wherein his
own heart. And this being found, he has then his work before him, he sees
what he must generally deny, and what parts of the general with his chiefest
strength he must resist; and what he thinks fit to resist himself, let him
also provoke others, to resist the same. If we make not this search at all,
lust may come to our hearts not known to be lust, but in the shape of
righteousness, or at least, covered by custom from appearing to be
unrighteousness, and so may be admitted. If we make this search, and that but
general, we may indeed find al vices and so may be moved to make a general
resistance to al. But yet if we make not a different resistance, that is, more
settled and strong against the stronger, (such as are those of our nation, time
and person) by not matching them, we our selves are ouermatched, and so over
maistered. This knowledge as it is in it self necessary, so it may be known
to be such, because our merciful God, by a long succession of Prophets, taught
and imparted it to man. He sent early and late his faithful messengers to
tell Jacob his sins, and Israel his transgressions, to dissuade the wicked
that he turn from his wickedness, and live. And as those Watchmen of God,
marked the access and inroade of sins, to give warning both to themselves
and others, that they should not perish in the deluge of vices; so should there
be a perpetual watch kept by the Saints and servants of God, over themselves
and others, that they may not be ignorant of Satan's policies; that the Foxes
be taken betimes, which destroy the Vineyard; and that all leaven of errors
or maliciousness may be purged, as soon as mixed. And indeed what work does
more profitablie employ the skilful master builders and edifiers, then the
finding and repairing of the ruins of the City of God? That is building
indeed, to bring a stone into a decayed place, not to fill up that which is
already full. That is most properly fortifying, which gives strength, to the
place that needs it, not to that which is already safe. wherefore let both
Prophets and people labor herein, until time shall be no more, that the
breaches of Jerusalem may be both found and repaired; that the enemy be kept
out at his places of advantage, that Satan may have no new engine, but that
there may be a defense ready against it; until our Lord Jesus, the founder
and foundation of his Church appear. Who now building by the Ministry of his
Prophets, will then commend and exalt those that have been the wise and
faithful builders, and will lift up the whole City once perfectly built into
the safety and blessedness of his own presence, for ever and ever.

The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, even so, come Lord Jesus.

AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF all the Meditations that are contained in this Book.
A
THe benefit of Adversity. 26 Against Ambition. 36 The true guiding of
Affections. 38
B
MAn is to learn of Beasts. The excellence of new Birth, in respect of the old.
20 A continual use of the outward and inward Baptism. 30
C
A Christians progress. 44 Evil Customs to be abolished. 52 Confutation of
Chance. 58 Proofs of Christian religion. 57. 69 Against Covetousness. 72
Christ not to be loved for temporal ends. 84 An exhortation to the writing of
Cases of conscience. 86 The Creature should direct us to the Creator. 3
D
AGainst Despair. 54. 9 To love Death. 55. 31 The Devil in the last times
most to be resisted. 63 Against Divisions and scismes. 16 Against
Distrustfulnesse. 22 The cause of man's endless Desires. 33
E
TO avoid Extremities. 7
F
TRue friends. 42 Duty to the Fatherless. 66 The veriest fool, he that sets
his wit and heart most on the world. 50
G
REason of the littleness of Grace in the elect. 57 5. Part The use of the
Gospel. 70 God, our All-sufficience. 78 God, the light of the soul. 6 Not to
draw followers to our selves, but to God. 14 God one and unchangeable. 17 God
is the salvation of Man. 27. and not works.
H
AGainst Hypocrisy. 64 Of Humility. 85. 4 The excellence of a Christians
Happiness. 5 Heavenly things neglected because not seen, and how to see them.
25
I
IVdges and judgment. 40 The foulenes of incest. 43 Against spiritual
Idolatry. 77 Against Images. 82
K
The kingdom of Satan. 57 8. part. Knowledge increased should increase good
works. 1 Diverse knowledges of good and evil. 24 The true knowledge of our
selves and the use thereof. 39
L
Shortness of life. 41 The love of God. 53 The use of the Law and the Gospel.
70 To love God above all things. 11, 13 Against lust. 35
M
THe right use of Gods mercy. 46 Mahumetan religion far inferior to the
Christian. 57. 1 part. Man created for another world. 62 Against wicked
Marriages. 67 Remedies of man's Misery. 68 Contemt of the Ministry, 73 1.
part. Nobility makes not men unfit for the Ministry. 73. 2. p. The
impouerishing of the Ministry. 73. 3. part. Remedies of the poverty of the
Ministry. 73. 4. part. Comfort against present Miseries. 83
N
Profanation of Gods name. 51 The right use of a good nature, and comfort to
an evil nature. 80 Not to rest in nature. 2
O
OPposition of holy duties and holy men, the devils policy. 48
P
PResumption. 54. 9 The providence of God, the rest of man. 58 Popes supremacy.
59. 1. part. And shifts. ib. 2. part. Purnesse of heart. 61 The name Puritan.
73. 7 Against spiritual pride. 75 How to endure well the pain or the losses
of pleasure. 15. 37
R
OF the Resurrection. 57 7. part. 60 Of Regeneration, and unregeneration. 65
How to read profitably. 71 Resolution to be rich. 72 Not to judge rashly. 73.
8. part. 79 The rule and guide of a Christian. 74 Against revenge. 81
S
A Sanctified Soul. 45 Swearing. 51 The approouing of Sacrifices. 57. part. 4
Against Simonie. 73. part. 5 Reasons why Superstition may bring forth many
works. 7 The Scripture vpholdeth it self. 23 Diverse witnesses which approve
the Scripture. 28
T
TRoubles truly judged and borne only by faith and the Spirit. 49 How to escape
tentations. 18
V
THe praise of Unity. 16
W
TO make use of worldly wisdom. 41. 13 How to use the world. 56 The folly of
man's wisdom. 57 part. 3 Against whoredom. 76 The chiefest wisdom, is to
seek God the sovereign good. 50 The excellence and necessity of good works. 1
The world much confused and disorderly, but we must be are with it, and strive
to amend it. 10 How truly to judge a man wise. 12 The weakness of man sets
forth the glory of God. 21 How we shall be judged by works. 27 To beware of
much intermedling with worldly things. 32
FINIS.

