Romes Monarchy, ENTITVLED THE GLOBE OF RENOWNED GLORY.

Briefly comprehending the first foundation and building of Rome by Romulus:
The principal wars and conquests of the Romans after the time of their
first choosing Consuls, till Julius Caesar attaining soly to the Empire, and
from him more briefly to Nero.

Where in small compass is described, many most noble, and virtuous acts,
achieved in their said wars, and conquests; strange Tragedies, secret
practices and policies, Ambition, hate, and revenge: and how insurrections,
rebellion, strife, civil discord and discention prevailing, was the only
plague, ruin, and utter destruction of many great Monarchies, Kingdoms,
Cities, and Countries.

Translated out of the French and Italian histories by E. L.

Il premio e meritato.

AT LONDON Printed by the Widow Orwin, for Matthew Law. 1596.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MOST WORTHY for virtues, Master Alderman Slany, Lord
Mayor of the city of London: the right Worshipful Master Thomas Low, and
Master Leonard Halliday, Aldermen and Sheriffs of the same city: and to the
right Worshipful the rest of the Aldermen their brethren, and other the
Magistrates in authority there: long life, health, and all good happes in this
life, and after eternal felicity.
RIght Honorable, and right Worshipful: Next unto the sacred Scriptures of
almighty God, wherein is contained the only ground of our faith, belief, and
salvation in Christ Jesus, the knowledge of other Histories, are not of small
importance to be weighed, and in some measure digested of all men, for diverse
causes if they be duly considered and examined: but most of all and especially
with more regard and judgment of such as your Honor and Worships are, who for
many considerate causes and other virtues, are called to the administering of
justice in the public weal: I except vain fabulous inventions, and mean
those philosophical works, which either are moral, or historical, tending
to virtue, or suppressing vice. Among all which worthy volumes, as the numbers
be many, and subjects sundry, the histories of the ancient Romans government
is not of least esteem to be preferred with the chiefest: considering how from
their mean original and base beginning, they acquised and got the
sovereignty of the whole world. This brief translation (right Honorable and
right Worshipful) written in French, describes the principal wars and
Conquests of the Romans, whose acts and gests, (concerning the government of
their Commonwealth, with other matters in the large volumes contained) are not
(I know) unknown to your Honor and Worships, and a great number more (by
knowledge of which, is reaped no small profit:) but the multitude, or vulgar
sort of our nation, not having those large volumes, neither can attain unto
for value of price, or want of knowledge of the languages wherein some of them
are written, may in this brief behold how those great Monarchs in their said
wars, stirred up by Ambition of rule and Emperie, subdued the Nations of the
world, only first, by flinging into the principalities of peaceable Princes,
the fire of civil discord, strife, and discension: by means whereof when they
had gotten that footing, then shortly after followed the ruin, decay, and
utter overthrow of those Countries, and Kingdoms, their cities and people:
and how when their Empire was at highest, through those furies kindled with
hate and revenge among themselves, their great government fell to ruin and
decay, (a thing most wonderful in the judgment of God) so that at this day of
their great Conquests, there is no more mention left thereof, save only the
bare name of Caesar: whose declining estate (God sparing me life) I mean to
bring into as small a room and compass, as this, which shows their
increasing fame of worldly glory.

My humble desire is, that this my poor unpolished labor may find that
favor of your Honor and Worships to be accepted, and taken in good part,
under your worthy protections, the rather in that they who are here mentioned,
were Citizens and governors of a most renowned City like this, wherein you
are Magistrates, and government thereof, for your virtues, committed unto you,
whose minds whilst they lived, the world could not co^taine, do before your
Honor and Worships in a few paper leaves muster themselves and their greatness,
to the end that their great Conquests under your patronages, may first pass
through this noble City, and after through the cities, towns and villages of
her Majesty's dominions, to all her other faithful and true hearted subjects, by
reading of which they may consider in these thundering days, the great
threatenings of our mighty and mortal foe, the insatiable Monarch, whom the
worlds Empire will not suffice, Caesar like with his adherents, seeking daily by
many crafty conueiances, treasons, treacheries, and other inhumane and
unchristianlike means, to kindle the fire of strife and civil discention
among us, the easier to prevail, to the utter ruin, and overthrow, both of
Prince, people and country, which God of his good grace, has most mightily
and miraculously defended a long time: let all true English hearts pray, that
it will please him so to continue his gracious favor evermore toward us.

What unity, love, concord, and peace is, (Gods name be blessed) we may all
say we have felt, do feel and know, and whilst the bands of them true and
firmly lasts, we shall be invincible: but if once they begin to dissolve, by
perusing of this brief history, may be seen how many miseries follow.

God preserve your Honor and Worships, and that it will please him to direct
your hearts in all your actions, to increase in you virtue, which lives when
all worldly vanity else dies, and send you long lives, to be most worthy
members, for the advancement of this most noble flourishing Commonwealth and
Monarchy, which God of his gracious goodness grant long to continue, under the
government of the thrice happy and prosperous reign of the admirable Empress
of the world, our most gracious Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, over whom be
the power of his mighty hand evermore extended. Amen.

Your Honor, and Worships most humble to command: E. L.

To the loving, courteous, and friendly Readers.
AS in a little nooke or corner of a Cabinet, a rich Jewel or precious stone
unpolished, may be couched: so in the compass of these few paper leaves is
briefly comprehended the fame and memory of the most renowned conquerours of
the world: the remembrance of whose great acts, ne can or will, ever be
forgotten. Like an Apprentice or unskillful Artist, have I adventured the
disrobing of their noble conquestes out from the French copy, in English
prose, and dividing the same into chapters, in some places augmented from the
italian, enterfraught with some few mean poetical fictions, not altogether
unfitting to the subject where they are placed. Faults are sooner found then
amended, and therefore (Qui non fa, non falla: qui falla s'amenda) (if any have
escaped, as who lives not committing any) and that exceptions be taken as
there may be, by some prying Pasciphil^s, howsoever the finenes of their
Caprichios, may mistake the sense, the good, virtuous and well disposed spirits
will construe the best, the other will show their kind: what faults soever
there be espied, my intent is to surprise virtue, and subingate vice: Praying
the almighty to send love, peace, unity and concord among all faithful
Christian Princes, and their subjects in Christ Jesus, that as all, that bear
that name from him in outward show, so all may both inwardly and outwardly
follow him, simply in manner of life and doctrine, for the benefit of
themselves in the life to come.

Farewell.
Romes Monarchy.
CAP. 1.
The building of Carthage, and Rome, the expelling of Romes Kings, and first
choosing of Cousuls there, the overthrow of 300. Romans being all of one
name, and family, called Fabians.
OF Priams pomp, his palace or his town,
Srong Troy, the walls, or how those wars began
Which ten years held, by Grecians last beat down:
Or whether side the praise or glory wanne
Is not here meant at all, upon to scanne:
Yet will my muse (in mean style) pen I employ
Of wars to write long after that from Troy,
Aeneas came into Italia soil:
But, leaving him and farther on to pass:
Excepting too, what ever jar or broyle,
Did after chance till Rome yfounded was
By Romulus, whose birth is counted base:
Thus much is said, because Aeneas line,
Is brought by writ, in Caesar's seat to shine:
For, Who commanded the whole world.
when Augustus, surnam'de Caesar, sat
Sole with the Scepter in the imperial throne,
Virgil, to praise his high descent, and state,
In his Aeneidos, Virg. Aene. lib. 6.
makes it to him known,
How Trojan race the world then rul'de alone,
Old Priams stock (of Troy that famous king)
In him * most fresh, Oct August.
ore all the earth did spring.
But memory, and fame of nations old,
Swift time makes end, as was as of beginning.
Romes base commence in writing is enrolde,
To be at first, a web of slender spinning;
And yet at last had all the world winning,
As floudes at first come slily creeping in,
So at full sea, to ebb do straight begin.
So works time of every thing the change: The spread eagle, the arms of the
Emperor.

O Rome whose wings sometime the earth orespread,
Thy glories gone, thy fame still lasting, strange,
Thy captains that did raise thy state are dead,
Both Pompee, and Caesar's aspiring head,
With many more, their monarchies and all:
Whom Time has rais'de, and likewise made to fall.
But, Whatsoever is decreed by divine power, worldly policy cannot withstand.
what so fates and destiny allottes,
Fortune will not gainsay, or back withholde
What subject is unto her stains and spots,
Naught can avail, no mines, or mounts of gold.
And what again in favor she does hold,
Shall mount, and wear both diadem, and crown,
And vnlook'te for, as fast come tumbling down.
Proof of thse things by Carthage first of twain,
Whose plotted seat queen Dido the new married wife of Sicheus, who^ the king
of Tyrus slew, from whose cruel tyranny Dido fled into Afrique. 50. years
before Troyes destruction.
Dido did begin,
By grant obtain'de, and so much ground did gain
To build upon, in reach of a bulls skin,
Which she cut small in pieces long and thin:
In lengthes stretched out, it far orespead the field
In circuit, there the walls she began to build
With houses brave, high towers, temples fair*
The stately Forte, which Birsa had to name:
Whose tops high mounted, seem'de to touch the air:
For strength and wealth the world it had for fame.
Yet for all that, the Romans it orecame,
The city sacked, and raz'de the walls to ground:
Whose match each way, on earth was the^ scarce found.
Of Rome, the walls and buildings first of all,
Old writtes record, that Romulus began
To Between 350. or 400. years after Troyes destruction, or Eeneas coming
into Italy.
found the same, whose mean estate, some call
Him shepherd borne, or else a bare heardsman
Nursed by a wolf; but he such glory wan,
As fates decree the chance of every thing,
His power grew so, as lastly made him king.
And after him, if histories say true,
Two hundredth years, add forty four withal,
Six kings more raign'de, 1. Kings.
each one in order due,
The last of which, his pride did cause to fall:
And name of king did ever after thrall,
To rule, or rainge, that famous city in,
Who called was that time, the proud Tarquin.
Their Kings expelled, 2. Consuls.
two Consuls next bare sway,
Whose office was to endure for a year,
Iunius Brutus to the state a stay,
Chief cause the Tarquins Romes kings chased were;
His own two sons, no whit he did forbear
For to be head, with others, seeking mean,
Their Tarquins kings for to restore again.
A noble deed of justice, Justice.
right, and zeal:
O happy place where rulers upright stand. Justice duly and rightly executed,
causes a common wealth to flourish.

A worthy member of a public weal:
A president for every state and land,
Vice to correct with rod of justice hand.
Thus Consuls two, in place of kings did guide
The state of Rome, which after stretched wide.
During which time, discordes did often rise
At home, and forth, A province in Italy near unto Rome, an il neighbor to
their state.
Toscane the country hight
That then made war, but Rome did them despise,
Three hundredth Romans went with them to fight:
All of one name called Fabians, put to flight
Their army, and they all slain, left no more
Of that name but a child, who did restore
Their house again: which chance to Rome did fall
Thirty three years, after their kings decay,
And after that three hundredth years in all
Of Romes building, things at uncertain stay,
By reason brawles did often them affray:
From them Embassage to the Grecians went,
Who laws to Rome in brassie tables sent.
CAP. 2.
The third and fourth alteration of officers in Rome, where, after many changes
the Consuls were of continuance until Julius Caesar.
IN mean estate was Rome at that same time,
Wanting both wits, and men of wisdoms lore
To make them laws: but things that be in prime
Come to be ripe, though it be long before:
In Greece that time were wisemen plenteous store,
That in all kind of Arts profound did flourish,
Romes weak estate with wisdom they did norish.
Those laws brought home the public state, and weal,
Rechanged was from Consuls two as then
To Decemuirs supremely that did deal
With every cause, as much to say Ten men:
But this new change, was altered soon again:
Appius Claude, one of that number tho
Committing rape, that government did orethrow.
A magistrate, to do an act so vile:
The people would no longer them permit,
Consuls again were chose, who but a while
Did last, but yet again began to flit
Their officers, for so it was thought fit:
Two Tribunes then were chose, whose power and might
Was Consul like, the peoples wrong to right.
This time also (...) three hundredth year, L. Quintius Cincinnatus.

And fifteen since (...) ^^rst was founded,
An office was which only one did bear,
Which seems to be, on great authority grounded:
Dictator calde, Dictator, which office had endured now already about 70.
years.
who caus'de to death be wounded
Spurius Melius, who sought to be Romes roye,
His house and name, for ever to destroy.
Two years next after government again,
To warlike Tribunes, came serving in war
Abroad, at home, as fortune list to reign,
To stint all strives of mutiny and jar:
And to keep off, the enemy a far:
Which did endure about some seventy,
In all which time, men worthy many were.
Amongst them all one Furius Camille,
For virtue past all those, supplied that place,
For service good, he was requited ill:
He is exile, was forest to take his race,
Although sometime he Consul were in grace.
Ingratitude so reigns in peoples minds, Ingratitude

For doing good, with ill requital finds.
Causeless exilde, the Senate him recalde,
Whose virtue sau'de all Rome from spoil and sack
By French men Burguinions. Malice not of any continuance, but vanquished by
virtue.
wrought, and therefore was restalde
In dignity, for putting them to wrack.
Thus fortune plays with men, now forth, then back:
Dictator he was after in two years,
Virtue suppressed, at length more great appears.
A worthy wight eke Manlius ycalde,
Soon after that, the Capital did guard,
Against the French: The virtuous oftentimes are diffamed by envy, and foiled.
who welnie hap it thralde,
In doing which, he had an hard reward:
Suspicion foul, his fame and glory bard:
(Sans proof) supposed he would Romes state distaine:
For which he was cast from rock Tarpeiane.
Decreed it was, not any of his race
Or noble house, thenceforth should bear the name
Of Marc, which seem'de as then a great disgrace:
But to rehearse again before mentioned.
Camillus fame,
Who seven times of Tribune had the name:
To lead the Romans unto battle bold,
Had good success, and died very old.
CAP. 3.
Of Romes severity in justice, of their constancy for the common wealths
cause, the time of Alexander the great his being, and of the Romans wars
against Pirrhus, King of Epirotes. About this time the care and charge of the
common wealth came from the Tribunes to Consuls again.

ROmes age was now three hundredth fourscore,
Also nine years, when Captains there was found
Most valiant, wise, the like was nere before:
Who in assaults, their enemies brought to ground:
Themselves not dreading death, or deadly wound.
Too long it were their names all to recite,
Who in defense of Romes estate did fight.
And in the same vs'de justice for small crime,
Amongst all which, one of them do I find
Torquatus nam'de, chief Consul at that time:
His only son (a thing far out of kind)
He caused to die, for fighting out of the place he was charged to stand in.
(vnassin'de)
Against his foe, which he orecame in fight,
Though well he did, law could not him acquight.
What laws were made, were duly executed,
Such men they were, Heroical of mind:
For dastards they disdained to be reputed,
For countries weal, duty and love did bind
Their deaths to seek, rather then lives to find:
For to advance the Romans state and name,
Willing died many, to gain perpetual fame.
One Decius Mus, did vow to lose his life
In fight against the Latins, Romans foes,
For countries cause, which he performed, in strife
With them that time, which made the Latins lose
The field that day, receiving bloody blows.
One of self name after 44. years after in a battle against the french
Senonois.
his son also
In such like cause, his life did eke forgo.
Although that he were Consul at that time:
About which time as written I do find,
The Monarch great was then in chiefest prime:
Macedo king, Alexander the great.
stout Alexanders mind,
Whose conquests great, were but a puff of wind:
For when he had maistred the world all,
At Babylon by poison had his fall.
Against the state of Rome he did intend
To have made war, if Asia once subdued,
Then next through all Europa to have wend, In this time lived Homoer and
Socrates.

His hands yet more in blood to have imbrued:
But fates by death his purpose did seclude,
At 12. years reign, and 33. years age,
His part being played he left vain worlds stage.
His force against, (but death you hear forbad)
Papirius was for Romans chieftaine chose,
Whose valiantness great fame attained had,
In giving foil to Samnites cruel foes
To Romans, tho in danger like to lose
Their army all, under their T. Vetu^ius Calvin, and Spurius Post-humus albin.
Co^suls, who dishonourably had taken truce with the enemy, greatly to the
Romans disgrace.
Consuls twain,
Papirius force did victory obtain.
Dictator he that office after bare,
And earnest was in martial discipline,
Expert, and quick, in warlike fears his care
Was evermore, that soldiers should incline,
Not nice to be, to lodge, or diet fine,
But valiant, stout, and to endure all toil,
Which made them often to give their foes the foil.
In this time lo of Romes increasing fame,
In Saragosse the Dionisius the tyrant of Syracusa.
Tyrant then did reign,
Whom to advise with precepts good there came:
Divine Plato who hardly escaped unslain,
This tyrants acts was had in such disdain:
In histories who list to read shall see,
His hateful life vpheld by tyranny.
Strange were his acts, too many to be told
Here in this place: but for to make the rest
To be supposde, from one I cannot hold:
Of Barbar would he nere be trimmed or dressed, There are many would trust the
barbar to trim their beards if they had any.

For fear the razor should his life arest:
His daughters aye with nutshels burning bright,
Should sindge his beard, and so his head to dight.
But now return to noble Rome again.
After the death of Alexander great
Forty two years, one Pirrhus that did reign
Epirotes King, the Romans state did threate:
His army did their forces often defeat,
Yet, ere two years were gone and ouerpast,
He sought their peace and friendship at the last.
To which request the Senate would have granted:
But Appius Claude full seven times elected
Consul, then old and blind, their purpose daunted,
Of cowardice the Senate he detected,
In public speech he Pirrhus peace rejected.
Fabritius eke against Pirrhus stout did stand,
Friendship with him to hold, would at no hand.
Though Pirrhus did to him great presents send,
With offers mo, for to revolt and turn
Upon his side, Constancy to the commonweal in a Magis^^ate.
Fabritius would not bend
For presents, ne for promises, once spurn
Against Romes state, such love in him did burn
To countries weal, (O pattern precious stone
For this our age to look, nay gaze upon.)
Yet more, what did this noble heathen knight?
(But Machiauels, from whom all mischiefs springs,
Work contrary) he void of hate or spite, The heathen scorned the^ Machiauels
devises, now a days too much reigning.

No stabbing blades, or murdring dags in brings,
No banketting, nor physic poysonings:
Nor no such parts, vile practices most evil,
Bred first in hell, invented by the devil.
But he sends to (Romes enemy) Pirrhus king
A runnagate, a rogue, a perjured slave,
A soldier of his own, Among Christians now a days treasons are rewarded,
and traitors succored.
who promising
By poison, or some other means, in grave
The Romans should, Pirrhus, dead, see, or have:
Fabritius n'wold to this foul deed consent,
But him fast bound, to Pirrhus prisoner sent.
When Pirrhus saw the Romans friendship, he
Could not obtain by treaties, or reward,
Determined by war the end to see:
With martial men he stood upon his guard, The first use in Italy of Ele^hants
in war.

And Elephants to combat strong prepared:
He was the first, to Italy that brought
Those beasts, who bare me^ on their backs that fought.
But to encounter Pirrhus haughty pride
And mighty force, a noble Roman knight,
Dentatus called, with Romans him beside,
For Romes estate, who did not fly, but fight.
They Pirrhus, and his power discomfit quight:
Dentatus for his worthy valor shown,
Had triumph brave, which through all Rome was known.
Until this war which Pirrhus lastly made,
Five hundredth years the romans had welnie
Broils still at home, and often ouerlayd
With neighbors nere, (...) wars (...)the (...) of (...). years ere they made
any conquestes abroad.
people of Italy:
Doubtful their chance, and fortunes they did try:
The Latins often, the Samnites, Toscanes, other,
One gaining now, then loosing, straight the the other.
But in the end, their home wars brought to cease,
Some vanquished, some by truce, and friendship bound;
Romes fame did now begin for to increase,
Against Carthage to make war, Libia a province in Afrique, where Dido built
Carthage.
means they found:
A stately town, seated on Libia ground:
More ancient it was then Rome, by many years,
As by record of writers it appears,
CAP. 4.
The first beginning of the wars with Carthage, Attilius Regulus chief
Captain taken prisoner, sent to Rome to treat for peace, but persuaded war,
returning to Carthage was put to death.
GReat was the fame throughout the world spread
Of mighty Carthage, Things at the highest, decaying highest.
rich, exceeding fair,
Whose wealth, and pomp, was cause her ruin bred,
At such time when at highest in the air,
Her glory grew, then fell it to appayre.
By which is shown, all earthly honors state,
Fall of it self, or else brought down by fate.
Chief leader first of Romans to this war,
Attilius Regulus had the only charge;
His army pressed, no mishap could him bar,
On shipboard came, with many a boat, and barge,
And hoysing sails, sea room, and wind at large,
Need was there none, once for to ship an oar
Until such time, they came to Afrique shore.
Where taking land, such favor fortune lent,
As in short space, Having first gotten a party in the country.
they many cities took:
With Carthage often, all good haps backward went,
Their force decreasd, and country them forsook,
Their chieftaines slain, their soldiers durst not look
Out at their gates, so hard they were beset,
And to triumph, naught did the Romans let.
From Carthage then Ambassadors did wend
(For one, that could an army rule and guide)
To Lacedemon, who, did unto them send
A captain stout, in warlike feats well tried
Xantippo namde, who never once denied
To fight for them, with all the skill he may,
And Romans force, to give repulse or slay.
But here (behold) of war, the lot, and chance,
The Romans had the overthrow in deed; The chance of battle uncertain.

They, who but late in triumphs did advance,
Do fly, lie slain, and wounded, some do bleed:
Who wins often, has sometimes evil speed,
Attilius taken, and many him beside,
In prison pent like fortune to abide.
And Xantippo of Carthage for his deed,
Rewarded was, (woe worth wretches ingrate)
To give him gifts, Ingratitude most vile.
and honor, they agreede,
With loving speech, as seemed his estate:
But little knew he, of their inward hate:
Toward his ship, they brought him with glad cheer,
And after, dealt with him as you shall hear.
On shipboord come, they laud him to the skies,
And taking leave, They murdered him, because at his return, the Lacedaemonians
should not glory in the victory gotten by their Captain.
do leave great gifts behind:
The Master, they did charge in any wise,
All secretly t'agree unto their mind;
This thing therefore unto him they assignde,
That in the night, Xantippo the should slay,
And after, drown his carcass in the sea.
But (now) return to Attilius again,
Whom Carthage kept in prison fure and fast,
They did with him accord for to obtain,
The Romans love, and peace now at the last:
And to forget all war and discord past,
Ambassadors to Rome they straight did send,
Attilius with them must likewise wend.
But first they took an oath and made him swear, If the heathen held their
word in matters of life and death, how much more ought christians in smaller
moments.

For to return their prisoner back again:
(If love and peace to them denied were)
And at their pleasure, so still to remain.
Attilius here, all promise breakers stain,
Whose vows and words, are not performde in deeds;
Fair flowers in show, prove but ilsauouring weeds.
Ah Regulus, thy fame shall aye endure,
Who free at home out of thine enmies hands,
Would not to live in Rome, their peace procure,
But rather choose to lie in cruel bands,
For Countries cause to leave life, goods, and lands:
Thy constancy in word, and valiant mind,
A pattern is for men of noble kind.
And where the Carthaginians, thought that he
Would treat for peace, And the exchange of prisoners on both sides.
persuaded otherwise
The Senate, not to peace with them t'agree:
War noble Romans, Carthage peace despise,
By league with them, no profit will arise
Romes state unto, they yield, and he again
To Carthage went, and paid the price with pain:
Where being returned, he ransom paid by death,
For countries cause, which he did not refrain:
Most cruelly they causd to stop his breath,
By rolling of a barrel down a main
An hill most high, unto his grievous pain,
Sped thick with nails, where he was closde within,
Most cruelly piercing his tender skin.
During this war, good hap the Romans had
By Sea, at first, under their Consul stout
Duillius, made Carthaginians glad
To fly, and Hanno, Carthage Captain.
Hanno put into a doubt:
Though truce of times was taken them throughout:
Both secretly committing under hand,
Vile parts at Sea, when peace was on the land.
Yet in the end, full peace tweene them took place:
But long it did not last, for vnquencht hate
Not clean extinct, will secret work disgrace:
And, Daily practices of Machauellians
so fares still the course of worldly state:
Envy, friendlike, with fair smoth speech can mate
His mortal foe, and deadly foes, we see,
How ere in heart, outward seem to agree.
Such intercourse, tweene Rome, and Carthage was,
Each other to convince by policy:
For twenty years, and upwards, there did pass
Strange stratagems, with many secrets slye:
Ambition causde them many maystries try,
That, in the end the peace was broken quight,
And taking arms, the fall again to fight.
CAP. 5
The second war of Carthage, by Publius Scipio, Hannibal the Carthaginian
Captain in Italy, his return to Carthage, is overcome and flies.
ABout this time Cornelius Scipio,
Sardignia Isles, and Corsica, he took
With other holds the Carthaginians fro:
This second war, most nere their welfare shook,
That forced they were about them for to look:
But Hannibal, who now their chiefetaine was,
Brought them great hope, and much relieved their case.
The city Sagunt, he besiegde most strong:
Came into Spain, and after into France,
And with his army, marched all among
The Alpie Mountains parting France and Italy, of a wonderful height.
hills and lastly did advance
His ensigns, spread (so fortune leads the dance)
In Italy, the Romans to pursue,
Vexed with home By the countries about Rome.
wars, which done, began a new
Stout Hannibal his war; of which to read
His battles three, against the Romans won,
Shall see, and hear of many a worthy deed,
At large of him, Three times he gave the Romans the repulse* and in the
fourth, had a most mighty victory.
by Rome, and Carthage done,
But Hannibal, did cause his enmies shun
Three times the field, the names, of places three:
Tecyn, Trasimene, the third, flood Trebie.
Quinbus Fabius, Dictator was create,
The Carthaginians force to stop or stay,
His valor did withstand their running state,
And Hannibal a while did keep at baye:
But after that again, held on their way
To Cannas field, where Romans him withstoode,
And, where the earth, was glutted with their blood.
Such slaughter there, the Romans did sustain,
As put all Rome, into a wondrous fray,
Deuoyd of hope, Publius Scipio, the son of Cornelius Scipio, before rehearst.
for ever to regaine,
So great a loss, in mind to fly away,
And leave the city at uncertain stay:
But Scipio young, of courage wise, and stout,
Both comfort gave, and drove away all doubt.
Now Hannibal whom fortune favored so,
Had at command the country all Hannibal had al Italy at commandment. The
country being fertile they surfeted with the fruits, so that many dyed.
about;
The summer past, to winter he did go
To Capua, with Carthaginian rout,
Where idleness infected valor stout:
Abundance bred their bane, cloyd with delight:
His army all was welny orethrowne quight.
But whilst he lay within Italia soil,
He Romans force had welny vanquished quight:
Yet Asdrubal received a mighty foil Near to the flood Metaurus by M. Liuius
and C. C. Nero.

By Romans Consuls, that with him did fight,
Bringing new succors for to revenge the spite
To Carthage done, whilst Hannibal with chance,
By fortune might against Romes walls advance.
But Publius.
Scipio this while stout, bold and wise,
Whose valor great, is spoken of before,
Had good success in Which place was assignde to him for the war. About this
time his father and uncle were slain in lberia in the Carthagiman wars.
Spain, whose fame did rise
Throughout all Rome: and to augment it more,
In getting Spain, which place his father bore,
And uncle both, to Rome did come at last,
Where for desert, in Consulship was plast.
His noble mind, bent to his cities good,
Required Afrique might be him assignde,
For public weal to loose his life and blood:
But his desire impediments did find:
Old Fabius sharply did resist his mind, One who had bin often Consul.

Who gave advise rather at home to stay,
Against Hannibal with force to take the way.
But Scipio then contrarying Fabius will,
Declared his mind in open audience
The Senate too, to grant him their good will:
For it will prove by good experience, Desire to revenge his uncle and fathers
death.

In Afrique if we fight for Romes defense,
Need will drive Carthage call home Hannibal:
Who it denies, I know such hap will fall.
For he who is their chiefest hope and stay,
And he on whom their saftie does depend,
Long time they will, ne can, miss him away:
So shall our wars in Italy have end:
To his advise the Senate did attend,
Debating much, some loath, Of the Senate.
yet was assignde
For Carthage war, which greatly pleased his mind.
But first to The common passage into Afrique and nerest from Italy, where he
was but slenderly furnished at first for such a war.
Scicil Isle must take his course,
And there prepare to furnish full his need,
To rig up ships, to abide the waters sourse:
Pressed in each point, away go'th he with speed,
Though all the Senate scarce thereto agreede:
Yet lo this war grew to so glorious fame,
As none so much encreast the Romans name.
So much prevailed Scipio his virtue there,
As Carthaginians gain to loss did fall:
By means whereof so hard beset they were,
As Carthage town was welny brought in thrall,
Enforced to revoke home Hannibal.
The Senate now found Scipios saying true,
Away he went that meant Rome to subdue.
Who then had for the space of sixteen years,
Infested all Italia about:
Put Rome and Romans often in deadly fears: When he was sent for he had his
army before Rome walls.

And brought their state to many a dreadful doubt,
Delivered now from troubles which did sprout
And spring each day, by means of such a foe,
Hannibal gone joy did expel all woe.
But ere that he from Italy did pass,
Carthage to Rome Ambassadors did send
For to have peace, Subtle practices used generally now a days
which thing concluded was:
Yet secretly their wars they did intend,
Each kind of way they did repair and mend,
Their armies that did arms and victuals want,
Which wars among them had made very scant.
But Hannibal no sooner was arrived,
At Carthage tho, Hannibal, a ^worne enemy to the Romans by a vow at nine years
of age, in the time of Amilcar his father.
but did dislike the peace:
Of hope he should be sure to be deprived,
And purpose too, if that the wars should cease:
Displeasde he seemde, but did his force increase.
Brave Scipio to meet upon the field,
Whose noble mind did never mean to yield.
Their Armies tweene, light skirmish often did chance:
Hannibal was for victuals hard beset,
He who but late to war would needs advance:
Secret seeks peace, provisions for to get,
Obtaind, performde, conditions did not let
On Carthage side, but people all cride out
We are betrayde among these champions stout.
And iarring thus themselves full often among, Discord the sign of destruction,
the plagues of commonweals, and private mesnages.

Now taking truce, and then do break again:
They cry a fresh, these Captains do us wrong,
Whose outrage rulers seek for to restrain:
Things running thus, the magistrates are feign
The peace to break, commanding Hannibal
To try by fight, what fortune will them fall.
Both armies lay each in the others sight:
King Massinissa, a King in the country, betrothed to the daughter of
Asdrubal, given by the Carthagi. first to him, and after to Sysax, another King
in the country there, to him married, and after, Massinissa married her again,
when for fear to be taken of the Romans, poisoned her self.
Massinissa was on Romans side:
Who league with Scipio made before in spite
Of Carthage, who denied him his bride:
(A noble maid in prime of beauties pride)
First his from them, but after did her mary
Another to, the cause that made him vary.
This civil strife with many others more,
The city in, and country all about,
Was cause at last of Carthage overthrow:
In steed of reason, will, did rule the rout:
Tweene magistrates also foul hate did sprout,
Rage, insolence, and often death most vile:
Thus foul revenge did high, and low beguile.
But Hannibal hearing of Romans strength,
Of Scipioes bounty, clemency, and fame,
His noble mind, with more, sought means at length
To speak with him ere they to battle came,
It chaunst, and lo, fury seemde to inflame
Hannibal, who, in words was somewhat tart:
Threatening each other, a sunder they do part.
The time being come when both their armies met,
Great was the slaughter made on either side:
But Romans did the victory there get,
Making their foes to dye with wounds full wide.
Hannibal fled, he durst not longer bide:
The loss so great, that Carthaginians crave
Peace once again, with Romans for to have.
Scipio agreed, Romes Senate did consent:
Whilst peace endured, many things did chance,
Here to recyte, too long were verament;
But Romans did their honors still advance,
And Carthage welfare, backwardly did glaunce.
Scipio to Rome returnde, did triumph gain,
And for surname, was called Africane:
For that those wars attained had such fame,
And profit great brought unto Romans state,
The country whole had Africa to name
By him subdued, ordeynde thereto by fate:
Thus time we see, The nature of time.
brings all things to their date,
Destroying often, and raising up again,
Yielding some store, others does pinch with pain.
CAP. 6.
The wars of the Romans with the Macedonians, the conquest of Asia, the
death of Scipio African, Romes Ambassador puts the great King of Assiria in
fear with his speech, the conquering of Macedonia and Dalmatia.
PEace on this wise, again to Carthage granted:
Rome had home-broyles, wars greater outward grew.
The Macedonian King against Romans vanted,
Whose proud attempt, with Grecians to subdue,
Quintus Flaminius, led forth the warlike crew
Of Romans, tho subduing that same King,
And Grecians, all subjects to Rome did bring.
He charge gave to this King of Macedo,
Phillip by name, never once war to move
Against Roman state, Nor to pass the limits of his country.
which he agreed unto,
Performing it with duty and with love:
To Romans he a friend did after prove,
For aid he gave with all his power and might,
When Romans would at any need to fight,
Antiochus the great Assiria king,
Came with great Into Greece.
power, the Romans to withstand:
This Phillip then, most willingly did bring
His force, and ioyn'de with those of Romans band:
Glabrio for Rome obtained the upper hand.
Antiochus fled to Egypt ward with speed,
Raising more force, to do some other deed.
Phillip, and he (it is said) descended were
From those, who, when great Alexander dead,
In kingdoms did divide his whole Empiere, Civil discord, the overthrow of
the Macedonian Monarchy.

Partage of which, great wars, and discord bred,
Between all those to that succession led:
With cruel fightes, each other long did thrall,
As last, the Romans came t'enioy them all.
Thus Romes triumphing glory high did grow,
Her power was great by sea, and eke by land:
With sack, and spoils, of cities they did flow:
Nations not any, might Romans force withstand,
Kings, and countries, fat off did at their hand
Desire aid, amongst all which did come
Ambassadors from Egypt unto Rome.
Praying to guarde young Ptolome their King,
Now vexed with wars, and like to have the chafe,
With power which Antiochus did bring,
From Kingly seat, and crown him to displace:
The Senate gave consent to right his case,
Sending unto Antiochus, to cease
His war, and suffer Ptolome live in peace:
Which he obeyde, but yet to have a fleece
Of Romans spoil, and to revenge late spite,
Did lead along his army into Greece,
Procurde by means of Hannibal, in flight
From Carthage force, by Scipio put to flight
(As is rehearst before) from whence he fled,
Antiochus too, with succor to be sped.
But into Greece, the Romans Army brought,
Encountered him, Antiochus.
with whom `was Hannibal:
Orethrew the^ both, and brought their powers to naught:
Here Carthage captain had a second fall,
Antiochus eke received a farther thrall:
By sea also, Rome got the upper hand,
Expeld him thence into Assiria land.
Lucius Scipio, was chief this war that led,
Brother unto Scipio calde African:
And for because so happily he sped,
The surname of Asiatique he wan:
But speak again of Scipio African,
Lieutenant to his brother in this war,
At his return to Rome, there fell a iar.
The Tribunes of the people, Envy the enemy to all virtue.
did molest
Through envy (sure) the glory he had won:
By means whereof, in quiet for to rest,
From Rome he went, (their malice for to shun)
To A house or manor of his in the country.
Lyterne, till their heat of rage was done:
But there as some do say (such was his chance)
This worthy man, death wounded with his lance.
Whose loss full many did lament, (no doubt)
So brave a man to dye at such an age,
For fifty years he was not all full out:
Thus do we see, the valiant bold and sage,
When time brings death, cannot withstand his rage,
Rome happy thou, to breed so brave a wight,
Unhappy folk, his virtue so to quight.
Hereby is seen the fruits of envy still,
Who never works good, but evil evermore:
Virtue she seeks for to destroy and kill,
Things that are whole, she hurtes, and makes sore,
Those that are good, the envious do abhore:
Which thing has been, and ever more will be,
Bright virtue blamde, by foul iniquity.
Where state and wealth increases day by day,
By valor of the virtuous, and the stout,
Envy there roots, and takes such hold and stay,
In secret wise, brauing among the rout:
And with pretense each cause is good, (no doubt)
Infecting sore such places that so flourish,
Under the cloak of virtue, vice does nourish.
With policy, and practice sly, they frame
Their brazen face, and adders tongues to bite:
They gloss, and feign, and flatter without shame,
With forged lies, they faith, and truth do spite,
And where as once their venym vile does light,
They do not cease, to puff with poisoned breath,
Like Cockatrice, to bring them to their death.
(Alas the while) so Rome did Scipio lose:
During which time, Aetolia people were
Taken, to be the Romans utter foes:
But Marcus Fuluius.
Fuluius, whose nobleness was clear,
Subdued and brought them under Romans fear:
Thus still their fame, did every day increase,
Held wars abroad, at home the lived in peace.
Antiochus, (who late rehearst before)
To whom for aid, stout Hannibal did fly:
Enforst to keep his country, and no more
His fortune, with the Romans force to try:
His kingly life, away from him did hye,
Unto the King (then) of Bythynia
Hannibal went, for aid on him to stay:
Which thing when as the Romans understood,
To Prusias sent, (Bythinia King so hight)
To render him, it should be for his good,
If not, it were means to work him great dispight,
The Romans would redress the wrong with might:
Thus Hannibal, was nere his ending days,
Whose noble acts won everlasting praise,
And fame beside, for ever during still:
But foul despair, (did much appayre the same)
In ougly shape who now came him until:
Monster most vile, whose acts aye end with shame,
With in his mind such deep conceits did frame,
As they alone Despair in distressed minds, solitary are not alone.
together, musing sat
Of glory past, and now his wretched state.
Hope banished was, despair did bring in fear,
And he feared most to fall in Romans hands:
When him before, Infernal plagues to earthly minds distressed.
most ougly shapes appear:
Hell seemed loose, and round about him stands,
Grief, sorrow, care, thought, misery with bands,
Ruin, decay, woe, wrack, and endless strife,
Slander, disfame, and shame to rid his life.
Envy, revenge, hate, discord, and disdain,
Malice, and scorn, pride would not be behind:
The pride of Rome so pincht his heart with pain,
Because revenge did not fall to his mind:
And now despair again his eyes did blind,
(When as these furies, had his spirits possessed,
More greater yet, t'augment his great unrest.)
Showed him his armies, and his victories,
His glorious pompes, The remembrance of pleasures past, pincheth when penury
is victor.
his triumphs, wealth and all
Carthage great loss, how Rome did him despise:
The wrack eke of his brother Asdrubal,
After all this, his own mishaps, and fall
From so great height, and lastly, now to light
Into their hands, whom he did always spite.
Midnight was come, and every thing at rest:
When sightes yet strange, more monstrous did appear,
(As it is with all by foul despair possessed:
Tossed, and turmoyld, with horror, dread, and fear,)
And long before the day began for to clear,
In vision saw great battles, thousands slain,
Huge heaps of dead, whose blood the earth did stain
Before him seemed t'appeare great flames of fire,
Where in despair bad him go end his life,
Murder fast by (inflamde with rage and ire,)
To kill him, ready with a bloody knife:
Waters to drown himself and rid all strife:
The Romans hands t'escape, there is no hope;
Hang thy self (quoth despair) here is a rope.
Behold this chamber wherein thou do lie: Acts of distressed souls,
possessed by despair, running through their senses.

A thousand ways there is to end thy woe,
See there a tower stately, standing hye,
Thy self from top thereof thou soon may throw,
Here, stab thy self thy valor great to show:
Or cut thy throat, or brains do knock from head,
No joys in life, in best case when thou art dead.
Despair at length the victory did gain,
And Hanniball did geeue consent to dye:
Distressed he past hope, did think life vain,
With shame to live, that late in honors hye
Did sit, and now to dwell in misery,
With them who were his cruel deadly foes:
He prayed despair some way else to dispose.
His wretched life, those former means rehearst
He liked not, (when sighing breathed for air:
Both head and heart, of Hannibal quick pearst)
Then what say thou unto a potion fair?
A bolle of wine, Hannibal poisoned himself.
carrouse, drink to despair,
Sorrows are dry; this draught will quench all strife:
Thus poisoned, he did leave his loathed life.
Ah wretched state, vain worlds vading joys,
High for to be, auailes nothing at all,
Thy pompes and glory, are but trifeling toys,
For record take we, worthy Hannibal,
And many more whom fortune has made fall:
She lifts high, and smileth, when a frown,
Makes Caesar hop besides his seat and crown.
Antiochus dead, The ambition of antiochus, King of Assiria, who also would
govern the King of Egypt, being but yet a child, minding thereby to obtain
the Kingdom to himself.
Antiochus again
Succeeded him, who likewise undertook
In Egypt, chief next to the King to reign,
Yet under age, his state to over look:
But th'Egiptians, would not this thing brook,
They seeing his sleights, and where about he went,
To Rome in have, once more for succor sent.
Popilius Lenas charge the Senate fro,
Embassage went, with that great King to speak,
By Romans power, he coniur'd him to go,
And his great siege from Alexandria break;
Antiochus feared himself to be too weak,
Desired time, to be advised thereon
To answer him, to stay, or else be gone.
Popilius then a rod held in his hand,
With haughty look beheld the King in face,
And round about, in place where he did stand,
A circle on the ground therewith did trace:
Antiochus (quoth he) say on a pace,
Ere I out of this circle set one foot;
Straight answer me, delays shall nothing boot.
This Scarbrough warning put the King in fear,
Which made him to Popilius straight agree, Romes Ambassador, fears the great
King of Assiria with a word.

His siege forthwith in all the have to rear,
And Egypt all, to leave in unity.
By writers lo these things recorded be,
To show what might, and rule, the Romans bare
By destiny, or through their virtues rare.
For at this time, their rule did stretch so far,
Inuading still the world every where,
Who did not yield themselves, the rod of war
Should draw out blood, and bring them under fear:
The world, they seemde in sunder for to tear,
Reigning alone, as sovereigns, and chief,
As after here, it shall be showed in brief.
Phillip King of Macedo (who but late
Rehearsed is) ambitiouslie now bent,
To live as King within his own estate,
Did think himself too straight shut up and pent,
Of promise made before time did relent:
League with the Romans brake, and purposde war
If he had lived, but death his course did bar.
But (lo) his son, His breach of promise punished after in his son, called
Perseus, solicited by his nobles, after his fathers death, to take in hand this
war.
that next him did succeed,
Incited often to take that cause in hand,
As heir unto the war, at last agreed,
Of Macedons he raisde a mighty band:
Emilius Paulus, did his power withstand,
Orethrew his host, and prisoner took him tho
With wife, and children, greatly to their woe.
Returned to Rome, triumphing with his pray,
Where, for surname, Macedonique was called
Still after that, and from that self same day,
Macedo state to Rome was full instal'd,
Dalmatia after, also was enthralled
By Nasica, Cornelius, so namde,
Whose force was such, as he those people tamde.
CAP. 7.
The third and last war of Carthage, when the City was quight subverted and
razed to the ground.
WHen time by fates, unto his period reaches,
To top of wealth, or bottom of all woe,
A rule most firm unto the world teaches,
Nature, ne art, can alter or forgo,
Unless that he most high divine say no:
Who rules fates, who guides time and all,
Who builded first, and last shall make to fall.
Six hundredth years and four (now) it was,
Since building first of noble Rome began.
Carthage once more deuisde to bring to pass,
To regaine that, which late the Romans wan:
Force they prepare, with all the speed they can,
Their neighbors vex, with Who at this instant gave unto the^ a great
overthrow, which weakened them sore to withstand this last war.
Massinissa King,
The Romans friend, and thus themselves they bring
To utter ruin: for now it was debated
In Senate house, to save, or to destroy
Carthage, when at the last it was dilated
For Romans weal, to make clear all annoy,
After that time chief, magistrate, or roy,
Should govern more, or dwelling there be found,
Commission was, to raze it quite to the ground.
Bellonaes, face now fround with tyranny,
Behold th'ambitions, rightly in their kind,
That to aspire, regardes no misery,
Or woes, or wrack of others, so their mind
Ambition is never sufficed till death.
Suffised be, which with a blast of wind
Is ouerturnde, and vanishes away,
Not knowing how soon may come their own decay.
But such the nature and condition, is
Of earthly minds, t'enioy what they delight,
Forward to run, The wise foreseeth destiny but fools fall in their folly.
not thinking ought amiss,
Should them betide, or once their purpose spite,
And certes we see, often times does run out right
Without a stop, or any stay at all.
Those things decreed, by destenie to fall.
As here the Romans, purposing this war.
All doubts debated, into Afrique sent
To Libia coast, when Carthage saw a far
Romes force, and knowing the Senates full intent,
Amazde they were, now this, then that way bent:
One part resolved their city to defend,
With fame, their lives, and miseries to end.
The league of peace some seek to hold, their ire
Some sue t'asswage, and to that end do make
Long suites and plaintes: A great number of their Children according to the
last trues.
(and last with tears desire)
Bringing pledges, in favor them to take,
But all in vain, denied, with grief they quake
Distressed thus, provisions all were scant,
Of friends abroad, they had as great a want.
Only a few, but discord caused their wrack,
When wars first began, then brake they unity:
One side, forwards did draw, the other back,
Which thing now last, wrought all their misery:
Famine, with plagues, murder, and treachery,
Which to recure, was now (alas) too late,
When first their folly, last brought their final fate.
Censorino, Martio, and Mamilio were
Chief in this war, who carthage first beset:
Whose fortunes, for the space of four year
Was loss most part, small honor did they get:
Though toil they took, in cold, in dry, and wet,
Till Scipio young, who was th'adopted son
Of Scipio, that before had Afrique won.
Seemed for to tread, and trace, the steps aright
Of his great Uncle, or else his Graundsire:
For in these Carthage last wars, did acquight
Himself so well, the army did admire
His service there, a Trybune then no higher,
Whose virtue did among them such glory gain,
As sole Empire, by Romes voice did obtain
Ore all the army at fiege of Carthage tho: The people desired him for hope
only of the former, Scipio who conquered Astique before.

But thereto would the Senate not assent,
The people by treaties desired so,
Or else perforce, would cause them to consent:
Clayming old custom, lastly were content,
Applauding much, their captain newly chose,
For Rome to fight against their long mortal foes.
When Scipio (thus) had of this war full charge, The true pattern of a most
noble Captain.

Within the camp, he framed orders new:
In friendly sort, he made unto them large
A speech, commending of their valor true,
Eke what required, in soldiers to be due:
Purging from them the vicious, idle all,
Who through corruption, might th'armie thrall.
Which done preparde by sea, and eke by land,
For the assault, which to defend, with might
The Carthaginians, lost time on no hand,
But fought, and wrought to offend by day and night*
To Romans they did many ways work spite:
But all in vain, since fates would have it so,
That Romans force, the city should o'rethro.
But like as time of every thing makes end,
So now of Carthage, fast came on the fine,
Besiegde with out, with in themselves they bend
To jar (alas) of utter ruin a sign: Where Magistrates are not obeyed with
a confusion comes final destruction.

Strength fayld, and with despair, they began to pine:
Yet long, and often, they did the Romans grieve,
Whom Scipio by his valor did relieve.
Succor by land and sea, from them he took,
Brake down the walls; The end of disobedience to the Magistrates in a commonwealth, is many miseries.
entered the city in:
When terror (lo) the Carthaginians shook,
Like people mad, to run the do begin,
In desperate case, to loose all, or all win,
Killing, and killed, at length the Romans gain,
The maistrie, and the city to obtain.
Which to behold, what heart but would lament,
To see how Carthage stood in woeful case,
Her stately fort called Birsa, torn, and rent,
And houses sacked before the owners face:
Huge flames of fire, rising in many a place,
A woeful thing for to behold with eye,
Smoke dim the air, and flames to reach the sky.
Great was the slaughter, The nature of fury once conqueror.
made by Romans all,
In every street, ran murder, blood, and fire,
The silly babes, from mothers breasts do fall,
Husbands, and wives a sunder do retire,
Brothers, and friends, and sisters, pay the hyre
Of death, (alas) a grief it was to see,
The cities ruin, and their great misery.
Some with the sword, some midst the flame to burn:
A spectacle most horrible to rue,
Both magistrates, The misery of disordered people, even their own enemies,
do often lament to behold.
and people, dying, mourn,
Of former welfare, their ilfare last to view:
Scipio himself shed tears, with grief that grew,
To see the ruin of that city old,
Late rich and fair, welnie laid flat on molde.
Continued had seven hundredth years and more,
Flourisht most brave, with plenty of each thing,
And had command, On earth, nothing permanent.
ore kingdoms, cities store,
Rul'de eke by sea, as chief imperial King,
With store of ships, that riches home did bring,
All in short space consumde, and ruinde quight,
Subject unto blind fortunes cruel spite.
Which well may show, the state of kingdoms all,
Though nere so rich, so populous and stout:
But fortune can, and has made them to fall,
And welnie razde, both names and places out,
Recount we will, some chief among the rout;
What is become, of Troyes pomp and pride,
Of Priam King, and all his power beside.
Assiria that Monarchy so great,
The Persian, Mede, and Macedonian King
In battle that Darius stout did beat,
And all the world, did subject to him bring,
Carthage may here draw with them in one string:
Thus works time, change, and chance, of each thing,
Base, high to raise, more faster down to bring.
Thus Carthag (lo) came to her final end,
Razde to the ground; to Rome rich spoils were brought
That were of choice The image of Apollo, of fine gold pillars of gold, of the
weight of 1000. talents, with innumerable other spoils, besides those taken by
the soldiers.
and Scipio eke did send
Scicilians too, brave statutes finely wrought,
And ornaments, the Carthaginians, cought
Long since from them, which antique were and old,
Which they by force, from them also did hold.
In Rome was joy for this great victory,
With high and low, Scipio did triumph gain,
His praises were extended to the sky,
With peoples voice, and sound of trumpes amayne,
For surname (also) was given him Africane:
Because an end he made of so great war,
Whereby Romes gloriy stretched exceeding far.
CAP. 7.
The conquest of Achaia, the razing of the city Corinth, wars in Portugal,
Spain, and with the slaves in Scicilia, the razing of Numanitia in Spain.
WHen all these wars of Carthage ended were,
Th'acayan people gathered head amain,
In Greece, and there an army they did rear
Against Romes state, whose brauing to restrain,
Lucius Mummius Consul, leave did gain
To fight with them, of Romes force was he chief,
Who them o'rethrew unto their pain and grief.
Their country subject unto Rome they yielded,
Corinth chief city principal of Greece:
Hundredth of years full many, had been builded,
With sack and spoil, Lucius Mummius, had for surname Achaique.
his soldiers did it fleece,
Burning the same, left standing not one piece:
And after razde the same quight with the ground,
No dwelling left, in it for to be found.
About which time, in Portugal there was,
A person stout, Viriatus called by name,
But mean of birth, yet so it came to pass,
That from a shepherd, Portugal subject to Rome.
grew to so great fame,
And with his force, the Romans often did tame,
But he by treason slain, and not by fight,
Which caused that country, fall to Romans right.
Not far from thence, in Spain a town did stand,
Numanitia called, which long time wars did hold
With Romans force, fighting with equal hand:
Both one, and other, gaynde as fortune would:
The Romans took disdain, a poor town should
Brave them so long, and not to have it taken:
Thither was sent stout Scipio 14. Years after Carthage destroyed, and in the
622. of Romes foundation*
African,
At whose aproach, disorder great was found
The army in, that at the siege did lie,
Which he reformde, and then by trumpets sound,
With sharp assault Numantiaes force did try:
Did take the same, the people mercy cry,
His soldiers spoiled, and sacked every place,
And afterward did clearly it deface.
About this time within Scicilia isle, When the foot will rise against the
head, cut it off on the ground, any more to tread.

Bondmen, and slaves, did make a great uproar,
Them to appease was used many a while,
Their number did increase, still more and more:
But yet an army, was raised up before,
For to subdue their power and their strength,
Whom Consul Fuluius pacified at length.
CAP. 9.
The second wars in Asia; the death of Scipio African: wars with Iugurth
King of Numidia, and wars in Germany, France, and other places.
Soon after this, in Asia war was moved,
On the behalf of Attalus the King,
Who by his will had given to be prou'de,
His kingdom, crown, and every royal thing,
The Romans too; but one a plea did bring
Against the case namde Aristonicus:
But Rome replied, and brought an action thus:
With armed men to try the matter out:
Aristonious overcome, and brought to yield;
Perpenna Consul with his Roman rout
Captiued him, in battle on the field;
Which year following, In the year of Rome, 625.
to death (too soon) did yield
Scipio, as he within his house took rest,
Strangled it was thought, by some whom he loved best.
Not much above fifty six years of age,
(Lo valiant wightes, foul fortunes cruel spite)
Rome was perplexed with dolor, Both the other, Scipio and this, dyed in the
flower of their age.
grief, and rage:
And as some write, in skies appeared a sight,
It Is said the son kept not his course aright,
How ere it was, the loss was great to Rome,
So time brings too, all earthly things their doom.
In France ensuing, after this also,
The Consul Fabius gained a battle great:
And Gracchus, Tribune of the people, tho
A man most rare, on matters grave to treat,
By Enuies rage, some did him cruel threate:
For slain he was, about dividing lands:
The wise we see, cannot shun malice hands.
And now began the wars of Iugurth stout, Iugurth K. of Numidia, a country
in Afrique, appertaining sometime to the Carthaginians.

Which Salust does at large most plainly show,
Where may be seen great matters brought about,
And of the rest before past on a row
In other works, who will them read may know:
Why this small work was writ, one cause was chief,
Romes rising high to be declared in brief.
But Iugurths war, (which next did fall in chase)
Calphurnius first did take the same in hand, Calphurnius.

Who Consul was, and after him had place
Cecilius Metellus, strongly mand:
But lastly Marius, with his warlike band
Orethrew his host, with many a deadly wound,
Ending the war, had Iugurth prisoner bound.
During which war with this Numidian king,
The Germans high, and low, began to molest
Italia soil, Slaughter and overthrows of the Romans, by the Germans.
and mighty troops did bring,
In France also, that country to infest:
The Romans had by them unquiet rest,
Great slaughter often, amongst them they did make,
Chief Captains many, were forced their lives forsake.
But Marius, Consul four times now chose,
Gave them repulse, and last their power orethrew:
The Almanes hie, were slain and soon did lose,
At Aix in Prouence, where their strength they drew:
In Lombardie, at Lysieres, did rue
The other sort, which done, afresh did grow
New wars, that over all Italy did flow.
Those people that upon the soil did dwell,
In sundry parts, which often heretofore
Be nam'de, The Latins Samnites, To scanes, Veientes, Eques, Falisques, and
others, now such countries as areabout Rome, Florence, Genua, Mantua, Ferrara
Sienna, and others.
began again for to rebel:
With much ado appeasde was their uproar,
And being reduc'de to quiet, as before:
Swift time that does begin, and end all thing,
A dangerous war, against Romes state did bring.
CAP. 10.
The wars with Mithridate King of Pontus, upon which grew the civil wars
in Rome, between Sylla and Marius: of wars in Portugal, and the utter
overthrow of Mythridate the great, King of Pontus.
IN Kingdoms rule, most strange is fortunes chance,
Fleeting, unsure, not to be thought with heart:
Events each day, both to, and fro, do glance:
Sores thought well salu'd, elsewhere unknown do smart
Trust treason proves, and plays a tragique part
With secret sleights: Ambition works wiles,
Faith proves frauds, and friendships are but guiles.
Mythridate King of Pontus, valiant, stout,
With army strong, did give two Kings the foil,
Gave them the chase, their seat and kingdom out:
One of Two countries in Asia.
Bythinia, the other of the soil
Of * Cappadoce, their countries both did spoil:
Which war, so sore the state of Rome did trouble*
First strife, next hate, and after murders double.
These wretched Kings distressed thus with woe,
In league and friendship, were with Romans knit
Unto their aid, perforce did drive them The Romans.
to:
But here mark fortune when she list to flit,
Who frowning seemde, on Romans side to sit,
For wars abroad, to hurt them did begin,
And ^arres more ill, at home themselves within.
Strife did arise two captains stout,
Which after grew to war, Civil discord, the only mischief of all
commonwealths, and which brings therein, destructions, sooner then any other
plague.
and deadly wound:
Note here the fruits sedition brings out,
And where likewise ambition takes ground:
The bodies sick, whereas the heads unsound.
Rome had good cause to look both pale and wan,
Never so plagude, since first their state began.
Stout Mythridate with kings chase not content,
But farther runs, into the Romans land;
Long it was before the Senate could consent,
Who for this war, as leader chief should stand:
On parts they were, on this side, and that hand, Contention cause of hate and
revenge.

Sylla some chose, because of noble race,
Some Marius, rather to supply the place.
Between these two, began Romes woeful state:
(Here may be seen what civil discords breed)
Sylla had pressed his army at Romes gate,
Marius constrained to fly away with speed,
Perforce was such, and so hard grew his meede,
In a small boat, as fast as he could hye,
To Afrique coast, away from Rome did fly.
So Sylla had of Pontus war the charge,
And thither marched with Mithridate to fight,
Absent from Rome: One poison driven out by another, and yet the grief not
cured.
Cynna, whose power was large
That time Consul, began the state to spite,
Stirring up strife, but was soon put to flight
By Octauian, who in office with him was,
Out of the city to Cynna gave the chase.
Marius on this returned from exile,
His power with Octauian did unite,
In Rome committing many parts most vile:
Wrong bare the sway, The fruits of civil discord.
and did orepresse the right,
Murder, and theft, was done in open sight:
They Consuls chose, and did what ere they lust,
Their will was law, that every thing discust.
Sylla this while in war against Mithridate,
The Romans loss, in part did get again:
Hearing of Romes foul broils and troubled state,
Fast homeward hied, to ease that grievous pain:
And when he had, A quiet state the mean while.
for most overcome and slain
His enemies, that against him did resist,
Bare sway alone, and then did what he list.
Thus one gap stopped, a worser breach is made,
One tempest past, a fouler storm does rise:
One drowning scapte, a gulf more ill to wade:
One ill foreseen, True is an old saying, seldom comes the better.
a vilder blinds the eyes:
One foe found out, a crueller lurking lies:
One canker healed, out breaks more pestlent sore:
Marius was ill, Sylla could be no more.
For when the wind tempestuously does blow,
Oreturning towers, houses trees and all:
Those harms past ore, incontinent does flow
A mighty flood, by rain continuing fall,
Drencheth up beasts on fields, and in the stall,
Drowning both corn, and fertile meadow ground,
One common loss does make a grievous wound.
Marius windlike at first did blow and rage,
Which tempest little calmed, scarce ouerpast:
Sylla not bent, that so it should assuage:
But after blasts, brings floods of rain as fast,
The woolfe full pancht, the bear take his repast:
Who hunger bides? but weaker beasts among
The ravening sort, oppressed by open wrong.
Sylla his enemies sharply did pursue,
Some banished were, and on their goods set price,
Their children eke that after should ensue,
He quite despoyl'd for ever to arise
Office, Revenge joined with ire.
or rule to bear in any wise:
No man what ere might safe enjoy his state,
Or life, if once against him he bare hate.
So far forth was his heart enflamed with ire,
Marius being dead, part of his carcass tho,
(Such fury did his raging mind inspire)
He causde into a river to be throw:
Behold revenge to mortal men a foe,
Near satisfied, until she have her will,
Of will restrainde, with grief her self does kill.
Thus Sylla got the victory at length,
Dictator made, and had the chiefest place
For to command, and now again in strength:
Rome began to grow, and mutinies to race,
But yet far of, an Exile in disgrace
With Sylla, nam'de Prescribed by Sylla.
Sertorius stout and fierce,
With war did seek the Romans state to pierce.
In Portugal an army he did wage,
Got many towns, in wars having great skill:
For to appease this unlooked for outrage,
Pompee had charge, to work therein his will:
Between these two, each part much blood did spill,
After great fights, Sertorius was slain
In treason foul, with craft caught in a train.
A few years after, Pompee this had wrought,
All Spain he got, and in that time also
Bythinia king, to earth by death was brought,
Heir to his crown, he made the Romans tho:
But Giving many overthrows to the Romans, during the civil wars.
Mithridate king of Pontus said no:
Who occupied Bythinia all the while,
That Marius, and Sylla, made the broyle.
Against whose pride, Lucullus Consul went
And foyld him often, speeding so at the last,
His army all in piecemeale cut and rent,
And from Bythinia made him hye in have,
In Pontus bounds, shutting him up full fast,
From whence also, in fight was driven away,
Flying for aid to the king of Armenia.
Lucullus still did after him pursue,
And oftentimes with both the powers did fight
Of those two kings, who thought for to subdue
Lucullus force: when each in others sight
Were come, the Romans oreprest them by might,
The Kings enforsed to forsake the field,
Their people most were slain, and fled, some yield.
But here by means of mutiny and jar
In Romans camp, which did Lucullus let,
With Pontus king to make an end of war,
Whereby he might the gain of glory get,
The Senate did a message send to set
Lucullus Lived often most sumptuously, etc. Not meddling any more in matters
of the commonwealth
home, and in his room did place
Pompee, those wars of Mithridate to chase.
Who late before, Pompee
great fame and credit gainde,
In vanquishing by sea the navy strong
Of Pirates stout, who had with power attainde
The sovereignty of all the coasts along
From Spain, to Nere unto Constantinople, or beyond, which com passes the one
side of all Europe.
Hellespont, there all among
Those Isles: yet further did their force extend
By land also, which Pompee brought to end.
The overthrow of whom did much prevail,
For Romes welfare, and for the common state:
So hard beset till then, they could not sail
Out from their shores: but brought now to this rate,
Pompee prepared himself for Mithridate,
To Asia sped, making his power there strong,
Those wars to end, which Rome had vexed long.
Which entered too, he prosecuted so,
As in short space, Mithridate was bereft
Of hope, for ere to rise his state unto,
When once his forces were asunder cleft,
Small was the succor tho unto him left:
For after being besieged by his son
Pharnaces called, his life he yielded done,
Killing himself. Vnconsta^cie of mind in miseries, engenders despair.
O fury foul despair
That do inspire, thy self in souls distressed:
But, what is life, say such? a blast of air:
Foul honors seat, chief cause of great unrest.
The mean estate is ten times happier blessed.
O pride of Rome, Romes ambition still continues.
Ambitions pattern left,
Which never will from following race be rest.
But yet a while, behold this mighty king
Stout Mithridate, how fortunes frowning spite,
Did at the last, his wars and conquests bring
To wretched state, that forty years with might,
Most valiantly did with the Romans fight,
And victor often, their Captains many led
With him each where captived, so well he sped.
Treasons he scapte, and murmurings many a one:
Of body strong, to walk on foot, or ride;
No wound did ever make him shrink, or groan,
To shun the wars, at any time or tide:
Gaynst poisoning, he poison did provide,
Wherewith when as he would his life have ended,
No power at all, by poison was extended.
His son (as is rehearst) Pharnaces nam'de,
Usurping now his crown and dignity,
Mythridate saw his wrack in such sort fram'de,
Fearing to fall, in farther misery,
Into the Romans hands by treachery,
Drew forth the venim, which he ever bare
About his sword, began it to prepare.
Two of his daughters being fast him by,
Did pray the King that they might first of all
Take taste thereof, the potion for to try,
(Loathing their lives to see their fathers fall)
He would not yield, but they would needs enthral
Themselves to death, and drank and present dyed,
The self same thing, by Mythridate was tried
But would not work, his body long before
He so prepar'de, By this King, was invented the triacle now used, called by
his name.
against all poison strong,
For to withstand all treason, envy bore
Against his state, who sought all means by wrong
T'abridge his days, but fortune made him long
Happy to live, unhappy for to die,
From Empire so to fall in misery.
Vanquished with grief, which long before his heart,
Ne body could, the Romans legions great
Overcome, by practice, policy, or art,
And now (quoth he) lo what does me most freate: Friends, and his soldiers
forsook him, by means of his son who usurped the crown.

Faithles soldiers, children unkind entreat
Me too, my friends unfaithful to me are:
These foes I fly, rather then life to spare.
Unto a Duke that stood unto him near,
(Quoth he) to me thou ever have been just,
From huing any longer rid me clear,
Lest Romans tread my glory in the dust,
Ore me a king to triumph as they lust:
Since poison will not end my wretched life,
Help me by bloody stroke to cease all strife.
The Duke bewailed Mithridate with tears,
Yielding his help, to rid him of his woe:
To his right breast, with trembling hand he bears
The bloody blade, that did his life undo:
Mithridate with a stroke, drove it into
His breast, when as the lively sprite outbrast:
Thus this great king, fortune with spite down cast.
What therefore boots long life with troubled state,
Though riches, wealth, and honor men possess?
What does avail long life, The longer life, the greater strife
without debate,
In pleasure, joy, never to feel distress?
In weal, or woe, let life be more or less,
Death is all one, at first, as tarry long,
Since dye we must, mid woes small joys among.
CAP. 11.
The disturbance of Romes estate by the conspiracy of Catiline, Ierusa'ems
tribute to Rome, wars by Julius Caesar in Germany, France and England, by
Pomp the King of Egypt was restored to his kingdom.
LIke as the day (when fresh Aurora spreds
Her curtains large) expelling dark nights shade:
Bright Phoebe does rise from chamber and vnbeds
Himself abroad, with blasing rays, does glade
Aslant the earth: where length of shadows made:
By mistie clouds, all vanish quite away
Rough winds arise, it proves a stormy day.
Through heat perhaps, a thunderclap may sound:
Or else rough Aeol raise a mighty wind,
With floods of rain fast pouring on the ground:
That herds of cattle scarce can find
Shilter to save their bare backs (thinly linde)
When as those beasts that feeding lie in stall, The weakest always goes to
the wall.

Recks not the storm, how great so ere it fall.
So fares fates: fair weather now foul prove,
Storms past, there comes a quiet calm again,
Seasons and times such earthly chances move:
So Romes high state now whole, then sick with pain.
In worldly life, cares be our daily gain:
Laws, Civil strife a destroyer.
for the good of commonweals firm seated,
Through civil strife their right use are defeated.
As Pompee had those broils and iarres late ended,
Seditious fire began to light again;
Now Catiline by Gathers a crew, discontented through idleness and
voluptuousness.
coniuration bended
A number more (their countries peace to stain)
The state of Rome to spoil, ambitious brain:
But Cicero who Consul was that time,
Detected them of that most heinous crime.
But Catiline to Toscane came by flight,
Gathering fresh crewes of wretches all forlorn:
Against whom Anthonius, The reward of rebeliious persons disturbing the quiet
estate of the common wealth.
(Consul) went to fight,
By whose great valor in pieces cut, and torn
The rebels were, (unhappy wretches borne)
But fates to men, do aye alot such chance,
That by wrong means, themselves think to advance.
And in this year fine Cicero Consul was
Jerusalem, and all Judea land,
(Great Pompees power atchieu'de and brought to pass)
Did tribute pay unto the Romans hand:
Octauian eke as you shall understand,
(Who Emperor was in process following here)
Receiu'de his birth, at Rome in this same year.
Five years after Gabinius, and Piso
Consuls were chose, when as the A people in Germany.
Swysers bold,
Did cast their course, by A Country in France very fruitful.
Prouence for to go
Farther in France, whereas they meant to hold
Their biding place (say nay who so would)
By reason of the fertile soil and ground,
Great foyson there of fruits, in season found.
Whom to forbid to abide or there to rest,
Julius Caesar raisde an army strong,
Commanded by the Senate, Julius Caesar, his first charge in warrein Germany.
soon was pressed:
And in short space the Swysers came among,
Their power most dead, on earth he laid along,
And after that to Ariouist also,
And Almane King he gave like overthrow.
Besides these two, he other battles fought,
In parties more of Germany, and France,
Near river Rhyn, Caesar fortunate in all his wars.
his enemies he brought
Subject, which far his glory did advance:
From thence with power, ore Ocean seas did glance,
And did arrive among the Brytanes then,
With whom to fight, Caesar in England.
he found them matchless men:
But yet in fine, he did subject that Isle
Ere he returned, and letters thence did write
To Rome, (which were conveyed in short while)
The first day of September to recite, Letters written to Rome from England.

To Cicero, which he receiu'de in sight
Upon the nine and twentieth of the same:
From England, in a month those letters came.
Caesar from thence returned again to France,
Had good success, the country quiet brought
Ere it was long, thus fortune can advance,
Those whom she means at length to bring to naught:
About this time, th'egiptians Rome besought
To aid their king, expeld his country fro
By Archelaus, worker of his woe.
Unto the Senate Pompee suit did make,
The king distressed, for to restore again:
Gabinius charge thereof Commanded by the Senate or council.
must undertake,
He Archelaus, perforce did constreine
For to depart, upon a grievous pain:
So The noble mind of Pompee to distressed Princes.
Ptolome received again his crown,
And royal seat, by Pompees high renown.
CAP. 12.
The Civil war between Caesar and Pompee Caesar's quieting, the state of
Egypt, his quick expedition through diverse other countries his attaining to
the Empire.
LIke as two Lions long without their pray,
And coming where they hunger may sustain,
Both being fierce, they will agree no way
In friendly sort, to part the spoil in twain,
High stomackt both, both think the whole to gain,
Do fall at strife, one for the others part,
Where one, or both, do rue their rage with smart.
This civil war which now began to rise
Tweene Caesar stout, and Pompee called the great:
Shows lion like, the grudge that smothring lies
Within the heart, Where revenge takes root, nothing but death can supplant
it.
which canker like does eat:
Until such time revenge, breaks out in heat,
And sets on fire, from smoke unto a flame,
Never extinct without some foul disfame.
This ground whereon this grudge began to grow, Hate will build on a small
ground to be revenged

The cause thus fell, stout Caesar was rejected
Consul to be, until he did bestow
His army, and his office last elected:
But hate has means, that spite shall be detected,
Although small cause important thereto long,
Right set aside, hate works by open wrong.
But this conceit Caesar held in his mind:
To yield his strengthes, then naked should he be,
Where now before, might hap then come behind:
Yet nevertheless, ye yielded to agree,
If Pompee would, release as well as he,
His power also, which Pompee would not yield.
Caesa^.
Hasted to France again, and from the field
Brought on his army, came in Italy:
Took many towns by love, and composition:
Pompee this hearing, with Consuls both did fly,
Caesar pursued, (there was no prohibition)
But ere he came, to make with them condition,
Embarqute they were, on sea board, under sail
And out of sight, might bid to them alhayle.
For want of ships to serve his warlike turn,
He thought not good there long while for to stay:
But back again to Rome made his return
From Durazo, (from whence they fled away)
At Rome held court long after, day by day,
Framing complaints, against those that did him wrong,
And offering peace the Romance state among.
He perceiving the Senate made small count
Of what he spoke, from Rome in have he sped:
And ere it were long at Or Marcellis, a town in in France, lying between
Spain and Italy, on the sea coast.
Marcels did dismount,
Whereas the town against him did make head:
But he by sea an army caus'de be led,
Left it besiegde by water, and by land,
And into Spain did journey out of hand:
Where Pompees captains did unto him render,
With all their forces, at his command to be,
And with them hasted, whereas hope was slender,
At Marseiles town, ere he came sought t'agree
And yield to him, which done, away goes he
To Rome again, and in his absence was
Dictator made, (through fates so brought to pass.)
The people (eke) the more to raise his fame, Partly through fear of further
trouble.

Elect him Consul, with Seruilius marched:
And when he had set every thing in frame,
For public weal, to And Pharsalie where they fought.
Thessalie dispatched,
And there a time to fight, with Pompee watched,
Did him overcome, slew all his power welnie,
Pompee enforst to Egypt for to fly:
Where reigned then, Ptolome his son that late,
(Before rehearst) by Pompees mean who was,
Restorde again into his royal state,
In have by flight Pompee to him did pass,
In hope he would with courtesy (alas)
Requite with aid, and succor, at his need
Him now distressed, for that his former deed:
But he to whom, Pompee this pleasure did,
Was dead, and now this King was but a child,
Who scarcely would to Pompee welcome bid:
Of hope and succor being thus beguilde,
Ingratitude, (who is a monster vilde)
Within the hearts of the Egyptians grew,
Doubting mishap, in treason they him slew.
Vile wretches that durst on him so lay hand,
Whose noble heart relieved your wretched state:
Did you not fear, the breach of league and band
With Romans made, but could ye him so hate
That was your friend, though destiny and fate
Did on him frown, so in his blood t'embrue
Your cruel hands: but you his death shall rue.
Caesar shall not let unrevenged go,
Your barbarous part, though he his enemy be:
The day shall come wherein you shall cry woe,
Ruying your state with wrack, and misery,
For doing of so foul a villainy,
In killing him, the worlds flower chief,
Whom Caesar (lo) bewailes with tears, and grief.
Presenting of his head, think you to find
Pardon, and peace? no, no* Egyptians base
Sprung from the stock of some vile rascal mind:
No marvel though like rogues the world ye trace,
Let not the earth afford you byding place;
But wander ye, as wretches all forlorn,
Your offspring cursed, and those before you borne.
No doubt those plagues shall light upon you all:
The Romans who your kings often succor gave,
Shall raze their seat, and ever after thrall
Their name, and make both king, and queen a slave,
And farther yet, this curse eke shall you have,
Craft, and deceit, and theft shall be your trade,
Until the gallows, end of all have made.
Ah worthy wight, Pompee the Phoenix rare,
Star of the world, before, and ever since:
Both memory, and fame, shall aye declare
Thy noble arts whose prowess did convince, Pomp but young, yet a great
conqueror.

Full many a realm, and province, king, and prince,
At twenty five years age being no more:
What one did ever match thee since, or before.
For noble mind, for valor, bounty love,
Whose good success did raise the Romans state:
For constancy which mishaps could not move,
For honor shew'de to wretched Mythridate,
Himself his race, to many in like state;
Thy virtues blazed thy noble disposition,
But cruel minds, made thereof prohibition.
The stately triumpn Rome did make to thee,
Declare thy fame, when thou did back return
With captiu'de kings conquered, thy victory
As bright as sun, or blazing lamp did burn:
Which sight to see, made them with grief to mourn,
When in a chariot shining bright, all gold,
Set rich with stones, their eis might thee behold.
To sit, There was counted to be in silver 2200. talents, after our account in
money, an infinite some.
and when their scepters, and their crowns,
Their royal roabes, with ornaments, and all
Their stately wealth, their jewels, spoil of towns,
Silver, and gold, with statues high and tall
Of beaten gold, yet more to show their thrall:
Their armours, and their weapons, broad in sight,
They prisoners all, overcome by thee in fight.
Triumphing thus, Besides prisoners there were 314. pledges, children of
Kings, and great Princes of countries by him over come, showed in the triumph,
with the images and pictures of those slain in battle, to represent his
victories.
with much more in like sort,
Romes youth went first, next them the youthful crew
Near man's estate, then followed with great port,
Grave citizens, next Senate did ensue
Clad in their roabes, of color bloody hue:
Many sorts more of people in their place,
Before and after, in triumph then did trace
In order due: Those of his army strong,
Some chief, on horseback, some on foot did go,
Never the like triumph there was among
Romes conquerours, for any overthrow,
That given ws to country, or to foe,
Yet (lo) (alas) such was his destenie,
Hated by friends, and slain by treachery.
What minds have men in honors seat that sit,
High still to clime, not knowing how soon they may
When dread is least in dangers greatest flit,
And being once fallen, soon wither and decay,
On mighty trees grows sundry sorts of spray,
Whose roots turned up, the danger is not small,
When tumbling down comes bark, boughs, twigs, and al.
Pompee even so oreturn'd by cruel fate
By such as should have him their succor lent,
His friends who love did bear unto his state,
Branches, and boughs, firm fixed to him and bent,
Were afterward cut off, scattred, and rent,
As here ensuing shall be showed in place,
If well you note, this high imperial chase.
Caesar pursued, and into Egypt came
With power great, the king that time in arms,
A quarrel had his sisters pride to tame
Cleopatra, (for shunning future harms)
On either part there was ofttimes alarmes,
Which to appease, Caesar did them incite
For him t'appeare, as Judge the cause to right.
In that he was Consul of Roman state:
And for before the former king that did
Did league contract, (assenting to a rate)
The Senate with, in friendship to abide:
But The Egyptians, with disdain did slide
From this offer, took it in great disgrace,
Their king to plead, before a Consuls face.
Whereon in arms they drew them out of hand,
Sought means Caesar, like Pompee to orethrow:
But he withstood them with his warlike band,
In dangers great: yet last did make them know
He Caesar was, for victory did blow
Upon his side, the king dead, he divided
Egypt in two, and thus it was contrived.
Cleopatra, ioynde with her younger brother,
Should both enjoy the state and dignity,
The one to be as mighty as the other,
Subjects to Rome, ever after to be:
This done, Caesar departs, and after he
Transportes his force, and army out of hand,
With speed most swift into Assyria land.
To Pontus next, and there the king orethrew,
Pharnaces nam'de, The greatness of man's mind, atchieueth many enterprises,
thought impossible, which proves true, that a man is but his mind.
the son of Mythridate,
(Rehearst before) and afterward he drew
Armenia too, and quieted that state:
With Gallogreece, assigning them a rate.
Cappadoce, Pont, Bythinia also,
Romes league on pain of death not once forgo.
This done, to Rome fast making his return
The season cold, in winters shortest days:
Desire of rule so made his heart to burn,
Setting a part all manner of delays,
From Rome, to Scicill Isle, and there not stays,
But takes ship and sails to Afrique coast, Cato slew himself at Vtica, a
city in Afrique, for that he would not fall into Caesar's hands.

With great desire t'encounter his enemies host.
Pompees allies: amongst whom, Cato grave
With other more, had raisde an army great
To take their parts, king Iuba, a King in Afrique, his league with Rome.
Iuba they do crave,
Who did consent with them his foot to wet,
In doing of which he was set by his seat:
For Caesar had ore them the victory,
The great'st part slain, the rest away did fly.
When Caesar had ended this chase of wars, In his own person, ere he
attained the sovereignty of Emperor, he had made war in three parts of the
world, viz Asia, Africa and Europe, and from them all, returned victor.

Returning back, triumphing with great spoil,
In every place made peace, and ceast all iarres,
And to his enemies given utter foil:
To Rome he came, and resting now from toil,
He triumph had, and did command each where
The world throughout, all nations did him fear.
Now here behold Romes Empire sovereign,
Whose fame does yet continue to this day:
The name of Caesar still it does retain,
And ever shall until the worlds decay:
The Scriptures by the Prophets so do say,
Interpreted by learned clerks divine: No sooner full sea, but ebb begins.

But now at height, note how it did decline.
CAP. 13.
The wounding to death of Julius Caesar in the Senate house.
WHen blood, Ambition, cause of many miseries.
when fire, when slaughter, spoil and sack,
Throughout the world had run to raise Rome hye,
(Alas) what woe, what misery, and wrack,
(Vile wretchedness, and torments cruelly
Her Empire causde, causles many to dye)
Through treasons used, with subtlety and craft,
And slye deceits since in the world laft.
But richly clad in throne Imperial,
(As Phoebe in skies with majesty does shine)
Caesar did sit, and in his hand the ball,
Or globe did hold, for token or a sign,
(As say he might the world all is mine)
Sole to command, no match or mate had he:
Such was his mind, gaining sole sovereignty.
But here began hate, envy, and disdain,
The Monarch new, Honers seat full of dangers.
his greatness to despise,
His equals late, now vassals, he to reign
Alone, and they, as base before his eyes:
High minds, secret, the furies made to rise*
Not privately pretending of his harms,
Nor publicly banding with men in arms.
But as he in the imperial seat did sit
In parliament, When dread is least, then is danger greatest.
not dreading ought at all,
Pricks forth revenge, his enemies all fit:
The tree high grown with fatal axe to fall,
Least that his boughs, spread large with shade might thrall
Small under trees, and wood that grew him near,
Purpose pursued, they would no longer bear.
Unto him came in number eight or nine,
Each one a dagger, bodkins some do say:
What ere, but there, the thread they began t'vntwine
Of that great A relation to the fourth staff in the first Chapter of this
book.
web, begun so many a day
Before, and now iwoue, begins away
To wear and fret, by piecemeale raged and torn,
As at this day base Bashrags The Turks
do it scorn.
Thus sunk the ship that floted with full sail,
Through storms stird up by furies plagues of hell:
Thus worthy Caesar worlds rule bids alhaile,
Leaving the trumpe of fame, his praise to tell:
His virtue flies, his name, among us to dwell:
Upon this globe what glory more can be,
Virtue, acts, name, left to eternity.
CAP. 14.
The fortunate and prosperous reign of Octauius Augustus Caesar, in whose time
our Savior Christ was borne.
WHen Summers heat, Summer the ripener of al fruits.
with parching flames had burnd
The earths fresh coat, decked sweet by Flora queen,
Whose colors gaye, to russet brown was turned,
Through drought, fire hot, each pleasant field was seen
Bare backed, deep scortcht with chawnes, in steed of green
Ceres vncrownde, her garland withered ripe,
Pan, harvest home to Swains, had played with pipe.
Fruits falling fast Autum the same did hye, Autum, the gatherer and ^orier.

Clear days began to be o'recast with clouds,
Turning to mists, and rain descends the sky:
Birds couerts seek, and beasts together crowdes
Close from the cold, in house by fire shrowdes
The rustique sort, and greater swaynes beside,
Content perforce the winters wrath to bide.
Whilst chilling cold with many a bitter blast,
Disroabes the trees, and bating quight the ground,
When Saturn with his cruel looks does cast
A mantle thick, Winter the destroyer and spender.
the color seen and found
White every where, (but skies black) low all round
This globe upon, and when is depending seen
Trees leau'd with ice, in liew of Summers green.
When whistling winds do sheere the tender skin,
And razor like, piercing, does make a raze
On seely creatures, barely clad, and thin,
Nigh staru'de, with cold, looking with rueful grace,
Do wish the spring to hasten on a pace,
Which does ensue: when Phoebe warm beams does show
His force from high, to dying things below.
Then from his hole the seely fly does creep, Spring the quickner again of
all.

For joy to feel the warmth approaching nigh,
Each creature else, whom winters wrath made weep,
Rejoice clouds past, But this spring, the comfort of all Christians, the
harvest has been long, God grant many good laborers there in, that when Autum
comes, winter following be not sharp.
beholding clear the sky:
Beasts caves, fruits earth, fowls naked bushes fly,
Mounting toward air, and all do seem to sing,
The sweetest time (of all) is in the spring.
Which season chaunst when Caesar's burning sun
And harvest toil, began to end, and drew
Both Autumn, and his winter course in one,
Dispoyling him of all his prime gaynd hue,
Octauius spring began the world anew:
So fresh a spring as never was before
Upon the earth, nor ever shall be more.
Caesar thus slain, his glory laid down low,
His force that late did through the world fly,
Ambitious minds does point, Planting with care and yet not knowing who shall
enjoy that they have toyled for.
and as it were show,
Their vading joy, when they have touched the sky:
Great is their fall, that seek to climb on hie,
Restless their minds, besides their bodies toil,
Consuming time, themselves with cares do spoil.
Octauius, who was Caesar's sisters son,
(The birth of whom recounted is before)
Such love belike had of the soldiers won,
Of Legions he did gather a great store,
Reuengement of his Iu. Caesar.
uncles death he bore
Secret in mind, but seemde, as though that he
Took arms to fight, against Mare Antonie.
In favor of the public state and weal:
But ere it was long, Inconstancy the change of many strange chances.
the empire did divide
With him, and Lepidus, they three to deal
In causes all, before them to be tried:
Triumuirates so called, for to decide
Matters of war, of peace, contention, strife,
What ever else, concerned goods, or life.
Marc Antonie at this time bare such sway,
As by his power he gave commandment,
Marcus Tullius Cicero, for to slay,
Who late in wars with power against him went:
(This same was he that was so eloquent)
But now behold how envy sowed seed,
Quarrels between the Triumuirates to breed:
For Lepidus, deposde his office fro,
Upon suspicion of some treachery, Discention cause of destruction.

Esteemed Octauius for his mortal foe:
Reuengde to be, drew to him Antonie,
To Egypt-ward they both in have did fly,
Where Antonie took after unto wife
Cleopatra, which bred foul hate and strife.
Cupid (blind god) the Romans heart did wound, Liking and lust cause of
dishonor

At sight of this Egyptian (stately dame)
Agreeing both, convenient time was found,
To quench desires heat, and burning flame:
Strange may it seem to some, the noble fame
These two lived in, with honor, wealth at will,
All pleasures sought, their minds for to fulfill.
Fine sumptuous feasts, delights, with triumpes brave:
What dainty thing was thought on, was not had:
Gold, pearl, stone, attire, that heart could crave,
Nothing did want, that might their minds make glad,
Sportes were deuisde, t'expell all causes sad,
This life they led: but Antonie to blame
For one part played, which wrought his end with shame.
Octauius sister he had espousde before:
Casting her off, the egyptian took to wife,
Which now at last grew to a canker sore,
A cause that moved Caesar unto strife:
When Antonie, amidst this pleasant life*
With his rich queen of Egypt wearing crown:
Dread set apart, fortune began to frown Sweet meat will have sower sauce

Caesar his army into Egypt lead:
Egyptians force the Romans made to fly,
Have and away, who fast did run best sped,
Cleopatra, and her brave Antonie,
Their high estate brought down by destiny:
Force, Delights with carelesnes, bringes wrack and wretchedness.
and hope, faylde, their welfare to regaine,
Excess was turned, to penury and pain.
Recalling both their former lives to count,
Now feeling want, relief to them was strange:
No hope again, unto their state to mount,
Despair throughout their senses all did range,
Working vile means, their wretched lives to change,
With grief of which, so nipped both their hearts,
As loathing life, the same to death impartes.
The Empire sole Octauius then did sway;
Antonie dead, peace through the world was:
Forty four years, Christ's birth, the spring of our joys.
he reigned day by day,
And in the twentieth nine, it came to pass
That Jesus Christ, our only Messiah
Was borne, (for us) of a pure virgin,
Our souls from hell, for to redeem and win.
The Monarch now long resting without war,
Nation not any durst once strive against Romes state,
By sea, or land, near hand, or yet a far.
The first that did, were Germans full of hate,
People that time, loving strife and debate:
But subjects Caesar brought them under yoke,
So fortunate he was, and bare such stroke.
Some say that often reuoluing in his mind,
The burden great of government he bare,
Determind once, the same to have assignde
To others, to discharge him of that care:
But private being, knew not how it would fare,
To lead that life might be unto him strange,
Doubting besides of Romes estate the change,
Of noble mind, The praise of Augustus.
with virtues fully fraught
Peace to observe, both liberal, bounty, free
To learned men, Constancy in virtue, makes old age long happy.
who virtue, sought, and taught:
For in his time, most higest in degree
And perfect fine, (it is written for to be)
The Latin tongue, but now corrupt, vnpure
To that was then, which we have now in ure.
When as the term of forty four years
Expired was, Caesar at utmost date
Of life, did leave (as by record appears)
In quiet peace his high Imperial state,
A thing (no doubt) ordainde before by fate
So for to be, for good of all mankind,
As learned clerks in holy writ do find.
CAP. 15.
The reign of Tyberius next Emperor.
OCtauius dead, (whose name Augustus was)
Next did succeed Tyberius to the state,
His son adopt, and kinsman in like case:
It Is said the Senate humbly did him treat,
(Unwilling for to rule, his brains to beat,)
To take the state on him, at last agreede:
During whose reign, there chaunst not worthy deed.
Which was for profit of the public wealth:
But left unto the Senate all the care,
Seeing himself in rich estate, and health,
Bent whole his mind to quiet life and fare,
Occasion great the empire did appaire:
For now both Parthia, Denmark, Poland, France,
With other more, against Rome did advance.
Thus may we see when as the flood is full,
It falls again: so fares all worldly haps,
Fruits first be ripe, before men do them pull:
In seasons fair, sudden comes thunderclaps:
In midst of joys, grief all our mirth vpwraps;
And now behold of Rome the morning shine,
Past midday mark, begins for to decline.
Divines do hold, Christ's death, our comfortable harvest, God grant us grace
to gather thereby fruits, that in winter we dye not, but live
that in the fifteenth year
Tyberius raignd, our Savior Jesus Christ
Did suffer death, (to make us sinners clear,
To dwell with him that sits in throne most highest,
Who helps us aye, when dangers we be nighest)
Whose Empire stands, and ever shall endure,
When worlds pomp still fleeteth, never sure.
CAP. 16.
The reign of Caligula.
Caligula.
TYberius son, Caligula so calde
Succeeded next, a most pernicious child,
Unto all vice he was a bondslaue thralde,
Most fit to dwell with savage men and wild,
A life he led, that wicked was and vilde:
Great heaps of gold, Tyberius in his reign
Had got, he spent in one year, lewd and vain.
Claudius.
Claudius next him supposde his uncle, The Brytaines revolt from Romes
government.
he
Came to England, reduced again that land
That did revolt, from Romans sovereignty,
The Britains did resist him with strong hand:
But he orecame them with his Roman band, Gloucester, so Claudius Cae^ar.

And ere from thence did part, (unto his fame)
A city built, and calde it by his name.
Nero.
NExt him ensued Nero, when once again
The Britons bold began to war anew; Virtue builds, vice plucketh down.

The Romans they did pill, and put to pain:
In France the Frenchmen also them orethrew:
A mighty wind in many countries blew,
In Syria, and also Armen^,
Their forces most, were beat and shronk away.
Last out of Spain old Galba did retire,
Drawn on by Who was governor of a province in France, for the Romans wrote
letters into Spain. The only decay of the Empire was civil discord.
Julius Vindex, who from France
Persuaded him to Caesar's seat aspire,
(See how Ambition mortal minds do lance)
He was content, though old, (to follow chance)
Did march to Rome, upon whose coming fled
Nero, who was most wretchedly found dead.
Whose story full at large may well be seen,
In Tacitus in English fine translate,
A worthy present for a King, or Queen,
For noble Peers, or others of high state:
His praise deserved, Virtues praise never dies.
shall never come too late,
Who did so well, in English it reduce
For high degree, to serve for public use.
Where is described Nero his monstrous life:
A commonwealth, and state, in pieces torn:
Where may be seen, Whose increase is mighty now a days.
what fruits do come of strife,
How broods of vice, each quiet state does scorn,
And seek to ruin: but subjects truly borne
Fly civil discord, bringing woes and spoils:
Most foul are fowls their own nests that befiles.
FINIS.

