Here after follow(...) the hystorye of Gesta-Romanorum.





Sometime there dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor, which had a fair creature
to his doughtar named Atle^ta, whom diverse great lords and many noble
knights desired to have to wife. This Atle^ta was wounders swyfte on foot,
wherefore such a law was ordained yt no man should have her to wife but such
as might over run her and take her by strength of foot. And so it befell
that many came and ran with her, but she was so swyfte that no (...) course
of reunynge. At ye last (...) Pomeys unto her father and said to him thus (...)
lord if it might please you to give me your daughter to wife, I will gladly
run with her. Than said her father, there is such a law ordained and set,
that who so will have her to wife, must first run with her, and if he fail
in his course, yt he overtake her not, he shall lose his heed, and if it
fortune him to overtake her, than shall I wedde her unto him. And wha^ the
Emperor had told him all the peril that might* fall in ye winning of her,
the knight wylfully granted to abide that ieopardye. Than the knight let
ordeyne him three balls of gold against the rennynge. And when they had begone
to renew a lyttel spare, the young lady over ran him, than ye knight threw
forth before her the first ball of gold. And when the damoysell saw ye bal
she stouped and took it up, and that while the knight wanne before her, but
that auayled little, for wha^ she perceived that, she ran so fast that in
short space she gate before him again. And than he threw forth the second
hall of gold, and she stouped as she did before to take it up, and in that
while the knight wanne before her again, which this young damoysell seeing
constrained herself and ran so fast, till at the last she had him at a
vauntage again, and was before him, and by that time they were nygh the mark
where they should abide, wherefore ye knight threw forth ye third ball before
her, and like as she had done before s^ouped down to take up the ball, and
while she was in taking up the third ball the knight gate before her, and was
first at the mark. And thus was she won.

By this Emperor is understand the father of heaven; and by this damoysell is
understand the soul of man, with whom many deuylles desire to run, and to
deceive her through their te^ptacyons, but she wythstandeth them myghtyly and
overcomes them. And when they have done their power, and may not speed than
make they three balls of gold, and casts them before her in the three ages of
man, that is to say, in youth, in manhood, and in old age. In youth he
casts the ball of lechery before her, that is to say, the desire of the
flesh, nevertheless for all this ball oftentimes man overcomes the devil
by confession, contrycyon and satisfaccyon. The second ball is the ball of
pride, the which the devil casts to man in his manhood, that is to say, in
his myddle age, but this ball man oftentimes overcomes as he did ye first.
But let him beware of the third ball, which is ye ball of couetyse that the
devil casts to man in his old age, which is dredefull. For but if a man
may ouerco^me this ball with these other two, he shall lose his honor, that is
to say, the kingdom of heaven. For when man brenneth in couetyse, he thinks
not on goostly richesse, for ever his heart is set on woorldly goods, and
recketh not of prayers ne of alms deeds, and thus leseth he his heritage, to
ye which god has bought him with his pre^yous blood, unto the which our
lord Jesus Christ bring both you and me and al mankind. Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise named Anselme,
which bare in his arms a shield of silver with five reed roses. This Emperor
had three sons, whom he loved much, he had also contynuall war with the
king of Egypt, in the which war he lost all his temporal goods, except
a virtuous tree. It fortuned after on a day that he gave battle to ye said
king of Egypt, wherein he was grievously wounded. Nevertheless he opteyned the
vyctory, notwythstandynge he had his deedly wound, wherefore while he lay in
point of death he called unto him his eldest sone and said. My most dear and
well-beloved sone, al my temporal richesse I have spente and almoost nothing is
left me, except a virtuous tree the which stands in the mids of mine
Empire, I give to the all that is under the earth and above ye earth of ye same
tree. O my reverent father (quod he) I thank you much. Than said the emperor,
call to me my second sone. Anon his eldest sone greatly gladded of his fathers
gift called in his brother, and when he came than said the emperor. My dear
sone (quod he) I may not make my testament for as much as I have spent all my
goods, except a tree which stands in mine Empire, of the which tree I
bequethe to the all that is great and small. Than answered he and said. My
reverent father I thank you much. Than said ye Emperor, call to me my third
sone, and so it was done. And wha^ he was come, the Emperor said. My dear
sone I must dye of these wounds, and I have but only a virtuous tree, of the
which I have bequethed thy brethren their porcyon, and to the I bequethe thy
porcyon, for I will that thou have of the said tree all that is wete and dry.
Than said his sone. Father I thank you. Soon after that ye Emperor had made
his bequest he dyed. And the eldest sone anon took season of the tree. When
the second brother herd this, he said My brother, by what law or tytel
occupy ye this tree. Dear brother quod he I occupy it by this tytell, my father
gave me all that is under the earth and above of the said tree, and therefore by
reason this tree is mine. Unknowynge to the quod the second brother, he gave
me all that is in bread, length and depnes of the said tree, and therefore I
have as great* right in ye tree as thou. This hearing the third sone came to
them and said. O ye my best beloved brethren, it behooves you not to strive
for this tree, for as much right have I in this tree as ye, for well ye wot
by ye law, that the last will and testament ought to stand, for sothly he
gave me of the said tree all that is wete and dry, and therefore by right the
tree is mine, but for as much as your tales ben great, and mine also, my
counsel is that we be iustyfyed by reason, for it is not good nor commendable
that any strife or dyssencyo^ should be among us. Here beside dwells a king
of reason, for it is not good to strive, go we there unto him, and eueryche of
us lay his right before him and like as he will judge, let us stand to his
judgment. Than said his brethren, this counsel is good, wherefore they went
all three unto the king of reason, and eueryche of them syngularly showed sorth
his right unto him, like as it is said before. When ye king had ^erde their
tytels, he rehearsed them all again ^yngularly, first saying to the eldest sone
thus. Thou say for the quod the king that thy father gave the all that is
under the earth and above the earth of the said tree. And to the second brother
he bequethed all that is in bread length and depnes of that tree. And to the
third brother he gave all that is wete and dry. And with that he laid the
law for them, and said that the last will ought to stand. Now my dear sons,
breuely I shall satisfye all your reasons. And when he had thus said, he
turned him unto ye eldest brother, saying thus. My dear sone if the list to
abide ye judgment, of right the behooves to be letten blood of the right arm.
My lord quod he your will shall be done. Than called the king forth a dyscrete
physycyon, co^mau^dyng him to let him blood. When the eldest sone was thus
letten blood, the king said to them all three. My dear sons quod he where is
your father buried. Than answered they and said. Forsothe my lord in such a
place. Anon the king commanded to delue up the body, and to draw out a bone
of his breast, and to bury the body again, and so it was done. And when the
bone was drawn out, the king commanded that it should be laid in the blood
of the elder brother, and that it should lie till it had received kyndly the
blood, and than to be laid in ye son and dried, and after that it should be
wasshen with clear water, his servants fulfilled all that he commanded. And
when they began to wasshe the blood vanysshed clean away. When the king saw
this, he said to the second sone. It behooves yt thou be letten blood as thy
brother is. Than said he. My lord thy will shall be fulfilled, and anon he
was served like as his brother was in all thing, and when they began to wasshe
the bone, the blood vanysshed away. Than said the king to the third sone. My
dear child it behooves the also to be letten blood. He answered and said. My
lord it pleases me well so to be. When ye youngest brother was letten blood,
and served in all thing like as his two brethren were served before, when ye
kings servants began to wasshe ye bone, they might neither for washing ne
for fretynge do away the blood of the bone, but ever it appeared blody. When the
king saw this he said. It appears openly yt this blood without doubt is of
the nature of this bone, thou art his true sone, and these other two ben
bastardes, I give to the that tree for evermore.

Dear fre^des this Emperor is our lord Jesus christ which bare a sheelde of
silver with five reed roses, that is ta say, his body that is so fair so
clear and more radiant than any silver, according with psalmist saying thus.
Speciosus forma pre filijs hominu^. That is to say, he was more special and
fayrer of shape than all ye children of men. By these.v. roses we understand
his five wounds, which he suffered for mankind. And by the king of Egypt we
understand the devil, against whom he fought all the time of his life, and
at the last he was slain for mankind. Nevertheless before his death he made
his testament to his three sons. By the first to whom he gave of the tree all
that was under ye earth and above, we shall understand the mighty men and
states of this world, to whom he has given power in earth, in water and in
air, so that they be obedyent at their will, and all thing under heaven. By
the second sone to whom he gave ye tree in lenght, bread and depnes, we may
understand the wytty men of this world, as Justices, atturneys and men of
law, these men have power in length, bread and depnes upon gentylmen of
myddle degree, and upon poor men, them to deem and judge as they list. By ye
third sone to whom he gave all that was wete and dry of the tree, we shall
understand good christen men, which have and suffer both wete an dry, that
is to say, now pouerte, now trouble, now solace, now care, now cold, now hete,
and all this they receive of god thankfully to have this noble tree yt was thus
bequethed them. This tree is the tree of paradyse, yt is to say, everlasting
iaye of heaven which is given to us all, if we will take it thankfully,
nevertheless it is heaven in diverse wise, and not egally, for some has more,
and some has less, after their merytes, this notwithstanding every man
opteyneth not, therefore it behooves them to go unto ye king of reason, that is
to say, unto the father of heaven, that knows all thing or they be made. The
first sone was let blood and in his blood the bone was wrapped. By this blood
we shall understand our merytoryous deeds, and by the white and heavy alms
deed which is full heavy to the^ that give alms, nevertheless it makes the
soul white, wherefore when these mighty men give alms, or do a merytoryous
deed, though it be made dry and stablysshed with the son, and by the wind
of dyuyne predicacyon, nevertheless when the water of pride, envy, wrath, and
such other, all the merytoryous deeds done before is brought to naught, and
the blood, that is to say the alms deeds by ye which they should come to
everlasting life, begins to vanysshe away. For why as the apostle says,
he that offends in one sin, is gylty in all. This blood letter which let
them blood is a discrete confessor, though the mighty men of this world do
good deeds and fulfill their penance, nevertheless when the water of couetyse,
that is to say, when the purse is full of money anon they give true
judgment, against whom it is written thus. The wisdom of this world is
nothing else but folly before god And against the mighty men of this world
speaks holy scripture and says. Where be those mighty men which were praised
among the birds of heaven, eat and drink, and often descended to hell. The
third sone of this Emperor is a good christen man, which all the time of his
life did good deeds, and lived without pride, envy and lechery, from the bone
of such a man the blood may not be wasshen away, that is to say, his
merytoryous deeds may not be put away from penance, such a man is ye true
child of god, of whom our lord speaks thus. Ye the which have forsaken all
thing for me, all, that is to say, ye that have forsaken the will of sin,
shall receive an ho^dred times more, that is to say, ye shall not only
receive the tree of paradyse, but also the heritage of heaven. These two other
sons ben bastardes, for why, that they behote in their baptym they wrought all
the contrary through their wicked living. And therefore he that desires to
obtain the joys of heaven, him behooves to abide steadfastly in werkynge of
good works, and than by reason may he obtain the tree of paradyse, unto the
which that lord bring us which lives and regneth eternally world
wythouten end. Amen.

IN Rome there dwelled sometime a noble Emperor named Dyoclesia^, which above
all worldly goods loved the virtue of charity, wherefore he desired greatly to
know what foul loved her birds best to the intent that he might thereby grow
to more perfyte charity. It fortuned after upon a day that this Emperor
walked to the forest to take his dysporte, where as he found the nest of a
great bird that is called in latin strutio with her bird, the which bird
the emperor took with him, and closed him in a vessel of glass. The mother of
this little bird followed after unto ye Emperors place, and entered into the
hall where her bird was closed. But when she saw her bird and might by no
means come to her, ne get her out, she returned again to ye forest, and
there she abode three days and at ye last she returned again to ye palace,
bearyng in her mouth a worm that is called thumare. When she came where her
bird was, she let the worm fall upon ye glass, through virtue of which worm
ye glass brake, and the bird escaped and s^ewe forth with his mother. When
the emperor saw this, he praised much ye mother of this bird, which so
dylygently labored for the delyueraunce of her bird.

My friends this Emperor is the father of heaven, which greatly loves them
that been in perfyte love and charity. This little bird closed in the glass and
taken fro the forest was Adam our forefather, which was exiled fro paradyse,
and put in the glass, that is to say, in hell. This hearing the mother of the
bird, that is to wit, the sone of god descended fro heaven and came to the
forest of the world, and lived here three days and more, bearyng with him a
worm, that is to say, manhood according with the psalmyst, saying. Ego sum
vermis etno^ homo. That is to say, I am a worm and no man. This manhood was
suffered to be slain among the jews, of whose blood ye vessel eternal was
broken, and the bird went out, that is to say* Adam went forth with his
mother the sone of god and flewe unto heaven.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a worthy emperor and a wise, which had a fair
daughter and a gracyous in the sight of every man. This Emperor bethought him
on a day to whom he might give his daughter in marriage, saying thus. If I
give my daughter to a rich man, and he be a fool than is she lost and if I
give her to a poor man and a wytty, than may he get his living for him and
her by his wisdom. There was that time dwelling in the cite of Rome a
philosopher named Socrates, poor and wise, which came to the emperor and said.
My lord displease you not though I put forth my petycyon before your hyghnes
The Emperor said, what so ever pleases the tell forth Than said Socrates. My
lord ye have a daughter whom I desire above al thing. The Emperor answered and
said. My friend I shall give the my daughter to wife upon this condicyon, that
if she dye in thy felawshyp after that she be wedded to the, thou shalt
wythouten doutelese thy heed. Than said Socrates. Upon this condicyon I will
gladly take her to be my wife. The Emperor hearing this, let call forth all ye
lords and states of his Empire, and made a great feast at their wedding. And
after ye feast Socrates led home his wife to his own house, where as they
lived in peace and health long time. But at the last this Emperors daughter
syckned to death. When Socrates perceived this, he said to him self. Alas and
woo to me, what shall I do, and whether shall I flee, if themperours daughter
that is my wife should dye, and for sorrow this Socrates went to a forest
there beside and wept bytterly. The while he thus wept and mourned there came
an aged man bearyng a staff in his hand, and asked ye cause of Socrates why
he mourned. Socrates answered and said. I wedded themperours daughter upon
this co^dycyon, yt if she dyed in my fellowship, I should lose my life, now she
is syckened unto the death, and I can find no remedy nor help, and therefore I
mourn more than any creature can think. Than said the old man be ye
comforted, for I shall be your helper, if ye will do after my counseyle. In
this forest be three herbs, if ye make a drink of the first to your wife, and
of the other two a plaester, and if she use this medicynall drink and plaester
in due time, without doubt she shall recover to perfyte health. Socrates
fulfilled al as the old man had taught him. And wha^ his wife had used a while
that medicynall drink and pleaster, within short time she was perfytly hole
of al her sycknes. And when the Emperor herd that Socrates wrought so
wisely, and how dylygently he labored for to heal his wife he promoted him to
great dyngnyte and worship.

Dear fre^des this Emperor is our lord Jesus christ his daughter so fair and
so gracyous is the soul, made at the similitude of god, which is full gracyous
and glorious in the sight of him and of his angels, while that she is not
defouled and abides in her own propre clennesse. This soul god would not
give it to a rich man but to a poor man, that is to say, a man that is made
of the slyme of the earth. This Socrates is a poor man for why, every man
comes poor and naked in to this world from his mothers belly, and every man
takes his soul in wedlock upon such co^dicyon, that if she dye in his
felawshyp by deedly sin, without doubt he shall lose eternal life. Therefore o
thou man if thy wife sycken so through deedly sin, do tha^ as Socrates did go
unto the forest, that is holy church, and thou shalt find there an old man
with a sta^^e, that is a discrete confessor, which shall tell the of these
three herbs, for he has power to bind and to unbind. The first herb is
contricyon, of whom thou sholdest make thy drink of tears. Ambrose says
that tears wassheth away sin, where shame is to knowledge it, and these two
other herbs ben confession and satysfaccyon, if these herbs be used in
plaester, the sinner without doubt shall receive his health, and his soul
shall be delivered from sin, and by all right he shall have everlasting life.
Unto the which bring us our lord Jesus.

Sometime there reigned in Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise named Frederyke,
which had an only sone, whom he loved much. This Emperor when he lay at
the point of death, he called unto him his sone and said. Dear sone I have a
ball of gold which I give the upon my blessyng, that thou anon after my death
shall give it to the most fool that thou may find. Than said his sone. My
lord wothout doubt your will shall be fulfilled. Anon this young lord after
the death of his father went and sought in many realms and found many recheles
fools, because he would satysfye his fathers will labored farther till he
came in to a realm where the law was such, that every year a new king was
chosen there, and this king had only the guydynge of ye realm but a year, and
at the years end he was deposed and put in exile in an ylande, where as he
should wretchedly fynysshe his life. When themperours sone came to this realm
the new king was chosen with great honor, and all manner of mynstralsye went
before him, and brought him with great reverence and worship unto his regal
sete. And when the Emperors sone saw that, he came unto him and salewed him
reverently and said. My lord loo I give the this ball of gold on my fathers
behalf. Than said he I pray the tell me the cause why thou gyuest me this
ball. Tha^ answered this young lord and said. My father charged me in his death
bed upon pain of forfeytynge of his blessing, that I should give this ball
of ye most fool ye I could find, wherefore I have sought many realms, and
have found many fools, nevertheless a more fool than thou art found I
never, and therefore this is the reason. It is not unknown to the that thou
shall regne but a year, and at the years end thou shalt be exiled into such
a place where as thou shalt dye a myscheuous death, wherefore I hold the for
the most fool that ever I found, that for the lordshyp of a year thou
would so wylfully lose thy self, and therefore before all other I have given
to the this ball of gold. Than said the king, without doubt thou say sothe
and therefore when I am in full power of this realm I shall send before me
great treasoure and richesse wherwyth I may live and save my self from my
scheuous death when I shall be exiled and put down. And so this was done,
wherefore at the years end he was exiled, and lived there in peace upon such
goods as he had sent before, and he dyed afterward a good death.

Dear friends this Emperor is the father of heaven the which byquethed the
ball, that is to say, worldly richesse to fools and ydyottes, which
sauoureth no thing but that is erthly. This Emperors sone, that is to say, a
precher and a discrete confessor serched about many realms and lands to
show to mysbyleuing men and fools their peril. The realm wherein no king
might regne but a year is this world. For who so had lived an hundred year,
when he comes to the deeth him shall seem that he has lived but the space of
an hour, therefore do as the king did, while that ye be in power of life send
before you your treasour, that is to say, alms deed and other merytoryus
deeds, and certainly wha^ ye be put in exile out of this world, ye shall live
in peace, and shall find ye mercy of god plentefull, whereby ye shall obtain
everlasting life. Unto the which bring us he, that for us dyed on the rode
tree. Amen.

DIoclesyan reigned in the cite of Rome, in whose empire dwelled a noble
philosopher, ye which let up by his craft an image in the mids of ye ^ite of
Rome, the which image stretched out his arm and his formest finger, whereupon
stood this posy written in latin. Percute hic. Smite here. This image after the
death of this philosopher stood still a long time, and many great clerks came
thither for to read the superscripcyon that was on ye finger, but none of them
understood what it mente, wherefore there was great wondering among the
people. And at the last a long time after there came a strange clerk out of
far countries, and when he saw this image he read ye scripture Smite here.
And than upon a day when he saw the shadow of the hand, he took a mattocke
and brake up ye ground under the hand where the shadow was, according to the
understanding of the superscripcyon, and anon he found an house al of marble
underneath the grouode, wherein he entered, and came in to a hall, where he
found so much richesse, so many yewelles, and so great meruayles that he
never saw ne herd of such nor so many before that time. At ye last he saw a
board covered, and all manner of things necessary thereto set there upon. He be
held farther and saw a carbuncle in a wall that lyghtened all ye house. And
anenst this carbuncle on that other side stood a man holding in his hand a
bow with an arowe ready to shote. The clerk merualled much when be saw all
these things, and thought in himself, if that I t^ll this forth there will no
man believe me, and therefore I will have somewhat of these goods in token of
proof. And with that he saw a knyfe of gold upon ye board, which he took and
would have put it in his bosom. But anon the archer smote the carbuncle and
brake it, wherwyth all the hole house was shadowed and made dark. And when ye
clerk perceived it, he wept more bytterly than any man might think, for he
wist not by what way he might go out, for as much as the house was made dark
through the brekynge of the carbuncle. And that darkness abode still for
evermore after. And so fynisshed the clerk his life there in that darkness.

Dear friends this image so standing is the devil which says evermore. Smite
here. That is to say take heed to erthly ryche^se, and not to heavenly
treasour. This clerk that smote with the mattocke betokens the wise men of
this world, as pleders of ye law, atturneys, and other wordly men that ever
be smytyng what by right and what by wrong, so yt they may get the vanytees
of this world, and in their smiting they find great wonders and meruayles,
that is to say, they find therein the delytes of the world, wherein many men
reioyseth. The carbuncle that gives light is the youth of man, which gives
hardynes to take their pleasure in worldly richesse. The archer with his arowe is
death, which lays watch anenst man to slay him. The clerk that took up ye
knyfe is every wordly man that weneth ever to have all thing at his will. Death
smyteth the carbuncle, that is to say youth, strength and power of man, and
than lies he wrapped in darkness of sin* in which darkness oftentimes he
dies. Therefore study we to flee the world and his desires, and than shall we
be sure to win everlasting life, unto the which Jesus bring both you and
me. Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Tytus, a wise man and a
dyscrete, which ordained in his days such a law, that what knight dyed in
his empire, should be buried in his armure, and who so ever presumed to spoil
any knights armure after he were deed, he should dye without any withstandyng
or gaynsaying. It befell after within few years that a cite of ye empire was
besyeged of themperours enemies, wherefore that cite was in peril of lesyng*
for n^ne that was within that cite might not defend^ themself by no manner of
craft, therefore great sorrow and lamentacyon was made through out all ye cite.
But at the last win few days there came to the cite a young knight and a fair
and doughty to do deeds of arms, whom the worthy men of the cite beholding
and understanding his doughtynes^^, cried with one voice. O thou most noble
knight, we beseech the if it please thy worthynesse to help us now at our most
need, loo ye may so this cite in is peril of lesynge. Than answered he and
said. (...) ye not syrs th^^ I have none armure, and if I had armure I would
gladly defend your cite. This ^earynge a mighty man of the cite said to him in
secret wise. Sir here was sometime and doughty knight which now is deed and
buried within this cite ac^or^dynge to the law, and if it please you to take
his armure ye might defend this cite and deliver us fro peril, and that shall
be honor unto you and profit unto all the empire. When this young knight had
herd this, he went to the grave and took ye armure and arrayed him self
therwyth, and fought myghtyly against his enemies, and at the last he opteyned
and had the vyctory, and delivered ye cite from peril. And when he had so
done, he put the armure again in to the grave. There were some men in the cite
that had great indignacion and envy at him, because he had opteyned the
vyctory, and accused him to the judge, saying thus. Sir a law was made by
the emperor, yt who so ever despoyled a deed knight of his armure should dye,
this young knight found a deed knight and took away his armure, therefore we
beseech ye that thou proceed in the law against him, as against him yt is
breker of ye law. When the Justice herd this, he made ye knight to be taken
and to be brought a fore him. And wha^ he was examyned of this trespace against
the law, he said thus. Sir it is written in the law* that of two harms the
leest is to be chosen, it is not unknown to you that this cite was in peril
to be lost, and but I had taken this armure I had neither saved you ne the
cite, therefore me thinks ye ought rather to honor and worship me for this
good deed that I have done, than thus shamefully to repreue me, for I am led
as he that is ready to be hanged, and also good syrs an other reason I may lay
for mine excuse. He yt steleth or robs vyolently, purposes not to restore
ye thing that he robs, but it is not thus with me, for though I took the
armure of the deed knight for your salvation, when I had opteyned the victory I
bare it again to ye same place, and so the deed knight has that is his by the
law. Than said the Justice, a thief that breketh a house that he may stele and
bear away such as he may find, and though he bring again that he has taken,
I ask of the if that the brekyng of the house be lawful or not. The knight
answered, sometime the brekynge of an house may be good, where as it is made in
feeble place, which should cause the lord of the house to make his wall
stronger, that the thieves after ye break not the walls so lightly in auoydyng
of more harm. Than said the Justice, if the brekyng of the house be good,
nevertheless in that brekyng violence is done to the lord of the house. And so
though thou dydest good with the armure of ye deed knight, nevertheless thou
dydest wrong to the deed knight in taking away his armure. The knight said, I
have told you how that of two harms the leest is to be chosen, and that harm
where through great goodness comes, ought not to be called harm, but it should
rather be called good. For if that any house within the cite were on fire and
began to brenne, it were more better to throw it to the ground and three or
four houses thereby, than they should be set on fire, also whereby all ye cite
might be burnt. Right so, if the armure often ye deed knight had not ben taken
the cite and ye all had been lost. And when the Justice herd yt he answered so
well and so reasonably, he might give no judgment against him. But the which
had accused this knight slew him, for whose death there was great weeping through
out all the cite, and his body was worshypfully buried in a nee^ tomb.

Dear friends this Emperor is the father of heaven and this cite is ye world,
the which is besyeged of the devil and deedly sin. And as many as were
within this cite, were al in peril to be lost. This young knight that came to
the cite, is our lord Jesus Christ, which had not the armure of our manhood
till he went to the grave, that is to say, to the womb of ye glorious vyrgyn
Mary: by the annu^ciacyon of the angel, saying The holy ghost shall light in
the. etc. Lo thou shall conceive and bear a sone. And thus in the womb of the
vyrgyn he took the armure of ye deed knight, that is to say he took the manhood
of Adam ourfore father, and saved the cite, that is the world with mankind
from peril by his blessed passion which he suffered on the cross, and than he
put his armure again in to ye grave when his blessed body was buried, but ye
cytezyns enuyed him, that is to say, the jews of Jury accused him to Pylate,
and laid the law against him, saying. If thou suffer him thus, thou art not
the Emperor Cesars friend, we have a law and after ye law he ought to dye.
And thus our lord Jesus Christ of his enemies was condemned to the death of
the cross, and after ascended up to heaven, where our lord Jesus bring us all.
Amen.

THere reigned sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor and a wysed named Betolde,
which ordained a law, that what woman were taken in anoutry her husband
being alive, she should be cast in to perpetual prison. There was that time a
knight that had a sayre lady to his wife, which did a^outry her husband
being alive, and was with child, therefore by ye (...) in prison, where within
short time after she was delivered of a fair sone. This child grew up till
he was.vij. year old, his mother daily wept hertely. And when the child
herd this he said to his mother. O mother why weep ye thus, and for what cause
is your body thus turmented. Than said his mother. O thou my sweet sone, I have
great cause to mourn, and thou also, for above our hedes is people walkyng,
and ye son shyneth in clerenes, and great solace have all men yt are above
us, and we be here contynually in such darkness that I may not se the, ne thou
me, alas that ever I conceived the. Than said ye sone such joy ne such light
as ye speak of saw I never, for I was borne here in this darkness, therefore if
I had meat and drink enough, here would I live all the days of my life,
therefore mother weep ye not, but show me solace. This lame^tacyon that was
between the mother and the sone, herd themperours steward that stood abo^^
their hedes, whereof he had great compassion, and went unto ye Emperor, and
knelyng besought him of his grace, that the mother and the sone might be
delivered out of prison. The Emperor as a merciful lord granted yt they
should be delivered. Nevertheless if they trespaced so in time to come, they
should be punysshed with double pain, and after that they were delivered, this
woman ended her life in that cite.

Dear friends this Emperor is the father of heaven that made this law that
what wedded woman, that is to say, what soul that is wedded to our lord and
does auoutry, that is to say, deedly sin, should be cast in ye prison of
hell, therefore a sinful soul has great cause to weep, for she is departed
from light, that is to say, from the joys of heaven. Her sone that desired
meat and drink, ben the mighty men of this world, that say to the prelates
of the church and to the prechers yt preche unto them the joys of heaven, that
while we may live and have all ye solace of ye world, we desire none other
heaven. The steward that herd their lamentacyon is our lord Jesus, that
knows all the preuytees of our hertes and contricyon of our sins, besought
the father of heaven for us, that we might be delivered from the prison of
sin, and that we might come to everlasting life, to the which bring us our
lord Jesus. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled an Emperor named Pomper, which above all other
things was mercyful. This Emperor let cry through our al his empire a great
feast, and that poor and rich should come to this feast. And who so ever
came to that feast should not only be well fed, but also he should have
great gifts. When the herawde had warned all manner of men to comme to this
feast, at ye time there were two poor men lyenge by the way, that one was
lame and that other was blind. This blind man said to the lame man. Alas and
woo to me and the, how shall we do, for the emperor has let cry a feast, and
who so ever comes there shall not only be well fed, but also he shall have
great gifts, and I am blind, and thou art lame, how shall we do. What said
the lame man to the blind man, I shall tell the good counseyle, if ye will do
after me, thou shalt let for nothing, I am lame and feeble and may not go,
nevertheless I may se, and thou art blind and strong and may not se, take
thou me upon thy back and bear me, and I shall led the the right way, and
thus shall we both come to themperours feast. Than said the blind, after thy
counseyle let us do, come on my ba^k and I shall bear the, and thou shall led
me the right way, and so they did that they came both to that feast, and
received great rewards and gifts among other men. And thus ended their
lives in peace.

Dear ^rendes this Emperor is our savior Jesus Christ, that let cry a
general feast, that is to say, the joys of heaven, unto ye which joys he
calls all mankind, and forsakes ii^ man that will come unto him. This lame
man betokens the prelates of the church prechers and confessors that have
nothing of their own, but lyuen by techynge and alms of other men. And this
blind man betokens the lay men which know not the right way to heaven. It
behooves that the blind man, that is to say, the lay men to bear the lame
man, that is to say, the prelates of the church susteynynge and fedyng them
with the tythyng of alms and other oblacyons, than the prelates be beholden to
teache and to inform us the way to heaven, where as we shall not only have a
feast, but also great reward and joy, unto the which god bring us all. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled an Emperor named Follyculus, the which was right
wise, merciful and ryghtfull in all his works. This Emperor builded in the
eest a noble cite, wherein he put all his treasour and precious stones and
richesse to be kept. Unto this cite the way was stony and full of brymbles
and sharp thorns, and three knights were armed ready to fight with them that
would come to that cite. Therefore the emperor ordained that who so ever
overcame these knights, should enter the cite, and take at his will of
themperours treasour. After that this Emperor let make in the northwest a cite
wherein he ordained all manner of pain, turmentyng, sorrow and myschefe, to ye
which was a broad way, full delectable, growing full of roses and fair
lyllyes, and in that way were three knights, ever waiting if any man came
toward the cite of the north, to serve him with al manner of delycates and
things necessary. And if it fortuned any man to enter within that cite, the
custom was such that the people should take and bind him hands and f^te and
cast him in prison, there to abide the coming of the Justice. When this was
cried through out all the empire, there were two knights dwelling in a cite
there beside, one hight Ionatas, and he was a wise man, that other hight
Pyrrius, and he was a fool, nevertheless there was between them great love.
This Ionatas said to Pyrrius. Dear friend there is a commune cry made through
all lands, that themperoure has made a cite in the eest, wherein he has put
all his treasour, and who so ever may enter that cite, shall take of the
treasour what him list, therefore my counsel is that we go to ye cite. Than
said Pyrryus, thy counsel is good, and I desire to fulfill it. The wise
knight said if it be so that thou will follow my counsel, I pray the that
faithful frendshyp may co^tynue between us and in token of love that thou wylt
drink my blood, and I shall drink thine, that none of us depart ne fail
other in this journey. The folysshe knight said, it pleases me right well all
that ye say, wherefore they were both letten blood, and eueryche of them drank
others blood. When this was done they went forth together on their journey, and
when they had gone three days iourneys toward the cite where ye treasour was,
they came to a place where was two ways, one was sharp, stony and full of
thorns, that other way was plain and fair and full of swetnes and delytes.
Than said the wise knight to his fellow. Dear friend here be two ways, one
sharp and thorny, nevertheless if we go this way, we shall come to this
cite that is so rich, and there shall we have that we desire. Than said this
folysshe knight to his fellow. I wonder greatly of you that ye speak such
things, for I will rather believe mine eyes than your words, I se here openly,
and so do ye, that here is an hard way and full of thorns, and as I have
herd say, there be three champyons armed in this way, ready to ^yght against all
men that go that way toward the cite of ye eest, and therefore I will not go
that way, but here is (as ye may se) an other way plain and easy to walk
in, and in this way there ben three knights ready to serve us and give us al
manner things necessary to us, and therefore by this way will I go, and not by
that other way. Than said the wise knight, certainly if we go by that way, we
shall be led in to the cite of the north, wherein there is no mercy, but
perpetual pain and sorrow, and there shall we be taken and bound and cast in
prison. Certainly said the folysshe knight, this way is ye ready way, and as I
believe it is more profitable than ye other way. Than went they both forth ye
fair way, and anon three knights met with them, which received them
reverently as for a night, and gave them all manner of thing that was necessary
to them. And on ye morrow they took their journey forth to ward ye cite. And
when they were within the cite, anon the Emperors officers met with them and
said. Dear friends why come ye hither, in so much that ye know ye law of
this cite so cruel of long time here before, sothly ye shall be served now
after ye law. Anon they took the wise knight and bound him and put him in
prison* and after that they took the folysshe knight and bound him fast and
kest him in to a dyche. Soon after it befell that the Justice came to the cite
to give judgment on them that had trespaced ye law and anon all the
prisoners were brought forth before the Justice, among whom these two
knights were brought forth, one from prison, and that other from the dyche.
Than said the wise knight to the Justice. Reverend lord I complain of my
fellow that is gylty of my death, for when we two came to the two ways whereof
that one led to ye cite in the eest, and that other to this cite, I told him
all the peril of this cite, and the reward of that other cite, and he would
not believe me, and said to me in this wise. I believe mine own eyes better than
thy words, and because he was my fellow, I would not let him go alone in this
way, and thus came I with him, wherefore he is cause of my death. Than said the
folysshe knight, I complain that he is the cause of my death* for it is not
unknown to you all that I am a fool, and he a wise man, and therefore he
should not so lightly have followed my folly, for if he had forsaken this way, I
would have followed him, and therefore he is cause of my death. Than said the
Justice to ye wise knight, because that thou with all thy wisdom and great
understanding so lightly consented and followed the will of the fool and his
folys^he works, and thou fool because thou would not do after the counseyle
ne fulfill the wholesome words of this wise man and believe him, I give judgment
that ye be both hanged for your trespace. And so it was done, wherefore al men
praised greatly the Justice for his dyscrete judgment.

Dear friends this emperor is almighty god, and in the eest is ye cite of
heaven, wherein is treasour infynyte. And unto this cite is an hard way and
full of thorns, that is to say, the way of penance, by ye which way full
few walks, for it is hard and strayte, according to holy scripture, saying
thus. Est arta via que ducit ad vita^. It is a strayte way that ledeth to
everlasting life. In this way ben three armed knights, that is to say, the
devil, the world, and the flesh, with whom it behooves us to fight, and to
obtain the vyctory or we may come to heaven. The second cite that is in ye
north is hell. And to this accords scripture, saying thus. Ab aquilone
pondetur oe^ malu^. Out of the north comes all evil. Certainly to this cite
is ye way plain and broad, and walled about on every side with all manner
delycates, wherefore many men walk by this way. The three knights yt gives to
every man going this way what thing them needs, ben these. Pride of life,
couetyse of eyes, and concupyscence of the flesh, in which three the wretched
man greatly delyteth, and at ye last they led him in to hell. This wytty
knight betokens the soul, and the folysshe knight betokens the flesh,
the which is always folysshe, and at all times ready to do evil. These two be
fellows and knytte in one, for eueryche of them drynketh others blood, that is
to say they shall drink of one cup, either joy or pain shall they have after
the day of dome. The soul chosech the way of penance, and in as much as,
she may she s^ereth the flesh to do ye same. But the flesh thinks never
what shall come after, and therefore she goth in the delight of this world, and
flees the delight of penance. And thus the soul after the death is cast in to
hell, and the flesh is cast in to the dyche, that is to say, in to the
grave. But than the Justice comes, that is our lord Jesus christ at the day
of dome to deem al mankind. Tha^ ye soul shall complain upon the flesh, and
the flesh upon the soul. But when ye Justice that will not be deceived
neither by prayer ne by price, shall condemn ye soul because she followed ye
fraylte of ye flesh, and also he shall condemn the flesh because it would
not believe the soul, wherefore let us study to tame our flesh, that we may
obey god, and than shall we have everlasting life Unto the which bring us our
lord Jesus. Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Frederyke, which had no
children save a daughter, tho whom this Emperor after his decese bequethed
all his empire. This understanding an earl that dwelte there beside, came unto
this young lady and wowed her, and stered her to sin all that he might,
wherefore this young lady in short process of time enclyneh to the earl, and
this earl anon lay with her and defouled her, and after that he put her from
her heritage, and chaced her out of her empire, wherefore she made great
lamentacyon, and fled unto a realm there beside, where as she daily wept and
mourned. It befell after on a day that while she sat mourning beside a way
there came rydyng by her a fair young knight upon a good horse, which came
toward her a great p^ce, and worshypfully salewed her, and asked the cause
why she mourned so sore. Than answered she and said. My reverend lord, I am an
Emperors daughter, common of a royal kynne, my father is deed which left me
all his empire, because he had none other heir, and after his decese an earl
there beside deceived me and took from me my maydenhe^e, and after that he put
me vyole^tly out of mine heritage, so that now I am feign to beg my breed
from door to door, and this is the cause of my sorrow. Than said the knight,
fair damoysell I have great co^passyon on thy beauty and on thy gentylnes,
therefore if thou will grant me one thing, I shall fight for the against ye
earl, and I behote the the victory, Than said she, alas alas, I have nothing
yt I may give to the but my self. And I ask no more of the said the knight
but that thou would be my wife and love no man so much as me. Than said she.
Reverend sir that will I do gladly, and more if I might. Than said the knight,
I will that thou do for me one thing, that if it fortune me to dye in battle
for the, and opteyne the victory, thou shalt take my blody sherte and hang it
upon a perch in thy chamber, and this shalt thou do for two things. The
first is, yt when so ever thou beholdest the sherte, thou shall weep for me.
The second is, that what so ever man comme to wowe the to be his wife, than
shalt thou hastily run unto thy chamber, and behold my blody sherte, and
think hertely within thy self thus. The lord of this sherte dyed for my love
in battle, the which recovered my heritage god forbede that I should take any
other man after his death. Than said she. Reverend sir all this I shall fulfill
by the grace of god. And when ye knight he^de this he gave battle against the
earl and o^teyned the victory and ye earl was overcome and ^ledde. And this
young lady was brought and received again in to her heritage. Nevertheless
this knight was deedly wounded in that battle, whereof he dyed, but or he dyed
he bequethed his blody sherte unto this damoysell, desiring her to keep her
promise. When this young lady herd of his death, she wept sore and made great
lamentacyon for his death. And in his sherte was wryte^ this verse. Think on
him and have mind, that to ye was so kind. Anon when she had received the
sherte, she hanged it upon a perch in her chamber, and as oftentimes as she
beheld it, she wept bytterly. It befell not long after that the states of
her Empire came to her and desired her to take a husband. But than she went
to her chamber and beheld the blody ^herte, than waxed she sorrowful and said
oftentimes alas alas thou suffered death for my love, and thou also recovered
again mine heritage, god forbede that I should take any other man but the. And
thus she answered every man that came to her, and so they went away vnsped,
and she ended her life in peace and rest. Dear friends this Emperor is the
father of heaven and his daughter is the soul of man, made at the similitude of
god, to whom god gave and bequethed the empire of paradyse. But there came an
earl, yt is the devil and styred her to sin, when she ete of the apple and
said to her thus. In what hour ye ^ate of ye apple, ye shall be like gods,
wherefore we brekyng gods commandment we were all exiled out of paradyse, and
chased to the realm of this world, here to live in great wretchedness, like
as the psalmyst says. In sudore vultus tui. etc. In the sweet of thy vysage
thou shalt eat thy breed. But than came a fair young knight and a strong
that is to say, our lord Jesus Christ, which had compassyon upon mankind, and
took our flesh and our blood and gave battle to the devil and overcame him,
and thus wanne he again our heritage. Therefore let us do as this young lady
did, put we this blody sherte, that is to say, the mind of ye passion of
Christ on the perch of our heart, and think we how ^ur lord Jesus Christ shed
his precious blood for us. And if any man that is to say, the deuylt or any
other would styre us to sin, anon think we on ye passion of Christ, and
say we thus. I shall take none other but the which have shed thy blood for
me, and thus shall we win everlasting life. Unto the which god bring us
all. Amen.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor named Apolloninus, which ordained
for a law that every man upon pain of death should worship the day of his
natiuite. This Emperor called to him a clerk yt hight Uirgyll and said. My
dear master there be many heed sins done contrary to the law, therefore I
pray the that thou by thy conning would make some craft whereby I might know
who trespaceth against ye law pryuely or pertly. Than said Uirgyll. My
reu^^e^de lord your will shall be done. Anon this Uirgyll through his craft
made an image in the mids of the cite of Rome, which dysceuered and told
themperours messengers who trespaced against the law, and who not. There was
that time dwelling in ye cite of Rome a smyth that hight Focus, which for no
thing would worship the natyuyte of the Emperor. It befell upon a night as
the smyth lay in his bed he thought upon the image that had accused so many
men before, and dred leest the image would accuse him. wherefore he rose and
went to the image and said. I make a vow to god if thou accuse me I shall
break thy heed And when he had thus said, he went home. The Emperor on the
morrow after following sent his messe^gers to the image as he was wont before,
to know and to understand who had trespaced against the law. And to them
than said the image, lift up your eyes and behold what is wryt^n in my
foreheed. And than they looked up and saw this posey written. Te^pore mutantur
homines determina^tur. Times ben changed, and men ben worse and worse. For who
will say the troth, shall have his heed broken, therefore go ye forth to your
lord and tell him all that ye have read and seen. The messengers went forth
and told ye Emperor all that they had herd and seen. Than said ye Emperor,
arm your self and go to the image, and if that ye find any man that has
bosted or thretened the image, bind him hand and foot and bring him to me.
Than went the messengers forth to ye image and said unto it. Tell us ye troth
if any man has thretened the, and we shall avenge the anon. Than said the
image. Take the smyth Focus, for he is the man that will not honor the
natyuyte of the Emperor. Anon the messengers led forth that smyth before
the emperor, and anon examyned him why he kept not the day of themperours
natiuyte in reverence and honor according to the law. Than answered the smyth
and said. Reverend lord I beseech you that ye will hear mine excuse, and if I
answer not reasonably to all manner of points yt ye will ask me, I will put
me fully to your grace. Than said the emperor, I shall hear the, and that that
is ryghtfull I shall do. Than said the smyth. It behooves me to have.viij.d.
every day in the weke, and that I can not get without great labor, and
therefore I may in no manner wise keep ye day holy day more than other days:
Than said the Emperor. Why behooves it the to have these. viii.d. Than said ye
smyth. I am bound to pay daily.ij.d. and.ii.d. I lend, and.ii.d* I lose,
and.ii.d. I spend. Than said the Emperor. Tell me more expressly of
these.viij.d. Than said the smyth. I am bound every day to pay ii.d. to my
father, for when I was young, my father spent on me.ii.d. daily, and therefore
am I bound to help him, and pay him again his.ii.d. for his sustentacyon
Also.ii.d. I lose on my wife. Than said the emperor why lesest thou that.ii.d.
on thy wife. Than said he, where se ye ever woman but she had one of these
points, either she is wylfull or contrary to her husband, or of hot
co^pleccyon, and therefore that I give her I lose Also.ii.d. I lend to my sone,
wherwyth he is sustained, that when I come to age and pouerte, that he may
pay me again.ii.d. like as I do to my father. Also I spend.ii.d. on my self
in meat and drink, and that is little enough. Than said themperoure, thou
have answered well and wisely. Not long after it befell that the Emperor
dyed, and this smyth Focus was chosen to be Emperor, because he spente
his.viii.d. so wisely and so profytably, and thus he ended his life in peace
and rest. Dear friends this emperor is our blessed savior Jesus Christ, which
ordained by his holy law yt every man should worship the sunday. This Uirgil
that made this image, is the holy ghost, which is set up among us, a precher
to teache virtues, and to repreue vices, and that he should not spare the poor
ne ye rich. But now if a precher would say troth against any man, anon he
shall be thretened of the enemies of Christ, that is to say, by evil men
that neither love god nor man, wherefore the precher may say now a days that
posey which was written in the fore heed of the image. Times ben changed from
good to ill, and men ben daily worse and worse. For who so would say the
truth now a days, shall have his heed broken. Therefore it is need they be
armed, that is to say, that every precher be armed with good deeds in ensample of
other, and than it needs not to dread, in so much that they have god and
truth to stand by them, according to ye apostles saying. Si deus nobiscu^:
quis contra nos. If god be with us who may be against us. By this smyth Focus
is understand every good christen man, which daily should work merytoryous
deeds, and than ought he to be presented before the heavenly Emperor. This
Focus paid.ii.d. to his father, and so we should pay to our father of
heaven.ii.d. that is to say, honor and love. For when we were the children of
wretchedness and put in bondage, almighty god sent down to the earth his sone
to redeem us, according to saint John^ the euangelyst, saying. Deus dilexit
mundu^ vt filiu^ suu^ vnigenitu^ daret pro minido. God loves the world so
well that he would give his only sone for the salvation of the world. Also
this Focus lent.ii.d. to his sone, that is to say, every christen man ought
to lend to ye sone of god our lord Christ Jesus good will and merytoryous deeds
in our life, that the may pay us again at ye day of dome, when soul and body
shall be gloryfyed, and in that he is our brother, and it may well be proved by
ye text of Esaie, saying thus. ^uer natus est nobis. etc. A child is borne to
us. This Focus lost.ii.d. on his wife. Thy wife betokens thy flesh, upon
whom thou have lost ij.d. that is to say, unlawful love and consent to sin,
for why, the flesh is contrary to ye ghost, and ever is ready to harm. This
Focus also spente.ij.d. on him self, yt is to say, by ye first penny ye shall
understand penance done, in which the soul greatly delyteth in heaven, and
there is gloryfyed. And by the second penny we ought to understand the
steadfast abiding in doing of penance, for he that abides unto the end,
shall be saved. And who that spends well these two pens, shall obtain
everlasting life. Unto the which bring us our lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled a noble Emperor which among all other virtues loved
best mercy, wherefore he ordained a law that every blind man should have an
hundred shyllynges by year of his treasour. It befell on a day that there came
certain men to a tavern to drink wine, and after that these men had sytten
in the tavern three days, the fourth day they were greatly in the tauerners
debt, and had no money to pay for their wine, wherefore the tauerner came to
them and charged them yt they should not void till they had paid for their
wine. Tha^ said one of ye drynkers to his fellows. Syrs quod he, the emperor
has made such a law that every blind man shall have an hundred shyllynges
of his treasour, therefore let us cast lottes among us, and to whom the lot
falls, let his eyes be put out, and so may he go to themperours palace and
get an hundred shyllynges. And this greatly reioysed them, and said that the
counsel was right good, wherefore they cast lottes among them, and the lot
fell on him that gave the counseyle, and than his fellows forthwith put out his
eyes. And when he was blind, he went to themperours palace, and asked of ye
steward an hundred shyllynges, according to the^perours law. Dear friend said
the steward, thou myghtest se with both thine eyes yesterday, and thou also
understand ye law amys, for ye law is made for men yt are blind through
infirmytees, or by ye will of god, and yesterday you had thy sight in the
tavern, but wylfully you have lost thine eyes, therefore go you to the tavern
again to thy fellows and make thy peace and quyte thy self, for here getest
thou not a farthyng. Than went this wretched man forth and told his fellows of
ye stewardes answer, and with that came in ye tauerner and despoyled them of
al their clothes and bette them, and thus drove them with shame out of the cite,
and so were they never seen there after.

Dear friends this emperor is our savior Christ which ordained for a law yt
every blind man should have an ho^dred shyllinges of his treasour. This blind
man betokens every sinner, which synneth through infirmytees, or entysyng of
the devil, the world and the flesh, which shall receive an hundred
shyllynges, if he be inwardly repentau^t of his sins, that is to say he
shall have an hundred times more joy, according to scripture, saying thus.
Centuplu^ accipietis et vita^ eternal possidebitis. Ye shall receive an hundred
times more joy, if ye be repentaunt and turn from sin, and also ye shall
have everlasting life. These men that came to the tavern and drank the wine,
be sinners, which oftentimes come to ye tavern of our adversary ye devil
and drink, that is to say, they there consume and waste away al goostly
virtues, which they received when they took christendom at ye font stone,
wherefore ye devil our ennemy despoyleth them and makes them to lose all their
good deeds yt ever they wrought before they cast lottes, that is to say, the
cast among them ye custom of sin, and this lot of sin falls on them
that is worshypfull and without mercy, and such a man wylfully becomes
blind, that is to say, he becomes wylfully a foul sinner, like Judas that
betrayed our lord without any suggestyon or entysing, and therefore such men
sin more grievously when they come before the steward, that is to say,
before the prelates of the church, they may not lightly obtain the joys of
heaven, for why, they be not in ye right way to leave their sin. Therefore
study we with all our diligence to please god, that we may obtain everlasting
reward. Unto ye which bring us our lord Jesus. Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Pylomyus, which had only a
daughter a fair damoysel and a gracyous in ye sight of every man and was named
Aglaes. There was also in themperours palace a ge^tyll knight yt loved this
lady above all thing in ye world. It befell after upon a day that this
knight talked with this lady, and vttred in secret wise his desire to her.
Tha^ said she curteysly, sith ye have vttred to me the preuytees of your heart,
I shall in like wise for your love utter to you ye secrets of my heart, and
truly I say that above all other I love you best. Than said ye knight, I
purpose to visyte ye holy land, and therefore give me your troth, that
this.vij. year ye shall take none other man, but only for my love to tarry me so
long, and if I come not again to this day.vii. year, take tha^ what man ye
like best. And in like wise I shall promise you that within this.vij. year I
shall take no wife. Than said she, this covenant pleases me well. When this
was said, eueryche of them betrouthed other, and tha^ this knight took his leave
of this lady and went forth to the holy land. Anon after that ye Emperor
treated with the king of Hungary of marriage for his daughter. Than came the
king of Hungary to themperours palace to se his daughter, and wha^ he had seen
her, he lyked meruaylously well her beauty and her goodness, so that the emperor
and the king were accorded in all things as touching ye marriage, upon the
condicyon that the damoysell would consent. Than called the emperor the young
lady to him and said. O my fair daughter I have provided for the yt a king
shall be thy husband, if the list to assent, therefore tell me what answer
thou will give to this. Than said she to her father, it pleases me well, but
of one thing dear father I you beseech if it might please you to grant me for
ye love of god, I have auowed my chastity only to god for this.vij. year,
therefore dear father I beseech you for all the love yt is between your gracyous
fatherhode and me, that ye name no man to be my husband till these.vij. year be
ended, and than I shall be ready in all things to fulfill your will. Than said
the emperor, sith it is so that thou wylt no husband have these.vii. year, I
will not break thy vow, but wha^ the.vii. year ben passed, thou shall have ye
king of Hungary to thy husband. And than the emperor sent forth his lettres to
ye king of Hungary, praying him if it might please him to abide.vii. year for
ye love of his daughter, and tha^ should he speed of his intent without fail.
Hereof the king was pleased, and granted to abide. And when these.vij. year
were ended save a day, the young lady stood in her chamber wyndowe and wept
sore, saying thus. Alas alas as to morrow my love promised to be with me
again fro the holy land, and also the king of Hungary to morrow will be here
for to wedde me, according for my fathers promise, and if my love come not at
a certain hour, than am I utterly deceived of the inward love of him. When
the day came, the king arrayed him toward the emperor with a great company to
wedde his daughter, and was royally besene and arrayed in purple. And while ye
king was rydyng on his way there came a knight suddenly ryding by him, to whom
he said thus. Dear friend whens art thou, and whens co^mest thou. The knight
answered and said, I am of thempyre of Rome, and now am come late fro the holy
land, and am ready to do your service such as I ca^. And as they rode talkyng
by the way, it began to rain so fast, that all the kings array was almoost
loost. Than said ye knight. My lord quod he, ye have done folysshly, for as
much as ye brought not with you your house. Than said the king, how spekest thou
so, my house is large and broad and made of stones and mortar, how should I than
bear with me my house, thou spekest to me like a fool. When this was said they
rode farther till they came to a great water and a deep, the king smote his
horse with his spurs and lepte in to ye water, so that he was almoost drowned.
When the knight saw this, and was over on that other side of the water without
peril, he said to ye king. Ye were in peril, and therefore ye did folysshly
because ye brougt not with you your bridge. Than said the king, thou spekest
meruaylously, my bridge is made of lyme and stone, and co^teyneth in quantite
more than half a mile, how should I than bear with me my bridge, therefore you
spekest folysshly. Well said the knight, my folysshnes may turn the to
wisdom. When the king had rydden a little farther, he asked ye knight what
time of the day it was. Than said the knight, if any man have lust to eat, it
is time of the day to eat, and therefore my reverent lord I pray you to take
a sop with me, for that is no disworshyp to you but great honor to me before
ye states of this Empire Than said ye king, I will gladly eat with the. They
sat both down in a vine gardyn, and all yt were with the king and with the
knight dyned. And when dinner was done and that ye king had wasshen, the knight
said to the king. My lord quod he, ye have done folysshly for that ye led
not with you your father and your mother. Than said the king, what say you, my
father is deed, and my mother is old and may not travail, how should I than
bring them with me, therefore to the I say ye troth, a folyssher man than
thou art saw I never. Than said the knight, every work is praised at the
end. When ye king had rydden a little farther, and was ny hand themperours
palace, the knight asked leave to go from him, for this cause he knew a nerer
way to the palace to the young lady, yt he might come first and led her with
him. Than said the king, I pray the sir tell me by what place purposest thou
to ride. Than said ye knight, I shall tell you troth, this day vii. year I
left a net in a place, and now I purpose to visyte it and draw it to me,
and if it be broken I will leave it, and if it be hole than will I take it to me,
and keep it as a precious jewel, and when he had said what him list he took
his leave of the king and rode forth, and the king kept the broad hye way.
When the emperor herd of the kings coming, he went against him with a great
company, and worshypfully received him, and let do of his wete clothes, and
arrayed him again with new clothes. And when the emperor and the king were set
to meat the emperor did him all ye ch^^e and ^^lace that he could. And wha^
they had dyned th^mperour asked tidings of the king. My lord said he, I shall
tell you what I herd this day by ye way. There came a knight to me and
reverently ^alewed me, and anon after that there came a great rain, and
co^fou^ded greatly my clothing, and anon the knight said, sir y^ have done
folyshly, for so much thou brought not with the thy house. Than said the emperor,
what clothing had y^ knight on him. A cloak quod the king. Than said
the emperor, for sothe that was a wise man, for the house whereof he spoke was a
cloak and therefore he said to you that ye did folysshly because ye came without
your cloak, for if ye had brougt with you a cloak, tha^ had not your clothes ben
defouled with the rain. Than said ye king, when we had rydden a lyt^l farther,
we came to a deep water, I smoote my horse with the spurs and almoost I was
drowned, and he rode on the other side of the water and found no peril, and
than said he to me, ye have done folysshly, for so much y^ ye led not with
you your bridge. Forsothe said the emperor he said troth, for he called the
bridge your squyers, yt should have rydden before and assayed the depnes of ye
water. Than said the king, we rode farther, and at the last he prayed me to
dyne with him, and when we had dyned he said I did unwisely, for I led not with
me my father and my mother. Sothly said the emperor he was ^ wise man and said
troth, for he called your father and mother breed and wine and other vytayles.
Than said ye king we rode farther, and anon after he asked me l^ue to go fro
me, and I asked dylygently whether he went. And he answered again and said.
This day.vij. year I lef^e a net in a preuy place, and now I will ride to
vysyte it, and if it be broken or torn, tha^ will I ^eue it, and if it be hole
as I left it, than shall it be to me right precious, and I shall bear it with
me. When the emperor herd this he cried with a loud voice and said. O ye my
knights and my servants, go ye lightly unto my daughters chamber, for sothly
that is the net whereof ye knight spoke. And anon his knights and his
servants went unto his daughters chamber and found her not, the sore said
knight had take her with him. And thus the king was deceived of the damoysell,
and he went home again to his own country confounded.

Dear fre^des this emperor is our lord Jesus Christ and his fair daughter is
everlasting life, the which the emperor had ordained for kings, knights and
other men. The knight that loved this young lady, is every good christian soul,
which holds himself not worthy to come in the sight of god unto such joy
as ye apostle says. Non est condign passionis huius te^poris ad futura^
gloria^. They be not so worthy of suffryng to come unto the glory that is to
come. This knight went.vii. year on pilgrimage, like as a good christen man al
ye days of his life should labor and travail i^ fulfyllyng the.vii. works
of mercy. By this king y^ came without a cloak in the rain, is to understand
the mighty men of this world as Justices, Mayres and Baylyes, that have no
clokes to cover all their other clothes. By this cloak is understand charity,
as the apostle says. Charitas cooperit multitudine^ pcto^rum. Charity covers
al our sins. But many men have not this cloak, wherefore they be wete in ye
rain of pride, auaryce and lechery This king also was almoost drowned, because
he lacked his bridge, that is to say, perfyte faith. For we s^ daily that there
may no man pass over a great water broad and deep without a bridge, or some
other thing yt is able to bear him. Right so without faith it is impossyble
to please god. And thus may no man be saved without faith when they set their
life in worldly joy or worldly help, more than in the help of god, which is
mighty to do al things, wherefore he says himself thus. Saluator si
habueritis fide^ sicut granu^ sinapis poteritis. etc. If ye have faith as ye
grain of mustarde than may ye say to ye hills, go thou forth and it shall go
But many of us now a days has over feeble faith, and therefore they shall
suddenly fall in the claye of desperacyon, and by deedly syn^e oftentimes they
offend god. Also this king had not brought with him his father and his
mother. By the father which is cause of generacyon is understand humylite,
without whom there is no virtue in no man. And thereto accords saint Gregory,
saying thus. Si qis ceteris virtutes sine humilitate congregat. etc. He that
gadereth al other virtues without humilite, is like a man that casts dust in
ye wind. His mother betokens hope, therefore he that will obtain everlasting
life, him behooves to have the cloak of charity, bridge of faith, a father of
mekenes, and a mother of hope, as ye apostle says. Spe salui facti sumus. Also
this knight went the strayte path way, and the king the broad way. For he
that will be saved behooves to go a strayte way, that is to say, the way of
fasting, alms deeds, chastyte and penance. Of the which way speaks the
apostle. Stricta est via que ducit ad vita^ eternal. The way is strayte ye
ledeth to everlasting life. But many men go that other way which ledeth to
hell, that is to say, by ye way of flesshly lust, and such men ben gone out
of the way of everlasting life, but such men be deceived through y^ way
Therefore study we to walk that way, whereby we may obtain everlasting life.
Amen.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a noble Emperor named Agyas, which had with him a
knight called Gerarde, which was a doughty warryour, nevertheless he was as
meke as a lamb in the Emperors hall, but in ye field he was like a lion. This
Emperor had a fair daughter, whom the strong and mighty earl of palester
rauysshed and defouled, nevertheless it displeased more the emperor ye
defoulyng of his daughter than the rauysshynge, wherefore he called unto him his
counseyle and said. Dear friends it is not unknown to you the despyte and
violence done to me in defoulyng of my daughter, and therefore I purpose to give
battle to the earl, wherefore I pray you to be ready at a day set to proceed
with me in battle. And they said lord we be ready to live and dye with you in
battle. When the day of battle came, they met on both sides, and a cruel
hard battle was given on both sides, and all that were of themperours party
were slain. And as the emperor should have been byheded, the knight Gerard put
himself among his enemies before the emperor and fought manfully, and so
the emperor escaped, and the knight abode and slew the earl. nevertheless this
knight had diverse wou^des. This not withstandyng he abode and fought still till
the blood ran down to his heles. And when his enemies saw that ye earl was
slain, they ^edde, and the knight with his people followed on y^ chase till he
came to ye place where themperours daughter was, and led her with him. And
thus with triumph and vyctory he returned again to the emperor. For y^ which
victory and getyng again of themperours daughter he was greatly praised of all
people. Not long alter it befell that this knight had to do in themperours
court, wherefore the knight came unto the emperor and prayed him mekely to be
favorable in his cause, and farthermore he prayed him to do ye rayson asked.
When the emperor had herd him, he called to him a justice and said. Go thou and
do justice to this knight, and that that the law will. And when ye knight
herd this, he cried with a loud voice. Alas alas who herd ever such a thing
of an Emperor, thou were said he in battle where thy heed should have been
smytten of, and I in mine own person and none other men put mi self in
ieopardy for the and saved the, and now thou have assigned an other man to be
judge in my cause, alas that ever you were borne. And with yt word the knight
did of all his clothes, and showed ye wounds that he had received in the
battle unto all ye men that were there present, and said. Lo what I have
suffered for the, and I put none other man in my stead, and now thou assygnest
an other man in my cause. Forsothe I say to ye that I never served such a
lord before. When the emperor herd this, being almoost co^fou^ded in himself
said thus. O dear friend all that thou says is troth, thou saved me from death
thou wonnest my daughter again and for my sake you have suffered many wou^des.
Forsothe it is right that I comme down and make an end of thy cause, such as
may be honor and joy to the. And than the emperor labored besyly in this
matter, and made thereof an end according to ye knights intent, wherefore all
men greatly commended the Emperor.

Dear friends this Emperor may be called every christen man, or else al
mankind, which had a fair daughter, that is to say, the soul made to the
symilytude of god. This earl betokens ye devil, which rauysshed and
defouled by sin the soul of man through eating of the fruit of ye tree
knowing good and evil, wherefore al mankind was in seruage till a strong and
valiant knight came and put himself on the cross between the devil and
mankind. For if that had not ben we had all ben dampened euerlastyngly, and
this knight brought again the foul of man unto ye church, wherefore he suffered
many great wounds in his body. And now this knight, that is to say, our lord
Jesus Christ has a matter to do among us, that is to say, to find in us
p^rfyte life, wherefore he calls on us daily that we should be ready at all
times, saying thus in the apocalipse.iii. Ecce sto ad hostium et pulso: si qs
mihi aparuerit in troibo et cenabo. That is to say. Lo I stand and knock at
the door, if any man will open to me I shall come in and soupe with him. But
many men does as this Emperor did, the which gave ye ynyght an other judge
than himself. But now a days there ben some men that will do no penance for
the love of him, which assygned no man but hymfelfe to fight for us. And
therefore against unkind me^ it shall be said thus Lo he hangs on ye cross
despoyled of all his clothyng and shows to us all his wounds yt he suffered
for us. Be we therefore kind, that we may suffer for his love some penance,
and that at the day of dome we may say thus. Have we not done penance in our
life. For he that suffers pain for the love of god, shall receive an hundred
times more reward, and also he shall obtain everlasting life, unto the
which bring both you and me and all mankind. Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a wytty Emperor named Po^pey, which had a
fair daughter called Aglas. This daughter had many virtues above all other
women of that Empire. First she was fair and gracyous in the sight of every
man. She was also swyfte in rennynge, that no man might overtake her by a great
space. When the Emperor understood these two virtues in his daughter, he was
right joyful, wherefore he made to proclayme through out al his Empire, that
what man poor or rich would run with his daughter, should have her to wife
with great riches, if he might over run her and come sooner to ye mark than
she, and if she over run him and come sooner to the mark than he, his heed
should be smytten of. When the states of ye empire, as dukes, earls, barons and
knights herd this cry, they offered them self one after an other to run with
her, but ever this young lady over ran them al, wherefore they lost their
hedes according to ye law. That time there was a poor man dwelling in Rome,
which thought within himself I am a poor man and come of poor kynrede,
there is made a common cry, yt what man so ever might over run the
Emperors daughter by any wise, should be promoted to great honor and
richesse, therefore if I might ouerco^me her by any manner way, I should not
only be promoted to great honor but also al my kynne This poor man provided
himself of three Iewelles, whereby he might win her. First he made a garla^d
of reed roses and of white. Secondly he made a fair gyrdell of sylke craftily
wrought. Thyrdly he made a purse of sylke set full of precious stones, and
within the purse was a ball of three colors, and upon this purse was wryte^
this posey, who plays with me, shall never be weary of my play. Than puthe
these three things in his bosom, and went forth to ye palace gate cryenge and
saying. Come forth fair lady comme forth, for I am ready to run with you
and fulfill ye law in all things. When the emperor herd this, he commanded
his daughter to run with him. This young lady went to her chamber wyndowe,
and when she saw him, she despised him, and said. I have ouerco^men said she
many worthy knights, and now must I run with a chorle, nevertheless I shall
fulfill my fathers commandment Anon the damoysel arrayed her for to run
with him And at ye last they ran together, and within short space the
damaysell went far before him. When this iugler saw this, he threw forth
the garlande of flowers before her. And when ye damoysell beheld and saw that
she stouped down and took it up, and set it upon her heed, and that while the
iugler went before her. And when this young damoysel saw this, she wept sore,
and for sorrow she threw ye garlande in a dyche and ran after him
dylygently, and at the last ouertoke him, and lift up her right hand and gave
him a buffet, saying to him thus. Abide thou wretch, it besemeth not thy
fathers sone to have me to his wife. And this young lady went before him a
great space. And when the iugler saw this, he took out the gyrdel of his bosom
and threw it before her. And when she saw that, lightly she stouped down and
took it up and anon gyrde her therwyth, and than the iugler went again
before her. And when she saw that, she made great lamentacyon, and took the
gyrdell with her tethe and tare it in three pieces, and than threw it from her,
and than she ran fast after him, and at ye last ouertoke him, and than she
took up her hand and gave him a great blow, saying these words. O wretch,
wenest thou to ouerco^me me, and with that she ran before him a great space.
The iugler was slye and subtle, and abode till that she was almoost at the
mark, and than he threw forth before her the purse. And when she saw this
purse, anon she stouped down and took it up, and opened it, and found the
ball, and read the posey, who plays with me, shall never be weary of my
play. And than began she to play, and so long she continued in playinge till
that the iugler was before her at the mark. And thus he wanne the Emperors
daughter.

Dear friends this emperor is our ^auyour Christ and his fair daughter is
man's soul, which was made clean with the water of the holy font, and was
also full light to run, that is to say, in virtue while that she is in
clennes, so yt no deedly sin might ouerco^me her. This iugler that is come
of so whyly blood, is the devil, the which studyeth day and night to deceive
innoce^tes. He prouydeth him of three things. First of ye garlande which be
tokeneth pride by this reason, for why a garla^de of flowers is not set upon
the arm nor upon the foot, but upon the heed, that it may be seen. Right so
pride would be seen, against proud men speaks saint Austyn, saying thus.
Quecu^que superb^u^ videris filiu^ diaboli dicino^ dubitetis. That is to say,
what proud man that ye may se, doubt ye not to call him the sone of the
devil. Do thou therefore as the maiden did, be weep thy sin and draw of the
garland of pride and cast it in the dyche of contrycyon, and so shalt you give
the devil a great buffet and ouerco^me him. But when this iugler, that is to
say, our goostly ennemy ye devil sees himself ouerco^me in one sin, tha^
he returns and tempts a man in an other sin, and casts before man the
gyrdel of lechery. But alas there be full many gyrde with the gyrdell of
lechery, of the which gyrdell speaks saint Gregory, saying thus. Gyrde we our
loins with ye gyrdell af chastyte, for who so ever is gyrte with this gyrdell
shall not lose the course of life. Than casts the iugler forth, yt is to say
the devil, the purse with the ball. The purse that is open above and close
under betokens ye heart, which evermore should be close under against erthly
things, and open above to heavenly joy, and the two strings yt opens and
shytteth the purse betokens the love of god and of our neighbors. The ball
which is round and mouable to every part of his dyfference betokens
couetyse, which moves ever both in young and in old, and therefore the posey
was good and true that was written on the purse, who so plays with me, that is
to say with couetyse, they shall never be fulfilled. Therefore says Seneca. Cu^
oi^a p^ta^ senescunt, sola cupiditas inuenescit. When yt all sins wax old,
than couetyse al only waxes young. Therefore let us take heed yt we play not
with this bal of couetyse, and than without doubt we shall obtain and win the
game with ye tenes ball in ye bliss of heaven yt never shall have end. Unto
the which bliss bring us he, that shed his blood for us upon the rode
tree. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled a mighty Emperor and a wise named Theodose, which
above all thing loved best melody of harp and hunting. It befell after upon
a day as this Emperor hunted in a forest he herd so sweet a melody of harpes
that through the swetnes thereof he was almoost rauyshed from him self, wherefore
he sought about the forest to find that melody, and at the last he espied at
the end of the forest a poor man syttyng beside a water playing on a harp so
swetely, that the emperor before ye day herd never so sweet a melody. Than
said the emperor, good friend comes this melody of thy harp or no. The poor
man answered and said. My reverend lord I shall tell you ye troth. Beside
this water my wife and my child and I have dwelled.xxx. year, and god has
given me such grace, that when so ever I touch my harp, I make so sweet
melody that ye fysshes of this water come out to my hand, and so I take them,
wherwyth my wife my child and I ben fed daily in great plenty. But alas and
welaway, on the other side of this water there comes a whysteler and
whysteleth so swetely, that many times the fysshes for sake me and go to his
whysteling and therefore my reverend lord I beseech you of help against his
hyssyng and whystelyng. Than said the emperor, I shall give the good help and
counsel, I have here in my purse a golden hoke which I shall give ye take
thou it and bind it fast at the end of a roode, and with ye smite thy harp,
and when you see the fysshe stere draw them up to the land with that hoke,
and than his whystelyng ne hy^syng shall not avail. When ye poor man herd
this, he reioysed him greatly, and did al thing as he had taught him. And when
this poor man began to touch his harp ye fysshe moved, and than he took them
up with his hoke, and lived thereby long time, and at the last ended gracyously
his life in peace and rest. This Emperor betokens Jesus Christ, which
greatly delyteth to hunte the soul of mankind in the forest, that is holy
church. He loves also the melody of the harp, that is to say, he loves
much those yt teache the holy word of god. This poor man that sat bithe
water side betokens the prelates of the church and the prechers of ye word
of god, which ought to sit beside the world. and not in the world, yt is to
say, they should not set their delight in worldly things. The prechers ought
to have the harp of holy scripture, wherwt they may praise and honor god, and
also therewith draw out of this world ye sinners. Therefore says ye psalmist
thus Praise ye god in timpanes and crowdes, and sing ye to him on the harp
and the psalter of.x. strenges, But now adays the precher may say alas, for
when I preche and teache holy scripture, the devil comes and whysteleth so
swetely that ye sinners draw to him, and will not hear the word of god, but
they turn themself only to the delight of sin. The devil deceyueth also
mankind by diverse ways. First in time of prechynge he makes some to sleep,
and them that he can not make to sleep, he causes them to talk and clatter,
and them that he can not make to clatter, he makes them so dull that they may
not savor ne understand what the precher says, and them that he can not
begyle by these means, he puts in them be synesse, and causes them to go
out of the church. Lo so many ways the devil has to deceive mankind, and
to let ye word of god. Therefore every prelate and every precher behooves ye
golden hoke of gods grace against this whysteling, by ye which grace they may
draw sinners out of this world up to heaven, unto the which bring us our
lord Jesus. Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor and a wise man named Polemus,
which had no child save only a daughter, whom he loved so much that daily
and nyghtly he ordained to keep her with armed knights. And above these
knights he ordained a master well taught in every conning for to teache them
and to enferme them how they should do. He ordained also a steward for to guide
his household. And when all this was done, on a night as he lay in his bed he
be thought him yt he would go vysyte the holy land. And than wha^ all thing
was ready for his journey according to his purpose, he called unto him his
steward and said. Dear friend I purpose to se the holy land, and therefore I
leave my daughter in thy keeping, and also I charge the that she lack nothing,
but that she have all manner of joy and gladness that pertayneth to a vyrgyn.
Secondly I leave in thy keeping five knights that been her kepers, that they
lack nothing yt to them behooves. Also I leave to the my greyhou^de, that thou
nourysshe and feed him as it apperteyneth, and if you fulfill all this that I
have said, thou shall at my coming again receive a great reward. Than said
ye steward My dear lord in all yt I may I shall fulfill your will. When this
was said the Emperor took his journey to ward the holy land, and the
steward a long time kept well and truly themperours ordinance. But at the
last it befell upon a day that this steward had espied this young lady
walkyng alone in an orcheyarde, with whose love he was suddenly taken, wherefore
anon against her will he defloured her. And wha^ he had sinned with her, he
gave her ill language and hated her more after than ever he loved her before,
and drove her out of ye palace, wherefore this damoysel for great pouerte and
defaute went fro door to door and begged her breed. But when the knights that
were her kepers herd of this they reproved shamefully the steward of yt synful
deed. Than the steward waxed wroth, and for great hate that he had in his
heart he despoyled ye knights of al their goods, and drove them fro the
palace. And when they were thus robbed and exyled, some for defaute of goods
became thieves, and some manquellers, that through this inco^uenyent they wrought
great harm. Soon after this there came tidings that the emperor was arrived
in far lands coming homewarde. And when the steward herd this, he was
greatly troubled and moved in himself, and thus thinking in himself he said
thus. This may not be but needs I shall be accused for my trespace that I have
done against themperours commandment, he is my lord and mercyable, therefore
better it were that I go and mete with him with all honor and humylyte, and
accuse my self to him, and ask him mercy, than any other should go before to
accuse me to my lord of my treason. Than this steward anon did of all his
clothes save his breche and his sherte, and took three ropes wysh him in his
right hand, and bare foot went and met the Emperor. But when the emperor
had espied him coming a far in such a wise, he wo^dred greatly. And when
the steward was come so nere that he might speak to the emperor, he fell down
on his knees and salewed him reverently. Than said ye Emperor, what is
befallen ye that thou metest me in this array, for as much as ye art my
steward thou sholdest have met me with a great company of knights. A my lord
quod he, there is befallen me an heavy case, for the which it behooves me thus
to mete your hyghnes. Than said the emperor, what case is that that is befallen
the. My reverend lord quod he, it behooves first your hyghnes to ask of me why
I bring with me these three ropes. Than said the emperor, why bear thou these
three ropes in thy hand in such a wise. Than answered this woeful steward and
said. This first cord I bring with me to bind my hands and fete so hard
till the blood breast out on every side, for yt I have well deserved. The second
rope I bring with me ^o draw me by horse tail upon ye pauement till that my
bones de bare without flesh, for that shall profit me for the great treason
yt I have done against you. The third rope yt I have brought is to hang me with
upon an high galous so long that the birds light on my heed and on my body,
and feed themself of my flesh, and these things ben due to such trespacers
and brekers of the law as I am, and therefore my reverend lord have mercy on
me, for I dare not knowledge my trespace till I be certain of thy mercy and
pity. Than said the emperor, I se in the great mekenes and contricion, therefore
tell forth thy trespace, and sothly you shalt find mercy and grace. Alas alas
than said he, I have defouled thy daughter, and put her out of thy palace, and
now for great defaute she beggeth her breed from door to door. I have also
despoyled thy knights of all their goods, and now some of them for defaute of
goods ben thieves, and some manquellers, and the master of ye knights I have
slain. But I have fed thy greyhounde with the best as long as I might and
tied him with a chain, but at ye last he brake his ^hayne and went his way,
so yt now he renneth about in the country. When the emperor herd this, he was
sore astonyed and said. Have thou defouled my daughter whom I loved so well,
and also exiled my knights and slain their master, and the greyhou^de which
I loved best, of whom I gave the charge is gone also, sothly were it not that
I had forgyuen it the, and that ye mekest thy self so greatly, I should put
the to the most vylest death that could be thought. Therefore go thou anon and
bring again my daughter, than may thou wedde her, and if any harm here
after befall to her in thy defaute, than shall I double thy pain. Also bring
thou again my knights, and restore to them their goods, and set them in their
state and office as they were before. And also seek diligently my greyhou^de
till you find him and than bind him fast, so that in the here after may be
found no defaute. And when ye steward herd this he bowed down his heed and
thanked the Emperor of his great mercy. And than he went forth and sought
through out all the Empire so long till he had founden the Emperors daughter
and the knights, and also they greyhou^de, and brought them again. And after
that wedded the young lady with great honor and joy* and also restored again
the knights goods. And at the last he ended his life in peace and rest.

This Emperor betokens our lord Jesus Christ His daughter betokens ye
soul of man, made at the similytude of our lord god. And the.v. knights
betokens the.v. wits, armed with ye virtue of baptym to keep* the soul.
The master of ye knights is reason which ought to rule the wits. The
greyhounde is the flesh of man. The steward betokens every man to whom god
has given life and soul to keep under pain of lesyng everlasting life. But a
wretched man reme^brynge that is to come full often corrupts and defouleth
his soul by sin, and dryueth her from her palace of heaven, and than goth she
from door to door, that is to say, from sin to sin. He despoyled these.v.
knights of their goods, that is to say, the.v. wits of their virtues,
taking away the lawful sight fro the eyes, exhorting them unlawfully, and
also steryng the ears to hear sclau^der and backbytyng, and so forth of al ye
other wits, and thus some be made thieves, and some ma^quellers. The master
of these.v. wits is slain when so ever man is ruled by will, and not by
reason. The greyhou^de, that is the flesh, wherein a man delyteth was fed,
and bound with the chain of reason, which he breketh full often and renneth
out, and does much harm. The coming again of this Emperor from ye holy
land betokens the coming of our lord Jesus Christ at the day of dome to
deem all mankind. Therefore do we as the steward did, accuse we first our self
of our sins leest the devil and the world accuse us, and than it were to
late to ask mercy, therefore do we of our clothes betime that is to say, our
sinful life, and take we three ropes in our hands. The first rope yt should
bind our hands and fete, betokens the rope of contrycyon, which not only
ought to bind our hands and fete, but also our other members, both within
and without so hard, that the blood brast out on every side, that is to say,
that the sin might void. Hereto accords Ezechiel saying thus. In quacu^que
hora egerit penitentia^ p^to^rum saluus erit. When so ever ye sinful man does
penance he shall be saved. The second cord for to draw ye trespacer, is
confession, which should draw us from the beginning of our life unto this
day by ye penance of our mouth unto the time that the flesh be fallen from
the bones, that is to say, till the lust of ye flesh be turned away by the
stones of penance. For in like wise as the stone by nature and kind is hard,
right so penance ought to be hard. The third rope that should hang the
felon, is ye rope of satisfaccyon, of which hangyng speaks the apostle,
saying. Suspende elegit a i^a mea. My soul has chosen to be hanged. For like
as a man is lift up from the ground by hanging, right so a sinner is lift
up fro sin toward heaven unto god by the ha^gynge of satisfaccyo^ upon this
galous, we should hang till the birds of heaven came down, yt is to say till
the apostles come down to feed us with our good deeds. For there is more joy
of one sinner doing his penance a fore the angels of god in heaven. etc. Like
as the steward brought again themperours daughter. So it behooves us to seek
about by diverse works of mercy, and find our soul yt we lost, and bring
her again to the church, and rule well our.v. wits, and feed our greyhounde
as we should, and make our life so clean and pure, that we fall not again to
sin for dread that it fortune to us worse, and yt we have no leyser to ask
mercy again at our need. And if we fulfill all this truly unto to our lives
end, without doubt we shall obtain everlasting life. To ye which our lord
bring us all. Ame^.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor and a wise named Edfenne, which
ordained for a law that who so ever rauysshed a maid, should be at her will,
whether she would put him to death, or yt she would have him to her husband. It
befell after that a man rauy^shed in a night two fair mayde^s, ye first
damoysell desired that he should dye, and the second desired weddyng. The
rauyssher was taken and ^edde before the judge, that should satisfye both
these damoyselles through his wisdom and ryghtfulnes. The first damoysell ever
desired the death according to the law. Than said the second, I desire him to
be my husband, for in like wise as thou have the law for the, in like wise I
have it for me, and nevertheless my petycyon is more better than yours, for it
is more charytable, therefore me thinks in my reason that the justice should
give sentence with me. Than the justice understanding the great mercy of the
second damoysell, gave judgment that he should wedde her, and so it was done.

This Emperor betokens our lord Jesus Christ. The rauyssher betokens every
sinner, which rauyssheth gods mercy as often as he defouleth the
commandments of god by sin, for the devil may never ouerco^me man but if
it be suffered by will. For saint Austyn says. Non est peccatu^ nisi sit
volu^tariu^. It is no sin but if it be voluntary. The sinner rauyssheth the
mercy of god as often as he has very co^tricyon. The rauysher also is called
before the Justice when ye soul is departed from the body, and anon the first
damoysell (that is the devil) laid against the sinner that he ought to dye
euerlastyngly by ye law of ryghtwysnes. But that other maiden (that is Christ)
laid for her how ye mercy of god ought to help by co^tricyon and co^fessyon,
which is ye high way to everlasting life. Unto the which god bring both
you and me. Amen.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty emperor and a rich named Lypodyus, which
took to wife a fair vyrgyn and a gentle, and was the king of Assyryens
daughter. This young lady conceived and bare a child, and in the birth of her
sone she dyed. And anon after her decese this Emperor wedded an other wife
and begat her with child also. And anon after that these children were
borne, he sent them both in to a strange land for to be nourysshed. Than
said the mother of the second child. My reverend lord.x. years ben passed
sith I bare my child, and yet saw I him never but ones, and that was the
first day of his birth, therefore I beseech you my lord to send for him, that
I may ones rejoice me of his sight. Than said ye Emperor, I have an other
child by my first wife, and if I send for thy sone than must I send for
both, and tha^ anon he sent for them. And when they were common they were
passing fair and well nourysshed, well taught and passing like in all manner
things, that uneaths that one might be known fro that other but if it were
only of the father. Than said the mother of ye second child. A my lord tell
me which of these is my sone, and he called him her sone that he begat on his
first wife When thempresse herd this, she gave all her cure to nourysshe and
to eeche him, and despised that other. When the Emperor saw this, he said to
his wife. Sothly I have deceived the, for him that ye love so much is not
thy sone but that other is thy sone. Than set she all her cure upon the second,
and forsook the first. When the Emperor saw this, he said. Truly I have
deceived the yet, without doubt this is not thy sone, but one of them two is
thy sone. Than said ye mother. A my lord for his love that dyed on ye rode
tell me without cauellacyon which of them is my sone. The Emperor answered
and said, certainly I will not tell you till they be come to ma^hode, for this
reason. First I told you that this was thy sone, and him thou nourysshest as
thy sone and forsokest that other, and when I told you that this was thy sone,
than ye despised the first and cherysshedest the second, therefore I will that
thou cherysshe and nourrysshe them both till they come to that ye may have
joy of them. When thempresse herd this* she nourysshed them both a like. And
wha^ they were both come to age, the emperor made a great supper, and before
all his gestes he told his wife openly which of them was her child. Than
rejoiced she greatly, and with her sone she ended her life in peace and rest.

This Emperors sons betokens those yt be chosen to everlasting life, and
those ye be not chosen. The mother of them is the church yt nouryssheth them
both. Therefore our lord will not yt the church should know which be chosen
and which be not chosen. For if she knew that, than would she love ye one and
hate ye other, and so should charity be overthrown among us, and should live
in discord and strife, but troth at the day of dome shall tell us which of
them shall be saved, and which shall be dampened. Therefore pray we in this
world that we may come to the everlasting feast in heaven. Unto the which
god bring both you and me. Amen.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty emperor named Pole^nus, which had three
sons whom he loved much. It befell upon a day when this Emperor lay upon
his bed, he bethought him to which of his sons he might give his empire
after his decese. Than called he to him his three sons and said. Which of you
three yt is slowest, shall have mine Empire after my decese. The first sone
answered and said. Thine Empire by reason shall be mine, for I am so slow,
that if my foot were in the fire, I had lever yt it should be brent than to
take it out. Than said ye second I am quod he more apt to the Empire than
thou, for though there were a rope about my neck wherwyth I should be hanged,
and if I had a sharp sword in my hand for great sloth that I have I would
not put forth my hand to cut the rope in saving of my life. And wha^ these
two brethren had said, the third said for him thus. I ought to be emperor
before you both for I pass you in sloth, and that will I preue thus I lie
vpryght in my bed, and there droppeth water upon both mine eyes, and for
great sloth yt I have I mean not my heed neither to the right side of the
bed nor to the left side for saving of my self. When the Emperor herd
this, he byquethed the Empire unto the youngest sone as to the slowest of the
brethren.

This Emperor betokens the devil, which is lord and father over ye
church of pride. By the first sone is understand a man that comes in evil
felawshyp by whom he falls in mysgouernau^ce, and had lever to be burnt in
the fire of sin, than depart from them. The second sone betokens him yt
knows himself bound with the band of sin, wherwyth he is to be hanged on
the galous of hell, and is so slothful that he will not cut them away with
the lawful sword of co^fessyon. By the third sone is understand a man that
hears the techynge of ye joys of heaven and of ye pains of hell, and will not
m^^e himself to the right side for love and desire of reward, nor to the
lift side to forsake his sins for dread of turme^t. Such a man without
doubt for his sloth shall obtain the realm of hell. From ye which realm
keep us our lord Jesus. Ame^.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Alexander, the which
besyeged a cite of the king of Egypt with a great host, nevertheless this
Emperor lost many mighty knights without any hurt of stroke. And thus from
day to day his people dyed suddenly, whereat this Alexander wondered greatly and
was full sorrowful thereof in his mind, and anon let call before him ye wysest
philosophers yt might be found, and prayed the^ to tell him why his people
dyed thus suddenly without wound. The philosophers answered and said. My lord
it is no wonder, for upon ye walls of that castle wtin the cite is a
cocatryce, through whose sight your men dye, for they ben infected with the venym
that comes of his eyes, and anon the dye. Than this Alexander asked if there
were any remedy against that cocatryce. The philosophers answered and said. My
lord there is a good remedy, which is this, let set up a large myrrour of clear
glass over against this cocatryce between your host and the wall of the cite,
and when the (...) beholds himself in the myrrour the deed^^ ^^ture of his
venymous sight shall rebou^de agayn^ to himself, and thus he shall dye, and
your men shall be saved. The Emperor wrought by the counse^l^ of the
philosophers, and let set up anon a large myrrour of glass, and thus was this
cocatryce slain, and the Emperor with his host made an assa^te to the cite,
and optayned the vyctory.

This Emperor may be, called any chryste^ man, the whyc^^ ^^ght to gader an
host of virtues, for without (...) more may no man fight goostly. The cite
against whom ye shall fight is the world, wherein there is an (...) castle,
that is to say, vanite of vanytees. (...) vanitatu^. And al vanite, in this
vanite stands th^^ ^^atryce, that is to say, pride of life, desire of (...)
^^istes of flesh, wherefore this pride infectet (...), that they dye at the
last euerlastyngly Therefore the greatest remedy against this pride, is ye
co^syderacyon of our uncleanness, how we came naked in to this world, and if it
be asked why a man is proud, certainly it may be answered thus, for ye defaute
of clothyng of virtues, what shall we do when we dye thus goostly but set up a
poor myrrour of conscience, and by that conscience we may consider our will
and our bryttylnes as in a glass, where then may se thine own defaute, and
if we do thus without doubt ye cocatryce, yt is pride of life, desire of eyes,
and lust of flesh, we shall utterly destroy and obtain ye victory of this
worldly cite, and than be we s^re to win everlasting life, unto the which
god bring ^othe you and me. Amen.

A Mighty emperor sometime (...) named Archelaus, the which (...) wedded a
fair young lady, whom a young knight loved, and had to do with her as often as
him list. It befell on a night that this Emperor bethought him in his bed to
visyte ye holy land, wherefore without any more delay he ordained al thing
necessary to his journey, and took his leave of thempresse and of the states of
thempyre and went toward ye holy land. When thempresse herd this, she took
the master of the ship and said. If thou will consent to me and be true,
ask of me what ye will and thou shalt have it. The master of the ship was
smytten with couetyse and said. O my dear lady what so ever ye will command
me I shall without fail fulfill it, so that ye will reward me for my labor.
Tha^ said thempresse, or ye do ought for me I shall give the what the list to
have, so that you will swear to be true to me and keep my counsel. The
master of ye ship anon made his oath to be true to her. Than said
thempresse My lord goth with you in your ship, therefore when he is in the
mids of the sea, cast him out that he may be drowned, and ye shall obtain
your reward without any wythsaying. Than the master of ye ship swear a
great oath and said. By god after he comes ones win my ship, ye shall
never se him more. Than the lady paid him as much gold as he would have, and
forth he went to his ship. And within short time after the Emperor take
his ship, and when he was in the mids of ye see, the master of ye ship
took the emperor and threw hem over board in to the sea. Than the master
returned again and told the Empress that the Emperor was casten in to ye
see, whereof she was full glad. This Emperor that thus was cast in to the sea
had learned in his youth to swymme, and swamme forth till he saw an ylande in
the sea, but ever in his swymmynge wha^ he was faint and like to have been
drowned he prayed god to be his help and wept sore, till at ye last he came
in to a lyttel ylande wherein was nothing but lions and lybbardes and diverse
other beestes, that swam thither from other lands. When this Emperor had taken
land in that isle he espied a young lion fyghting with an old lybbarde, and
the lion was almoost ouerco^men. The Emperor had great co^passyon on ye lion,
and drew out his sword and slew ye lybbard. The lion ever from that time
forth followed the Emperor, and would not leave him for nothing, but every day
yt pray that this lion took he brought and laid it before themperours fete,
and anon the emperor smote fire on the flynt stone, and boiled the body in the
skin, and thus was he fed long time, till at the last as he walked to ye
see strande he saw a ship come saylynge by, and anon with an hye voice he
cried. And when ye shypmen herd this voice they wondered what it might be,
wherefore they sailed toward him, and when they were come to him he said Good
friends take me with you, and I shall pay you a good freyght. And anon they took
him in to their ship, and the lion followed him swymmynge in the sea after the
ship. And when the lion was in point to have been drowned, the shypmen had
pity on him, and took him in to the ship. And when the Emperor came to land
he paid his freyght, and when he had paid them, he went forth till he came
nere his own palace, where he herd tro^pettes and claryons, with all manner of
other mynstralsye, and as he herkened what it might be, there came fro the
palace a squire toward him that was of his knowledge, but ye squire knew not
him, to whom the Emperor said thus. Good friend I pray the tell me what
melody is this that I hear. The squire answered and said. The Empress is
married this day, and there ben all the states of thempyre at her feast, and
therefore they make such melody to make her gestes merry. Than said the emperor
to ye squire, where is her husband that was Emperor before. The squire said
yt he was gone to the holy land, and was drowned by the way in the sea. Than
said the emperor, I pray ye sir that thou would do mine erande to thempresse
and to ye lord that would be her husband, that I may come in to ye palace
and play before them with my lion* The squire granted to do his erande, and went
in and told the lord and the lady that at ye gate was a goodly old man that
desires to come in and play with his lion before you. Than said the new
wedded lord, bring him in, and if he be worthy percase he might get his
meat for his play When the Emperor with his lion was brought in, the lion
anon without any comfort or setting on, ran upon the young knight yt was
newly married and slew him, and when he had so done, he ran upon the Empress
and d^noured her to the hard bones before all ye lords of the Empire. And
when the states saw this, they were greatly aghast and began to flee. But the
emperor with his fair speech comforted them and said. Loo this is the
vengeance of god, for this is my wife yt has used auoutry long time with
this knight that lies here deed, and she ymagyned my death with the master of ye
ship, and here upon the master threw me in to the sea, but god saved me fro
ye death, and because I help ones ye lion at a need, he forsook me never sith,
and now as ye se al when I came in to my palace without any comfort of me he
has slain both the auouterers, and therefore understand ye for troth that I
am your lord ye Emperor Anon when they herd this, they lift up their eyes
and beheld him, and at the last they knew him for their lord, wherefore they
were greatly rejoiced, and praised god for that miracle, which had saved their
lord and Emperor. And they lived after in rest and peace.

By this Emperor ye may understand every christen man that purposes to
vysyte ye holy land, that is to say, to get everlasting life through the
works of mercy. But his wife, that is the wretched flesh murmureth against
the soul, and loves better her lemman that is deedly sin, than her
husband. This Emperor went in to the ship taking his journey toward the
holy land, that is to ^aye, he went to holy church which is ye way to god.
But the wife, that is to say flesshly men accused him to ye master of ye
ship, that is to say, to the prelates of the church for great mede which
oftentimes blyndeth ye sight of many justices where through many perfyte men ben
cast out of ye ship in to the sea to be drowned, yt is to say, out of ye
church in to the sea of this world. But what shall he do than that is thus
casten to be troubled in this world, certainly thus ought he to do, let him
learn to swymme, that is to say, let him put al his hope in god, and than by
his grace he shall come to an ylande, that is to say, the religyon of clean
heart, and that he shall love ever ye better to keep himself out of this
world, and therefore says saint James thus. A clean relygyon and vndefy^ed is
a precious thing in ye sight of god, and he yt is in this religyon shall find
a lion, whom him behooves to give against the devil. This lion is our lord
Jesus Christ that came of ye kynrede of Jude, which fyghteth ever against the
devil, and if a man has helped this lion at any time, trust well than that he
will not forsake him but be with him at all his need, according to the psalmist
saying thus. Cu^ ipso su^ in tribulatione. I am with him in trouble. By this
lion* thou may take thy wife, yt is to say, thy flesh with penance and
^lee thy sin, and than without doubt you shall obtain the Empire of heaven.
Unto the which bring us our lord Jesus. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled a mighty emperor named Gorgony, which had married a
curteys lady and a fair to his wife. This young lady in due process conceived
and bare him a sone, a fair child and an amyable. When this child was.x.
year old, his mother the Empress dyed. And anon after ye Emperor wedded an
other wife. This second wife loved in no wise themperours sone, but did him all the shame and reprefe that she might. When the Emperor perceived this, wyllyng
to please his wife, exiled his sone out of his empire. And wha^ this child was
exyled, he went and learned physyke, so that within short time he was a subtle
and a co^^ynge phisycyan. It befell soon after that the Emperor his father
syckened and was almoost deed, wherefore when he herd that his sone was such a
phisycyan, he sent for him by lettres, prayinge him that he would come to him
without any delay. And than the sone willing to obey, and fulfill his fathers
commandment, in all haste came unto him. And when he had seen his father and
felt his poulces and his veins, all the sycknes he had was soon healed with
his medycynes from all manner of dangers. Soon after that the Empress his
stepmother began to wax sick. And many physicyans said that she would dye. And
when the emperor herd this, he prayed his sone to help her of her sycknes.
Than said his sone, certainly father I will lay no hand on her. Than ye
Emperor began to wax wroth and said. If ye will not obey my commandment
thou shalt void my felawshyp. His sone answered and said, if ye do so dear
father, ye do unrightfully, for well ye know that ye exiled me out of your
Empire through her suggestyon, and mine absence was cause of your sorrow and
sycknes, and in like wise my presence is cause of her sycknes, and therefore I
will not meddle with her, and also I will use no more medicynes, for oftentimes
physycyans ben deceived, and therefore I dare not lay hand on her, leest men
would say (if it fortuned her to dye) that I were cause thereof. Than said the
Emperor. She has ye same sycknes that I had. His sone answered and said.
Though she have ye same sycknes, nevertheless ye be not of one co^pleccyon.
For what so ever I did to you, ye held you content, and when ye saw me come
within ye palace, ye reioysed of my coming, and greatly were eased to se him
that ye begat. But wha^ my stepmother saw me she swelled for anger and waxed
evil at ease, and therefore, if I should speak to her, her sorrow would increase,
and if I should touch her, she would be from her self. And also a physycyan
profyteth naught but where as ye sick man delyteth in him. And when the child
had said, he escaped and went his way.

This Emperor betokens every christen man, which is wedded to his
chrystendom at the font stone Forwha^ ye soul is made ye spouse of Christ, on
whom man begeteth a sone, yt is reason. But this wife, that is to say,
chrystendome dies wha^ so ever a man lies in deedly sin, and after her a
man weddeth a stepdame that is to say, wyckednes as oftentimes as he is ruled
by will, and not by reason, wherefore a man yt lives by flesshly lust
ofte^tymes exyleth reason, and than anon the soul waxes sick, for the
absence of reason is the cause of the sycknes of the soul. But wha^ reason
that is both goostly and bodyly the physycyan is bringing again by works of
mercy, than anon man is healed of his sycknes. But than the stepmother waxes
sick, that is to say, when froward will waxes sick, tha^ is the flesh
oppressed by penance. And therefore study we to oppress our flesh so by
penance, that we may comme to everlasting joy. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled a mighty emperor named Folemus, which had wedded ye
kings daughter of Germany, a fair lady and a curteys, which within short
time conceived and bare a sone. When this child was borne, the states of the
Empire came to the Emperor, and eueryche of them besought the Emperor to
nourysshe his sone. The Emperor answered and said. To morrow shall be a
tourney, and there shall ye all be, and which of you does best and optayneth
the vyctory, shall have the keeping of my sone, and if he nourysshe him well, I
shall promote him to great dignite and honor. And if he do the contrary, he
shall dye the foulest death that can be thought. Tha^ said they. Dear lord all
this pleases us well. On the morrow when every man was come to the tourney,
the states iusted and scarmysshed full manfully long time, till at ye last
there came a doughty knight named. Iosyas, that so manfully bare himself
among them, that he wanne the vyctory. And anon when all this was done, this
Josias took ye child and led him forth with him. And because this Emperors
sone should be received in his country, he sent before to his castle, and
commanded his officers that it should be dyght both without and within, and
that the chyldes bed should be made in the mids of the castle, and also the
seven scyences should be painted about the chyldes bed, that when the child
wakened out of his sleep, he might lie in his bed and read his lesson. This
knight had a fruytfull and a wholesome well by ye chyldes beds side, wherein he
used to bathe himself, and the knights wife bare ye key of this well and
there wss a wyndowe yt the son might come in and shine. It fortuned on a
day that the lady yt kept the key left ye wyndowe open through neclygence.
And when the lady had so done, there came a bear and saw the wyndowe open and
went to the well and bathed him therein, of whose bathing the well sauoured
after for the great hete that was that time, wherefore who so ever drunk
thereof waxed lepre wtin short time. And so it fortuned within a little space
after that ye lord and the lady and al their household were lepers, and not
wtstandyng it appeared not suddenly. And in the mean time there came a great
egle in at ye wyndowe where as the Emperors sone lay, and bare the child
away out of his cradell. And when the knight perceived this, he wept bytterly
and said. Alas alas and woo to me wretched creature that ever I was borne, what
shall I do, for now I am the sone of death, for I am a foul leper, and so is my
wife and all my household. And the while he was thus mourning theere came to
him a phisycyan and said to him Sir if ye will do after my counseyle, it shall
not repent you. First it behooves you and your wife and all your household to
be letten blood, and after yt to be bathed and wasshen clean, and than shall I
lay to my medicyne And when ye are hole, than shall you and your wife and all
your household walk to the mountains and seek the Emperors sone, for the
egle has let him fall in some place. The knight wrought all thing by the
counsel of this phisycyan, and anon after was letten blood and received the
medicyne, and than he was al hole and his wife and all his household, wherefore
he lepte on his horse, and took with him three squyers, and rode forth and
sought ye child. And at the last he found him hole and sound lyenge in a
valey, and than was he greatly reioysed. And for the great joy and gladness
that was in him for ye finding of themperours sone he made a great feast, and
after the feast he led the child home to his father. And when the emperor
saw his sone in good health, he was right glad, wherefore he promoted him to
great worship, which lived after ye long time in great honor and worship, and
at ye last ended his life in peace and rest.

This Emperor betokens the father of heaven, his sone betokens our lord
Jesus Christ, whom many men desire to nourysshe at eester when they receive ye
sacrament. He nouryssheth him that best iusteth with the devil and overcomes
him through penance. The knight that took this child with him betokens a good
christen man that fasteth truly and blyssedly all ye lent before. Therefore do
we as ye knight did, send we before messengers to dyght and to make clean ye
castle of our heart from al spots of sin by works of mercy, and so shall
this child Jesus rest and light in the mids of our heart. The well betokens
mercy, which ought to be next our lord. For who so ever is without mercy and
truth may not nourysshe that blessed child Jesus. But it happens often yt the
knights wife (yt is ye flesh of man) bears the key of mercy, and often
leueth ye well open and than comes the bear (that is the devil) and casts
venym in to ye well of mercy, and who that tastes thereof shall be infected
with ye lepry of sin. The wyndowe wherein the son shyneth is ye grace of ye
holy ghost, by whom men live and are comforted goostly, by this wyndowe the
egle comes in, that is to say, the power of almighty god, and took away ye
child Jesus from ye heart of man, and tha^ man has great cause to weep, but
what shall he do when ye child is gone but send for a subtyl phisycyan, that
is to say, a discryte confessor, which shall give him counsel to let him
blood and all his household, that is to say, to put out sin through
co^fessyo^ of tongue before his goostly father. Than must he bathe himself with
tears of co^tricyon and co^punccion of tongue, and after yt take the medicyne
of satisfaccyon, and than shall he be made clean from al manner of sin. And
when he has done thus, he must lepe on ye palfray of good life, and ride forth
with his three squyers, that is to say, fasting, prayer and alms deed, and than
without doubt he shall find the child Jesus in the valey of humilite, and not on
a hill that is to say, pride. And if he do thus, doubtless he shall have might
and power to nourysshe that blessed child Jesus, for whose nourysshynge the
father of heaven shall promote him unto everlasting joy. Unto the which joy
god bring us all. Amen.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor named Fulgentius, which governed
his people nobly, and loved the^ so much that he made to proclayme through out
all nacyons, that who so ever would come to him rich or poor at a certain
day, should have their petycyons what so ever (...) were. When ye mighty men
herd this, they were glad, and came at the day assygned, and every man put
forth th^yr peticions unto the Emperor, and anon their petycyons were
granted and fulfilled, in so much that almoost all the empire was departed
among them. And than every man was joy full and went home again and took s^a
syne of such lands and castles as the Emperor had given them, Anon after
the poor men gadred them together and said. A common cry was made that all
men both poor and rich should come to ye Emperors palace, and their they
should have what so ever they asked, and ye rich men have been there lately and
optayned their peticio^s. Therefore go we now and wit if we may obtain any
good of ye Emperor. That counsel was approbate and allowed among them all,
wherefore they went forth till they came to ye Emperors palace, and there they
put forth their petycyons according to the^perours proclamacyon. And when the
Emperor had herd them, he said to them Dear friends I have herd all your
peticyons, and it is troth that my proclamacyon was, yt every man
indifferently should come and have their peticyons, but the rich and mighty
men have been here before you, to whom I have given all that I had, save only
the royalte of my lor^shyp, and so have I nothing left to give you. A good
lord have mercy upon us, and let us not go void again, for we know well
that is our own defaute that we came not rather with these other rich and
mighty men, but sith it is so, we ask your grace that we may obtain somewhat
by the which we may live. Than said the Emperor. Good friends though I have
given all my lands, rentes and tenementes, and all ye castles to the rich men
that came before you. Nevertheless I have kept still in mine owe hands the
lordshyp over the^, and that lordshyp I give to you, and so shall they be your
servants, and be obedyent to you all. And when the poor men herd this, they
were greatly reioysed, and kneled down to the Emperor and thanked him saying.
^o though we come late, yet we be made lords over all these other, And with
this they took their leave and went home again. But when the rich and the
mighty men herd that, they were greatly moved, and set a common parlyament
among them self. And thus it was spoken among them. Alas alas how may we
serve them that sometime were but chorles and our subjects in all manner things,
and now they be made lords over us. Therefore go we al with one assent to
the emperor and pray we him of remedy. When this was said their counsel was
commended, and forth they went to the Emperor and said to him. Reverend lord
what may this be, those yt were our servants be made our lords we beseech
you mekely that it may not be so. Tha^ said the Emperor. Good friends I do you
no wrong, for my cry was common, that what so ever ye asked of me ye should
obtain your peticyon, and ye asked nothing of me but lands, rentes and
honors, and all that have I granted you at your own will, in so much yt I
kept nothing for my self, and each of you were well content at your away
going, and after yt came simple and poor men and asked of me some goods
according to my proclamacyon, and I had nothing to give them, for I had given
you all that I had, save only the lordshyp over you, which I kept in my
hands, and when the poor men so cried on me, I had nothing to give them, save
only the lordshyp over you, and therefore ye should not blame me, for that ye
asked ye had. Than said they. A good lord we pray you effectuously of your
counsel in this case, and of your help. The Emperor answered and said, Syrs
if ye will work after me, I shall give you good and profitable counsel. Than
said they. Lord we be ready to fulfill what so ever ye say to us for our
profit. Than said the emperor. My good friends ye have of me both lands and
tenementes, with other mouable goods, and that great plente, the which by my
counsel ye shall depart with the poor men, that they may grant you the
lordshyp. And anon these rich men gladly granted to this, and departed al
their goods among the poor men, and than they gave them again the lordshyp
over the^, like as they had of ye rich men And thus were they both content,
and the emperor was greatly commended of all the people, because he accorded
both the parties so wisely.

By this Emperor is understand our lord Jesus Christ, which made a
proclamacyon by his prophets patriarchs, apostles and prechers, that every man
both poor and rich should come and ask everlasting joy, and without
doubt they shall obtain their peticion. But ye rich and mighty men asked
none other thing but worldly honor and transytory richesse, for this world
shall pass and all his couetyse, wherefore he gave them so much of worldly
goods, that he had nothing left to himself, according to scripture. The
birds of heaven have nestes, and ye foxes in earth have caves; but ye sone of
god has nothing in earth where he may put his heed. The poor men be such as
be meke in heart. Of the which poor men speaks our lord, saying. Blessed be
the poor in heart, for the kingdom of heaven is theyrs. And if it should seem
that they have lordshyps above mighty men of this world, therefore these rich
men ought to depart their richesse with poor men, according to the
scripture, saying thus. Give ye alms, and all thing shall be cleue to you.
And thus may ye get a lordshyp in heaven, unto ye which lordshyp I beseech
almighty god to bring us all. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled a mighty emperor named Domicyan, which had two
daughters of whom one was passing fair, and that other foul and ugly to
behold, wherefore he let cry through out all his empire, that what man would
have his fair daughter to wife, should have nothing with her but her fayrnes.
And who that wedded his foul daughter, should have all his empire after his
death. And when the proclamacyon was made, there came many lords yt desired to
wedde his fair daughter. Tho whom the Emperor answered thus. Syrs quod he,
ye wot not what ye desire, right well ye know that if ye wedde her, ye shall
have nothing with her but her fayrnes, and farthermore if I give her to one of
you and not to another, than will ye strive for her, therefore if ye will needs
have her and forsake my foul daughter, you behooves first to just for her, and
he that wynneth her, shall wedde her. Than were the greatest states of ye
empire greatly rejoiced, and anon only for he love they would just and also
fight, wherefore they set a day of battle, and many worthy men were slain on
both sides, nevertheless one optayned the victory and wedded that fair lady.
The second daughter that was foul and ugly saw this that her sister was
wedded with great solempnite mourned and wept daily, wherefore the Emperor her
father came to her and said. Dear daughter why mournest thou thus. Alas dear
father quod she, it is no wonder though I mourn, seeing my sister wedded with
so great honor and gladness, and every man is feign of her, and no man loves
my felawshyp, and therefore dear father what I may best do sothly I wot not.
Than said the emperor. O my dear daughter, all yt is mine is thine and it is
not unknown to you that he which wedded thy sister had nothing with her but
her fayrnes, and therefore I shall proclayme in mine own person through all
mine Empire, that what man weddeth you, I shall make him sure by let^re pate^t
of al mine empire after my death. Tha^ this young lady though she was foul and
ugly, nevertheless she rejoiced in ye promise of her father, and anon after
the proclamacyon was made, than there came a young knight and a gentle and
wedded ye lady and after the death of the Emperor he seized all the Empire and
was crowned Emperor and she Empress. This Emperor betokens our lord Jesus
Christ which has two daughters, that one fair and that other foul. That one
fair betokens this world, which is full fair and delectable to many me^.
That other foul betokens pouerte and trouble, whom few men desire to
wedde. Nevertheless a common cry was made by holy scripture, that who so
would have his fair daughter, that is the world, should have nothing with her
but her fayrnes, that is to say, the worldly vany^ees which fade and fall a
way like as the fayrnes of man. But who that will wedde the foul daughter,
that is to say, wylfully to receive pouerte and trouble for gods love,
without doubt he shall obtain ye empire of heaven, according to scripture,
saying. Ye that have forsaken all thing for my love to follow me, shall have
everlasting life. Many noble and worthy men have iusted for the fair daughter,
that is to say, have foughten both by see and by land for this world for
couetyse of worldly richesse, and at the last there be many slain, for there
is nothing here but pride of life, couetyse of eyes or of the flesh, where
through all the world is put to great myschefe. But he that weddeth the fair
daughter, that is ye world, is he that sets all his affection and desire in
the wrecchednes of this world, and will not for nothing forsake this world,
like a wretch and covetous man. But he that weddeth the foul daughter, is a
good christen man, which for the love of ye kingdom of heaven forsakes all this
world, and not only does thus but also despyseth himself, bodyly obeyinge
unto his soueraynes in all thing. Such a man certainly shall obtain the
Empire of heaven. Unto the which Jesus Christ bring both you and me. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled a mighty emperor named Andromyke, which above all
thing loved melody. This Emperor had within his castle a well of such
virtue, that who so ever were dronken and drank of the water of that well,
should incontinent be fresshe again, and be delivered from all manner of
dro^kennes. There was also dwelling in this Emperors court a knight named
Ydrony, whom ye Emperor loved much, but oftentimes he was dronken, which
vice the emperor hated above all thing. And when this knight perceived
himself dronken, than would he go to the well and drink of the water and
refresshe him self, so that what so ever the Emperor said to him he would
answer him so reasonably, that no dronke^nes might be seen in him, and for his
wytty answer he was grea^ly beloved of the Emperor. Nevertheless his fellows
of the court enuyd him much, and ymagyned among themself how they might
depart ye Emperors love fro him. It fortuned on a day that this Emperor
went to the forest and herd a nyghtyngale sing so merely, that oftentimes
after he would rise erly in ye morning, and sometime from his meat and walk
to the wode for to hear the swetnes of her song, wherefore many of his men
said among themself. Our lord delyteth so much in the nyghtyngales song,
that he recketh little of our profit, in so much yt through two things his
love is withdrawn from us, that is to say by Ydrony the knight and by the
sweet song of the nyghtyngale. Than said an old knight that was among them.
Syrs quod he, if ye will do by my counseyle, I shall deliver you of the knight
Ydrony and of the nyghtyngale without hurt or death. They swear and said, what so
ever ye bydde us do, we shall anon fulfill with all our heart. When this knight
herd this, within a while after he espied this Ydrony droken, wherefore he
locked fast ye well, and as this knight Ydrony came to refresshe himself, he
found ye well fast locked. The Emperor had a great matter to treat, wherefore
in haste he sent for this knight, because of his great wysdom to have his
counseyle. And when he came before ye Emperor he was so dronken that he might
not ones move his tongue, neither had wit, reason, nor understanding to
answer the Emperor to his matter. But when the Emperor saw this, he was
greatly grieved, for so much as he hated that vice, wherefore he commanded
anon that from that day forth he should no more be seen within his land upon
pain of death. This hearing his fomen greatly were gladded, and said unto the
old knight. Now be we delivered of this knight Ydrony, there is no more to do
but yt we might find the way to be delivered of the nyghtyngale, in which
the Emperor delyteth so much. Than said this old knight your ears shall
hear and your eyes shall se that this nyghtyngale shall be destroyed in short
time. Not long after this old knight espied that ye nyghtyngale used to sit
upon a tree even above the foresaid well, where as her make came and grendred
with her, nevertheless in the absence of her make she took oftentimes an other
make and did auoutry, and when she had thus done, than would she descend to
the well and bathe her self, that when her make came, he should feel no savor
ne evil odor of yt she had done. When ye knight had seen this on a time he
locked the well, and when the nyghtyngale would have descended to bathe her
self after her auou^ry, she found the well closed, wherefore she flewe up to
the tree again and mourned sore in her manner, and left of her sweet song.
Than came her make and saw that she had trespaced against her nature, he
returned again and in short time brought a great multitude of nyghtyngales
which slew his make, and tare her al to pieces And thus was the wise knight put
away and the nyghtyngale slain, and the Emperor put from his pleasure and
solace such as he was wont to have.

This Emperor betokens our lord Jesus Christ which loves greatly the song
of perfyte devotion, for when we pray we speak with god, and when we read, god
speaks with us. The well that was in ye palace betokens confession that is
in the church, therefore if any man be dronken with sin, let him drink of ye
well of confession, and without doubt he shall be safe. This ydrony betokens
every man that wylfully returns again to sin after his confession, like as
a dog yt makes a vomyte and casts out the meat that he has eaten before,
and after wha^ he is hungry comes and eats it again. Nevertheless if a
man yt has sinned thus will drink of ye well of confession, he shall receive
his goostly strengthes. The nyghtyngale yt sat on the tree betokens the
soul ye sytteth on ye tree of holy doctrine And her song betokens the soul
that sytteth on the tree in devout prayers to god. But this soul does
auoutry as oftentimes as she consents to sin. Nevertheless if she run to
confession and bathe her with the water of contricyon, god shall love her. But
her fomen that be the fendes of hell seeing this that god is so merciful, they
stop the well of confession, that is to say, the mouths of them that would
shryue themself, with shame and dread of penance, that they dare not tell
forth their sins. And thus ben many exiled and put to death everlasting. And
therefore study we to bathe our life in the well of confession with ye water of
contrycyon, and than may we be sure to come to everlasting life. Unto the
which god bring both you and me. Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Darmes, which had a mighty
strong cite and strongly walled about, and a bell hanging in the mids of
ye cite, and when so ever this Emperor went to battle without ye cite, this
bell should be ronge, but there should no man ring ye bell but a virgyn. Within
short time after it befell that dragons and serpe^tes and many other venymous
beestes empoysoned much people, so that ye cite was almoost destroyed,
wherefore the states of the cite went with one assent to the Emperor and said.
Lord what shall we do, lo our gods and our cite is almoost destroyed, and ye
and we be in peril to perysshe through these fell beestes that consume us,
therefore take we good counseyle, or else we are but lost. Than said the
Emperor, what say you is best to be done in this matter, and how may we best
be defended. Tha^ answered one of ye wysest and said. My lord hear my
counsel and do thereafter, and ye shall not forthynke it, ye have quod he in
your place a lion, and set up a cross and hang this lion there upon with
nails, and when other venymous beestes se him thus hanging on the cross,
they will dread, and so shall they forsake this cite, and we shall be in rest
and ease. Than said ye Emperor, it pleases me well that he be hanged in
saving of you. Than took they ye lion and henge him on the cross fast nailed.
And other lions and venymous dragons came toward the cite and saw the lion
thus hanging, they fled away for dread, and durst come no nere.

This emperor betokens the father of heaven, the cite well walled with ye bell
in ye mids betokens the soul walled about with virtues. The bell betokens
a clean conscience that warns a man to battle when he should fight against
the devil, that he might arm himself before with virtues. The virgyn yt should
ring this bell is reason, the which as a virgyn declyneth all to ryghtfull
clennes. The venymous dragon yt bears fire betoken^th the flesh of man;
which bears the fire of glotony and lechery, yt which brent. Adam our fore
father when he ete of the forboden apple. The venymous be^stes that poisoned
the men betokens the fendes of hell* which for ye most part has destroyed
mankind. The states of the cite betoken patriarchs and prophets, which
besought god of good cou^^eyle and remedy that mankind might be (...), and
anon it was cou^seyled for the best (...), that a lion (yt is Christ) should
be hanged upon a cross according to scripture saying thus. Expedi^ vnus
mori^tur homo pro populo et nongens peroat. etc. That is to say. It behooves a
man to dye for the people, leest all folks be perysshed. Than took, they
Christ and henge him on ye cross, for the which the devil dredeth christen
people, and dare not ny^h them. And thus, by the grace of god christen men
shall come to everlasting bliss. Unto ye which bring us he, that for us dyed
on the rode tree. Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor and a merciful named Menalay,
which ordained such a law, that what mysdoer were taken and put in prison; if
he might escape and come to the emperors palace, he should be there safe for
all manner felony, treason, or any other trespace that he had done in his life.
It was not long after but it befell yt a knight trespaced, wherefore he was
taken and put in a strong and a dark prison, where he lay long time, and had
no l^ght but at a little wyndowe, where as skante light shone in that lyghtned
him to eat the simple meat yt was brought him by his keeper, wherefore he
mourned greatly and made great sorrow that he was thus fast shette up from the
sight of men. Nevertheless when the keeper was gone there came daily a
nightyngale in at yt wyndowe and sange full swetely, of whose song this woeful
knight often time was fed with joy, and wha^ this bird seized of her song
than would she fly in to ye knights bosom and there this knight fed her many
a day of the vytayle that god sent him. It befell after on a day that this
knight was greatly desolate of comfort. Nevertheless the bird sat in his
bosom eating nuttes, and thus he said unto the bird. O good bird I have
sustained the many a day, what will thou give me now in my desolacyon to
comfort me, remember the well that ye art the creature of god, and I also,
therefore help me now in my great need. When the bird herd this, she flewe
forth from his bosom, and tarried from him three days. But the third day she
came again, and brought in her mouth a precious stood, and laid it in the
knights bosom. And when she had so done, she took her flight and flewe from
him again. The knight meruayled of ye stone and of the bird, and therwyth he
took the stone in his hand and touched his gyues and fetters therewith, and
anon fell of all his fetters and chains wherwt he was bound. And than he
arose and touched the doors of the prison, and anon they opened, and so he
escaped and ran fast to ye Emperors palace. When the keeper of ye prison
perceived this, he blewe a horn thryse and raised up all the folk of the cite,
and led them forth cryenge with an hye voice Loathe thief is gone, follow we
him al. And with that he ran before all his fellows toward the knight, and
wha^ he came nygh him, ye knight be^^ his bow and did shote an arowe, wherwt
he smote the keeper in ye lunges and slew him, and than he ran to ye palace,
where as he found socour according to the law.

This Emperor betokens our lord Jesus Christ which ordained a law that
what mysdoer, that is to say, what sinner might escape and come to the palace
of holy church through confession and co^tricyon should find there perpetual
socour and help. This knight betokens every sinner that is taken in deedly
sin, and judged unto the prison of hell by ye law of god, and he is straytly
bound with chains of sin, wherefore he wepeth and mourueth daily for his
trespace. The keeper of this prison betokens the devil that keeps such a
man hard bound in sin, and serves him with richesse and delytes of this
world, that he should not escape from him. The bird that syngeth so swetely
betokens the voice of heaven that says to the sinner. Reuertere reuertere
sunamitis. Turn again now turn again thou prisoner, that is to say, turn
again thou sinner and I shall receive the ^o grace. For when mankind was in
limbo patru^ which was a certain prison of hell before the coming of
Christ. Than came a bird that is to say, the godhede bearyng with him a stone
that betokens our lord Jesus Christ, according to holy scripture, saying.
Ego su^ lapis. etc. I am a stone. The soul of Christ descended with the godhede
and brought with him all mankind out of the prison of hell, therefore if any of
us be in the prison of deedly sin, touch we our sins with the stone, that
is to say, with the virtue of our lord Jesus Christ by confession and
contricyon, and than wtouten doubt the chains of our sins with his stone
shall be broken and fall from us, and ye doors of heavenly grace shall be
opened, and we shall obtain help and socour in the palace of ye church. And
if the keeper of ye prison, that is to say, the devil which is the blower of
the horn of pride, lechery, or couetyse, stere up any sinners, than turn we
again toward him manly and shote at him ye arowe of penance, and withouten
doubt he shall flee from us. And tha^ by ye grace of god we may obtain the
palace of heaven. Unto ye which bring us our lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor and a mercyful named Ebolydes.
It fortuned on a day that this Emperor walked unto the forest, where as he
met suddenly with a poor man, and anon when this Emperor saw him, he was
greatly moved with mercy and said. Good friend whens art thou. My souerayn
lord quod he, I am yours and borne in your land, and now I am in great
pouerte and need. And than said the Emperor, if I knew that ye were true in
every thing, I should promote the to great riches, therefore tell me what is
thy name. My lord quod he I am called Lentyculus, and I behote you my troth
and true service, and if I do other wise I submyt me to you and to all manner of
pain that ye can put me to. When the Emperor herd this, he promoted him
anon unto great richesse, and anon after yt he made him a knight and steward
of his land. And when he was thus exalted to richesse and honor, he waxed so
proud yt he despised them that were worthyer than he, and despised such as
were simple and poor. It was not long after that it befell that this steward
rode by a forest, where as he met with the foster, and charged him yt he
should make an hondreth pyttes in the ground, and cover them over with grene
grass and small bows, that if wild beestes fortuned to go in the forell that
way, that they should than fall in, and so should they be taken and brought to
the Emperor. The foster answered and said, sir as ye have said it shall be
done. Not long after it fortuned yt this steward rode to this forest again
to se if these pyt^es were made, and as he rode he be thought him how great a
man and how mighty he was made and how all thing in ye Empire obeyed to him
and was ready at his will. And as he rode thus thinking, he said to himself.
There is no (...) save only I, and with that he smote his horse with his
spur^es, and suddenly he fell in to one of ye deep pyttes that he had ordained
before himself for the wild beestes, and for ye great depnes thereof he might
not arise again by no manner of craft, wherefore he mourned greatly. And anon
after him came a hu^gry lion and fell in to ye same pyt, and after the lion an
ape, and after ye ape a serpent. And when the steward was thus walled with these
three beestes, he was greatly moved, and dred sore. There was that time dwelling
in the cite a poor man named Guy, that had no good save only an ass, wherwt
daily he carried styckes and fallen wode and such as he could get in ye
forest, and those he brought to ye market and sold the^ and in this wife he
sustained himself and his wife as well as he might. It fortuned that this
poor Guy went to this forest as he was wont, and as he came by ye deep pyt he
herd a man cry and say. O dear friend what art you, for gods sake help me,
and I shall quyte the so well that you shalt ever after be the better. When
this poor Guy herd yt it was ye voice of a man, he meruayled greatly, and
stood still on the pyttes brynke and said. Lo good friend I am come for you
have called me. Than said the knight, dear friend I am steward of all the
Emperors lands, and thus by fortune I am fallen in to this pyt, and here be
with me three beestes, that is to say, a lion, an ape, and an horrible serpent,
which I dread most of all, and I wot not of which of them I shall be first
devoured, therefore I pray the for gods sake get me a long cord wherwyth
thou may draw me out of this deep pyt, and I shall warau^t ye to make the
rich in all thing for ever more hereafter, and but I have ye rather help I
shall be devoured of these beestes. Than said this poor Guy, I may ful^ ill
entende to help ye, for I have nothing to live on but that I g^der wode, and
carry it to ye market to sell, wherwyth I am sustained, nevertheless I shall
leave my labor and fulfill thy will, and if ye reward me not it shall be great
hyndraunce to me and to my wife. Than the steward made a great oath and said
that he would promote him and al his to great richesse. Than said Guy if thou
wylt fulfill thy promise I shall do yt ye bid me And with that went again to
the cite and brought with him a long rope and came to ye pyt and said. Sir
steward lo I let down a rope to the, bind thyselfe about the myddle
therwyth, that I may pull the up. Than was the steward glad and said. Good
friend let down ye rope. And with yt he cast the end of the rope down into
the pyt. And when the lion saw that, he caught the rope and held it fast, and
Guy drew ye lion up, wenynge to him he had drawn up the steward, and when he
had so done the lion thanked him in his manner and ran to ye wode. The second
time this Guy let down the rope, the ape lepte to it and caught it fast, and
when he was drawn up he thanked Guy as he could and ran to the wode. The
third time he let down the rope and drew up ye serpent which thanked him
and went to ye wode. The steward cried with an hye voice. O dear friend now am
I delivered of three venymous beestes, now let down the cord to me, that I may
come up. And this poor Guy let down the rope, and the steward bound
himself fast abouthe the myddle, and anon Guy drew him up. And when he was
thus help he said to Guy. Come to me at three of the clock to the palace,
and than I shall make the rich for ever. This poor Guy rejoiced thereof, and
went home without any reward. Than his wife demanded him why he gadered no
wode wherwt they might live that day. Than told he her all the process as it
befell, how the steward fell in to ye pyt, and also the lion, the ape, and the
serpent, that he had made in ye said forest, and how he had helped him out with
a cord and saved him from deuouryng of ye three venymous beestes and how he
should go to the steward and sethe his reward on ye morrow. When his wife
herd this, she rejoiced greatly and said. If it shall be so, good sir arise to
morrow at a due hour and go to the palace and receive your reward, that we
may be conforted thereby. So in the morning Guy arose and went to ye palace
and knocked at the gate. Than came the porter and asked the cause of his
knockyng. I pray the quod this Guy go to ye steward and say to him that here
abides a poor man at the gate that spoke with him yesterday in the forest.
The porter went in and told the steward as ye poor man had said. Than said
the steward, go thou again and tell him that he lies, for yesterday spoke I
with no man in the forest, and charge him that he go his way, and that I se
him there never after. The porter went forth and told poor Guy how the
steward had said, and charged him to go his way. Than was this Guy sorrowful
and went home, and when he came home he told his wife how the steward
answered him. His wife conforted him in all that she might and said. Sir go ye
again and prove him thryse. Than on ye morrow this Guy arose and went to the
palace again, praying the porter ones to do his erande again to the steward.
Than the porter answered and said, gladly I will do thine erande, but I dread me
sore that it shall be thy hurt. And than went he in and told ye steward of
ye coming of this poor man When ye steward herd that, he went out and all
to bette this sely Guy, and left him in peril of death. When his wife herd
this, she came with her ass and led him home as she might, and all yt she had
she spente upon surgyens and phisyciens to help him. And when he was perfytly
hole, he went to the forest as he was wont for to gader styckes and small wode
for his living. And as he went about in that forest he saw a strong lion,
dryuynge before him asses that were charged with chaffer and marchau^dyse. This
lion drove forth the asses before Guy which dred sore the lion leest he would
have devoured him, nevertheless when he beheld the lion better, he knew well
that he was the same lion yt de drew out of the pyt. This lion left not Guy
till all ye asses with the marchau^dyse were entered in to his house, and than
the lion did him obeysaunce and ran to ye wode. This Guy obtained these
fardels and found great richesse therein, wherefore he made to proclayme in
diverse chyrches if any man had lost such goods, but there was none that
challenged them. And when Guy saw this he took the goods, bought therwyth house
and land, and so was made rich. Neuertheles^e he hau^ted the forest as he did
before. And after yt as he walked in the forest to gader wode he espied the ape
in the top of a tree, the which brake bows besyly with her tethe and claws*
and threw them down, so that in short time Guy had laden his ass. And when
the ape had so done, she went her way, and Guy went home. And on the morrow
Guy went to the forest again, and as he sat byndyng his fagottes, he saw the
serpent that he drew out of the pyt come toward him, bearyng in his mouth a
precious stone of the colors, the which stone yt serpent let fall at Guyes
sete, an(...)ad so done, she kyssed his fete and went her (...) Guy took up
the stone, and meruayled greatly (...) virtue it might be, wherefore he arose
(...) went to a seller of precious stones named Peter, and said. (...) brother
I pray ^he tell me the virtue of this p^ecyous stone, and I shall reward the
well for thy labor. Wha^ this stone seller had well beholden and understood
the nature of this stone, he said Good friend if the ly^^ ^o s^ll thy stone, I
shall give the an. C. mark. Than said Guy, I will not sell my stone till thou
tell me truly the virtue ^^erof. Than said the merchant, without doubt this
none has three virtues, the first virtue is this, that who so bears this
stone upon him, shall have joy wyth^u^ sorrow, the second virtue is, that he
shall have plente without defante the third virtue is, he shall have light without
darkness and it has also another virtue, that no man may sell it but for as
much as it is worth and if he do the contrary the stone returns again to ye
first owner. When Guy herd this, he was right joyful, and said to himself, in
a good hour I drew these beestes out of the pyt. Not long after it befell
that this Guy by the virtue of this stone was made passing rich, and bought
great possessions and lyuelode, wherefore wtin a while he was made knight. It
was not long after ye emperor had knowledge how sir Guy had a stone of such
virtue, wherefore he sent for sir Guy, co^maundyng him to come to him in all
haste, and so he did. And when sir Guy was come to ye emperor, the Emperor
said to him. My friend I have herd say that sometime thou were in great
pouerte, and now art made rich by ye virtue of a little stone therefore I pray
the that thou sell me that stone. Sir Guy answered and said, yt may I not do,
for so long as I have that stone I am sure of three things, that is to say,
of joy without sorrow, plente without defaute, and light without derknes. When the
Emperor herd this he had greater desire to bye that stone than he had before,
and said. Sir Guy of two things thou must chose one, that is, chose whether
thou wylt forsake this empire and all thy kynrede, or else sell me thy stone.
Than said sir Guy. My lord if it must needs be thus, be it at your will,
nevertheless I shall tell you the peril of this stone, if ye pay not
therefore as it is worth, without doubt it will come to me again. Than said ye
Emperor, sothly I shall give the suffycyent, for thou shalt receive of me
therefore a thousand pound, and so it was done, sir Guy received the money and
went home. On ye morrow erly he opened his cofer and found the stone, and
than he told to the lady his wife how he had sold the stone to ye Emperor
and delivered it, and how he found it again in his cofer. Than said his wife,
good sir in all ye haste ye can go again to the Emperor and take him the
stone, for dread that he be not wroth, and through malice put some fraud in us.
Than went forth sir Guy again to the Emperor and said to him. My lord
yesterday I sold you a stone, yt which if it please you I would feign se. The
Emperor went for the stone to his treasour and found it not, wherefore he was
right sorrowful, and came again and told sir Guy how it was lost Than said sir
Guy. My lord grieve you not, for I told you yesterday that I might not sell it
but if I had the value thereof, and yesterday I received a thousand pound of
you therefore, and this day I found it in mi cofer again and therefore if I had
not brought you the stone again perauenture ye would have showed me your heavy
lordshyp, and with that he showed forth the stone, whereat the Emperor
meruayled greatly and said. Sir Guy by thy troth that thou owe to me tell me
how thou came by this stone. Than said sir Guy. By my faith that I owe to you
I shall tell you ye very troth as touching this stone. Your steward that is
promoted up of naught let make many deep pyttes in your forest, and it fortuned
not long after that he fell down in to one of them him self, and might not
rise again for depnesse of the pyt, it fortuned also the same day that a
lion, an ape and a serpent fell in to the pyt with him, that time was I a poor
man, and as I walked in to the forest with mine ass for to gather wode he
cried to me that I should help him out of the pyt, and save him fro death, for
there were in the pyt with him three venymous beestes, that is to say, a lion,
an ape, and a foul serpent, and than he behyght me by mouth to promote me and
all my kynne to great richesse And when I herd that, I was glad, and let down
a cord, supposyng to have drawn up him, and than I haled v^ a lion, and after
that an ape, and than a serpent, and at the last your steward. The lion gave
me ten asses charged with marchaundyse, the ape gave me as much wode as mine
ass might bear, and the serpent gave me this stone yt I have sold you, but
your steward bette me and wounded me so sore for my good deed, that I was
borne home upon mine ass. When ye Emperor herd this, his heart was greatly
moved against ye steward wherefore he examyned him of that false deed, but he
was dombe and would not speak, for so much yt he could not deny his falshede.
Than said ye Emperor. O thou wretched creature, unreasonable beestes, as the
lion, the ape, and the serpent rewarded him for his good deed and thou that art
a reasonable man have almost beaten him to death that saved the and took the out
of the pyt, therefore for thy falshede and wyckednes I judge the to be hanged
this day on the galowes, and all thy goods and lands I grant to sir Guy,
and also I ordeyne that sir Guy shall occupye thy place and be steward, and so
it was done. When sir Guy was thus rewarded by the Emperor and made steward,
he was well beloved of every man as long as he lived, and at ye last ended his
life with honor and good peace.

This emperor betokens the father of heaven, the poor man betokens every
man that comes in to this world feeble and naked from his mothers belly, and
at ye last is promoted to great richesse and worldly honor, as the psalmyst
says. Destercore erigens paupere^. God lyfteth up the poor man out of fylthe,
and many such men know neither god ne themself, but cause to make deep
pyttes, that is to say, unkindness and malice they ordeyne against simple men,
in the which pyt ye devil causes them often to fall, according to a text in
Ecclesiastico. Houea^ qui alteri facit, ipse incidit in ea^. That is to say,
who makes a pyt to an other man, often time he falls therein himself, which
text was well proved by Mardocheus. This Guy that went daily to ye forest with
his ass to gader wode betokens every right full man, dredyng god in ye
forest of this world, yt wode that he gadereth betokens his mery^oryous
works that he caryeth on his ass, which betokens ye body of man, wherewith
his soul may joy and live in ye tabernacle of heaven. And as the steward, the
lion, the ape and the serpent that fell in to the pyt, right so when a sinful
man falls in ye pyt of sin. The lyo^ of ye kynrede of Jude (that is Jesus
Christ) descends with him as oftentimes as the sinner has will to come to
grace. Therefore says the psalmyst. Cum ipso sum in tribulatione. That is ta
say, I am with him in tribulacio^. This Guy draws up ye lion, yt is to say
Jesus Christ out of the pyt by the rope of virtues. He drew up ye ape also,
that is to say contrary will to reason, yt he might obey to reason. For of all
manner beestes the ape is most like to man, right so among all the strengthes
of the soul will ought to be lykened unto reason, and to obey reason. He drew
up also a serpent, by the which is understand penance for two causes. For the
serpent bears in his mouth venym, and his tail is a medicyne Right so
penance bears at the beginning bytternes to the doer, nevertheless it is
full sweet and medicynable unto the soul at ye end, and therefore every
ryghtwyse man should draw to him the serpent of penance. And at the last he
drew up the steward from the pyt of sin, according to Christ's saying. I am
not come only to call ryghtwyse men, but sinners to penance. Also it is
written that Seneca which taught an Emperor many lores and virtues of truth,
and at the last like this steward caused to slay his master Seneca. Also
Christ gave power to Judas to work miracles, like as he did to other
dyscyples, nevertheless he betrayed him at the last. Right so now a days be
many children of Belial which delight more to do harm tha^ good, in especyall
to them yt would ^eche them perfytly both for the soul and for the body. The
lion gave to the ryghtwyse man.x. asses charged with marchaundyse, that is to
say, our lord Jesus Christ gives to every ryghtwyse man.x. commandments
charged with virtues, by the which he grows to ye richesse of heaven. The ape
also gadereth him wode as often as the ryghtfull man werketh wylfully ye deeds
of charity. For wode is profitable for two things, that is to say, to make
fire and to build houses. Right so ^fy^^ charity heateth the angel,
according to scripture, saying. Quia magis gaudiu^ est angelis. etc. That is to
say. More joy is to angels for one sinner doing penance. etc. Charity also
reyseth the house of heaven against the coming of the soul. The serpent also
gave him a stone of three diverse colors, the which he betokens our lord
Jesus Christ, whom we seek by penance. Therefore says saint Jerome in the
second table thus. ^ost naufragi^^ est premia^. That is to say. We should do
penance after our trespace. That Christ is a stone, may be proved by himself,
saying thus. Ego sum lapis viuus. That is to say, I am a living stone. Christ
has three colors, which betokens yt might of the father, the wisdom of the
sone, and the mekenes of the holy ghost. Therefore who that may get this stone,
shall have the empire of heaven, and joy without sorrow, and plente without any
defaute, and light without darkness. Unto which light bring us our lord Jesus
Christ that dyed for you and me and all mankind. Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Anselme, which had wedded ye
kings daughter of Iherusalem, a fair lady and a gracyous in the sight of
every man, but she was long time with the Emperor or she wa^ conceived with
child, wherefore the nobles of ye Empire were right sorrowful because their
lord had none heir of his body begoten. Till at the last it befell that this
Anselme walked after supper in an evening in his gardeyn, and bethought
himself how he had none heir, and how the king of Ampluy warred on him
co^tynually for so much as he had no sone to make defense in his absence,
wherefore he was right sorrowful, and went to his chamber and slepte. And at
the last him thought he saw a vysyon in his sleep, that ye morning was more
clerer tha^ it was wont to be, and that the moon was much more paler on that
one side than on that other. And after he saw a bird of two colors, and by
that bird stood two beestes which fed that little bird with their heat, and
after that came many moo beestes and bowed their heedes toward the bird and
went their way. And than came there diverse birds that song so swetely and
so meryly that the Emperor awaked. In ye morning erly this Anselme remembered
his visyon and wondered much what it might sygnyfye, wherefore he called to him
his philosophers and also the states of his Empire, and told the^ his dreme,
chargyng them to tell him the sygnyfyenge thereof upon pain of death, and if
they told him the true interpretacyon thereof, he behyght them great reward
Than said they. Dear lord tell us your dreme, and we shall declare unto you
what it betokens. Tha^ ye Emperor told them from the beginning to the
ending as it is before said. When the philosophers herd this with a glad chere
they answered and said. Lord ye dreme that ye saw betokens good, for the
Empire shall be more clerer than it is. The moon that is more pale on ye one
side than on ye other betokens the Empress, that has lost part of her
color through the co^cepcyon of a sone yt she has conceived. The little bird
betokens the sone that she shall bear. The two beestes that fed this bird
betokens all the wise men and rich men of this Empire shall obey thy sone.
These other beestes yt bowed their heedes to the bird betokens that many
other nacyo^s shall do him homage. The bird ye song so swetely to this little
bird betokens ye Romans which shall rejoice and sing because of this
birth. Lo this is ye very interpretacyon of your dreme. When the Emperor
herd this, he was right joyful. Soon after that the Empress trauayled and
was delivered of a fair sone, in whose birth was great joy made without end.
When ye king of Ampluy herd this, he thought in himself thus. Lo I have
warred against the Emperor all the days of my life, and now he has a sone
the which will revenge all three wrongs that I have done and wrought against
his father when he comes to full age, therefore it is better that I send to
the Emperor and beseech him of trewse and peace, that his sone may have
nothing against me when he comes to manhood. Wha^ he had thus said to
himself, he wrote unto the Emperor, besechynge him to have peace. When the
Emperor saw that the king of Ampluy wrote to him more for dread than for
love, he wrote again to him, that if he would find good and suffycient surety
to keep the peace, and bind himself all the days of his life to do him
service and homage, and to give him yearly a certain trybute, he would receive
him to the peace. When the king had read the tenor of ye Emperors lettres,
he called his counseyle, praying the^ to give him counsel how he might best
do as touching this matter. Than said they. It is good that ye obey ye Emperors
will and commandment in all things. For in the first he desires of you
surety for the peace, and as to this we answer thus. Ye have but a daughter,
and the Emperor but a sone, wherefore let a marriage be made between them, and
yt may be a perpetual sykernes of ye peace. And also he asks homage and
rentes which is good to fulfill. And than the king sent his messengers to the
Emperor, saying that he will fulfill his intent in all thing, if it might
please his hyghnes that his sone and the kings daughter might be wedded
together. All this pleased well the Emperor, nevertheless he sent again,
that if his daughter were a clean vyrgyn from her birth unto that day, he
would consent to that marriage. Than was the king right glad, for his daughter
was a clean vyrgyn. Therefore wha^ ye lettres of couenauntes and sykernes were
sealed, the king did do make array a fair ship, wherein he might send his
daughter with many noble knights, ladies and great richesse unto the Emperor
for to have his sone in marriage. And when they were saylynge in the sea toward
Rome, a storm arose so ferue^tly and so horrybly that the ship al to brast
against a rock of stone, and they were all drowned save only ye young lady,
which set her hope and her heart so greatly on god, that she was saved. And
about three of the clock the tempest seaced, and the lady drove forth over the
wawes in that broken ship which was cast up again, but an huge whale followed
after, ready to devour both the ship and her, wherefore this fair young lady
when night came she smote fire with a stone, wherwt the ship was greatly
lyghtned, and than ye wale durst not aue^ture toward the ship for dread of
the light. At the cock crowynge this young lady was so weary of the great
tempest and trouble of the sea that she slepte, and within a little while the
fire was out, and than came ye whale and devoured her And when she wakened and
understood her self in the whales belly she smote fire, and within a little
while she wounded the whale with a knyfe in many places, and when ye whale
felt himself wounded, according to his nature began to swymme to land.
There was that time dwelling in that country an earl that was a noble man
named Pyrrys, the which because of recreacyon walked by the sea strande, and as
he was walkyng thus he saw where as the whale was coming toward ye land,
wherefore he returned home again, and gadered many strong men and women and
came thither again, and fought with this whale, and wounded him sore, and as
they smote the maiden that was in his belly cried with a hye voice and said. O
gentle syrs have mercy and compassyo^ on me, for I am a kings daughter and a
true virgyn from the hour of my birth unto this day. When the earl herd this
he wondered greatly, and opened the side of the whale and found the young lady,
and took her out. And when she was thus delivered, she told him forthwt by
order whose daughter she was, and how she had lost all her goods in the sea,
and how she should have been married unto the Emperors sone. And when ye earl
herd this he was right glad, wherefore he conforted her the more, and kept her
still with him till she was well refreshed. And in the mean time he sent
messengers to the Emperor, lettynge him wit how this kings daughter was
saved. Than was the Emperor right glad of her salvation and coming, and had
great co^passyon on her, saying. A good maid for ye love of mi sone thou have
suffered much woo, nevertheless if thou be worthy to be his wife* soon shall
I preue. And when he had thus said, he let bring forth three vessels, the first
was made of pure gold well couched with precious stones without and wtin, full
of deed men's bones, and thereupon was written this posey. Who so choseth me
shall find that he deserves. The second vessel was made of fine silver,
filled with earth and wormds, and ye superscripcyon was thus. Who so choseth me,
shall find that his nature desires. The third vessel was made of led, full
within of precious stones, and thereupon was written this posey. Who so choseth
me, shall find that god has disposed for him. These three vessels the Emperor
showed to the maiden and said. Lo here daughter, these be noble vessels, if
thou cose one of these wherein is profit to the and to other, than shalt thou
have my sone. And if thou chose that wherein is no profit to the nor to none
other, sothly thou shall not wedde him. When the maiden saw this, she lift up
her hands to god and said. Thou lord which know all things, grant me
grace this hour so to chose that I may receive the Emperors sone. And with that
she beheld the first vessel of gold which was forged and graven royally, and
read this scripture. Who so choseth me* etc. saying thus. Though this vessel
be full precious and made of pure gold, nevertheless I know not what is
within, therefore my dear lord this vessel will I not chose. And than beheld
she the second vessel that was of clear silver, and read the superscrypcyon,
who so choseth me, shall find that his nature desires. Thinking thus within
her self, if I chose this vessel, what is within I know not, but well I wot
there shall I find that nature desires, and my nature desires the lust of
the flesh, and therefore this vessel will I not chose. When she had seen
those two vessels and given an answer as touching to them, she beheld the
third vessel of led, and read the superscripcyon, who so choseth me, shall
find that god has disposed. Thynkyng within her self, this vessel is not
passing rich ne precious without forth, neuertheless ye superscrypcyon says,
who so choseth me, shall find ye god has dysposed, and without doubt god
never disposed any harm, therefore as now I will chose this vessel. Wha^ the
Emperor saw this he said. O good maiden open thy vessel, for it is full of
precious stones and se if yt have well chosen or no. And wha^ this young lady
had opened it, she found it full of gold and precious stones, like as the
Emperor had told her before. And than said the emperor. O my dear daughter
because thou have wisely chosen, therefore shall thou wedde my sone. And when he
had so said, he ordained amaryage and wedded them worthyly together with much
joy and honor, and so continued to their lines end.

This Emperor betokens the father o^ heaven the which was long time without
a (...), wherefore many men were perysshed and went to h^^l. The Empress
conceived when the angel Gabryel^ said. Lo thou shalt conceive and bear a
child. And than the fyrmame^t began to clear when this little child lyghtned
ye world with his birth. The moon than began to wexe pale when the face of ye
vyrgyn Mary was over shadowed by virtue of the grace of the holy ghost, and not
only her face was thus shadowed, but also her body for she was great with child
an other woman, wherefore Joseph would have forsaken her pryuely and gone away.
The little bird that came from the one side of the moon betokens our lord
Jesus Christ, which at mydnyght was borne of our lady, wrapped in clothes and
laid in an ox stall. The two beestes betokens ye ore and the ass that
Joseph brought with him* which honored him in his birth. These other beestes
that came from far betokens the herdes in the field, to whom the angel
said thus. Ecce nuncio vobis gandiu^ magnu^. Lo I show to you great joy. The
birds that song so swetely betokens the angels of heaven which song at
his birth this merry song. Gloria in excelsis. Joy to god above, and peace to
men in earth. The king of Ampluy which held war against ye Emperor
betokens al mankind, that was contrary to god as long as he was in the
deuyls power. But anon wha^ our lord Jesus Christ was borne he bowed himself
to god, and besought him of peace when he received his baptym, for at our
baptysyng we behote ^o draw only to god, and forsakr ye devil and all his
pompes This king gave his daughter in marriage to ye Emperors sone. Right so
each of us ought to give his soul in marriage to gods sone, for he is ever
ready to receive our soul to his spoule, according to scripture saying.
^^sponsabo ipsam mihi. I shall spouse her to me. But or the soul may come to
ye palace of heaven her behooves to sail by ye see of this world in ye ship
of good life, but oftentimes there aryseth a tempest in the sea, that is to
say, the trouble of this world, the temptacyon of the flesh, and the
suggestyon of the devil aryseth suddenly and drowneth the virtues that ye soul
receives at the font stone, nevertheless yet falls she not out of ye ship
of charity, but keeps her self surely therein by faith and hope. For as ye
apostle says. Spe salui facti sumus. By hope we be saved. For it is impossyble
to be saved wout hope or faith. The great whale that followed the maiden
betokens ye devil, which by night and by day lies in a wait to ouerco^me
the soul by sin, therefore do we as did ye maiden, smite we fire of charity
and love out of the stone, that is Christ according to his saying. Ego su^
lapis. I am a stone. And certainly the devil shall have no power to grieve us.
Many men begin well as did ye maid, but at the last they be weary of their good
works, and so sleep they in sin. And anon when the devil perceyueth this
he deuoureth the sinner in evil thoughts, delytes, consent and we^ke.
Therefore if any of us feel our self in such life under the power of the
devil, let him do as the maid did, smite the devil with the knyfe of bitter
penance, than kyndell the fire of charity, and without doubt he shall cast the
on ye land of good life. The earl that came with his servants to slay the
whale betokens a discrete confessor, which dwells beside the sea, that is
to say, beside the world, and not in ye world, that is to say, not drawing
to worldly delectacyons, but ever is ready with good words of holy scripture to
slay the denyl and destroy his power, we must all cry with an hye voice as
did this maiden, knowlegynge our sins, and than shall we be delivered from ye
devil and nourysshed with good works. The Emperor shows this maiden three
vessels, that is to say, god puts before man life and death, good and evil,
and which of these that he choseth he shall optayn. Therefore says Sampson.
Ante homine^ mors et vita. Death and life is set before man, chose which him
list. And yet man is uncertain whether he be worthy to chose life vefore death.
By the first vessel of gold full of deed men's bones we shall understand
worldly men, as mighty men and rich, which outward shyneth as gold in
richesse and pompes of this world. Nevertheless within they be full of deed
men's bones, that is to say, the works yt they have wrought in this world
ben deed in ye sight of god through deedly sin. Thefore if any man chose such
life, he shall have yt he deserves, that is to say, hell. And such men be
like toumbes that be white and royally painted and arrayed without, and covered
with cloth of gold and sylke, but wtin there is nothing but dry bones. By ye
second vessel of silver we ought to understand the Justices and wise men of
this world which shine in fair speech, but within they be full of worms and
earth, that is to say, their fair speech shall avail them no more at ye day
of dome than worms or earth, and perauenture less, for than shall they suffer
everlasting pain, if they dye in deedly sin. By the third vessel of led
full of gold and pecyous stones we ought to understand a simple life and a
poor which the chosen men chose, that they may be wedded to our blessed lord
Jesus Christ by humilite and obeysaunce, and such men bear with them precious
stones that is to say, merytoryous works pleasynge to god by the which at ye
day of dome they be wedded to our lord Jesus Christ and obtain ye heritage of
heaven, unto the which bring us he, yt dyed on ye rode tree. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled a mighty Emperor named Calopodu, which wedded a
fair lady to his wife, they were not long together but that this Empress
conceived and bare him a sone a goodly child and a fair, and when he was of
age he was set to scole. And wha^ he came to.xx. year of age he desired his
fathers heritage, saying. Dear father ye are an old man, and may not govern
your Empire, therefore if it please you to give it me, it shall be to your
profit. Than answered the Emperor and said. Dear sone I dread me sore that
when the Empire is in thy power thou will not fulfill my will ne my desire.
Than answered the empress (for so much as she loved her sone better than her
husband) and said. My lord quod she that may not be, for thou have but one
sone, and therefore as I believe he will fulfill thine intent in all thing, and
this Empire may help him well, and therefore it is best to grant him the
Empire. Than answered the Emperor and said. I will first have of him a lettre
obligatory, that when so ever he does any thing against my will, that than I
shall depryue him of the Empire without any withstanding. The sone granted to
this, and let make the obligacyon, and sealed it. And when this was done, this
young Emperor waxed so proud, that he dredde neither god nor man, and did
very much harm. But ever his father suffered it pacyently for he would not be
corrected by no man. Till at the last there fell a great derthe in that Empire,
so that many men dyed for de^aute. This old Emperor was by himself and
began to have need, wherefore he went to his sone for to have some sustenaunce,
which his sone granted and suffered for a while. But within short time his
father began to ware syeke, wherefore he called his sone, and prayed him to give
him a draught of must His sone answered and said. That will I not do, for my
must is not good for thy complec^yon. Than said the Emperor. I pray the sone
give me a draught of thy wine. His sone answered and said that he should have
none, for my wine is not yet fined, and if I touch it, it will trouble, and
therefore I will ^^t bro^he it till it be clear and fined. Than said his father.
Give me some of thy second tonne. That will I not be quod ^e, for that wine is
passing mighty and strong, and such wine is not good for a sick man. Tha^
his father prayed him hertely for a draught of the fourth tonne. Than answered
he and said, thereof get ye none, for it is feeble and without any sustentacyo^,
and such wine is not good for you, for it is not confortable. Than said his
father, new good sone give me than of the fyfth tonne. That will I not quod he,
for that tonne is full of lies and dregs, and such is not for men nor
uneaths for hogs. When his father saw he might get nothing of him, and
after was as hole as ever he was, than went he to the king of Iherusalem end
made his complaynt of his sone, and showed him the lettre obligatory which his
sone had ma^^, wherefore his father might put him out of the Empire without any
wythsayinge. When the king herd this, he called ye Emperors sone to answer
his father. And when he came he could not answer to his father with no reason,
wherefore the king put him from his Empire, and seasoned his father therein
again, and so he continued all the days of his life.

This Emperor betokens our lord Jesus Christ according to the psalmi^t,
saying. He is thy father that has the in possessyon, and made the of naught.
The love betokeyeth man, to whom he gave all the Empire of this world,
according to this scripture. Celum celi dn^o. etc. That is to say. Heaven he
has given our lord and earth to man. Mankind made an obligacyo^ unto our
lord Jesus Christ when he received his chrystendome at ye font stone, where he
behyght him surety to serve him truly, and to forsake ye devil and all his
pompes and vaynglory. This Emperor began to wax sick on a day, that is to
say, our lord Jesus Christ is troubled as ofte^tymes as a chryste^ man synneth
and breketh his commandments, wherefore he thursteth greatly the help of our
soul, and than he asket a draught of the first tonne, that is to say, he
asks of man the fyrh age of his chyldhode to be spente in his service. But a
none the wicked man answers and says. I may not do so, formy chyldhode is
must, that is to say, it is so tender and so young that it may not attempt so
soon to serve god, which is openly false, for the child of a day is not
without sin. For saint Gregory says in his dialogues, that children of.v.
years of age put out fendes from the bosoms of their fathers. And when god
sees that he may not have of ye must of his chyldhode, than desires he the
wine of ye second tonne. Than answers the wicked man and says, that his
wine is not yet clear enough, that is to say, he is not apt to serve god And
when god may not have of the second tonne, than asks he of the third tonne,
that is to say, of ye third tonne of his youth. Than answers the wicked man
and says, that wine is to strong and mighty, and therefore his youth ought to
be spente about deeds of this world, and not in penance, which should make
him feeble and weyke. When god sees that he may not have of this tonne, than
asks he of the fourth tonne. And than answers the wicked man and says,
that an aged man is feeble and may not fast, ne do no hard penance, and if he
did, he should be cause of his own death. And than asks our lord of the fyfth
tonne, that is to say, of his old age when he does crepe and may not go
without a staff. But the wicked man excuses himself and says that this wine
is to feeble to give such a feeble man, for if he should fast one day, it were
time on ye morrow to make his grave. And when our lord sees that he may not
have of the fyfth tonne, than asks he of the syxth tonne, that is to say,
when a man is blind and may not go to sin no more, yet desires he of such
a man drink, that is to say, the help of his soul. But the wretched man
lyenge in despeyre says. Alas alas to me because I served not almighty god my
maker and redemer her in time past while I was in youth and in prosperyte, but
now there is nothing left but only ye lies and the dregs of all
wretchedness, therefore what should it avail me now to turn toward god. But
for such men we should mourn. Nevertheless god is so merciful, that though
he might have no service of man in all his time, yet is he content to have the
lies of his tonne, that is to say, his good will, though he may not serve him
otherwise, and so shall his good will stand him instead of penance. For in
what hour the sinner does his penance, he shall be saved, as Ezechiel
wytne^seth. The apostle says. Alas alas and welawaye, for there be many that
will give no wine, ne none other thing to him, wherefore god shall complain
unto the king of Iherusalem, that is to say, to his godhede at the day of
dome, and than god and man shall give a sentence defensable against such men,
saying. Esuriui et non dedistis. etc. I have hungered, and ye gave me no meat.
I have thursted, and ye gave me no drink. Loo thus shall he rehearse to the the
seven works of mercy. And when this is done than shall they be put to
everlasting pain, and the ryghtfull men into everlasting bliss, where they
shall have joy wythouten end. Unto the which bring us our lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Antony, under whose reygne
the rowers on the sea had taken prisoner a mighty man's sone of an other
regyon, and brought him to ye Emperors prison fast bound. When this young man
was thus in prison, he wrote to his father for his rau^some, but his father
would no rau^some pay, ne none other thing send to conforte him. This hearing
his sone, wept sore and might not be comforted for the unkindness of his father
This Emperor had a fair daughter which visyted every day this prisoner, and
conforted him as much as she might. To whom the prisoner answered and said.
How shall I be merry, or how may I joy, thus for to lie fast bound in prison
from the sight of man, and notwithstanding this, it greueth me more that my
father will not pay my raunsom. When this maiden herd this she was moved with
pity and said. Dear friend I am sorry for the, nevertheless if thou will
grant me one thing, I shall deliver the from this anguysshe and pain What
thing is that quod he. That thou will take me to thy wife. Than said the
prisoner, I promise you surely to fulfill your intent and desire, and for the
more sykernes I plyght you my troth. When he had so done, it was not long
after the damoysell delivered him out of prison, and fled away with him home
to his fathers house. When the father saw his sone and the maiden together, he
asked ye cause why he brought her with him. Than said his sone. Sir this
da^oysell delivered me out of prison, and therefore she shall be my wife. Than
said his father. I will not consent that she shall be thy wife, for two
reasonable causes which I shall show the. The first is this, it is not
unknown to the that the Emperor her father might have had for thy
delyueraunce great good, and for as much as she was untrue to her own father
and true to the, it seems well that thou should not trust long in her, for
who is false to her own father, by reason should be very false and untrue to an
other man. The second reason is this. The cause why she delivered the out of
prison it was neither for pity nor for love, but for flesshly lust that she had
to the. For at thy delyueraunce she made covenant with the to be thy wife, and
had of the thy troth, and therefore sone it is not reason that she should be thy
wife. The maiden answered to this questyo^ and said. As for the first reason
which thou layest against me that I should be untrue to my father, that is
false, for my father has plente of richesse, and thy sone is but poor, and
therefore I help him for pity, and for none other cause, and nevertheless thou
that art his father would not pay his ransom that he might be delivered out
of prison. Loo for this cause I have delivered him, therefore I am kynder to him
than thou that art his own father, and he is more beholden to me than to the.
Unto that other reason, where as ye say that I delivered him because of
flesshly lust. I answer and say playnli that it is not troth. For all manner
of flesshly love is cause of strength, or else of fayrnes, but thy sone is not
strong, for his enprysonment has done away his strength. He is not fair,
for by the pain that he has had in prison he is made low and unlusty to the
sight, and therefore pity only moved me to deliver him, and not flesshly lust.
Than said the sone unto his father. Dear father for as much as I was in peril
of death, and wrote unto the that thou would pay my ransom that I might be
delivered, and thou would not help me, but this damoysel of her gentylnes
and for pity has saved me from death, and delivered me out of prison, and
therefore sothly she shall be my wife, wherefore forth with he wedded her with
great honor, and with her ended his life.

Dear friends this Emperor betokens the father of heaven. The young man
which was taken with the rowers of ye see betokens all mankind, which was
taken with the devil by the sin of our fore father Adam, and was cast in to
the prison of hell with great sorrow and pain. His father would not rau^some
him that is to say, the world would do nothing for him. This fair daughter
betokens the godhede, which came down from heaven and took manhood of the
vyrgyn Marye, and so made a goostly marriage between him and man. And upon this
condicyon he delivered mankind out of this prison of hell when he came fro
heaven and forsook the felawshyp of angels for to dwell with us in this
wretched valey of tears. But the father that betokens ye world, grutched
ever against him, and would not suffer that the soul of man should beco^me the
spouse of Jesus Christ, but that she should always serve him and forsake our
lord. Therefore if we follow the world and his vanytees, sothly we shall fall
in to the snare of the devil. Fro the which defend us our blessed savior
Jesus Christ. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled a noble Emperor of great lyuelode named Alexander,
the which above all virtues loved ye virtue of largess, wherefore he ordained
a law for great curiosite, that no man under pain of death should turn a
playce in his dysshe at his meat, but only eat the white side, and not the
black, and if any man would attempt to do the contrary, he should dye without
remedy, but or he dyed he should ask three bones of the emperor what him list
(except his life, which should be granted him. It befell after on a day
that there came an earl and his sone of a strange country to speak with the
Emperor. And when this earl was set to meat, he was served with a playce,
and he which was hungry and had an appetyte to his meat* after he had eaten
ye white side he turned the black side and began to eat thereof, wherefore
anon he was accused to the Emperor, because he had offended against the
law. Than said the Emperor. Let him dye according to the law without one
delay. When the earls sone herd that his father should dye, anon he set him
down on both his knees tofore the Emperor and said. O my reverend lord for
his love that henge upon the cross, let me dye for my father. Than said the
Emperor. It pleases me well that one dye for the offense of the law. Than
said this earls sone, sith it is so that I shall dye, I ask the benefytes of
the law, that is to say, that I may have three peticyons granted or I dye.
The Emperor answered and said. Ask what thou will there shall no man say
the nay. Than said this young knight. My lord ye have but one daughter, the
which I desire of your hyghnes that she may lie with me a night or I dye. The
Emperor granted, though it were against his will in fulfyllynge of his law.
Nevertheless this knight defouled her not as that night. Therefore pleased he
greatly the Emperor. The second peticyon is this, I ask al thy treasour. And
anon the Emperor granted, because he should not be called a breker of his
own law. And when this earls sone had received ye emperors treasour, he
departed it both to poor and rich, wherefore he optayned their good wylles.
My third peticyon is this. I ask my lord that all ye eyes may be put out
incontinent which saw my father eating of the black playce. Wherefore the
Emperor let make an inquisicyon anon who it was that saw the earl turn ye
playce. And they that saw him turn the playce bethought them and said within
themself If we knowledge that we saw him do this trespace than shall our eyes
be put out, and therefore it is better that he hold us still. And so there was
none found that would accuse him. When the earls sone saw this he said to the
Emperor. My lord quod he, ye se that there is no man accuses my father,
therefore give ye ryghtfull judgment. Than said the Emperor. For as much that
no man will knowledge that they saw him turn the playce, therefore I will not yt
thy father shall dye. Lo thus the sone saved his fathers life, and after the
decese of the Emperor wedded his daughter.

Dear friends this Emperor betokens the father of heaven, which ordained a
law that no man should turn the black side of the playce, that is to say,
there should no man labor for richesse or lordshyp by couetyse and falshede.
The earl that came to the Emperor betokens Adam our for father, which came
out of the land of Damasse to the court of paradyse and turned up the black
side of the playce when he ete of the apple, wherefore he should have been
dampened to everlasting death. But his sone that betoke^eth our lord Jesus
Christ. For he took flesh of Adam, and proffered himself wylfully to dye for
him. The father of heaven granted that he should go down to dye for mankind
Nevertheless or he dyed he asked three peticyons of his father of heaven. The
first was this, yt he might have by him his daughter, which betokens the
soul of man, and bring her with him into the bosom of heaven, according to ye
words of Osee, saying. Desponsabo eam michi. That is to say, I shall wedde
her to my wife. The second peticyon was this. All the Emperors treasour,
which betokens the treasour of heaven, according to this scripture. Sicut
disposuit michi pater. That is to say. Like as my father has disposed for me,
so I dyspose for you. The third petycyon was this, that al their eyes should be
put out, that is to say, that the devil which daily accuses man that he
might be put fro the light of heavenly grace. And thus saved he mankind and
led him up with him unto the palace of heaven. Unto the which palace bring
us our lord Jesus. Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Lemycyus, which on a day
rode to a forest for to sport him, where as he met suddenly with a poor
man, to whom he said thus. Friend whens co^mest thou, and who art thou. My
lord quod he, I come fro the next cite, and your man I am. Than said the
Emperor, thou semest poor, therefore if thou will be good and true, I shall
promote the to great richesse and honor. Than answered this poor man and said
My lord I promise you faithfully to be true to you as long as I live. The
Emperor anon made him knight, and gave him great richesse. When he was thus
promoted, he waxed so proud that he thought himself more able to be an
Emperor than his lord, wherefore he made suggestyon to diverse lords of that
Empire that he might usurp and take upon him through strength of them to be
Emperor. When ye Emperor herd this, anon he exiled him and al those that
were co^sentyng to him, so that they were put in great wretchedness and sorrow,
and than the Emperor ordained other men in their stedes, and gave them all the
possessions of the traitors. And when the banysshed men hard that strangers
had taken possessyo^ of their land and goods, anon they conspeyred against
them, and through treason prayed them to a feast. And they as innocents
thynkyng no treason, came at ye day assygned and were served with five messes,
which were poysoded, wherefore as many as tasted of that viteyle dyed
incontinent. When the Emperor herd this, he was greatly moved, and called his
counseyle to wit what was best to be done of this treason and of their death.
Than said the Emperors sone. My lord I am your sone, and ye be my father, and
therefore I shall give you good counsel and profitable to all men. Not far
hens is a little realm, wherein dwells a fair maid and a gracyous in the
sight of every man, which has an orcharde wherein is a well, whereof ye water
is of such virtue, that if it be cast upon a deed man, anon he shall live
again and recover his life. Therefore my lord I shall descend unto that realm
and seek that water by the which they that were slain at the feast might rise
again to life. And when ye Emperor herd this he was greatly reioysed and
said. Sone thy counseyle is good. And anon the Emperors sone went in to the
said realm, and fell in conceyte with the maiden, in so much that he entered
in to the gardyne and assayed of the well. And when he had so done, he made
five deep trenches in the ground, in the which the water ran till it came
where the deedmen lay buried, and anon when the water touched them, they arose
from death to life. And than the Emperors sone led them unto his father. And
when the Emperor saw this he was right joyful, wherefore he crowned his sone
with a laureate crown, in token of vyctory, and so he ended his life in rest
and peace.

This Emperor betokens the father of heaven. The poor man that was promoted
betokens Lucifer, the which was made of naught and exalted in the Empire of
heaven in so great joy and clerenes, that him seemed through his pride that he
would be like almighty god, and not only like him but more than almighty god,
wherefore the father of heaven expled him and all them that consented unto him to
hell, and in their place man was exalted to great joy and honor. The devil
seeing this, enuyed him that man should come to such glory and honor, and
badde Adam and Eve to a feast when they ete of the apple against gods
commandment, and counseyled them thus, saying. In what hour ye eat of ye
apple, ye shall be like gods. And at this cursed feast they were served with
five messes that were poisoned, that is to say, their five wits were
accorded in eating of the apple, whereof man was infecte and dyed. This
hearing the Emperors sone moved with mercy came down from heaven in to this
world and acqueynted him so well with the blessed vyrgyn Mary, that he found
in her the well of manhood, and conjoined it to his godhede, according to
scripture. I am ye well of life, who drynketh of it shall not thurst. After
that he let make five trenches in the ground, that is to say, five wounds in
his body, of the which ran both blood and water, whereby all mankind was
raised fro death to life, and led them up in to the palace of heaven. Unto the
which bring us our blessed savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Sometime in Rome dwelled a mighty emperor named Dunstane, in whose empire
dwelled a gentle knight that had two sons. One of his sons wedded himself
against his fathers will unto a common woman of the bordell. The knight
hearing this exyled his sone from him. And when he was thus exiled he begote on
this woman a sone. And soon after that he wexed sick and needful, wherefore
he sent messengers to his father, besechynge him of his mercy. This hearing
his father, had compassyon and rushe on him, wherefore he was reconsyled. And
when he was thus brought again unto his fathers grace, he gave his sone which
he had begoten to fore on this common woman to his father. And he full kyndly
received it as his sone, and nourysshed it. When his other sone herd this, he
said to his father. Father quod he, it seems that thou art out of thy right
mind, which I will prove by this reason. For he is out of his right mind that
receives a false heir, and nouryssheth him whose father has done him
anguysshe and disease tofore. For my brother which begat this child has
done the great injury when he wedded ye common woman against thy will and
commandment, therefore me seems that thou art out of thy right mind. Than
answered the father and said. Because thy brother is reconsyled thou art
enuyous to me and also unkind to thine own brother, willing to put him from
my felawshyp for evermore, and sothly none unkind man shall have mine heritage
but if he be reconsyled. But yet thou never reconsyled him of his unkindness,
for thou might have reconsyled him, but thou would not therefore of mine
heritage getest thou no part.

The father of the two brethren betokens the father of heaven. And his two
sons betokens the nature of angels and the nature of man. For man was
wedded to a common woman of the bordell when he ete of the apple against the
commandment of god, wherefore he was exyled by the father of heaven and put fro
the joys of paradyse. The sone of the common woman betokens mankind. This
knights sone, that is to say Adam began to be needful, for after his sin
he was put from joy in to this wretched valey of tears and weeping,
according to this scripture. In sudore vultus. etc. In the sweet of thy vysage
thou shalt eat thy breed. But after by the passion of Christ he was
reconsyled. But the other sone that betokens the devil was ever unkind, and
grutched daily against our reconsylynge, saying that by sin we ought not to
comme unto the heritage of heaven. Unto the which bring us our lord Jesus.
Amen.

Sometime dwelled in Rome a mighty Emperor named Donate, which did do make
three images, of yt which one held out his hand straight unto the people, and
had on his finger a ring of gold The second image had a berde of gold. And
ye third had a mantell of purple, co^maundynge upon pain of death that no man
should rob these images of ye ring the herd, nor the mantell. It befell
afterward upon a time that one Dionyse a tyrant came in to the temple and
took away the ring from the first image, the berde from the second, and the
mantell from the third. And anon when he had thus done, he was forthwyth
accused unto the Emperor and brought before him, and was examyned of that
trespace, why he despoyled the images against the Emperors commandment. Than
answered this Dionyse and said. My lord it is lawful to answer for my self,
where as none will answer for me, when I entered in to the temple ye first
image held forth his hand straight to me, as who says, I give ye this ring,
and therefore I took the ring at the gift of the image. And when I saw the
second image having a berde, I thought thus with in mi self. I knew sometime
the father of this image which had no berde, and now his sone has a berde
which is against reason, the sone to have a berde and the father none, and
therefore I took from him his berde that he should be like his father. After
that when I saw the third image closed in a mantell of gold, I thought that
a mantell of gold was not behouable to him in winter, for gold is naturally
cold, which might because of his death, and therefore I took it from him
because it was to cold in winter, and to hot in somer. When Dyonyse had
excused him by these reasons, the Emperor answered and said. Thou have
answered wyckedly for thy self, what should cause the rather than any other
man to despoyle these images* for as much as I commanded that no man should
take any thing away fro them, and thine own mouth has condemned the. And
anon the Emperor called to him one of his squyers, and charged him to smite
of his heed, and so it was done.

This Emperor betokens almighty god the father of heaven. The three ymagenes
betokens the poor men, the rich men, and the mighty men of this world. The
tyrant Dyonyse betokens justices, sheryffes, baylyes, sergeauntes and
catchpolles, and al other offices, which take away from poor men the ring of
their fyngers, and say thus. I may take that is given me. But when the poor
man has ought to do, he must needs put forth his hand to give whether he will
or no, if he shall speed. They take also the ^erde from the rich men, and say
thus. This man is rycher than his father was, therefore take we his lyuelode fro
him and make him like his fore father. They take also the mantell of gold from
the mighty men, when they se any man of honor and of good living willing to
correcke such mysdoers, than say they. This man is to cold, for he enclyneth
nothing to our opynyo^s, and also he is to hot of power in werkynge against
us, therefore go we and take from him the mantell of might, and so they accuse
him and put him out of office. But certainly all such men stand in peril of
everlasting death. From the which save us he, that dyed for us upon the rode
tree. Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Euas, which had a fair
young lady to his wife, upon whom he had begoten a fair sone. When the states
of the Empire herd this, they came unto the Emperor and besought him to have
the keeping of his sone. Anon the Emperor sent a sergeaunt through out the
Cite, saying that in whose house were first found fire and water, the good
man of that house should have his sone in keeping and to nourysshe. And than
the Emperor made a proclamacyon that who so ever had his sone to keep should
nourysshe him clenly, and feed him with holsom meats and drynkes And when the
child came to age, than should ye keeper be promoted to great honor, wherefore
many men let make ready fire and water, in hope to have the child. But on the
night when every man was a sleep, there came a tyrant named Sulapius that
quenched ye fire and threw out the water. Nevertheless among all other there
was a man named Ionathas that labored so diligently that he kept both day
and night fire and water. In a morning erly the sergeaunt at the Emperors
commandment went through the Cite and sought in every house for fire and
water, but he could find none till he came to Ionathas house, where as he
found both fire and water ready, wherefore he was brought before the Emperor,
and delivered him his sone according to his proclamacyo^. When Ionathas had the
Emperors sone he led him home unto his house. And soon after he sent for
masons and carpenters, and let make a strong chamber of lyme and stone. And
when the chamber was made, he sent for paynters, and let paynt on the wall
within the chamber.x. images with this posey written above their heedes. Who so
defouleth these images shall dye a foul death. And than he let draw on the
door a galous, and a figure of himself hanging thereupon with this posey
written above his heed. So shall he be served that nouryssheth the Emperors
sone amysse. Also he let make a chair of gold, and himself sitting therein
crowned with a crown of gold, with this superscripcyon above his heed. Who
that nouryssheth the emperors sone clenly, thus shall he be honored. When
this was done, oftentimes in his sleep he was tempted to defyle these images,
but anon he read the superscrypcyon above their heedes, and than all the
temptacyons seaced And when the Emperors sone was evil kept, than went he
to the galowes and read they posey that was written above his own heed, and
for dread thereof he kept the child the better, and was dylygent to give
attendaunce on him. And when he beheld the chair and himself sitting therein
crowned with a crown of gold he was right joyful, thynkyng to have a good
reward for keeping of the Emperors sone. When the Emperor herd of his
diligent demeanor about his sone he sent for him and for his sone, thanking
him for his well keeping and nourysshynge of him, and after promoted him to
great honor and worship.

This Emperor betokens ye father of heaven. The Empress betokens the
blessed virgyn Marye. The Emperors sone betokens our lord Jesus Christ. The
sergeaunt that was sent through out the Cite betokens saint Johan Baptyst,
which was sent before our lord, to make ready for him, according to holy
scripture. Ecce mitte angelu^. etc. Lo I fend mine angel before me. etc. The
states that desired the Emperors sone to nourysshe betoken the patriarchs and
prophets, which desired greatly to nourysshe our lord Jesus Christ, and also
to se him, but they might not se him ne nourysshe him, for fire, and water
which should have been cause of their sight, was not with them perfytly. The
fire betokens the holy ghost, which had not yet appeared in them, for they
were not wasshen with the water of the font. Also ye may understand by the fire
perfyte charity, and by the water true contricyon, which two now a days
fails in many men, and therefore they may not have the lyttel child Jesus in
their hertes. Ionathas that watched so dylygently betokens every good
christen man, which studyeth ever to watch in doing of good works, yeldynge
to god for sins the fire of charity, and the water of contricyon But
afte^tymes the tyrant which betokens the devil, puts out the fire of
charity fro men's hertes, and casts out ye water of contricyon, so that they
may not nourysshe the lyttel child Jesus. Therefore let us watch as Ionathas
did, that we enter not in to temptacyon. And call we unto us masons, that is to
say, dyscrete confessors, which can make in our hertes a chamber of stone,
that is to say, a sure faith and hope Than call we to us paynters, that is to
say, prechers of gods word, which can paynt in our hertes ten images, that
is to say.x. commandments, which if thou keep and observe daily, without
doubt thou shalt be honored in heaven. And if thou keep well the Emperors
sone, thou shalt sit in a chair of gold, crowned with a crown of gold. And
if that thou nourysshe him not well, without doubt thou shall be hanged on the
galous of hell. From the which preserve us our blessed savior Jesus. Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Menaly, which had wedded the
kings daughter of Hungary, a fair lady and a gracyous in all her works, and
specially she was merciful. On a time as the Emperor lay in his bed, he
bethought him that he would go vysyte the holy land. And on ye morrow he
called to him the Empress his wife and his own only brother, and thus he
said. Dear lady I may not ne I will not hyde from you the preuytees of my
heart, I purpose to vysyte the holy land, wherefore I ordeyne the princypally
to be lady and governor over all mine Empire and all my people. And under the
I ordeyn here my brother to be thy steward for to provide all things that may
be profitable to mine Empire and to my people. Than said the Empress. Sith it
will none otherwise be but that needs ye will go to the holy land, I shall be
in your absence as true as any turtyll that has lost her make, for as I believe
ye shall not escape thens with your life. The Emperor anon comforted her with
fair words and kyssed her, and after that took his leave of her and of all
other, and so went forth toward the holy land. And anon after that the
Emperor was gone, his brother became so proud that he oppressed poor men,
and robbed rich men, and yet did he worse tha^ this, for daily he s^er^d the
Empress to sin with him. But ever she answered again as an holy and a
devout woman, and said. I will quod she, never consent to you ne to none other
as long as my lord lives. Nevertheless this knight would not leave by this
auswere, but ever when he found her alone he made his complaynt to her, and
stered her by all the ways that he could to sin with him. When this lady
saw that he would not cease for no answer ne would not amend himself, wha^
she saw her time she called to her three or four of ye worthyest men of the
Empire, and said to them thus. It is not unknown to you that my lord the
Emperor ordained me pryncipall governor of this Empire, and also he ordained
his brother to be steward under me, and that he should do nothing without my
conseyle, but he does all the contrary, for he oppresses greatly poor men,
and robbet rich men, and yet he would do worse, if he might have his intent,
wherefore I command you in my lords name that ye bind him fast and cast him
in prison. Than said they. Sothly he has done many evil deeds sith our lord
the emperor went, therefore be we ready to obey your commandment, but in this
matter ye must answer for us to our lord the Emperor. Than said she, dread
ye not, for if my lord knew what he has done as wells I, he would put him
to ye foulest death that could be thought. Anon these men set hand on him, and
bound him fast with iron chains, and put him fast in prison, where as he lay
long time after, till at the last it fortuned there came tidings that the
Emperor was coming home, and had optayned great worship and victory. When
his brother herd of his coming he said. Would to god my brother might find
me in prison, for than would he inquire ye cause of mine enprysonment of the
Empress, and she will tell him all the troth, and how I desyrey her to sin,
and so for her I shall have no grace of my brother but lose my life, this know
I well, therefore it shall not be so. Than sent he a messenger unto ye
Empress, prayinge her for Christ's passion that she would vouchesafe to come
unto ye prison door, that he might speak a word or two with her. The Empress
came to him, and inquired of him what he would have. He answered and Tayde. O
lady have mercy upon me, for if the Emperor my brother find me in this
prison, than shall I dye with out any remedy. Than said the Empress, if I
might know that thou would be a good man and leave thy folly thou sholdest
have grace. Than did he promise her sykerly to be true, and to amend all his
frespace. When he had thus promised, the Empress delivered him anon, and made
him to be bathed and shaven, and arrayed him worshypfully according to his
estate, and than she said unto him thus. Now good brother lepe on thy stead and
come with me, that we may mete my lord. He answered and said. Lady I am ready
to fulfill your will and commandment in all things. And than the Empress
took him with her and many other knights, and so read forth to mete with the
Emperor, and as they rode together by ye way, they saw where a great heart
ran before them, wherefore every man with such hounds as they had chased him on
horsbacke, so that with ye Empress was left no creature, save only the
Emperors brother, which seeing that no man was there but they two, thus he
said unto ye Empress. Loo lady here beside is a preuy forest, and long it is
agone that I spoke to the of love, come now and consent unto me that I may lie
with the. Than said the Empress Al fool what may this be, yesterdaye I
delivered the out of prison upon thy promise, in hope of amendment, and now
thou art returned to thy folly again, wherefore I say now to the as I have said
before, there shall no man do such thing with me save only my lord the
Emperor, which owes of very duty so for to do. Than said he, if thou will
not consent to me, I shall hang the here upon a tree in this forest, where no
man shall find the, and so shall thou dye an evil death. The Empress answered
mekely and said. Though thou smite of my heed and put me to death with all
manner of turment, thou shalt never have me to consent to such sin. When he
herd this, he unclothed her all save her smock, and henge her up by the hear
upon a tree, and ^yed her stead beside her, and so rode forth to his fellows,
and told them that great host of men me^te him, and took the Empress away
from him. And when he had told them this, they made all great sorrow. It
befell on the third day after there came an earl to hunte in that forest, and
as he rode beatyng the brakes there started a fox, whom his hounds followed
fast till they came nere the tree where the Empress henge And when the dogs
felt the savor of her, they left the fox and ran toward the tree as fast
as they could. The earl seeing this wondered greatly, and spurred his horse and
followed them till he came where as the Empress henge. When the earl saw her
thus hanging he meruayled greatly, for as much as she was right fair and
gracyous to behold, wherefore he said unto her in this manner wise. O woman who
art thou, and of what country, and wherefore hangest thou here in this manner
wise. The Empress that was not yet fully deed, but in point ready to dye
answered and said. I am quod she, a strange woman, and I am comme out fro
far country, but how I came hither god knows. Than answered the earl and
said. Whose horse is this that stands here by the bound to this tree. Than
answered the lady* and said that it was hers. When the earl herd this, he
knew well that she was a gentylwoman, and come of some noble kynrede,
wherefore he was the rather moved with pity, and said unto her. O fair lady
thou semest of gentle blood, and therefore I purpose to deliver the from this
myschefe, if thou will promise to go with me and nourysshe my fair young
daughter, and teache her at home in my castle, for I have no child but only
her, and if you keep her well thou shalt have a good reward for thy labor.
Than said she. As farforth as I can or may, I shall fulfill thine intent. And
when she had thus promised him he took her down of the tree and led her home
to his castle, and gave her the keeping of his daughter that he loved so
much, and she was cherysshed so well that she lay every night in the earls
chamber and his daughter with her, and in his chamber every night there brent a
lamp, the which henge between ye Empress bed and ye earls bed. This lady
bare her so gentylly, that she was beloved of every creature. There was that
time in the earls court a steward, which much loved this Empress above al
things, and oftentimes spoke to her of his love But she answered him again
and said. Know ye dear friend for certain that I have made a solemn vow,
that I shall never love man in such wise but only him whom I am greatly
beholden to love by gods commandment. Than said the steward. Thou will
not than consent unto me. My lord quod she, what needs the any more to ask
such thing, the vow that I have made, truly shall I keep and hold by the
grace of god. And when the steward herd this, he went his way in great
wrath and anger, thinking within himself, if I may I shall bewroken on the.
It befell upon a night within short time after that the earls chamber door was
forgoten and left vnshette, which the steward had anon perceived. And when
they were all a sleep, he went and espied by the light of the lamp where the
Empress and the young maiden lay together, and with that he drew out his
knyfe and cut the throat of ye earls daughter, and put the blody knyfe in to
the Empress hand she being a sleep and nothing knowing thereof, to the
intent that when the earl awaked he should se ye knyfe in her hand, and that
he should think that she had cut his daughters throat, wherefore she should
be put to a shameful death for his myscheuous deed. And wha^ this damoysell was
thus slain, and the blody knyfe in the Empress hand, the countess awaked
out of her sleep and saw by the light of the lamp the blody knyfe in the
Empress hand, wherefore she was almoost out of her mind, and said to the
earl. O my lord behold in yonder ladies hand a wonderful thing. Anon the
earl awaked and beheld on the Empress bed and saw the blody knyfe as the
countess had said, wherefore he was greatly moved, and cried to her and said.
Awake woman of thy sleep, what thing is this that I se in thy hand. Anon ye
Empress through his cry awaked out of her sleep, and in her wakyng the knyfe
fell out of her hand, and with that she looked by her and found the earls
daughter deed by her side, and all the bed full of blood, wherefore with an
huge voice she cried and said Alas alas and welaway my lords daughter is
slain. Than cried the countess unto the earl with a pyteous voice and said. A
my lord, let that deuyllysshe woman be put to the most foul death that can be
thought that thus has slain our only child. And when the countess had said
thus to the earl, she said to the Empress in this wise. The high god knows
that thou mischeuous woman have slain my daughter with thine own hands, for I
saw the blody knyfe in thy hand, and therefore thou shall dye a foul death.
Than said the earl in this wise. O thou woman, were it not that I dread god
greatly, I should cleue thy body with my sword in two parts, for I delivered
the from hanging, and now thou have slain my daughter, nevertheless for me
thou shalt have no harm, therefore go thy way out of this ci^e without any
delay, for if I find the here this day thou shalt dye an evil death. Than
arose this woeful Empress and did on her clothes, and after lepte on her
palfray and rode toward the eest alone without any safe conduyte. And as she
rode thus mourning by ye way she espied on the left side of ye way a pair
of galous and seven sergeauntes ledyng a man to the galous for to be hanged,
wherefore she was moved with great pity and smote her horse with the spurs and
rode to them prayinge them that she might bye that mysdo^r, if he might be
saved from death for any mede. Than said they Lady it pleases us well that thou
bye him. Anon the Empress accorded with them and paid his raunsom, and than
he was delivered. Thus said she to him. Now dear friend be true till thou dye,
sith I have delivered the from death. On my soul quod he, I promise you ever
to be true. And wha^ he had thus said* he followed the lady still till they came
nygh a cite, and than said the empress to him. Good friend quod she, go forth
thy way before me of the cite and take up for us an honest lodging, for there
I purpose to rest a while. This man went forth as she commanded, and took up
for her a good lodging and an honest, where as she abode long time. When the
men of the cite perceived her fayrnes they wondered greatly, wherefore many of
them spoke unto her of unlawful love, but all was in vain, they might no
speed in no wise. It fortuned after on a day that there came a shyppefull of
marchaundyse, and arrived in the haven of that cite. When the lady herd this
she said unto her servant. Go to the ship and se if there be any cloth for
mine use. Her servant went forth to the ship, where as he found many
precious clothes, wherefore he prayed ye master of the ship that he should
come in to the cite and speak with his lady. The master granted him, and so
he came home to his lady before and warned her of the coming of ye master of
the ship. Anon after ye master of ye ship came and saluted the lady
worthly. And the lady received him according to his degree, prayinge him that
she might have for her money such cloth as might be profitable for her
werynge. Anon he granted that she should have, and soon they were accorded,
wherefore the servant went again with the master to ye ship. And when they
were both within the ship board, the master said to ye ladies servant. My
dear friend to the I would open my counseyle, if I might trust in the, and if
the list to keep my counseyle and help me, thou shalt have of me a great
reward. Than answered he and said. I shall (quod he) be sworn unto the on the
holy gospels that I shall keep thy counsel and fulfill thine intent, as
farforth as I can. Tha^ said ye master of the ship, I love thy lady more
than I can tell the, for her fayrnes is so great, that I would give for the
love of her all the gold that I have, and if I may obtain the love of her
through thy help, I shall give the what so ever thou will desire of me. Than
said the ladies servant. Tell me by what means I may best speed. Than said
the master of the ship. Go home to thy lady again and tell her that I will
not deliver the my cloth but if she comme her self, but bring her not to my
ship but if the wind be good and able, for than I purpose to lead her away.
Thy counsel is good quod the ladies servant, the^fore give me some reward,
and I shall fulfill thine intent. And when he had thus received his mede, he
went again to his lady, and told her that by no means ye master of the
ship would not deliver him the cloth but if she came her self. The lady
byleued her servant and went to the ship. And when she was within ye ship
board her servant abode without. When the master saw that she was within the
ship, and that the wind was good, he drew up the sail and sailed forth.
When the lady perceived this, thus she said to the master. O master (quod
she) what treason is this that thou have done to me. The master answered and
said. Madame certainly it is so that I must needs lie with the, and after wedde
the. Forsothe quod ^he, I have made a (...) that I shall never do such sin
but with him unto whom I am bound by right and by the law. Sothly quod he,
if ye will not grant me with your good will, I shall cast you out into the
mids of the sea, and there shall ye dye an evil death. If it be so (quod she)
that I must needs consent or else dye, than pray I the to array a preuy place
in the end of the ship, where as I may fulfill thine intent or I dye, but
first I pray the that I may say my or^yso^s unto the father of heaven, that he
may have mercy on me. The master byleued her, wherefore he let ordeyne her a
cabon in the end of the ship, and in she gothe and set her down on both
her knees and made her prayers, saying in this wife O thou my lord god that
have kept me from my youth in clennes, keep me now that I be not defouled, so
that I may serve the ever with clean heart and mind. When she had thus ended
her oreyson, there arose suddenly a great tempest in the sea, so that the
ship all to brast, and all that were within perysshed, save the lady that
caught a cable and saved herself, and the master of ye ship an other,
nevertheless she knew not of him, ne he of her, for they were driven to
diverse coostes. This lady landed in her own Empire befyde a no^ry wherein she
was worshypfully received, and she lived so holy a life, yt god gave her grace
to heal sick folk of all manner diseases, wherefore there came much people to
her both crooked, blind and lame, and every man through the grace of god and
her holy prayer were healed, wherefore her name was known through diverse
regyons* Nevertheless she was not known as Empress. In the same time the
Emperors brother (that had hanged her before b^ the hear) was smytten with a
foul lepry. The knight yt slew the earls daughter, and put the blody knyfe in
her hand, was blind, defe, and had the palsy* The thief that betrayed her to
the master of the ship was lame and full of the crampe. And the master of
the ship was distraught out of his mind. When the Emperor herd that so
holy a woman was in such a nonry, he said to his brother thus. Go we dear
brother unto this holy woman that is dwelling in the nonry, that she may heal
the of thy lepry. Would to god quod he that I were healed. Anon the Emperor
with his brother went toward the no^ry. And when the nonnes herd of his
coming they received him worshypfully with procession. And than ye Emperor
inquired of ye pryoresse if any such holy woman were among them that could
heal sick folk of their dyseases. The pryoresse answered and said that such
one was there. Than was ye Empress called forth before the Emperor, but she
muffled her face as well as she could, that the Emperor her husband should
not know her, and when she had so done, she salewed him with great reverence
as it apperteyned to his estate. And he again in like wise, saying thus. O
good lady, if ye list of thy grace to heal my brother of his lepry, ask of me
what thou will, and I shall grant it the for thy reward. When ye Empress
herd this, she looked about her and saw there the Emperors brother, that was
a foul lepre. She saw there also the knight that slew the earls daughter
blind and defe The thief that she saved fro the galowes lame and also the
master of ye ship distraught out of his mind and all were come to her for
to be healed of their sycknes, but they knew not her, for all that they knew
not her, she knew them well. Than said she unto the Emperor thus. My reverend
lord, though ye would give me al your Empire I may not heal your brother, nor
none of these other, but if they knowledge openly what they have done. When the
Emperor herd this, he turned him toward his brother and said unto him.
Brother knowledge openly thy sin before al these men that thou may be healed
of thy sycknes. Than anon he began to tell how he had led his life, but he
told not how he had hanged the Empress in the forest by ye hear. When he had
knowleged all that him list, the Empres^e said. Sothly my lord, I would gladly
lay unto him my medicyne, but I wot right well it is in vain, for he has
not made a full confession. The Emperor hearing this, turned him toward his
brother and said again in this wise. What evil sorrow or unhappy wretchedness
is in the, see thou not that thou (...) foul lepre, therefore knowledge thy
sin truly that thou may be hole, or else avoid my felawshyp for evermore.
A lord quod he, I may not tell my life openly but if I be first sure of thy
grace. What have thou trespaced against me quod the Emperor. Than answered his
brother and said. Mine offense against the is grievous, and therefore I ask
mercy. The Emperor thought not on the Empress, for as much as he supposed
that she had been deed many years before, he commanded his brother to tell
forth what he had offended him, and he should be forgyuen. And when the
Emperor had thus forgyuen his brother, he began to tell openly how he had
desired the Empress to sin with him, and how he had hanged her by the hear
in the forest, because she would not consent to him. And when the Emperor
herd this, he was almoost beside himself, and in his woodnes said thus. O
thou most wretched creature, the vengeance of god is fallen upon the, and
were it not that I have pardoned the thou sholdest dye the most shameful death
that could be thought. Than said the knight that ^lewe the earls daughter. I
wot not quod be of what lady ye mean. but well I wot that my lord found on
a time such a lady hangyng by the hear in the forest, and brought her home to
his castle, and betoke her his daughter to keep, and stered her as much as I
could to sin with me, but she would in no wise consent to me, wherefore I
slew the earls daughter that lay with ^er* and when I had so done, I put the
blody knyfe in ye ladies hand that the earl should think she had slain his
daughter with her own hands, and than was she exiled thens but where she
became I wot not. Than said the thief I wot not of what lady ye mean, but
well I wot that seven sergeauntes were ledynge me to the galous and such a
lady came riding by, and bought me of them, and than went I with her, and
afterward I betrayed her unto a master of a ship. Such a lady (quod ye
master of the ship) received I, and when we were in the mids of the sea, I
would have layne with her, but she sat down to her prayers, and anon there
arose such a tempeest that ye ship all to brast, and were all drowned save
I, but what afterward befell of her wot I not. Than cried ye Empress with a
hye voice and said. Sothly dear friends ye are now clean confessed, wherefore I
will now lay to my medycyne, and anon they received their health. When the
lady had thus done, she opened her face unto ye Emperor, and he anon knew
her, and ran to her and enbraced her in his arms and kyssed her oftentimes,
and for joy wept bytterly saying. Blessed be god, now have I found that I
desired. And when he had thus said, he led her home to his palace with great
joy, and after when it pleased god, they ended both their lives in peace.

This Emperor betokens our lord Jesus Christ The empress betokens a holy
soul. The emperors brother betokens the flesh, to whom our lord has
given charge of this Empire, but moo^^ pryncipally to the soul. Nevertheless
the wretched flesh often steret^ the soul to sin. But the soul that loves
god above all things wythstandeth that temptacyo^, and calls to her, her
goostly power, that is to say, reason, will, understanding and conscience, and
makes them to enpryson the flesh that is disobedyent to the ^oule, in the
prison of penance, unto yt time he obey to reason in all thing And thus i^
hope of mercy he synneth again to whom holy scripture says. Maledictus homo ^
peccat in s^e. Cursed be that man that synneth in hope. And at ye last the
soul enclyneth to the flesh, and lets him out of the prison of penance,
and wasshetht him from the fylth of sin, and arayeth him with good virtues,
and makes him lepe on the palfraye of charity, and so rydeth forth to mete our
lord an ester day. But alas full often the sinner trespaceth against holy
scripture, wherefore the heart, that is to say, the lust of the flesh and of
sinners aryseth before him, and after renneth great hounds, that is to say*
evil thoughts, and so long they chase till the body and the soul be left
alone, and tha^ the flesh se stereth that noble soul the spouse of almighty
god to him. But the blessed soul that is so well beloved with god, will not
forsake her lord and consent to sin, wherefore ye wretched flesh full often
despoyleth her of al her clothing, that is to say, of all her virtues, and
hangs her up by the hear on an oak, that is to say, on lusts and delytes,
and there she hangs unto the good earl comes, that is to say, a dyscrete
confessor in the forest of this world, to preche and teache the word of god,
and takes her down and ledeth her forth to ye church to nourysshe his
daughter, that is to say, to nourysshe conscience with works of mercy. The
earl had in his chamber a lamp, right so every discrete confessor or precher
should have before him the lamp of holy scripture, whereby he may se both the
greuaunce and the profit of the soul, in techynge of virtues, and putting
away of vice. The steward that stereth her to sin is not else but pride of
life, which is steward of this world, by whom many men be deceived. But when
the soul that is so well beloved with Christ, will not consent unto the sin
of pride, than takes this evil steward the kny^e of couetyse, wherwyth he
sleeth the earls daughter, that is to say, conscience, according to
scripture, saying. Gold and silver has blinded the eyes of judges, and has
overthrown wise men, so that equite and ryghtwys^es might not enter, but stood
aferre and turned their backs. This lady also bought a man from hanging, that
is to say, from everlasting death, which he had deserved by deedly sin.
Therefore do we as did this lady, smite we our horse, that is to say, our
flesh with the spurs of penance, and so ride we ^orth in all haste to save
our neighbor from the galous of deedly sin, helping him both bodyly and
goostly, as Solomon says. Woe be to that man lyenge in deedly sin, that has
no man to lift him out thereof. Therefore awake thy neighbor and help him. For
a brother that is helped of an other is like a sure cite, and if he give no
more but a cup of cold water to him in the way of help, he shall not lose
his reward. But many now a days be full unkind as was this thief, which
falsely deceived his lady after yt she had saved him from hangyng. The master
of ye ship betokens ye world, by whom many men be deceived. But
nevertheless as often as a man takes on him wylfully the charge of pouerte,
and obeys unto the commandments of god, and forsakes the world, than
breketh the ship. For it is impossyble to please god and man and the world
at ones. When this lady had escaped the tempest of the sea, she went to a
nonry, that is to say, the soul after ye troubles of this world went to the
holy life, and than she healed all manner sick folk, that is to say, every
man that is troubled in his soul that is to say, infecte with diverse
sycknesses that this lady heals through holy life. But the soul might not be
seen of Christ her husband, till she had knowleged openly all her.v. wits
how she had spent them. But when she had made a pure co^fessyo^, than ye
Emperor our lord god her husband knew her, and took her in his arms, and
led her home to the palace of heaven. Unto the which almighty god bring us
all. Amen.

IN Rome dwelled sometime a mighty Emperor named Martyn, which for love kept
with him his brothers sone, whom men called Fulge^tyus. With this Martyn
dwelled also a knight that was steward of his Empire and uncle unto the
Emperor, which enuyed this Fulge^tius, and studied day and night how he might
bring the Emperor and this child at debate, wherefore the steward on a day
went unto the Emperor and said. My lord quod he, I that am your true
servant owe of duty to warn your hyghnes if I hear any thing yt touches
your honor, wherefore I have hard such things that I must needs utter it in
secret unto your lordshyp between us two. Than said the Emperor. Good friend
quod he, say on what the list. My most dear lord quod the steward,
Fulgentius your cosyn and your nigh kynsman has defamed you wonderfully and
shamefully through out all your Empire, saying that your breath stynketh, and
that it is death to him to serve you of your cup. Than the Emperor waxed
wroth, and was almoost beside him self for anger, and said to him thus. I
pray the my good friend tell me the very troth if that my breath so stynketh
as he says. My lord quod the steward, ye may believe me, I never perceived a
sw^ter breath in my days than yours is. Than said the Emperor, I pray the
good friend tell me how I may bring this thing to a good proof. The steward
answered and said. My lord quod he, ye shall right well understand the
troth, for to morrow next when he serves you of your cup, ye shall se that
he shall turn away his face from you because of your brethe, and this is the
most very proof that may be had of this thing. Forsothe quod the Emperor,
a truer proof can not be had of this thing. Wherefore anon when the steward
herd this, he went straight to Fulgentius, and took him aside, saying thus.
Dear friend thou art my kynsman, and also nenewe unto my lord the Emperor,
therefore if thou will con me thank I will tell the of the vice whereof my
lord the Emperor complayneth often, and thinks to put the from him (but if
it be the rather amended) and that might be a great reprofe to the. Than said
this Fulgentius A good sir for his love that dyed upon the cross tell me why
my lord is so sore moved with me, for I am ready to amedde my defaute in all
that I can or may, and for to be ruled by your good and dyscrete counsel. Thy
breath quod the steward stynketh so sore, that his drink does him no good, so
grievous is unto him the stynkynge breath of thy mouth. Than said Fulgentyus
unto the steward. Truly that perceived I never till now, but what thinks you
of my brethe, I pray you to tell me the very troth. Sothly quod the steward,
it stynketh greatly and foul. And this Fulgentius byleued all that he said,
and was right sorrowful in his mind, and prayed the steward of his counseyle
and help in this woeful case. Than said the steward unto him. If that thou
wylt do by my counseyle, I shall bring this mate to a good conclusyon,
therefore do as I shall tell the. I counseyle the for ye best and also warn the,
that when thou seruest my lord the Emperor of his cup, that than thou
turn thy face away from him, so that he may not feel thy stynkynge brethe,
unto the time that thou have provided the of some remedy therefore. Than was
Fulgentyus right glad, and swear to him that he would do by his counsel. Not
long after it befell that this young man Fulgentyus ^erued his lord as he was
wont to do, and therwyth suddenly he turned his face from his lord as the
steward had taught him. And when the Emperor perceived the auoydyng of his
heed, he smote this young Fulgentius on the breast with his foot, and said to
him thus. O thou noughty rybawde, now se I well it is true that I have herd of
the, and therefore go thou anon out of my sight, that I se the no more in this
place. And with that this young Fulgentyus wept full sore, and avoided the
place and went out of his sight. And when this was so done, the Emperor
called unto him his steward and said. How may I put this rybawde from the
world that thus has defamed me. My most dear lord quod the steward, right
well ye shall have your intent. For here beside wythyn these three mile ye have
bryckmakers, which daily make great fyres for to brenne brycke, and also they
make lyme, therefore my lord send to them this night, and charge them upon
pain of death, that who so ever comes to them first on the morrow, saying to
them thus. My lord commands you to fulfill his will, that they take him and
cast him in the forneys with the stones, and this night command ye this
Fulgentius that he go erly in the morning to your werkmen, and that he ask
them whether they have fulfilled your will or not, and than shall they
according to your commandment cast him in the fire, and thus shall he dye an
evil death. Sothly quod the Emperor thy counseyle is good, therefore call to me
that rybaude Fulgentyus. And when this young man was come to the Emperor, he
said to him thus. I charge ye upon pain of death that thou rise erly in the
morning and go to the brenners of lyme and brycke, and that thou be with them
before ye son rise three miles from this house, and charge them on my behalf
that they fulfill my commandment, or else they shall dye a shameful death.
Than said this Fulge^tius. My lord if god ^ende me my life I shall fulfill
your will, though I should go to the worlds end. When Fulgentyus had this
charge, he could not sleep for thought, but that he must arise erly for to
fulfill his lords commandment. The Emperor about mydnyght sent a
messenger on horsbacke unto his brycke makers, co^maundyng them upon pain of
death, that who so ever came to them first in the morning, saying unto them
the Emperors commandment (which is before rehearsed) that they should take
him and cast him in to the fire and brenne him to the bare bones. The
bryckmakers answered and said it should be done. And than the messenger rode
home again, and told the Emperor that his commandment should be
fulfilled. Erly in the morning following Fulgentyus arose and arrayed him
toward his way, and as he went he herd a bell ring to mass, wherefore he
went to that church for to hear mass, and after the eleuacyon of the blessed
sacrament he fell a sleep, and there he slepte a long while, so that the
priest ne none other might awake him. The steward desyryng inwardly to hear
of his death and how he did, about one of the clock he went unto the workmen
and said to them thus. Syrs quod he have ye done the Emperors commandment or
not. They answered him again and said. Nay sothly we have not yet done his
commandment, but anon it shall be done. And with that they set hands on
him. Than cried the steward with an high voice and said. Good syrs save my
life, for the Emperor commanded that Fulgentyus should be put to death. Than
said they, the messenger told not us so, but he bade us tha who so ever came
first to us in the morning, saying as is before rehearsed, that we should take
him and cast him in to the farneys and brenne him to ashes. And with that
word they threw him in to the fire. And when he was burnt, Fulgentyus came
to them and said. Good syrs have ye done my lords commandment. Ye sothly
said they, and therefore go ye again to the Emperor and tell him so. Than said
Fulgentius For Christ's love tell me that commandment. We had in
commandment said they upon pain of death, that who so ever came to us first
in the morning, and said like as thou have said, that we should take him and
cast him in to the forneys. But before the came the the which bring us our
lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Delphinus, which had no
children save only a daughter, which was a fair creature, and greatly
beloved of her father. As this Emperor walked upon a day on hunting in the
forest, suddenly he rode forth out of his way, and lost his men, wherefore he
was greatly disconforted, ^or he wist not whether he rode, ne in what place he
was, till at the last when he had rydden thus all the day alone, in the
evening he saw a house, and thither he rode a great pace, and knocked at the
gate. Anon the good man of the house herd him, and asked the cause of his
knockyng, and what he would have. Dear friend quod the Emperor, lo it is
night as ye may se, therefore I desire you of lodging for the love of god. When
he had thus said, the good man of the house unware that he was the Emperor,
answered thus and said. Good friend quod he I am the Emperors foster, and
have plente of venyson and other vyteylles for you. When the Emperor herd
this, he was right glad in his mind, nevertheless he told him not that he
was the Emperor. And than the foster opened the gate, and received him as
worshypfully as he could, and set him to his supper, and served him honestly.
And when he had supped, the foster brought him to his chamber, and when time
was he went to bed. In the same night it befell that the fosters wife was
trauaylynge of child in an other chamber fast by, and was delivered that same
night of a fair sone. And as the Emperor lay in his bed slepynge, him
seemed he herd a voice saying to him thryes these words. Take, take, take. And
with that he awoke, and meruayled greatly what it might be, saying to himself
thus. A voice bydde^h me take, take, take, what shall I take. And anon he fell
a sleep again, and the second time he herd a voice, saying unto him these
words. Yield, yield, yield. And with that he wakened again, and wondered
greatly, saying unto himself. What may this sygnyfye. First I herd a voice
that said, take, take, take, and nothing I received. And right now I herd
another voice that said, yield, yield, yield, what should I yield. And as he
lay thus thinking in him self he fell a sleep again. And than he herd the
third voice, saying these words thryes. Flee, flee, flee, for this night is
a cyylde borne that after thy decese shall be Emperor. When the Emperor
herd this, he wakened and wondered greatly what it might be. In the morning
erly following the Emperor arose, and called to him the foster and said. Dear
friend I pray the that thou will tell me if any child be borne this night to
thy knowledge. My wife quod the foster this night is delivered of a fair sone.
I pray the said the Emperor, show me thy sone. When the Emperor had seen
the child, he saw a token in the chyldes visage, whereby he might know him an
other time, and than he said to the foster thus. Dear friend know thou who
I am. Nay sothly quod the foster, for I saw you never before this time, as
far as I am remembered, nevertheless it seems that ye should be a gentylman.
Than answered the Emperor and said. I am quod he the Emperor your lord,
whom ye have lodged this night, wherefore right hertely I thank you. This
hearing the foster fell down upon both his knees at his fete, and besought
him of mercy, if that he had offended his hyghnes in any thing prayinge him of
forgyuenes. Than answered ye Emperor and said. Dread the not, for I thank
the hertely of thy good chere, and thy sone that was borne to night I will have
for to nourysshe and bring up in my court and to morrow I shall send for
him. A my gracyous lord quod the foster, it is not agreeable that such a noble
Emperor should nourysshe the child of his subgecte and servant,
nevertheless your will be fulfilled, for when your messengers comme I shall
deliver them my sone. When this was said, the Emperor took his leave and rode
home toward his palace. And when he was comme home, he called unto him such
servants as he trusted best, and said to them thus. Go ye quod he unto my
foster, with whom I was lodged this night in the forest, and receive of him
his sone, of which his wife was delivered this night, and upon pain of death I
command you that ye flee him by the way, and cast his flesh to the dogs,
but bring with you the heart to me. And but ye fulfill my commandment, ye
shall dye the most foulest death that can be thought. Anon his servants
went to the forest and received the fosters sone, and brought him with them.
And when they were comme nere unto the palace, one of them said. How shall we
do that we may fulfill our lords commandment in sleynge of this child. Some
answered and said that the child should be slain, and some would have saved
his life, and while they strove thus among themself, one of them that was
most merciful said unto the other. O my good friends hear my counseyle, and
ye shall not forthynke it. If we murder this innocent child we shall greatly
offend almighty god, therefore here be young pigs, sle^we one of them, and
than may we bear with us his heart, and present it unto the Emperor, saying
that it is the heart of the child, and thus shall we not shede the chyldes
blood. Than said they, thy counsel is good, but what shall we do with the
child. Good friends quod he, let us wrappe him in some clothes and lay him in
some holowe tree, for perauenture god will help him and save his life. And when
he had thus said, they did gladly after his counseyle in all things, and slew
the pygge, and went their way and bare home with them the pigs hert^ to the
Emperor, saying unto him thus. Loo gracyous lord we have slain the child
as ye commanded us, and with that they showed him the pigs heart. The
Emperor supposing that it had been the chyldes heart, took it and kest it in
to the fire, despyteously saying. Loo that is the heart of him which should
have been Emperor after me. Loo what is to believe in dremes and vysyons,
which be naught else but fantasyes and vain things. The second day after
that the child was put in to the holowe tree, th^re came an earl for to hunte
in the forest, and as his hounds chaced an heart they came to this holowe tree
where the child lay, and when they felt the savor of the child, they would
go no farther. The earl seeing this meruaylled greatly why his hou^des abode
there, and smote his horse with the spurs and rode a great pace till he came
to them. And when he came unto the tree wherein the child was laid, he looked
in at an hole and saw there the child lyenge, and than was he right glad, and
took up the child in his arms full louyngly, and bare him home unto his
castle, saying unto the countess his wife. Loo my dear wife, this day by
fortune I have ^ounde a full fair child in an holowe tree as I hunted in ye
forest, whereof I am right glad. And because that I never begat sone ne
daughter on the, ne thou never yet conceived a child, therefore I exhort the
that thou will feyne thy self trauaylynge of child, and say that thou have
borne this child. The countess fulfilled right gladly the earls will and
desire, and said. My most dear lord, your will in this thing shall be done.
Not long after this tidings went through out all that country that the
countess was delivered of a fay^e sone, wherefore every man made great joy.
The child began to grow and was right well beloved of every man, and most
specially of the earl and of the countess. It befell after when the child.
was.xv. year of age, the Emperor made a solemn feast unto all ye lords of
his Empire unto the which feast this earl was called. And at the day assygned
he came and brought the child with him which was at that time a fair young
squire, and carved at the board before the earl. The Emperor greatly beheld
him, and espied the token in his for^heed which he had seen before in the
fosters house* wherefore he was greatly moved and vexed within (...) and said
unto the earl in this wise. Whose sone is this Sothly said the earl, he is my
sone. Than said ye Emperor. By the faith and troth that thou owe unto me,
tell me the troth. The earl seeing that he might not excuse himself by no
manner wise, but that needs he must tell him the truth, than told he him al
together, how he had found him in the forest in an holowe tree. This hearing
the Emperor, was almoost out of his right mind for anger, and called unto
him his servants which he had sent before to slay ye child. And when they
came before him, he made them for to swear upon a book that they should tell
him the troth what they had done with the child. Gracyous lord said they,
we put us unto your grace and goodness, for without doubt, pity so moved us,
that we might not ^lee him, and than we put him in an holowe tree, but what
afterward befell of him, sothly we know not, and in his stead we slew a
pygge, and brought you the heart thereof. When the Emperor had herd the very
truth of this matter, he said unto ye earl. This young man quod he, shall abide
here with me. The earl anon granted, though it was greatly against his will.
And when the feast was ended, every man took his leave at the Emperor, and
went where as them list. And at that time it fortuned that the Empress and
her daughter soiourned in a great country far fro thens by the commandment
of the Emperor. It befell not long after the Emperor called unto him that
young squire and said. The behooves quod he, to ride unto the Empress my wife
with my letters. I am ready at your commandment my lord said he, to fulfill
your desire. Anon the Emperor let write letters, whereof the intent was this.
That the Empress should take the bearer of these letters, and let him be
drawn at a horse tail, and after that she should let him be hanged till he
were deed, and that upon pain of death. When the letters were all made and
sealed, than the Emperor took them unto the young squire, co^maundynge him to
speed him on his journey. And anon ye young squire received them gladly, and
put them sure in a box, and rode forth on his journey. When he had rydden three
or four days on his journey, in an evening he came unto a castle where as
dwelled a knight, and prayed him mekely of a nights lodynge. The knight seeing
and beholdynge the good favor of this young squire, he granted him lodging,
and made him good chere and well to fare, and afterward brought him unto his
chamber. And when he was there he went to bed, and anon fell on sleep, for
he was full weary of his journey, and forgate his box with the letters lyenge
openly in his chamber. When the knight saw the box, he opened it, and found
the letters sealed with the Emperors sign manuell, and was greatly tempted to
open them, and at the last he opened them full subtylly, and than he read how
the Empress upon pain of death should put the bearer of them to death, and
than he was right sorrowful, and said within him self. Alas quod he, it is
great pity to slay such a fair young man, and therefore if I may, it shall not
be so. And anon the knight scraped away that writing and wrote in ye same
paper a letter saying these words. Upon pain of death I command the that
thou take the young squire bearer of these letters, and let him be wedded
without any delay unto my daughter and yours, whyth all the honor and
solempnyte that can be tought, and when they be wedded that ye take him as your
own sone, and that he keep my rowme till I comme unto you my self. When the
knight had thus written, he closed the letters subtylly and put them in to the
box again. Erly in the morning the young squire arose and hastily made him
ready, and took his leave of the knight, and rode forth on his journey, and the
third day after he came unto the Empress, and salewed her right worshypfully
in the Emperors behalf, and took her the letters. And when the Empress had
read them, anon she sent her messengers through the country, co^maundynge the
states and gentylmen to comme unto her daughters wedding at a certain day
assygned. When they day was come thither came many great lords and ladies,
and anon this young squire wedded the Emperors daughter with great honor and
worship, according to the tenoure of the letters, and was right well beloved
and most honored among ye people. Not long after it befell that the
Emperor came in to that country. And when ye Empress herd of her lords
coming, she took with her her sone in law with much other people, and went
against ye Emperor for to welco^me him. When the Emperor saw this young
squire ledynge the Empress his wife, he was greatly moved within him self,
and said. O thou cursed woman, because thou have not fulfilled my
commandment, thou shalt dye an evil death. A my dear lord quod she, all
that ye commanded me to do I have fulfilled. Nay cursed (...) man said the
Emperor, it is not so, for I wrote to the that thou sholdest put him to death,
and now I se him alive. My lord quod ye Empress, saving your grace ye wrote
to me that I should give him your daughter to wife, and that on pain of death,
in wytnes whereof loo here your letters with your own seal manuell. When the
Emperor herd this, he wondered greatly and said. Is he wedded than to my
daughter. Ye sothly said the Empress, long agone with great solempnite and
worship, and as I believe your daughter is with child. Than said the Emperor.
O thou lord Jesus Christ, it is great folly to s^^yne against thine ordinance,
therefore sith it is so, thy will must needs be fulfilled. And with that he took
his sone in law in his arms and kyssed him, which after his death was
Emperor, and ended his life in rest and peace.

This Emperor may betoken Herod, or else every sinner, which walked alone
without troth, till he came to the fosters house, that is to say, the church
which is the house of god. This Herod would have slain this child Jesus,
wherefore he sent messengers to seek him, according to the scripture of saint
Mathewe, tellyng how he commanded ye three kings to seek him, and bring him
tidings again where he was yt he might come and worship him also, but this
said he not for love, but for deceyte. The foster betokens Iosep our ladies
husband which kept him. But when the messengers came, that is to say, when
the three kings came, they slew him not, but worshypped him on their knees,
and left him in the holowe tree of his godhede. The earl that came and foude
this child betokens the holy ghost, which warned Joseph by the angel in
his sleep, that he should take our lady and her sone and flee in to the land
of Egypt. This moralyte may be understand of yer wy^e. This Emperor may
betoken a sinner that walks in the forest of this world sekyng vanytees and
naught else unto the time he comme to the house of god, and there he is received
benygnely of the prelate of the church, if he will obey the commandments of
god. But many of us now a days slepeth in the church when they observe not
the works of mercy, and therefore ought they to dread the voices which I have
rehearsed by ye first take, that may be understand the great benefyte that he
gave the when he put in the a soul, made at his own symylytude. By the
second take is understand the sone of the father of heaven, which was borne
of the blessed virgyn Mary. By the third take is understand the same sone of
god, which dyed upon the cross. By the first yield is understand, that we
ought to yield our soul unto almighty god as clean and as fair as he gave it
us after the washing of our baptysme. By the second yield is understand,
that we ought daily to yield honor and worship and love unto almighty god. By
ye third yield is understand that we ought to yield to god true confession,
contrycyon and satisfaccyon. The first flee betokens sin which we should
flee. The second flee betokens the world which we should flee for the
great falshede and temptacyons that been therein. The third flee betokens
everlasting pain, the which we ought to flee through merytoryous works, by
the which we may come the rather unto everlasting joy and bliss. Unto the
which bring us our lord Jesus. Amen.

THere dwelled sometime in Rome a mighty Emperor named Sauracinus, which
ordained for a law, that who so ever rauysshed a virgyn should dye, and if she
were rescowed, than he that rescowed her should have her to wife, if him list,
and he would not wedde her, than should she be guyded and wedded by his
counsel. It befell upon a day that a tyrant named Poncianus would rauysshe
a virgyn, and led her with him into a forest, and defouled her of her
maydenhede. And when he had so done, he would have slain her, and as he was
despoylynge of her clothes there came rydyng by that forest a curteys and a
gentle knight which herd the cryenge, and lamenting of a damoysell, wherefore
he smote his horse with his spurs, and rode a great pace in to the forest,
to wit what it might be. And than he saw a woman standing naked save her
smock, and than said the knight. Art thou she (said he) that cried so
lamentably. Than answered the damoysell and said. Ye sothly, for this man that
stands here has rauysshed me and defouled me of my maydenhede, and now he
would slay me, and therefore he has despoyled me of my clothes that he might
smite of my heed, for the love of god gentle knight help me now. Than said
the tyrant. She lies, for she is my wife, and I have found her in auoutry
with an other man, and therefore I will slay her. Than said the knight. I
believe better the woman than the, for lo the tokens of troth appear openly in
her vysage that thou have rauysshed her, and therefore will I fight with the for
her delyueraunce. And anon they sterte together and fought egerly till they
were both sore wounded. Nevertheless the knight optayned the vyctory, and put
the tyrant to flight. Than said the knight unto the woman. Loo I have suffered
for thy love many sore wounds, and have saved the from ye death, will thou
therefore be my wife. That I desire you quod she with all my heart, and thereupon
I betake you my teouth. When she was thus ensured, than said the knight. Here
beside is my castle go ye thither and abide there till I have vysyted my
trendes and my kynnesmen, to provide for all things needful for our wedding,
for I purpose to make a great feast for thine honor and worship. My lord
quod she, I am ready to fulfill your will. Than went she forth unto the
castle, where as she was worshypfully received. And the knight went unto his
friends for to make him ready against the day of marriage. In the mean while
came Poncyanus the tyrant to the knights castle, and prayed her that he
might speak with her. Than came she down from the castle to him. This tyrant
subtylly flatered her, and said. Gentle love if it please you to consent to
me, I shall give you both gold and silver and great richesse, and I shall be
your servant, and ye my sovereign. When the woman herd this, full lightly she
was deceived through his flateryng language, and granted him to be his wife,
and took him in with her into the castle. It was not long after but that this
knight came home, and found the castle gate she^^e and (...) thereat, but
long it was or he might have an answe^^ And at the last the woman came and
demanded why (...) knocked so hard at the gate. Than said he to her. (...)
^ere lady why have thou so soon changed my love (...) comme in. Nay sothly
said she, thou shalt not (...) here, for I have here with me my love which
(...) ^oued before. Remember quod the knight that thou gave me thy troth to be
my wife, and how I saved the from death, and if thou ponder not thy faith,
behold my wounds which I have suffered in my body for thy love. And anon he
unclothed himself naked save his breche, that he might show his wou^des
openly. But she would not se them, ne speak more with him, but shette fast the
gate and went her way. And when the knight saw this, he went to the Justice
and made his complaynte to him, prayenge him to give ryghtwyse judgment on
this tyrant and this woman. The judge called them before him, and when they
were come, the knight said thus. My lord quod he, I ask the benefytes of the
law, which is this. If a man rescowe a woman from rauysshynge, the recower
shall wedde her if him list, and this woman delivered I from the hands of the
tyrant, therefore I ought to have her to my wife, and farthermore she gave me
her faith and trou^h to wedde me, and thereupon she went to my castle, and I
have done great cost against our wedding, and therefore as it seems me she is
my wife, as by the law. Than said ye judge to the tyrant. Thou know well
that this knight delivered her from thy hands, and for her love he suffered
many grievous wounds, and therefore (...) thou wotest that she is his wife by
the law, if (...) list. But after her delyuerau^ce with ^^aterynge speech thou
have deceived her, therefore this day I judge (...) to be hanged. Than said
the judge to the woman (...) like wise. O woman thou know how this (...)
saved the from death, and thereupon thou betokest (...) thy faith and troth to
be his wife, therefore by (...) reasons thou art his wife, first by the law and
a (...) by thy faith and troth. This notwythstandyng thou consented afterward
to the tyrant, and brought him in to the knights castle, and shette the gate
against the knight, an would not se his wounds which he suffered for thy love,
and therefore I judge the to be hanged. And so it was done, both the rauyssher
and she that was rauysshed were dampened to the death, wherefore every man praised
the judge for his ryghtwyse judgment.

This Emperor betokens the father of heaven which ordained for a law, that
if the soul of man were rauysshed from god by sin, the sauer of the soul
should wedde him, if him list. The woman that was rauysshed betokens the
soul of man, which was rauysshed by sin of our fore father Adam, and led
out of paradyse in to the forest of this wretched world by the tyrant
Poncyanus, which betokens the devil, and he not only defouled her by
lesynge of the heritage of heaven, but also he would slay her with everlasting
pain. But the soul cried with an high voice, whose cry our lord Jesus Christ
herd. This cry was made when Adam cried after ye oil of mercy. (...) till
(...) was needful, (...) the ascencyon day (...) a dwelling place of (...)
should dwell after the day (...) in honor and glory. But alas in (...) the
devil and begyled the wretched (...) sin, and so he entered in to ye castle
of our (...) should be the castle of god. The knight I (...) at the gate of
our heart, according to (...) Eccesto ad hostium et pulso. Lo I stand (...)
and knock, if any man will open that I (...) But where as the devil is, god
may not enter, but y^ the sinner will receive him by penance, which seeing
the gentle knight Jesus, showed himself naked (...)

(...) of Ge^^a Roman^rum, (...) London in Creed lane, by (...) King. In the
year of our (...) god. M.^.LUII.


