THE HEAVENLY ACADEMIE.

Iam hic videte magnum Sacramentum, fratres. Magisteria forinsecus, Adjutoria
quaedam sunt, and Admonitiones; Cathedram in Coelo habet, qui corda docet.

Aug. Tract. 3. in 1. Joan. LONDON, Printed by Robert Young for John Bartlet,
and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard near St. Austins gate.
1638.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN Lord ROBERTS, Baron of Truco, etc.
My Lord*
TO whom first as a Judge, and next as a Patron, should a work present it
self, that concerns both Universities, but to a person that has knowledge of
both? For the lower, I think there are scarcely any, that have more profited
in it, in no more time; a diligent and apprehensive Learner, having met with an
able and communicative Teacher. And for the higher, I think you know it well,
because you love it well. Not to go far for a proof, the expressions of
love, which you have been pleased to show me, did arise (as I believe)
especially from this root; because you thought me to be of that Universitie.
Now that for which another is loved, must needs be loved it self, and what is
loved is known; for what we know not, we love not.

And in this love and knowledge, I desire that your Lordship may still
increase, until you come to the fountain of knowledge, and the final, full,
and transcendent object of all created love. Toward this increase, if the
following work may give some advancement, it shall add much to the joy of him,
who is to

Your Lordships (especially spiritual) service justly devoted, F. Rous.

The Preface.
IT is the just saying of an Ancient, Prodere grata commemoratione decet
scientiae patrem; It is comely to acknowledge with thankfulness, the Father of
our knowledge. If this be justly due from man unto man, how much more due is it
from man unto God? For though man be called the father of those that are taught
by him, Genesis 4. 21.
yet God is the Father of those fathers; even a Teacher of those teachers: and
therefore by our Saviors judgment deserves only the name of Father, in
perfection and eminence. Those then that have God to be a Father of knowledge
to them, should return to this Father the praise and glory of this knowledge.
The heavenly gifts of God, when they move kindly and naturally, do move like
the Heavens, in a circular motion; returning to that place and point from which
they began first to move; from God unto God. They come from him as graces, and
return to him in the shape of glory.

Accordingly, having received a measure of grace from this heavenly Teacher, by
which I am what I am, I could not but acknowledge it, and by this
acknowledgement return him glory for grace. And because I desire also that
others may have the like grace, that God also from others may have the like
glory, I testify to others that which I have felt and seen. I have evidently
seen and felt, that men are taught of God; and so there is a third school for
the Students of Divinity. And as they pass from the Countrey-schoole to the
Universitie, so should they yet mount higher to a third, even a Celestial
Academie. And certainly, as the second excels the first, so and much more does
the third excel the second.

Some perchance may answer with the Servant, Son, and Heir of the Great
Elijah; Hold your peace, I know it already. Yet those that know it, will not
envy that it be told to those that know it not. There are sons of the Prophets
that must grow up like young plants in the house of the Lord; and those have a
time when they know it not, and this discourse may meet with that time. Yea
there may be some Masters in Israel, into whose ears perchance it has passed,
but not entered into their hearts, that as a man must be borne, so he must be
taught from above. And if this nail be driven beyond hearing, into knowledge,
experience, and taste, I hope no man will be sorry for such a gain. Besides,
too true and common it is, that the natural heart of man willingly lies down
and takes up its rest in the abilities of Nature; and fetches oracles from
thence (the cause of so many errors, and differences the consequences of
errors) and therefore has it need of such goads to awake it, and to make it
open the eye and ear to this heavenly Teacher.

It is most true, that those who have not been taught in this higher school
of Grace, but only in the lower of Nature, cannot well acknowledge that which
they know not; this school being best learned, known, and acknowledged, by
those whom it most teaches. And those who have been well taught there, do
well know, that Christians are herein better than their neighbors, even than
the best of Pagans, because they are taught by God, the best, most
transcendent, and infallible Teacher. The heavenly Teacher teaches them both
what and how to believe; he gives them his heavenly truths contained in his
Word; and gives them withal an heavenly mind to discern, believe, and receive
them. And thus while a Christian holds his religion by an heavenly hand, and
both are given him by an heavenly Teacher: a Christians tenure of religion is
far more noble, excellent, and assured than that of the Pagan. A Christian thus
taught from above, believes and worships what he knows, whereas the Pagan
worships what he knows not; even that which be has received only by the way
of Nature, from natural, deceived, and deceiving men: But the Christian has a
spirit from God in Christ Jesus (for if any man have not the spirit of Christ,
he is not Christ's) and this Spirit gives him a spiritual eye, which an Heathen
has not; and yet this eye alone, can truly and kindly discern and see
spiritual and heavenly truths. And for this spiritual eye, which the
Christian has from the Spirit of God, the Heathens and Mahometans may say
among themselves of a Christian, as once an Heathen King said to his Heathen
Subjects of Joseph: Can we find such a man as this? a man in whom is the
Spirit of God.

And that such Christians may abound, is the end of this work, which for ought
I know, has not been overwrought, nor thereby made superfluous and
unseasonable for the present age. Socin.
I wish that fetching heavenly knowledge from carnal reason and humane wit,
have not made it too seasonable. Yet to turn men back the more willingly from
this counter-course, I have brought forth patterns of some, who have taught
and professed a denial of their own wits and reasons, though acute and
excellent; and have (as it were) quenched their own natural lamps, that they
might get them kindled above by the Father of lights. Yea, thus did sundry of
them, even in those times, when humane wit and reason had made too great a
mixture with the mysteries of Divinity. Yet then did God preserve the
soveraigntie of his own light in eminence and glory, by the homage of these
men's confessions, and submissions to that light. And if such high thoughts and
imaginations (that commonly do most exalt themselves against the knowledge
taught of God) do thus submit unto it, the lower should not be high when the
higher are low.

The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. THe great use and benefit of the lower Academies. CHAP. II. The
necessity, and eminence of the Heavenly Academie. And first, in point of
knowledge. CHAP. III. A second benefit of the Heavenly Academie: The attaining
of heavenly things after they are known. CHAP. IV. A third benefit of the
Heavenly Academie: Knowing by tasting. CHAP. V. A fourth benefit of the
Heavenly Academie: Teaching to teach. CHAP. VI. Ways and means of admittance
into the Heavenly Academie, and taking degrees in it. CHAP. VII. A second step:
Denial of man's wit and wisdom. CHAP. VIII. A third step: Conformity to God.
CHAP. IX. A fourth step: Conversing with God, and diligent coming to his
School. CHAP. X. An applicatorie and cautionarie Conclusion.
THE HEAVENLY ACADEMIE.
CHAP. I.
The great use and benefit of the lower Academies.

OUR Savior Christ having made use of many old things of the Creation, to
represent and insinuate many new things of the Regeneration, he infers a
position from his practice; therefore every Scribe which is instructed to the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 13.
is like unto a man that is an Householder, which brings forth out of his
treasure things both new and old.

Whosoever then would express the best character of an heavenly Scribe, from
whence should he rather take it, than from the best pattern, lively set forth
by the best and highest Teacher, who was that which he described, and
described that which he was? And whereas our actions must be guided by rules,
he does justly draw rules from his own actions.

Having then so absolute, both a Pattern and a Teacher, let us boldly frame
the character of our heavenly Scribe, to the shape both of this chief Doctor,
and of his Doctrine. Accordingly we will commend to our Scribe things both new
and old (but the old first, because they are first) and after him who is Truth,
will lay down this true position; That toward the making of a learned Scribe,
there is a great advantage to be gained by the gathering of old things into his
treasury. The Scribe that will be learned, may be a gatherer of old things; and
so let him be. Let him gather into his treasury the things of Nature, yea
gather a stock of them, and lay them up for his use, when he comes to the new.
Let him know in a competent measure what is to be found abroad in the old
Creation; yea, let him learn what is copied out of it by art and industry, to
serve him in the things of Regeneration: and if in this search he meet with the
learning of the Egyptians, he may carry their jewels into his treasury. Let
an Heathen Logician or Philosopher, be his Gibeonite to cleave wood, and to
draw water for his service in the Sanctuary. Let the one divide, define, and
order; and the other draw secrets from the depths of Nature, to serve the Lords
servants in the Tabernacle. Let the precept and patterns of virtues, gathered
from their doctrines and stories, serve for spurs and incentives to grace, to
go beyond the effects of Nature; and for exprobrations when she does it not.
And let the languages both of the Unbeleever, and Mis-beleever, serve for keys
to open to new men, those mysteries which the old men see not, neither do open
to themselves, though the keys be in their hands.

Such old things as these are earthly needles, that may draw in heavenly
truths: They are earthly glasses, that may help our eyes to a clearer
discerning of heavenly images: they may help to illustrate, to insinuate, to
convince, and to gain. By them the new man may be a Grecian to the Grecians,
to gain and convince the Grecians; and a Jew to the Jews; to gain or
convince the Jews; and all things to all men, to win some. And accordingly the
most laborious Scholar of the greatest Master, though sometime rapt up into
the heavenly School, yet when he is among the Jews, he convinces them by
the Prophets Acts 26. 22.
received of the Jews; and when he is at Athens among the Grecians, he
convinces them also by their own Prophets; even learned Heathens, Acts 17. 28.
by their Heathen Poet.

Lastly, this Scribe in the lower Academie, may improve the abilities of
Nature, given him by the first and old creation. For these old things will grow
by use and exercise, and likewise become excellent instruments in the new
estate; there being no little use of understanding, memory, and elocution,
when they shall become new, and new things shall be added to them.

And thus the Scribe having gained in the lower Academie a large provision of
these old things, he commends the use of that Academy, which furnished him and
his treasury with this provision: and himself is to be commended for one part
of a perfect, and well instructed Scribe. And though there remain yet a more
excellent part, yet even to this part there wants not an excellency, and
consequently a great degree of praise and commendation.

CHAP. II.
The necessity and eminence of the Heavenly Academie. And first, in point of
knowledge.

THe learned Scribe being thus furnished with old things in the lower Academie,
it remains that he add Docens omnem hominem in omni sapientia, tam externa,
quam divina: veluti vir quidam fortis and strenuus bellator ambidexter, per
utramque eruditionem in adversarios sese armans, per utramque disciplinam
vincit reluctantes. Greg. Nyss. in Basil. fratris laudem.
new things to the old, so to be perfectly instructed according to the
character stamped by our Savior. To get these new things he must ascend up,
and get him into a new Academie; even to that Teacher of souls, whose chair
is in Heaven: for this highest Teacher both shows and gives us many new
things in this highest Academie. Among them we will first take notice of a new
knowledge, given by a new light and sight, created in the soul. For certainly,
whatsoever we may think of our skill and knowledge in other arts, gotten by
the old and natural understanding; yet if we rest in this old and natural
understanding, we are still short of the true and kindly Unaquaeque forma
indita rebus creatis a Deo, habet efficaciam, respectu alicujus actus
determinati, in quem potest secundum suam proprietatem, ultra autem non potest
nisi per aliquam formam superadditam, sicut aqua non potest calefacere nisi
calefacta ab igne. Sic igitur intellectus humanus habet aliquam formam,
scilicet ipsum intelligibile lumen, quod est de se sufficiens ad quaeda^
intelligibilia cognoscenda, ad ea scilicet, ad quorum noticiam per sensibilia
possumus devenire. Altiora vero intelligibilia intellectus humanus cognoscere
non potest, nisi sortiori lumine perficiatur (sicut lumine gratiae vel
prophetiae) quod dicitur lumen Gratiae, in quantum est Naturae superadditum.
Aquin. 1. 2. ae. quaest. 109. A. 1. Qui sine lumine supernaturali Scripturas se
intelligere arbitratur, sine alis and pennis volare contendit. Savanarola de
Simplic. Vit. lib. 5. Qui ad lectionem sacrarum Scripturaru^ accedit sine
lumine supernaturali, seipsum impediat, and irrideat; quia leget, and non
intelliget, quod est frustra terere tempus. Naturales enim scientiae, per lumen
natural rationis, quod omnibus ^^est, intelligi possunt: At scientia divinitus
inspirata, non nisi divino lumine poterit apprehendi. Id. pr^^em. Expos. 1. in
Orat. Dominica. Docet Spiritus Sanctus, non externo clamore vocis, sed interna
inspiratione and illuminatione cordis; scribit enim Legem in corda nostra.
Igitur cum non alius Doctor and Rector Ecclesiae a Christo datus sit quam
Spiritus Sanctus, consequitur, quod hi soli vere docti sunt, qui Spiritum
sanctum habent. F^rus in Joan. 14. Mentem Sancto Spiritu non repletam Deum
videre non posse: nisi quis cum prolixa Dei gratia intellige^e coeperit dicta
and facta Prophetarum, nihil ei proderit, quod videatur voces eorum and opera
proferre. Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. Acutum ingenium non conducit ad melius
and facilius credendum fide divina -- Nam actus ejusmodi fidei est
supernaturalis etiam quoad substantiam -- Noster intellectus non elicit
ejusmodi actu^, nisi juxta quantitate^ and proportionem luminis infusi, Gonz.
in 1. DIsp. 72. n. 12.
knowledge of Divinity. Divinity is a supernatural science, and therefore a
supernatural light is needful to the right discerning of it. He that sees
the things of Divinity only with a natural light, does not see divine things
in the true, but false shapes: for these things have one shape in themselves,
and another in him that thus does see them. The faculty by which we will
truly and kindly behold an obj^ct, must have a fitness and capacity proper
and agreeable to that object. There must be some kindred and proportion
between them; and that which sees, and that which is seen must be
connaturall. Accordingly if we will discern colors, we use sight; if savours,
smelling; if sounds, hearing. And for things of the second intention, to
discern them, we ascend above Sense unto Reason, and see them with our
Understandings. And now proportionably if we ascend higher to divine,
heavenly, and spiritual mysteries, we must have a divine, spiritual, and
heavenly knowledge, whereby to discern them. For the Quando anima nostra
intellectualibus operationibus ad intelligibilia movetur, superflui quidem sunt
sensibilium sensus; sicut and intellectuales virtutes quando anima Deiformis
facta, per unctionem ignoti, inaccessibilis lucis lumini se immittit. Dionys.
Areop. de divin. nom. Lect. 9. Intelligibiles virtutes nstrae naturalis
rationis superfluunt, quando anima nostra Deo conformata immittit se rebus
divinis, non immissione oculorum corporalium, sed immissione fidei; scilicet
per hoc, quod divinum lumen ignotum and inaccessibile seipsum nobis unit and
communicate. Aquin. in Areop. locum. Omnis virtus creatae naturae habet terminos
suos. Non enim potentia visiva potest aliud cognoscere quam lucem and colores;
nec auditiva praeter sonos; nec intellectus noster potest naturaliter aliud
intelligere quam naturalia, and ea quae per naturalia quoquo modo cognosci
possunt. Sicut ergo potentia visiva, de sonis nullum potest dare judicium, nec
auditiva de coloribus, ita nec homo animalis, nec carnalis, qui caret lumine
supernaturali, potest de spiritualibus certu^ judicium dare -- Quia autem
spiritualis habet lumen, quo supernaturalia cognoscuntur, potest de eis recte
judicare. Savanar. de simpl. vit. lib. 3. con. 6.
natural understanding does perceive them no better than the ear does the
reason of sounds, or the nose the reason of smells; and summarily, than the
senses do the things of the second intention. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Surely the eye has not seen, nor has the ear heard these heavenly things:
that is, neither mere natural seeing, nor mere natural hearing, can give us
the true knowledge of them. Yea, Verse. 14.
the heart of man, that is, the natural reason of a natural man, does not
rightly discern them. But to know the things of God, there must be a mind
given from God; even a spiritual mind to discern spiritual things. If a
learned Mathematician will teach a child the secrets of his skill, he must not
only give him his rules, but his understanding. Now there is infinitely more
odds between the great Teacher of Heaven and the most rational man on earth,
than between the most learned teacher on earth and the lowest learner. Neither
in this heavenly school, between the supreme Teacher and his earthly
sehollers, is only a difference of degrees, which I call a difference of
quantity, but also a difference of quality. For sithence the fall of man, the
knowledge of man is grown carnal: his wisdom is a fleshly wisdom, and his
understanding is grown heterogeneall, and of a different nature and temper;
yea; not only different and strange, but cross to the divine wisdom and the
mysteries thereof. Therefore the great Teacher of souls, seeing our need,
according to that need, gives his Learners and Disciples a Novo oculo, nova
aure, novo cord, quaecunque videri, and audiri possunt, sunt per fidem and
intelligentiam comprehendenda, spitualiter dicentibus, audientibus, agentibus,
Domini discipulis. Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 2. Caput Christus est; per illum
enim videmus, audimus, and loquimur. Iren. lib. 5. cap. 17.
new and heavenly understanding, to discern; and discerning to approve as most
true and real, divine and heavenly objects. With giving us the things of God,
he gives a spirit to discern and savor the things given us of God: with the
things of Christ, he gives us the mind Nos spirituales sensum Christi habemus,
id est, participes facti sumus scientiae Christi, per acceptionem Spiritus
sancti; and ideo animales homines, vel Pseudo-Apostoli, nos judicare non
possunt, qui sensum Domini habemus, quem illi ignorant. Anselm. in 1 Cor. 2. A
sancto Spiritu procedens illuminatio, quem qui possident, possunt cum Paulo
dicere, nos mentem Christi habemus. Basil. in Psalm 48.
of Christ. And now having gotten spiritual understandings, spiritual things
appear to us in their right shapes, and seem such as they are. And while to
those whose teaching does not ascend above the earthly Academie, spiritual
things are things not scene, their inward as well as their outward eye not
discerning them; to the spiritual man taught of God in the higher Academie,
they are seen spiritually; and he sees not only that they are, but what
they are, and they are truly that which he sees them to be.

CHAP. III.
A second benefit of the Heavenly Academie. The attaining of heavenly things
after they are known.

NEither is there only a new knowledge given us in the heavenly school, by
which we may truly and rightly see the things of God, but there is a new
virtue infused to us, by which we may receive and enjoy them. If only a light
and sight had been given us, by which we may clearly see and know the
excellent things which God has prepared, but had no power to receive them, our
sight and knowledge of them, might serve as a light, whereby to see their
excellency, and our own misery. For then should we only see an happiness,
from which our selves are excluded. But God, rich in mercy, and who works
his works from end to end, teaches the will to receive, as well as the
understanding to see. He gives not only an eye to behold, but a hand to
receive celestial riches. It is a poor and beggarly speculation, to know the
richness of Mines, the preciousnesse of jewels, the value of pearls, and in
the mean time, by having none of them, to suffer extremities of penury and
want. But our highest Teacher not only shows us the treasures of his
Kingdom, but teaches us to take them, and so makes us truly and really rich.
As they are not in themselves mere words, and bare imaginations, but Prove. 3.
14. Prove. 8. 18, 19. and verse. 21. (...), Substantia permanens.
realities, enduring riches, true and solid substance, which the heavenly
Teacher by a new light discovers to us: so neither are they presented to us
as bare sights, shows, and spectacles, but they are really made ours, by his
teaching of our wills and affections to apprehend and receive them. Christ Jesus
the precious Pearl of the Gospel, in whom are hid al treasures of
blessedness, anointing our eyes with his ointments, appears to us as the
fairest of men; and annoynting our hearts with his ointments, fills our hearts
with such love of him, that we are drawn to run after him; and running after
him, we overtake him, and overtaking we are married to him: And being married
to him, Christ our Well-beloved is ours; and if Christ be ours, all things with
him are ours also. In him we have blessings of the highest nature, and more
immediately flowing into us from the Creator: remission of sins, peace with
God, communion with God, conformity to God, a spiritual sonship, an
inhabitation of the Spirit, an earnest of an eternal inheritance, a joy
unspeakable and glorious, a power of godliness, the hidden Manna, fore-tasts
of blessedness, the kisses of Christ Jesus. Such invaluable treasures, and
glorious riches are taught us, and given us by teaching, when God is our
Teacher, and we are taught of God. Whiles he calls on us without with his
outward word, to open our mouths wide, he calls, moves, and teaches us within
with his operative word, so to open them, that they are filled with these good
things; yea with Himself, who is Goodness it self.

This is a lesson which is only taught in the heavenly school; For none can
come to Christ, but he whom the Father draws by his heavenly teaching: if we
ascend not up to the Heavenly Academie, and get up above the teaching of men,
unto the teaching of God, our hearts will never thoroughly learn this lesson of
happiness. The besenesse and sensuality of man's heart will lie down below
the due estimation, price, and love of these pearls; and not suffer it to open
it self, though it be to a Savior bringing blessedness with him. It will not
give a mess of temporal profit, preferment, or pleasure, for an heavenly
birthright, and a glorious inheritance. It will account it the chief learning,
to learn some new promotions, lands, and lordships: and no wonder, for it
takes only visible things for realitie, though these be but temporal, and
perish with the using; and though the things not seen are an enduring
substance for all eternity. But the scholars taught in the school of Christ,
account it their chief learning to learn, and by learning to receive Christ
with his blessings and blessedness; whom the more they thus learn, the higher
are they esteemed and placed by their Master, who is Truth it self, in the
school of blessedness.

CHAP. IV.
A third benefit of the Heavenly Academie; knowing by tasting.

THere is yet another eminent, and transcedent learning given us by our
heavenly Teacher in his highest school, and that is, a mysterious and secret,
yet an assured, evident, and exceeding delectable knowledge, arising from
experience and taste. By the first teaching, we rightly saw the things of God
presented to us by God. By the second we were taught to receive and possess
them. By the third, after we have tasted those heavenly things whereof we were
possessed, from this taste there arises a new, but a true, lively, and
experimental knowledge of the things so tasted. And indeed this is a knowledge
Sicut mellis natura non adeo verbo persuaderi iis, qui minime sunt experti,
quantum in ipso gustu cognosci potest; sic nec coelestis verbi suavitas clare
praeceptis, aut doctrinis tradi poterit. Non enim nisi veritatis dogmata,
penitus probantes propria experientia, Domini bonitatem deprehendere possumus.
Basil. in Psalm. 33. Accipe quod sentitur, antequam discitur; nec per moras
temporum longa agnitione colligitur, sed compendio gratiae maturantis hauritur.
Cyprian. Epist. 1. Non potest aliter affectio cognosci, quam experimentaliter,
ab eo qui pet eam afficitur; quam experimentalem affectionis cognitionem, non
potest eam habens, in alterum verbis quibuslibet infundere, nisi similiter
affectus sit alter ille, Quoniam solus novit (prout in Apocalypsi scribitur)
qui accipit. Propterea vocatur Manna absconditum. Exemplis est perspicuum, in
illo qui novit dulcedinem mellis solum per doctrinam, sicut Medicus sanus
infirmitatis dolorem. Haec autem dulcedo a gustante, hic dolor ab aegrotante,
aliter and long before cognoscuntur. Gerson. de medit. cordis, cap. 4.
Primitias Spiritus habentes, quid sit hoc absconditum Manna ignorare non
possunt, quia hoc gustando, potius quam legendo vel audiendo, didicerunt. Thom.
Camp. Ep. 1.
which no art, eloquence, or expression of man can teach us. For even in
natural fruits there are certain rellishes, and, as I may call them, Idaea's
and characters of tastes, which nothing but the taste it self can truly
represent and show unto us. The West-Indian Piney cannot be so expressed in
words, even by him that has tasted it, that he can deliver over the true shape
and character of that taste to another that has not tasted it. And yet have we
other fruits, that by some kindred may seem to counterfeit some lineaments of
that taste. But no earthly things can in any degree give us the true taste of
the heavenly; but the heavenly are left to be known by their own taste. The
Scripture therefore uses earthly things, that by them we may ascend above
them; and that not finding in earthly things what the heavenly things are, we
may ascend up to the heavenly things themselves, by tasting truly to know them.
In one place we are told, That Christ's love is pleasanter than wine; and in
another, That the Laws of God are pleasanter than honey: Here by the
pleasantness of wine we do not learn the true shape of the pleasure of
Christ's love: for this is another kind of pleasure, than the pleasantness of
wine: Neither in the sweetness of honey do we truly see the sweetness of
Gods Law; for it is a different kind of sweetness which the soul tastes in the
Law, and the body tastes in honey. Yea, the very Manna it self which was
visible, does not give the true taste of the hidden and invisible Manna; but it
is still hidden, except it be known by Gustate, inquit, and videte. Profecto
qui sacrosancta divinarum rerum disciplina initiantur, permagnificas ipsarum
recognoscent gratias: and excellentissimam celsitudinem ac magnitudinem
participatione speculantes, coelestia Divinitatis beneficia grate laudabunt.
Dionys. Areop. Hier. Eccles. cap. 3. Quare autem hoc nomen nemo scit nisi qui
accipit? Videlicet, quia nominis hujus scientiam, non alienum extrinsecus
documentum, sed proprium intrinsecus essicit experimentum. Inflati and tumidi
sciant, ut sibi scire videntur, quantum volunt, sive quantum possunt, hujus
tamen nominis scientiam consequi non possunt: Scriptu^ estenim; Haec
cogitarunt, and erraverunt, excoecavit enim illos malitia illorum, and
nescierunt sacramenta Dei. Nemo ergo scit dignitatem, sive ingenuitatem nominis
hujus, quo nominamur, vel sumus filii Dei, quantumcunque sciat, sive buccis
sonantibus perstrepat (ut ille Aristoteles, sive omnes Aristotelici) relationem
patris ad filium, sive filii ad patrem, nisi quem spiritus adoptionis
regenerando Filium Dei Patris effecerit, and ipsa regeneratione, scientem hujus
rei, doctumque suo tactu perfecerit. Rupert. in Apoc. cap. z.
tasting, as the new name is not known, but by him that has it. Therefore the
joy of the Holy Ghost is indeed unspeakable as well as glorious; because he
that has it cannot so express it, that another who has not felt it, may
learn and know it. There is a taste in the grace and love of God, which no man
can see but by tasting; and by tasting it may be seen. There is a peace of God,
which passes all understanding; which though the understanding of him that
has it do not fully comprehend, yet it does in some measure apprehend and
know the sweetness of it by tasting it. But the true knowledge hereof cannot
be delivered Ea quae in contemplatione sancti viri intuentur and gustant, nec
scribi possunt. Savanar. Prooem. Expos. 4. in orat. Dom. Nunqua^ aliquis
intelliget verba Apostolorum and Prophetarum, quantumcunque illa refonet
exterius, si non imbiberit affectum scribentium. N^que enim aliter conceptus
little verborum in animo generabit. Gerson. de Theol. Mist. Innumerae sunt
assertiones talium concordissime dicentium Theologiam mysticam per experientiam
intimam colligi, eam quoque long sublimiorem, and ultra quam dici valeat,
jocundiorem, sapidiorem, and perspicaciorem existere supra caeteras
cogitationes ab extrinse co venientes. Id. ib.
over by the greatest Doctor on earth in picture and representation. Therefore
the high and heavenly Teacher (by the Psalmist) first calls on us to taste, and
after to see, even to get that sight and knowledge which is gotten only by
tasting. By tasting the things themselves, God teaches us to know what the
things are; and the more we know them, the more we shall love them; and the
more we love them, the more we shall taste them; and the more we taste them,
the more we shall know them. And thus shall we run on in an Ettradit prius
mensuratam claritatem, postea illis sicut gustantibus lumen, and magis
desiderantibus magis seipsum immittit, and abundanter superfulget, quoniam
dilexerunt multum; and semper extendit ipsas ad anteriora. Dionys. Areop. de
Divin. Nom. Lect. 4. Sic quaedam circultio attenditur, dum ex lumine crescit
luminis desiderium, and ex desiderio aucto crescit lumen. Circulatio autem,
secundum sua^ naturam, perpetua est; and sic semper divinum lumen extendit
animas ad anteriora. Aquin. in locum Areop.
endless circle of tasting, loving, and knowing, which grows still greater
the more we round it.

Let it also be observed, that this knowledge thus taught of God, does give
such an assurance of understanding, concerning the things thus known, and does
so seal upon the soul the truth and excellency of them, that all objections,
trialls, and tentations, cannot blot out the stamp and character of this seal;
but the soul will still answer, That against taste there is no dispute. And
with the Apostles; we cannot but testify what we have seen, and known by
tasting.

There is yet another knowledge taught by God in his heavenly school, which
though it arise not from the very taste of spiritual things, yet it arises
from the soul, having soundly tasted of Gods Spirit, and being thoroughly
affected with it. When the soul is inwardly bedewed, and (as it were) written
upon by the Spirit, there will arise from this writing, and the virtue of this
heavenly dew, an unknown kind of knowledge, which cannot be taught by man; yea
Attend in spirituali matrimonio duo esse genera pariendi: and ex hoc etiam
diversas soboles, sed non adversas; cum sanctae matres aut praedicando animas,
aut meditando intelligentias pariant spirituales. In hoc ultimo genere interdum
exceditur, and seceditur etiam a corporeis sensibus, ut sese non sentiat, qui
verbum sentit. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 85. Affectus charitatis Deo
indissolubiliter inhaerens, and de vultu ejus omnia judicia sua colligens, ut
agat vel disponat exterius, sicut voluntas Dei bona, and beneplacens, and
perfecta dictat ei interius, etc. Idem de Not. and Dign. Amor. Divin. cap. 8.
Quanquam illi ipsi sancti aliquando inter disputandum aliter locuti sunt, sicut
video omnibus accidisse, ut alii sint dum verbis aut disputationibus intenti
sunt, and alii dum affectibus and operibus. Illic dicunt aliter quam affecti
fuerunt ante; hic, aliter afficiuntur quam dixerunt ante. Ex affectu vero
potius quam ex sermon metiendi sunt homines, tam pii quam impii. Luther. de
Serve. Arb. cap. 53.
the man himself that knows it, cannot teach it to himself before he knows
it; but rather knows it first without himself, and then teaches it to
himself by this knowing it. The soul being steeped and affected by the
Spirit, this affection does eruct, deliver, and speak to the soul hidden
truths, which before she saw not, nor could see by the mere magisterie of man
without, no not of her own man within. Yea, this reaching of the affection is
sometimes so pregnant and powerful, that though the head being captivated by
humane reason subject to error, or by the prejudice of education, do hold and
maintain an evil tenet, yet the heart shall even then, by the Spirit, endite
a good matter, contrary to that evil error which the head maintains. And
no wonder; for if by the first writing in the heart at the Ethnici non credendo
credunt. Tertull. de Carne Christi, cap. 15. Magistra natura, anima discipula;
quicquid aut illa edocuit, aut ista perdidicit, a Deo traditum est, Magistro
scilicet ipsius Magistrae. Tertull. de Testim. Animae, cap. 5. Lucretius
oblitus quid assereret, and quod dogma defenderet, hos versus posuit: Cedit
item retro de terra quod fuit ante In terram: sed quod missum est ex aetheris
oris, Id rursus coeli fulgentia templa receptant. Quod ejus non erat dicere,
qui perire animas cum corporibus disserebat. Sed victus est veritate, and
imprudenti ratio vera surrepsit. Lact. Instit. lib. 7. cap. 12.
creation (though now much blotted by the fall) yet there are still some
parcells of an inward teaching, contrary to that which the head or wit of man,
misled by outward teaching, does maintain: Then much rather in the newwriting
of Regeneration may be impressions of truths, which may breathe, break, and
speak out when the soul is strongly heated, affected, and animated by the
Spirit. And thus may arise up a new discovery of truths not known before; yea,
perchance contrary to that which before was thought to be known and
accordingly believed. And these doctrines of the Spirit in our selves and
others, should be carefully noted, and gathered into a treasury, by all that
receive the love of the truth. For even among those that err, such truths
being found, they are precious in themselves; and withal of undeniable
authority against the In omni fere controversia ab his ego provoco ad hos; sed
ut illa mulier a Caesare dormiente ad Caesarem experrectum -- Illic veritatem
oppugnare isti voluerunt: hic, veritas voluit se ipsa defendere. Episc. Mort.
Apol. part. 1. Lect Cathol. Cum in quibusdam improbant, quod in aliis
approbant, in his accusantur, in illis contra se testimonium dicunt. Aug.
contr. Episc. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 4.
errors of those, by whom they were uttered. And indeed it may be, the truths
which some inwardly know and believe, may be imputed to them, rather than the
errors which they outwardly received, and do outwardly, and in a kind of
external ignorance maintain. But howsoever, very precious they are
wheresoever they are found; and very often oraculous Decisions and
Resolutions; and may add to the stock of knowledge in the lower schools, who
cannot give this knowledge, but may receive it from the higher. For indeed, not
so much man does teach this knowledge as God; who not only teaches man
without man, but sometimes more than without him, because against him.

CHAP. V.
A fourth benefit of the Heavenly Academie; Teaching to teach.

THere is yet a fourth excellence of the highest Academie, and it is this; That
the Doctor of that Chair teaches men best to be the best Teachers. And this
being the scope of most of those that study Divinity in the lower Academies;
for this should they chiefly, though making use of the lower, pass up and
ascend to the higher: for the higher has herein diverse advantages above the
lower.

Toward a general discovery hereof, we may take notice, That Christ Jesus
when he ascended up on high, and received from his Father all power both in
Heaven and earth, did undertake the building of his own Church. Ephesians. 4. 7, 8,
11, 12.
And for the perfecting of this holy building he sent down gifts unto men, 1
Cor. 3. 9, 10, etc.
by which they were made able and skillful Builders. And no doubt these are the
best and most able Teachers, whom Christ the great Lord of the building does
enable to teach, and to build by teaching. And indeed if Christ has enabled
that number, which he has deputed for this building, how can any man think
that he is a fit and kindly builder, except he be of that Tremo potius quam
dico, ne in immensam abyssu^ abeat navicula, and desit spiritus. Da enim mihi
navim vacuam, gubernatorem, nautas, funes, anchoras, omnia disposita, and
nusquam esse spiritum venti, nonne tardat, omnis quantuscunque est apparatus,
si desit operatio Spiritus? Ita fieri solet, licet sit sermonis ampla supellex,
and men's profunda, and eloquentia, and intelligentia, and non adsit Spiritus
sanctus, otiosa sunt omnia. Chrysostom. de Spir. sanct. In Theologicis veritatibus
sciendis and colligendis, duo genera gratiarum per Christum agnoscere debemus:
unum quidem quod per merita and gratiam ipsius habuerimus principia nostrae
fidei, ex quibus illas veritates colligeremus: alterum, quod ex illis recta
ratiocinatione procedentes, mysteria nostrae fidei explicemus, and defendamus,
and inde veritates Theologicas ad aedificationem Ecclesiae probemus. Et haec
est gratia per Christum, de qua loquitur Paulus ad Ephesians. 4. Dedit alios
Pastores and Doctores. Haec autem gratia dicitur a Paulo, donum prophetiae, 1
Cor. 14. cum appellat Prophetas eos qui mysteria interpretantur. Vasquez 1. 2
ae. Disp. 188. cap. 2.
number whom Christ has thus enabled? The gifts which Christ gave, Ephesians. 4.
12.
are those that should perfect the Saints, fulfill the work of the Ministry,
and edify the body of Christ. Wherefore the Giver of those gifts being gone up
on high, let men also lift up their eyes on high for those gifts. And as the
Disciples stayed in Jerusalem, until they were endued with the power of
teaching from on high: so let men that stay in the lower Academie, in their
stay, earnestly seek to receive a power from on high. Let them not wholly look
downward, as if from thence they could receive the gifts that are given from
above. Indeed looking down, they may see the gifts that are come down upon
others (though not upon themselves) and they may pick up the crumbs that fall
from the tables of these Masters: and making up these into loaves, they may
give them to the hungry. But it must needs be confessed, that this is a lower
kind of ability in teaching, seeing that which lends to this must needs be the
higher; the borrower here also being a a servant, and therefore inferior to
the lender. And it seems, that not so much these, as they that received those
gifts from on high, do build by these. But those that receive gifts from on
high, either take not all at the second hand, but somewhat at the first; or if
they make use of things formerly taught by the gifts of others, they do (as it
were) quicken and enlive them by their own gift, and so send them forth newly
animated by the same Spirit which spoke them. Yea, by this Spirit they often
make them not only to live, but to grow to a greater measure of light or heat,
by enlarging them unto more instruction, or kindling them unto a more incentive
excitation.

But if we will yet take a more punctual notice of the excellencies of this
heavenly teaching of Teachers, we may take a more particular survey of some
eminent abilities given with the gifts of the highest Teacher.

A first is, a spiritual and divine Ut in Solis radiis, tenuiores,
limpidioresque substantiae primae, influente luce replentur, sicque exuperantem
lucem in subsequentes Solis vice transfundunt: ita non sine periculo divinis in
rebus quibusque, se aliis Ducem praestare praesumit, qui non per omnia evaserit
simillimus Deo, and ab inspiratione judicioque divino fuerit gubernator
declaratus. Dionys. Areop. Eccles. Hier. cap. 3. Sanctis Doctoribus ea quae in
sacra pagina continentur occulta, primum per divinam gratiam aperiuntur, quae
postmodum sive per ipsos, sive per alios, populis manifest praedicantur.
Richar. de Sancto Victore in Apoc. lib. 7. cap. 10. Et nunc and semper
adhibendus sit Spiritus, per quem solum Deus and intelligitur, and exponitur,
and auditur. Greg. Naz. Apol. Fug.
light, given commonly in an eminent and more than ordinary measure, to those
that are enabled and taught from above to be spiritual Teachers. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, shines in their hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. They receive light, that they may turn others from darkness to light,
and show them the way of peace, which by this light they have discovered. They
have an Urim from on high; and a spiritual light and sight, by which they
become eyes to the blind, and a light to them that sit in darkness. The great
Shepherd of souls, and Master of the highest school, does not send out from
his school the blind to guide the blind, that both may fall into the ditch, but
he makes shining and burning lights, that they which see them may not only
rejoice in their light, but be led by it to the enjoying of the supreme and
sovereign light, in the vision of whom is perfect blessedness. And he that
has this light has the key of knowledge, by which he can open the mysteries
of salvation, and discover the counsels of God, and see the mind of Christ,
and find out wonders in Gods Law. He pierces into the inward vein of the
word, and (as it were) lets it blood, and causes to spring from it a flood of
doctrine: whereas the same word to another that has not this light, seems
like the Rock whereof it was said; Shall I fetch you water out of this Rock?

And the Multo nobilior est illa doctrina, quae de sursum ex divina influentia
manat, quam quae laboriose acquiritur humano ingenio. Thom. Camp. de Imit.
Christ. lib. 3. cap. 30. Item cap. 44. Ego sum qui doceo hominem scientiam, and
clariorem intelligentiam parvulis tribuo, quam ab homine possit doceri. Cui ego
loquor, cito sapiens erit, and multum in Spiritu prosiciet -- Ego sum qui
humilem in puncto elevo mentem, ut plures aeternae veritatis capiat rations,
quam si december annis studuisset in scholis.
doctrine flowing from this light of the Spirit, is most fit for spiritual
building; 1 Cor. 2. 13.
spiritual things being fittest for spiritual, because most connatural; yea,
because it flows from an infused gift (in a spiritual sense) it may be said
to be most Qui gratia Dei and charitate plenus est, si verba sua profert ab
illa forma, id est, a gratia and charitare subministrantur, dicitur loqui a
Spiritu Dei, non artificialiter. Sed si careat gratia and charitate, and verba
justorum in medium proferat, artificiose dicitur potius loqui quam ex Spiritu
Dei. Item, si artifices possent sua artificialia opera facere naturalia, non
est dubium quod hoc facerent. Unde videmus quod conantur abscondere artem. --
Oratores and Poetae, qui artem sequuntur parum orando prosunt: similiter
Praedicatores qui art utuntur, nullum fructum faciunt. Sed Apostoli and alii
Praedicatores, qui verba protulerunt per Spiritum Dei, totum mundum
converterunt. Savanar. de Simp. vitae, lib. 3. concl. 1, and 2.
natural; and because most natural, most effectual.

Secondly, from this higher Academie comes that ability of teaching, which
teaches by doing. There is a teaching by word, and a teaching by conversation;
and if this latter be required of women, much more of those men, who are the
Teachers and Fishers of men. 1. Pet. 3. 1.
They that teach by word only, seem to build with one hand only; they that
teach by word and example, build with two hands; but they that teach by word,
and destroy by example, do build with one hand, and pull down with the other.
And certainly, if they destroy what they build, they are great trespassers, and
foolish builders. St. Paul shows himself a wise Masterbuilder, while he
makes himself a pattern of his own doctrine; and being a follower of Christ,
calls upon his flock to follow him, as he follows Christ. He calls upon them
to do, not only what they have heard, but what they have seen in him: Phil. 4.
9.
and see what follows such teaching, and such learning; The God of peace shall
be with you.

And this teaching by pattern does he deliver over to his spiritual
posterity; for he calls upon Timothy his son (and by him upon his sons sons,
even all the sons of Timothy) to be a walking Word, and a visible Doctrine; 1 Timothy 4. 12.
even a pattern of Believers, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
both in word and conversation.

True it is, that the people should do as the Teachers say, and not as they
do, when they say Christ's spiritual words, and do their own carnal works.
But such is the corruption of fallen mankind, both in sight and affection,
that in sight it rather looks on outwardly-visible works, than inward,
invisible, and spiritual words, and in affection it is more apt to follow
carnal examples than heavenly rules. And this being a pestilence, wherewith
mankind is apt to be infected to death, how fearful is it to bring such a
plague into a flock?

But on the contrary, a holy life joined to sound doctrine, is a continual
testimony and martyrdom of the doctrine. Such a life commends the doctrine to
the belief and love of men. It persuades a possibility, and shows a
facility of doing it. What we see done, we think may be done, and when we
see a pattern before us, we do it much the more easily and perfectly. Now
that Teachers may be such patterns of light, inwardly burning, and outwardly
shining, let them repair to the Father of lights; who from this higher
Academie, baptizeth with that fire which not only kindles light in the souls
of his Messengers, but makes his Ministers a flame of fire. And, if thus
kindled from above, with holy Barnabas, they be good men, full of faith and the
Holy Ghost, that which followed then, may be hoped will follow now; Acts 11.
24.
Much people shall be added to the Lord.

Thirdly, the highest School, and no other, teaches the Art of Experimental
Divinity, which being learned, does give an excellence and Crown to the
ability of teaching. There is great odds between an experienced, and a
meerely-contemplative Captain. And if the great Captain of our salvation
learned experimental obedience by the things which he suffered, and by his
sufferings experimentally tasted and known, knows how to take due notice,
consideration, and compassion of those that suffer; how much advantage may we
think is added to his Under-Captaines, by their experience in the Christian
warfare? An heavenly Teacher, with St. Paul, having run the race of
Christianity, 2 Cor. 6. 8, 9.
through honor and dishonor, through evil and good report; as unknown, and
yet known; as dying, and yet living; as sorrowful, and yet always rejoicing;
as having nothing, and yet possessing all things: such an one (I say) when he
meets with souls in the like estates of honor, or dishonor, and the other
differences incident to a Christians life, he can presently out of his own
experience draw forth lessons of direction, reproof, or consolation: yea, out
of his own experience he can almost fore-prophesie events, and foretell
issues out of tentation. And indeed, as in other states of soul, so especially
in the case of a broken spirit, experimental Teachers have an high and eminent
advantage. For such an one looks back to his own soul, and there reads the
story of it imprinted by experience, and from thence tells the distressed
soul, both the cross which she endures, and the joy set before her. He
talks with the troubled soul in her own language, having thoroughly learned it
in this high school of experience: and when the grieved soul does but hear
the Teacher speaking this language, she is received: yea, when she hears him
speak so truly of the grief, she believes it is possible, and perchance
likely, that there may be truth in his comforts: yea, it is no small comfort
to the distressed soul, by such infallible and evident descriptions, to find
and hear one that has been in the like distress wherein she is now
afflicted. For one of their greatest terrors arises hence, that none was ever
in their case; and that the Almighty has singled them out from all the world,
to be the very marks of his arrows. Besides, when these men bring
consolations for tribulations, they bring sure and sound ones; for they bring
every one of them with a Probatum. They can name the man that was cured by
them, and say with the Psalmist; This poor man cried unto the Lord, and thus
was heard, comforted, and healed. With St. Paul, they comfort others with the
very same consolations wherewith with themselves have been comforted of God.
Thus this skill of experimental Divinity gives an advantage of knowledge, and
not of knowledge only, but of confidence to the Teacher; for he says what he
knows: and on the other side, it gives an advantage of trust and comfort to
the hearer.

But the inexperienced man, when he comes to a soul set on the rack of a
tortured conscience, and there uttering the fearful expressions of a
terrified mind; this distressed soul is a Barbarian to him, and he is a
Barbarian to her. She speaks what he understands not, and he cannot speak to
her in a language which she can comfortably understand. But this Teacher is
often of the same opinion concerning this troubled soul, which Christ's carnal
kinsmen had concerning him; Mark. 3.
They sent out to lay hold on him, saying; He is besides himself. And no
wonder, for they never saw sin in the true ugly shape of it; they were never
upon mount Sinai, neither did they there hear the thunders and lightenings of
the Law against sin; and therefore they are not like Moses, who did quake and
tremble. Yea, this quaking and trembling is so strange to them, that they ask
with wonder of these amazed souls: Why did ye skip as Rams, and tremble as
little Lambs? To whom it may be answered: It was at the presence of God on
Sinai.

Again, on the other side, when the time is come, wherein God calls out;
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people: there is no balm in their Gilead, there is
no oil of joy in their lamps: they have not had the foregoing tribulations,
nor the following consolations: Therefore if they would give consolations, they
must be borrowed ones (like the axe of the the young Prophet) and not the
very same by which themselves have been comforted of God. Yea, commonly for
want of experience, they know not the Crisis of a soul, nor when the soul is
upon a turn, and is come to the season of receiving consolation. They know not
the hour of our Savior, when he is ready to turn the water of tears into
the wine of consolation. And therefore such an one often misplaceth his
spiritual physic, and gives restoratives to a soul not thoroughly purged from
the love of sin, or while the fit is upon the soul; when it were more fit to
weep with them that either do, or should weep; and by that agreement in
weeping, to draw the mourning soul to a second agreement, even to rejoice with
him that rejoices. For this is the wisdom of a Teacher, experimentally
taught from above; and this wisdom is justified, and in high estimation with
all her children.

Fourthly, from the heavenly school descends a mighty, active, and maine
advancement of teaching, and that is, a storge, or natural affection, given to
a Teacher. There is a gift of love infused by God into the heart of a Teacher,
by which he is taught of God to love his Flock; and this love inflameth,
constrains, and teaches him to teach. In St. Paul we see deep impressions,
and powerful expressions of this love: yea, we see him as a man all on fire
with this love; so that for the love of souls, 2 Cor. 11. 23, etc.
weariness and watching, hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness, perils and
persecutions, are all but as stubble in his way; and the fire of love, which has
eaten him up, consumes them also, and turns them into nothing. He feeds his
sheep sometimes at his own costs, and with an holy symony buys the work of
his own ministry, and strains for an argument to approve it. For whereas
he might call 2 Cor. 12. 14.
himself a Labourer, and so might plead for the wages due to his work, he
calls himself a Father, that thence he may fetch a reason of providing for
his children. Yea, he does not express his love only under this title of a
Father, (though that character being well stamped on a Pastor, with the
affections belonging to it, would make him actively and industriously careful
for the good of the flock) but he descends into the lowness, and (as it were)
the fondness of a Nurse: 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2.
He softly handles and dandles, Hebr. 5. 11, 12.
as a Nurse her children, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8.
and speaks halfe-words, low doctrines to them, when he sees they are not gone
beyond milk, nor come to the digestion of stronger meat. Yea, he is so
fervently affectionate to them, that he is willing to have imparted to them,
not the Gospel of God only, but his own soul. And he adds the reason;
Because they were dear unto him. Hence we learn, That it is the dearnesse of
the flock, which is the maine spring that sets all on working. This is it which
imparts the Gospel willingly, and not for constraint and lucre: This is it that
makes a Teacher instant in season, and our of season: Briefly this is it which
makes him with pleasure to undergo all labors, even from the watching of one
hour, to the imparting of his soul or life. So that if you exhort a Pastor to
visit the sick, you exhort him but to one duty; if you incite him also to
comfort the weake-hearted, you invite him but to two; but if you could give him
love, you give him a Spring and Incentive, that would move him to these, and
all other good duties. And this love is taught by the highest Teacher: for he
is Love in the Fountain, and all Love besides himself, is a stream of this
Fountain.

But on the other side, where this Love is wanting, du^ies are not done at all,
or they are done by pieces and starts; or they are done dully and coldly, and
the doers of them are like the wheels of Pharaohs chariots in the the red sea,
they move very heavily. The fire of love is out, by which being enflamed
themselves, they should impart heat unto others; and the zeal is wanting, by
which they should provoke many. They have not in them the affections of
Fathers, and therefore their flocks appear to them in the shape of bastards,
and not of sons. Accordingly they often set them our, as some do their base
children to wanderers, and such as will take them best cheap: or if they give
them any food, their hearts go not with it, neither do they care whether it
do them good, or they do grow and prosper by it. And though perchance one of
these may act the part of a Lover, yet commonly it will show like an
artificial Scene; that only being for the most part proportionable, durable,
and serious, which is natural.

Therefore take such an one as Timothy, Phil. 2. 19, 20.
that naturally (and not artificially) cares for the Church, and there is no
artificial man that is like minded to him: for he takes care not only for some
pieces, but for the whole estate of the Church. And he works not pieces of
Gods work, but the whole work of the Lord; yea, he works it, 1 Cor. 16. 10.
as St. Paul did; and how he did it, we have seen before. And if you will
see the root of it, look into his inside, and there you shall see the bowels
of Phil. 1. 8.
Christ Jesus. Phil. 1. 8.
The bowels of Christ Jesus, that often would have gathered Jerusalem, as a
hen gathers her chicken: the bowels of Christ Jesus, that accounted the
gain of souls to be his meat and drink: the bowels of Christ Jesus, that
have in them the greatest love to the flock: for greater love has no man,
than he that lays down his life for his flock. These bowels are in St.
Paul: and therefore no wonder, if having received the bowels of Christ, by the
spirit of Christ, he walk in the steps of Christ, while he walks by the
same spirit of Christ.

Behold then here the most excellent way, even the way of love, which teaches
the Teacher, and directs him into all the ways of profiting his flock. And
this teaching love is it self taught by the highest Teacher, 1 John* 4. 16.
whose name, and nature, and very being is love; and by whom men are taught to
love one another; He it was, that did put an earnest care of the Church 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9.
into the heart of Titus; and therefore he it was also, 2 Cor. 8. 16.
that did put the bowels of love into him, 2 Cor. 7. 15.
from which issued this care. And if thou have the same bowels, thy flock
will be thy children, and thou will be a father to them: in their reigning,
thou shall reign; they will be thy joy and thy crown now, and thy great
rejoicing hereafter in the day of the Lord Jesus. Thou shall come to him, and
say; Behold, I and the children whom thou have given me. And he shall say to
thee; Well done, good and faithful servant, because thou have fed, and loved
these my lambs, thou have loved me; and because thou have gained many, rule
thou over many Cities.

CHAP. VI.
Ways and means of admittance into the heavenly Academie, and taking degrees
in it.

BY that which has been said it appears, that there is a higher Academie as
well as a lower; and that the higher has some excellencies above the lower.
True it is, that though there be a difference, yet there must not necessarily
follow a division: yea, much rather there should follow a conjunction; and he
that is in the lower, should strive to be in both at once. And indeed this is
a maine business of this work, to conjoyne things which God has not
separated; and not to diminish, but to advance the lower, by lifting it up to
the higher.

Now to ascend from the lower to the higher, there are certain stairs and
steps, by which men usually go up, and become Disciples and Pupills of the
heavenly Teacher. A first step is that which should ever be first in
intention, though last in assecution; A right end. When we come to God to be
taught, we must propose an end worthy of God; And surely none but God is an end
worthy of God. A most perverse and base disorder it were, to make man the end
of God; and much more confused and disorderly were it, to make God to serve
man, in his service of some base lust: for then may he not only say, Thou have
made me to serve with thy sins; but, thou have made me to serve thy sins. Thou
put God below thy sins, and put thy sins to be thy gods. And how can
thou expect that God should by his teaching give thee an excellence above
others, when thou by his own gifts do intend to put, either his creature
which he has made, or sin which he made not, above him; and him infinitely
below himself. Wherefore let not ambition make Non cogito in Ecclesiasticis
honoribus ventosa tempora transigere; sed cogito me Principi Pastorum omnium
rationem de commissis ovibus redditurum. Aug. Epist. 203.
worldly pomp (which thou have renounced in thy Baptism) nor the pride of life,
and outward preferment, thy end; but account and propose God himself before
thee, as thy highest preferment, exceeding great reward, and all-sufficient
end. Neither make earth the end of Heaven, nor put the god Mammon in the place
of the true God, neither seek the gifts of his Spirit, that thou may make
money of them. This is a right, and withal a most base symony, and therefore
prepare thy self to receive the answer which was made unto Simon thy father;
Thou art in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; and thou art very
unfit for a part and fellowship among the Disciples of the heavenly Teacher.
Know that this high Academie is not a place for Prentices, therein to learn a
trade and occupation for worldly gain; but the Teacher being the King of
Heaven, he teaches his Scholars to be Kings; even first to seek, and at last
to attain an heavenly Kingdom. And earthly things are promised to be given as
attendants upon this heavenly Kingdom. Therefore as as the Heaven is high
above the earth, so let it be in thy thought and intention: make God thy end,
who makes Heaven by his presence to be Heaven. Desire his gifts, to glorify
the Giver by the^ here, and to be glorified by him hereafter eternally in his
heavenly Kingdom. But if thou make earth thy heaven, and this world thy god;
this false heaven, and false god after a while will forsake thee, and the true
Heaven, and true GOD, whom thou have despised, will not receive thee. In the
mean time expect no gift from God, except such as the Quails, which perchance
may bring some food to thy lust, but leanness and judgment to thy soul. If
with Balaam, thou look out for prophecies, that by them thou might gain
the wages of unrighteousness, though thou fall into a trance, and art
enlightened, to make others see by thy light; yet thou thy self art still a
child of darkness, and by thy light encreasest thy own stripes; and being in
the way of Balaam, art likely to come to his ways end, even a death among the
unrighteous.

Yea, seek not the gifts themselves for themselves, neither make them their
own end. It is a pleasant thing for the eye of the body to behold the light of
the Sun; but to behold a spiritual light, which shines from the highest
light, is far more pleasant to a spirit: yet must a reasonable spirit know,
that to behold the highest Spirit himself, is the highest pleasure; and
therefore these lower gifts of the Spirit are far more valuable, for showing us
by their light the way to the sight of the highest Spirit, than for the light
it self by which they show it.

Wherefore it remains still, that God be proposed as the end of his gifts,
whereof he is the beginning. God was his own end in the giving of them, and
it is both thy duty, wisdom, and benefit, to have the same end which he
has. If thou join with God in his end, it is most likely he will join with
thee in the means, and in the increase of them toward his own end. For God
will not be wanting to his own end, which were to be wanting to himself.
Therefore enlarge thy self as much as thou can, in this intention of making
God thy end, wherein the more thou increasest, the more it is likely he will
increase his teaching of thee, and the degrees of his gifts in thee. And
according to thy degrees of grace, shall be thy degrees in glory: as thou have
sought him much in the gifts of his grace, so by them shall thou find him much
here, and much enjoy him hereafter in glory.

CHAP. VII.
A second step: Denial of man's wit and wisdom.

HE that will ascend up to the heavenly School, there to be taught of God,
must leave man's carnal wit and wisdom behind him, as Abraham left his Asses
at the foot of the mount. The wisdom of man, says St. Paul, is foolishness
before God; and the natural man discerns not the things of God: therefore if
thou endevourest by thy natural wit to discern the things of God, thy labor
is employed rather not to discern them: thou may perchance conceive, and
after perceive, bastard, mis-begotten, and false shapes of them; but the things
themselves, in their true shapes, thou do not see and perceive. The carnal
wit sees the shapes which it self puts upon spiritual things, and not what
they themselves do bear, and indeed appear in, to a spiritual eye. And
surely if man's wit see, and by seeing teach it self truly the things of God,
what need were there of an heavenly Teacher? But because thou art naturally
blind to the things of God, and they are only spiritually to be discerned,
therefore must thou go up to a spirit, to give thee a spiritual eyesight,
that so thou may spiritually discern them. And when thou go up, to get a
spiritual mind of the great Father of Spirits* remember to put off thy carnal
wit and wisdom, which must be stripped off before thou can put on the other.
The keeping of thy natural and carnal wit, is the keeping of thy folly; and
this folly will cast her own color on the things of God, and make them seem
folly to thee, or only wise in that color which that casts upon them. And
this is a reason why the greatest wits do stumble so often at the wisdom of
God, upon which they behold the shape of folly, of their own setting on; and
why they fall into errors, thinking to mend Gods wisdom by their wits; and
why themselves, though professing themselves wise, yet remain fools; even
because they think and profess themselves to be wise. While they think their
own wits to be fit instruments for the discerning of Gods wisdom, they not
finding his, wisdom to be wisdom by their wits, they censure it to be
folly; and therefore go about to correct it, which is indeed to pervert it. In
the mean time it is the greatest folly, which puts the shape and title of
folly upon the greatest wisdom, and goes about to amend wisdom with folly.
And thus are these wise men taken in their own wisdom; for their own
wisdom becomes a snare to them, and makes them first, and after takes them as
fools. Yea, misery and folly are met together in them, and that in a highest
degree, while they see not, but censure and reject the most wise mysteries of
God, which offer and present to them salvation, and eternal felicity.

Therefore let the heavenly Scholar put off his own earthly and carnal
wisdom, and go up to God for a new Principle, even a new mind, by which he
may truly see and know the things of God. The new world of Divinity must be
begun in a man, as God began the old world, it must have nothing for a
foundation; and when man is nothing in himself, then God will begin to create,
and make him something. This is that which St. Paul says: Let him be a fool,
that he may be wise. For indeed, that which thou think to be thy wisdom,
thou must put off, and make it vanish into nothing, being a fool in regard of
that wisdom; and so thou shall be made wise in the true wisdom. But this is
not perfected at once. Therefore, as at thy first entrance into the heavenly
Academie, thou must begin a denial, and annihilation of thy own wit and
wisdom, so after thou art entered, thou must strive to continue and increase
this denial: for though thou do in will and purpose put it off, and deny it
wholly at first; yet in act it is not wholly put off, it being part of the
remaining body of sin, which hangs so fast on, that it cannot wholly be put
off, until man be dissolved. But thou must strive to get ground of it while
thou live; and the greater thy natural wit is, the more must thou strive.
For the greater it is, the more apt will it be to see reasons by it self, and
without Gods teaching, which will fall out too often to be reasons against
Gods reasons, and wit against Gods wisdom. And the admission of humane wit,
against Gods wisdom, by some great wits, (that perchance first in purpose or
profession submitted to the wisdom of God) has been the cause of many
dangerous errors in the Church. I say, A mixture of man's wit with the Divine
Word, has bred Mules in Divinity, even confused, foolish, and misshapen
errors. But let the learner in this high Academie lay aside his own sight,
which is blindness, and get from his Teacher that eye salve, which may give
him spiritual discerning. Let him keep his wit in a perpetual captivity, and
passivenesse to the Spirit of God; and beware that by no means he make that
portion of Spirit which is in him, to suffer under the activitie of his own
carnal wit. But having received an eye from God, let him see Gods matters with
Gods eye, and so shall he keep himself safe from error, and shall be led
into the truth. For a mind given of God, does approve only the truth of God.
And though in this life of imperfection, no man have so much spiritual light,
as to discern all truth; yet the spiritual light, which every spiritual man
that is taught of God receives, is sufficient for the discovery, or
discerning of so much truth, as may lead him like a stream to the Ocean and
fullness of truth and blessedness. And for a preparation toward this fullness,
let him work out, and endeavor to perfect his own emptiness: for the more
degrees he gains of this emptiness, the more degrees shall he receive of
Gods fullness; even of his teaching grace here, and his crowning grace for ever
hereafter.

CHAP. VIII.
A third step: Conformity to God.

Likeness draws love, and love causes a communication of counsels: yea,
love it self is a likeness to him who is Love, and thus love from love draws
a partaking of secrets: when the heart and ways of man are In quantum ad
puritatem conscientiae pervenit, quantumcunque voluntatem suam mortificando
animae conjunxit, seque vnu^ cum Deo fecit, in tantum spiritualia cognoscit,
and Dei voluntatem intelligit. Rich. de Sanct. Vict. in Cantic. cap 7.
agreeable to Gods heart, then the heart of God is (as it were) great with that
affection which longs to communicate. Shall I hide the thing that I do from
Abraham (says the Lord) seeing Abraham both keeps the ways of the Lord, and
will teach his children to keep it? The Psalmist also professes, that he got
many degrees of wisdom, by his walking with God in the Laws of God, even by
the conformity of his heart and ways to the heart and will of God. Thereby
(says he) I am wiser than mine enemies, wiser than old men; yea, wiser than
my Teachers. No doubt he had obtained his prayer of God; Lighten mine eyes, and
I shall see wonderful things in thy Law.

And as likeness is it self a reason, that moves God to be thy Teacher, so it
carries with it a second reason: Where is likeness and conformity to God,
there is also a covenant with God: where the Law of God is so written in the
heart, that by this writing the heart is framed according to Gods heart, Jerem.
31. 33, 34.
there is covenant between God that wrote this Law, and him in in whom it is
written. God is his Pater vos non docuit, quo modo potestis me agnoscere? omnes
regni illius homines docibiles Dei erunt, non ab hominibus audient; Et si ab
hominibus audiunt, tamen quod intelligunt, intus datur, intus coruscat, intus
revelatur. Aug. in Joan. 6. Tract. 26.
Father and Teacher, and he is Gods Son and Disciple. He says plainly, thou
art his son, and he says truly, (his promises are Yea and Gal. 4. 7, 24.
Amen) that thou art his Disciple, Esa. 54. 13.
for he promises, that thou shall be Joh. 6. 45.
taught of God. And David upon trial, acknowledges the truth of this
teaching, when he says; The secret of the Lord is Psalm. 25. 14.
with them that fear him; and his covenant, to make them to know it. He has
not only made a covenant with them, but he makes them to know it; he does
both give it, and teach it.

Thirdly, there is a friendship between those that are conformed unto God, and
God to whom they are conformed. Abraham, the father of the faithful, was
called the friend of God; and the faithful children of Abraham are also called
his friends. God is no complementer, and therefore if he allow them the term,
he allows them also the truth of this friendship. Joh. 15. 15.
Ye are my friends (says our Savior) if ye do whatsoever I command you.
Now we know that a friend will tell a friend his counsels. So says our
Savior, Because ye are my friends, therefore whatsover I have heard of the
Father, I make known unto you.

Fourthly, there is a marriage between Christ and his Church, the Church in
this marriage is one spirit with him, as in natural marriages two are one
flesh. And if there be such a marriage, there is also a marriage-love between
them. Now marriage-love does communicate counsels: and it is so hard, if not
impossible, for marriage-love to deny such a communication, that the woman who
could only make her challenge upon a counterfeit shape of marriage, yet thinks
it fit to object this question: How can thou say that thou love me, when
thy heart is not with me? And why is not his heart with her; Because he does
not tell her his counsels? even such counsels, as being told, may endanger
his liberty and life. But Christ, the best husband, having given his life for
his Spouse, and himself to his Spouse in a sacred union, how shall he not
with his life and himself give her his counsels also? It is his own word: If
the wives be ignorant or doubtful, let them ask their husbands. Herein he
implies, That if the wives do ask their husbands, they being asked should be
willing to reach their wives. Surely, if Christ require this willingness to
teach in lower and meaner husbands, whose knowledge, yea whose love cannot be
here in perfection, will not this husband, who is light it self and love it
self, teach his own wife by this most perfect light, and from this most
perfect love? Yea certainly, in the bed of love he will not only tell her the
words of his counsels; 1 John 2. 20, 27.
but by a sacred unction (being one spirit with her) he will make her to see
the counsels of his words: he will give her an inward and spiritual eye, to
see the inward riches and realities of his counsels. So that whereas the world
cannot see the wisdom of God, and the precious things contained in it, for
the mystery; the Spouse by this new light, looking within the veil of Ephesians.
1. 18, 19.
the mystery, shall see the wisdom of God, and most excellent treasures
contained in it, presented and offered by it.

Wherefore that God in Christ may be thy Teacher, study this conformity to
God, which by likeness, by covenant, by friendship, by marriage-love, may draw
him to teach thee: And first put off the old man, corrupt with deceivable
lusts, which cause in thee a deformity, yea, an enmity against God. The
uncircumcision of the flesh has in it a contrariety to God and his wisdom,
and makes thee adverse to Gods teaching, and God unwilling to teach thee. It is
also a veil upon the eye of thy soul, and hides thy sight from his light, and
his light from thy sight. And until a spiritual circumcision do take off
this veil, thou art in the school of the Prince of darkness, and art not yet
teachable by the Father of lights. But if this veil of the old man be first
removed by mortification, and thou shall in the second place put on the new
man, wherein is the image of God (light agreeable to his light, and a love of
him who is Love, and of that which he loves) then God will delight in thee, as
a father in the son that resembles him; and as a father his son, he will
delight to teach and nurture thee. If thou keep this image clear, that God may
see his face in it, he will therein also see his covenant, and seeing his
covenant, he will take thee for his friend, yea, for his spouse; and by all
these, as by so many cords of love, he will be drawn to teach thee. Being
thus pure in heart, thou shall see God: thou shall see him here guiding and
teaching thee, and hereafter in presentiall vision eternally blessing thee.

CHAP. IX.
A fourth step: Conversing with God, and diligent coming to his School.

HE that will be taught of God, must come Deus Trinitas, Pater, and Filius,
and Spiritus sanctus veniunt ad nos, dum venimus ad eos. Veniunt subveniendo,
venimus obediendo; veniunt illuminando, venimus in^uendo; veniunt implendo,
venimus capiendo, ut sit nobis non extraria visio sed interna: and in nobis
eorum non transitoria mansio, sed aeterna. Aug. in Joan. Tract. 76.
diligently to his Teacher, and meet him, where and when he uses to teach. Now
he teaches both publicly in the great Assemblies, and privately in the little
Temples and Sanctuaries. In the great Congregation his Spirit meets thee in the
ministry of the Word, and in the seals of that Word, and offers to write
that Word in thy heart; so that thou may see it plainly to be the wisdom of
God, and may see in it the wonderful things of God. Thou shall see in the
Word, Gal. 3. 1.
the mysteries which he teaches thee; yea, thine eyes in it shall see
Sermonem constituens vivificatorem, quia spiritus and vita sermo, eundem etiam
carnem suam dixit; quia and sermo caro erat factus; proinde in causam vitae
appetendus, and devorandus auditur, and ruminandus intellectu, and side
digerendus. Tertull. de Resurrect. carn. cap. 37. Quibus tantum manifesta facta
est passio ejus me praedicante, ut eum ante oculos vestros pendere putaretis.
Primas. in Gal. 3. Hoc quod modo loquimur carnes sunt verbi Dei, etc. Ubi enim
mysticus Sermo, ubi dogmaticus and Trinitatis side repletus profertur ac
solidus, etc. haec omnia carnes sunt verbi Dei. Origin. Homil. in Number. 23.
Illuxit ergo in cordibus nostris, ut and nos luceamus vobis, ad hoc ut
percipiatis illuminationem scientiae claritatis Dei, in facie, id est,
cognitione Jesu Christi; quia per faciem unusquisque cognoscitur. Anselm. in 2
Cor. 4.
the Teacher himself; for therein shall thou see Christ lively set forth, and
offering his flesh, his humanity, yea himself, both God and man, unto thee.
Such sights may thou see in this great School of God, being enlightened and
taught by his Spirit, which Spirit is a companion of the Word, by the virtue of
the New Covenant; and by this Covenant we may claim and expect it from God.
Therefore is the New Covenant called, The Ministry of the Spirit, in an
excellency above the Law, which was called, The Ministry of the Letter. And
it is such indeed as it is called: for while St. Peter taught the word to
Cornelius and his friends, the Spirit accompanied the Word, and fell on them
that heard it. St. Paul also calls up the experience of the Galatians for a
witness of this truth; Gal. 3.
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith
preached? And indeed if this truth thus covenanted by God, and actually made
good by him, were accordingly believed, rested on, thirsted after, and
expected, God should be more often heard speaking spirit and life with his
Word, in the inward ear; and the Word should not dye so often in the outward
ear, or carnal heart for want of this Spirit. It is an unvaluable loss, that
men do so much divide the outward Teacher from the inward, and rest on the
former, without respect to the latter. Whereas when we go to the outward
Teacher, which is man, we should set our eyes and hearts chiefly on the inward
Teacher, which is God: we should challenge him upon his covenant and promise,
saying and praying; Remember thy promise to thy servant, wherein thou have made
him to hope. And therefore speak Lord, that thy servant may hear; for without
thy speaking, thy servant cannot hear. He may hear the outward Possunt
quidem verba sonare, sed spiritum non conferunt: pulcherrime dicunt, sed te
tacente cor non accendunt. Literas tradunt, sed tu sensum aperis. Mysteria
proferunt, sed tureseras intellectum signatorum. Mandata edicunt, sed tu juvas
ad persiciendum. Thom. Camp. De lmit. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 2.
sound of the Word in his ear: but he cannot hear the inward sense and power
in his heart. The outward Israel had seen the great wonders of God upon
Egypt, they heard the thunders on mount Sinai; Deuteronomy. 29. 1, 2, 3.
yet neither did they see those wonders, nor hear those thunders. And Moses
tells them how it came to pass, when he says; The Lord has not given you
eyes to see, and ears to hear until this day. They thought their own eyes
sufficient to see, Esa. 42. 19, 20.
and their own ears to hear; and resting in this insufficient sufficiency,
God left them to it; and so they did neither see nor hear: for Gods works,
wonders, and voice, can only kindly and truly be seen and heard, by eyes
and ears given of God from Heaven.

Know therefore thy own insufficiency, yea, the insufficiency of the best
Teacher in the world (for who is sufficient for these things?) to teach thee
inwardly, what he teaches thee outwardly; 2 Cor. 2. 16.
and know that the sufficiency 2 Cor. 3. 5, 6.
of inward teaching comes only from God.

Therefore while thy outward ear expects the outward word of the outward
Teacher, let thy inward ear expect the inward teaching of the inward and
highest Teacher. 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7.
For Intuere quam caute illum de se humilia sentire moneat. Non ait, Ne forte
possis: sed quid? Ne forte det illi Deus resipiscere; ut si quid fiat, ad
Dominum cuncta referantur. Tu plantas, tu rigas, Ille seminat, and fructus
parere facit, atque ad Incrementum perducit: Nunquam igitur ita simus affecti,
ac si ipsi cuiquam persuaserimus, etiamsi ille nobis obaudiat; sed ad Deum
referamus omnia. Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy 2.
thus only may the planting, though of Paul himself; and the watering, though
of Apollos, be made something, even when God gives an increase, which otherwise
are nothing. And being thus inwardly taught to profit and increase, thou art
taught according to the New Covenant; for thou art taught of God. Come
therefore diligently to this school of his, where he uses thus to teach,
believe his Covenant, and take it by believing.

And secondly, That thou may the better believe and take it, he has given
thee seals of the New Covenant, by which the New Covenant is presented unto
thy faith, sealed and confirmed. By this confirmation and sealing, thy faith
should be increased, and by the increase of thy faith, thy union with Christ
Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant, will be increased; and by the
increase of this Union there will be an increase of the Spirit (the promise of
the New Covenant) which knows the things of God, and which will show them
more unto thee, the more it is in thee. When thou wast baptized into Christ,
thou did put on Christ; and when thou eatest the spiritual meat, and
drinkest the spiritual drink in the Eucharist, thou do put him on more and
more. Thy being in Christ, even thy new being, which thou receivedst before,
thou do now feed and nourish, and bring forth into manhood. And as thou
growest into manhood, thou know by the Apostles reason, Heb. 5. 12, etc.
thou art enabled to grow in knowledge, to be more skillful in the word of
righteousness, better to discern good and evil, and to digest the stronger
meat of divine mysteries. As we grow up in our stature in Christ Jesus toward
a perfect man, we leave our childish knowledge behind, Ephesians. 4. 14.
and grow up to him in all things (and therefore in knowledge) which is the
head, even Christ. The head is Wisdom it self, and they that grow in him
grow ^n wisdom, and still take higher degrees in the heavenly School, under
this highest and most heavenly Teacher.

Thirdly, seeing God teaches thee by his Spirit, and he is the Giver of the
Spirit, by which he teaches thee; go to the Giver himself for this gift.
Go to him by prayer, and go to him publicly in the house of prayer, and
there join with the Church in prayer, for the Spirit which he has promised
to his Church. The uniting of many hearts and voices in one petition, makes it
the stronger and more powerful with God. And it may well be, that when thou
joynest with the Congregation in prayer, thou may join with some, who shall
not only double the strength of thy prayer, by an equal strength of Spirit
added to thine, but by a double portion of Spirit, exceeding thine. And so by
this joining of stocks in public prayer, thou may be a double gainer, both
while thou art a partaker of many prayers, and while thou art partaker of some
more powerful than thine own. And indeed Christ would not have spoken of two or
three gathered together in his Name, except there had been some benefit and
advantage in this gathering together, and in two or three above one. Therefore
let us especially expect him as he has promised, to be present where two or
three are gathered together. Now we know that Christ is present with his
Church by his Spirit, even that Comforter which leads into all truth. Acts 4.
31.
And accordingly we find, that when the Church was united in prayer, they were
filled with the Holy Ghost. And because Christ is present with his Church by
this Spirit, to the end of the world, illuminating and teaching both Pastors
and people; our Church prays for the Pastors, That God would illuminate them
with true understanding and knowledge of his Word: and for the people, That
God, who taught the hearts of faithful people, by the light of the Holy
Spirit, may give us by the same Spirit, to have a right judgment in all
things. Join then with the Church, in the offering up, and receiving down of
such petitions; and do not by dividing thy self from the offering, divide thy
self also from the receiving. But for so precious a gift as the Spirit, make
thy prayer as powerful as thou can; and more powerful may thou make it,
if thou get more power joined together by a Communion of Saints.

Seek God also by private prayer for this gift of the Spirit, which Christ
himself has taught, yea proved by undeniable arguments, Luke 11. 13.
that God will give to them that ask it. And the experimental truth of this
saying of our Savior, many excellent Saints have found and acknowledged,
professing that they received sometimes by prayer more light for the clearing
of dark places, than by study and reading. Oremus Dominu^, -- ut in Spiritu
Sancto considerantes quae per Spiritum scripta sunt, and spiritalibus
spiritalia comparantes, digne Deo, and Sancto Spiritui qui haec inspiravit quae
scripta sunt, explicemus. Orig. sup. Numer. Homil. 16. Et nunc and semper
adhibendus sit Spiritus, per quem solum Deus and intelligitur, and exponitur,
and auditur. Greg Naz. Orat. 21. Assit Dominus; assit and viribus and mentibus
nostris. Aug. in Psalm. 147. At tu votis and precibus tibi ante omnia lucis
portas aperiri opta. Neque enim ab aliquibus perspiciuntur atque intelliguntur,
praeterquam si cui Deus and Christus ejus concesserint intelligentiam. Justin.
Mart. Dial. cum Tryph.
And therefore we shall find that the Fathers in their Homilies and
Expositions, do often interrupt their preaching with praying; and in prayer
seek to be enabled by the Spirit for preaching. Matthew. 22. 22.
But come to God with faith; for the promise runs thus, That whatsoever we ask
believing, we shall receive: Come also with fervencie; for Christ has taught
us, Luke 11. 8.
That what friendship cannot do, yet importunity may obtain: And it has
been tried by the Canaanitish woman, and many others since her time, That
where a denial will not be taken for an answer, there the answer has been
turned into grant. And the more to encourage us to importunity, for the
obtaining of this grant of the Spirit, let us take notice first, That God does
chiefly like those prayers that are made for the Spirit. God is a Spirit, and
as, because he is a Spirit, he likes best that worship, and those prayers,
which are made by the Spirit, so does he highly love those Prayers which pray
for the Spirit, by which such agreeable and acceptable prayers are made.
Secondly, God has abundance of Spirit, and this abundance and fullness of
Spirit has he delivered over to his son Christ Jesus, whose humanity is Uber
Deitatis, The Breast of the Deity. And as we all must receive from the
fullness of this Breast, so this Breast being full, is most apt to give, and
therefore most willing to meet with those, that are most desirous, and thirsty
to receive. It delights to be drawn, yea, to be pressed by importunity, and
is not only pleased, but (as it were) eased, when he meets with an hungry
soul, and a mouth opened wide, that he may fill it.

Lastly, join Legendo and ruminando, si etiam pure Dominu^ largitorem bonorum
omnium depreceris, omnia quae cognitione digna sunt, aut certe plurima, ipso
magis inspirante, quam hominum aliquo commonente, perdisces. Aug. Ep. 120.
meditations with thy prayers. As prayers sometimes do kindle thy meditations,
so sometimes meditations may kindle thy prayers. While I mused (says the
Psalmist) my heart waxed hot: For meditation does stir, and blow away the
ashes, even earthly and carnal thoughts, and kindles the fire of the Spirit.
The soul of a Saint is a little Sanctuary, or Temple, where God dwells by his
Spirit; and this Spirit being sought to in this Temple by the servants of God,
has given them many times divine answers and resolutions. So has this little
Temple been turned into a School, where the souls of men enlightened have
seen more than seven men upon the Watchtower of humane speculation. And when
thou go to this School, let meditation purge thy soul from carnal
drossinesse, and fire it into a spiritual purity. Let this spiritual fire
burn away that corporeal grossness, which entertaines and makes Beata
anima, quae est instar domus Jacobi, in qua nulla simulachra, nulla effigies
vanitatis. Ambr. de Fuga Seculi, cap. 5. Quante fois qu'il se resouviendra de
Dieu autant de fois estant libre and descharge de forms de toutes creatures,
il pourra legerement monter, au Coeur Haut, comme la Meiche d'une chandelle
encores fumante, quand elle est presentee au dessous de celle qui est allumee,
la flamme descendant incontinent au long de la fumee, s'attache a la Meiche
encores tiede, and l'allume. Harph. Theol. Mist. lib. 3. part. 2. chap. 9.
Sentio per occultas gratiae rimulas, quia talis, and talis est anima tibi
intime unita; and sie ei locutus es. Illa tacer ab omnibus sensibilibus, and tu
loqueris ei in Spiritu de invisibilibus. T. Camp. Solil cap. 10. Eripe
distractum and captivum animum ab omnibus concupiscentiis and corporalibus
imaginibus, ut teipsum in meipso illuminata ratione inveniam, qui me ad tuam
pretiosam and incorruptibilem fecisti imaginem. Idem de Discip. Claustr. l. 4.
c. 3.
carnal and bodily images. Let the glass of thy soul be cleansed, and made
spiritually pure, that it may be fit to entertain a pure spirit, and those
spiritual sights, which the Spirit shall present unto it. And being thus pure
in heart, thou shall see God in thy soul. He who is light shall shine into
thy soul, and by this light the face of thy soul shall shine, as the face of
Moses on the mount. In his light thou shall see light, and by this light shall
thou see that which all the natural light in the world cannot show thee. God
who commanded light to shine out of darkness, will give thee the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. And when the light
of this knowledge does appear, then know that thy Teacher is near. Then stand
on thy Watchtower, and hear what he teaches thee, and see what he shows
thee. A lesson of this Si tam magnum est, tamque jucundum (ut experta loqua^)
spiritales viros audire, and doctos adeo Doctores Veritatis habere, quanto
majus, quantoque jucundius ab ipso Deo quotidie discere, quotidie didicisse?
Beatus homo quem tu erudieris, Domine, and de Lege tua docueris eum. Rich. de
Sanct. Vict. Sermon. de Spiritu Sancto.
Teacher, and of this teaching is the best learning, and makes the best
Scholars, because taught in Gods, that is, in the best Academie. Yea,
sometimes in a minute thou shall see that by this teaching, which thou can
not attain in many years by humane teaching, or thy own study, labor, and
industry. Therefore whatsoever time thou bestowest in study, be sure to set
apart some time, wherein to study the Holy Ghost, who sitting in his chair of
grace, teaches his Scholars inwardly to see those divine and heavenly truths,
which may advance thee in the way to heavenly glory.

CHAP. X.
An applicatorie and cautionarie Conclusion.

THe excellency, necessity, and utilitie of the Heavenly Academie being
discovered and seen, the judgment is easily led to give sentence, That it is
good for us to be there. And it is a good ambition, not to stint and stop our
selves in the lower Academie, but to asce^d by it to the higher. It is a good
ambition, because a spiritual one, which desires to get up to the highest
Teacher, who is also the highest Spirit, and who alone teaches his Scholars
to see spiritual truths, with a spiritual eye. Yea, he not only makes the
eye to see spiritual things, but gives to his Disciples the excellent
spiritual things which they see: And then also by giving them to be tasted and
enjoyed, they are yet better known and seen, even so seen as no man can see,
but he that has them, and has tasted them. He also teaches his Scholars
to be the best Teachers; and which is best of all, he teaches them to attain
a Kingdom; and which is the Crown of this Kingdom, to see the Teacher
himself in a beatificall and eternal vision.

Strive therefore to get up to this Heavenly Academie, and as seriously as thou
intendest it, so diligently use the means that advance thee to it, and in it.
Let him who is thy Beginning be also thy End; and propose not thy self as thy
own end, much less that which is inferior to thee; neither make base
creatures the end of thy self, and of thy highest Creator, and heavenly
Teacher. Get out also from thine own wisdom (a very bad Teacher of heavenly
things) and give thy self wholly from it, unto that Teacher who is Wisdom it
self. And that thy heavenly Teacher may delight to teach thee, get and
increase that likeness to him, and conformity with him, which may make a love
and friendship between him and thee. Come often to his School, and
wheresoever thou have news of his teaching, there desire to meet him with thy
learning. Though Martha be troubled with many things, many businesses, yea,
many humane Teachers; yet with Marie do thou choose the better part, and desire
to sit at the feet of thy heavenly Teacher. And if any thing hinder thee for a
while (for sometimes the the gathering of fruit may defer the dressing of the
root) yet return eftsoons to thy Teacher, and meet him in some of his
Schools. And whatsoever hinder thee, take heed that it be not carelessness of
thy Teacher, nor a fullness of his teaching; for if thus thou withdraw thy
self from him, thou will fall back in thy learning, and not being watered by
the dew of his teaching, thou will grow dry in the root, and therefore must
needs wither and decay in thy fruits.

But that thou may not be mistaken, concerning the true heavenly teaching,
nor the use of it, take with thee some cautions. First, do not mistake a
teaching of thine own for an heavenly teaching; neither set thine own
imagination in the Celestial Chair. This has misled many into many and
great errors, whiles being taught by the strength of their own imaginations,
they have thought themselves to be taught of God. And indeed many times, as
errors do thus come from the strength of humane apprehension, so their
prosecution does savor of this strength, and shows from whence they come; for
too often opinions are headily nursed into schisms and divisions, as they were
headily brought forth; Jam. ^. 13, 15.
the same flesh that was the mother, being also the nurse. But the wisdom from
above being first pure, and then peaceable, Verse. 17.
such are they also, who are kindly taught by that wisdom. Wherefore to try
thy teaching, whether it be of God, first try whether it be pure, that is,
agreeable to the Word, Psalm. 12. 6.
which (the Psalmist says) is pure. Esa. 8. 20.
For if it agree not with the tenor and frame of this Word, there is no true
and kindly light in it. Mark also and consider, whether it do not savor of
love, and agree with that meek and quiet spirit, which of God is much
esteemed. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9.
For the right Disciples of God are taught to love, Romans 14. 17, 18, 19.
and the God of peace does fill them with the peace of God. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
True it is, 2 Cor. 13. 11.
that if by the evident light of the Word, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 16.
there is somewhat discovered that bears the true shape of the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, and thou see that God hates it, this may thou also hate: but
even the desire and love of peace must not go out of thy heart; yea, the love
of peace must manage thy war with error, and even by oppugning it, thou must
follow peace and ensue it. And still take heed that thou do not make little
errors great, nor condemn the wheat for the tares, nor seek to amend lesser
errors by a greater fault of schism and division.

Secondly judge rightly of thy own measure, and measure thy self rightly by
it. And when thou have first measured thy self aright, then also measure thy
actions and undertakings by it. St. Paul will have every man to keep in, Romans
12. 3.
and bound his thoughts concerning himself, by the measure of faith given him
of God. Strive what thou can to increase thy measure, yet use it as it is,
and neither think of thy ability beyond that which it is, nor think to
produce effects beyond the cause; which is indeed to make something out of
nothing. Make use of that which thou have, which will not only increase the
fruits of thy gift, but increase the gift it self, and turn two talents into
four. But if thou go beyond thy gift, in thy opinion of it, thou go from
truth into error, from sobriety into presumption and pride. If thou go
beyond thy gift in thy practice, thou go beyond strength to weakness,
beyond that which is, to that which is not, and do not advance, but lessen
thy own end. For beyond thy sight thou can not see; neither can thou
finish the house, for the building whereof thou have not the costs. In the
mean time, if thou have a willing mind, God accepts thy doing out of that
which thou have, and expects it not out of that which thou have not. And if
thou be faithful in that (though little) which thou have, God will make thee
Ruler over much. It has been a fault in diverse, though well-meaning souls,
sometimes to undertake that which they are not enabled to effect; sometimes to
condemn that which they are not enabled to comprehend; and sometimes to
approve what they do not attain and understand. Job 42. 3.
I uttered, says Job, that I understood not, things too wonderful for me,
which I knew not: but Job being taught by God, learned a remedy for this
disease, even a cure by contraries; a cure of inordinate speech, by an orderly
silence. Job 40. 5.
Once have I spoken, but I will not answer: yea twice, but I will proceed no
further. Therefore if something be revealed to a second, 1 Cor. 14. 30.
which was not to the first, let the first hold his peace. Silence is his first
part, who sees not what he should say, and hearing his second. Phil. 3. 15, 16.
Therefore according to that which we have attained, let us walk and speak;
and leave that to which we have not attained, to those that have, until God
shall reveal it. And let those that have a greater measure, help those that
have the lesser, not despising their lesser measure, because it is lesser; but
even therefore strive to increase it. 2 Cor. 8. 14.
For thus, in some sort, that equality of Manna may be kept, while the
abundance of one supplies the want of another, and the lesser is filled up by
the greater. And let the greater know, that to whom much is given, of him much
shall be required; and if a man have received five talents, the proportion of
gain returned, is expressed to be five; and not two, as for two. And if thou
have gained many, thou shall rule over many Cities.

Thirdly, (as before of the measure so now) judge aright of the kind of thy
gift. True it is, that all those that are taught of God according to the
promise of the New Covenant, are all taught the Law of faith, and the Law of
love. They shall all know me, Ier. 31. 34.
says the Lord, Joh. 6. 45, 47.
from the greatest to the least; Joh. 17. 2, 3.
even according to that knowledge which is life eternal. And this must needs
be the knowledge of faith; Ephesians. 2. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9.
for by faith are we saved, even that faith which is the gift of God. Joh. 13.
34, 35.
The Disciples of God are also taught to love one another; and by this love are
they known to be Disciples. And thus by faith have they unity with the Head,
and by love with the Body. Yet is it also true, that the Spirit which gives the
light of faith, gives also to diverse of the Faithful diverse other powers and
operations of light. To one is given wisdom to govern; to another, judgment
to decide controversies, doubts, and difficulties; to another, a sharp sight of
secrets and mysteries. One excells in contemplative ability, another in
practical. One knows best how to give advice, another knows better how to
obey and follow. Let every man therefore find out his different ability and
excellency, and with his greatest ability let him make his greatest traffic.
As every man has received the gift, so let him exercise and dispense it, as a
good Steward of the manifold grace of God. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11.
The grace of God is therefore diverse and manifold in many, that in many his
manifold grace may more evidently and gloriously appear; and that each having
need of other, Sermo divinus humanam naturam supergreditur, nec potest totum
and perfectu^ anima concipere. Iccirco and tantus est numerus Prophetarum, ut
multiplex divina sapientia per multos distribuatur. Unde and tacere praecipitur
primo in prophetia loquenti, si secundo fuerit revelarum. Firmil. apud Cyp.
Epist. 75.
there may be a mutual help from each to other, as from the members of one
body. Therefore if thou art a foot, do not strive to do the work of an hand,
but help the work of an hand, if thou may by the work of a foot. For a
foot may indeed thus have a part in the work of an hand, while in the work of
a foot it supports and carries the hand to the work of an hand. Be then
chiefly tha^ which God would have thee to be; and what by his gift he has
showed thee thou should be. Keep thou especially in thine own line,
neither trouble thy self (much less boast) for the line of another. When
Christ speaks to thee to follow him one way, thou may not with Peter make
quarrels and questions concerning John's other way; for so may thou receive
Peter's answer from the Master: What is that to thee? follow thou me. It is the
Masters part to allot the way and work of his Disciples; and therefore let
both Peter and John walk that different way, to which their Master has
differently directed them. A contrary course is a mere confusion, and
therefore agrees not with him, who is the God of order, and not of confusion.
And as it brings all out of order, so it brings all to nothing. For while that
gift is neglected, by which some good may be done, and that gift is affected,
by which (not being attained) no good can be done; Gods work is either undone,
or ill done. Therefore use thine own gift, according to the will of the Giver,
and so shall it go on in the right way, to thy brothers profit, thine own
reward, and thy Lords glory.

Lastly, for thy heavenly teaching, and all the knowledge taught by it, take no
glory to thy self, but give it whole and entire to thy heavenly Teacher. If
flesh and blood have not taught thee, but the Father in Heaven, let not flesh
and blood, but the Father in Heaven, have all the glory of his own teaching.
If thou have nothing in this kind, but what thou have received, and much
receiving causes much owing, how can thou glory in the increase of thy
receipts, except thou will also glory in the increase of thy debts? But indeed
the more thou have received, the more thanks and glory should thou return
to the Giver. And surely, God has a plot of glory in the dispensation of his
teaching. For to make safe his glory to himself, he often leaves the wise
and great of the world to the blindness of their natural wisdom, and takes
the mean and despised ones of the world, even babes, and things that are not,
and gives them his teaching. And this he does, That no flesh may rejoice in
his presence; but that all glorying may be excluded from man, and kept wholly
for himself. Then do not think it safe to rob God of his glory, which he
has thus plotted and contrived. Know that to rob God of his glory, is a
highest kind of sacrilege: And not so only, but it is also a highest kind of
ingratitude, to take from God because he has given to thee. Yea rather,
because he has been large in his grace to thee, be thou enlarged in thy
return of thanks and glory to him. This plentiful return of glory to God,
is the best way to get an increase of that grace, for which thou give him
glory. Yea, to take all glory from thy self, and to give it to God, is the
way to receive true and solid glory from God. For God will honor those that
honor him; and so shall it be a most gainful course for thee, while by
putting from thee a glory that belongs not to thee, God will freely give thee
a glory, that shall by this gift truly belong unto thee. And whereas that
would be but a false, guilty, and transitory glory, which man would give
unto himself, this shall be a pure, true, and eternal glory, which shall be
given by God unto man. Do not then make thy self vain, and sinful, and
miserable, by stealing glory from God to thy self; 2 Thessalonians. 1. 12.
but make thy self happy by glorifying him, and being glorified of him.

Neither do thou glorify him only in words, but in works; let it appear in
the excellence of thy works, that thou have had an excellent Teacher. Let the
light of thy works so shine before men, that they may glorify God the Father
of this light. Christ tells his Disciples, that by bringing forth much fruit
his Father is glorified. Let therefore both the plenty and the excellency of
thy fruit, gain glory and praise to the heavenly Husbandman. And indeed
Christ our Master, punctually and expressly does call for excellent fruits of
his Disciples. He thinks it not enough for his glory, if his Scholars, being
taught of God, bring forth only the fruits of such as are taught by men.
Therefore he raises them up to a higher kind of fruitfulness, by this
question: What excellent thing do ye? Matthew. 5. 47.
He expects fruits of an eminent virtue beyond others, who beyond others have
had an eminent teaching and Teacher. Do then some excellent things, ye that
have so excellent a Master; and glorify your Master, by doing things more
excellent than the mere Scholars of earthly Teachers. To this end, let your
fruits issue from the new man, which is taught of God; and not from the old
man, which came in by the teaching of Satan. Let the excellent and unmatchable
ointments of Christ Jesus give an excellent savor to your works, and let the
house of the Church be filled with the savor of these ointments. Let the
sweetness thereof so ravish and overcome men, that they may be forced to
confess, That God is in you of a truth, and that you have been taught of God.
And to this God, which is in you, and has taught you to excel in virtue, let
them give all the glory.

And thus after you have a while advanced the glory of your Teacher, your
Teacher shall advance you into the sight of his glory. These drops and dewes
of grace, by which you are now taught, shall bring you to the sight and
fruition of the Teacher himself, who is an ever-flowing Fountain, and
boundless Ocean of light, wisdom, grace and glory. Then the most glorious
Sun-light and influence of Gods presence, irradiating and overflowing thee, and
so more than fully teaching thee, shall drown the Starlight of this teaching,
which thou receivedst here below. Yet shall thou magnify this lesser teaching,
because it has brought thee to this great and glorious Teacher, whose light
shall give thee the sight of the highest wisdom; whose presence shall
inebriate thee with the fullness of joy, whose right hand shall give thee the
pleasures of eternity. And in these eternal pleasures shall thou eternally
glorify thy supreme Teacher, who has taught thee to a Kingdom, and that not
an earthly, fading, and vanishing Kingdom, but to a Kingdom of Heaven that
cannot be shaken, a Kingdom of bliss that has no end, a Kingdom wherein the
Righteous shall for ever shine in the glory of their Father: for the Lord
shall be their everlasting light, and their God their glory.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Thomas Wykes, R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.
November. 11. 1637.

