TESTIS VERITATIS

(...) KING JAMES

(...) OF THE (...) OF ENGLAND.

OF THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH.

Plainly showed to be ONE (...) the points of (...) Free will, (...).

With a discovery of the Grounds Natural, Politic of ARMINIANISME.

By F. ROVS.

Printed at London, by W. I. 1626.

To the Reader.
Having heard of a public declaration, Doctor Palca^quell in his Co^cio ad
(...). Febr. 27.
made by a reverend and right worthy Divine, of his Most Excellent Majesty's
Resolution and Decree, to oppose Arminianisme, I thought it a fit time to put
in order some pieces, which being set together, might amount to an evident
Proof and Testimony, that his Majesty, herein has merited most glorious and
incomparable Titles, even such as have in them the Weight and Substance of High
and supreme Excellency.

For first, herein He is the Successor of his Father (as in Blood and Royalty,
so) in his excellent Thoughts, Designs, and Actions: for this is a proceeding
and going on in the same work, wherein the most learned King, and absolute
Judge of Doctrines, began a most noble Foundation. His zeal in this matter,
would not be bounded with the seas, but on the wings of an heavenly fire
flying beyond them, it there consumed the fifties and their Captains, it
dissolved the Bands of the Enemies of the truth.

Secondly, herein the Title of Nursing Father of the Church, a Title given to
Religious Kings by the heavenly Oracles, more strongly fastneth and spreads
the Root of it. So that at once the same Person, hereby acquireth the
Dignity, both of a perfect Son, and a glorious Father. When the Doctrine of
a Church is cherished* the life of a Church is cherished; and when a contrary
Doctrine is opposed, then the Doctrine of a Church is cherished.

Thirdly, hereby the Title of Defender of the Faith, has still more Realitie
put into it, and it is made more unlike to those empty Titles, that have the
Word without, and not the matter within.

Each of these I hope shall appear in that which follows. For though it
consists of many several pieces, like unto broken accounts, yet I hope, being
all set together, they will arise to make up the promised sums, both in
weight and number.

F. R.

The Doctrine of Predestination delivered, and approved by King JAMES, our late
Sovereign of Famous MEMORY.
GOd has two wills, a revealed will toward us, Medit. on the Lords prayer.
and that will is here understood; he has also a secret will in his eternal
counsel, whereby all things are governed, and in the end made ever to turn to
his glory: oftentimes drawing good effects out of bad causes, and lightout of
darkness, to the fulfilling either of his Mercy, or Justice, etc. The first
Article of the Apostles Creed teaches us, that God is Almighty, how ever
Vortius and the Arminians think to rob him of his eternal Decree, and secret
will, making things to be done in this world, whither he will or not.

We doubt not but that their Ambassadors which Declar: against Vorstius.
were with us about two years since, did inform them of a fore-warning that
we wished the said Ambassadors to make unto them in Our name, to beware in time
of seditious and heretical Preachers, and not to suffer any such to creep
into their state. Our principal meaning was of Arminius, who though himself
were lately dead, yet had he left too many of his disciples behind him.

We had well hoped that the corrupt seed which that Ibid.
enemy of God, Arminius, did sow amongst you some few years since (whose
disciples and followers are yet too bold, and frrequent within your Dominions)
had given you a sufficient warning, afterward to take beede of such infected
persons, seeing your own Contrymen already divided into factions upon this
occasion, a matter so opposite to unity (which is indeed the only prop and
safety of your state next under God) as of necessity, it must by little and
little bring you to utter ruin, if wisely you do not provide against it; and
that i^ time. Thus while his Majesty is an enemy to the enemies of
Praedestination, he is a friend and protector to that Doctrine, whose enemies
he does oppose.

The Articles of Ireland agreed on in his Majesty's Articl. agreed on anno 1615.
Reign, cannot be thought to contain any other Doctrine, but such as was
approved by his Majesty. In them we read.

The cause moving God to praedestinate to life, is not Number. 15.
the foreseeing of faith, or perseverance, or good works, or of any thing
which is in the person praedestinated; but ONLY the good pleasure of good
himself. For all things being ordained for the manifestation of his Glory, and
his Glory being to appear both in the works of his Mercy, and of his
Justice, It seemed good to his heavenly wisdom, to choose out a certain
number, toward whom he would extend his undeserved Mercy, leaving the rest to
be spectacles of his Justice.

And that we may yet more punctually know this Doctrine there allowed by Him,
to be verily his own Doctrine, we read thus from his own Dictates.

God draws by his effectual Grace, out of that at Medit on the Lords prayer.
tainted and corrupt mass, whom he pleases for the work of his Mercy,
leaving the rest to their* own ways which all lead to perdition.

Praedestination and Election depends not, upon Conference at Hampt. Court.
any Qualities, Actions, or Works of Man, which be mutable, but upon God his
eternal, and immutable Decree and Purpose.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England concerning Praedestination.
PRaedestination to life* is the everlasting purpose of Article 1^.
God, whereby before the foundation of the world was laid, he has constantly
decreed by his counsel secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation those
whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to bring, them by Christ
unto everlasting salvation as vessels made to honor, wherefore they that be
endued with so excellent a benefit of God, be called according to Gods
purpose, by his spirit working in due season, they through grace*obey that
calling, they be justified freely, they be made sons of God by adoption, they
be made like the image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, they walk
religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy, they attain* to
everlasting Felicity.

Upon the Articles of the Church of England, Master Rogers Chaplain to
Archbishop Ban^* See the Epistle* Dedicatorie where he affirms these
propositions to be maintained by the Church of England.
there is set forth an Analysis of these Articles, resolving them into
propositions; which propositions he says are maintained and approved* by the
authority of the Church of England: and this Analysis, upon this Article of
Praedestination thus infers.

Hereby is discovered the impiety of th^se me^ which think, that*m^n does make
himself eligible for the ^. Proposition.
kingdom of heaven. And that, God beheld in every man whether he would use his
grace well, and believe the Gospel, or no, and as he saw a man affected, so
did praedestinate, choose or refuse him.

But the Analysis it self plainly according to the Article rectifieth this
disorder, and makes Justification, Sanctification, and Glorification, to flow
from Praedestination; so that Praedestination depends not on them.

Diverse be the effects of Praedestination; but chiefly 7. Proposition.
it brings to the elect Justification by Faith in this life, and in the life
to come, Glorification; always a conformity to the Image of the only begotten
Son of God, both in suffering here, and inioying immortal glory hereafter.

The heavenly wisdom of our Church in this point, is so fully and plainly
expressed by her self, that she needs not to be justified of her children,
yet ex abundanti, I add one or two Testimonies, but first admonishing the
Reader to take notice of the Doctrine of the Church of Ireland, before set
down, and withal to beware that he think not two Doctrines to be taught in
these Churches but one.

Before Augustines time, many great and worthy Doctor Field of the Church. lib.
3. cap. 9.
Prelates and Doctors of the Church, not having occasion to enter into the
exact handling of that p^t of Christian Doctrine, did teach that men are
Predestinate* for the foresight of some things in themselves. And Augustine
himself in the beginning of the conflicts with the Pelagians, was of opinion;
that at the least for the foresight of Faith, men are Elected to Eternal life,
which afterward he disclaymed as false and erroneous, and taught that man's
salvation depends on the efficacy of that grace which God gives, and not
his purpose of saving upon the incer^tainty of man's will. This Doctrine of
Augustine was received and confirmed in the Church against the Pelagians and
Semi-pelagians.

Thus is our Doctrine the Doctrine of the Church, upon advise and due
examination: the other Doctrine is the error of those that had not duly
entered into the exact handling of this point. Now to follow an error, when the
truth is upon due trial cleared and brought to light, brings that sentence to
pass which Vincent. Li^m. cap. 11.
Lirmensis pronounces. Absoluuntur Magistri, condemnantur discipuli. The
Masters* are freed, and the Scholars are condemned. For the one erred by
infirmity, and wanting the occasion of not-erring; the others err out of more
wilfulness, and stumble in the day time, having a fair occasion of
not-erring, of not-stumbling.

Doctor Fr: White Deane of Carlisle acknowledges the Doctrine of St. Augustine,
to be the Doctrine of the Church of England, in these words.

Although our Tenet concerning Praedestination, be no Reply to Fisher. page
275.
other then Saint Austin and his Scholars maintained against the Pelagians.

Now Saint Austins opinion is presently to appear in his own words, as defore
it has been showed by Doctor Field. And in the point of Free Will we shall
see that the most learned and judicious King JAMES, yields this consent by name
to the same Saint Augustine. Thus is there a perfect harmony between this
great King, the Church of England, and the Catholic Church; which that we
may more evidently see on the part of the Catholic Church, behold here what
she teaches by her chief Fathers, Doctors, and Teachers.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE Catholic Church concerning Election or Praedestination,
taught by the Fathers, and subscribed by Doctors and Schoolmen.
NVm putatis (o Viri) nos unquam haec in Scripturis Justin Martyr Dial* cum
Tryph. Iud.
intelligere potuisse, etc. Do you think (O men) that we could ever have
understood these things in the Scriptures, except we had received grace by the
will of God, who willed that we should understand these things? of which grace
you being destitute (that is, the Jews) have understood none of them, that it
might be fulfilled, which is taught by Moses: They have provoked me by strange
Gods, etc. And I will provoke them by that which is no Nation. Dialog. cum
Tryph.

Nos elegit Deus, etc. And again, God Elected us, and was made manifest to
them that sought him not. Behold, says he, I am the God of a Nation, which
God anciently promised to Abraham, when he told him that he should be the
Father of many Nations.

Elegit Deus non natura, etc. God did Elect, not those Iraneu^ lib. ^. cap. 34.
that are better by nature, but those that are worse. Id. lib. 3. cap. 33.


Praedestina^it Deus, etc. God Predestined the first natural man, that he
should be saved by the spiritual man: And he proves his salvation to be
necessaey. Cap. 38.

Neque ad hoc pretijs aut ambitu, etc. Neither is there Cyprian (...) Mors.
need of money, industry, and man's hand, that man's chiefest dignity or power,
should be gotten by some excellent work, but it is the free and ready gift of
God. As freely as the Sun shines, the Fountain waters, the shower
moystneth, so does the heavenly Spirit Power it self into us.

Iacobus Apostolus docuis, etc. James the Apostle Athanaesius, Cent. Arrian. 4.
has taught: Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth: therefore of
all the regenerate, yea, and of all that by creation were generated, it is the
will of God by the word of God that does create, and regenerate whatsoever
pleases him.

Quoniam animarum Medicus, etc. Because the Physician Hillary in Psalm. 48.
of souls came not to call the just but sinners to repentance, therefore he
ORDAINED, that whatsoever was worst in every company, should be soonest
CALLED. The worst of all men that inhabit the earth, were the Heathen, and
they are preferred first to be Called.

Non volentis, etc. Perseverance is not in him that Ambrose in Psalm. 118. Sermon.
10.
wills, nor in him that runs. For it is not in the power of man, but in
God that shows Mercy, that thou should be able to accomplish, that which
thou have begun.

Et si long est a peccatoribus salus: etc. And again. Though salvation
befarre from the wicked, yet let (...). Sermon. 20.
no man despair, because many be the Mercies of God. Those that by their own
sins are perishing, by the Mercy of God are freed. I will have mercy (says
he) on whom I will have mercy. He has appeared plainly to them that sought
him not, he has called those that fled from him.

Non eliguntur Paulus, etc. Paul and those which are Hierrme ad Ruffin. lib. 1.
like him are not Elected, because they were holy and unspotted, but they are
Elected and Praedestinated, that in their lives afterward in good-workes and
virtues, they might be holy and unspotted.

But though before this time the Fathers had not clearly discovered, nor
delivered the Doctrine of Praedestination, it ought to be no prejudice to the
Doctrine. For

What need is there, that we should be driven to Austin. de praedest. Sanct.
cap. 14.
search the works of those who before this Haerisie (viz. of Pelagius) arose,
had no necessity to busy themselves in this question, so difficult to be
resolved: which yet surely they would have done, if they had been enforced to
answer this kind of men.

Yet he also shows that this Doctrine was ever (at least impliedly) in the
faith of the Church.

Let him say, that the Church had not at all times De bono persevere. cap. 23.
in her Faith, the truth of this Praedestination and Grace, which now with more
diligent care is defended against the new Haeretickes; let him, I say, affirm
this, that dares to say that she did not at all times pray, or that she did
not sincerely pray, both that unbelievers might believe, or that believers
might persevere.

His own opinion is to be found in many of his works; wherefore I only
produce one or two places for patterns.

De his quibus poenam seueritas iusta decreuerat, etc.

Out of those to whom the severity of Justice adjudgeth De praedest and * gra.
cap. 13.
punishment according to the inexpressible Mercy of his secret dispensation, he
chose out vessels which he might fit unto Honor, both delivering some from
wrath to come by a free calling, and leaving other to the sentence of Justice.

Miseretur scilicet magna bonitate, etc. He has Enchirid. al Laurent* cap. 99.
Mercy with Goodness, he hardneth without injustice; so that he that is
freed may not boast of his merits, neither he that is damned may complain of
any thing but his merits. For Grace alone differenceth the Redeemed from the
Lost, whom one common cause derived from the root, had united together in one
mass of destruction.

Praedestinationem Dei nullus Catholicus, etc. The Praedestination Prosper ad
capit* Gall. capit. 1.
of God no Catholic does deny.*Now the faith of Praedestination is
established by manifold authorities of the holy Scriptures, yet unto it, it is
not lawful to ascribe, any of the sins of men, who came to their pronenesse
unto sin, not by Gods creation, but by their first Fathers transgression.
From the punishment whereof, no man is freed, but only by the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ; prepared and Praedestinated in the eternal counsel of God,
before the foundation of the world.

Pia constantique doctrina abundanter probauit, (Auggustinus) Id. ad excerpt.
Genis. Resp. ad. Dub. 9.
etc. Augustine by a godly and constant Doctrine abundantly proved, that
Praedestination was to be preached to the Church, in which Praedestination is
the preparation of Grace; and Grace is to be preached in which is the effect of
Praedestination: and the foreknowledge of God, wherein he fore-knewe before
all ages, on whom he would confer his gifts. Of which preaching, whosoever is
an impugner, he is a most open defender of Pelagian pride.

Imo nouerunt, non solum Romanam, etc. They know Prosper ad Ruffin.
that not only the Roman and Africane Church, and all the sons of promise,
through all the parts of the world, do agree with the Doctrine of this man (
Augustine) as in the whole Faith, so in the confession of Grace.

In his Epistle to Possessor a bishop of Afric, seeking Homesda Bishop of
Rome.
counsel of him concerning the reading of the books of Faustus, That the
Catholic Church does maintain the Doctrine of Saint Austine, and particularly
name his writing to Hilarious and Prosper, in which the Doctrine of Free
Praedestination is maintained and defended*

Haec si ita sunt vt haeretici iactitant, etc. If things Petrus Diaconus de
incar. and gra. Christi.
go so as the Heretics boast, then have they comprehended the unsearchable,
and incomprehensible judgments of God, etc. And the Scriptures deceaues us
which says, that the judgments of God are incomprehensible. But we believing
them to be incomprehensible do affirm, that out of one mass of perdition,
some are saved by the goodness and grace of God, and others are forsaken by
his most just and secret Judgment.

Deus qui hominem condidit, etc. God who made man, Fulgentius de Incar. and
gra. in fine.
by his Praedestination fore-appointed to whom he would give the gift of
illumination to believe; and the gift of perseverance to profit and persist,
and the gift of glorification to reign, who no otherwise performed in Deed,
than he has ordained in his unchangeable Will. The truth of which
Praedestination by which the Apostle witnesses, that we are Praedestinated in
Christ before the foundations of the world; if any man refuse to receive with
the belief of the heart, or to speak with the confession of his mouth, if
before the last day of this present life, he do not cast off the stubbornness
of his error, whereby he rebelleth against the true and living God, it is
plain that he does not pertain to their number whom God in Christ freely
chose, and Praedestinated before the foundation of the world.

Nemo ergo perscrutari appetat, etc. Let no man be Gregory the great. Moral.
in Job, lib. 29. cap. 15.
earnest to search why one is chosen, when another is rejected, or why one is
rejected when another is chosen: because the face of the deep is covered, and
Saint Paul himself witnesses, that his judgments are unsearchable, and his
ways past finding out.

There is a two fold Praedestination, either of the Isidore. Hispalensis. Seut.
lib. 2. cap. 6
Elect unto rest, or of the Reprobate unto death. Both are done by the
judgment of God; so that he ever causes the Elect to follow heavenly and
inward things, and by forsaking the Reprobate, he suffers them to follow
earthly and outward things.

Beda expounds the ninth to the Romans, in the sense and sentences of Saint
Austin, and therefore concurreth in the same Doctrine of Praedestination.

Praedestinatio non solum bo norum est, etc. Praedestination Anselme. de
Concor. praesc. and pradest.
is not only of good, but it may be said also of evil, as God is said to do
the evil which he does not, because he permits it. For he is said to harden a
man when he does not soften him, and to lead into tentation when he does not
deliver. Therefore it is not unfit that he should thus Praedestinate, while he
does not amend evil men, nor their evil deeds. But yet he is said more
specially to foreknow good things; because in them, he makes that they be, and
that they be good: but in the evil things he makes but their being, not the
evil of their being.

Nonergo ideo misertus est Deus, etc. God did not Idem in Romans 9.
take mercy on Jacob, because he willed and runned: but therefore Jacob
willed and runned, because God had mercy on him. Let it be sufficient for thee
who yet live by Faith, and not seeing perfectly, but knowing only in part, to
know and believe that God does save none but by free Mercy, nor damn none but
by most righteous Justice. But why he saues or not saues, this man rather than
that man, let him search who will look into the great depth of Gods
judgments, but withal let him take heed, that he fall not down headlong.

Ius meum voluntas est Iudicis. etc. My right is the Bernard. in Cant. Ser^. 14.
will of the Judge. What more Just for Merit? What more rich for reward? May
not he do what he will? Mercy indeed is showed to me, but to thee is done no
injury. Take that which is thine, and go thy way. If he have Decreed to save
me also, why will thou destroy me? Talk what thou will of thy Merits, extol
thy labors, the Mercy of God is better then life. P. Lombard o^ Master of
Sentences* lib. 1. Did. 41* D.


Plegit eos quos voluit gratuita Misericordia, etc. God Elected whom he pleased
by free Mercy, not because they would be faithful, but that they might be
faithful. And he gave them grace, not because they were faithful, but that
they might be. For the Apostle says: (1 Cor. 7.) I obtained Mercy, that I
might be faithful. He says not, because I was faithful. Grace is indeed
given to the faithful, but it is also given first that he may be faithful. So
also he reprobated whom he pleased, not for any future merits, yet by a most
true Justice, though hidden from our eyes.

Manifestum est, quod id quod est gratiae, etc. It is manifest Thomas Aquina^.
part. 1. q. 23. art. 5.
that Grace is an effect of Praedestination, and that cannot be put as a cause
of Praedestiuation, which is shut up under Predestination. God would show his
goodness on some whom he Praedestinated in sparing them by way of Mercy; and
on those whom he Reprobateth in punishing by way of Justice. And this is the
reason why he chooses some, and reprobateth others. But why he chooses these
unto glory, and reprobateth those, there is no reason to be given but the will
of God.

Non est talis causa prohibens, etc. There is no such Bradwarden the profound.
De Causa Dei. lib. 1. cap. 39.
cause, either forbidding the will of God, or causing it, by which an answer
may be given, why he loved this man, or hated that man.

Vocetur Praedestinatio bonorum, etc. Let the Praedestination Id* lib. 2. cap.
45.
of the good be absolutely called Praedestination; and the Praedestination of
the evil, Reprobation. And then Praedestination may be thus described:
Praedestination is an everlasting fore* appointment of final Grace in the way,
and everlasting happiness in the Country (or home) to the reasonable
creature, by the will of God.

Hic quart^ concludit, quod vtramque, etc. He concludes, Gorran in Romans 9.
that both Election and Reprobation, depends on Gods good pleasure, saying,
Therefore he has Mercy on whom he will, etc. Because freely he has loved
Jacob, and rejected Esau, he has Mercy on whom he will by giving Grace; and
he hardneth whom he will, not by imparting wickedness, but by not giving
Grace. Whereupon Saint Austin: As the Sun in departing far from the earth,
does harden Ice, not by imparting coldness, but by not giving heat.

Ago sum qui cunctos condidi Sanctos, etc. I am he Thomas Campensis de Imit.
Christi. lib. 2. cap. 63.
that made all Saints. I gave them Grace. I bestowed glory. I know all their
good works. I prevented them in the blessings of my sweetness. I fore knew my
beloved before all ages. I Elected them out of the world, and they did not
prae-elect me. I called them by Grace. I drew them by Mercy. I led them
through manifold tentations. I powered into them glorious consolations I gave
them perseverance, etc. I am to be blessed and honored in them all, whom I
have so highly glorified and Praedestinated without any foregoing good works
of their own.

Gratia Praedestination is in divinis literis, etc. The Cassander end^ in the
end of this Doctrine. C^nsult. Art. 18.
Grace of Praedestination is so greatly commended in the word of God, and
Ecclesiastical writers, That those who are endued with Faith in Christ, and
with good works springing from that Faith, may not ascribe these things to
themselves, but unto God, and to the Grace of his divine Praedestination, and
Flection, and so may glory in the Lord, and not in themselves.

The Doctrine of King JAMES, concerning Free Will, and effectual Grace.
THe only way for enabling us to do it (viz. the will Medit on the Lord
prayer.
of God) is by our earnest prayer to God, that he will enable us to do it,
according to that of Saint Augustine, Da Domine quod iubes, and iube quod vis.

And lead us not into Tentation) the Arminians cannot Ibid.
but mislike the frame of this petition, for I am sure they would have it, And
suffer us not to be led into tentation, etc. Saint Augustine is the best
decider of this question, to whom I remit me.

The Reader is referred in the margent to Saint Augustine thus:

Aug: de Praedestinatione Sanctorum, De dono perseuerantiae contra Pelagianos
and passim alibi. Now Saint Augustines Doctrine of Free Will is shortly to
follow.

Our next general petition is, That his Kingdom may Ibid.
come, etc. That in the meanetime, his will may be done on earth, as it is in
Heaven; The effect, which the Kingdom of Heaven in this Earth will produce.

The nature of man, through the transgression of our Declar. against Vorstius.
first parents, has lost Free Will, and retayneth not now any shadow thereof,
saving an inclination to evil, those only excepted whom God of his mere Grace
has sanctified, and purged from this Original Leprosy.

It suffices us to know that Adam by his fall lost his Meditation on the Lord*
prayer.
Free Will, both to himself, and all his posterity, so as the best of us all
has not one good thought in him, except it come from God, who draws by his
effectual Grace, out of that attaynted and corrupt mass, whom he pleases,
for the work of his Mercy.

The Doctrine of the Church of England concerning Free Will.
THe condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, Article 10.
that he cannot turn and prepare himself, by his own natural strength, and
good works, to Faith and calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do
good works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of Godby Christ
preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us when we have
that good will.

Here we see first, the servitude of the Will under sin in the state of
natural corruption. There is an impossibility of turning and preparing by
natural strength; and secondly the power of Grace on the Will in converting
it; the Grace of God by Christ, does so effectually prevent us, that it makes
us to have a good will.

And as the Church teaches us this Doctrine, by Articles, so does she also
teach and confirm it by practice. For in her Liturgy she plainly
acknowledges, both the slavery of the Will under sin, and the effectual
power of grace on the Will. Concerning the bondage of the Will under sin, it
is said in a Collect: The frailty of man without thee, cannot but fall. And in
the Catechism. Know this that thou are not able to do these these things of
thy self, nor to walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him, without
his special Grace.

And concerning the efficacy of Gods grace on the Will in turning and changing
it, the Church directly makes it the foundation and groundwork of diverse
prayers: yea, in express terms she acknowledges Gods effectual power on
the Will to be the ground of a prayer for the King. Almighty and everlasting
God, we be taught by thy holy word, that the hearts of Kings are in thy Rule
and Governance, and that thou do dispose and turn them, as it seems best
to thy godly wisdom. In which words Gods effectual power on the Will is laid
as the ground, and now see the prayer built upon it, which is of the same
substance.

We beseech thee so to dispose and govern the heart of our most gracious King
and Governor, that in all his Thoughts, Words, and Works, he may ever seek
thy Honor and Glory. There is also another for the King in the Letany, That
God would so replenish him with the Grace of his Spirit, that he may always
incline to his Will and walk in his Way.

In which prayers, our Church both obeys the Scripture, and performs her
duty: but on the other side it is considerable, whether that Doctrine be not
a kind of Betraying and Disloyalty, that denies these prayers, by denying the
effectual power of God on the will of man. For how can he pray for the
efficacy of Gods power on the will of his Sovereign, that believes no such
efficacy of Gods power to be at all on the Will?

Again, the efficacy of Grace is yet more generally acknowledged by our
Church, as we may see in these patterns taken out of her Liturgy. By thy
special Grace preventing us, thou do put into our minds good desires.
Again, Lord we pray thee that thy Grace may prevent and follow us, and MAKE
us continually to be given to all good works. And again, O God forasmuch as
without thee, we are not able to please thee, grant the working of thy mercy
may in all things direct and rule our Hearts. But omitting diverse others, I
add these following, to show that the efficacy of Grace, does not only move
our wills to good, but establishes us in goodness. Give us grace that we be
not like children, carried away with every blast of vain doctrine, but firmly
to be established in the truth of the holy Gospel. (To which prayer in these
times especially it will not be amiss to say Amen.) Again, Almighty God which
do MAKE the minds of all faithful men to be of one Will, grant unto thy
people that they may love the things, which thou command, and desire that
which thou do promise, that among the sundry, and manifold changes of the
world, our hearts may surely there be fixed where as true Joys are to be found.

To conclude, the Letany is a president of diverse patterns; one while praying
for the King, That his heart may be ruled in the Faith, fear, and love of God:
and another while, That the Church may be ruled and governed universally in the
righs way. And again, that God will bring into the way of truth all such as
have erred, and are deceived. Now these prayers while they beg of God, that
good desires may be put into the heart, that hearts may be disposed and
turned by God, etc. they do plainly acknowledge the efficacy of Gods grace on
the wills and hearts of men. For when they beg that Gods Grace may work such
effects; they acknowledge such effects to be the proper and kindly works of
Gods Grace.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE Catholic Church concerning FreeWill, and Gods effectual
Grace.
PErdidit nos liber a Voluntas, etc. Free Will has undone Tatianus Assirius.
Orat. Co^t. Gentes.
us; and we who were Free, are now brought into bondage, and sold by sin.

Spiritus Sanctus assu^scit, etc. The Holy Spirit uses Ireneus, lib. 3. cap.
19.
to dwell in Mankind, and to dwell with Men, WORKING the will of God in them.

Quando rogamus ne in tentationem veniamus, etc. Cyprian de Orat. Dom.
When we pray that we do not go into Tentation, we are admonished of our
own infirmity and weakness by this prayer; lest any man should insolently
extol himself, lest any man should proudly, and arrogantly ascribe any thing
to himself, etc.

Dei est, inquam, Dei omne quod possumus; inde viuimus, inde pollemus, etc.
Idem epist* prima.

It is Gods, I say, it is Gods, All that we can do: Id epist. 1.
thence we live, and thence is our strength.

Retributione bonitatis ac pietatis paternae, etc. The Id. epist. 77.
Lord by the Retribution of his goodness, and Fatherly kindenes, rewards in
us, that which himself has wrought, and honors that which himself has
perfected. For it is of Him, that we overcome, and that the enemy being
subdued, we do attain to the victory of a most mighty combat.

Quicquid a nobisrecte geritur, etc. We must take Basil de vi^. Solit* cap. 17.
heed, that whatsoever is well done of us, our soul do ascribe the causes of
our virtue unto the Lord, ascribing NOTHING to our own POWER.

Vt decor animae fiat, and efficax, etc. That there may ^l. in Psa. 29.
be Beauty in the Soul, and a power effectual unto those things that are
necessary, there is need of Divine Grace.

Anima omnis humana, maligno seruitutis iugo, etc. Id. in Psalm. 4^.
Every Soul of man is subject to the miserable yoke of bondage, under the
common Enemy of mankind, and being deprived of the Freedom of her Maker, she
is carried away captive, by reason of sin.

Quaniam igitur humana natura a boni iudicio fraud Gregorius Nyllenus de Orat.
Dou^ica.
inducta aberrauit, etc. Because humane nature, being seduced by subtlety,
erred from the true judging of good, and inclined our Will to the contrary, all
mischief invaded the life of man, and brought it into the power thereof, etc.
Because we were encompassed and inthralled by this tyranny, being brought into
bondage of death by the incursions of our affections and perturbations as it
were by certain executioners and enemies, therefore do we rightly pray, That
the Kingdom of God may come upon us. For we cannot otherwise put off, nor
avoid, the wicked Power of corruption, unless the quickening power in steed
thereof do get dominion in us. If then we do pray, that the Kingdom may come
upon us, by the force of these words we do beg; Let me be freed from
corruption, let me be delivered from death, let me be loosed from the bands of
sin, that death reign no longer over me, that the tyranny of sin and
wickedness, be no longer effectual against us.

Libertatem suique potestatem ac propriam voluntate, etc. Id. ib.
Man changed the freedom, and power of himself, and his own Will, with the
heavy and noisome slavery of sin.

Q^ Christum f^quitur, etc. He that follows (...).
Christ, if he be asked why he would be a Christian, he may answer, because it
was my Will. Which when he says, he does not deny, that it was Gods Will
also* For the Will of man is prepared* of God, it is Gods grace, which causes
that God is worshipped of a Saint.

Quando dicit, Nemo potest venire me, etc. When he Hierome adr. Pelag. 3.
says, No man can come unto me, he breaks the proud freedom of Will; which
if it would go unto Christ, unless that be done which follows, ( Except my
heavenly Father draw him) it shall will in vain* and strive in vain. And this
is also to be noted, That he which is drawn, does not run of his own
accord, but is brought, either drawing back, and slow; or unwilling.

Libero arbitrio male vtens homo, etc. Man abusing Augustine, Encher. ad
Laurent. cap. 30.
Free Will, lost both it and himself. For as he that kills himself, kills
himself by life, yet by killing himself comes not to live; neither can raise
himself up again, when he has killed himself: so likewise when by
Free Will sin was committed, sin ouercomming, Free Will it self was lost:
for of whom a man is overcome, to him he is in bondage. This is verily the
sentence of the Apostle Peter: which being true, what can be the liberty of a
bond-slaue, but only a delight in sinning? He serves God freely, who
willingly does the will of his Lord. And by the same reason he is free unto
sin, that is the servant of sin. Wherefore he shall not be free unto
Righteousness, except being freed from sin, he begin to be the servant of
Righteousness.

Et si homines (...) bona, q^pertinem, etc. Although Idem* de Pr^dest. Sanct^
cap. 10.
men do those good things which belong to the worship of God; it is Gods doing
that they do what he commanded. Therefore these things are commanded to us,
and yet are showed to be the gifts of God, that it may be understood, that they
are our works, yet God works that we do work them.

Tantum quippe Spirit Sancto accenditur voluntas* etc. Their will is so much
kindled with the Holy Ghost, Ide^do correp. and gra. cap. 12.
that therefore they are able to work because they will; and therefore they
will, because God works that they will.

Plenissime declaratur omnia, etc. It is most fully declared, Prosper de voc.
gent. lib. 1. cap. 9.
that all things which pertain to the obtaining of life etenall, without Gods
grace, can neither be begun, increased, or perfected; and any election, that
boasts of Free Will, that sentence of the Apostle does most invincibly
withstand, when he says, who has discerned thee?

Si quis vt a peccato purgemur, etc. If any man do^ (...) Council cap. 4.
affirm, that our Will does seek God, that we may be purged from sin, and
does not confess that by the infusion of the Holy Ghost, and his working in
us, it is wrought that we should Will to be purged, he resists the Holy
Ghost, saying by Solomon: The Will is prepared of the Lord; and he resists
the Apostles wholesome teaching: It is God that works in us, both to Will and
to do, of his good pleasure.

Quoties bona agin^s, De^s in nobis etc. As often as Ibid 9.
we do any good works, God in us, and with us, works that we work.

(...) peccati, nunc s^rvus Iustiti^, etc. Ye were before the servants of
sin, now the servants (...). Scem* 1 14.
of righteousness, etc, Sin before falsely said that thou wast a freeman*
when it held thee a wretched bondman. But Grace no^ calls thee a servant,
whom truly to make free, she has adopted to be a son of God.

Quid enim aliud potuit, etc. What can be borne of Petrus Diaconus de Incar.
and gra. cap. 6.
a servant but a servant? For Adam did not beget sons when he was a freeman,
but when he was a servant of sin. Therefore as every man is of him, so every
man is by him the servant of sin.

Regnante peccato habet liberum arbitrium, sed liberum Fulgentius de Incar. de
gra* cap. 19.
fine Deo, etc. When sin reigns, man has Freewill, but free without God,
and therefore miserably, and slauishly free, because not made free, by the free
gift of Gods Mercy. This the Apostle does evidently insinuate, saying: When
ye were the servants of sin, ye were free unto Righteousness. Therefore
he cannot be the servant of Righteousness, which is free unto Righteousness,
because as long as he is the servant of sin, he is not found fit to serve
any thing else but sin. From this slavery of sin no man is made free, but
he that is freed by the Grace of Christ our deliverer; that so being freed from
sin, he may become the servant of God.

Ipso fatit vt faciamus, etc. God works that we Id. de praedest. ad Meximum
lib. 1.
work, by whose working in us* all the good that we do, is wrought. Of whom
it is said to the Hebrews: Let him make you perfect in every good work,
working in you that which is pleasing in his sight.

Ad indignam mente veniens Deus, etc. God coming to an unworthy soul, makes
her worthy by coming Greg. Mag. (...)* (...). ^. cap. 22.
to her; and works in her those works which he may reward* though he found
NOTHING in her but that which he might punish.

Profectus hominis Dei d^numest, etc. The profiting Isidore Hispal. Sent. lib.
2. cap 5.
of man is the gift of God. Neither can any man be amended of himself, but of
the Lord. For man has not any thing of his own that is good, whose way is not
his own, as the Prophet witnesses: I know Lord that the way of man is not his
own.

Aguntur Spiritu Dei, vt and ipsi, etc. Men are actuated Anselme in Romans 8.
by the Spirit of God, that they may act that which is to be done, and when
they have done it, they may give thanks, to Him by whom they were actuated.
For the Spirit of God which actuateth them, is both their leader and helper in
their actions.

Verba non sunt mea, sed Apostoli, etc. They are not Bernard de lib. arb. and
gra.
my words but the Apostles, who attributes all the good that may possibly be,
unto God, and not to his own Will; even to think, to will, and to do. If
then God works these three things in us, (that is, to think good, to will
it, and to perform it) he works in us, the first indeed without us, the
second with us, and the third by us. For by sending in a good thought he
preuenteth us; by changing our wicked Will, he ioynes it to him by consent,
and by giving power to our consent, this inward WORKER, shows himself
outwardly in our manifest work.

Post peccatum ante reparationem, etc. After sin, and ^. Lombard. lib. 2
did. 25 Ex Hug. de S. Vict.
before the restoring of Grace; the Will is oppressed, and overcome of
concupiscence, and is weak in evil, and has no grace in good, and therefore
it can sin, and it cannot choose but sin, and that damnably.

Operans Gracia, est quae praeuenit, etc. Working, (or Id. lib. 2. did. 26. ^.
operating) Grace is that which preuenteth the good Will: For by it the Will of
man is freed, and prepared, that it may be good, and that effectually it may
will good. But cooperating Grace follows the Will when it is good, in helping
it.

Gracia Dei mecum ostendit vt spepo, quod ipsa est causa Bradwarden de causa.
Dei. lib. 1. cap. 40.
efficiens, etc. The Grace of God with me, I hope will show, that Grace is
properly the efficient cause of every good act: I mean Grace freely given,
which is an habit poured into the soul freely by God. Virtue, and chiefly the
chiefest virtue, Grace of Charity is no self EFFECTVALL than Vice. But Vice
effects evil acts, wherefore Grace or Charity effects good acts. And that
I may say nothing of vices, morally gotten, who does not know, who does not
feel, what acts one Radical vice effects, that law of the members, that
tyrant of nature, that source of sin, Concupisence, or the lustfullnesse of
our flesh, which also the Doctors often call Original sin? A witness hereof
is experience, too common, too forceable. A witness also is the Apostle, when
he says, I am carnal, sold under sin, for what I do, I allow not. For I
do not that which I would, but that which I hate that I do. Seeing then that
lust is so violent, so effectual, so manifoldly actuous, how does Charity
repress, diminish, and overcome it, if she do nothing at all, if she move
nothing at all, if she be altogether idle?

Qua Gratia non noua Voluntas creatur, etc. By which Grace, there is not
created a new will, neither is the Cassander Consul^* Art, 18^
will enforced being unwilling, but the will being sick is healed, being
depraved, is rectified; and is changed from evil into good. And by an inward
kind of motion is drawn, that of unwilling it may become willing, and may
freely consent to the Divine calling; and afterward the same Grace cooperating,
it may obey the will of God, and by the same Grace perseuering in good works,
may also through the same Grace enter into the inheritance of the heavenly
Kingdom. This Doctrine of the Grace of God and Free Will the sounder
Schoole*men strongly defended against the Pelagians, among whom was Thomas
Brauarden (or Bradwarden) called in his time the profound Doctor, who wrote an
excellent work (which he calls a sum) against Pelagianisme, increasing in
his days. And how much many of them did attribute to Grace, Bonauenture alone
may testify: This (says he) is the duty of godly minds, that they attribute
nothing to themselves, but all to the grace of God, wherein how much soever a
man does give to the Grace of God, he shall not depart from piety, though by
giving much to the Grace of God, he take away something from the power of
Nature, or Free Will; But when something is taken away from the Grace of God;
and that is given to Nature which belongs to Grace, there may be danger.

THE DOCTRINE OF King JAMES, concerning the Certainty of Salvation, and
against the Apostasy, or falling away of the Saints*
ABout the same time one Be^tius a Scholar of the late Declar. against
Vorstiue.
Arminius (who was the first in our Age that infected Leyden with herisie*) was
so impudent, as to send a letter unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, with a
book intit^led de Apostasia Sanctorum. And not thinking it sufficient to auow
the sending of such a book (the Title whereof only were enough to make it
worthy the fire) he was moreover so shameless* as to maintain in his letter
to the Arch* bishop, that the Doctrine contained in his book, was agreeable
with the Doctrine of the Church of England. Let the Church of Christ then
judge, whether it was not high time for Us to bestirre Our selves, when at this
Gangrene had not only taken hold amongst Our nearest Neighbors, so ^ Non solum
paries proximus iam ardebat, not only the next house was on fire, but did also
beg in to creege into the bowels of Our own Kingdom.

It is true, that it was Our hard hap not to hear* of this Arminius before he
was dead, and that all the Reformed Churches of Germany had with open mouth
complained of him. But as soon as We understood of that distraction in your
State, which after his death hoc left behind him, We did not fail (taking
the opportunity when your last extraordinary Ambassadors were here with Us) to
use some such speeches unto them concerning this matter, as We thought fittest
for the good of your State, and which We doubt not but they have faithfully
reported unto you. For what need We make any question of the A^gancy of these
Heretics, or rather* Atheistical Sectaries (...) you, when one of them at
this present remaining in your Town of Leyden, has not only presumed to
publish of late, a blasphemous book of the Apostasy of the Saints, but has
besides been so impudent as to send the other day a copy thereof as a g^odly
present to our Archbishop of Canterbury, together with a letter wherein he is
not ashamed (as also in his book) to lie so grossly, as to (...) that his
Heresies contained in the said book, are agreeable with the Religion, and
profession of the Church of England. For these respects therefore have we
cause enough very heartily to request you, to root out with speed, those
Heresies and Schisms, which are beginning to bud forth amongst you, which if
you suffer to have the Reins any longer, you cannot expect any other issue
thereof, then the curse of God, infamy throughout all the Reformed Churches,
and a perpetual rent and distraction in the whole Body of your State.

His Majesty does exhort you, seeing you have heretofore ^id.
taken Arms for the liberty of your Consciences, and have so much endured in
a violent and bloody war, the space of forty years for the profession of
the Gospel, that now having gotten the upper hand of your miseries, you would
not suffer the followers of Arminius to make your actions an example for them
to proclaim to the world, that wicked Doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints.

It is all worthy of deep consideration; and among, (if not above) the rest.
1. The opinion that this great and wise King had of this Doctrine of The
Apostasy of the Saints. He says of a book so entitled; The Title ^re
enough to make it worthy the fire. And he call^ him Heretic and (...) that
published this book. The book also He terms, A (...) of the Apostasy of
the Saint^. And by his Ambassador He calls it, That wicked Doctrine of the
Apostasy of the Saints. 2. What agreement this book and Doctrine had with the
Doctrine of the Church of England. Here of the King says, He was shameless
to maintain in his letter to the Arch bishop, that the Doctrine contained in
his book was agreeable with the Doctrine of the Church of England. And again,
A letter wherein he is not ashamed (as also in his book) to lie so grossly,
as to auow that his Heresies contained in the said book, are agreeable with
the Religion and profession of our Church of England. 3. The dangers that arise
from this kind of Doctrine. Arminius left behind him a distraction in the
State, And, you cannot expect any other issue thereof, then the curse of God,
infamy throughout all Reformed Churches, and a perpetual rent and distraction
in the whole Body of your State. 4. The council that was both taken and given
hereupon. It was high time to bestirre our selves, when as this Gangreene, had
not only taken hold on our nearest Neighbors, but did also begin to creep
into the bowels of Our own Kingdom. And, For these respects therefore have
We cause enough, very heartily to request you, to root out with speed these
Heresies, and Schisms, which are beginning to bud forth amongst you.

I may add hereunto the Doctrine of the Articles of the Church of Ireland,
which fitly may here be inserted, as both looking to King James, under whose
Authority and protection it came forth, and was maintained, and looking to the
Doctrine of the Church of England, since it were an intolerable and impudent
injury, to the wisdom and religious knowledge of those times, to say that
between them there was not a harmony.

All Gods elect, are in their time inseparably united unto Article of Ireland:
Number. 33.
Christ, by the effectual and vital influence of the Holy Ghost, derived from
Him, as from the Head, unto every true member of his Mystical Body.

A true, lively, justifying Faith, and the sanctifying Number. 38.
Spirit of God, is not extinguished, nor vanishes away in the Regenerate,
either finally, or totally.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England, for Certainty of Salvation.
THe Church of England teaches the certainty of Salvation, and she has done
it so constantly and and generally, that it will be very hard to produce any
one of her Sons, that durst (before very late days) to affirm and defend to
the contrary, by any public work and writing. She has taught this
Certainty by her own Articles: She has re-enforced it by an exposition of
Her Articles, it has been explained and enlarged, by Articles of Lambeth, it
has been taught by Her most eminent Sons, the Reverend Fathers the Bishops
of this Church, and the Professors of Divinity, who are trusted by her, to
deliver her true thoughts, and Tenants in Divinity to her children. And we
see that it has also been sealed up and settled in Articles of the Church of
Ireland, between which Church, and the Church of England, to make a
contraritie and opposition is a thing of extreme danger and absurdity.

And first for her own Articles. In the Article of Praedestination, our Church
teaches the Certainty of Salvation diverse ways. One way, by making Salvation
to depend on such a constant and sure Election, that it brings the Elect
constantly to Salvation. A constant Decree of Election, brings the Saints
constantly and assuredly through the way of Salvation, unto the ways end, even
Salvation it self. This constant bringing of the Elect to Salvation, we may
find in these words.

God has constantly Decreed by his Counsel secret to Article. 17.
us, to deliver from Curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ
out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation.

From hence is it plain and easy to argue.

Those whom God has constantly Decreed to bring to Salvation, they are
constantly and certainly brought to Salvation.

But here God has constantly Decreed to bring his Elect to Salvation.

Therefore the Elect of God are constantly and certainly brought to Salvation.

And that this bringing to Salvation, is not in the ways end only, but in the
way it self, the particulars by which the Elect are brought to Salvation
plainly show, which are to follow in the next consideration. But here by the
way, let us note, that this bringing to Salvation, by a constant and certain
Decree, carries with it a certain, and assured Salvation, even by the
confession of the Enemies of it. For in this very respect, because it induces
a certain and constant Salvation, they reject it; as that which crosses their
inconstancy and mutabilitie of Salvation. This Doctrine of certainty crosses
their doctrine of Incertaintie, and therefore their doctrine of incertaintie,
crosses and rejects this doctrine of Certainty. For well they know that it
must be a certain Salvation, which is wrought and brought to pass by a
constant and absolute Decree of Election. Therefore to plant this Apostacy,
and that men though Elected, may have leave to fall from Salvation if they
will, they make an Election, which follow^th a man, upon the condition of his
sore-seene perseverance. So that as in the doctrine of our Church, a constant
Decree of Election, constantly bringing to Salvation must needs withal give a
final perseverance in the state of grace, their Doctrine not enduring this
constant perseverance and salvation, issuing from a constant Decree of
Election, have devised an Election that waits upon man, to see whether he
will give to himself final perseverance, by his own Free Will. An Election
by which no man is actually Elected until he be no man, that is, until he
be parted the soul from the body. But (as I said before) our Doctrine may be
known to be a Doctrine of Certainty, that does oppose and reject this falling
away, because the fallers away do oppose and reject it, there being indeed an
incompatibility between, a constant Decree, that brings men constantly to
Salvation; and a dependant and contingent Decree, that waits on man's
uncertain Will, to see whether his will will finally persevere, and so bring
his owner to Election.

A second way, by which our Church teaches the certainty of Salvation in this
Article is this; Because she says the same grounds that St. Paul does, when
he planteth and builds a certainty of Salvation. Yea, she almost uses the
same words. Saint Paul, first in a general shows that there is a constant
and uninterrupted progress of good and happiness to the Saints that love God,
and are called of his purpose. This general he makes good by particulars; for
he brings them in as proofs of the general. Therefore he begins with the
word, For: For whom her did foreknow, he also did praedestinate to be made
like to the Image of his Son, whom he did praedestinate them he also
glorified. Behold, the Apostle has made good his general by these
particulars. His general of the constant good and happiness of the Saints, is
proved by these particulars, because God from his first fore-knowing or taking
notice of them, never leaves doing them good from one degree of good to
another, until he has brought them to eternal glory and blessedness. So
that this place is no other but a proof of the constant and vndefeasable
happiness of the Saints. Now let us see how our Church does parallel this
Doctrine of Saint Paul with the Doctrine of her Article. Our Church first in
the general teacherh, that God by his constant Decree brings his Elect to
Salvation; And then she also descends to particulars in the like manner.
Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a benefit of God, be ^alled
according to Gods purpose, by his Spirit working in due season; they through
grace obey the calling; they he justified freely; they be made sons of God
by Adoption, they be made like the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus
Christ; they walk religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy they
attain to everlasting felicity. Behold here also the particulers, by which
that general bringing to Salvation is perfited, so that to join both
together; The business of Saint Paul and our Church is both one, or rather the
purpose and business of Saint Paul is the purpose of our Church, even to show
that the Saints and Elect are constantly and infallibly brought to Salvation
and happiness by Gods love and Election. And indeed there is such a continued,
and indissoluble chain beginning in Gods purpose and Decree, and not ceasing
until it bring the Saints to Gods to be glorified, that there is no room, nor
gappe for this full and final Apostasy to break in, and interpose it self.

And that we may be yet more sure, that this place of Saint Paul, did intend
this very thing to prove the infallible, steadfast, and perpetual blessedness
of the Saints; as before it has appeared, both by his general position at his
entrance, and after by the particulars in his progress, so it may also most
fully appear, and strongly (for a threefold cord cannot be broken) by the use
that he makes in his egresse. It were too much to stand upon each particular of
his inference and application: I will take notice of a few. First, he triumphs
like a conqueror, beholding the safety and assured victory of the Saints: What
shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us?
God is for the Saints all the way from the first foreknowledge, unto the final
glory, what Arminius or Bertius can make any Apostasy to be against us, when
God is thoroughly for us. God being steadfast with us from Election to
glorification, no interloper can come in with intercision to cut off and put a
sunder this continued chain of happiness, which God has joined together and
guardeth all the way. And that yet more plainly you may see that this was St.
Paul's very meaning and purpose, behold it in his own words, Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? See here a challenge sent to the whole world, for
he defieth any thing that would seem to separate Gods beloved from the love
of God. Wherefore let the Arminians take heed how they come within Saint Paul's
defiance. For the truth is, they do undertake to accept Saint Paul's challenge,
and give an answer to his question; for when Saint Paul says, Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? They answer, that there are many things
that may separate Saints from ^he love of Christ. But let them take heed how
they make St. Paul their adversary. For it concerns them nearly to agree with
this adversary while they are in the way lest their adversary deliver them to
the judge, etc.

Neither is Saint Paul contented to defy their Apostasy and separation only by
way of a question in general terms, but he passes on to particulars and most
weighty ones, which (if any) might cause an Apostasy and separation of Saints
from the love of God. But both these particulars he denies to be able to
separate, yea, generally all or any creature he denies to be able to
separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus. Here also I will spare to
insist on every particular; but I desire the Reader to consider of ^ few of
them which I think include all other, if the rule be true, that the greater
includes the less. First* Life and Death cannot separate us. Now the Author of
Apostasy himself could say, Skin for ^kin, and all Job. 24.
that a man has will he give for his life. Touch therefore his bone and his
flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. But both the example of Job and the
Doctrine of Saint Paul show that death, nor pain do not separate the Saints
from the love of God. For Job will trust in God though he kill him; and Paul
says, That in all thos^ things we are more then conquerors. Now if this
maximum terribilium cannot separate the Saints from the love of God, what can
lesser terrors do? surely they can separate less.

But here by the way, let me give a note of instruction, or at least
remembrance, to the Doctors of Apostasy, that in this case of Job and other
Saints, of whom S. Paul speaks, it is God that loved us who makes us to
conquer, and not our own Free Will: for certainly, if God did not hold us by
his love, but we held him only, there were quickly an end of the business;
death and many things else would separate us from the love of God. Especially
if among those many things, we take notice of those that follow: Angels,
Principalities and Powers. These are the mightiest creatures of all, and yet
these cannot separate us from the love of God. Now if these that excel in
power cannot separate us, how can any lesser, and inferior powers separate us?
But here also we must carefully and humbly acknowledge, that we have no
defense, safety and security against these mighty powers, but the prevailing
power of God, which assisteth those whom he loves, and makes them conquerors,
For these are the sons of Anah, of whom it is said, who can stand against the
Sons of Anah. This is the strong man whom none can bind but one that is
stronger then he. And indeed this is the very cause of our over coming if we
believe S. John, Because 1 Ioh. 4. ^.
he that is in us, is greater then he that is in the world. Therefore Gods
constant love is still to be looked unto, as the only cause of our safety,
which keeps our wills by grace against these ouer-mightie enemies; and
wretched were we, if our wills were put to keep themselves by grace. For then
if we were but as Adam, these principalities and powers would prevail with us
as with Adam, especially having a body of sin about us which he had not. But
the only cause of our standing against these principalities, under whom Adam
fell, is the constant love and purpose of God; By that as S. Paul says, We are
more then 2 Cor. 1. 21.
conquerours, and thence it is, that Principalities and Powers cannot separate
us from the love of God. And as by this constant love of God we are constantly
and safely preserved from separation and Apostasy, so let our constant saftie
ever acknowledge this constant love and purpose of God to be the cause of it.
But both this safety and the cause of this safety the teachers of Apostasy
do deny, so robbing God of the glory of man's stabilitie, and robbing man of
the safety and stabilitie which he has from God. Finally, that yet we may
know our selves to be fully and finally safe, the blessed Apostle is not
contented to speak of safety from separation and Apostacy only in the
present time, but he denies Apostacy, beth by future things, and in the future
time. Nor things present, nor things to come, etc. shall be able to separate
us from the love of God. Behold a final and full perseverance in safety, for
things present cannot separate us, and things to come shall not be able to
separate us, yea, no other creature, that is, nothing can separate us, and
therefore not the Arminians.

A third way by which our Church in this Article does teach Certainty of
Salvation is this: she says that the consideration of Election does establish
in the Saints a Faith of their salvation to be enjoyed through Christ. For the
Saint finding in himself the mortification and vivification of the Spirit,
hence ascends up to the knowledge, view, and consideration of his Election,
and from this constant Election has a stable and sure Faith that he shall
enjoy eternal salvation in Christ. Now from hence plainly issues this
argument.

That salvation is certain, whereof there is an established Faith.

But there is an established Faith of the Salvation of of the Saints.

Therefore the Salvation of the Saints is certain.

The first proposition clears it self by its own light. For there is not an
established Faith of uncertain and fallible things; but of certain Yea, if
there were no other word but the word of Faith, this Faith presumes and
p^esupposeth a certain and infallible truth, for the object of it: and
consequently in this place a certain and infallible salvation of the Saints.

The second proposition is raised plainly out of the words of the Article. For
the consideration of Election is there said, upon the view of Sanctification to
establish a Faith of Salvation to be enjoyed.

Wherefore I may conclude in the words of the ninth Article.

There is no condemnation to them that believe and are baptized.

Which the Article of Ireland thus resembles;

Howsoever for Christ's sake, there be no condemnation Number. 34.
to such as are regenerate and do believe.

The first of which is a position of our Savior: They that believe and be
baptized shall be saved: They Mark. 16. 16.
are not only now in the state of Salvation, but they shall hereafter be
saved, for he that believes shall not Ioh. 5. 24.
see condemnation. And the other rests on the saying of Saint Paul, who says
that to the Saints there is no condemnation; For the Law of the Spirit of life
which Romans 3.
is in Christ Jesus, freeth a Saint from the law of sin and death. Now if a
Saint be free from death, who can make him a bondslaue of death? This were
flatly to affirm that which the Apostle denies both here and elsewhere. We
have not received the spirit of bondage to Romans 8. 15.
fear again, but the spirit of Adoption; by which we cry Abba Father: And if
a son, then no more a servant: Behold Saint Paul says, we have not received
the spirit Psalm. 46. 7.
to fear again, who then dares to put upon the Saints a spirit of bondage to
fear again? and Saint Paul says by the Spirit of God, If a son, then no
more a servant: And how dares flesh and blood to say, if a son, yet again a
servant? But let us stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, neither let us again be entangled with the yoke of bondage. Let us say
with Saint Paul, once a son, and no more a servant; once a son, and a son
for ever. And indeed Christ himself says, That a son abides in the house
Ioh. 9. 35.
for ever, only let us remember, that therefore we are delivered from this
fear and house of bondage; That Luke 1. 74.
being delivered from our enemies we might serve God without fear; In
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives. Our safety
is given us mainly 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
for an encouragement to holiness: For he that has this hope purges
himself as God is pure.

And now that it may appear, that I have not wrested a private sense out of
these public Articles, let us see whether the same truth has not been
publikly taught by others.

There is a work (formerly alleged) which has this Title, The Faith,
Doctrine and Religion, professed and protested in the Realm of England, and
Dominions of the same, expressed in thirty nine Articles, the said Articles
analyzed into propositions, etc. This work was made by a Chaplain of Doctor
Bancroft, late Archbishop of Canterbury, and to his Grace Dedicated. But it is
well known Archbishop Bancroft did not favor any Puritanicall or
Schismatic Doctrine, neither is it to be thought that his Chaplain, would
or durst offer any such unto him. Neither is it to be believed, that he would
be so shameless as to say to the same Archbishop, in his Dedicatorie Epistle,
That these Propositions she (that is the Church of England) publicly
maintains, if there had been any Puritanicall Doctrine maintained in them.

Now this Writer, having raised a Proposition upon these words of the
seventeenth Article ( constantly decreed) he infers.

Wander then do they from the truth, which think, That the Regenerate may
fall from the Grace of God, may destroy the Temple of God* and be broken off
from the (...) Christ Jesus.

The same Doctrine is proved by other Articles, more plainly and punctually
unfolding what was in the former Articles, truly and really contained, though
not so manifoldly, no^ severally expressed* Neither were these Articles
(commonly called the Articles of Lambeth) approved by obscure, private, or
Schismatic persons, but by chief Fathers of this Church in Eminence and
Authority. John Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of London, Richard
elect Bishop of Bangor, Doctor Whitaker, and other most learned Divines.

In these Articles we find the points of Free Election, Final perseverance,
and certainty of Salvation embraced by the Fathers of our Church; and
particularly in these which follow.

The cause which moved God to praedestinate some to life, was not the foresight
of their Faith, or of their Perseverance, or of their Good works, or of any
thing else which is to be found in men praedestinate, but Gods mere good will
and pleasure.

A true, lively, and justifying Faith, and the Spirit of God which sanctifies,
is neither finally, nor totally extinct in the Elect, it fails them not, it
forsakes them not.

A man truly faithful, that is, A man endued with a Faith that justifies, may
be assured by Faith of the Remission of his sins, and of his eternal
Salvation through Christ.

And now if I should undertake to bring forth the sayings of those Doctors and
Fathers of this Church that have taught the Perseverance of the Saints and
Regenerate, and the Certainty of Salvation ensuing this certain Perseverance,
multitude would overcome me, and exceed the bounds, both of this work, and the
Readers patience. And yet it is also almost an equal difficulty to show any
number that have publicly (without the cry of the Country) maintained the
contrary Doctrine; That is, the Apostasy of Saints, and the Mortality of the
(Immortal) seed of God. And though some would feign seek shelter under the
shadow of Dr. Ouerall, yet he does not only leave them open to storms, but
his own drops do fall down and batter them. For in the Great, Famous, and
Royal Conference at Hampton Court, he is recorded thus to say for Total and
final Perseverance.

Those which were called and justified according to the purpose of Gods
Election, howsoever they might and did sometimes fall into grievous sins,
etc. Yet did never fall, either* TOTALLY from all the graces of God to be
Utterly destitute of all the parts and SEED thereof, not FINALLY from
justification.

But to set some bounds unto boundless abundance, and to avoid both tedious
multiplicitie, and mere penury, I will bring forth some few of our Doctors,
as a pattern of the rest; Men that cannot be accused for want of skill to know
the Doctrine of our Church, no^ I think of dishonestie, that they should want
will to show it; and most of them were dead before late questions, and dead men
are commonly very impartial Judges.

The Council of Trent* even that sinful Counsel* in Doctor ^abington Bishop
of Worcester.
one Canon says thus, etc. And in a third Canon thus* If any man shall say
with a firm Certainty, that he shall have that great gift of Perseverance to
the end* unless he has learned it by some special (...) let him ^ee
accursed. Unto which three wicked Canons, etc. Where this Reverend Father
shows it to be the Doctrine of Trent, and withal a wicked Canon, which
teacherh this Doctrine, that a man cannot be certain of final perseverance*
Exp^s* on the Cr^ed.

Again. By the spirit of Adoption, and effects of Gods grace agreeable, we
may have certain knowledge, that we shall inherit Gods kingdom, which none
shall do but they that continue to the end, and were appointed unto it, before
the beginning of the world. Ibid.

When it pleases him to add that, He abides for ever (that is the Holy
Ghost, Ioh. 14. 17.) this comfort beyond the reach of either pen or Heart.
For hereupon it follows, that sa^sure is our salvation with him in that (...)
joyful kingdom, that we cannot fall from it finally. For this blessed Spirit
is the pledge of our inheritance, whereby we are sealed unto the Day of
Redemption: He therefore abiding with us forever* needs must we be sure of
that whereof he is a pledge and an earnest given, which is the very peace of
God that passes all under standing. O sweet office therefore of a blessed
Spirit. And O thrice blinded men with darkness of Rome, that will reach us to
doubt of our Salvation. We have this Spirit (...) a pawn* and the promise of
his abode for ever with us, though the times may come through grievous
temptations, that we may not think so for a while. Ibid.

Where Finally He (that is, the Holy Ghost) is lost* he never was by
Sanctifying grace. Ibid. Whence issues a plain conclusion, wheresoever the
Spirit was by Sanctifying Grace, there he is not finally lost.

As for the Bliss and Glory of Heaven, though yet we Doctor Abbot Bishop of
Sa^isbury.
know it not, yet we know that God has given to us, the interest and Title of
it already, and by Faith do stand assured through the Spirit, that he will in
due time give us the full sight and fruition of it. And a little after out of
S. Austin, De praedest. Sanct. cap. 17. He calls and justifies none but
whom he has praedestinated unto glory, and therefore it follows, that he
gives them perseverance, for the attainement of the said Glory. Certainty of
Salvation against D. Bishop.

The same S. Austin says to his hearers, If there be in you faith which
works by love, even now ye belong to them that are praedestinated, called,
justified. Now since the faithful by S. Austens judgment, do belong to them
that are praedestinated, called, justified, it follows by Saint Austins
judgment, that they are to be assured, that they belong to them that shall be
glorified, and therefore shall certainly persevere; because whom God has
praedestinated, called, justified, them he has glorified, as the Apostle
says, and therefore does S. Austin will the In Psalm. 148.
faithful man to believe that he shall live for ever.

But I need not to insist much on particular sentences of this Right Reverend
and learned Father of our Church, seeing he has whole Discourses, of The
Certainty of Salvation, and of the Perseverance of Saints. to which I would
rather remit the Reader, that he may quench his thirst in the Fountain it
self. Only I advertise him, that in the Epistle Dedicatorie to His De pers^n*
Sanctorum.
Majesty (then Prince of Wales) there is a complaint of some of our Divines,
that following the bypath of Arminius, Dogmate etiannum destruant Articulos
Religion is, quos prius propria manu confirmarunt. Wherein this Reverend Bishop
shows us*, that Arminianisme (whereof falling from saint-ship or the grace of
regeneration is a part) is the way to destroy the Articles of Religion, And if
a Minister write Arminianisme, he writes against those Articles, which he has
confirmed by his own subscription and writing. So upon the matter the same
hand writes forward and backward for and against the same things, yea,
contrarily and against it self. Suffer me also to observe another saying in
the very entrance of that work. Repertus est etc. There is found one Bartius,
a false teacher of Leyden, who was not afraid to set forth a book execrable in
the very Title of it. OF THE APOST ACY of the SAINTS: a man as it seems of the
School of Arminius, whom also the Vorstian liberty of Prophesying (that is, a
licenciousnes that grows mad against well established Religion) has
transported and persuaded him, that out of one inch of Novelty, and most vain
desire of singularity, he should depart from the received sentence of our
Churches. Wherein it may evidently appear in what contrariety to the Doctrine
of our Church, stands or rather falls, this Apostasy, and falling away of
the Saints.

Augustine says not, That no man can be sure of perseuerancet Doctor Fulke.
etc. But of perseverance he affirms, ca. 12. De Correp. and gra. To the
first man which in that good wherein he was made right, had received that he
might not sin, that he might not dye, that he might not forsake that good,
an aid of perseverance was given, not whereby it should come to pass, that he
should persevere, but without which he could not persevere by Freewill. But now
unto the Saints praedestinated by the grace of God, unto the kingdom of God,
not only such an aid of perseverance is given, but such that even
perseverance it self is given to them; not only that that they cannot
persevere without this gift, but also by this gift they are not but
perseuerant. For he not only said, without me ye can do nothing; but also he
said, Ye have not chose^ me, but I have chosen you, and have appointed you;
that you may go and bring forth fruit and that your fruit may abide. By which
words he showed, that he had given them not only Justice, but perseverance in
it. For when Christ so appoints them, that they go and bring forth fiuite,
and that their fruit should abide who dare be bold to say, peradventure it
shall not abide?) All Christians therefore ought to be assured that they shall
remain in the Vine, keep his Commandments, and such like conditions as be
required of them. For as S. Augustine says, He that makes men good, makes
them also to persevere in good* Answ. to the Rhemist. Testa. See more there
upon Romans 8.

He held of the Angels, somany as he was pleased, and Doctor Field.
suffered them not to decline, and go a side with the rest, and raised up and
severed out of the mass of perdition, whom he would among the sons of men.
The Angels now confirmed in grace, and those men whom in the multitude of his
mercyes, he delivered out of the State of condemnation, and reconciled to
himself, do make that happy society of blessed ones, whom God has loved
with an everlasting Love. This Society is more properly named the Church of
God, then the former consisting of men and Angels, in the state of that
integrity wherein they were created, in that they which pertain to this happy
company, are called to the partitipation of Eternal happiness, with the
calling of a more mighty, potent, and preualing grace then the other. For
whereas they were partakers only of that grace, which gave them power to
attain unto, and continue in the perfection of all happy good if they would,
and then In tanta faelicitate, and non-peccandi facilitate, in so great
faelicity, and facility of not offending left to themselves to do what they
would, and to make their choice at their own peril, These are partakers of
the grace which wins Infallibly, holds Inseperably, and leads
Indeclinably, in the ways of eternal blessedness.

Without which efficacy of Grace winning Infallibly, holding Inseparably, and
leading Indeclinably, no man ever attained to salvation; of which who so is
partaker shall vndoubetly be saved. Of the Church. Lib. 1. cap. 3. and cap. 17.
Doct Ioh. White


This holy, reverend and greatly*learned man, in his Way to the Church, has a
Digression, with this Title. Digres: 41. Entreating of Praedestination, and
Freewill as the Protestants hold them, and showing that their Doctrine
concerning thosepoints does neither make God the author of sin, nor lead men
to becareles of their lives, etc. And indeed he excellently proves what he
undertakes, in this Digression. In another, we read thus.

Perseverance in good, begins not in the will, but in Gods protecting Grace,
that vpholds the will from desisting: whence it follows that to every new
work, the will needs a new Grace, as Organs give sound no longer then while
the bellows are blowing. Against this our Adversaries teach, that a just man
when himself will can practice any Righteousness, internal, or external by
doing good works, and keeping Gods Law, neither needs he ordinarily a new
Grace to excite him, but only to help him; And in case of falling into sin,
when it is said, the will cannot cooperate to rise again, the meaning is, that
it cannot do^ it so easily. And this he calls An impious blasphemy, and
sauouring of Pelagianisme. Digress. 42.

The Title of another Digression (43) is this: Proving that Gods children
without miracles or extraordinary Revelation, may be and are infallibly
assured, that they have grace, and are in the state of salvation.

There we read in the Digression it self: The manner how we know we have
grace, and shall be saved, is by the means of the holy Ghost, whose work it
is to assure us (I think then it is the evil spirits work to take away this
assurance) the which he does, first, by producing in us the effects of saving
Grace, and Praedestination, which i^ the constant reforming of our life within
and without. Whereupon it follows that he which gives himself effectually and
steadfastly to a godly life, may infallibly be secured thereby of his
Salvation, because God whose promises are infallible, has promised salvation
to all such. Where the Reader may note, That the constant Reformation of our
life is an effect of Praedestination, and a work of the Spirit. Now if this
constant Reformation be wrought in us by the spirit, and is given to us as a
fruit of Gods constant Decree of Praedestination, how can we fall away? for a
constant Reformation and falling away cannot stand together; But here we see
Gods Spirit gives us a constant Reformation of life, and therefore falling away
is excluded.

A little after. Stapleton confesses, that S. Paul pronounces the same
certainty of other men's salvation, that 1 Cor. ^. 40. Romans 8. 38. ^ Tim. 4. 8.
he does of his own. And therefore we may have assurance of Grace and
Perseverance as well as he had. For in diverse places he shows, that he was
assured of Gods spirit, and Grace, and eternal life. You shall hear what the
Ancient Fathers say touching this matter: Macarius says, Although they are
not as yet entered into the whole Inheritance prepared for them in the world to
come, yet through the earnest which they now receive, they are as certain of
it, as if they were already crowned and reigning, etc.

Bernard says: who is just but he that returns love to God who has loved
him, which is done when the Spirit by Faith REVEALS to a man the eternal
PVRPOSE of GOD concerning his FVTVRE SALVATION.

Dr. Reynoldes was a man indifferently well esteemed by some for his learning
in the place where he lived, and not accused by any that I knew for not being
orthodoxe in any point of the Doctrine of our Church. Yet Salomons saying is
true, That the Race is not to the swift etc, neither is favor (still) to men of
skill* wherefore as when a Countrey-Gentleman would borrow money in this City,
though his estate be never so great in the Country, yet commonly he must
hauea Citizen bound for him that is known to the City, so since Doctor
Reynoldes, though well known for his learning in the place where he lived, yet
perchance may fail to have trust among some men. I must take leave to get a
surety for him, even one that is living, and whose words I think will be
taken in the City.

The man whom I produce to give his word for Dr. Reynoldes is Doctor Francis
White Deane of Carlisle, I have already indeed produced him for a witness, but
now I produce him for a surety; yea since he can here be a witness also, let
him be both a witness and a surety.

First therefore, I take him as a witness of Perseverance in that which I
formerly cited out of him. That our Tenet concerning Praedestination is no
other then what Saint Austen and his Scholars maintained against the
Pelagians. Now it may plainly appear by diverse of Saint Austens works, that
the Praedestination taught by Saint Austen, gave to the praedestinaite an
infallible perseverance, a perseverance by which a Saint could not but
persevere. And that I may not send away my Reader presently to read or buy the
works of Saint Austen, let him but look back to the allegation of Doctor
Fulke, and there he shall plainly see that which here I tell him: so that
thence will arise a plain Argument,

The Tenet of our Church concerning Praedesti nation, is the Doctrine of Saint
Austen.

But the Doctrine of Saint Austen teaches a Praedestination, that gives a sure
and infallible Perseverance

Therefore the Tenet of our Church teaches a Praedestination that gives a sure
and infallible Perseverance.

Neither may aman dare to meddle with any thing but the Conclusion, for the
former proposition is guarded by Doctor White, and the second by Saint Austin
and Doctor Fulke.

But Doctor White comes somewhat nearer, and RePly to Fisher.
Proves that A member of Christ, and the Catholic Church in the Creed (which
consists of the true members of Christ) can never fall away unto damnation, and
therefore must needs be possessed of final perseverance.

That Church (or the Catholic Church in the Creed) has the remission of
sins, and life eternal, and passes not to Hell. Ioh. 10. 28. Aug. de Doctr:
Christi: lib. 3. cap. 32.

Again, The testimonies of St. Austen objected by the same Adversary, which
are, that the Catholic Church is the Body of Christ, whereof he is the Head,
and that out of this Body, the holy Ghost quickneth no man, make altogether
against himself. For none are vital Members of Christ's mystical Body, but
Just and Holy persons. And it is the same Fathers Doctrine, Impii non
suntreuera corpus Christi. wicked persons are not in Deed and Verity the Body
of Christ.

And in another place, In corpore Christi non sunt, quod est Ecclesia, quoniam
non potest Christus habere membra damnata. They are not in Christ's Body because
Christ CANNOT have DAMNABLE members.

Thus are Christ's members sure of Salvation, because safe from damnation, they
cannot be damned, therefore they must be saved, and I think that they will not
deny that final perseverance is an inseparable companion of Salvation.

And now we come to another place in the same work, which though it begin in
Witnessing, yet it ends in Suretiship.

It (that is still The Catholic Church in the Creed) is the Church builded
upon the Rock, against which the gates of Hell shall not prevail either by
Herisie, Tentation, or Mortal sin, Matt. 16. 18. Matt. 7. 24 And if it be a
mere fancy to hold this, then Gregory the great with many ancient Father,
were fantasticks for teaching in this manner. Which to make good there are many
citations adjoined. Aug: de Ci^it: Dei. lib 20. cap 8. Nunquam ab illo ecclesia
sed vcetur praedestinata and electa ante constitutionem mundi. Origin: Trac: 1
Mat: Vnumquodque peccatorum etc. portae sunt Inferorum. Vna Inferorum porta
vocatur scortatio. C^mmultae sunt, neque recenceri numero possint Inferorum
portae, nulla porta Inferorum valet aduersus petram aut Ecclesiam quam Christus
super illam aedificat. Gregor: Moral. lib. 28. cap. 6 Sanctam Ecclesia^ de
Sanctis in aternum perman suris constructam, nullis huius vitae persecutionibus
superandam, Ipse super quem ^dificata est euidenter ostendit, cum ait, Port^
Inferi non praeualebunt aduersus eam. Ambr: in Luc, lib. 2. cap. 3. Bern: in
Cant: sermon: 7^ Dr. Raynold, de Script: and Eccles. These. 4 confirm the same
at large.

Thus are we referred to Doct. Reynolds by this learned man, and therefore we
may safely pass on to see what he says. Neither is this Reference merely
general and learge, but punctual to this very point of the final
Perseverance of the Saints. A more general commendation he has besides of
this same work; when he says. The adversaries have made no Reply to Doctor
Reynoldes Theses.

Neither are any endued with sanctification, but those whom God has Elected
that they should be Saints: And to true Sanctification Justification
concurreth. But God Justifies only the Elect, and Iustifiing Faith, by which
the Hearts are purified, is the Faith of the Elect of God, The wicked are not
beeleeuers in the Apostolical use of that word. For whosoever beeleeueth shall
be saved, and the end of Faith is the salvation of the soul. And howsoever
they may be called beeleeuers for a profession of faith, or for a temporary
Faith, yet they are not redeemed, as those which are grounded on Christ, For
those that are Redeemed are made Kings and (...) God, which is the Pr^per
prerogative of Saints* And they that (...) did up on Christ, have built houses
grounded upon the Ro^, which shall never fall. These. 4. which is the very same
whereunto D* White referred the Reader. The (...) Doctrine of Final
perseverance* (...) again confirmed, in the Apology of these These Master
Hooker.


As Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more death has no more power
over him* so the justified man be ing allied to God in Jesus Christ our Lord,
does as necessarily from that time always live, as Christ by whom he has Ioh.
14. 19.
life lives always. I might if I had not other where largely done it already,
show by many and sundry manifest and clear proofs, how the (...) and opera^ns
of life, are sometimes so indiscer^ble, and so secret, that they seem stone
dead, who notwithstanding are still alive unto God in Christ. For as long as
that abides in us, which anima teth, quickneth, and gives life, so long we
live, and we know that the cause of our Faith abides in us for ever. If
Christ the Fountain of life, may flit, and leave his habitation, where he once
d^elleth, what shall become of his promise, I am with you to the worlds end; If
the Seed of God which contains Christ, may be first conceived, 1. Pet. 1.
and then cast out, how does S. Peter term it immortal? 1. Ioh. 39.
How does S. John affirm it abides? If the Spirit which is guen to cherish,
and preserve the seed of life, may be given and taken away, how is it the
EARNEST of our INHERITANCE until Redemption?

If the Justified ^rre a^ he may, and never come to understand his error, God
does sa^e him through general repentance, but if he fall into H^risy, he
calls him at one time or other by actual Repentance; but from (...), which
is an inward direct deny all of the foundation, (...) preser^eth him by
special providence forever. Discourse of Justification.

Thus have the Fathers, and Doctors of our Church, plainly showed the Doctrine
of our Church. And this last witness, (a man beyond all exception of Schism
or Partiality, the enemies of this Doctrine being Judges) has strongly
confirmed and established it. Yea, he has cut off that Goli^ Head, which
commonly marches against the host of God, to terrify them out of their
assurance of Final perseverance, and certain Salvation. For he shows that
the truly justified, after their errors* are saved either by general or
actual repentance, but from Infidelity and Fundamental Errors, they are
preserved for ever. And Dr. Overall, seems to join in one harmony with this
doctrine of M Hooker, saying the like for Errors of life, that this other did
for errors in belief. In the Conference at Hampton Court, these are his words,
Those which were called and justified according to Gods purpose and Election,
howsoever they might and did sometimes fall into greiuous sins etc. were in
time renewed by Gods Spirit unto a lively Faith and Repentance, and (...)
justified from those sins, and the wrath and Curse, and Guilt annexed
thereunto. So that the objection now adays urged, was long since prevented
with an answer, and should have kept silent the mouth of it being stopped. For
to what purpose is it to ask and object; What if a justified man commit a
great sin, and dye without Repentance? When it has been answered long since,
that Justification has such a Repentance annexed to it, as shall suffice to
wash away the guilt and wrath of those Error^ and sins into which the
justified shall fall. If true Justification and (...) Repentance, go still
together and (...) not (...), what a strange question is that, which rayseth an
objection from Justification separated from Repentance* I^ it lawful for them
to make a Justification of their own severed from Repentance, and to raise an
objection thence, against our Justification, conjoined with repentance? This is
a mere deceit to argue from things ill divided, against things well conjoined.
Yea, cursed are they that put a sunder what God has knit tog^thhr. King James
said in the Conference at Hampton Court, It was hypocrisy, and not true
iustifiing faith, that was severed from Repentance. If then true Iustifiing
Faith and Repentance, be not severed, their argument against perseverance taken
from iustifiing Faith, severed from Repentance, is a mere imaginary, and
fantastical argument. For they imagine a severing of things not indeed
severed, and then they raise an argument from the separation which is only in
their own brains, and not in the thing. So that the ambition and utmost hope
of such an argument is only this* If such a thing were that indeed is not,
then that would not be, that indeed is. If iustifiyng Faith were wholly severed
from Repentance as it is not, then perseverance would not be Persverarance. We
have seen out of S. Austen, Our Church and Doctors, that the same Election
which Decrees to the Saints glory and Salvation, Decrees also perseverance.

Now Perseverance, must needs have that sufficient Repentance without which it
cannot be perseverance. And therefore the same Decree that decrees
Perseverance, must needs also Decree that Repentance, without which
Perseverance cannot be. And in deed one and the same Seed of God (Decreed to
all the Elect) is an immortal seed, both of repentance and perseverance.
Briefly then, though a man were to be excluded from Salvation, for not
performing a condition, yet if he be sure to perform the condition, he is
still sure of Salvation. As on the other side, if he be sure of Salvation, then
he is sure to perform the condition: without which he cannot be sure of
Salvation. Now those whom our Article says, God has constantly Decreed to
bring to Salvation, they are sure of Salvation. And therefore are they sure of
that Repentance, and all other conditions or qualifications, without which they
cannot be sure of Salvation. Perchance the same matter in Mr. Hookers words
will be Discourse of Justification.
of more authority. Our Savior when he spoke of the sheep effectually called,
and truly gathered into his fold, I give unto them Eternal life* and they
shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hands, In promising
to save them, he promised no duobt to preserve them, in that without which
there can be no Salvation, as also from that by which it is recoverably lost.
But in a second place* let the questioners give me leave to ask them a
question? Whether in this their damning of men regenerate, that do not
particularly repent for every great sin, they do not bring in a Doctrine of
despair? For if one of these great sins ever happen to be forgotten, it is
the very case of sin against the Holy Ghost: There remains no more
sacrifice for Heb. 10.
sins, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery
indignation. A sin forgotten, cannot be for given.

There is no salvation without particular Repentance, no^ no particular
Repentance without patticular Remembrance; Again we know that some live in an
innumerable variety of grea horrible sins, such as S. Paul reckons* 1. Cor. 6.
9. Now if these men after come to repent, it is impossible for them to remember
their numberless particular sins which they have committed, and to apply to
them a particular repentance. Then by the same reason it seems to me it were
impossible they should be saved. But if God accept a general repentance of
them, it were good to bring some place of Scripture which says that others
cannot be saned in case of forgetfulness, by general repentance. It is the
saying of Doctor Francis White. The promise Reply to Fisher.
of Remission of sins is conditional. Esaias. 1. 16. 17. etc. and the same
becmmeth not absolute until the condition be fulfilled, either actual, or in
desire, and preparation of the mind. Now if that desire and preparation of the
mind to Repentance will serve, surely I think there is no child of God, that
has not had a full desire and purpose to repent of all his particular sins,
and especially the great ones. Yea we find in them by experience a preparation
and readiness of mind to actual Repentance. David having his sin plainly
discovered to him, presently falls to Repentance, and is presenly released of
his sin. And Hezechiah being convinced 2. Sam. 12. 13. 2. King. 20. 19.
of his sin in pride^ presently accepts the chastisment of his sin, and his
humbling immediately follows in the Text. And Peter when he had denied Luke.
22. 61.
Christ, as soon as Christ looked upon him, he went out and wept bitterly.
Whence it appears, that the seed of Repentance in these great falls of the
Saints is not dead but sleeps; it lies in the earth during this winter of
grace, being ready to bud, as soon as the frost of Tentation is dissolved, and
the Sun of Righteousness warmeth it with a new access, and increase of
beams and heat. And here I think it is worth the observing, that there are
certain sins that are certainly known to be sins, yet while the strength of
tentation is upon the Saints, they partake very much of the concealment of
secret sins. For the same lust and corruption that prevails upon the Will of
a Saint to do so great a sin against which his Will was determinately bent
and resolved, casts also very commonly a mist on the understanding of the
same Saints, that the thing formerly appearing out of measure sinful, now does
not look like a sin; for the flesh having darkened the understanding for a
season, that appears not in the shape and odiousness of sin to the flesh,
which most plainly and evidently appears sinful, being seen by the spirit.
And therefore a Saint after a great sin, when he comes truly to discern it,
is like a man awaked; awaked I say out of a slumber of the flesh, wherein his
eyes were closed. and he saw not sin to be sin, and awaked into the light
and sight of the Spirit by which alone a man spiritually discerns. So David
had need of a plain similitude, to convince him of a sin that was in it
self plain enough, but no doubt by lust so covered and hid from appearing in
the true shape of sin, that before this discovery which awaked the Spirit in
him, he had not the full and true sight of the odious and ugly face of his
sins. Briefly, Vzzah who dyed in his sin, was saved or damned. I think no
man will be so cruel as to say he was damned; we see he had a good affection
to the Ark of God, and no doubt a good love to God, for whose sake he loved
the Arc, but his good love was ill managed, and the wrath of God came upon
him, because he served that God in an ill manner, whom no doubt he loved, with
a good zeal and affection. Now if Vzzah was saved, by this Doctrine he must
actually repent of this sin, which was so mortal to him. But first we read
of no such actual Repentance, and next the suddenness of the stroke may
seem to prevent it. But on the other side, if he did actually repent, then may
any Saint else be thought actually to repent, and so this question is again
needelesse, as before was proved to be absurd. And surely he which gave Iezabel
that sedu^d the servants of God, a space to repent, may be thought to be at
least as gracious to the spouse of Christ, (his Saints and members) even to
give them this space to repent, to whom we know he has given the grace to
repent.

If they do now reply, are Saints immortal having sinned? I answer by asking
again, Was Iezabell immortal, when God gave her lpace to repent? Besides, no
death can prevent Gods mercy; God knows the time of his Saints, and if
Sparrowes fall not to the ground without Gods providence, much less do
Saints. God has the time of Saints in his hand, and the same God has also
Grace in his hand; and therefore nothing can hinder him, but that he may
prevent the time which he has in one hand, with the grace which he has in an
other. Yea as he is the Lord both of life and grace, so is he of tentations.
Therefore as he can command time to stay and grace to hasten, so also can he
command tentations to take what time he pleases, and can make them to keep
what distance he will, to the last time of the Saints. Yet I may add further,
and I think that Arminians can hardly disprove it; If a Saint have in him the
grace of Repentance, which would bring forth the Act of Repentance if it had
time, it were somewhat strange that a Saint should be damned, not for want of
grace (but) only for want of time. Now the remaining grace of Repentance, after
the fall of Saints, apeares before in David Hezekiah and Peter, who readily
repented upon their summons. And even Bertius himself confesses, that neither
David nor Peter in their falls, did wholly loose the Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, this question is grounded on the Popish distinction of sins mortal
and venial: A distinction which Doctor Francis White in his Orthodoxe, has
with sound reasons and allegations mightily battred There it is said by him,
That concupisence is as verily sin as Adultery; And that there is a plain
Commandment against it; now the breach of any Commandment (especially the
body of it) must needs be mortal, So when a man couets his neighbors wife,
yeahis neighbors Ox, he has mortally sinned. Hereupon appears a diverse
fault and mischief of this question or objection. First a man is in perpetual
fear and torment, because such lusts do so often arise in him. Secondly, this
objection has but only vanity or nothinges in it. For it is an argument
raised out of nothing, and nothing in the hands of the creature will make
nothing. The distinction of sins into venial and mortal is nothing, for every
sin is mortal. Death runs along with the whole breach of the Commandments*
Cursed is he that continues not in all things which Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
are written in the book of the Law to do them. Now if the curse and wrath of
God be annexed to the breach of any part of the Law, surely the breach of any
part of the Law makes a man subject to wrath and consequently Romans 8. 23.
to death. For the wages of sin (even of all sin without exception) is
death. Now if all sin be mortal, and the mortalnesse of sin be the reason of
the incompatibility of grace and salvation, then every sin and breach of the
Law is incompatible with grace, and so a Saint may fall from the state of Grace
many times in a day; and many times in a day he had need to be again
regenerated. But on the other side, if they will allow Grace to stand with
mortal sin in the breach of one Commandment (as the tenth) they must be
forced to allow it likewise in the breach of another; at least if they will
allow Grace to be compatible with the mortal breach of one half of a
Commandment, they may be enforced to allow it in the breach of the other
half. For mortalnesse of sin being the cause of incompatiblenesse with
Grace, this mortal sin running all along through the whole breach of the
Commandment, the effect of incompatibility must needs run along with it
throughout the whole breach of the Commandment. Or else as Grace may stand
with the breach of one half of the Commandment, so may it stand with the
breach of the other half, except men will stint the Grace of God, and say it
cannot reach home to overcome the whole breach of a Commandment, especially
one of the second Table as that of Adultery, which is usually reckoned one of
their mortal sins. Yea, it were fit that these ^inters of Gods Grace, should
give us a Table of all the breaches of every Commandment, and then put down
their finger just on the place, where the breaches leave to be venial* and
begin to be mortal; This seems very necesary for the full discerning of a
matter of so great consequence and concernment, as falling from the state of
grace; for without this knowledge a man may fall from the state of Grace by some
sin which he knows not to be mortal, and then forgeting it or neglecting it,
there is an end of him, he must be damned for ever. But to make such a Table by
Scripture is altogether impossible, and without Scripture it is vain and
frivolous. How much better were it to say with the Scripture, That in the
Justice of God sin and life are incompatible, even any sin with life eternal.
But by the Grace of God, sin and life are not incompatible; for God in his
Saints leaves even now a remnant of the body of sin, Romans 7. and 8.
that often leads them captive to the Law of sin; and yet at the same time
there is the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, freeing them from an
absolute reign of sin and death. There is a remainder of the old Adam, and a
seed of the new Adam, and the motions, yea single acts of the old remainder,
do not kill the whole immortal seed of the new Adam. As one action does 2.
Pet. 1. Pet.
not make a habit, so one action does not destroy a habit, especially these
infused habits, which are grounded in a godly nature, and an incorruptible
seed.

But that I may show them the cause of their mistaking, (which is the way to
remidy it) I give them to understand, that their error come from hence, because
they do not weigh these things in the Balances of the Sanctuary. They do not
weigh spiritual things, with the weights of the Spirit. For it in these
upright Balances, they did weigh sin and grace together, they should find,
that in the old man there being buds and leaves and fruits of sin, sinful
thoughts, words, and actions, and the like in the new man the buds and leaves
and fruits of sin, cannot over weigh more, then the buds and leaves, and
fruits of grace, but it is a reign and whole body of sin, that must
counter. poyse, and equal a reign and body of grace. More plainly thus, one
particular sin, may prevent and cut off for the time some act of grace which
should have prevented it, but one act of sin, does not cut of and expel, the
whole new man and body of grace. The whole seed and root of Grace is not
dug up, but by a whole body and reign of sin, and indeed this whole
reign of sin, is absolutely a sin which the Regenerate cannot commit.
There are diverse places that confirm this in the Scripture, yea, diverse places
in St. John's first Epistle. I take notice of one: Whosoever is borne of God
does not commit sin, for his seed remains 1. Ioh. 3. 9. 1, Ioh. 5. 4. and 1^
in him, and he cannot sin, because his seed remains in him. A regenerate
man we know can sin actually, but he cannot sin in the full service of
sin: and even our Savior himself interprets the committing of sin, for
the service of sin, Whosoever commits Ioh. 8. 34.
sin is the servant of sin. But this service of sin and the seed of God
are incompatible, and therefore the seed of God still remaining in the
Regenerate, (which the Apostle affirms) this reign of sin cannot stand in
them with it. So are the Regenerate still safe, while single actual sinnnes do
not destroy the whole seed of Grace, but only a whole service of sin, from
which the Regenerate are preserved, by the seed of God that remainet^ in them.
Briefly a remaining seed is never lost, neither by actual sins which are
committed, which do not over weigh and prevail against it, not by a body of
sin, which the seed of God remaining for ever excludes.

And hereupon in the second place these men may also plainly perceive their
error, in saying that a Saint by some actual sin is in the whole state of
damnation. For the seed of God remaining in the Regenerate, he cannot be
wholly in the state of wrath and damnation, for there is something in him with
which God will not be angry, even the remaining seed of God. But you will ask
me perchance, Is not God angry with sin? Yes, and very angry with a very
great sin; but yet his whole wrath does not arise when there is a seed of
Grace that abaites the wholenesse of his wrath. Therefore let us again set up
the balances of the Sanctuary, and as before we laid the whole seed of Grace
in one balance: against one single sin in the other balance: so now let us
lay the seed of Grace together with some single sin in one balance, and the
whole or full wrath of God in the other. And let us withal know that our
merciful Father looks upon these balances through his beloved Son Christ
Jesus. and then we shall soon find that single sins joined with a seed of
Grace, will not draw move, and counter* weigh a whole and entire wrath. God
beholding a Son of God (though with some sin through that first Son in
whom he is well pleased does not suffer his whole displeasure to arise upon
him. There are drop^ of wrath (as Hierome Hier. in Ezech. li^. 1. cap. ^.
note) and there is a not wrath, Psalm: 6. And there is a who^e displeasure, Ps
78. 38. Now these drops of wrath may be upon lesser sins; yea a hot wrath,
may be upon a Saint, ^or greater (...)* but a whole displeasure is not upon
him, except he had a who^e reign of sin; and from that (as I showed before)
a Saint is preserved. For there is still a seed of Grace remaining, and with
that seed God cannot be angry, yea he still loves it, and where this love
remains, there the wholenesse of wrath is abated, so much as is the measure of
this remaining love. Neither is this without the word of God. For God himself,
when he has* said, of a Saint, I will be his Father, and he shall 2. Sam. 7.
14.
be my son; he says also, If he commit iniquity I will chasten him with the
rods of men, but my mercy shall not depart away from him as I took it from
Saul. God when he was angry with Iehosaphat, He told him by the Prophet:
Should thou help the ungodly etc. Therefore is wrath upon thee from the
Lord. Yet withal God forgot 2. Chron. 19. ^.
not the seed of Grace in his heart. Nevertheless there are good things found
in thee, thou have prepared thy heart to seek the Lord. So though there be a
measure of wrath, and God in measure contend with these branches Esaias. 27. 8.
of sin, yet the root of grace remaining, Grace also remains. As long as
the seed of God remains, so long union with God remains, and as long as
union with God remains so long a man is in the state of grace, and cannot be
wholly in the state of displeasure. But as millions of sins lying upon the
Son of God, brought with them such a heavy displeasure of God, that in regard
of the anguish and plague of it, to which he was delivered up, he cried out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, and yet as concerning union, God had
not forsaken him* so also in the sons of God united to this Son, though for
some single sins a great wrath may arise, and God in regard of outward
feeling may seem to forsake them, yet that union still remains, and whom God
has thus knit together, no man can put asunder. In Christ that became sin
for us, all the sins of the Saints and union with God were not incompatible,
wherefore sins and union with God are not incompatible. And though this union
was Hypostaticall, and our a lower union, yet from that Hypostaticall union,
our union is derived, and that union safegards and preserves the union derived
from it. His union is the Rock on which our union being built, that Rock
preserves the Church united unto it. The strength of Christ's union, is (not
the weakness Math. 16. 18. Math. 7. 25. Ioh. 14. 19. Ioh. 17. ^0. etc. ^. Pet.
2. 5. 6. 7.
but) the strength of our union, and in his safe union our union is safe
against the gates of Hell. And this is the very point that accuses and
conuinceth their horrible blasphemy, that say we are no safer by union with
Christ, who was God and man, then by generation from Adam who was but a man
that had not union with God.

But perchance some will object, this is a dangerous doctrine to be taught,
That Saints cannot fall from the State of Grace. And why? Because men will
presume. But let the obiectors remember, that the question is whether it be
true or untrue, not whether there may be ill uses made of it. For if it be
true, then this is just Gardiners argument against whole relying on the merits
of Christ, because the people would break out at this gappe, and leave buying
of heaven with their own merits. So might we argue, that the Grace of God may
not be taught, because some turn it into wantonness, no^ men send their sons
to the University, because knowledge puffs up. But let not Gods truth be
muzled up with carnal policy: especially let not truth be denied to be
truth, because flesh and blood makes ill uses of a spiritual truth.

But secondly, I deny* that this doctrne is dangerous to breed carelessness in
obedience, yea, it is a spur and encouragement unto obedience. For if we
consider how it is delivered, and to whom it is delivered, and with what
cautions and conditions it is to be delivered, it will be found to be a
doctrine most comfortable, and most advantagable, unto holiness. The usual
manner of delivering it, is by the way of encouragement unto obedience. Even
the whole Law is enforced upon this ground: I am the Lord that has delivered
thee from the house of bondage, thou shall have no other Gods but me etc. which
agrees just with the song of Zachary, That we being delivered from our
enemies might serve God without fear, in holiness and righteousness etc. In
the next place we may consider, that this Doctrine only appertains to the
Regenerate. To them only it can be so delivered, that it may be received, Now
the Regenerate have in them a godly nature, a spirit of love, and the love of
God being showed and sealed to them, the spirit of love in them is enflamed to
a more seruent love of God. And the more a man loves God, the more will he
keep his Commandments. So that it is most true which S. John speaks. He
that has this hope purges himself, as God is pure. But the clean contrary
is said by these men, He that has this hope, defiles himself (...) the 1.
Ioh. 3. 3.
Devil is filthy.

In the last place, let us take notice what cautions and conditions are annexed
unto this Doctrine. God knows our frame, and he sees that by nature we are
nothing but flesh, Ioh, 3. 6. And even after Regeneration there is a great
remainder of the flesh even in the Regenerate. Now this flesh is apt to be
puffed up, not upon this only, but upon any excellency of the Spirit,
knowledge, Revelation, yea, upon the grace of God, yea upon humility it self.
Therefore God has certain scourges for his children, to beat down this
flesh from presuming and exalting it self above measure* Whom the Lord loves,
he chasteneth, and he Heb. 13. ^.
scourges every son whom he receives. He has scourges of diverse sorts,
he scourges them in their estates, he scourges them in their bodies, he
scourges them in their mind yea in their souls themselves. He scourges them
by men, he scourges them by Devils, he scourges them by good Angels, he
scourges them by his own hand, even by hiding his face, by withdrawing his
comforts, by sending terrors into their souls: so that no scourge almost is
wanting but only Hell; yea, their is not wanting a kind of temporal Hell, but
only a Hell eternal. David is scourged with the death of the son of his
sin, with the rebellion of another son, with the railing of Shim^i, with an
exclusion from the Royal City, So that he wept as he went up, and had his
head covered, and he went ^refoote, he was called, A bloody man, and a son of
Beliall. And now I doubt not, but he was fully instructed by those scourges, to
buy those sins, no more at this price; his flesh was so taken down that he
humbled himself under Gods chastisment, and accepted it: Let him curse, for
the Lord has bidden him. 1. King. 11.
Solomon also sinning was scourged with the scourges of men; Hadad the Edomite,
Rezon the son of Eliadah and Jeroboam the son of Nebat* and Hezechiah for
the pride of his heart, had a fearful scourge upon his estate and posterity;
all that is in thine house shall be carried into Babylon; And thy sons which
thou spalt beget shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuchs in the palace
2. King. 20. 13.
of the King of Babylon. Briefly some are delivered unto Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, Paul himself is buffe^ed by the messengers of
Satan, lest he should be exalted above measure, and the Corinthians not
judging 2. Cor. 12. 7.
themselves, are judged of the Lord, so that some of them are sick, and some
of them asleep. The terrors of God which I call a temporal Hell, shake the
souls of the Saints having sinned, and grind them into contrition: So they
cry out, There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is
there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. I am feeble, I am sore broken,
I have Psalm. 38.
roared by reason of the disquietnesse of my heart. Thus we see to the
Doctrine of assurance are annexed remi dies against Security and Presumption, so
that it needs not an untruth to deny it, but only discretion wisely to
deliver it. When the Doctrine of Assurance is taught, let these chastisments of
God upon the pride and security of Saints be delivered with it; and then a
spiritual Doctrine being delivered with these correctiues and corrosiues of
the flesh, will be comfortably profitable to the spirit, and not hurtful to
the puffing up of the flesh. The Grace of God in a Saint seeing the goodness
of the Lord sealed to him on the one side, and the terrors of the Lord on the
other side, has sufficient grounds of a full and awful resolution, to serve
God with reverence and fear. It is the saying of an holy man near 200 years
since, Doctus dono Gratiae, et eruditus verbare substractionis, etc. A Saint
being taught by the gift of grace and by the Rod of Gods frowns and temporal
desertions, takes heed of pride, takes heed of security. And Gregory the
great, has an excellent passage wherein he says, that God does keep the
soul of a Saints in so even a balance, counterpoysing virtues with
Tentations, (Miro modo agitur, vt nec de virtute, quispiam extolli debeat, nec
de tentatione desperet) That he need not to be lifted up with his virtues,
nor despair for his tentations. Greg. in Job. lib. 9. cap 5. So it will be
unnecessary as it is untrue to say that a son of God may be damned, for even
therefore are they scourged here, that they may not be damned hereafter but
that they may be received. They are scourged with the scourges of men, Heb. 12.
1 Cor. 11. 32.
but the mercy of God is not taken away from them; they are judged of God, that
they may not be condemned with the world.

But the same men that are so hard against the Saints, yet they are very kind
to the Reprobates, and they that will not allow a particular grace to give unto
the Saints a sure salvation, will allow a general grace to give unto all,
(Reprobates and all) an uncertain salvation; Yea, to speak the truth under
the show of a general salvation, they give no salvation at all. For man fallen
will not stand, by that grace wherein man perfect did fall: so that if
effectual grace be taken away, salvation is taken away. But what say they?
Christ dyed for all. True, but what of that? Therefore all men have grace to be
saved by Christ's death. A miserable inconsequence. There can nothing follow but
this, Therefore Christ gave himself a sufficient ransom for all* The ransom
is sufficient for all, it is offered to all, but all men do not receive it.
Man by his fall has deprived himself of grace, by which he may accept the
promises of grace, so that his own incapacity, hinders him from accepting this
general remedy. A King at his Coronation gives a general pardon; yet this
does not prove that all men are able particularly to apply this general
pardon. There are some that think themselves rectos in Curia, and that they
need it not, some are negligent and careless of their estates; and a third
sort are ignorant of it, and a fourth is poor and cannot sue it out. So in the
general pardon offered in Christ Jesus, there are some Iustificiaries, as the
Scribes and Pharisees that think they they need it not, there are some that
with Esau despise it for carnal profaneness, there are some that Romans 10*
are hardened and blinded being ignorant of Gods Righteousness in Christ Jesus,
though they have it Preached, yea though they have a zeal of God and such are
the Jews; and there are some that never heard of Christ Jesus, and they cannot
sue out a pardon by believing in him of whom they have not heard. But this is
the sum of the truth: Man being wholly fallen by Free Will though assisted
with a general and sufficient grace, lost his Free Will, grace and life
eternal. God in his mercy gives a Savior Ioh. 17. 2. Heb. 9. 15.
with a sufficient ransom for all the sinners of the world, that of all the
world he may take whom he pleases, anb by effectual grace join them to
Christ in an eternal union of blessed felicity. If Christ had not dyed for
all, God could not of all have saved whom he pleased. If he had given
effectual grace to all, all would be saved; and then God had bin all Mercy*
and no Justice; If he had given effectual grace to none, none would be saved,
and then God would have been all Justice, and no Mercy. But God purposing to
show, both Mercy and Justice, leaves some in the state of the fall, to which
man voluntarily cast himself, and by effectual grace ioynes others to Christ
unto eternal salvation. His Justice cannot be accused, but his Mercy ought to
be magnified: And we are infinitely more bound to God for his sure Mercyes in
that Effectual Grace, by which he certainly saves millions, then to
Arminians for their general grace, by which they go about certainly to damn
all.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE Catholic Church, of the Certainty of Salvation.
TEmplum Dei etc. That the Temple of God, which is inhabited Ireneus lib. 5. ^9
by the spirit of the Father, and that the members of Christ should not be
partakers of Salvation, how is it not a most great blasphemy?

Mori est vitalem amittere habilitatem etc. To dye is to Id. cap. 10.
loose the ability of life, etc. But this does not happen to the soul, for
it is the breath of life; neither to the Spirit, for the Spirit is simple, and
cannot be dissolved, and is the life of them that receive him.

Partem aliquam spiritus eius sumimus, etc. We receive Id. cap. 11.
a part of his spirit, unto the effecting and preparing of incorruption, by
degrees accustoming, to receive and carry God in us; which the Apostle also
called an earnest, that is, part of that honor which is promised to us of God.

Qui credit in filium habet vitam aeternam etc. He that believes elemens
Alexa. padag. lib. 1. cap. 6.
in the Son has life eternal. If then we who have believed have life
eternal, what remains beyond the possession of life eternal

Non es, inquit, amplius servus etc, ( He says) Thou art Idem Ibid.
no more a servant but a son. If a son, then also an Heir through God;
What then wants to a Son, when he is an Heir?

Qui credidit in nomine eius etc. He that believed in his Ciprian de Orat.
Dominiea.
name, and is made the Son of God, from that time must begin, both to give
thanks, and to profess himself the Son of God.

Scriptum est enim, Iustum fide viuere etc. (It is written) Id. de Mort.
The Just shall live by Faith. If thou art Just, and live by Faith, If thou
truly beleeuest in God, why, since-thou art to live with Christ, and art secure
of the Lords promise, do thou not rejoice, that thou art called ( by death)
unto Christ?

Plus amare compellimur etc. we are enforced to love the Id. ibid.
more while it is granted to us to know what we shall be, and to condemn
that which we were. Hilary d^ Trini^* lib. 1.


Conscia securitatis suae ocio etc. The soul knowing her own safety, rests
in quietness rejoicing in her hopes, so much not fearing death, that she
accounts it as the way to life eternal.

Chananeaiam ipsa etc. The Chananitish woman, being Ibid in Mat. c. 15
now saved by faith, and CERTAIN of that inward Mystery, and sure of her own
salvation.

Per spiritum sanctum datur etc. By the Holy Spirit it is Basil. de spiritu.
cap. 15.
given, a restoring into Paradise, a return into the Kingdom of heaven, a
recovery of the adoption of sons, a confidence of calling God Father, a
partaking of eternal glory, and that I may say all at once, to be in the
fullness of all blessedness, both of this life, and of those good things which
are laid up for us in the life to come; which in the mean time we do enjoy by
FAITH, beholding that Glory as in a glass. For if the EARNEST be such, how
excellent is the Perfection.

Been ait confido. etc. He says well, I am confident. For Ambrose Sermon. 15.
confidence is the strength of our hope, and an authority of hoping. Therefore
hope still and no man can make t^ee ashamed of thy expectation. Our expectation
is life eternal.

Signauit nos dando spiritum etc, He has sealed us, Id. in 2 ^or. 1.
by giving his Spirit to us for an Earnest, that we may not doubt of his
promises; for if when we were in the state of death he gave us his Spirit, it
is not to be doubted, but that to us being made immortal, he will add glory.

Non praeter spem esse debemus, etc. We must not be Angust. in Psalm. 1^2.
without hope, yea we may be bold with great confidence, because if he be
with us on earth by charity, we are also with him in heaven -- He is below by
the compassion of charity, we are above by the hope of charity. For we are
saved by hope? But because our hope is certain, though salvation be to come,
it is so spoken of us, as if it were already done.

Tribulatio est enim nostra in presenti seculo, etc. Our Id* in Psalm. 123.
suffering is in this life, and our hope in the life to come: and except in the
sufferings of this life, the hope of the life to come did comfot us, we should
perish. Our joy brethren, is not yet in performance, but in hope. But our hope
is as certain as if the thing were already done. Diverse other places have
been already cited out of him of Final perseverance. I refer the Reader
particularly to his book. De Bono Perseuerantiae, and de Correptione and
gratia. Where among many other sentences approving the Perseuerrance of the
sons of God, he says (cap. 9.) Nullus eorum: etc. None of them being
changed from good into evil does end his life.

Exempta est a morte anima, etc. That soul is freed Prosper in Psalm. 114.
from death, even though she be compassed with mortal flesh, which of
unbelieving is made believing: and besides that perfect eternal rest from all
labors, which the death of the Saints precious in the eyes of the Lord does
obtain, the soul which is delivered from the death of infidelity has also
her rest in this life; even that soul which cease from the works* not of
righteousness, but of iniquity. Such a soul which is now alive unto God, and
dead to the world, and is diligently buried in spiritual endeavors, not
resting in an idle, but a quiet tranquillity, of humility and meek nesse, she
accounts as now possessed, whatsoever with an undoubted hope she patiently
expects.

Neque vsque eo solum etc. Neither is the grace of Christ ^irill Alex. Comment.
in Esa. l^. 3.
the Savior of us all only so far extended toward us, but in good hope, the
possession of the Kingdom of heaven lasting and eternal life, and the absence
of all evil, which uses to affect with grief, are likewise added. For it is
written of the Saiuts. everlasting joy is upon their heads.

Probi viri, cum mundu^ possideant cor, etc. Good men, having a pure heart,
became the receptacles of the comforter, as Id. in Joan. lib. 9. cap. 44.
it is possible to men, in this life; and they do know that they shall enjoy
great and wonderful rewards. For they shall be sanctified of the spirit and
they shall be made partakers of all good things and the baseness of bondage
being cast off, they shall be adorned with the dignity of adoption of the sons
of God, which Paul shows, saying: Because ye are sons, God has sent the
spirit of his son crying, Abba, Father.

Non accepistis spiritum seruitutis etc. You have not received the spirit of
bondage etc. For he cannot be a just man in the sight of God, who serves him
not for love, but for fear. Which place I allege, because the fallers from
Grace, by teaching this falling from Grace, do teach men a Doctrine, by which
men must be continually in servile fear, and to this very end they abusiuely
allege, Be not high minded, but fear, and, Work out your* salvation with
fear and trembling.

In Scriptura sacra aliquando etc. In the holy Scripture, Id. in Job. lib. 16.
cap. 2.
sometimes the gift of the Holy ghost is called an Earnest, because thereby our
soul is strengthened unto the Certainty of inward hope. Well therefore it is
said by Paul, Who has given us the Earnest of his Spirit; For to this end have
we received this Earnest, that we may hold a Certainty of that promise which
is made unto us.

Mandatum Dei si timore fit poenoe etc. If the commandment Anselme in Romans 8.
of God be done, by the fear of punishment, and not by the love of
righteousness, it is slauishly done, and therefore not done. For that fruit
is not good, which does not proceed from the root of love, etc. We have
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we call God our Father: For the
veryspirit of God himself, gives witness to our spirit, that is, he makes
our spirit to know and understand, that we are the sons of God*

Habes, homo, huius arcani Indice^ spiritum etc. O man, Bernard. Ep. 107
thou have the iustifiing Spirit for a Teacher of this secret, and in the same
witnessing to thy spirit, that thou also art the Son of God. Take knowledge
of the counsel of God in thy Justification, etc. For the present Justification
of thee, is both a revelation of Gods counsel, and a certain preparation unto
future glory.

Aliquis non potest, etc. A man cannot have that friendship Aquinus 1. 2.
quest. 65. art. 5.
with God, which is called Charity, except he have a Faith by Which he
believes that there is such a Society and Familiarity of Man with God, and do
hope that himself pertaines to this Society, Now how certain and infallible
this hope is, let himself also speak. Hope goes Id. 2. secudae q. 18. art. 4.
on to her end by way of Certainty, as partaking Certainty from Faith, which is
in the knowing Faculty. Bradwarden proves Perseverance, to be a free gift of
God unto man, and therefore not of man to himself by Gods Bradwarden. de de
causa Dei. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Grace, which first position is the very ground of infallible Perseverance, and
the latter of falling away: and he inferres. Propter haec huiusmodique mo^iua,
etc. For these and the like motives, it seems more probable to me* and more
agreeable to reason, and Catholic Doctrine, that Perseverance is not given to
merits, but is freely given of God, according to his free Grace, free
Praedestination, and free Purpose, as the first working grace that justifies a
sinner. Non peccat videlicet ad mortem; etc. He does not sin, F^rus in 1.
Ioa. 5
unto death, but this he has not of himselfl, but from this, that he is
regenerated into a Son of God, by Faith and Baptism: for this regeneration
does preserve him. For by Faith he is made the Son of God, by Faith he is
cleansed from sin, by Faith he is preserved in the obtained righteousness,
by Faith he ouercomes the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and by Faith he
rises again after falling, and therefore Satan cannot touch him. He may
indeed dare to tempt the godly; So likewise he durst to tempt Christ; Yea
sometimes he drives just men unto a fall, as we see David and Peter: But
FINALLY, as in Christ he could have nothing, so neither can he prevail over
the Saints. For none can take Christ's sheep out of his hands. Wherefore going
to his Passion, he recommended all those that believed in him unto his Father.

A hearty desire for the conversion of those that hold the final a version
and falling of the Saints.
AS themselves hold that they may depart from fundamental Truths, unto
fundamental Errors, so I wish that they may also depart from fundamental
errors, whereof this seems to be one. That Christ Jesus the Son of God is
not that Rock, which preserves the Church that is built on him, that the
gates of Hell cannot praeuaile against Her.

THE GROUNDS OF ARMINIANIS ME, Natural and Politic.
NAture is a ground of Arminianisme* but it is corrupted Nature, even that
Nature, by which we are the children of wrath. Neither is Nature the fountain
Ephesians 2*
and spring of it, by a large common way, as the Gal. 5. 20.
flesh is generally the mother of haeresies, but by a more peculiar, inward and
deep generation. There are two evils* that by man's wretched fall are deeply
grounded, and intermingled, with the very principles and roots of man; and as
far as man is man, so far and so deep, their venom and infection does
enter. The one is Prede, and evil that by the fall has so thoroughly* soked
and pierced into the foundations of man, that man naturally desires to stand by
himself, and to be a selfe-vpholder, which is no other then that miserable
perferment, which the Devil at the beginning promised to mankind in their
first parents* That they should be as Gods. For it is God only* Exodus 3. 14.
whose Name is I am, it is God only that is a selfevpholder, and stands of
himself; and it is by the stabilitie of God alone, that all other things are
established; from whose establishment, as much as the wills of the Creatures
are freed, so much they are in danger. Yea this substantive, and selfevpholding
estate, is to corrupted Nature, a very plausible and desirable thing, and man
exceedingly desires with the prodigal son, to have his portion put by his
Father into his one hands, even to have Gods grace, delivered over to the
keeping of Man's Freewill, But the miserable consequence of this, in that
prodigal son plainly appeared when he had gathered all, He went into a
Luke 15. 13.
far country, and there wasted all his substance with riotous living. Man's
will, will not keep the grace of God, but will forfite and spend it, as Adam
our common Father did at the beginning; neither may it be hoped, that the son
with a great portion of corruption, should stand, in that state of fredome,
wherein his Father newly coming from the hands of God his maker, would fall.
Therefore it is the true safety of man's will, to be held by God, rather then
to be left free to hold God; to be established by grace, rather then to
establish grace in it self, to be apprehended by God, rather then to be left
free whether it will apprehend God, or no. Surely the Devil, is as strong as
ever, if not more strong by being more cunning, and man being less strong,
because more corrupt, his fall cannot be but more certain. Therefore if the
Devil, and his spiritual wickednesses, powers Ephesians. 6. 19.
and principalities must be resisted, and overcome, we have need of the whole
armor of God, yea we have need of God himself to support, strengthen, and
establish us; and accordingly the Apostle fitly begins, 2. Cor. 1. 21.
Be strong in the Lord, and the power of his might. For as else where, He
which establishes us in Christ is God. The Deity is the Rock, which in Christ
Jesus establishes us and makes us to stand; and so to stand, that the Gates of
Hell cannot prevail against us. The Rock keeps us, we keep not the Rock,
yea the Rock keeps us, that we keep the Rock, for if it did not so, the
Rock did not keep us, for if our keeping of the Rock, were not kept by the
Rock, we should neither keep it, nor be kept. But Scripture says, we are
kept from falling, because we are grounded on the Rock, and therefore the
Rock does Mat. 7. 25.
keep us even from falling from the Rock. But this true and only ground of
safety, the Pride of man scorneth and despises, and it still desires to have
the will free and loose from this establishment of the Rock, that in the sand
of this freedom, he may build a glorious, but a ruinous house, and walking in
the Turrets of it, he my say of it, as that stalking and presumptuous Monarch,
Is not this great Babylon, Dan. 4.
that I have built, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty?
But this Pride is a most certain way to ruin. For the same man that would be
like a God, God made him unlike a man, and the same heart that swelled into the
assuming of God* head, was changed into the heart of a beast, until he lifted
up his eyes o^ Heaven, and honored him that lives for ever, whose Dominion is
an everlasting Dominion, and who does what he will in the army of Heaven, and
the inhabitants of the Earths Wherefore it is the safety of ou^ Will, to be
established by that supreme Will, which only is stable and to attribute the
safety of our Will, to that GOD, from whom only we can receive it, Except we
rather approve this Great Monarch, in his pride, then in his repentance, and do
love proud R^ine, rather then humble stability.

And indeed Arminianisme may justly look for Ruin, for it opposes
stability. Yea I dare confidently to affirm that Arminianisme opposes the
maine scope and sum of the Scripture. The maine scope of the Scripture is
this, to bring all Glory to the Creator, from the Creature. This Glory plainly
arises, while we see the great uncertainty and mutability of the most perfect
Creatures, not established by union with the Creator: and the strength and
stability of the weakest and most frail creatures being knit to the Deity* A
pattern of the one is Adam with his Free Will, and a pattern of the other are
the members of Christ Jesus, And that this latter pattern may be more
evidently emminent, God has chosen out of weak and corrupt mankind, the most
weak and wretched, That he which glories, may glory in the 1. Cor. 29
Lord. Thus is the whole Frame of Scripture as it were a maine Body of our
Doctrine, which gives glory to God, by making the Greature, wholly to depend on
his Creator: And Arminianisme is an opposition to the same Scripture, and to
the Doctrine thereof, while it gives the stability of the Creature to the will
of the Creature; so that a Creature may answer St. Paul (as I learn an
Arminian has answered) Ego meipsum discerno: I make my self to differ from
another; I am mine own establisher. But be it still our ste^fast 2. Cor. 4. 7.
ground, That He which establishes us in Christ is God. 2. Cor. 1. 21. Psalm.
18. 31.
And who is God save the Lord, and who is a Rock save our God.

Another Natural ground of Arminianisme, is the Natural wisdom of man, or
the wisdom of Natural man. This Natural wisdom approues that only for
true wisdom which it self comprehendes, and the ways which are past finding
out, or are contrary to that which it has Decreed for Wisdom, are mere
foolishness to it. Wherefore even the Wisdom of God, and the Justice of God,
if they be not wise and just that way, in which the Natural man thinks
Wisdom and Justice only to be, he censureth the one to be Folly, and the
other Injustice. Thus by the fall of man, man is fallen into this drunkenness,
that he thinks the wisdom creating, can be measured and judged by the
wisdom created, yea, not by the wisdom created, but by the wisdom
corrupted. The wisdom of man fallen, is set for a Judge of the
incomprehensible wisdom of him who made man in his perfection; and he that
is now less then himself, will comprehend him, that was infinitely greater,
then man, when he was greater then himself. Neither is this a stone that we
stumble at, for lack of notice. For God hinselfe has showed us this Rock of
offense. The natural man, perceineth not the things 1. Cor. 1. ^. etc
of God, but they are foolishness to him. And, The world in the wisdom of
the world knew not God. Now by the same reason, the more of this wisdom that
knows not God, and that counts Gods wisdom to be foolishness, the more
does the wisdom of God seem folishnesse to it. Therefore there were no
greater enemies and opposers to the Doctrine of God, then Politicians and
Philosophers, both which were united in that most able Natural man, and most
venomous adversary of Christianity, Julian the Apostate. And that God may
glorify this wisdom of his which they count foolishness, and make it to
triumph over their foolishness which they so seriously and reverently think
to be wisdom, he takes simple, weak, and base men even foolish things,
and by his spirit giving them his divine wisdom, he confoundes the wisdom
of the worldly wise, while these foolish things are saved by the wisdom of
God, and the wise men perish by the wisdom of man. So that there remains no
other remedy for this disease of humane wisdom. but that such men become
fools, that they may be wise. They must put off humane wisdom, and esteem
it to be folly, if they will put on the wisdom of God. The Natural wisdom
must be captiuated by the Spirit, and a spiritual Doctrine must be received
by a spiritual understanding; for spiritual truths are not kindly to be
received but by a spiritual hand. And surely if Humane wisdom had need to
be put off in the receiving of any spiritual Doctrine, it had need
especially to be laid aside in receiving the Doctrine of the Grace of God. For
that Doctrine is very spiritual, it flies high, and the top of it pearcheth
the clouds, and hides it self in heaven, to be adored rather then to be
discerned. And so the great Apostle himself does leave it. Now these high,
and most spiritual doctrines, offend the eyes of natural wisdom, which
enjoys those secrets chiefly which it self comprehends, and accountes a
transcendent wisdom to be foolishness. So the Owl thinks day to be night,
and the sun to be a cause of blindness; but the Night goes for day, and the
setting of the Sun, to be the Spring of the morning. Therefore the wit of
man, offended with the purity of this spiritual doctrine, has invented a
doctrine of its own which exceedingly agrees, with the wit of man that bare
it; for here (though not in a better case) the Mother is the Nurse, The wit of
Man has made a Foard in the depths of God, it has found out the ways that
are past finding out, and where St. Paul cries out O depth, there they lead
along their scholars, that they pass through it almost with dry feet The
plot of Election and Grace is discovered, and these men will tell you the
reasons of Gods Counsel; Neither is it a new devise of mine, to accuse Man's
wisdom of this folly, it has long since been done: yet will I bring a
witness whom I may call an Oracle of these last times, a man of the most sound
and definite Judgment, that these latter Ages have brought forth, And his
discovery may very well serve for a remedy.

The Divines of greatest name, held that Article (of free Praedestination) for
Orthodoxe, and the contrary for Heretical, because good writers of the
School, as Saint Thomas, Scotus and others, did commonly thus believe, That
God before the foundation of the world, out of the universal mass of mankind,
by his only and mere mercy did choose some to glory, to whom he prepared
effectual means for the obtaining of the same, and this is called, to
Pradestinate. And of these there is a certain and determined number, which is
not to dee increased, etc. Yet this opinion was oppugned by other Divines, but
of lower note; who called it hard, cruel, horrible, and impious, as that which
made God to be an accepter of persons, etc.

The first sentence, indeed comprehending a great mystery and secret, does
humble the mind of man: and while on the one side, it presents to man, the
deformity of sin, and on the other side the excellency of Gods grace, it
wholly fixes him upon God. The second opinion is more plausible, popular,
glittering, and agreeable to the pride of man's heart, and in this respect it
was acceptable to the Friars; professing more the Art of preaching, then the
sound knowledge of Divinity. It did also seem more probable to the Courtiers,
as being agreeable to reasons of policy. And indeed those Who defended it,
because they relied on reasons merely humane, they prevailed with men of humane
wisdom, but when the matter came to be tried by testimonies of Scripture,
then their cause soon fell to the ground. Hist: Council: Trid: Lib: 2.

So we see here the same Author leads us to a second Politic grounds of
Arminianisme.
ground of Arminianisme which is Policy. It were too long for a work which I
intended to be short, to insist on the several sorts of Policy, in which this
error has been rooted, and from which it has sprung up, and spread abroad
the branches of it. My Author has discovered one of the Friars; it serves
their turn best for Rhetorical persuasions, and plausible declamations. And I
wish other Clergymen had not also their Politic ends, and did not seek to
get glory to themselves, by selling the glory of God. No question it were an
outward and seeming glory to them, if when a man has killed the seed of God in
him, they without any seed of God could make this man to live again, and to
enter into heaven, not being regenerated, that is, having wholly lost his
Regeneration. But in these gains, God loses; for his seed loses the glory
of being incorruptible, that corruptible man may get the glory of God.

But I hasten to another Policy, and that is, The plot of 3
bringing in Popery. Whosoever will bring in Popery, into a country strongly
fixed in the Protestant Doctrine, must not presently fly in the face of the
whole Protestant Doctrine, but his only way, is to work into it by these
degres of plausible Arminianisme, even to put in these little thieves (they
seem little to natural men) into the window of a Church, and then they may
unlock the doors of a Church, and let in all Popery. Our Religion is contained
in diverse and several Articles, and they run upon one Thread of Establishment
and Authority, now if you can cut this Thread but in one place, and break
through the Authority which established the^, you may easily see, that all the
rest like beads will run out. But here a word may serve to the wise.

Fourthly, Arminianisme being a kind of twilight, 4
and a double-faced thing that looks to two Religions at once, Protestantisme
and Popery, he that is in it, is like him that stands in the borders of two
adjoining Kingdoms, who is ready to dwell in either, as either serves his
turn best. So that an Arminian is like a flying fish, if preferment be among
the birds, he is ready to fly after it with the birds, and if it be among the
fishes, then among the fishes he will swim after it.

Fifthly, it seems to be a factious ground whereupon 5
Politic men may work their own ends, and that I may use the words of one
that perchance will be more pleasing to some, and one that seems to
acknowledge such a thing de facto. Did no wiser men, or man work upon perhaps
exasperated minds, or exasperate MONTAGVES Appeal. p. 42.
minds to work upon, as it has happened elsewhere in points of controuerted
Divinity called into question, or maintained on Foot, that Religion may serve
for a stalking horse to catch fools, and be pretended to serve Turns.

For I yet hasten to a Sixth Policy, and that is a fearful one, even a Policy
to loose Religion, Land and all. For there is not a Policy more advantagable to
the Spaniard, then to bring in Division into a Land, by bringing in
Arminianisme. This is not words but deeds, which I speak* For even this
Division, had almost forfeited the Low-countryes to the Spaniard. And whom the
wars of so many years, did make still stronger, the peace of a few years
with Arminianisme had almost brought to ruin. And it is well known to some
that have traveled, that this very Counsel has been given to the King of
Spain, by an execrable Author, for the destruction of England and the
Low-countryes, even to bring in this doctrine, which now has gotten the name
of Arminianisme. But far be it from us, so to devide our selves, by
opinions, that we should make our selves weak and our enemies strong. Let us
much rather like brethren, which quarrelled before, cast away the quarrels, and
join together against a common Enemy, both of Church and State. Let us strive
to put our selves into the same Religion, into the same unity, wherein God
protected, and prospered us, against this deuourer of Europe, and his
Invincible Nauies. We need no other Religion, no other unity to prevail
against him hereafter, then that wherein we have miraculously prevailed
against him hertofore. The same God of truth and peace, will defend us in the
same Truth and the same Peace. And I doubt not but the heart of the Parliament
is to this Truth and Unity, and fully resolved, to pass by that path unto all
due service, and fit supply that may tend to the strength of HIM, who is called
in the Scripture The breath of our Nostrills, and to the confusion of His and
our Enemies.

Amen.
AN ADVERTISEMENT CONcerning the Allegations.
I think it fit to clear the pertinencie of the Allegations, which perchance
by some may be misconceived.

First in the point of praedestination; I think those since Austen are most of
them without exception, and speak to the point it self; which is a free
choice of some, from the whole corrupted Mass, they being like the rest when
they were chosen, but made to differ by choosing.

Those before Austen, if they be not so full and punctual, Austen himself
(there alleged) does excuse them, yet I doubt not but they do show a
difference of men, made by the mere grace and pleasure of God.

Secondly in the point of Freewill: I think the maine point of supposed
freedom is this. An indifferency or aequilibriousnes of the will no way
partially inclined, but aequally able to incline it self any way. In this
freedom the will is imagined of some, to be set by a general sufficient
grace, whereby it is freely able to bleeue or not to believe, to receive the
grace of salvation or to resist it. And in this opinion, the will it self is
the fountain of receiving salvation; and grace does not phisically and
effectually move the will to an assured receiving of it, but the will freely
moves it self, yea moves grace toward the receiving of it. Yet further some do
not only put freewill where there is a state grace, but even there where is
only the state of nature, and unregeneration, and to this end they, pervert
the place of Paul; To will is ready with me; but there wantes power to effect
it, by reason of the load and chains of sin which hinder the affecting. For
here they say St. Paul spoke of himself as he was unregenerate: though it
cannot be denied but Saint Paul was regenerate when he spoke it, yea, he
says in the same place that he served with his mind the Law of God, which no
unregenerate man does! Rom: 8. 7.

Now these places which show the power and efficacy of Grace on the will, not
leaving it in an aequilibriousnesse and indifferency to all ways, but
inclining it certainly and effectually one way, these I think are pertinent to
disprove the supposed freedom of will, which rather moves grace, then is
moved by grace. They disprove the kingdom of the will over grace, and do prove
the Kingdom of God in grace on the will.

Again those places which show the power, dominion, and tyranny of Lust and
the Law of sin on the will, they are also pertinent to disprove the same
supposed freedom of will. For they show the mighty and effectual power of
sin on the will, in the Captivity of the will under the Law of sin. For
where there is a Captivity, there cannot be this imaginary Freedom, Again
this very Captivity of the will under Concupiscence, necessarily infers, a
subjection of the will in Regeneration under effectual and reigning Grace, as
profound Bradwarden excellently gathers in the place alleged upon this point
of Freewill. For the strength of Concupiscence must be connterpoysed in the
will at least by an aequall strength of grace: wherefore if Concupiscence have
so much power to incline the will from God to the Creature, surely Grace in the
conversion of a sinner must have so much power as to incline the will to the
Creator from the Creature.

If it be said, That some of the Fathers, do speak somewhat more largely for
freewill in other places, that moves me little. The one may be the sayings of
prejudice, the other of Judgment, the one may proceed from an opposition to
the Manichees, the other from a single, and irrespectiue consideration. And it
is acknowledged generally that before pelagins, there was an inconvenient
largeness in many speeches, concerning Freewill Sure I am that seems most to
come from the Spirit, that attribute (especially in first motions unto God)
lest glory to man, and most to God* And the Dictates of the Spirit should only
be of Authority in points of Divinity.

Lastly, for the point of Certainty of Salvation; I know there is a two fold
Certainty. Things are certain in themselves, or they are certain to us; And
places that affirm either of these concerning the Salvation of Saints, do also
affirm a final* Perseverance of Saints. For if our salvation be certain in
it self, our perseverance without which there is no salvation, is also
certain. And if our salvation be certain to us, our perseverance without
which there can be no salvation, is also certain to us.

And howsoever some may perchance object other places of the Fathers* that from
temporal desertions, great falls of the Saints, and final Apostalyes of
temporary believers (Matt. 4. 16. 17.) do seem to intimate a general
possibility of falling from grace, yet it is worthy to be noted, that among and
amid these doubts which humane frailty suggesteth, the voice and testimony of
the Spirit breaths forth, that lays hold on heaven, as an undoubted
inheritance, inferring now in these Saints, as before in St. Paul, If sons,
then heirs* and he y^ ^exed with Christ. And one tesstimony of this Spirit of
Truth, is of more worth then all the doubts of humane frailty.

True it is and we acknowledge it, that the best Saints are sometimes
terrified with their own great infirmityes, Gods temporal desertions, and the
fearful falls of others: And in these agonyes they say; Is Psalm. 77. 8 etc.
his mercy clean gone for ever, does his promise fail for evermore: But
withal being received by the Spirit, they acknowledge, This is mine Infirmity:
Gods way is (high and spiritual) in the sanctuary, and with his strength he
redeemeth his people. And even this very terror of the Saints, from which some
would make an objection against Certainty of salvation, is an answer to
another objection made against the same Certainty. For these terrors serve for
a remedy against that carnal security, which they do usually object against
Spiritual Certainty.

To sum up all these Doctrines into a chain and connection of blessedness:
while God of his free mercy chooses some to salvation, from others aequally
wrapped in one mass of corruption; while by effectual Grace he rules in
their hearts and wills, and lastly while he dwelles and continues his kingdom
in them by an immortal seed, keeping and leading them infallibly 1. Pet. 1. ^.
Romans 11. 36. Luke 2. 13.
to salvation: Man is safe being kept by the power of God unto salvation; and
all the glory of Man's salvation is given to God. And then let all the world
listen to the music of heaven resounding in this Doctrine: Glory be to God on
high, and peace on earth* And let all the people say,

Amen*

